THE Royal Academy OF COMPLEMENTS. Wherein is set forth, a New Packet of
Letters erected for Ladies, Gentlewomen, Courtiers, Gentlemen, Scholars,
Soldiers, Citizens, Countrymen, and all persons of what degree soever of both
Sexes, viz.

Complemental expressions toward men and Women; leading to the Art of
Courtship.

1. A Tender of Service to a King. 2. A Tender of Service to a Queen. 3.
Respects from an Honorable Lady to a Queen. 4. A Fair Young Virgin to an Old
Rich Miser, whom her Guardian did design should Wed her. 5: A Gentleman's
request to his Friend, to borrow Money. 6. A Gentleman to his Friend, that sent
to borrow Money. 7. A Virgin to her Parents, that would have Matched her to one
whom she cannot Love. 8. A Courteous Lass to her Paramour, who had gotten her
with Child, 9. A Husband to his Lascivious Wife. 10. A Wife to her extravagant
Husband. 11. Civilities from one Lady to another. 12. The forsaken Maid, to her
Treacherous Friend. 13. One Ladies advice to another near Marriage. 14. A
Gentleman to his Lady, upon his urgent occasion of taking a Journey.
Composed by the most Refined Wits of this Age.

LONDON, Printed for E. H. and are to be sold by Absalom Chamberlain, over
against the Cap and Feather, in White Cross-street, next to Old-street: removed
from Swan-alley, in St. John-street.

The Royal Academy of Complements.
SIR, the pleasure I entertain to consider your goodness, is more satisfaction
to me than my advancement. Sir, should I not render you thanks for your many
favors, I should dye of a deep impatience. Sir, It Is my ambition to conserve
the honor I have obtained of being your Servant. Sir, you are noble in all
respects, that I have learned to love, as well as to admire you. Sir, your
passions are mine; nor can I live more in freedom, than when I am bound to you
in the bonds of Friendship. Sir, you are the Rising Sun which I adore. Sir, I
wear you in my heart. Sir, you are the Star I reach at. Sir, you are the
Miracle of Friendship. Sir, should I twine my Arms to Cable, sit up all Night
like a Watching-candle, and destil my Brains through my Eyelids, yet I must
love you: I then loving you, and you me, who is the third person shall hinder
us?
Complements toward Ladies, Gentlewomen, Maids, etc.
MAdam, your Beauty is the Conqueress of Man, who is never to be satisfied with
the luster of your Eyes; Fair one, your Feature and Virtues, Excel all mortal
sense.

Madam, unless you give me your self, it lies not in your Art, or Power, to
requite that affection wherewith I do adore you.

Madam, I never yet offered my affections to any beauty but your own; since
then you have the pre-eminence above all others, be favorable to him that
gives it, and with it, himself wholly to your disposal.

Madam, be wise, and dote not so much upon your own beauty; the man with the
balld pate, can so alter your Physiognomy, that in a short time it shall fright
you more than a Judge does a Thief.

Madam, it is past your art to shun me, I will put a girdle round about the
World but I will find you, etc.

Letters upon several Occasions.
A tender of Service to a King.
May it please Your Majesty,
I AM not ignorant of the great presumption, wherewith at this time I give a
trouble to your Majesty, nor can my deserts give me any hopes that the least
beam of your love, should shine on any thing that in me can be thought a Merit;
since I have learned you my command in all things, and it is contrary to the
duty I owe to Your Excellent Majesty, to disobey in any; but that Your Majesty
may know, you have a Subject that durst be Loyal, even in Disloyal times: I
have now attempted to arrive at the height of my Felicities, which is, not only
to be honest, but to be known to be Your Majesty's most Humble Servant, and
Obedient Subject.


A tender of Service to a Queen.
May it please Your Majesty,
THough I am a stranger to your Majesty, yet since I bear your Glorious Title
of a Loyal Subject, I have hence assurance, that your Majesty will vouchsafe to
give this boldness a favorable aspect; for indeed, I should doubt my own
Fidelity to my Royal Sovereign, should not your Majesty countenance my duty
with an acceptance of my Service; let me now only beg trouble of a pardon, and
I shall for ever study, as in duty bound, to manifest my self,

Your Majesty's Loyal Subject, and most humble Servant.


Respects from an Honorable Lady to a Queen.
Madam,
IF my passion had not overruled my reason, I would certainly have kept my
Letters from becoming so near an object for your sacred eyes, till some
commandment of your hand put them upon occasion to give them attendance; but
the care I have to preserve my self in the honor of your memory, and favor,
will not suffer me to continue any longer silent; therefore most humbly pray
your Majesty, to continue your self in assurance, even from hence, that my
Devotions are ever aspiring to your service, which yet I should half suspect to
be less perfect, if my inclinations might not own as great a part of that
ambition as my obligations; but the one accompanying the other, will establish
me for ever in an unchangeable resolution of being,

Madam, Your Majesty's most humble Servant.


A Fair Young Virgin to an Old Rich Miser, whom her Guardian did design should
Wed her.
Honourabe Sir,
FOR I must acknowledge the truth of that old Proverb, that says, Age is
Honorable; for all that, give me leave to tell you, though I am under the
Tuition of another, yet I am Mistress of my own affections, and in truth,
neither your wisdom or gravity, no nor your Riches can Charm me to affect you
Sir, be so much your self as to desist from your Suit to me, be in Charity with
the World, and in Love with Heavens, build Hospitals, that you may merit the
Prayers of the Poor, and spend not your precious time in Dotage upon a Woman;
for to be plain with you, I will sooner Wed my self to a Nunnery, or some
Loathsome Goal, than become your Bedfellow, and shall even have a greater
estimation for a wise man in Rags, than a fool in his Richest Trappings, if you
Vissit me or send to me any more; I shall conclude you Troublesome, and
Frantic; be vised then since you know the mind and resolution of,

Sir none but your, and yours till Death.


A Gentleman's request to his Friend, for a Sum of Money.
Sir,
LET me not be held no Friend, because I send to borrow Money; I had rather
want that, than lose your Love; but, Sir, if you shall think fit to pardon my
boldness, I desire your patience so far as to measure the Length of your
Purse-strings, since a present and urgent occasion pulls me on this strange
adventure, the Sum is but Five Pounds, which shall be paid within a Month, if
you dare take my credit for the asurance of it, and for Interest you shall have
my thankful accknowledgments, thus not doubting of your Civilty in this case, I
rest as ever,

Your Friend and Servant.


A Gentleman to his Friend, that sent to borrow Money.
Sir;
OUR Friendship would be held by a slender Thread, if five pound weight could
snap it; I have not only thought fit to pardon your boldness but do esteem my
self happy in that I have a Purse or strings to serve you your credit is
sufficient, and therefore I have sent you the Sum required: and shall expect no
other interest than the like courtesy, if you think it one, when you shall be
Troubled by,

Your hearty real Friend.


A Virgin to her Parents, that would have her Matched to one whom she cannot
Love.
Most Dear Parents,
I Beseech you, let the rules of nature be so prevalent with you, as not to
Marry me me to the Man whom you design; but if you do resolve that I shall
Marry, let it be to one that I can Love, or to my Grave, be not over ruled by
the thoughts of Avarice, lest you become in huemane, to your own blood and make
me,

Your Sad, Sorrowful, and Afflicted Daughter.


A Courteous Lass to her Paramour, who had gotten her with Child.
Dear Sir,
I AM now constrained to confine my self to a retired life, such is the fruit
of our dalliance that I am become obvious, and without your company shall be
odious to all that see me; and like your self, the Babe in my Womb, is
continually exercising it self in an Activity that affords me but little rest:
You cannot forget your promise to marry me e're you could prevail with me to
satisfy your pleasures. Sweet Sir, let your stay be short, for prolixity is
dangerous to both our Reputations, I Languish till you come, and till then and
ever shall remain my dear Soul:

Yours to love and live with you.


A Husband to his Lascivious Wife.
Wicked and Wretched Woman,
Have thou forgot all goodness, that thou dare lift up thy Adulterous eyes to
behold the Christial light? Have thou no sense of thy own filthy deformity?
Do thou not know the World brands thee for a Whore, a notorious Strumpet? Art
thou not sensible how thou have made me become a scum, and a byword to all
that know me? not that the credit of an honest man can be dashed by the
infidelity of a Strumpet! But so it is, that the corruptions of the times have
created a custom, to set the Wives sins upon the Husbands Forehead; thy
Children are either hated, or pityed by all, and I my self dare not look upon
them, lest I permit my fears to whisper to me thy Whoredoms, and their
bastardy; our Relations and those that were formerly our bosom friends, do now
forsake us, saying, they will not accompany themselves with such as belong to
the house of shame, or that Trade of Incontinency; consider these things and
repent, lest thy impenitency do farther provoke Divine Justice, and Heaven pour
forth Vengeance as a reward for all thy Impieties; and withal, remember this is
the advice of Thy abused Hus band.


A Wife to her extravagant Husband.
Vain and Miserable Man,
Can thou open thy eyes, and not fear lest every one that sees thee should
revenge those Adulterous and Lascivious actions of thine, wherewith thou have
brought upon thee the curses of a Chaste Wife, with her dear and Innocent
Babes, does not thy Conscience tell thee, there is an Everlasting Lawgiver Sits
in Triumph, against the day of Vengeance; to judge such perverse sinners as you
are: Do thou imagine that those strict Devils commanded from the beginning,
were but matters of policy, on that position of Man and Wife, being one flesh,
was merely breath and exhalation; surely it is so esteemed by Atheists, and
profane livers; but I fear, to the eternal horror of thy Soul, thou will roar
in the Pit of everlasting Perdition, from whence it is difficult to get
redemption; therefore be no more foolish, but call to mind how thou have spent
thy most precious time, endeavor to redeem it, and open the eyes of thy
understanding, that thou may repent, and sin no more, lest a worse thing
happen unto thee; consider that the lips of a Whore are sweet as Honey to the
taste of Fools, but in their heart is the sting of Scorpions, yea, the poison
of Asps lie under her lips; will thou then adventure the sting when there is no
Cataplasms for the sore? Will thou forget the Virtuous Wife of thy bosom, for
a Strumpet that is not only disloyal, but impudent? Dare thou despise thy
Children, those gifts of the Almighties providence, resembling Olive branches
about thy Table, those buds of the Divine blessings promised to the good man;
will thou run and wallow in the loathsome sins of lust, and carnal bruitality,
thou that may trace the pleasant walks of contentment, with honest and
chaste embracing; Oh! be more advised, lest the contract of your Nuptial Vows
prevail with thee: I conjure thee return to the pleasant Springs of our Amity,
that I may wash thee clean again with the Tears and Kisses of a loving Wife,
that thou may see thy Children flourish, and that I may no longer be as my
condition renders me,

Thy Sorrowful and Miserable Wife.


Civilities from one Lady to another.
Dear Madam,
MY ambition is still to continue in your favor, that it may prove as
importunate as it is unjust, because I never could deserve it; yet I have no
power to frustrate the effect of that, whereof you warrant the cause which
occasions my admiring of your worth; and since you have been pleased to assure
me of your Friendship, and your Favor, I can do no less than offer my Service,
which shall ever be in readiness to attend your commands: I have had some young
Gallants with me of late, who promised me more Visits, and have sent some
Complements; by the next, I hope to be better furnished with somewhat new, to
accompany those so often said, and shall perpetually, that I am, Madam,

Yours wholly at your Command.


The Forsaken Maid, to her Treacherous Friend.
Most unkind Man,
IT is my exceeding wonder that you should be one to make up the number of
those that dare to be wicked, now do I see my follies, when I hugged you in my
Bosom and believed those Oaths, and Protestations which you have most
Villainously broke; now can I call to mind the advice my experienced friends
gave me, never to trust to the pretensions of your Sex: Oh! can you see me on
your knees with wet and swollen eyes, and yet not learn to love me, nor hate your
self; or have you no regard to that innocent Lamb as yet in my Womb, which
though of a small Vollume, yet it is but your self in a lesser Frame: If you
believe, or think, it is not yours, let me be ripped up, and then you will
perceive each member to bear the lively Image of your own, and your name
likewise near it; for since you told me it should be so called, I wrote it in
my very heart; I have nothing more to say* but only to desire you to be so true
to your self, and me, as to remember and perform your Vow; if not, be so
merciful as to rid me of a loathsome Life, for if you do neither, my design
will be public, and rather then Live your Strumpet, I shall esteem it a
greater happiness since my misfortunes have brought me, to the misery to Die,

Your Sacrifice.


One Ladies advice to another near Marriage.
Good Soul,
IT is an unruly Age we live in, and my Love has occasioned this trouble to
you; I understand there is a Gentleman, Mr. A. B. is extremely prodigal of his
pretenses to you, in the way of Love and Marriage; my caution is only this,
that you have an eye to your own welfare. Build not upon empty promises, for if
you once suffer him to please his Humor before he is firmly yours, you will
certainly Forfeit your own Honor, consider as he is above you in Purse, and
the Portions of this Life, Beauty only excepted, for nature has given you a
Bountiful Proportion, whether his Intentions are real or feigned make him your
own; and then if you fall in two you, may understand the Phrase by observing
the occasions he will be bound by the Laws of God, and man to bear part in
whatsoever happens the Truth is: I had not taken upon me to give you this
admonition did not report speak loudly of his passions for you, and his
conditional promises to be yours hereafter if you consent to be his first, such
a Love has subtle shifts, and more meanings than a Harmless Maid, can easily
discover: Its reported too that you incline somewhat to believe him, and are
apt to think he means nothing but what is Honorable, yet know this from one
more experienced in things of this nature than you are, that if he should
perform his vows to you after he has Feasted his appetite, yet such a
breathing your reputation will continually admit of checks, opprobrious terms,
as Strumpet, Slut, Light-housewife; and what did you afford me that another Man
might not have had, and when the Glass is once broken it is not easily
cemented: dear Soul, keep Heaven about you, and let good thoughts Guard your
Innocence, so shall your Honor be unspotted; and your Life happy which is the
earnest Desire of.

Your Cordial Friend, and Servant etc.


A Gentleman to his Lady, tupon his urgent occasion of taking a Journey.
Honored Dear Lady,
HAD not Christianity tied me to a stricter Rule, I could, even curse the
severity of my Fate; since necessity compels me to be banished from you, and
consequently from my self; for let me go never so far distant, my Heart will be
always in your custody, and the thoughts of your dear self only my consolation,
but that I should be thus enjoined to me more, my person from you in whom
consists all my comfort and delight, is no small grief to me, especially
considering the Life I apprehended in your favor; the Heaven that I discovered
in your smiles, and all those delicious joys, that adored your countenance, yet
since it must be so, be assured my Dearest Dear, I shall not forget the vows of
my devotion, and I will be proud to Publish your virtues to the Ignorant World:
till I become completely happy in my experience of your constancy; nor, shall I
move in any other Sephere than what your influence does govern; and will sooner
Languish, to the worst of Deaths, than Love any but your divine Self, thus, my
only joy, leaving my Heart in your Tuition, I only beseech you to be tender of
it, for it is own, for yours, or for my sake; and in expectation of my happy
return, I rest,

Your Faithful, Humble Servant.


FINIS.

