THE SPIRITS Touchstone: OR, The Teachings of Christ's Spirit on the hearts of
BELIEVERS.

Being a clear discovery, how a man may certainly know whether he be really
taught of the Spirit of God, Being very useful for these times.

1 Cor. 2.15. But he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man.

By J. R. late Student of Morton College in Oxford.

London, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St. Paul's Church yard. 1657.

Sept. 10. 1656.
Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Dr. LANGLEY, Master of Pembrook-College in Oxford, and one
of the Canons of Christ-Church.
Reverend Sir,
Under God, and next to my Parents, I may righty term you the dearest friend
that I have in the World; from whom when I was at Oxford a Student in
Merton-College, I received many favors, and great encouragements to the
promoting of my studies, being by your care and vigilance over me preferred
from Pembrook-College, over which your self is a worthy Master, thither to a
Scholars place in the house. And since I left Oxford, I have been continually
in your thoughts, when God shall open a way for my further preferment. Upon
this account, with many other obliging arguments, I have presumed in this
present Treatise, a^ the first fruits of a more plentiful harvest, to address
my self unto you by way of thankefulness, to whom I owe my self, and the praise
and the glory, as to a secondary cause, of all those services which God shall
ever enable me to do for his Church and people. My portion to dispense the
Word of God is fallen out in a very disheartning and in an evil time: yet let
the opposition of the world, of flesh, and of the devil; let the carnal
reasonings of flesh and blood, let the malice of unreasonable men be never so
great, I have determined with my self to be the servant of Jesus Christ, and of
his Church, so long as my life, health, strength, liberty, or any ability by
the good providence of God is preserved unto me; and to spend it, and to be
spent for the Gospel of my Savior. If I meet with opposition, as I must do, I
have nothing but what I looked for, and what is my lot and portion while I am
in this life, and what all the faithful servants of Jesus Christ have formerly
undergon, and what the enmity in the spirit of the world against the Spirit of
God does naturally produce; and what we must have if we be faithful and
conscientious in our places, not dawbing with untempered mortar, but speaking
the truth in the heart; and what follows as necessarily wheresoever the power
of godliness, the cross of Christ, the lesson of self denial, and the setting
our selves against the corruptions of the times, and the breaking down of the
Magazines of sin, and the setting up the pure worship of God, and a plain,
sincere, honest hearted dealing for the good of their souls, not sparing any,
high or low, rich or poor, honorable or despised, so he it God may be
glorified, and the Kingdom of Christ advanced, is fully held forth. An evil
time I say it is, wherein, under a color of zeal for the cause of God, as if
these were the forerunners of Christ's second coming upon the earth, wherein as
they say he shall reign a thousand years, as John the Baptist was the
forerunner of his first coming (He indeed was so, for he came to prepare the
way of the Lord, and to make his paths straight before his face: But if we
grant them forerunners, they are no otherwise then sad omens of the worlds
destruction, with all the rest of the Antichristian party, when Christ shall
come to render vengeance upon them that know him not, and obey not the Gospel
of his Son) they pervert the right ways of the Lord, and corrupt the word of
God, (before the second coming of Christ there shall be an Apostasy from the
faith) when they seek to remove and to put out the light of the glorious
Gospel, that they may sin with more freedom, by turning our Bethel into a
Bethaven, and the houses of the Prophets to a den of abominable wretches. Woe
be to those men who are disobedient to the heavenly vision, who despise
Prophecyings, who reject the word of his faithful Ambassadors, calling them
Popish fellows, and Priests of Baal, under a pretense of higher mysteries. It
will be the saddest time that ever England saw yet, if the Sun shall go down
upon the Ministers of the Gospel, and the night shall come upon them. Where the
vision fails, the people perish. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.
Prove. 29.18. Hosea 4.6. 2 Chro. 15 3, 4, 5, 6.
When there was no vision, nor no teaching Priest, then there was no peace to
him that came in, or to him that went out. David says, Psalm. 11.3.
If the foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do? And if a
faithful Ministry, and a conscientious Magistracy be removed, and men be
suffered to do what they list, without reproof and correction, and instruction,
what can we expect but abominable prophannesse, but that England should become
a second Rome, a second Babylon, and another Sodom? But yet I hope better
things of England yet, since God has a precious seed to show forth his praise,
growing up in the two famous Universities of this land, watered exceedingly
with Divine showers of heavenly grace, and with the influences from above, by
the late prudent government in them; seeing by the wise providence of God such
pious, conscientious and holy men do sit at the stern and do guide the helm,
lest the sons of the Prophets might be infected with the errors and heresies of
the times; and the sons of Belial might prevail over them; though yet there is
not a sufficient purgation of pride, self seeking and of the advancement of
humane wisdom before the everlasting wisdom of God, from the Midst of them. And
there is yet something to be done before the blessing of God will descend upon
them in such a plentiful measure as otherwise it would, to wit, a joint
setting themselves with one shoulder, and with one consent to serve God in
sincerity of heart, and to bestir themselves more then ever for the preserving
of the truth of God, and to clear the truth from all those calumnies which
have been cast upon it in these latter times, and to stand up for the honor of
God, and of his Church. Now as there is a generation of men, men of perverse
minds, reprobate concerning the faith, given over to a spirit of delusions,
blinded with a judicial blindness, and hardened with a judicial hardness, led
away with the vanity of their minds, wicked and ungodly men, foreordained to
destruction, who would pull down all Ordinances, as preaching, prayer,
receiving of the Sacraments, holy conference, and all those means whereby grace
is wrought, cherished, promoted, and confirmed in the hearts of believers: and
which is far worse, they pretend to do all this by the light of the spirit
within them. As Mahomet the vilest of men did pretend that he was inspired by
the holy Ghost in the form of a Dove. so these miserable creatures pretend to
the teachings of the spirit upon their hearts, that so their heretical and
blasphemous Tenants may receive the better entertainment. If they had not
fathered their falsehoods, blasphemies, heresies upon the Spirit of God, I had
slept in silence, but when they make the Spirit of God to be a lying spirit, a
deluding spirit, a profane spirit, by their saying that the Spirit teaches
them to live above Ordinances, to blaspheme, to scoff at the word of his
grace, that the Spirit will supply all their wants without the use of means,
and that they stand not in need of those beggarly Elements, to wit, the Word,
Prayer, Sacraments, and other means of grace, as they call them, and all upon
the account of the Spirits teaching: I had no rest in my spirit, till what
light was imparted unto me concerning the teaching of the spirit upon the
hearts of believers, I had published for the benefit and comfort of true
honesthearted Christians; expecting to undergo the censure of some Aristarchus
or other, though God who tries all things knows the sincerity of my heart in
this matter. I wish the subject of my discourse had had a better workman to
have handled it; but what is defective in my endeavors shall be supplied in my
prays, that God would pour forth of his Spirit more and more upon the hearts
of his people, according to the tenor of the covenant, and that Gospel promise
that we shall be all taught of God; and to rectify those horrid abuses which
are done to the blessed Spirit, and to shame those impudent creatures who say
they are taught of the spirit, while they fulfill the dictates and commands of
the flesh and of the Devil, and to destroy the spirit of error and
profaneness, the spirit of Antichrist which exalts it self in the lives of
many Saints eminent in the eyes of the world, and to preserve his people, his
Ambassadors, his Sacraments, his truth, his Word in the power and purity of it;
and to keep us from Popery, superstition, will-worships, and from the doctrnes
of men; and to make his Church a glorious Church for purity of worship and
piety of life, in this thrice blessed Nation, for the means of grace, and for
the true knowledge of God which is in it; which is and ever shall be the request
of him at the thron of grace, who is,

Yours most obliged in all duty add observance, J. R.

TO The Ingenuous and Honest-hearted READER.
IT is well known to the grief and sorrow, and daily vexation of many righteons
Lots, who daily torment themselves for the perverseness of this crooked
generation amhngst whom they dwell, that the common plea of most men who
pretend to the knowledge of the things of God, is the teachings of the Spirit
upon their hearts: Never was the spirit so much cried up in respect of its
teachings as it is now adays, Caution. God forbid that I should sin against the
generation of the righteous and offend one of Gods little ones by opening my
mind in so free a way. I am verily persuaded God has at peculiar people, a
godly party amongst us, most dear and precious unto him, who know what their
generation work is; and what it is to serve God in spirit and in truth; a
praying people for whose sakes this very sinful Nation laden with sin and with
iniquity is still preserved a most glorious Nation: By these therefore whom I
so characterize in this Epistle understand those overly righteous people who
confining salvation and religion to themselves; as if none were saved but they;
set themselves with all their might against those who do not comply with them,
and by opposing godly Magistracy and Ministry of this present Nation, seek to
extirpate both; so be it their ends and aims may be carried on And I am verily
persuaded had done it, had not God procured in his mercy a gracious liberty for
us. Woe to those who abuse this liberty by venting forth uncouth opinions,
strange doctrines horrid blasphemies, these persons the Lord will consume with
the breath of his nostrils.
and never were men less void of the spirit, and besotted with the delusious of
the Devil, and with the fancies of these own pernicious brains then they are
now: If self-pride, intolerable covetousness, ambition of honor, contempt of
the word and Gospel of Christ, disrespect, slighting, and open scoffing it the
Ministers of the Gospel: If a secret covert-acting of profaneness under the
cloak of religion, as to lie, to deceive, to cozen, to backbite, to revile, to
reproach, to revenge, to hate, to rejoice at the harms of others who are far
better then themselves; and to lay wait for their falls, as if it did them a
pleasure to see God dishonored, to persecute, to molest, and the like, and all
this under a pretense of doing God service: If want of love to the Saints of
God, and to the ways of his worship, a not receiving of the truth in meekness
of spirit: if earthly mindedness and a grovelling in this present world, a not
obedience to Magistracy and the powers set over us by God: If a slavery to the
traditions and inventions of men: If a prejudice o^a heart against whatsoever
is not suitable to their corrupted minds: If self-seeking (when they seek their
own things and not the things which are of Jesus Christ,) and a refusing
whatsoever they cannot apprehend, and the light within them directs them to: If
an undervaluing of others, and a preferring of themselves, when every true
Christian esteems each other better then himself: If a proud, censorious,
critical spirit interpreting and judgeing of persons and of things, according
as their blind reason, and ill affected minds lead them: If inconstancy and
levity of mind, ignorance, profaneness and a building upon truths without any
ground or foundation: If a boasting, and bragging of an infallible spirit; and
of the light of the spirit within them: If a making of sections, parties and
factions needlessly and without any cause, only upon the account of
singularity; because they love to be Christians by themselves, and to walk upon
their own legs, and to stand upon their own bottoms: If a walking contrary to
the mind of the spirit, making the spirit the author of confusion in Church and
State; when merely upon the account of the spirits teachings, as if these were
a sufficient call for a man to be an Ambassador of Jesus Christ; and therefore
he must break his bounds; and leave that calling and station God has set him
in; and run upon irreverent things when they are not sent: If superstition,
will worship, sacrilege; neglect of the Sacraments, of Prayer, of the Word;
and of building up one another in the most precious faith: If a malicious frame
of heart under a sheepish sanctity, for many wolvish professors are now adays
in sheeps clothing: If an impudent, contradicting, blaspheming spirit; If a
persecuting spirit: If an advancing of their own fictions before the pure and
unspotted word of God: If a rash impetuous zeal not moderated with discretion,
and the love of the truth, and of the word of God, which is rather madness and
folly then zeal: If unbelief, Atheisms, Heresies, and most horrid blasphemies
not to be mentioned: If a living above Ordinances, without the use of the Word,
Sacraments and Prayer: If a coldness and deadness in affection to the things
of God; and a full bent of will to oppose Jesus Christ in his Saints, and in
his servants, and a continual persisting therein though they are condemned in
their own consciences, and so are like to commit that unpardonable sin against
the holy Ghost; from which sin, I heartily beseech God to preserve the Quakers
of these times, with many others who sin against the light of their own
consciences: If a hating of the power of godliness, and of the pure worship of
God: If a want of self-denial, and daily bearing the cross of Christ: If an
Apostasy from the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints; If a setting
up of false doctrines under the pretense of new discoveries: If we are not
fallen into the last times of the world, wherein that place is too much
verified, wherein men shall be covetous, lovers of themselves, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, 2 Timothy 3.1.2, 3, 4, 5.
disobedient to parents, unthankeful, unholy; Without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, Traitors heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God; Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power of it. If these things
be so, as it is too apparent to the grief of many righteous persons, who weep
in secret for the iniquity of the times; then we may as truly say, that Turks,
Infidels, and Pagans have the teachings of the spirit upon their hearts; as the
most part of our lukewarm, proud, opinionative, and carnally-minded professors
have; Such evil principles and wicked practices as are now amongst those that
go for Saints cannot agree with the blessed spirit. I am verily persuaded that
if once the furnace of affliction should wax hot again; and Christ should come
to sift England again by the red fiery flaming sword of persecution; and bring
us under the hatchet; and under the hand of Tyrannical persecutors; and should
come to purge his floor to distinguish between the precious, and the vile;
between him that fears God, and him that fears him not; between him that
serves him out of an upright heart, and him that serves him but under a
color and pretense: I am verily persuaded that the greatest part of profesting
Christians now adays, who make such a fair show in the flesh, who seem so
beautiful and glorious in the outside; who are so hot at the first onset, and
taking up a form of religion, who pretend so much to the work of the spirit
upon their hearts; if they were singled out to undergo the fiery trial would
fall the fowlest in the flesh. No outward privilege or benefit can afford a
man any comfort under an afflicted condition but only the sense of the love of
God unto us in Jesus Christ by an act of the spirit sealing it to our souls is
a certain sign that we shall continue unto the end. For who God loves once, he
loves to the end. And those whom God loves, God will preserve unto himself as a
peculiar treasure, as precious jewels in his cabinet secretly; and will make
their mountains strong, as strong as Mount Sion which shall never be moved,
that their faith and confidence shall be in the Lord Jehovah for ever and ever.
I beseech thee Christian, for the good of thy soul to separate thy self from
these deceiving creatures; let not their hypocrisy, their juggling with the
world, and their own consciences though they cannot mock God, their seeming
sanctity, their pretended piety, their high notions and deep interpretations
far fetch from the simplicity of the truth which neither they themselves, nor
others well understand delude thee? while they lay claim to the spirit, they
are in the bonds of iniquity: Consider whether they have the spirit before thou
closest with their sayings for truth; that they are taught by the Spirit of
Christ, and that the light of the spirit reside within them. Are they
regenerated, born again, and renewed by the Spirit of Christ? Do they grow in
grace and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ? Have they the witness of Gods
Spirit concurring with their spirits that they are the children of God? Does
the spirit help their infirmities? Was ever the spirit of prayer and
supplicatton powered forth upon them? Have they the preventing grace, the
renewing grace, the establishing grace, the comforting grace, the quickening
grace, the healing grace, the directive grace of the spirit? Do they love the
brethren because they are brethren, and one with thee in Jesus Christ, or
because they are of such an opinion? Do they acknowledge the spirit in others;
and magnify Gods goodness unto their soul? Did the spirit ever rarifie the
scorching heat of their burning lusts? Did the sanctifying influences of the
spirit ever descend upon their hearts? Did the spirit ever soften their hard
hearts, Cant. 7.7.
fructify their barren souls? The breasts of the spouse are like clusters of
grapes. Cant. 4 16
Did the spirit ever blow upon their gardens that the spices thereof may send
forth a precious smell in the nostrils of God? Do they bring forth fruits unto
holiness, that their end might be everlasting life? Did the spirit ever quench
the fire of hell within their consciences by pouring in the sweet oil of
consolation made up of the blood of Christ? Did the spirit ever cleanse their
consciences from dead works that they may serve the everliving God: Heb. 9.14.
Ez. 36.25.
The spirit is resembled by water. I will pour clean water upon you, and you
shall be clean. It is the nature of water, to molifie, to fructify, to quench,
to cleanse and purify: what zeal, what heat, what ardency of spirit, what
kindlings of affections are there in them toward God, and the ways of his
worship? what lights do they hang abroad to others, that others seeing their
good works might glorify God? and what progress do they make in Christianity;
with what eagerness of spirit as if they were serious for their souls good do
they lay hold on eternal life; Nay rather, do they not stand still, as if they
had already obtained perfection, when they are on the declining hand. In fire
there is heat, brightness and motion. Ex. 13.22.
What Dove-like qualifications have they? Does the spirit of meekness, of love,
and of a sound mind reside amongst them; The spirit of peace, of unity, of
gentleness, of fear, of sonlike obedience to the commands of God? The Spirit of
God came down in the form of a dove upon our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Mat. 3.16.
Were they ever truly affected with Gods distinguishing love and mercy in that
his Spirit should teach them, as they say, and let others lie in darkness? Did
the spirit drive away from amongst them the dust and the chaff of their vain
and frothy minds? Did the spirit ever enable them to overcome the bent of their
natural inclinations? If Socrates by the help of moral instructions was able to
bridle his loose disposition: much more may they who are taught by the spirit.
Did the spirit ever make, them of unwilling willing to receive Jesus Christ,
and to take his yoke upon them? The Spirit is resembled by the wind; which in
its blowing is arbitrary, Joh. 3.8.
irresistible, full of might and efficacy scattering the dust, and dispolling
the clouds. Do their hearts burn within them at the hearing of the things of
God, as the two disciples hearts did, with whom Christ had conference after his
resurrection? The Spirit of God came down upon the brethren in the form of
fiery flaming tongues. It is an easy thing for a man to say he is taught, and
enlightened by the Spirit of God; but how few are they that are so indeed?
Beloved Christian, I have given thee some light into this mystery concerning
the teachings of the Spirit, which if improved by thee, will bring much comfort
to thy precious soul, and much joy to him who is thine, and the truths friend.

I R.

A Brief summary of those general heads which are in this ensueing Treatise.
FIrst, the readiest way to win dissenting brethren to the obedience of the
truth, is to deal with them in the spirit of meekness. Under which head is
containd the handling of those who are of a contumacious spirit still opposing
the shinings forth of divine truth. 1 Admonition which must be once and again.
2 Sharp reproof, and that openly before many witnesses. 3 A Disowning them, and
a rejecting them from being of the Church. This admonition includes two things,
as 1 A demonstration of the absurdity of the things which they hold.

2 A secret insinuating unto them the truth and the excellency of the opposite
to which they hold.

2 The best and the most precious doctrine that is meeting with an unsanctified
heart is opposed, and had in derision.

3 That is the best preaching which works upon the affections stirring us up to
our spirititual duty that we may serve God acceptably, in reverence and godly
fear, all the days of our life, as well as informs our judgments.

4 The Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and of the Gospel of his grace, must be men
of peace, and not study to make factions and parties in the Church of God.

5 For believers to call themselves by the names of their spiritual guides be
they never so holy and religious men, or by strange names taken up by the
contumelies of ungodly men, is an unchristian thing, and disagreeing to the
mind of the spirit.

6 The word of God considered absolutely in it self, as the word of God ought
to be the rule and ground of our faith.

7 For men to preach their own inventions and new fangled notions, and the
fancies of their own intoxicated brains; or for men to allegorize Scriptures
according as their mind serves them, neglecting the pure fountain of the word
of God, is to build man's faith upon humane wisdom, and not upon the power of
God.

8 A servant of Jesus Christ must suit his style and matter according to the
judgment and capacity of his hearers.

9 There are secrets in Gods own keeping which all the learning in the world
can never attain unto, only the spirit reveals them.

10. Those that have the Spirit of God cannot but know the things of God.

11 There is no other way but by the Spirit to know the things of God.

12 Only the Saints have this privilege to enjoy the Spirit, which the world
cannot receive.

13 The Spirit of God comes by receiving, as a free gift of God unto believers.

14 The spirit of the world is acted with a diverse spirit from the Spirit of
God.

15 The World has a double evil spirit. 1 Satan. 2 That inbred spirit of
wickedness which is within it.

16 Satan is a Spirit because of his working, which is suitable to the nature of
spirits. He is the spirit of the world upon a double account. 1 Because he acts
in the world. 2 Because the world is willingly acted by him.

A double Antichrist 1 Mystical sin. 2 Personal.

That man of sin.

17 Whatsoever opposes Jesus Christ, or sets it self up in the plaoe of
Christ, is Antichrist 1 Our own righteousness is Antichrist. 2 The devil is
Antichrist. 3 The world is Antichrist. 4 All moral wisdom, and humane knowledge
is Antichrist, unless it be sanctified by the Spirit of God.

18 The children of God are acted by a double spirit, opposite to the spirit of
the world. 1 The Spirit of God. 2 The regenerate part within them which is
called a spirit.

19 The Spirit the third person in the blessed Trinity proceeds from the
Father and the Son.

20 The Holy Spirit is God, which is proved 1 By Scripture, 2 By reason: as 1
Because those attributes are applied to the Spirit which are only proper to
God, 2 Those works: 3 That adoration and worship which only belongs to God.

21 God gives all things freely in opposition to merit, and in opposition to
compulsion. Under this conclusion is answered an objection arising from the
death of Jesus Christ.

22 None can know the things of God, but those who have the teachings of the
Spirit upon their hearts.

Under this Conclusion is showed,

1 The various acceptations of the word Spirit in Scripture.

2 What the teachings of the Spirit are: 1 By way of praemonition, that it is
very difficult to know them. 2 Positively.

3 How the teachings of the Spirit may be distinguished from the motions, and
from the impressions of the Spirit.

4 How the Spirit teaches, 1 By enlightening our understandings, that we may
see the things of God. 2 By removing the enmity that is in our wills against
them.

5 What things more especially the Spirit teaches: 1 To know God, 1 His love
to believers in Jesus Christ, 2 His holy nature, 3 The exact justice of God
against every sin 2 The Spirit only has showed us the mystery of the blessed
and incomprehensible Trinity. 3 The mystery of the Incarnation of Christ. 4
The evil nature of sin: Where is proved, that the first motions to sin, are
sin, and an objection arising from them dissolved: 5 To understand the word of
God aright. 6 Several other things the Spirit teaches: Many other practical
duties the Spirit teaches

6 What manner of teachings the Spirits teachings are. 1 Infallible teachings:
Here is showed the difference between the Devils revelations and the teachings
of the spirit.
Wherein is answered an objection arising from the insallibility of the Spirit.
2 They are inward teachings. 3 Evident teachings. 4 Irresistible teachings. 5
Arbitrary teachings. 6 Determinating fixing, and quieting teachings. 7 They are
consonant to the Word of God. 8 Effectual, powerful, transforming teachings.
9 Quiet and comfortable teachings. 10 Abiding teachings. 11 Uniform teachings.
12 Only teachings.

6. Prove the conclusion, that only those that know the things of God can have
the teachings of the spirit upon their hearts. Where that place of Scripture is
opened, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, because they are spiritually discerned. Because all the men that have not
the spirit are either bewitched or besotted, or overcome with the power of some
domineering lust, or drunken with the pleasures of sin, or have no other light
to judge by but that little spark which is left within them since the fall
which is overpressed with the corruptions of sin, or are guided by sense which
is not able to judge aright of spiritual things.

7. Make application. 1. By way of insormation, to show that the greatest part
of Christians are void of the spirit, from that place of Scripture, 2 Cor. 3
17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Now most Christians are
in a state of bondage. Wherein you have three respects how the spirit is called
a spirit of liberty. 2. By way of exhortation, to stir you up to seek after the
spirits teachings upon a three fold account. 1. It is a singular blessing to be
taught by the spirit. 2 The teachings of the spirit are better then all other
teachings; and the wisdom of the spirit is better then all other wisdom
whatsoever, for these reasons:

1. All other knowledge it breeds distraction of mind, and pierces the soul
through with many sorrows.

2. A little knowledge with true grace is better then all the knowledge in the
world without the light of the spirit.

3. Other knowledge it puffs up, but the light of the spirit it humbles.

4. All other knowledge it does but furnish a man that he might be a more able
instrument for the Devil, and to carry on his designs in the world.

5. All other knowledge will but aggravate our condemnation, because it is not
sanctified by the spirit.

6. All other knowledge it is subservient to the light of the spirit.

7. All other knowledge will never make a man a good Christian.

8, All other knowledge will never satisfy and quiet our souls.

9. All other knowledge is but vanity and vexation of spirit.

10. All other knowledge it rather hinders then promotes the salvation of men.

11. God has a time when he will blast upon all humane unsanctified knowledge.
2. If thou art taught by the spirit, it is an evident sign thou art the friend
of God. 3. If thou art taught by the spirit, it is a true sign that thou art
instated into the Covenant of grace.

8. Give several signs whereby we may know we are taught of the spirit.

1. He that is taught by the spirit of God, is of an humble spirit.

2. He is of a joyful spirit.

3. He that is taught from above will not grudge at the dispensations of God to
others, but will do what lies in his power to teach others.

4. He that is taught of the spirit is a man of another spirit then he was
before.

5. He is of a meek spirit. Wherein you have the several kinds of meekness
opened, and what it is to be of a meek spirit.

6. He that is taught of the spirit is one that seareth God. Wherein you have
the several kinds of fear declared, and what it is to fear God aright.

7: He that is taught of the spirit will still desire to have further
discoveries of the spirit upon his heart.

8: He that is taught of the spirit is of a heavenly mind, and can perform all
duties in a spiritual manner.

9. Show what are the extraordinary teachings of the Spirit from the ordinary.

10. This head is discovered in four particulars. Declare the times wherein the
spirits teachings are most manifest. 1. In times of affliction. 2. Near the
time of death.

11. Answer several doubts and questions arising from the spirits teachings.

12 Declare that it is the duty of every Christian to walk up to that light
which God has given him: 1 To the light of nature.

2 To the light of conscience.

3 To the light of natural improvements; moral education, good examples.

4 To the light of the word, which includes both Law and Gospel. 1 Those that
have only the light of the Law, ought to walk up to that light. 2 It highly
concerns all Christians to walk up to the light of the Gospel, because of the
nature of this most excellent light, and the aggravations of their sins who sin
against it.

5 To the sight of the conviction of the Spirit of God.

Reasons. 1 Because every one shall be judged according to what measure of
light he has received. 2 From the nature of light, which manifests to us our
evil deeds, that thereby they may be reformed. 3 Because he that walks not up
in some cases to the light of his conscience, offends in not so doing. Where is
showed in what cases we may walk according to the light of our own consciences.

The Teachings OF CHRIST'S SPIRIT Upon the Hearts of BELIEVERS.
1 COR. 2.12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things which are freely given unto us
of God.


IN the former Chapter, the blessed Apostle of the Gentiles, after his wonted
salutation to this Church of Corinth, in the 10th verse of the same Chapter, he
exhorts them to unanimity and concord of spirit, to wit, that there be no
dissentions among them, but that they be knit together in one mind and in one
judgment: And to bring them over to this oneness of spirit, of being knit
together in love, he does not come in a rigorous way pleading his authority, as
the Apostle of Christ, or the power of the Keys, or Church censures, or
denouncing the threatenings of the Law, and the curses of God; but by a sweet
and alluring compellation, calling them brethren, and befeeching them in the
Name of Jesus Christ, he winnes them over to the obedience of the truth. Hence
observe, That the readiest way to win gainsaying brethren to the obedience of
the faith, Note.
is not to be of a fiery spirit as James and John were, and presently to count
them as disjoined and disunited from the body of Christ, and to count them
enemies to the power of godliness, and to excommunicate and dismember them: but
as good spiritual bonesetters, according to the Apostles word, Gal. 6.1.
(...). Gal. 6.1. Metapho ra a Ghirurgis artus dissolu tos leviter connect
entibus. Mal. 3.2, 3
To restore our fallen brethren with the spirit of meekness, and to pray for
them daily, and to expect their reunion, when the light of the spirit shall
shine into their hearts through the face of Jesus Christ. Till Christ shall sit
as a refiners fire, and purify the hearts of his people, as the Prophet
Malachy has it, and shall make them willing in the day of his power to receive
the truth in the love of it: But yet we ought to distinguish, Psalm. 110.3. Romans
14.1
and to make a difference between the precious and the vile, between him that
is weak in the faith, and him that offends out of malice and obstinacy, and
knows that he is in a wrong way, and will not be reformed. With the later we
are to deal in a more severe way openly, 1 Timothy 5.20. Mat. 7.6. Mat. 18.17.
rebuhing them before many witnesses, and if they still persist and turn to
Dogs, and rent us, then let them be unto us as Heathens or Publicans, and let
them be given over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor 5.5.
that their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. I find that the
Scripture uses several Greek words to express and show forth the various
ways we ought to proceed withal in handling those that have erred from the
faith.

1. (...), Admonition, a friendly and courteous telling them that they are not
in the right way, and that as long as they stick to these principles and adhere
to those false conclusions they are to seek in the things of God. Beseeching
them to examine them by the light of the Word, and the Spirits speaking in the
hearts of others, who have further discoveries upon their hearts of the truths
of God, and of those things which accompany salvation than they, and to judge
according to the analogy and proportion of Faith: Rom 12.6
To beseech them to examine upon what grounds they close with these opinions,
and of the ground of their faith, and of the reason of their hope. For we are
not upon Trust and upon bare Tradition to close with any Doctrine delivered
unto us, though it comes with never so fair a species of truth, 1 John 4.1.
but to try the Spirits whether they be of God or no, and be always ready to
render a reason of our Faith, 1 Pet. 3.15
and of the work of Grace upon our hearts, to every one that shall require it
of us. And to search into the lives of those men who endeavor to draw us to
their opinions, Gal. 6.13.
whether they are those that seek themselves, and their honor, and the
pleasing of their own humor, or the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ
in the hearts of his people: Now this admonition it must not be once, but again
and again, till by the power of the Word, and the bright shining forth of
truth, they being overcome by the beauty and the excellency and the power of
it, (for what is stronger then truth) they be over-weaned and prevailed upon to
a sincere and hearty affection to it. Now this (...) or Admonition includes, 1.
(...), falsae doctrinae, a demonstration of the absurdity, and the falsity of
the opinion they are in love withal, as the Apostle Paul did, who proved
Justification to be of Grace, and not of Works, showing the impossibility of it
by an Antithesis between Works and Grace: If it is of Works, Romans 11.6
it is not of Grace, otherwise Grace is no more Grace. We must first show them
that they are in a wrong way, before we can persuade them of the right: Says
Solomon, Prove. 14.12.
There is a way which seems right to a man's eyes, but the ends of those ways
are death. Now till a man sees that death and destruction follows and attends
his ways, he will never seek after Wisdoms path, and the ways which tend to
life. Act. 8.3. Act. 9.1. (...).
As long as Paul was nurtured up in the Jewish doctrine, and insensible of the
depravation of it, he was enraged in his spirit against the Church of God,
haling men and women to the Judgment seat; but when once the Spirit had
convinced him of the weakness of that dispensation under which he lived, Romans
10.1
and that the Law was not able to bring any thing to perfection, and the
Ceremonial Law is Statutes which were not good, Ezekiel 20.25.
as the Prophet Ezikiel calls them; and that he cannot be justified by the works
of the Law, he presently disclaims whatsoever formerly he embraced, counting
all things but loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge
of Jesus Christ. 2. A secret insinuating unto them the truth and the excellency
of the opposite to which they hold, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.16.
I beguiled you, i. e. I caught you as fishes are caught in a net, before you
were aware, by the power of the Word upon your hearts. We ought to strike the
iron while it is hot, and to work upon men's hearts when they are stirred up by
a holy compunction of spirit to search into the nature of things. Every time is
not fit to deal with men for their souls good, because the spirits of men,
according to men's various assections stirred up at such a time, rather then
another, are more suitable to receive an impression than at another time, as the
stories of Amaziah and Asa will clearly show, 2 Chronicles. 25. We read of Amaziah
that having hired an hundred thousand valiant men out of Israel of the Tribe of
Ephraim to assist him against the children of Seir; the Propher came to him in
the Name of the Lord, commanding him to separate these men from the men of
Judah, that they might return to their own place. Here Amaziah readily obeyed
the Word of the Lord by the Prophet, though to his own damage, with the loss of
the hundred Talents of silver. Yet we find in the following verses of the same
Chapter, that the same King Amaziah, when the Prophet came to reprove him for
serving the Gods of the Nations whom he had overcome, he was wrath with the
Prophet, and disobeyed the Word of the Lord.

O what a happy issue might many of Gods people have had of their admonitions
and reproofs upon the souls of others, if they had done it when the soul was of
a tender frame of spirit, sensible of its own infirmity, and under the sense of
its insufficiency kept low in its own eyes, desiring above all things to be
taught by the Spirit. I have known many who at the first onset of a reproof,
though sugared over with many sweet words (which is a great oversight in the
people of God, Psalm. 141.5.
and far from David's temper, who said, If the righteous smite him it shall be
as a precious balm, which shall not break his head) who afterward were as
Lambs apt to be guided by the weakest hand. 2 Samuel 15.6.
As Absolon is said to steal away the hearts of the men of Israel from his
Father David; so we are to win men's affections to our selves by our plausible
and affable carriage, and allure them by a self-denying frame of spirit to
yield unto us. As the Poet says, -- Peragit tranquilla potestas,
Quod violenta nequit. --


It is reported of Musculus, that by his gracious behavior to the Anabaptists
in his time, visiting them in prison, exhorting them and beseeching them to be
reclaimed, he did more prevail upon them to their conversion, than the
Magistrates could do by their imprisonments and punishments. 2 Timothy 2.24. But
the servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men,
apt to teach, suffering the evil. Instructing them with meekness that are
contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentance, that
they may acknowledge the truth.

2. To rebuke them sharply: Greek, Tit. 1.13. (...)
Cuttingly, to lay open the Word before them that two-edged Sword, and to press
it home to the conscience, v. g. as if they were to deal with one that denies
the resurrection, as the Saducees did, to set home with the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, that is plainly and powerfully that place of
Scripture which Christ objected against them, Mat. 22.32.
I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, the God not of the dead, but
of the living. This is it which Ecclesiastes speaks of, Eccles. 12.11.
when the Word is nailed home by the Masters of Assemblies: 2 Timothy 2.15.
this is rightly to divide the Word of God, giving to the stout-hearted sinner
its portion. Ministers are not to fear the face of man, Ephesians. 6.20.
because they are the Ambassadors of the ever living God, but to particularize
sinners, as Nathan did David, 2 Samuel 12.7.
saying, Thou art the man. Says God by his Prophet Hosea, Hos. 6.5.
I have slain them by my Prophets. The Word of God it kills the unregenerate
part, and makes us dead to the customs of the world, but quickens the
regenerate part within us. It either divides between Christ and us, and then it
is the savor of death unto death; 2 Cor. 2.16.
or either between us and our sins, between us and the world, between us and
our carnal corrupt reason, and then it is the savor of life unto life. It is
called a fire, Jer. 23.29.
because as the fire consumes the dross, and purifies the metal, so the Word
it purifies the dross in our hearts, and of reprobate silver it makes us fit
for the use of our spiritual Master Jesus Christ. And although they may resist
thee and shift off the truth, and hate the light, and are become thine encmies
because thou dealest plainly and powerfully with them, as Paul speaks of the
Galatians, Gal. 4.16.
Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth. Act. 7.54. (...). Instar
serrae dentes frendebant.
Yea though they may gnash upon thee with their teeth, as the malicious Jews
did at Stephen, yea though they may persecute you for your zeal, yet know this
that thou have performed thy duty, and delivered thy own soul, Romans 12.20. i.
e. Either by thy rendering good for his evil, thou have gained thy Brother, and
caused him to render love for love. (For love is a certain secret fire
enkindled in men's hearts by a sympathy with the object which allures, still
blazing forth and aspiring to be united with the thing loved.) Or if thou shall
not gain thy brother by thy Christian carriage, thou shall heap coals of fire
and brimstone upon his head to his everlasting torment.
and thy reward is with God, Thou have heaped coals of fire upon his head, and
fuel for his everlasting burning. But thy reward shall be as great as if thon
had reclaimed him, seeing thou have not been wanting on thy part to do thy
duty.

3. (...), Tit. 3.10. i. e. Recusare and repudiare. To give them over to the
swing of their lust, and to let them have their liberty in their pernicious
ways, and for a time to divorce them from our company, from having any
communion or society with us (as a Husband does divorce his Wife, who is given
over to a spirit of Whoredom) so to give them, as it were, a bill of divorce
for the future to have any spiritual commerce with them, as the word imports,
till God by his blessed Spirit shall bring them out of the snare of the devil.
Analogicall to this is the Apostles phrase, he that loves not the Lord Jesus,
let him be Anathema Maranatha, that is, 1 Cor. 16.22.
let him be accursed till the Lord comes, till Christ who is the Lord shall
arise in his heart, and dispell the clouds of sin and ignorance, and the
day star arise in his heart. Like to this is the word (...) deflectere, to
turn aside from them till their eyes shall be enlightened, to discern between
truth and error: says Christ, Mat. 18.18.
Whose sins you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, etc. So that the
Church of Christ, which includes both Pastor and People, excommunicating a
profane Esau, or a licentious Libertine, or a scoffing Ishmael, or a
falsehearted Disciple, or a rotten member that has a postatized from the
faith, or one that has fallen into some gross sin to the scandal of Religion,
till they have repented, is seconded by God in heaven, as acting that
Discipline and Jurisdiction which he has enacted in his Church. Simile.
As a dead member in a man's body joined to the living members, does but annoy
and hinder them, as if a man had one leg which were quite dead, and utterly
useless, it were better it were cat off than that is should remain united to
the rest, for it rather hinders the rest of the members than profits them; so
it were better that all these dead members, fruitless branches in Jesus Christ,
Joh. 15.2.
walking Saints, talkative Christians, were separated from the Church of God,
especially if they are discovered to be so by some notorious fault, or
Apoflacy, till they are renewed again by repentance, than that they should
defile and annoy the Church of God. Says the Prophet Haggai, Hag. 2.12.
An unclean thing may defile a thing which is clean, though a clean thing
cannot purify an unclean.
Aster an unclean person or an hypocrite is discovered, if they cast him not
forth and excommunicate him, he defiles the Church and the Ordinances of God,
but if he be not discovered and goes for a Saint, and has a name that he lives
when he is dead; Rev. 3.1.
and according to the Apostles phrase, Heb. 10.29. 2 Pet. 2.1.
for one that was sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, and bought by Jesus
Christ, though in Gods sight he be a wicked wretch and abominable hypocrite, he
defiles not the Church, because he is not discovered.

After the Apostle had exhorted them to unity of Spirit in the later part of
the seventh Chapter, he comes to show the different success his Ministry had in
reference to Jew and Gentile. The preaching of the cross of Christ to the Jews
a stumbling block, and to the Greeks soolishnese. Hence Observe,

That the best and the most precious Dectrine that is meeting With an
unsanctified heart, Note.
it is opposed and had in derision. The Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, a most
precious sweet and heavenly Doctrine, a Doctrine full of comfort, a Doctrine
rending to the establishing of weak dejected sinners, laden with the burden of
their sins, the most soulcomforting Doctrine that ever was delivered to the
sons of men; yet this Doctrine will not go down with the Jews and with the
Greeks, but to the Jews it is a stumbling block, and to the Greeks soolishness.
What word more comfortable than a crucified Christ? Joh. 1.14. (...)
Unigenitus. Col. 1.15. (...), Frimogenitus. Heb 1.3. (...), Mat. 3.17. (...)
Filius ille meus dilectus in quo complacitus sum. (...). His most dear Son, the
Son that lay in his Fathers bosom from all eternity. The Son of him who is the
Ancient of days. Joh. 10.18. Heb. 1.1.
a crucified Christ for a wretched forlorn sinner. Gods greatest mercies have
been the most a bused. God had but one Son, one only Son, one only wellbeloved
Son, one only wellbeloved Son who was the express Image of his Fathers
person, who was full of grace and truth, who was daily his delight, the delight
of God the Father, in whom he was well pleased, who was altogether lovely, who
was coequal with God the Father, and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God; this beloved Son, his only begotten Son, God out of his infinite love
to mankind sent in the fullness of time into the world with a message of
reconciliation to redeem sinners, enemies, rebels, and a postates from the very
womb, and yet what hard measure did the Lord of Life, who willingly came down
from the bosom of his Father, and freely offered himself a ransom for our
souls, being to deal with the hard-hearted and cruel Pharisees, find in the
world, as the History and Passion related by all the Evangelists do fully show
forth. Yea how is the Gospel of Peace, the Gospel of glad tidings brought to
light by the appearance of Jesus Christ in the world! How is it despised and
rejected and counted as nothing! Yea how are the precious servants of Jesus
Christ, who bring the good tidings of peace to poor souls, and the Olive branch
of salvation in their lips, how are they despised and made the offscouring of
the world in this present age! God has a controversy with the Jews at this
day, for spilling the blood of Jesus Christ, for the curse is upon them when
they said, Mat. 27.25.
Let his blood be upon us and upon our children. And certainly God has a
controversy with this Nation for the injuries done to the faithful servants
of Jesus Christ, and when God comes to reckon for blood, the blood of Gods
Ministers will lie the heaviest: As one drop of Christ's blood, by how much he
is more precious than all the sons of Adam, yea than all the Angels of heaven,
is of more worth than ten thousand worlds, and will lie heavier upon the heads
of them on whom it falls. Mat. 21.38.
As it was a heinous fault for the Husbandmen to whom the Vineyard was let out,
to slay the Master of the Vineyards own son, and shall be more severely
punished, so next to Jesus Christ, the blood of the faithful Ministers of
Christ will weigh the heaviest, heavier than all the blood of the Prophets
slain from the blood of Zacharias the son of Barakias, Mat. 23.35.
whom they slew between the Temple and the Altar, Heb 8.6. 2 Cor. 3.6.
which Christ so much aggravates upon, the Jews, because they are the
Ambassadors of a better Covenant, and Ministers of the New Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, which Christ has confirmed with his own blood.
O that this were not one of Englands giant sins, which lies heapt up in Gods
account, and makes the inhabitants of the Land odious in his sight! You must
observe you do not only kill the Ministers, when violently by the hatchet you
sever their heads from their bodies, but when by your unkindness toward them,
and your little regard you have to their labors, their tears, fastings,
watchings, studies, consuming of their bodies, and their strength, you break
their hearts and kill them by your unchristian carriage. There is the life of
many a precious Minister God has to plead with as for, whom the world little
takes notice of. Now as the preaching of a Christ crucified was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, so it were to be wished that
there were not many in this time who mock at the Cross of Christ, Heb. 11.29.
Which place some do apply to the sin against the holy Ghost.
and are guilty of that great sin that the Apostle speaks of in the Hebrews,
of trampling under foot the precious blood of the Son of God, and counting it
an unholy thing, while they do not magnify Christ Jesus in their hearts, and
in all things give him the pre-eminence, Col. 1.18.
and receive him for their Savior and Redeemer, Joh. 6.26.
for Him has God the Father sealed for this very purpose to reconeile us to
God; and to serve him as their Lord, seeing he has done so much for them, and
purchased them at so dear a rate: When they will divide their hearts between
Christ and their sins, and give Christ one part and sin another, all the
week Christ is not in their thoughts, and on the Lords day they think to
recompense God and to make even scores by an outward worship done unto him, as
if their present being good will fatisfie God and quiet their consciences for
all their former evils, which is a general mistake in the hearts of men: Or
they will divide between Christ and their own righteousness, which is
unrighteousness and abomination in the sight of God. There is no great Monarch
can less endure a beggar standing in his presence in nothing but rags and
full of bruises and sores and running issues from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot, from whence comes most noysom smells, than God can endure a
proud vaunting finner standing before him in his own righteousness: Isa. 64.6.
for ail our righteousness is unrighteousnes, it is filthy rags, and our best
services, unless they be tendered in Christ's Name,
are an abomination to the Lord, and a stink in his nostrils. Choose whole
Christ and Christ wholly and only, or else thou art an enemy to the Cross of
Christ. So in the sixth of John our blessed Savior having termed himself the
Bread of Life, verse. 35. And Jesus said unto them I am that Bread of Life, he
that comes to me shall not bunger, and he that believes in me shall not
thirst. Verse 41. the hard-hearted Jews they murmured at him, because he said,
I am that bread which came down from heaven. The Jews who had as yet the vail
upon their hearts, and whose minds by their own wilfulness and disobedience
Satan had blinded lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should
shine in their hearts, had no other apprehensions of bread, When Manna which
was the type of Christ came down upon the earth, there was old wondering at it;
and it was called Manna, because they said by way of admiration Ma-hu, What is
this? And they were very greedy for a time after it. But when Jesus Christ the
true Bread, the true Manna came down from heaven to feed our souls, there was
no minding of him, because his Divinity was over-vaild in his humanity, they
did not admire at Gods goodness as they ought to have done: they rejected him.
He came to his own, and his own received him not. Indeed they made him the
laughing stock of the world. And so Christ may be said to be the wonder of the
world, as the Prophet Isaiab says, I and my children are set for signs and
wonders, Isa. 8.18. i. c. We are made the maygames of the world, at whom all do
deride and wonder. But they did not admire his excellency, and acknowledge him,
and seek to him, as it behoved them to have done.
but as it fed the belly. But Christ Jesus has a higher mystery in it, to wit,
that he was the true Manna, the true heavenly Bread that feeds their souls
unto everlasting life. In the succeeding verses, 48, 49, 50, 51. when Christ
proceeds in declaring himself to be the Bread of Life, that his flesh is meat
indeed and his blood is drink indeed. Verse 52. the Jews strove amongst
themselves saying, How can this man give us his flesh to cat? In the 60 Verse
many of his Disciples when they heard this, said, This is a hard saying, who
can hear it. Verse 66. From that time many of his Disciples went back and
walked no more with him. Hence you see what carnal reasonings, and sinful
objections men's hearts do frame and invent to hinder and oppose the comfort of
the sweetest and most comfortable Doctrine. What more sweet to a hungry soul
that longs after eternal life, than to be fed and to be nourished with this
Bread of Life? It is an infallible sign that you are born of God,
and that your original is from above, and that God is your Father, Christ is
your Brother, and that you have higher principles than the flesh and the world
to walk by, and that your life is hid with Christ in God, if Jesus Christ the
true Bread of Life does nourish up your souls unto eternal Life: For the axiom
holds true in spiritual things as well as natural, A quo aliquid generatur,
ab eodem nutritur, from the which any thing is begotten, of the same it is
nourished; if you are born of God, you will be nourished by the bread of God;
if your original be heavenly, your food will be heavenly; if God were your
Father, Christ would be your nourishment and your food. Therefore Christ tells
the Jews, who in the eighth of John verse. 41. boasted that God was their
Father, verse. 42. proved them not to be the children of God, and that God was
not their Father, because they did not love him who was sent of God the Father,
If God were your Father, then would you love me, for I proceeded forth and came
from God, neither came I of my self, but he sent me. 1 John 5.1.
He that loves him that begets, loves him also who is begotten, and if we did
love God the Father, we should love Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of the
Father, and the Saints who are the spiritual sons of God, begotten of the
Spirit, crying in their hearts Abba Father. In the 44th verse. he proves them
positively to be the children of the devil, because they serve him and do his
works. Christ turns all carnal things into spiritual uses, and changes the
nature of them, and like a true Alchymist, turns brass into Gold; but the
Jews on the other side turned Gold into brass, and of all those precious
spiritual truths which Christ had delivered unto them, they had base carnal
and low apprehensions of. Blessed are they that by a lively faith feed heartily
upon the spiritual Manna, while others feed upon the husks with the swine,
they have bread in their fathers house.

In the beginning of the second Chapter the Apostle acquits himself in respect
of those former contentions, while one said he was of Paul, another of Apollo,
another of Cephas, another of Christ; showing there was nothing in himself or
in his Ministry that could occasion such divisions, Chap. 2. v. 1. I came not
to you with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the power of
God, that is, my preaching unto you was not in lofty strains of eloquence, and
high notions, or in a plausible and alluring style, fitter to please the ear,
and to humor men's fancies, and to make them giddy and unstable in the truth,
or in the high flown Rhetoric of the world, which is more suitable to an
Orator, or a Comedian upon a Stage, than for a Minister of Jesus Christ; not
with the enticing words of men's vanities, but in the demonstration of the
Spirit and of power, that is, he preached plainly, yet powerfully and
effectually, and feelingly to the conscience, and to work upon their hearts,
and to inform their judgments. If I seek to please men I am not the servant of
Christ. Gal. 1.10.
That is the best preaching which stirs up the affections and desires,
and sets all the wheels a work, and provokes us to duty and to the exercise of
piety in our lives and conversations. He is the best Preacher, who by his
powerful delivering the Word of God can stir up what affections he pleases
in the hearts of his people, as it is reported of excellent Bucholcer, that
though he were two hours in his Sermon, yet none of the common people were
aweary of him; and that with such vehemence of spirit, and earnest longing for
the good of their souls he dispensed the Word unto them, that he could stir
up what affection he pleased in the hearts of his hearers. Neither was the
matter he preached so sublime as to make men to admire him and to cry him up:
Not Philosophical notions, or critical points of Divinity, or curious
questions, or needless Doctrines, but the Lord Jesus Christ and him crucified;
For I have determined not to know any thing among you, 1 Cor. 2.2.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Neither was his delivery and outward
carriage and deportment in preaching the Gospel to them, to this end to breed
Schisms in the Church, for says he, I was with you in weakness, and in fear,
Yers. 3.
and in much trembling, that is, he was so far from being pust up with those
gifts and graces which God had endued him with, that he was among them with
much infirmity, in much affliction, and in much contempt as he says, Who is
weak and I am not weak, we are fools for Christ's sake, 1 Cor. 4.10.
but ye are wise, we are weak, but ye are strong, ye are honored, but we are
despised. In the 2. Cor. 10.10. For, say they, his Letters are weighty and
powerful, but his bodily presence is weak and his speech coutemptible. So that
the Apostle was no promoter of Sects and Separations and Parties in the Church,
but these divisions came from their lusts, from their carnality and fleshly
mindedness; 1 Cor. 3.3, 4.
For whereas there is among you envying and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? For when one says, I am of Paul, and another I am of
Apollo, are ye not carnal? So says the Apostle James, Iom. 4.1.
From whence are wars and contentions among you, are they not hence, even
from your lusts that war in your members? It is a sign thou art of a proud
impetuous and of an ambitious spirit, if thou art a breeder of dissentions in
the Church of God; and that which was falsely charged upon Paul, that he was a
seditious person and a disturber of the Nation, and upon Jeremy, Act. 24.5.
Ier. 15.10.
that he was a man of ftrife, may be justly charged upon thee, who for a very
light occasion makes a departure from the Church of God: Pro. 13.10
From pride comes contention, says Solomon, so thou art of a proud spirit, if
thou art of a contentious spirit. Hence observe, Note.
That the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ and of the Gospel of his grace must be
men of peace, and not study to make factions and parties in the Church of
Christ. They should endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. Ephesians. 4.3.
They should endeavor to preserve the truth of God, that so the truths of God
may preserve them. For as long as they stand up in Gods cause in opposition to
the flesh, the world and the devil, God will stand by them and plead for them,
and smite through the loins of them that shall rise up against them. Jude v. 3.
They must contend earnestly for the faith that was once delivered unto the
Saints, and plead with that Whore of Babylon by the sword of the Spirit, which
is the word of God, and vindicate the Scriptures from all those foul
aspersions, which the locusts of the bottomless pit, together with the
Socinians, Arminians, Anabaptists and Quakers of these times have cast upon it.
The Church, it is the House of God, and the Word is Gods Looking-glass, which
he has set up in his House, whereby all the defects and spots and blemishes
which are in Gods people may be discerned; and this word is committed to the
hands of the Ministers, as Trustees and Stewards to give out and to dispense to
every soul its portion, as time and occasion shall require. Now this treasure
is in earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
that the praise might not be of men but of God; and the people are not to be
their own carvers, as now adays many are, but to require the word at their
mouths, and to obey them in all lawful commands, examining by the Scriptures
whether those things be true or no, which they preach, as the Beraeans did,
Act. 17.11
and highly to honor them for their work sake. But now if they shall contrary
to Gods Word set up new Lights in Gods Church, and offer up strange fire, as
Nadab and Abibu did, Lev. 10.1.
and a new Looking-glass in Gods House, and appoint those things which God
never commanded, neither came it ever into his thoughts to require, and rend
the seamless Coat of Christ, that is, the Church, by their inventions and
traditions, and seek new doctrines, and new opinions, and vent them forth, that
others may follow their pernicious ways: by reason of which, 2 Pet. 2.2.
(...), Exitiis. (...), Blaspemabitur. 2 Pet. 3.16. (...), torque^t. Rack the
Scriptures.
the way of truth is evil spoken of, and captivate the understandings of others
by their carnal reasonings, and sinful objections, whereby they wrest the
Scripture to their own damnation, and giddy the spirits of weak Christians by
their deep notions and Allegorical interpretations, and set themselves up for
the only men, and to have other men called by their name, and by that party
they are of: What is this but to be of a seditious spirit, and to be the
incendiaries of the Churches peace? The Kingdom of Christ is a Kingdom of
peace, Omnes literae in nomine Jehovah sunt literae quiescentes, quo
observandum est, Deum ipsissimum fore pacis fontem. (...).
and God is a God of peace, and Christ is the Prince of peace, and the Gospel
is the Gospel of peace; Why therefore should not Christ's Ambassadors be the
Ambassadors of peace? I am not here against the communion of the Saints by way
of Church fellowship jointly to serve God and Jesus Christ in way of
distinction and separation from the profane world. But against that venomous
humor which is in some men, that to get themselves a name in the world, do
seek out and invent some strange and uncouth opinion, and vent it forth with
all the fair pretenses of truth that possibly can be, that thereby adopting to
themselves proselytes, they may walk in the light of their own fancies, and
delight in the vanity of their own imaginations. Observe again,

That for Believers to call themselves by the names of their spiritual guides,
be they never so holy and religious men, or by strange names taken up by the
contumelies of ungodly men, it is an unchristian thing, The word Brethren, is
very often used in the Acts of the Apostles, in the Epistle to the Romans, and
in several other places, Act. 9.30: 10.13: 16.2: 17.10: 18.18. Romans 12.1.
and disagreeing to the mind of the Spirit. Those be the best names which the
Scripture uses, as Brethren, Beloved in the Lord, Saints, Christians, Servants
of Jesus Christ, etc. It was Luthers charge to his followers, that after his
death they should be sure not to call themselves by his Name, that is, not to
be called Lutherans by his Name Luther; and why, Did Luther die for you or
Christ? If Christ died and was crucified for you, let him be your Lord and
Master? But if Christ did not die for you, and I died for you, then let me be
your Lord and Master, and be ye called by my Name. This argument the Apostle
urged against the proud vaunting Sectaries of his times, who named themselves
by the names of their spiritual guides, 1 Cor. 1.13.
Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized into the
Name of Paul? It is a great indignity, and an high dishonor offered to Jesus
Christ, who is their Lord and Savior, and has purchased them for his peculiar
people with his own blood, to be called after other Lords and other Saviors: 2
Cor. 5.16.
Resolve with St Paul, Hence forth to know no man after the flesh, but only to
acknowledge Jesus Christ. And say likewise, that though other Lords have had
dominion over our faith, and tyrannized over our consciences (as the late
Prelates did, and as the tyrannical party of these times do, who would have
all men stern their course according to their Compass, and sail where they
sail, and do what they do, and speak as they speak) yet now Jesus Christ alone
shall be to me all in all. 1 Cor. 1.24.
The Ministers of Jesus Christ are not to Lord it over men's consciences, and to
impose heavy yokes which they nor their fathers were able to bear, but as the
servants of Jesus Christ to become all things to all men, that they may win
all. Be not ye called Masters, Matthew. 23.10. Be not ye Sect-masters, such as
were amongst the Jews, who greedily affected the titles to be called Rabbans
and Rabbis, and were the ringleaders of parties and factions. Be not ye such
Masters.(...), Doctores, vel viae ductores. Ringleaders, Sect-Masters.
for one is your Master, even Christ which is in heaven. They are not to Lord
it over Gods heritage, but to account themselves as the servants of Christ,
condescending to men of low estate for the good of their souls. And the people
must have a reverent esteem of them, as those who are overseers set over them
for their good. They must not have their persons in admiration, and esteem of
them higher then they are (which thing has caused God to stain the pride and
the glory of the Prelaticall party, who advanced themselves above Christ,
reason above faith, and humane Learning, which perishes in the using, above
the everlasting Word of God, because they loved the praise of men, more then
the praise of God,) as if they were infallible, or they knew all things, or as
if the spirit of God were straightened up to that particular person, or to that
particular society they are of, or as if they were the only men to be followed,
and all others of a different judgment were erroneous, and that it is
necessary to be called by their names, as if they were the sum and the
top-stones of all piety and knowledge; but they must pray for them, knowing
they are men subject to infirmities as well as our selves. Pray to God to give
them a door of utterance that they may deliver the word boldly, and
confidently, sincerely, plainly, in the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, and to desire God to assist them in that great work they have
undertaken, and to obey them in all lawful commands, as the spiritual Pastors
and Bishops of our souls; and to encourage them in their work by honoring
them, and by giving them those Rights and Privileges which appertain unto
them. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21.
and unto God the things that are Gods. You commit sacrilege and rob God of
his due, when ye withhold from the servants of Christ that right which is their
own. Will a man rob God? says the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 3.8.
in robbing God you rob your selves, for hereby you cause God to withhold good
things from you. I could wish that there were a fair and equal carriage on both
sides. It were to be desired that Christians would rather say they are of the
Church of God in such a place, or of the Church of God over which such a man is
the Overseer, than that they would say as they commonly do say, they are of
such a man's Church. It is the Apostles phrase to the Church of God which is at
Coloss, Col. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. Act. 20.28.
which is at Ephesus, which is in her house, the Church which God has
purchased with his own blood. Ministers are but Gods Vicegerents, speaking unto
us in the place of God (for we should never be able to stand before God, and to
receive the word from his own mouth, because of the vast sea of guilt which
lies upon our consciences, and that infinite distance between the pure nature
of God, and our defiled and corrupted souls) they are the mouths of God to the
people, but the Church is Gods Church, which Christ has purchased with his
precious blood. He it is that keeps the Church from the malice of blood-sucking
persecutors; Ps. 121.4.
He that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps; He it is that destroys
the implacable enemies of it, destroying them with everlasting vengeance. He it
is that purifies the Church, Tit. 2.14.
that by his blessed Spirit does unite all the members together, Spiritus est
vinculum Ecclesiae. Pet. Mart.
and at the last day will make of many Churches now scattered up and down, one
universal triumphant Church for ever and ever. Let it be therefore the Church
of Christ and of God, and not the Church of man: Yet pray have a care of this,
that you do not term your selves the Church of God, when you are of the
Synagogue of Satan, Who say they are Christians when they are not, as those
hypocritical Jews did in John's Revelation; Rev. 3.
but see that you have Gods worship rightly administered amongst you, and that
ye worship God the Father in sincerity and in truth.

Now the Apostle goes on in the same Chapter, showing the reason why he used
such plainness in the exercise of his Ministry, to wit, that their faith might
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, that is, that your
faith might not be built upon humane inventions and traditions, but upon the
Word of God, which is the power of God to salvation, Ephesians. 2.20. that you may be
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus. Christ himself
being the chief Corner stone. Hence observe, That the Word of God, Note.
considered absolutely in it self as the Word of God, ought to be the rule and
ground of our faith. St Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.13. (...). 2 Cor. 10.15.
Scriptura seu verbum Dei dicitur (...), regula mensura. The word of God ought
to be the rule according to which we ought to square all our actions. Lev. 18.5.
Keep the true pattern of wholesome words which thou have heard of me in faith
and love which is in Christ Jesus, Greek, The form or lively exemplar of
wholesome words. So that that word which the Apostle had committed unto him, to
wit, the doctrine of faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, he must keep it
and reserve it by him as a most precious treasure. The Law of God is a perfect
rule of righteousness, commanding good and forbidding evil: The Gospel it is the
doctrine of faith and repentance from dead works, that by Jesus Christ we may
have eternal life. The Word of God, as it takes in both parts is a complete
rule of faith and obedience: The main thing the Law requires is obedience, He
that does them, that is, the Commandments of God, shall live in them. The main
thing the Gospel requires is to believe on Jesus Christ, Act. 16.31
Believe and thou shall be saved. Now Jesus Christ is the sum both of the Law
and the Gospel; Joh. 1.45.
Of him speak all the Law and the Prophets. He is the substance of the
Ceremonial Law, which either typified Christ himself unto us, or represented
unto us the benefits which come by him to believers. The Sacrifices were but
shadows of good things to come. The Moral Law it is our Schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ, Gal. 3.5.
for the Moral Law being become weak through our corruptions to bring us unto
life, and we being driven through a holy despair of our selves and of our
insufficiency to seek to Jesus Christ, that he would fulfill the Law for us,
and that through his righteousness our imperfect sincere obedience might be
accepted, the rigor of the Law is taken away, How believers are bound to the
Law.
so that we are not bound to the strictness of it, as the unregenerate are, who
have no part nor portion in Christ, but only as it is a testimony of our
obedience to God the Father, and of our hearty love to Jesus Christ. How a be
leever is said to keep the Law.
Every sincere convert may be said to do the whole Law in an Evangelicall
sense, because Christ has done it for him. Romans 8.3, 4. For that which was
impossible to the Law in as much as it was weak, because of the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh. That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For
salvation Jesus Christ ought to be the foundation of our faith, to wit, as the
Word of God does set him forth, a Prophet,
a Priest, and a King; the Word of God ought to be the rule of our faith in
respect of discipline and manners: Not the Testimony of the Church, not men's
traditions and inventions, but the pure Word of God, which he has set up for a
light in his Church unto the end of the world, which shall never perish, not
the least tittle or Iota thereof shall fail, but as God is the first eternal
truth, so the Word of God is the eternal truth: Cursed shall they be,
yea thrice cursed shall they be, who shall count the Word of God as a thing of
no use, and that look for another word, to wit, a Revelation of the Spirit, I
know not what revelation, but a delusion of the devil, and a giddy fancy of
their own pernicious brains, and shall not receive the Word of God, as the rule
of their faith. Zech. 5.4.
If the curse of God enters into the house of the thief, and of him that
sweateth falsely by his name, how much more into the house, body, soul, estates,
relations, good name, posterity, of the sacrilegious thief, who is guilty of
most horrid blasphemy, in taking away the Authority of the Word of God, and
denying that end for which God has appointed it? How many are they that cavil
at the plainness and evidence of it, because it points out, as it were, with
the finger, the evil practices of this crooked and perverse generation? That
most blasphemously say, if they had been in Gods place, they would have made a
better word, wherein every punctillo should have been so plain, that none of
those doubts which distract the minds of men should have been in it, and all
those false interpretations quite taken away, not knowing what they say. Like
that proud King of Arragon, who said, that if he had been in Gods place, he
would have made the world after a better manner, for which blasphemy he was
smitten with a dreadful judgment by God. If men had but a spirit of
discerning, and their minds enlightened to see the excellency, and the majesty
speaking in it, they would esteem and value it as much as ever, yea much more
than they now disrespect it. The Word is clear in it self, but because darkness
is upon our understandings, therefore we cannot see the beauty of it. O that we
could prize the Word as David did, Psalm. 119.72.
above thousands of gold and silver; Job 23.12
and as Job esteemed it, more than our appointed food, making it the joy and
the delight of our souls. Deuteronomy. 6.8.
That it may be continually between our breasts, and as a frontlet before our
eyes, that we could meditate therein day and night. David out of an admiration
of the excellency of Gods love, cries out, O how love I thy Law, Psalm. 119.97.
it is my meditation all the day! He loved it, because he meditated in it, Vbi
amor, ibi animus; and this love was so great, that he could not express it,
therefore cried he out by way of admiration, O how love I thy Law! and in
another place he says, Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy word within my heart, that I might not sin against thee; that
is, in the chambers of my soul, for the soul of a man is a large cabinet, fit
to receive many precious truths against the time of need: Mat. 13.52.
(Therefore every Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, brings out of
his treasure, that is, out of his heart, things both new and old.) I have
treasured up thy threatenings against sin and sinners, that whenever a
temptation is offered to sin against thee, I may draw forth a direct command
against such a sin, or denunciation of wrath against such a sin: As if he
were tempted to uncleanness, he would object Gods direct command against it,
Exodus 20.14.
Thou shall not commit adultery. As Christ vanquished the devil by the sword of
the Spirit,
saying, It is Written, Mat. 4.7.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: So should we take the sword of the
Spirit, and the shield of faith, whereby we may quench his fiery darts. As that
pious Matron, when a lewd Ruffian tempted her to uncleanness, desired of him
again to hold his finger one hour in the fire for her sake, at which request,
he answering, that the demand was unreasonable, replied, How much more
unreasonable is yours, that would have me burn in hell for ever to satisfy
your lust? So should we say, How can we do this great wickedness and sin
against God? We have his command to the contrary, his Word bids us not to do
it, How can we violate the authority of the sacred Majesty of heaven and earth?
How shall we be able to stand before God, who is a consuming fire, and commit
these abominations in his sight? What a good thing were it if Christians would
make a Common-place-Book in their hearts out of Gods Word, and by often reading
of it, and by that excellent duty of meditation laying it up, that they may
have spiritual matter to furnish their souls withal upon all occasions? This
is the true pondering of the Word of God. So much of the Word of God as we
meditate on, and by meditation is concocted to the nourishment of our souls, so
much we have and no more. This hiding of the Word within our heart is an
excellent means to further the gift of prayer, whereby we shall have store of
matter at all times and upon all subects to render up our petitions unto God.
That is the best prayer that is founded upon the Word of God. How sweetly does
the Spirit of God breathe forth in David's Psalms? and what heavenly expressions
there are suitable for a Christians spirit to exercise his faith and comfort in
God by, in the greatest trials and most soul-dejecting desertions? This hiding
of the Word of God, to wit, the sweet promises which concern salvation
contained therein to poor brokenhearted sinners, affords abundance of peace of
conscience and consolation of the spirit. Says David, I have hoped in thy
Word:
He is a true emblem of a faithful soul, A true sign of a believing soul.
who can trust God for his word sake, and build upon the Word of consolation,
who can plead with God upon a bare word of promise; Lord, have thou not said
it, and will thou not bring it to pass? If we would by a lively faith, suck
eagerly at these breasts of consolation, and dive deep into these wels of
salvation, and carry our buckets often to draw, and look to Jesus Christ in
whom all the promises are Yea, and Amen, for the earnest of his Spirit upon our
hearts, that they may be rightly applied to our everlasting comfort, our souls
would be satisfied abundantly as with marrow and fatness. So likewise says
David, Thy Word is a light unto my feet, and a lamp unto my paths; and in the
same Psalm, Psalm. 119.96.
I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandments are exceeding
large. The literal Word of God, though it has a beginning and an end in
respect of the letter, yet the Word of God considered Doctrinally, as it is the
wisdom of God the Father, it is infinite, like God himself, and has unfathomed
depths of the riches of Gods grace to sinners in Jesus Christ, contained in it,
Romans 8. O the depths of the riches of the wisdom of God, how unsearchable are
his works, and his ways past finding out!
It is a rich Mine of excellent discoveries of the Almighty God, which never
yet has been searched to the full, though when we come to heaven we shall know
abundantly more of it than we do now, and all doubts concerning it fully
satisfied, which do so trouble us in the body of this flesh. Let men of corrupt
minds talk what they will, that they fully understand the mind of God in his
word, by the light of the Spirit speaking within them, that they can unfold all
mysteries, and that they need not hearken to the word any longer, but only
hearken to the voice of the Spirit speaking in their hearts, because the light
of the Spirit is a greater light, they say, than the light of the word, I am
certain that they are grossly deluded by the father of lies; for the Apostle
Paul, that knew as much of the things of God as any Enthusiast whatsoever, yet
did see but through a glass, as it were imperfectly, till this veil of the
flesh being laid aside, he shall see God face to face: We know in part. Now if
the Word of God be exceeding large, larger than the perfections of all the
creatures, so that there is no sin that can be conceived of, but is forbidden
in it, and threatened with eternal death, and no grace but what is commanded
and exhorted to, under the promise of everlasting life, and the means to eschew
the evil, and to embrace the good, fully declared unto us, without all
controversy, this and this only is the Word of God, and ought to be the ground
and rule of our faith.

2. That for men to preach their own inventions, When men are much addicted to
Allegorize Scripture, suddenly they fall into some
and new fangled notions, and the fancies of their own intoxicated brains, or
for men to Allogorize Scriptures according as their mind serves them,
neglecting the pure fountain of the Word of God, is to build men's faith upon
humane wisdom, and not upon the power of God. We live in a Scepticall age,
deadly error, and are caught as it were in a snare before they are aware. What
a Solaecism upon his own body Origin the father of Allegories committed, by
Allegorizing that portion of Scripture, Mat. 19.12. is known to all those that
are verst in Ecclesiastical History.
wherein most Christians being troubled with that itching humor the Apostle
speaks of, are all for novelties and vain questions, which are nothing
material to the establishing our souls in grace, and neglect the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ. They are all for light, but little for zeal; all for
knowledge, but little for practice; all for notions, but little for truth; all
for further discoveries of secret mysteries, but little searching into their
own hearts; all for those truths that may inform the Judgment, but little for
those truths which may work upon the affections. Lord, A sweet ejaculation.
I pray thee to give me no more knowledge than what may work upon my heart to
the joining of a hearty obedience unto it; and that above all other knowledge I
may seek to know Jesus Christ and him crucified, to be made partaker of his
sufferings, and of the fellowship of his resurrection, that as he rose from the
grave of death, so I may arise from the grave of sin unto newness of life.
Lord grant that while others dive into thy secrets, and search after thy
Decrees, and do limit thee who art the holy one of Israel, by speaking of thee
irreverently, and ascribing unto thee those things which are not convenient,
and as the fly about the candle, never leave prying and approaching too near
till they be consumed in the pride of their own hearts, and in the vanity of
their own imaginations, I may sincerely and humbly, with all fear and reverence
to thy great and glorious Majesty, take thy Name into my mouth, and only speak
of thee as the word speaks and no further. Lord thou have said that thou art
Jehovah, Jchovah, Jah, Eheie, (...).
that is, who have thy being of thy self, which being is from all eternity,
ineluding all the differences of time, past, present, and to come: That thou
art Elohim, Almighty; Elschaadai, Alsufficient; Elion, High; that thou art I am
that I am, Exo. 3.14.
which implies that thou art only of thy self, and art all things to thy
creatures; I am bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothing to the
naked, health to the sick, liberty to the captive, comfort to the distressed, I
am all things to all men, as they stand in need of me. Is. 43.11.
Thou have said that thou art, and that there is none else besides thee; that
thou art but one God, and yet distinguished into three Persons, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. Lord, let me believe and admire this truth, rather than stand
and question it. And for thy Decrees which are as immutable as thy self, for
with the Lord is Yea and Amen for ever and ever, I beseech thee grant that I
may search no further than what is convenient for me as a creature to know, and
thy Word requires that I should search into. These are mysteries locked up in
thy own breast from all eternity, which though I cannot attain to in this life
to know, yet let me trace the footsteps of thy everlasting providence in thy
Word, and admire thy goodness toward them who are elected in Jesus Christ, and
magnify thy justice upon all the vessels of wrath to all eternity. This I
know, that though thou did not pass by any in thy act of pretenition, with
reference to sin, as thou did not elect the vessels of mercy with any
respect to their future holiness, yet thou never passest the sentence of
condemnation upon any, but for their sins past, Yet God does not condemn a
man simply as a sins, for then all should be condemned: but at such and such
a sinner, a sinner against great light, against great mercy, a sinner under
Gods judgment. An unbeleeving sinner, unbelief is the great condemning sin.
and receivest none into mercy but upon the account of Jesus Christ. And O that
there were a heart in me to seek above all things to know thee, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent; to seek wisdom and spiritual understanding, which
will be unto me a tree of life to preserve me from the snares of death. Thus
Lord desires every true and faithful servant of Jesus Christ.

Now as these men have itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3
so they heap up to themselves such Pastors and Teachers, as may serve their
own fancies; and it were to be desired that there were not too many amongst us,
who for preferment and for worldly honor, would make the Word of God to stoop
to the base lusts of carnal people, and preaching the fictions of their own
brain, cause men to build their faith upon unsound and sandy foundations. When
men hold forth Jesus Christ to the people, not as the Scripture holds him
forth, but according to their apprehensions of him, they build wood, hay, and
stubble, upon this precious foundation, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 14.
which when the day of the Lord shall come, the fire of the Lord shall utterly
consume, when every man's work shall be made manifest. Col. 2.23. (...).
This will worship, when men will take upon them to prescribe Rules and Canons
of Gods worship, Mar. 15.3. Col. 2.8. Gal. 4.10.
this worshipping of God after the tradition of our fathers, this observing of
times and seasons for the satisfying the lusts of the flesh, and not for the
service of God, this mixing of our own Ceremonies and Superstitious ways, is
odious and abominable in his sight. God cares not how little he has to do with
men in ways of his worship (for whatsoever sacred things we handle, we leave
the print of our fingers behind us) but has reserved this to himself, as one
main part of his Sovereignty, to prescribe Rules and give Laws, according to
which he requires that men should do him homage. He is that great Lawgiver, who
is able to kill and save alive. Jam. 4.12.
Now when men dare be so presumptuous and so highly impudent, as to incroach
upon Gods authority, and to take upon them to assign ways and means of their
own finding out to serve God by, what do they but, as it were, condemn the Word
of God for imperfection, and God himself for want of wisdom, as if he did not
know how to govern his creatures? Yea moreover God has strictly commanded that
we should not mingle our inventions with his worship. Exodus 20.25.
Thou shall not lift up a tool upon my Altar, lest it be defiled. God in this
place directly commands in the Antitype, that we should worship him according
to the way of his own choosing, and that we should not add the dross of our
own corrupted fancies, to the unspotted purity of his holy worship. God hates a
mixture of Religion at his very heart, and could not endure that the Israelites
should join themselves to the Canaanites, left they should learn their evil way
and be defiled. Men's inventions and Gods worship will never agree together. As
there is but one God, so the way of his worship is one, therefore says Paul,
Act. 24.14.
according to the way which ye call heresy, so worship I the God of my
fathers: But men of carnal minds consulting with flesh and blood, and not
with the everlasting Word of God, have sought out many ways to worship God by.
What a forged foppery of humane inventions and man's traditions is the Popish
Religion? What abundance of forms and outward worships have they? as if God did
look more at the outward man, and external behavior, than at the hidden man
of the heart, the sincerity of our actions, and the purity of our intentions;
the Lord judges not according to the appearance, 1 Samuel 16.7.
but he judges righteous judgment. Indeed they have a braver, and more
splendid Religion in outward beauty and worship (as a Lady of Paris said, when
she saw the Pope going his Procession, What a brave Religion is ours, in
respect of the Hugonites? that is, the Protestants) they have richer Temples,
and more beautiful shrines, but what is this in the sight of God? as painted
glass it rather darkens the light, than adds more light, though it seems more
beautiful than plain glass: so men's traditions, though they may carry a
beautiful pretense along with them, they rather darken the mind of the
Spirit, than add any further light unto the Word. This foundation will melt as
the wax before the Sun, in the time of Gods pleading and contending with
sinners. Others are too extreme on the other hand, and care not for any decency
and order in respect of outward worship, and cry down all outward circumstances
and conveniences, because God chiefly regards the heart. Let such know, that
God is the God of our bodies, as well as of our souls, and he requires outward
worship, that we should bow before him, and fall down at his presence, and
testify the brokenness and contrition of heart by outward gestures, as well as
heartworship, though that be the principal he aims at. Pray observe, that God
looks to every circumstance of his worship, as well as to the essentials of it,
yea to the least circumstance, and when he shall come to revenge the quarrel
of his Covenant, will severely punish those, who have failed in the least
particular of his worship. O that men would consider this, who are all for
duty, but little for the right performance of it, after Gods way and manner;
all for worship, but care not how they worship God. I find in Scripture, 1
King. 18.28.
that hypocrites have been most in duty, Baals Priests used to cut selves from
day to night; Mat 6.7.23.14.
and the Pharisees used to make long prayers; but I find that the people of
God have studied more how to please God, and to serve him after his own way and
method. The circumstances of an action, says the Philosopher, aggravate the
action more than the action it self. You will think Nadab's and Abihu's fault
to be of no consideration, Lev. 10.1, 2.
as to deserve so great a punishment, as to be destroyed for it; What was their
sin? why they offered fire to the Lord, as he commanded, but not that fire
which he commanded, that fire which should be continually kept in upon the
Altar for that very use, but fetched elsewhere, and therefore it is called
strange fire, such fire as the Lord never demanded. Let Gods Word be our rule,
and Gods glory the ultimate end and scope of all our actions, and then we
cannot do amiss in point of worship, and if we continue in well doing, at the
length we shall reap everlasting life. But when men corrupt the Word of God, 2
Cor. 2.17.
as the Apostles phrase is, putting new glosses upon it, and making it as a
nose of wax to turn every way, according as their genius tends, and it serves
for the carrying on of their designs (for how glad are wicked men if they
catch at any part of a sentence, which according to their blind apprehensions,
though to a judicious mind, and to one enlightened by the Spirit, it is
nothing to the purpose?) or handling the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 2.17.
(...) Cauponantes, Adulte rantes. (...). A corrumpendo vine, atque infuscando,
ut caupones s^lout. Men adulterate the word, and take away the beauty and the
majesty from it, when they think to put a luster upon it by their own
inventions.
mixing it, as a Vintner does water with wine, according to the Apostles word;
or neglecting the Word of God, lean to the light of their own understandings,
and studying strange and unheard of doctrines, under the name of experimental
truths, and which by long experience they have found out, deliver unto the
people the scum and the froth of their own vain minds, as the false Prophets
of old, who spoke lyingly in the Name of the Lord, saying they had a vision,
and a revelation, when they had not, that so both Minister and people might
both fall together, and both might be destroyed for ever and ever, and rendering
themselves abominable in the eyes of God, they build their faith upon their own
wisdom, which is rather folly than wisdom (for every man as the Psalmist says,
Ps. 49.10.
by the fall is become brutish in his understanding, and is of a reprobate
mind, that is, Tit. 1.16. (...), void of judgment.
of a mind that cannot approve of the things of God) and neglect the wisdom
and the power of God. They cry up themselves as Simon Magus did, for some body,
Act. 8.9.
for the great power of God, as he for his miracles was termed so, and
delighted in this appellation: so these would be so termed for the abundance of
the Revelations, and the great measure of the Spirit which they pretend to
partake of, as if they were the only lights in the world, and the Oracles which
God has set up in his Church. Lord I beseech thee by the power of thy
sanctifying Spirit, to destroy this Babell in the hearts of those who are thy
people, that they may not build their faith upon lying vanities, and trust to
the sparks of their own understandings, 1 Samuel 5.4.
but that this Dagon of superstition and false worship, of will worship, Col.
2.23.
and of that worship which seems to carnal flesh glorious and beautiful, 2
Cor. 7.1.
may fall down at the appearance of Jesus Christ in their hearts, that being
kept from the pollutions of the flesh and Spirit, they may perfect holiness in
the fear of God: for as long as this wisdom of the world is in us, which is
foolishness in thy sight, there is no room for thy word, or for Jesus Christ,
who is the eternal wisdom of God the Father. Joh. 6.27.
Let us not build our faith upon traditions and men's inventions, and feed upon
that meat which perishes (for all ceremonies, customs, and will worship is but
perishing meat) but upon the Word of God as our rule, and Jesus Christ for our
Savior, that so we may find comfort and peace of conscience at the hour of
death, and in the world to come everlasting life.

To proceed in the context, the Apostle having showed that he did not preach
the wisdom of the world; yet to magnify his Doctrine, and that he might give
it the pre-eminence, Verse. 6. he says, Yet we preach wisdom amongst those
which are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world; that is, though our
preaching be plain to you, who are but as babes in understanding, yet we can
preach in a higher style and more profound matter amongst those which are
perfect, that is, amongst those who are men in understanding, and more knowing
in the things of God, verse. 7. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery. Ver. 8.
Wisdom which the world cannot attain unto. Verse. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Hence observe,
Note.


That a servant of Jesus Christ must suit his style and his matter according to
the capacity and judgment of his hearers. Says Luther, Optimi ad Vulgus sunt
concionatores qui populariter, pneriliter, and trivialiter docent. They preach
best to the common people, who preach in the plainest way and method. The
converting of souls to Jesus Christ, and the building up Christians in the most
precious faith; and comforting sad dejected spirits, and destroying the Kingdom
of Satan in the hearts of wicked men, and to dispossess them of the unclean
spirit, and to convince gainsayers who oppose the truth, and to vindicate the
purity of the Word of God against men of reprobate minds, is the work and main
business of a true Ambassador of Jesus Christ, and not to seek their own
applause and credit in the world, by showing their learning and their
abilities, instead of setting forth the glory of God. 1 Cor. 14.8.
If the trumpet shall give an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself to the
battle? Isa. 58.1.
and if Ministers who are to lift up their voices like a trumpet, and to show
Gods people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, shall
give an uncertain sound, and shall speak in an unknown Language, or in a strain
exceeding the capacity of most people, how shall they be able to prepare
themselves against the battle to fight with sin, and to undergo temptations
and afflictions, and to save themselves from the overthrow of the ungodly
world? I have read of those that have repented they have preached too
profoundly, and have not done that good for the Church of God which they might
have done, if they had preached in a more humble manner; but I never read of
any that repented, because they preached too plainly. 1 Cor. 14.19.
St Paul says, I had rather speak five words with my understanding, than ten
thousand words in an unknown Tongue. Yet to explain the Original, and to show
the copiousness or the emphasis of the word in the Greek and Hebrew, is a thing
very commendable and praiseworthy, as our eminent English Commentators in
their Comments do, and those who are acquainted with the Original do, as every
Minister of Christ should be: or sparingly to quote some eminent Pillar in the
Church of God, for the further enlightening, or for the present confirmation of
that matter which we have in hand. Tit. 1.12.
St Paul noted the Poet Epimenides, when he said, The Cretians are always
liars, and the Poet Araetus, in the Acts, when he said, Act. 17.28
As one of your own tribe has said. As it was said of Christ, Now thou
speak plainly, Joh. 16.29
and speak no parable, so it should be said of Christ's Ambassadors. Says
God to Ezekiel, Son of man, Eze. 16.2.
make the house of Israel to know their iniquities. It is one thing to preach
against sin, and another thing to make the people to know their sins, that
they may be ashamed and confounded for the evil of their ways. But amongst the
higher-grown Christians, we are to deliver the mysteries of God, Heb. 5.12, 13,
14. Heb. 6.1. 1 Pet. 2.2.
we are to preach the wisdom of God, that wisdom that the world knows not of.
Strong meat is for strong Christians, but milk for babes and children.

Quest. But some might ask the Apostle how he came to partake of the wisdom of
God, and of this wisdom which the world cannot attain unto? You are brought up
at Gamaliels feet, Act. 22.3.
and according to the Law of the strictest Sect of the Pharisees; Act. 26.5.
we can say of you, as they said of Christ, we know whence you are, Joh. 7.27.
and where you were brought up, How came you therefore by this wisdom you speak
of? The Apostle by way of preoccupation says, God has revealed these things
unto us by his Spirit. Hence note by the way, Note.
That there are secrets in Gods own keeping, which all the Learning in the
world can never attain unto, only the teachings of the Spirit of God can
acquaint us with it, and there are some things which God reveals but to a few
persons in several ages of the world. Heb. 11.7.
Only a Noah can foresee the ruin of the old world, and prepare an Ark for the
saving of his house; Genesis 19.12.
a Lot the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; Christ Jesus the miseries that
were coming upon Jerusalem; Mat. 24.
Luther the miseries that were coming upon Germany; Augustine the destruction
coming upon Hippo in Africa; and Mr Calvin the persecution of Gods Church that
should follow his departure. Only those that are taught of God have their eyes
in their heads, and that Christian prudence to foresee the evils that are
coming upon the earth. Pro. 22.3. etc. 27.12
The wicked go on and are punished, but the wise man, that is, the spiritual
wise man, foreseeth the evil and avoideth it.

Then the Apostle goes on to show that if we have the Spirit of God, we cannot
choose but know the things of God: for the Spirit searches all things, yea the
deep things of God. Genesis 41.38.
It is the Spirit that discovers the secrets of God to his people, and makes
them to know the hidden things of Gods counsel; Dan. 4.8, 9.5.11, 14.
therefore Daniel is said to be a man in whom the Spirit of the Gods are: And
John when the Revelation was committed unto him, is said to be in the Spirit,
Rev. 1.10.
I was in the Spirit on the Lords day; say the Schoolmen, Spiritus est amor,
and amor est nexus Sanctae Trinitatis, ex boc sibi volentes, Spiritum procedere
and a Patre and a Filio, etcandem numericam essentiam cum Patre and Filio
habere, and Patrem a seipso, Filium per Patrem, and Spiritum a Patre and a
Filio omnia efficere. Now if there be such an unconceivable union between God
the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, certainly the communion is as
great (for from union arises communion) so that whatsoever secrets are in God,
the Spirit being one with God the Father, the Spirit only must deliver and
convey them unto us. I speak now of these Gospeltimes, Vrim and Thummim
Perspicuitas and Veritas. Urim ab On Hebraice lux Thummim a Thammim Hebraice
integer. Teraphim, ab Hebraico verbo Teraph sanare, quia cum male afficiebantur
Teraphim consulebant. Teraphim crat caput humanum odoratum, and unguentis
delibutum.
wherein dreams, and visions, and the appearances of Angels, and Urim and
Thumim, and all ways under the former dispensation have ceased; yea all
Diabolical ways have failed, for now there is no consulting of Teraphim, of
Oracles, of the Sepulchers of dead men, but the Spirit is now more plentifully
poured forth, according to the Gospel Covenant, Ye shall be all taught of God;
and in the 2d of Joel, speaking of the days of the Gospel, wherein this
mystery of Godliness shall be revealed, it is said, They shall be all taught of
God.

The Apostle proceeds to show that it is impossible any other way, but by the
Spirit of God, to understand the things of God: For what man knows the things
of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him? even so the things of God
knows no man, but the Spirit of God. As no man can know what are the intents
and purposes in the heart of another man, unless by conjecture (for the devil
who is called (...), q. Sciens, an old experienced seducer, of almost six
thousand years standing, by all his knowledge, cannot know positively the
heart, this is Gods prerogative only, I the Lord know the heart, but by our
actions, and by the temperament of our body, and by the exorbitancy of our
affections and unruly passions he does conjecture the bent and the frame of our
spirits, and accordingly suit his various temptations) which is more deceitful
than any thing else, yea so deceitful that we our selves cannot know the
depths of it: For if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts and
knows all things: Now if we cannot know the things which are in another man's
heart, much less are we able to know the secrets of Gods breast, but by the
Spirit of God. The Spirit is the great interpreter of Gods mind, the great
revealer of Gods secrets, the great unfolder of the mysteries of heaven, that
knows all the counsels and decrees past between the Father and the Son from
all eternity.

Quest. But some may say, How came you by the Spirit? whence is it that you
have the Spirit? The Apostle by way of anticipation says in the words of my
Text, We have received the Spirit, the Spirit is given unto us. And so having
done with the Context, and having showed the connection of the words, I am come
to the subject matter of my ensuing Discourse.

We have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things which are freely given unto us of God.
In the words you have, 1. Something employed. 2. Something expressed.


The thing implied is, That only those who have the teachings of the Spirit,
can know the things of God.

In the words expressed, you have these parts.

1. The spirit of the world put in opposition to the Spirit of God, implied in
this particle [But,] We have not received the spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is of God. 2. The end for which the Spirit of God is given or
received by the faithful, to wit, that they may know the things of God. 3. The
manner how God gives his things, to wit, Freely, That we may know the things
which are freely given unto us of God.
More particularly.

First, We have the Subjects in which, or the Patients in which the Spirit of
God is expressed in the particle [We,] We have not received the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God. We the Apostles and Disciples of Christ,
together with all the faithful of Jesus Christ. Only the Saints have this
privilege to enjoy the Spirit. Says Christ, I will send you the Comforter,
even the Spirit which the world knows not, John 14.16, 17. and I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you
for ever, even the Spirit of truth which the world cannot receive, because it
seeeth him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you,
and shall be in you. O sweet and heavenly place, full of marrow and fatness to
the godly, but full of terror to the wicked. Art thou a child of God? the
Spirit of God dwells with thee, and shall be in thee. Pray observe the words, he
not only dwells with a Saint, and as it were (...), How the Spirit is in a
believer.
an assistant unto him, but the Spirit of God is in a Saint. And as Christ and
a believer is as it were all one, so the Spirit of Christ and a believer is
said to be as it were all one. See what a near and unexpressible union there is
between God and a gracious soul, Joh. 17. (...). Chrysostom.
I in them and they in me, that they may be one even as we are one.

We shall have a likeness and a resemblance of that union which is between God
the Father, (...) ficut nou nota aequalitatis sed fimilitudinis ut variis locis
Scripturae ostendere poffimus.
and Christ, though not the same for substance. The Spirit not only dwells, but
has its in-being in every Saint. And as we cannot see our own souls, because
they are of a spiritual nature, and so not subject to any of the outward
senses, but we know we have a soul by the immediate operations of it. We know
we have a rational soul, because we understand and are able to infer one
thing out of another; Anima infert unum ex hoc, and hoc ex alto. Angclus unum
post hoc, one thing after another. The Spirit of God dwells not in the Saints
essentially, more than in other creatures: yet the faithful have a special
right to the essence of Gods Spirit, and he dwells in them by way of special
efficacy. Downam.
An immortal soul, because incorporeall, and not subject to change, as
considered in it self, but only in respect of divine power; A sensitive soul,
because we walk, eat, drink, and do the actions of living creatures: so we
cannot see the Spirit of God within us, but we know we have the Spirit, because
it quickens, it comforts, it upholds, it sanctifies us, and stirs us up to
our spiritual duty. He that has Christ, has the Spirit of Christ; every
Saint of God has Christ, and therefore he has the Spirit of Christ. As faith
unites us to Christ on our part, so the Spirit unites us to Christ on his part.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.9.
The world is void of the Spirit, because they cannot receive it. As they
cannot receive Christ, so they cannot receive the Spirit. Christ makes his
abode in no soul but an empty soul. Ps. 107.9. Luke ^.53.
He fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away. A
full stomach loathes the honeycomb; and a carnal soull filled with the
pleasures of sin, and with the satisfying of fleshly lusts, hates the
sweetness, and the rich treasures of grace and mercy which are in Jesus Christ.
The Spirit of Christ loves to dwell in an empty soul. Now the world is full of
an impure spirit; and while this spirit keeps the room of the heart, there is
no place for the Spirit of Christ. O that this worldly spirit were dispossessed
and cast out, this unclean, filthy, abominable spirit, that the holy Spirit of
God might enter in. Our hearts must not only be swept, but washed, before the
Spirit of God will enter in. You read, Matthew. 12.44.
that when the house was but only swept, the evil spirit returned again with
seven other spirits worse than before; but when our hearts are once washed, the
Spirit of God will, presently enter. Ier. 4.14.
Wash thy heart from filthiness, O Jerusalem, how long shall thy vain thoughts
lodge within thee? Iam. 1.21. (...).
Wicked men may sweep their hearts from that superfluity of naughtiness Saint
James speaks of, and may remove the excrescencies and the open breakings forth
of sin, they may lop the boughs, and as it were pare the nails (all which is
but a superficial piece of work, and a light piece of business) but the godly
only, we who have the Spirit of God, Tit. 3.5.
we only have our hearts washed with the water of Regeneration, therefore we
and we only have the Spirit of God.

Secondly, Here is the way by which, or after what manner they came to have the
Spirit, We have received it. They came to have it by receiving: It is not said,
we have purchased it, or we have obtained it by our prayers, or by our duties,
or the like, or we have bought it with our money, Act. 8.18.
as Simon Magus thought to have bought the holy Ghost, but we have received it:
1. How the Spirit is received. 1. The Spirit it is a free gift. Luke 11.13.
Gal. 4.6.
As a free gift, given by God to believers in Jesus Christ. The Spirit it is a
free gift. God is said to give us his Spirit. How much more shall your heavenly
Father give his Spirit to them that ask it of him. Because ye are sons, God
has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba Father. From
this place we must not think our Sonship is the cause why we have the Spirit,
Quia pro ergo. Because] It is not causal but illative and rational, in this
place, or rather demonstrative.
for the Spirit goes before Adoption, now the effect does not go before the
cause, but follow it; but because ye are sons, that is to witness unto you
that ye are the sons of God, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying Abba Father. 2. As a promise of Jesus Christ.
2. We have received the Spirit as a promise of Jesus Christ at his departure:
Christ when he was to leave the world promised to send another Comforter, even
the Spirit of truth. Christ deals with his Church as a loving friend does with
his friend: You know when friends are going a long journey, or a dangerous
voyage by sea, they use to leave behind them with their dearest friends some
pledge or token of their love. Some leave their pictures, some a ring, some a
good book, some one thing, some another, with this saying, When you look on
this, remember me, and though you should see me no more, yet be not troubled,
here is a pledge of my love which I have left with you, keep it, be sure you
keep it, and do not part with it. So our blessed Savior, that he might not
leave his Church all-together comfortless at his departure, Luke 22.14, 15, 19.
first of all, he leaves his Sacraments with them, as lively pictures and
emblems of his death and sufferings, so that in the Sacrament of the Communion
of the body and blood of Christ, when we see the bread broken, we should
remember, and present to our view the breakings of Christ's body upon the Cross;
and when we see the wine poured forth, remember the pouring forth of Christ's
blood upon the Cross, and this do, remembering the Lords death till he come.
Secondly, His Peace, My peace in opposition to the sottish peace that the world
gives, My peace I leave with you. Ioh. 14.27 Ioh. 15.26
Thirdly, His Spirit, I will send you the Comforter: so that we are to receive
the Spirit as a promise of Jesus Christ. 3. 3. As a redundancy of Gods love.
As a redundancy and fruit of the Fathers love. As Christ is a most eminent
fruit of the Fathers love, so is the Spirit. As Christ sends the Spirit, so
does God. 4. 4. As a testimony of our adoption. Romans 8.16
As a testimony of our Adoption. The Spirit witnesses with our spirits, that
we are the children of God. Our spirits do nothing avail to the grace of
Adoption, without the comforting Spirit of Jesus Christ. The Spirit of God,
lindx;
if it withdraws its testimony for a while, our souls are even in Hemans case,
Psalm. 88. at the brink of despair: And before conversion, before the Spirit
witnesses, our spirits like Nabals, are sottish and secure like a dead piece
of flesh, insensible of the greatest evil. If the Spirit comes by receiving,
and not by any thing in us, but is a fruit of the Fathers love, what a Popish
spirit are they of, who think to procure the Spirit by their prayers and by
their duties? Though Christ has promised to give the Spirit to those that
pray, yet not for their prayers. We are to pray for the Spirit, because God
has commanded it, but not to expect it for our prayers, because God has
promised it. The Spirit of God comes by receiving, therefore whosoever thou art
that think, by thy endeavors to have the Spirit, though I will not curse
thee as Paul did Simon Magus, for thinking to purchase the holy Ghost with
money, though he had but such a thought in's heart; yet I tell thee thou shall
never have it. Pray for the Spirit, but look not to obtain it by thy prayers,
but only by the way of receiving.

Thirdly, The spirit of the world put in opposition to the Spirit of God. 1. A
remotione subjectorum infertur diversitas for marum, quia lapis non est idem
subjectum cum planta, ergo habet diversam formam, ratio, quia in omni subjecto
debet apta esse organizatio membrorum, ut melius forma introducenda suo munere
fungatur. In omni vero subjecto promiscue sic dicto, non datur sufficiens
organizatio membrorum, quo quaelibet forma suas operationes exerceat. In lapide
non dantur organa satis, quo anima sensitiva, quod suum est exercere, exerceat.
Non datur organum videndi in lapide, nec inplanta.
By way of remotion in respect of the subject. We have recived not the spirit
of the world, i. e. The world has its own spirit, and the children of God have
theirs; different subjects have different forms: Now the world is not only
different, but diverse, quite another thing, and other men, considered with the
people of God, therefore have they different spirits; and not only different
but diverse. The Spirit of God makes us altogether other men, and other persons
than we were before. When the Spirit of God comes into the heart, all old
things are done away, and all things are become new. There is a Metamorphosis,
a transmutation, non ex hoc, sed ab hoc in aliud totaliter diversum, from
corrupt nature to grace, from the flesh to the Spirit, from darkness to light,
from being the children of the devil to become the children of God, from the
power, flavery and dominion of sin and Satan, unto the glorious liberty of
the children of God; from the fullness of the devil, of sin, and of the world,
to that fullness which is in Christ, to that fullness which is of God: Joh. 1.16.
Of his fullness have we received all grace for grace, that is, one degree of
grace after another. That ye may be filled with all the fullness of God. Ephesians.
3.19.
Not so as Christ's humanity was filled with the fullness of God, for the Spirit
was not given unto him by measure. Plenitudo gratiae est duplex. 1. Respectu
suipsius. Quando aliquis consequitur ultimum gradum gratiae, and quoad
essentiam and quoad virtutem, in tensive and extensive, ut aiunt, qui habes
gratiam juxta omnes illius effectus and operationes, secuudum quas se potest
extendere. Hoc modo Christus tantum gratiam habebat. 2. Respectu subjecti.
Quando aliquis habet plenitudinem gratiae secundum suum statum and conditionem.
Sic Stephaum dicitur esse plenus Spiritu sancto.
And in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. But we as imperfect
creatures in this life, shall receive of that communicable fullness, or of that
fullness which can be communicated to creatures as creatures, fullness of grace,
and fullness of the Spirit, according as we are able to receive it. Every thing
which is received, is received according to the capacity of the receiver; a
bucket can hold no more water than what is meet for a bucket to hold: Now we
who are but as the drop in the bucket, and as the dust in the balance in his
sight, that are not able to receive all the fullness of God, but only all that
which may be communicated to the creature, and that is very little in this
life, though in the lise to come our buckets shall be enlarged, i. e. our souls
made of a more capacious nature, and we shall be able to draw more abundantly,
and to contain more of this ocean of happiness. We are commanded to be filled
with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18.
Be ye filled with the Spirit; and as Commentaors observe, the former clause of
the verse being this, Be not drunk with wine, the later clause of this verse
may be interpreted likewise, But be ye drunken with the Spirit. This is a good
drunkenness to be drunk with the Spirit, as those in the Acts were, who were
drunk in a spiritual sense, though not in that carnal sense as they judged
them to be, because they were filled with the Spirit. The world and the godly
are quite Antipodes, the world is acted by a worldly spirit, and the people of
God by the holy Ghost, which appears by that malignity which has been in the
world since the Creation, against the people of God, the first actings of which
were seen in Cains murdering his brother Abel. Simile simili gaudet, like
rejoices in its like, and if the world and the children of God were alike,
they would love one another. Says Christ, If you were of the world, Ioh. 15.19
the world would love you, but seeing you are not of the world, and I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Sed est particula,
discretiva, seu disjunctiva apud Logicos.
2. This opposition between the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the world is
implied in this particle [But] We have received not the spirit of the world,
but the Spirit which is of God. Here I should show the difference and that vast
discrepancy between the Spirit of God and the spirit of the world: But because
for the future, when God shall enlarge my spirit, and occasion may be offered,
this may be a fit subject for a future Discourse, I shall omit this as not
belonging to my present intent and purpose, only by the way I shall distinguish
between a double spirit by which the world is acted. The world has a double
evil spirit.

1. Satan that evil spirit, Ephesians. 2.2. Wherein in times past ye walked
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of
the air, the spirit ((...), and per modum eminentiae, emphatically) that now
works in the children of disobedience. Here we have two Epithetes ascribed to
the devil, and both as he has relation to the world. 1. He is called the
Prince of the world, the Prince of the power of the air, i. e. the Prince of
all the infernal brood that are in the world. And the word Air, is put
Synecdochically as a part for the whole, for the world and the inhabitants
thereof, because God has given him power by his permission, to raise
commotions in the air, and to do seeming miracles, as appears in the story of
Job, Job 1. when he caused a wind to come from the four parts of the earth, and
to smite the four corners of the house, when it fell down and killed the
children of Job. A strange wind that could smite all the four corners of the
house all at once. Now because the devils greatest power is seen in the air, by
doing his seeming miracles, in that he is called the Prince of the power of the
air, is meant, that he is the Prince of this world. Agreeable to this is that
place, where he is called, the God of this world, and the Prince of darkness. 2
Cor. 4.4.
The god of this world has blinded their eyes, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ should shine in their hearts. The devil is the great Master of
misrule in the world, and he it is that breeds all the confusion which is in
it. He is that great sower of discord amongst men, and he will sow his tares
amongst the wheat, Matthew. 13.25.
and breed quarrels and dissentions amongst the children of God: he is a great
slanderer, a great accuser, full of enmity against God and his Saints. He is
the envious one; and all envious, proud, discontented lying persons are the
devils subjects. He is that cunning Politician, wiser than all the Achitophels,
Judases, and Maehiavillians that ever were, and knows how to play his cards for
the best advantage to allure souls to come under his government, and ever since
the Creation he has been plotting and contriving how to root out the Gospel,
to persecute the Saints, and to destroy the Church of God here upon earth. He
has stirred up and provoked his evil instruments, his great engines, wicked
Emperors, and blood-sucking Popes (the Power of the air) in all ages to
persecute the Church of God, and to banish it out of the world: But blessed be
God who has preserved himself a name upon the earth, and though the Egyptians,
Babylonians, Turks and Insidels, and all the wicked men in the world, did
combine together under their leading Captain Satan, against the Lord and
against his anointed, and against his precious servants, and thought to swallow
them up alive at once, and to devour them altogether, that the name of God
might be had no more in remembrance, that yet God has reserved himself a name
upon the earth, and a peculiar people to show forth his praise, and has
drowned the Egyptians in the red sea of eternal vengeance. What is the reason
that the Church has been preserved against the cruel assaults of furious
persecutors, and against the rage of the devil so many thousand years? Why I
will tell you, as the devil is the Prince and God of this world, so Christ
Jesus is the King of Saints, Rev. 15.3.
and the Prince of the Church, and God is the God of his people. Now which do
you think is strongest, 1 Pet. 5.8.
God or the devil, that roaring lion the devil that goes about seeking night
and day whom he may devour, or the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Which more
politic, Rev. 5.5. Rev. 12.9.
the serpent or Jesus Christ, who is the wisdom of God the Father? Prove. 8.
Which is the likeliest to prevail, or which party has prevailed in all ages,
has not the Church? Vincit patiendo Ecclesia, the Church overcomes by
sufferings, as the Israelites in Egypt, the more they were afflicted, the more
they grew. And though the Church has been small in all ages, in respect of the
enemies, and of Satan's party, yet the Saints of God might truly say, Let the
enemies part be never so numerous or great, that there is more with them than
against them; and why, because God is with them. He is the Savior of his
people. Exodus 24.24.
That God, who but with a look from heaven could destroy all the Egyptians,
that God who can destroy them but with the breath of his nostrils, Job 4.9.
Exodus 10.12.
who can cause weak and inconsiderable creatures to punish the foolishness of
his adversaries. Isa. 40.12.
That God who measures the waters, and spanneth the earth, and holds it in
the hollow of his hand, that God who created all things, and if will say but
the word, can loose the fabric of heaven and earth, and turn it to its first
nothing, Dan. 5.23
that God whose is our breath, and in whose hands are all our ways, that
disposes of Kingdoms, and gives them to whomsoever he pleases, that takes
the crafty in their own deceit, Job 5.12.
and destroys the wisdom of the wise: Last of all, that God who has at this
time the devils fast bound in everlasting chains of darkness, Jude v. 6.
unto the day of judgment, and has thousands of cruel persecutors under his
hands, whipping them with Scorpions to all eternity, Romans 9.5.
that God, who is over all blessed for ever; he is the God of the Saints; and
therefore no wonder if the Church prevails, and has prevailed, and will
prevail to all ages The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Matthew.
16.18.
We read in the Book of the Revelation, Rev. 12.12
that the devil is come upon the earth with great wrath and malice, because he
knows that his time is short. Says a Learned Commentator, God may lengthen the
devils chain, and give him more liberty than formerly, but he never quite
looseneth it, and lets him do what he lists.
He knows that in these last times his Kingdom is going down, and that Christ
is fulfilling his work, and that he will make but a short work upon the earth.
He knows it is best to be doing while the opportunity is put into his hand. And
what in former times he could not do by power and by persecution, he endeavors
in these later times to do by policy. Formerly he was a red Dragon, a ravenons
Wolf. a cruel Tiger, but now he is become an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
and comes in a more secret and mysterious way, yet his malice is as great as
ever against the Church, though he rides not upon the pale horse of death; Rev.
6.8.
and he endeavors by all means to increase his Kingdom to the everlasting
destruction of poor souls. O that there were a wise heart and a considering
heart in Christians to consider this, that now we are fallen into the last
times, and the devil now bestirres himself more than ever; that he is doing all
he can do with all his policy and subtilty to advance his Kingdom, and to gain
proselites to maintain his cause, listing soldiers daily under his banner;
therefore we should be a more praying people, and a more watchful people,
continually pleading at the Throne of grace, that God would accomplish his work
upon the earth, and hasten the coming of Jesus Christ, the bringing in of the
Jews, the fullness of the Gentiles, and the destruction of Gog and Magog, Pope
and Turk, with all the rest of the antichristian party. 2. He is called the
spirit of the world, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience. He may well be called a spirit, because of his working. The
manner of Satan's working upon the wicked.
He being a spirit has a great influence upon our spirits; and he can not only
suggest his temptations, and put evil things into our hearts, but like a
skillful fouldier he can marshall them, and put them in order before our eyes,
and set home the object upon the heart with all the delight, if an evil thing;
and with all the detestation, if a good thing, that possibly he can. He does
not only morally persuade us, but by a secret indiscernable way, (for the
operations of spirits, especially of one spirit upon another, are very
mysterious and difficult to be understood) but by a willing compulsion draw
forth the heart to entertain the motion. It is said that Satan stirred up David
to number the people. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Joh. 13.2.
And that Satan put it into Judas heart to betray Christ. And that Satan has
blinded the minds of them which believe not. 2 Cor. 4.4
There is a threefold blindness in an unregenerate man: A threefold blindness
in the ungodly.
1. A natural blindness. 2. A contracted blindness, by their long continuance
in ignorance. Wicked men are wilfully ignorant concerning the Commandments of
God. 3. A blindness which Satan super-adds over and above those two. Satan can
work insensibly upon the passions of the body and the images in the fancy. And
as he can delude our outward senses, making us believe we see such things, when
they are not such as they are presented unto us, so he can delude our minds
and hoodwink our understandings, and by his Paralogisms, and false
argumentations, reason us to a hatred of God and his ways, to embrace the
pleasures of sin and the works of darkness. We read of the Energy of the
devil, Ephesians. 2.2. (...), which works effectually in the children of
disobedience. (...) Efficacia, est verbum usitatissime relitum actionibus
formarum and spirituum, (...) operatio ^nima. Arist.
The more spiritual any thing is, the more force and power it has to work,
and the more insensibly it sets home the impression upon another. Conceit in
many men works strange things. A mere conceit of such a thing, or of such an
evil approaching, has driven men into deep melancholies and great sadness of
spirit, into strange diseases, passions and furies. If a mere conceit will do
so much, how much more will the way of reasoning of one spirit, by strength of
argument work upon another spirit? Arguments are spiritual weapons,
and he that stands to argue the case with the devil, fights with the devil
with his own weapons. Who is the great disputer of this world? the great
Sophister? the great Logician? but the devil. He uses all sorts of arguments
to raise fears and jealousies in the hearts of Gods people, to drive them to
despair, and to keep wicked men in their carnal security and desperate
presumption. He is the spirit of this world, he is the great agent that
commonly sets all the wheels and the springs a going. That drives furiously as
Jehn did, How Satan is said to be the spirit of the wicked world.
hurrying wicked men in their pernicious ways. The devil is the spirit of the
world upon a double account: 1. He acts in the world, and quickens and puts
vigor, and brings forth into act, that original corruption that lies rooted
in the heart of all men by nature. The work of the Spirit it is to give life,
and heat, and motion, to cherish and refresh, to excite the parts to do their
office. Now as the Spirit of God moved upon the waters in the first Creation,
hovering over the Mosaicall matter, fomenting and cherishing it, so the evil
spirit the devil moves upon the filthy puddles in our hearts, hovering over
that filthy corruption which is in us, cherishing and fomenting that body of
death which we carry aboot us. As the Vulture loves to feed upon dead
carcasses, so the devil loves to rake up that stinking cartion matter which is
in the hearts of all men by nature. Now the devil is not only an assistant
spirit to the world that sees the wheels a going (as the assisting Angels are,
which Aristotle supposes to set the primum mobile a work) but he works with
us, and he works in the world. Sometimes our hearts like a mint out of that
abundance of corruption that is in them, may coin evil things, for sin in the
heart will appear in the life; obscene and filthy words do naturally flow from
a lustful heart: But yet the coin often carries upon it the devils stamp;
Pliny speaks of the scorpion, that there is not one minute, wherein it puts not
forth the sting, as being loath to lose any opportunity of doing mischief: so
Satan will lose no fit time to tempt us, to draw us to his allurements that he
might destroy us. Burrought Moses choice:
if he sees us inventing mischief, he will be sure to put to his helping hand.
Many times the devil is the father of evil thoughts, but our own hearts are the
mother, the devil suggesteth, but it is our own hearts that conceive, according
to the Psalm. mist. They conceive mischief and bring forth falsehood. It is the
devil that blows up the fire of lust in our hearts, and adds fuel to it by his
delicious objects. That makes men rush into sin, as the horse rusheth into
the battle. As we commonly say, he must needs run whom the devil drives.
Satan did but put it into Judas his heart to betray his Master, and presently
he sets about his business. As soon as the devil had entered into him, he runs
headlong to the destruction of his immortal soul. When a man has wind and
tide, and the sails be up, he must needs go apace. Our affections are the
sails, our carnal interest and self-seeking is the tide, and the devil is the
wind. If our sails are up,
and the tide favors us, the stream of the times, or our Dallilah lusts do
prosper, and the devil comes and adds wind to the tide, and flatters us in
our ways by promising us the same gales of prosperity still, we fail apace and
in abundance of delight for a time, till at length we fall down into the Mare
mortuum, into the dead sea of everlasting misery. Think upon this, who with a
full career swim down with the current of the times, and care not whither you
are carried, so be it your carnal interest may prosper, and that you may have
the favor of a flattering world. You are acted by the devil, and certainly at
death he will pay you your wages. He is that filthy, unclean, Idolatrous spirit
that keeps the world in their superstitious ways, and which to this day
beguiles the poor Indians, and holds the greatest part of the world in
Idolatry, and Heathenish impiety, to the great dishonor of the true God, and
to their own everlasting condemnation. 2. He is the spirit of the world,
because he not only acts the world, but also because the world willingly
suffers it self to be acted by him. Wicked men are said to be led captive by
him at his will. 2 Timothy 2.26.
He leads them in a string to eternal perdition. As a Falconer carries his
Hawk upon his fist, so the devil carries poor creatures. They do not take up
arms to fight against him, Wicked men most properly are said to act evil. And
because they willingly submit themselves to the devil; while they are acted by
the devil, they may be said to act, because they do not resist him. The godly
are rather acted to evil, than said to act evil, because they do that which
they allow not, and which under a serious debate with themselves they utterly
hate.
but they willingly subject themselves to his Government, preferring the devil
before Christ, and these transitory enjoyments before the God of heaven. I may
say the world is a sworn enemy to Jesus Christ, and a faithful drudge to do
the devils drudgery. As Christ admits none but volunteers, and suffers none to
be of his society, but they that willingly submit themselves to his discipline:
so the devil has a great army of volunteers, and they willingly accept of his
terms and conditions: This only is the difference, the godly do take Jesus
Christ for their Lord and Savior directly, and as they serve Jesus Christ who
is the great Master, so they love him and embrace him for their Head and
Governor; but now the wicked world does not directly take the devil to be
their Lord and Master, for the thought of a devil is odious in the hearts of
all, both good and bad, and none would be said to be the devils servants; but
in as much as they voluntarily do his works, and subject themselves to his
yoke, they may be said indirectly, and by consequence, not only to have the
devil for their Lord, Joh. 8.
but for their father. Ye are of your father the devil, for his works ye will
do.

2. As the world has Satan for its evil spirit, so it has another evil
spirit, to wit, that imbred evil spirit of wickedness, that natural frame of
spirit in the hearts of wicked men, continually tending to the ways of sin.
This worldly spirit, this spirit of sin, or this sinful spirit, 1 John 4.3.
it is called the spirit of Antichrist, for there is nothing so opposite to God
the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, as sin is, and this spirit
of sin within us. What a worldly spirit is.
When men have an impetus of spirit, or a propensity and a full bent of will to
sin, then they are said to have a worldly spirit. When their hearts are set
upon the world, and upon their sins, and they will contrive all the ways,
and spate no cost and charges to bring their wicked designs to pass. A spirit
of Idolatry.
Men are said to have a sinful spirit of Idolatry, when they will undergo any
danger, and count nothing too much to lose, so by it they may keep their Idols
amongst them. A spirit of Adultery. (...), oculos plenos adulterae.
Men have a spirit of Adultery, when their eyes are full of Adultery, and are
so impious, that one might see the whore sitting in the adulterers eyes, and
they will spend their estates and their time, and all they have upon their
beloved whores. When men covee after riches beyond measure, and care not how
they grow rich, so they have it, and pull the meat out of the poors mouths by
usury and extortion, and never think they have enough, then they have a sinful
spirit, that worldly spirit of covetousness. This spirit of sin it is not
only a spirit of Antichrist, but Antichrist it self. There is a double
Antichrist, 1. A mystical Antichrist, A double Antichrist.
and this is sin. 2. A personal Antichrist, which is excellenthy described
by St Paul in the 2d to the Thessalonians, where he is set forth by several
characters, as these, 1. By his sin, he is called That man of sin, v. 3. 2.
By his parnishment, The son of perdition. 3. By his pride, He exalts himself
above all that is called God. (...).
4. By his policy, he is called, The mystery of iniquity. 5. By his hypocrisy,
He works with all deceivableness of unrighteousness. 6. By his success, Many
thousands shall come in unto him. So likewise in the Revelation this personal
Antichrist is excellently described, the number of the Beast agreeing with
Irenaeus his AATEINOS, and Gregory the 3d, Bishop of Rome, pointing out, as it
were by the finger, Gregory the 7th; otherwise Hildebrand, or the brand of hell
his successor, whom Phocas the Usurper, having slain his Master Mauritius,
caused to be proclaimed universal Bishop, and Head over all the Churches of
God. Then began this mystery of iniquity to show it self. But there is a
generation of men in the world, that hold there is no other Antichrist but sin,
and that impure spirit of the world, that spirit of Antichrist, denying that
there is any personal Antichrist at all. But they are grossly mistaken, for
this delineation which the Apostle holds forth of Antichrist, cannot agree to
things but to persons. Howsoever sin it is a mystical Antichrist, and that
which makes the personal Antichrist to be an Antichrist; (...).
A thing may be said to be Antichristian, or to be Antichrist in a double
respect, (...) sumitur aliquando, and significat, 1. Pro, seu vice alicujus. 2.
Contra, and fic fine compositione, and in compositione accipitur.


1. When it is set up in stead of Christ, and stands in his place. 2. When it
opposes and fights against Christ.
Sin is an Antichristian thing, or a mystical Antichrist upon this double
account; 1. Because it sets it self up in the heart of an unregenerate man in
the place of Christ. It is Christ's prerogative to have the heart. My son give
me thy heart. Sin steps into the throne, and stands there in Christ's place.
There is something of Antichrist in the best men that are upon the earth,
because sin remains within them. Says the Apostle, What I would not, that I
do, Romans 7.
and what I would, that do I not, now it is no more I, but sin that dwells
in me. 2. Sin it is a mystical Antichrist, because it opposes Jesus Christ,
and fights against him; sin it opposes Christ in all his Offices, as a
Prophet, a Priest, and a King; in his Sacraments, in his worship, in his Word,
in his Ambassadors, and in his Saints. Our own righteousness in the former
respect is Antichrist. When men establish their own righteousness, they destroy
the righteousness of Christ, and make it of no effect. The devil is Antichrist
in both respects, for he sets up himself in the place of Jesus Christ, Matthew.
4. Angels could fall no other ways, but by a ceflex of their understanding
upon themselves, when being held with an admiration of their own sublimity, the
memory of their subordination unto God, and their dependency on him, was
drowned in this conceit, whereupon their adoration, love, and imitation of God,
could not but be interrupted. Thus M. Hooker.
He seeks to be worshipped with the same worship which God is worshipped
withal. Says the devil to Christ, If thou will fall down and worship me, all
these things will I give thee. He tells a lie to make up the bargain, as if he
had the power of the earth to bestow it on whomsoever he pleases, when the
earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. The devil desires nothing more than
to draw men's hearts from God, and to have that worship given unto him which is
due unto God alone. Pride was the cause of his fall, as appears by that place,
1 Timothy 3.6.
Ordain not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the
condemnation of the devil. And since the fall, through the pride of his mind,
he has sought in all places to set up his worship in place of the most pure
worship of God. Idolatry in Scripture Phrase is called worshipping of devils, 1
Cor. 10.10. Rev. 9.20.
and in worshipping Idols they worship him. And as it is reported he has
feigned voices in the air, commanding that such a Saint departed should be
worshipped. As Romulus after he was dead appeared again (or the devil in the
shape of Romulus) commanding that he should be worshipped for a God under the
name Quirinus. And therefore that was the devil in Samuels mantle, 1 Samuel 28.14.
and not Samuel himself, because he permitted Saul to worship him. The devil is
Antichrist also, because he opposes Christ. Christ had two eminent conflicts
with him, one in the wilderness, where the devil was in presence with him,
tempting him to have unbeseeming thoughts of God the Father, Mat. 4.
If you be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread: as if he
should have said, Certainly if God were your Father, he would not let you be in
so great straits as to want bread. Earthly parents give their children food
when they want, how much more shall God the Father give his only begotten
Son, if thou art he, those things that are convenient for him? It is not
agreeable to the everlasting providence of such a Father, who is Lord of heaven
and earth, to see his child to be in want; command therefore that these stones
be made bread, do a miracle that we may see thou art the Son of God. God the
Father will work a miracle, before he will see his child to want. This the
devil did to take away his mind from the love of God his Father, and to drive
him from his faith and confidence in God. Besides, it had been a sin in
Christ, if he had obeyed the devil. Christ had another sore conflict with the
devil, though not immediately, yet mediatly by Peter; observe the subtilty of
the devil, seeing he could not prevail upon him in a public way, he comes upon
him in a more covert way, tempting him in a beloved Disciple. Jesus Christ.
speaking of his sufferings that were to come to him at Jerusalem, Peter
disswades him from going up thither; but what answer did Christ make him? Get
thee behind me Satan, Matthew. 16.23.
for thou savourest not the things which be of God, but the things which are of
men. Christ presently espied out Satan in Peter, though a beloved Disciple,
though a Saint, though one that spoke out of a good will to Jesus Christ, and
out of a desire not to have his Master die.
O that we could so suddenly epsy the devil tempting us in his wicked
instruments, and when they tempt us, cry out, Avoid Satan, as Christ did. So
that Satan is Antichrist, and he is called Satan, because he is Christ's and the
Churches adversary, Apoliyon, the Destroyer, the roaring Lion, the subtle
Serpent.

As the world has a double evil spirit, to wit. Satan and that inbred
wickedness that is in the world; so the children of God have a double Spirit,
1. The holy Spirit of God. 2. The Regenerate part within them: As appears by
those two places; Joh. 3.6.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit. The flesh lusts against the Spirit. By Spirit may be meant, (...).
either the holy Spirit of God striving with us by his motions and impressions,
or the Regenerate part within us, which is called a Spirit. The unregenerate
part the corrupt flesh is called a spirit: says James, Jam. 4.5.
The spirit within us lusts to envy, i.e. that fleshly part within us is full
of envy. Lusts to envy, the same word which is in the forementioned place,
the flesh lusts against the Spirit. And it is observable, that the same
action that is applied to the flesh, is applied to the Spirit, the flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, i.e. lusts
against the Spirit. Now if the same action is applied to both the principles,
to flesh and Spirit, to wit, lusts (which action is a proper action of
spirits) therefore the unregenerate part is a spirit. And if the unregenerate,
much more the regenerate. But you will say it is a contradiction to call the
flesh a spirit. Indeed to say natural flesh were a spirit, it were a
contradiction in the very terms, but to say flesh, i.e. corrupt flesh, is a
spirit, is no contradiction, but an abuse of the word. But you will say,
Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiore significatu, therefore seeing flesh
is put alone by it self, it must not be meant of corrupt and sinful flesh, but
of natural flesh. To this I answer, That the unregenerate part is not
Analogically but Aequivocally called flesh. It is improperly so called, because
original sin by natural generation is propagated from the parents to the
children; according to the series of generation, sin running continually in a
direct line, though it self be the only obliquity.

Fourthly, We have a divine attribute noting the Deity of the blessed Spirit,
in this particle [Which is of God.] We have not received the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God; this phrase in that the holy Spirit is
said to be of God imports three things.

1. That the Spirit proceeded after an ineffable manner from God the Father,
Hic processus apud Graecos dicitur (...) Abusive tamen.
not excluding God the Son. Agreeable to this is that axiom in the Schools,
Dius Pater est principium Sanctae Trinitatis, non tamen causa. Principium
ordinis, sive relationis, non essentie seu Deitatis.

2. Which is of God, Per Hebraismum, which is God. But the Spirit which is of
God, i.e. but the Spirit which is God.

3. Which is of God] that is, which came from God: Says Christ, I will pray
the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter. Joh. 14.16
Hence note these two Observations, which I shall briefly discuss and so pass
over.

1. That the Spirit, the third Person in the blessed Trinity, proceeds from
the Father and the Son. Not from the Father, excluding the Son, as the Eastern
Churches say, but from the Father and the Son jointly considered. From the
Father, and so it is called the Spirit of God: Romans 8.11
If the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, i. e. the
Spirit of God, he also shall quicken your mortal bodies. From the Son, and
so it is called the Spirit of Christ: If any man has not the Spirit of Christ,
Romans 8.9.
i.e. which proceeds from Christ, he is none of his. In that the holy Spirit
is called the Spirit of God, Sic Metaphrastes in Romanos. Siquidem enim est
spiritus Dei Patri^s non ipse pater sit, necesse est: and tamen quia Dei
Spiritus est, verus Deus fit, oportet.
and the Spirit of Christ, is observed these three things. 1. That the Spirit
of God is God. 2. That he is a distinct person from the Father and the Son. 3.
That he proceeds from them both.

2. That the Spirit of God is God. Acts 5. Why has Satan filled thy heart, to
lie to the holy Ghost? thou have not lied unto men but unto God. 2 Samuel 23.2,
3. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. The God
of Israel said, the reck of Israel spoke to me. 1 Cor. 12.6. But there are
diversities of gifts, but the same God which works all in all. 1 John 5.7.
For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
holy Ghost, and these three are one.

1. Consider the Scripture gives those attributes to the Spirit, which are only
proper to God: 1. Eternity, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit, etc. 2. Omniscience, 1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit
searches all things. 3. Omnipresence, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? 4. Almightiness, 2 Timothy 2.7. Isa 11.2.

2. Those works are applied to the Spirit, which are only proper to God. 1.
Creation, Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit moved upon the waters, i. e. as a Hen lies
upon her brood, cherishing it, and giving it heat, so did the Spirit of God lie
upon that Chaos fomenting and cherishing it, Psalm 33.6. By the Word of the Lord
were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.

3. Adoration and worship is given to the Spirit, Quod si Spiritus non esset
persoua distincta. sed tantum Dei virtus, utique non possit in invocatione
distinctae illius fieri mentio, cum per particulam (...) aequaliter and
distinct persouae conjunguntur: Si non esset Deus, non esset adorandus.
which is only proper to God. We are said to be baptized in the Name of the
Father, Son, and of the holy Ghost. And St Paul in his Epistles frequently,
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14.

Fifthly, We have the end for which the Spirit is given, i. e. That we might
know the things which are freely given unto us of God. Without the Spirit we
are in the dark, and we know not whither we go. But of this hereafter.

Sixthly, We have the adjunct or circumstance put to the things which are given
unto us of God, to wit, that they are given freely. That we might know the
things which are freely given unto us of God. How God is said to give us the
things of salvation freely.
God gives, and he gives freely, liberally and bountifully, and expects nothing
at our hands but a thankful heart. The things of God are given freely upon a
double account: 1. In opposition to merit. 2. In opposition to compulsion and
unwillingness.


God gives freely in opposition to merit. We deserve nothing at Gods hands but
hell and destruction. We merit hell, but we merit nothing else. Romans 6.23.
Primarily eternal death is meant there, as appears by the Antithesis between
life and death. 1 Cor. 4.7.
The wages of sin is death, i.e. all manner of death, the death of
afflictions, temporal death, eternal death; but the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Our common mercies, as life, health,
peace, liberty, friends, food for our bodies, and the like, are all from
free grace. What have thou that thou have not received, and that thou have not
received freely? If our common mercies be of free grace (for every step we step
is a step of mercy, the breath we breathe forth is Gods breath, and not our
own, if he takes away our breath we perish) how much more are spiritual things
of free grace, which are more eminently called the things of God? It is of Gods
abundant grace and goodness, that by his Spirit we might know our election of
God.
God might have elected us unto everlasting life, and we never have known it,
until we should have enjoyed it. We might have been left in despair and under
a cloud of temptation all our days, had not God freely given unto us the
earnest of his Spirit. The Gospel or the glad tidings of peace and
reconciliation through Jesus Christ, is of free grace, therefore it is called
the Gospel of his grace. Act. 14.3.
So likewise Jesus Christ is a most signal fruit and effect of Gods free grace
and love to mankind. Joh. 3 16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Salvation by
Jesus Christ it is of free grace. Ephesians. 2.5. By grace ye are saved. All of grace
and nothing of debt. All from Gods love, and nothing that is in us. Gods good
pleasure and his free grace is the impulsive cause of all our mercies, and that
we are acquainted with those mysteries which were hid from all eternity, Erigu
me gratia divina, sed terret me indignitas mea, atqui si dignus essem, jam non
esset gratia, sed merces, si ex operibus, utique non ex gratia: gratia cuim non
est gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo. oie Gethardus.
until these last ages. Ascribe all to free grace, and account thy self less
than the least of all Gods mercies, and unworthy of any smile, or any favor
from Gods hands. So likewise God gives freely in opposition to compulsion or
unwillingness; say the Schoolmen, Gods will is the cause of all things; Ephesians.
1.11. Who works all things according to the counsel of his own will. Nothing
moves God to do good to poor sinners, but the riches of his grace in Jesus
Christ. Remember this thou poor drooping soul, that complainest by reason of
the burden of thy sins, and think that the multitude of thy sins do
exceed the greatness of Gods mercies. As the most righteous man that ever lived
could merit nothing at Gods hands, or move God to bestow any thing upon him
upon his own account: so neither can the greatest sinner that ever lived hinder
God, or his sins put a stop in Gods way, that he cannot show him mercy in
Jesus Christ, if God be pleased to show him mercy. God shows mercy because he
will show mercy. Romans 9.15 Exodus 33.19.
God is gracious because he will be gracious. As all thy prayers, tears,
duties, fastings, watchings, can prevail nothing with God, but upon the account
of Jesus Christ, so neither can thy unkindness, thy unprofitableness, thy
sinfulness, thy disingenuous and foolish carriage with the great God of heaven
and earth, keep God from showing thee mercy. God has his therefores of mercy
in himself, and not in the creature, Ezekiel. 30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait
that he may have mercy upon you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may
have compassion upon you. It is a strange therefore that has no dependence
upon the words foregoing, but upon Gods infinite mercy: God shows mercy because
he delights in mercy. God gives us heaven, because he delights to magnify his
glory upon all the vessels of mercy. And when we by our prayers at the Throne
of grace, obtain good things at the hand of God, we do not change God; but only
those things which God had decreed from all eternity to give us, upon the
condition of our asking, though not for our asking, we receive in time when we
beg them at Gods hands.

Ob. How can the things of salvation, as Justification; Adoption, etc. be
freely given unto us of God. Baxter in his excellent Book called the Saints
Everlasting Rest.
seeing Christ Jesus has purchased them for us?

Ans. 1. The purchase of Christ does not clash with the freeness of the things
of God to us. They were dear to Christ, but free to us. If the Father freely
gives the Son, and the Son freely paies the debt, and if God freely accepts
that way of payment, when he might have required all which Christ has done, at
our hands, and if the Father and the Son, and the holy Ghost do freely offer
those things which Christ has purchased for us upon a cordial acceptance of
them, and receiving of them by the hand of faith, then the purchase of Christ
does not hinder but that the things of eternity may be free to us.

2. There are some things which Christ cannot properly be said to purchase for
us, but God out of the abundance of his mercy, added as it were an overplus to
the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ. Heaven and eternal glory, and the
beatificall vision, is not strictly said to be purchased by Christ, but it is a
redundancy of the Fathers love. The immediate effect of Christ's death, is
Justification, a redeeming us from the curse of the Law, and from the wrath of
God which was due to our sins. The more remote and consequentiall effect is
heaven and eternal glory.

Having explained the words, I come now to raise some Observations from them.
From the matter implied, That the teachings of the Spirit are absolutely
necessary to know the things of God, Observe this Note,

That none can know the things of God, but those who have the teachings of the
Spirit upon their hearts.

From the words expressed observe, 1. That worldly men, or the men of this
world, are led by a worldly spirit. 2. That the spirit of the world is
altogether opposite to the Spirit of God. 3. That all that are the people of
God have or shall receive the Spirit of God. 4. That the end why they receive
the Spirit, is, that they may know the things of God. 5. That all things are
given to us freely of God.


The Observation which is the subject of my ensuing discourse, is drawn from
the thing implied; which is this,

That none can know the things of God, but those that have the teachings of the
Spirit upon their hearts.

In the handling this Observation, I shall show,

First, The various acceptance of the word Spirit, and that here is meant the
Spirit of God.

Secondly, What are the teachings of the Spirit.

1. By way of premonition, that it is a very hard thing to know them. 2.
Positively, according to the Scripture phrase, what they be.
Here briefly I shall distinguish between the motions, impressions and flashes
of the Spirit, and the teachings of the Spirit.

Thirdly, How the Spirit teaches, to wit, 1. By enlightening our
understandings. 2. By taking away that enmity which is upon our wills against
the things of God.


Fourthly, Show what more peculiar things the Spirit teaches.

Fifthly, What manner of teachings they are.

Sixthly, Prove the conclusion, That none can know the things of God, but they
that have the Spirits teachings.

Seventhly, Make application, 1. By way of Information, to show that the
greatest part of Christians are void of the teachings of the Spirit upon their
hearts. 2. By way of Exhortation, to stir you up to seek after the teachings
of the Spirit; and this Exhortation is pressed home upon a threefold account.
And a threefold cord is not easily broken.

1. From the excellency of the Spirits teachings, and of that light which comes
thereby, above all other teachings, and above all other knowledge whatsoever.
2. Because if the Spirit teaches thee, it is an evident sign thou art the
friend of God. 3. If the Spirit teaches thee, it is a sign thou art instated
into the Covenant of grace.
Eighthly, I shall give several signs whereby we may know we are taught of
the Spirit.

Ninthly, Show how we may distinguish between the more extraordinary teachings
of the Spirit upon our hearts, which are peculiar to more eminent Saints, and
other teachings.

Tenthly, Show the times wherein the Spirits teachings are most manifest. 1. In
times of affliction. 2. Near the time of death.

Eleventhly, Answer some doubts and questions arising from the Spirits
teachings.

Twelfthly, Show that it is the duty of every one to walk up to the light which
he has received.

The various acceptations of the word Spirit in Scripture.
I. The Spirit is put in opposition to the body, Luke 24.39. A spirit has not
flesh and bones, etc. so the gross foul of a beast is called a spirit. The
spirit of a man goes upward, Eccl. 3.21.
and the spirit of a beast goes downward.

II. It is applied to any tenuious, nimble or subtle substance. So the wind
may be called a Spirit, Job 4. A spirit passed before my face, i.e. a nimble
substance resembling the gliding motion of a spirit. So we commonly say the
spirits of wines, because of the refinedness of them,

III. Any strong impetous or violent inclination, Buroughs upon this place in
his Comment upon Hosea.
or full purpose to do a thing, may be called a spirit, Hosea 4. 12. The spirit
of whoredoms has caused them to err, i. e. a strong inclination, and full
bent of will to go a whoring from God, has caused them to err.

IV. For the heart of man, wherein listh the affections, in opposition to the
will, and the understanding, and the memory, according to the intellectual
part of it: 1 These. 5.23. I pray God that your whole soul, spirit and body may
be kept blameless till the coming of Jeses Christ. By the soul is meant the
understanding and the will, and by the spirit the heart, (...).
wherein lies the affections; Rem. 1 9. God whom I serve with my spirit: Luke
8.55. You know not of what spirit ye are of, i. e. of what affections Though
some have another interpretation of it, as you may see hereafter.

V. It is taken, Quo plus materiae, co plus potentiae, quo plus formae, co plus
actus. Quo plus potentiae viz. passivae, co plus corruptibilitatis, quo plus
actus, co plus substantia. ^ic Philosophi aiuns.
1. For strength and courage. 2. For incorruptibility, Isa. 31.3. Their horses
are flesh and not spirit, i.e. subject to corruption, and not abiding, weak,
and not strong. What is weaker than flesh? all flesh is as grass. What is
stronger than a spirit? spirits are of vast strength and operation. What is
more corruptible than flesh? the word flesh notes corruption. What is more
abiding than a spirit? a spirit is of a durable nature in respect of it self,
though God can suddenly destroy it, Luke 1.17. It is said of Jesus Christ, that
he shall come in the Spirit, and in the power of Elias, i. e. in the courage,
strength, and power of Elias. The Scripture usually puts one word for the
further explanation of the other.

VI. It is taken for the soul of man: Luke 23.40. Father, into thy hands I
commit my spirit. Zech. 13.1. The Lord forms the spirit of man, i.e. the soul
of man; so says Stephen, Act. 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

VII. For life; Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be
allwaies wroth, for the spirit would fail before me, i.e. the life and the
souls which I have made. When God comes to contend with sinners for their sins,
there is no standing before him, unless Jesus Christ intercedes, and makes up
the difference.

VIII. We read of a spirit of infirmity: Luke 13.11. There was a woman which
had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, i. e. she had a vehement and a great
infirmity lying upon her.

IX. We read of a spirit of judgment, and of a spirit of burning: Isa 4.4.
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, by the
spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning, i. e. by great judgments,
and by burning afflictions. That Gods judgments are compared to fire, appears
by that place in the Prophet Ezekiel, where God says of wicked men, Ezekiel.
21.32.
I will bring them into the fire, and there I will leave them. You see the sad
condition of wicked men, God brings them into the fire of affliction, and never
takes them our again. When God comes to deal with wicked men for their sins,
when he begins he makes an end. Afflictions shall not rise up the second time,
says the Prophet Nahum. Nah. 1.9.
But though God may bring sore judgments upon his own people, and bring them
into the fire of affliction, he takes them out of the fire again, and does not
leave them in it, as he does wicked men, but when he has accomplished his own
work upon them, and they are fit vessels for his use, he takes them out of the
fire. It is a sign thou art not reprobate silver, but tried silver, and a true
Saint, if thou can patiently and beleevingly undergo the siery trial. And
though thou may be ready for the present to faint under the afflicting hand
of God, thinking that God has forgotten thee, and that he will be gracious to
thee no more, yet when Gods time is fully come, and thy filth is thoroughly done
away, God will take thee out of the sire, and thou shall be a glorious Saint in
the sight of God. Indeed Gods people may be sorely smutted and besmeared with
the fire of affliction (as we see by experieuce that fire commonly blacks
things before it makes them clear) but yet they shall not be consumed, as the
wicked shall be, but shall be delivered. Ps. 34 17.
The Lord knows how to deliver the righteous out of all their afflictions.
Well may Gods judgments be compared to fire, to the spirit of judgment, and
to the spirit of burning, for these reasons: 1. Fire purifies, it separates the
dross from the pure metal: so afflictions they purify the soul. Gods children
are afflicted, that they might be made partakers of his holiness. Heb. 12.10.
Before affliction came upon us, we were unclean, we were worldly, earthly
minded, we forgot our God, we were impure, instruments fit only for the devils
service. But by afflictions we are cleansed, we are more spiritual, and have
learnt to mind heavenly things, more watchful, more industrious to pump out
sin as fast as it comes into the soul, and to be more diligent in Gods
service; afflictions are Gods files, whereby he takes away that rust that
defiles the soul. How many has a fit of sickness, an outward cross in their
estates, relations, good names, the missing of their expectations, the
unfaithfulness of friends, the deceit that is in the world, or some grief which
has been as a continual dropping upon their souls, as the Stone,
Wind-cholick, Falling sickness, etc. driven home from the house of their
spiritual bondage, and from this mystical Egypt, where there is nothing but
pollution, to bethink themselves of the house of their heavenly Father? Before,
says David, Psalm. 119.67.
I was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I learned thy righteous
judgments. Affliction it is Gods pruning knife, whereby he lops off the
superfluous branches; it is Gods Razor, whereby he shaves off the excrescencies
of sin; it is Gods niter, whereby he cleanses our defiled garments. They are
Gods messengers sent to call us forth our of Sodom, the spiritual Sodom, where
there is nothing but filthiness and wallowing in the mire of sin, to prepare
our hearts to meet Jesus Christ our Bridegroom in the beavenly Canaan. As the
shepherd sets his dog at the sheep to fetch it out of the mire and dirt wherein
it is plunged: so afflictions are as it were Gods dogs, to bark and hunt us out
of the pollutions of the world, that we may be made meet for the inheritance of
the Saints in light.

2. Fire melts some things and consumes others: Afflictions melt the heart of
Gods people, but they consume the ungodly. Josias heart melted when he heard
the Law of the Lord read, 2 King. 22.19.
though he did but hear what threatenings God had made against the breach of his
Law, his heart melted within him. Manasses heart melted under Gods offliction.
Poverty of spirit comes often from poverty of purse in a child of God. But the
afflictions of the wicked they do but perboyl them for hell, they are but
heralds of everlasting vengeance, Gods pledges that he will never do them good,
they do but eat out their spirits, their comforts, their common graces, against
the eternal consumption of their spirits, by that ever gnawing worm.

3. Fire it softens some things, and it hardens others: So afflictions they
soften the godly, but harden the wicked; the more God afflicted Ahaz. the more
he sinned, and the more his heart was hardened, therefore God has put this
brand of infamy upon him never to be wiped off again, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
This is that King Ahaz. So Pharachs heart was hardened by Gods judgments. It
is a most dreadful sign God intends to make thee a brand of hell fire, if thy
heart is hardened under the afflicting hand of God. How afflictions may be said
to harden.
Fire it softens the wax, but hardens the clay; afflictions do not harden as
considered absolutely in themselves, but accidentally, as they meet with the
corruptions of men's wicked hearts. A wicked man is like the Smiths Anvill, the
more he is smitten, the more rebellious and stout hearted he is.
Affliction it is so far from driving a wicked man to God, that it drives him
farther from him, making him desperate in his wicked courses, and like Julian
the Apostate, when the dart of Gods vengeance has been upon them, they have
blasphemed and cursed the holy Name of God. It is a most dreadful thing, and a
great aggravation of our condemnation, when we add sin to sin under the
afflicting hand of God: As in Ames 4. says the Lord, I have brought such and
such judgments upon you, yet have you not returned unto me says the Lord. But
Gods people are of another disposition, of a flexible and of a pliable nature,
ready to receive whatsoever God shall impart unto them; they consider that God
is their Father, and that all their afflictions shall be for their good. That
God corrects them but in measure, Enashim, of a weak, sickly, crazy man.
and with the rods of a man, and that it is either to make them humble for
their sins, or to prevent the breaking forth of the boyls of sin for the
future. They know that God looks more to the frame of their hearts, and how
their spirits are under Gods hand, whether perverse and peevish, or patient and
submissive, than at any thing else. Besides, they consider that these
afflictions are but to drive them to their Fathers house, and when they are
sufficiently broken, and sufficiently humbled under his afflicting hand, he
will take them up in his arms and kiss them (as a loving mother does a weak
sickly child) and restore unto them the joy of his salvation. There are two
extremes we are apt to run into under afflictions, either to despise the
chastning of the Lord, Heb. 12.5.
or to faint under his displeasure: Wicked men they despise the hand of God,
and Christians are ready often to faint, but that Jesus Christ stands by, as he
did by that blessed Martyr, and wipes the sweat off from their faces, when they
are nigh to swound, and gives them some comfortable sun-shines of his loving
presence.

X. The Spirit is taken for the motions of the Spirit upon our hearts: 1 These.
5.19. Quench not the Spirit, i. e. the motions and impressions of the holy
Spirit of God upon thy heart. Believe it Christian for a truth, that though
thou can not blot out the teachings of the Spirit, yet thou may shift off
and extinguish the motions of the Spirit. Have a care of this great sin, lest
by thy impenitency, ingratitude, and wilful rebellion thou stiflest the
glowings of the Spirit. Have a care that when God strives with thee thou do
not strive with God again. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Act.
9.5.
Have a care thou beeft not found a fighter against God. Says Stephen of the
rebellious Jews, Ye stiff-necked, Act. 7.51.
ye do always resist the holy Ghost, i. e. you turn the deaf adder, you stop
your ears against the blessed Spirit warning you of that destruction which you
have brought upon your selves in betraying the Lord of life. Wicked men when
they quench the Spirit are said to provoke the Spirit. They stir up a holy
anger and revenge in the Spirit against their sins. Mark 3.5.
As Jesus Christ looked upon the Pharisees with a holy anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, so the Spirit is angry at the hardness of the
hearts of stubborn hearted sinners. Ephesians. 4.30.
But you who are the people of God, you grieve the Spirit of God by your
unkindness, when ye seek to put out the light of the Spirit within you. Walk in
the light while you have the light, for though God will never leave you wholly
in the dark, and utterly deprive you of his Spirit, yet he may bring a cloud of
temptation over you, which may eclipse the glory of it for a time. I beseech
you grieve not the Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. As you would not be said to kick against the bowels of a bleeding
Savior by your sins, so neither do you kick against the bowels of a most
gracious Spirit, or of the Spirit of grace striving with your hearts to the
obedience of the truth. As wicked men by their often sinning against the
Spirit, do quite sin away the Spirit (for by sinning so often against
conviction, they sin so long till they have no light to sin again, having
sinned it all away) so the godly by sinning against the Spirit, do cause it to
withdraw its gracious influences for the present. O that troubled consciences
mourning under the loss of the comfortable presence of God in Jesus Christ,
would consider this; Thou that complainest of the Spirits absence, Have thou
not sinned away the Spirit by quenching its motions, and resisting its
impressions? Thou that complainest of the want of assurance, and of the Spirits
not witnessing with thy Spirit, Have thou not sinned away thy assurance by
committing some sin, or omitting some duty against the light of the Spirit?
What a wicked thing is it that Christians should complain of the Spirit, and
murmur against God for the light of his countenance, when God and his Spirit
have more reason to complain of them? Christians are said to quench the Spirit
two ways:

1. When they withdraw the fuel which should maintain the Spirit: as fire is
put out when you withdraw the fuel which should maintain the fire; so you
quench the Spirit, when you withdraw the fuel by which the Spirit is
cherished. When you will not hear the Word, when you will not pray, when you
neglect the Sacraments (the Sacrament often received is a great confirmation of
our faith, and a great cherisher of the work of the Spirit upon our hearts)
when you will not be much in meditation (the Spirit loves to meet with a
solitary soul disburdened of the world, and seeking to have communion with God)
when you will not confer and often speak of the things of God, when you
forsake the assembling of the Saints together. As one coal kindles another, and
one candle enlightens another, so the light of the Spirit in the heart of
another, may in time kindle and flame thy heart. 2 Timothy 1.6.
When men fail to stir up the gift of God which is in them, (...), iguem
rineribus absconditum resuscitare.
and to excite their graces, and to bring them forth into action, but let them
sleep and lie dead and buried in their souls, by these means they substract the
fuel of the Spirit. Christians should be men of activity, always doing and
never idle in the work of the Lord. As the fountain is still purging forth that
filth which lies nigh it: so Christians should be still purging forth the
remainders of that original corruption which is in them; still resisting
temptations, continually treasuring up the whole armor of God against the
fiery trial; daily weaning themselves from the world, and preparing to meet
Jesus Christ the Bridegroom of their souls. As an idle man is the devils shop,
wherein he forgeth what he pleases, so an active Christian is the Spirits
shop. If we do what we are able, believe it Christians, the Spirit will not be
behind hand, but will further the work of grace in our hearts. It is because we
are so backward in our duty, that the Spirit is so backward upon our souls. If
thou would have the continual flowings in of the Spirit, I beseech thee
Christian, for the good and for the comfort of thy soul, for I speak what all
true Christians do generally find good, pray more, 1 These. 5.
pray continually, that is, lose no opportunity, let no time pass when thou
ought to pray, or when thy occasions require it (for there are many
emergencies which fall out, which require this duty, and of some Christians
more than others) but be sure to pray, hear the word at all occasions; let not
a Sermon pass if you can hear it; let not your souls be famished for want of
nourishment. As you would not be said to murder your bodies, so do not you
murder your precious souls. Many do quench the Spirit when they do not know it.
Some will hear a conscientious Minister a long while, and highly commend him,
as most of our profane Esau's do, but when once this Minister shall touch their
beloved sins, they presently fall off and hear him no more. Mar. 6.20.
Herod heard John gladly for a time, and reformed many things, but when once he
touched his Herodias, and touched the apple of his eye, he presently distates
him, and cuts off his head. What a sad thing is it, that men should shift off
such an impression, and wipe off the sweet and heavenly dew? If you will not
wait at the pool, you are never like to have the Spirit descend upon you, and
if you will not mark the time of the Spirits coming down, and comply with the
Spirit at such a time, you are never like to have any feeling effect wrought
upon your souls: Have a care therefore of withdrawing the Spirits fuel.

2. When men cast their lusts in the Spirits face, and damp the breathings of
the Spirit by their lusts, then they may be said to quench the Spirit. As water
quenches fire, so lusts they quench the Spirit. Lust is the great quench coal
of the Spirits motions. As mud and filth does damp up the course of the water:
so every lust does dam up the course of the Spirit. Yea every particular sin
which is committed with a high hand to the reproach of godliness, and to the
dishonor of God, quenches the Spirit for a time. When David had committed
those two great evils, murder and adultery in the matter of Vriah, upon the
commission of these sins God withdraws his Spirit, and the comfortable
presence of his countenance. Hence he complains of brokenness of bones, and of
wounds in his soul, Psalm. 5.8.
My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of. my foolishness. And he prays
God to uphold him with his free Spirit, ver. 12.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.
As the water free-zeth when the sun goes down, so your, spiries wilk freeze
when the spirit goes away from you.
What do you think will become of you when the Spirit departs from you? You are
in a dull lumpish condition, you cannot pray nor hear the word, nor do any
spiritual duty with that rejoicing and freeness of spirit and alacrity of
mind, as formerly you did, you are left in a sottish condition for a time.
Your spirits will be as heavy as lead, very unapt and contrary to the service
of God; and if those sparks of grace which God has put into your hearts did
not enable you to do somewhat more than those who never knew what the saving
work of the Spirit meant, you would (as wicked men do when the Spirit leaves
them) never seek to God for his Spirit any more. As lusts choke the Word, so
they choke the Spirit. Whence is it that many Christians do complain of the
Spirits absence, and of the departure of God from them, as Saul did, 1 Samuel
28.15.
Woe is me for God is departed from me? Why? As Saul by his disobedience and
rebellion caused God to depart from him. so you by your disobedience and
resisting of his motions, have caused the Spirit to depart from you. Search
your hearts diligently, and see whether there be not some abominable thing
which the Spirit would pluck forth of thy heart. Is there not a hankering after
thy old beloved lusts? Have thou not an itching after past delights, when thou
were in the flesh? The Spirit does not all its work upon a soul at the first
work of conversion, but still afterward is employed to purge out every
abominable thing out of thy heart (a child of God after conversion may fall
into the same sins he committed before conversion, yea the very same beloved
sins) the venomous humor is not thoroughly purged out in conversion, and the
Spirit by its good will would not leave a hoof or any root of bitterness in the
heart, but because we are in the body of this flesh, we must grow by degrees,
and make progress daily.

Search I beseech you and examine your hearts, whether there be not some lust,
the Spirit would give a deaths wound to, and thoroughly mortify and extinguish,
and you will not yield to the Spirit that you may be mortified. I beseech you
Christians to set about it: The Spirit will never be quiet and let you alone,
if you belong to God, till this root of hemlock and wormwood be rooted out, i.
e. whenever it comes to thy soul, the controversy shall be about thy lust,
whether thou will yet leave it or no, whether thou will be thoroughly purged
from thy old lees, whether you would have this body of flesh thoroughly
crucified. It will never come with its comforting presence, till thou closest
with the Spirit in this great work. Examine your hearts, I believe if the
business were thoroughly fifted, there is some lust at the bottom, some filth
that lies below which keeps out the Spirit from coming into thy heart. Sic ut
fumus apes, and fater columbot, sic Spiritum sanctum expellit grave oleus
peccatum. Basilius, As smoke drives away bees, and an ill sent the doves: so a
noysom lust drives away the Spirit.
As loath as thou art to go into a dungeon full of toads and serpents, and
venomous creatures, so loath, yea more loath is the Spirit to come into thy
heart, if there be a lust or an abominable thing at the bottom. Yea, I say, the
Spirit cannot come into thy heart, while thy lust stands out against him.
There is an opposition in respect of the things themselves; What communion has
light with darkness, God with Belial, the pure Spirit with thy filthy lust? The
Spirit may come and knock long enough, and Christ may knock long enough, and to
no purpose, if thou art not willing that the Spirit should accomplish the work
upon thy heart. I beseech you examine your hearts in this matter. Note this
well.
A man may live a Professor all his days, and be as conscientious in the ways
of God,
as any Christian in the world, and think himself as fair for heaven as the
best, and yet at last perish for some unknown lust in his heart, which if he
had examined and found out, it might have been mortified, and his soul saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus. Besides consider, you have not the influences of the
Spirit at command. The Spirit will not blow upon thy heart when thou would
have it, but when it lifts. The Spirit comes down but upon certain times, and
those times are uncertain to thee; how therefore does it behoove thee,
Christian, to take the Spirits time, and to join with the work of the Spirit
upon thee? Besides, do thou know how long the Spirit will move upon thy
heart; how long the prosperous gales will laft, which if thou had sailed
along with, would have brought thee to heaven? Do thou know how long the
Spirit will strive with thy heart, crying out, Why sinner, how long shall it be
ere Christ shall be thy Lord and Savior? Beloved Christian, though there be
hope as long as the pool is open, and thou art alive, and live under the
Ordinances of grace, that the Spirit may descend again upon thee, yet seeing
thou have sinned so often against the pleadings of the Spirit, and have
quenched the Spirit so long, who can tell whether ever he will come down in
mercy again upon thy soul for ever? For God has a time in this life to bid his
Spirit to let sinners alone, and never to strive with them more, but let them
be filthy if they will be filthy. Though this time God has reserved in his own
wisdom secret from men that they should not know it. The black book of
reprobation is known only to God, and none may say positively God has rejected
him, unless he is certain he has sinned against the holy Ghost (as too many
weak Christians under desertion are apt to say) and how know thou, thou have
sinned the sin against the holy Ghost? if thou have a desire to repent for thy
sins, if thou art willing to receive Jesus Christ for thy Lord and Savior,
never fear it Christian, all is well, thou art in a good condition: yet I
beseech thee do not quench the motions of the Spirit upon thy heart.

XI. The Spirit is put for a state or a condition, or a calling, as some
interpret. We have not received the spirit of bondage; Romans S.
but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, i. e. not a state or
condition of bondage, but a state of adoption: so Ravanellus. Likewise when
Christ said to his Disciples, You know not of what spirit ye are of, Luke 9.55.
i. e. of what state, of what calling, of what condition ye are of. It is not
suitable to men of your profession, of your coat to be so fiery and so
impatient: so Aretius. Yet I rather follow the judgment of a judicious Divine
in our days, who in the forementioned place in the Romans, means by spirit,
not a state there, but a person, i. e. the third person in the blessed Trinity,
very judiciously explaining the words after this manner; Showing that when once
the Spirit has been the Spirit of adoption, that Spirit is never after the
spirit of bondage again unto us; this in no ways hindering, but that a child
of God after the Spirit of adoption, may have the fears of bondage again, for
though the Spirit does not contradict his testunony, yet he may withdraw his
rest money for a time, and leave us in the dark, yea the devil may trouble and
affright us, and our own consciences may condemn us.

XII. By Spirit may be meant a pretense and opinion of some revelation Dr.
Goodwin in his excellent Book called, A child of light walking in darknels.
concerning something which a man's own private conceit or imagination inclined
him so to think. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. Be not troubled, neither by spirit nor by word,
to think the day of judgment is at hand. By spirit, i. e. if any pretend a
revelation that the day of judgment is at hand do not believe him. 1 John 4.1.
Try the spirits, i. e. those pretended revelations which men feign, and see
whether they are of God or no. Believe not every spirit, because that many
false Prophets are gone out into the world.

XIII. The Spirit is taken for the graces of the Spirit in you. (...).
Revel. 1. To the seven Spirits of the seven Churches, i. e. to that Spirit
which is sevenfold in respect of its graces to the seven Churches. The Spirit
of God dwells within you; that is, according to some, not the Spirit it self,
but the graces of the Spirit. Gal. 5. These are the fruits of the Spirit, love,
joy, peace; meekness, temperance, patience, etc.

XIV. The Spirit is taken for those unclean lusts which the devil brings along
with him in the hearts of those in whom he lodges. Matthew. 12.45. When the
unclean spirit returns, he brings with him seven other spirits worse than
the former, i. e. many other filthy lusts more abominable than the former.

XV. Consule Pareum in Genesin and na hunc locum interpretatur, viz. Spiritum
illic accipi pro vi seu officacia divina. Cap. 1. Geneseos.
The Spirit is taken for Divine force and efficacy. Judge. 14.19. And the Spirit
of the Lord came upon him, i. e. a Divine force from on high came upon Sampsons
spirit, whereby he set upon the enterprise of killing the Ashkelonites.

XVI. The word Spirit fignifieth a new quality of holiness created and wrought
in all the Elect by the Spirit of God, whereby all the powers and faculties of
the soul and body are renewed according to the Image of God, in wisdom,
holiness and righteousness, otherwise called the Regenerate part: Romans 8. The
flesh lusts against the Spirit.

XVII. Spirit is taken for the chief and excellent faculties of the soul,
called reason and understanding, 1 Cor. 2.11.

XVIII. The Spirit is taken for the vigor, and efficacy of the understanding:
Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind.

More particularly.

First, The Angels are called spirits: 1. Good: Who makes his Angels spirits,
and his Ministers a flame of fire, Heb. 1. 2. Evil: Mark 5.4. We read of a man
possessed with an unclean spirit, and says Christ, What is thy name? says the
unclean spirit again, My name is Legion, for we are many. A Legion of devils in
one poor man.


Secondly, By way of eminency God is called a Spirit: John 4.24. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth. God
is a Spirit, if you take God essentially for the Deity, (...).
or personally for the three persons, Father, Son and holy Ghost.

Thirdly, More particularly the third Person in the blessed Trinity,
distinguished from the Father and the Son, is called a Spirit. Often times in
Scripture he is called by the Name of the holy Ghost: Matthew. 3.16. I saw the
holy Ghost descend upon him like a Dove.

Having done with the ambiguity of the word Spirit, I come to show what are the
teachings of the Spirit upon the hearts of Believers.

In handling of this I shall premise, That it is a very difficult thing to know
what the teachings of the Spirit are. As thou can not tell how the bones grow
in her that is with child, or what properly be the influences of the stars,
Eccl. 11.5.
or how-one spirit communicates its mind to another, or the causes of natural
sympathy or antipathy, as thou can not tell whence the wind comes, John 3.
or whither it goes, so is every one that is born after the Spirit.

It is a very difficult thing to tell what the Spirits teachings are.
First, Because they are teachings abstracted from sense. And as the
Philosopher says, by how much things are abstracted from sense, the higher
they are, and the more difficult to be understood. By how much things are more
spiritual, by so much the more hard it is to have a species or an apprehension
of them. We can conceive of things but under gross and material apprehensions,
because the Phantasm which is transferred from the active intellect to the
passive is material. That they be abstracted teachings appears,

1. Because they are immediately upon the soul, and not barely upon the soul,
but upon the inmost parts of the soul, Jer. 31. I will write my Law in their
inward parts, i. e. in the most retired part of the soul I will write my Law.
So likewise the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.23.
Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind. Not only in your mind, but in the
spirit of your mind. What is meant by the spirit of the mind? i. e. in the
inmost and most spiritual part of your mind. Grace has its foundation laid
deep in the soul by the Spirit of God (now you know that is the best foundation
which is laid the deepest) the Spirit searches into the bottom of the soul,
and lays the seeds of grace as deep rooted as he can. As God when he wrote the
Law, Exodus 32.15.
he wrote it upon the two Tables of stone, he wrote within and without upon the
Tables, noting thereby that there was no place left for man to add any thing
to the perfect Law of God: So the Spirit writes within and without upon the
soul. The Spirit in conversion ploughs up the fallow ground of our hearts, and
sows the seeds of grace within us, which because of the deepness of the soil,
cannot be at first discerned by us, but when the seed begins to grow up, then
we see evidently what the Spirit has been doing. And as Christ said to Peter,
Joh. 13.7.
What I am doing thou do not know as yet, but thou shall understand
hereafter, so thou may not know for the present what the Spirit means when
it teaches thee. The Spirits foundation is in the dark, but when he comes to
rear the building (for believers are a spiritual house of the Spirits own
building) and to beautify the work, 1 Pet. 2.5.
and to raise it higher and higher, then thou shall see the teachings of the
Spirit. The first lessons of the Spirit may be somewhat mysterious, but when
the Spirit shall comment upon them, then nothing will be more plain unto them.

2. Because they are spiritual teachings, and therefore abstracted teachings.
They are spiritual teachings, because the Spirit teaches them. A spirit
cannot communicate it self to our spirit, no otherwise then a spirit can. Now
as it is a very difficult thing, and much controverted with the Schoolmen, to
know how the Angels impart their conceptions, and express their minds one to
another, whether intuitive by viewing one another, or by something analogcall
to speech, which we shall know when we come to heaven: So it is as difficult,
if not more difficult, to know how the Spirit communicates it self unto our
hearts. Satan is said to put evil things into our hearts. Joh. 13.2.
Satan put it into Judas his heart to betray his Master; but what this putting
is we cannot tell. So the Spirit of God is said to put the things of God into
our hearts (I will put my Law into their hearts) but what this putting is we
cannot tell. Jer. 31.33.


Secondly, The Spirits teachings are very mysterious, because they are set
forth in Scripture by various significant acts, John 16.13.
as if the teaching of the Spirit was not one numericall act, Romans 8.16.
but as it were a complex act, including many particular acts in it. Col. 2.2.
Job 33.31 Romans 12.2.
Sometimes the guiding act, the witnessing act, the assuring act, the
inlightning act, the transforming act, the helping act, 2 Cor. 3.18.
and in a word, the teaching act is mentioned in Scripture. The Spirits
teaching includes many particular acts, Romans 8.26.
when it teaches us to be holy, it makes us holy; John 14.26.
when it teaches us assurance, it assures; when it teaches us what
justification is, it justifies; when it teaches us to pray, it is said to pray
along with us. Now multiplicity of acts breeds distraction of mind; especially
when the single acts of the Spirit are in themselves mysterious. Who can tell
me what the witnessing act of the Spirit is, whereby he witnesses with our
spirits that we are the sons of God? I am certain none can know what it is,
but he that feels the effect of it upon his own spirit, and that not at all
times, but when he feels the spirit witnessing. Who can tell me what the
sealing act of the Spirit is, that seal of the Spirit by which we are sealed
unto the day of redemption? This art is better felt than taught. Who can tell
me what the assuring act of the Spirit is, when it begets that plerophory, Heb.
10.22.
that full assurance of faith? Says John in his Revelation, Rev. 2.17.
No man knows what that white stone of absolution is, but he that has it. He
shall have a white stone, and a new name, which none shall know but him that
has it. The acts of the Spirit are better felt than expressed, known only to
those that have them, not to others.

Having done with the premonition, I come now to show what the teachings of the
Spirit be. Herein I shall observe the words of the Covenant made to believers
in Jesus Christ under the Gospel, whereof one main part is the teachings of
believers by his Spirit.

The teachings of the Spirit what they be.
The Spirits teachings upon the hearts of believers, are his puttings,
writings, printings, ingravings the Law of God, and all those things which
accompany sallvation, upon their hearts; which ingravings, etc. are by a secret
way, power and method unknown to us, but only to the Spirit, only we feel the
effect of the Spirits teachings upon our hearts.

Or, It is the Spirits creating a new light within us, by a secret way unknown
unto us at the first, which light in our consciences enkindled by the Spirit,
does in all things correspond and agree with the light of the word, and adds
more clearness to it in respect of our selves, that we might know the things of
God.

1. I say the Spirits teachings are his puttings, writings, printings,
engravings the Law of God upon our hearts, together with all those things which
shall accompany salvation: Heb. 8.8, 9, 10. Behold, says the Lord, I will make
a new Covenant, and this is that Testament that I will make with the house of
Israel; After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their
minds, and in their hearts will I write them, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. In that you are manifest to be the
Epistle of Christ ministered by us, and written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of
the heart. Jer. 31.33, 34. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people; and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. You see that
the Law must be first written in their hearts by the finger of God, i. e. by
the Spirit, before they can know the things of God. Ezekiel. 36.27 And I will put
my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep
my judgments and do them: the Spirit does not only write upon our hearts the
Law of God, but all things which accompany salvation. John 17. And when the
Spirit comes he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. There is no truth which
accompanies salvation in the Word of God, but the very same is written by the
finger of God upon the hearts of beleevets. That even as you see in a seal,
when you have put the seal upon the wax, and taken it away again, you shall see
it, stamp answering to stamp, character to character, print to print; so it is
in the hearts of the faithful, after their hearts are softened, the Spirit of
God writes the Law in their hearts. So that there is a Law within answerable to
the Law without, i. e. an inward aptness and disposition, whereby a man is
inclined to keep the Law in all points, which Law within us is called the Law
of the mind, Romans 7. I see a Law in my members warring against the Law of my
mind. The teachings of the Spirit do not only put the things of God into our
minds, but ingraff them as natural dispositions in our hearts, yea, the
Spirit of God ingravens them. As when letters are engraved in marble, so the
teachings of the Spirit engraven the things of God upon our hearts.

I call them the writings, the engravings of the things of God upon our hearts,
to distinguish the teachings of the Spirit, from the motions, impressions,
flashes, illuminations of the pirit. These are but light, superficial,
transient works, they reach not to the bottom of the soul, but they float at
the top: These impressions are suddenly begun, and suddenly ended. They are but
as a flash of lightning, which is no sooner seen but vanishes. They are but as
the morning cloud, and as the early dew, which suddenly pass away; as the wind
presently scatters the clouds, and the sun takes away the dew, so all these
common works of the Spirit pass away, and melt as the dew before the sun. The
best seeming professors that want the teachings of the Spirit, they are but as
blazing comets, which appear for a while and presently disappear. Wandering
stars, Jude 13.
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkenss for ever. Heb. 6.5. Psalm. 34.8.
They do but taste of the goodness of God, and so away. But the teachings of
the Spirit make a Christian, not only to taste, but to see the goodness of God.
They are permanent upon the soul, never to be blotted out again. They are not
as the flash of lightning, but as the noonday, full of brightness and comfort.
They are riveted in the soul, and imprinted in it.

2. I say they are the Printings of the things of God upon the hearts of
believers. Believers only have the teachings of the Spirit. And ye shall be all
taught of God, Joh. 6.45.
i. e. all ye who are under the Covenant of grace, and are interrested in Jesus
Christ, shall have the teachings of the Spirit. Unbeleevers may have the
motions, the breathings, the quicknings, the flashes, and the illuminations of
the Spirit, but not the teachings.

3. I say these printings and writings of the things of God, are done by a
secret method unknown to us, yet known to the Spirit. What he (...) tell, but
how he writes we cannot tell; what he prints we can tell, but how he prints we
cannot tell. Dan. 5 5.
As Belshazzar saw the hand when it wrote, but could not tell what the hand did
write; so believers on the other side, they see the writing of the Spirit, but
cannot see the hand that writes, nor understand how the Spirit writes; yet we
are in a far better condition than Belshazzar was: For it is better to
understand the writing, than to know how the hand does write; what is printed,
than how the Spirit prints; as it is far better to know that we are elected,
that we are justified, that we are renewed in the Spirit of our minds,
considered in themselves, than to know what Justification and Adoption is,
though we may know what Justification is, and that we are justified by the
Spirit.

4. Only we see the effect of the Spirits teachings upon our hearts; as a woman
may know she is with child, because the infant moves in her belly, so we may
know what the Spirit has been doing on our hearts, by that knowledge, zeal,
life, heat, motion, activity and courage we find in our spirits toward Gods
ways. We hear the clock strike, though we do not see the hand, or the wheels
that set it a going; so we may see our hearts echo back to the Spirit, though
we do not see the Spirit setting them on work. Ezekiel. 1.20
As Ezekiels wheels, wheresoever the Spirit went the wheels went, for the
spirits of the living creature was in the wheels: So because the Spirit of God
is in us, wheresoever the Spirit carries us we are carried. The Spirit moves
and we are moved; the Spirit prays when we pray, the Spirit witnesses when
our spirit witnesses, the Spirit sets the wheels going and we go. God is of a
truth in every Saint, though they cannot see him but in his operations. We know
that God is in us of a truth, because we act for God, and have the principle of
spiritual life from him. As we know the evil man has been teaching of us when
we see his evil tares, and heresies, and profaneness to spring up: so we may
know the Spirit has been teaching of us when we see the wheat to grow apace.

Otherwise:

The Spirits teachings is the Spirits creating a new light within us, by a
secret way unknown unto us at the first; which light in our consciences,
enkindled by the Spirit, does in all things correspond with the light of the
word, and adds more clearness to it in respect of our selves, that we may know
the things of God.

1. A creating a new light within us.] As God in the natural creation, created
light out of darkness, so it is in the spiritual creation, when the new man,
the infant of grace is born in us. Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. In the Lord]
that is, Jesus Christ by his Spirit has enlightened our minds in the
knowledge of him. 2 Cor. 4.6.
God who caused the light to shine out of darkness, has caused the light of
the Gospel to shine into our hearts through the face of Jesus Christ. This
light wrought by the Spirit it is a creation: for before this light arises,
before the sun of righteousness arises upon us, we were altogether darkenss,
we were darkness it self. And as it is said of the people amongst whom the
light of the Gospel shined, Isa. 9.2.
that the people that sat in darkness, and in the region of the shadow of
death, saw mavelous light; so we poor souls, before the Spirit enlightened
us, were in utter darkness, as in a dungeon, where there is not the least crany
to let in any light. Jude 13. Blackness of darkness, i. e. in utter darkness,
according to the Gospel phrase, Extreme darkness, where there is not the least
light, not any light at all
We were in a spiritual sense, as it were, in the blackness of darkness, but
when the Spirit was pleased to come into our hearts, he created light out of
darkness (Non ex materia quasi componente, sed quasi ex termino a quo) that is,
from darkenss he has translated us into mavelous light. Yea I may say the
Spirits setting up a light in the new creature, is more than a creation, if I
may so speak. For it is harder to create a thing out of its opposite in the
abstract, out of darkness it self to create light, than to create a thing out
of nothing: Excellently therefore did the Spirit of God set down this portion
of Scripture, to note unto us the great work of the Spirit in setting up a
light in the heart of man. 2 Cor. 4.6
God who caused the light to shine out of darkness. I may say that spiritual
darkness which is upon the hearts of unregenerate men, has a positive entity
in it, opposing the light of the Spirit for a time. (The light shined round
about, John 1.5.
but the darkness comprehended it not.) It is a wilful darkness, and a
wilful ignorance; but that first darkness was a non-ens, a mere privation, and
as soon as ever the light shined, the darkness vanished away. As to make a man
that is born blind to see, is a work equivalent to the work of creation, as
Christ did. So to remove that blindness which is upon our minds, that natural
blindness whereby we are as blind as beetles in the things of God (We have
eyes and see not) to remove that blindness, and to make us see, it is a work of
creation, and the only work of the Spirit.

2. A new light.] That is a more excellent light, a more transcendent light.
More excellent than the light of nature, or the light of conscience, more
excellent than the light of Ordinances, the light of means, the light of
natural improvements. More excellent than the light of knowledge, or any light
whatsoever. The light of the Spirit is the most excellent light. It may truly
be said, In thy light, O blessed Spirit, Psalm. 36.9.
we shall see light, in thy comfort we shall have comfort, by thy teachings
only we shall know the things of God. Blessed are they that walk in the light
of the Spirit. Revel 5.8. The four beasts, and the twenty four Elders fell down
before the Lamb, and they sang a new song, saying, etc. a new song, i. e. a
more excellent song; a new light, i. e. a more excellent light. 2. A new light
in respect of that abyss of darkness we were in before. A new thing is either a
rare thing, or otherwise a thing that never was before. There is no new thing
under the sun: Eccl. 1.9.
that is, there is nothing but what has been before.

Which light in our consciences enkindled by the Spirit, Conscientia est
judicium rationis practicae circa particularia per ratiocinatiouem deductum e
principits universalibus contentis in synteresi. Sic Philosophi. Synteresis est
habitus sive conservatio printipiorum practicorum.
does in all things correspond with the light of the Word.] The conscience, it
is an act of the practical understanding, together with the memory, bearing
witness unto God, by accusing or excusing us, accordingly as our deeds be,
whether good or evil. Or it is a spark of that primitive light left within us
since the fall, whereby in some measure we are able to distinguish between good
and evil, and accordingly to judge and consure our selves. Now because the
light of the Spirit, it is a diffusive light, spreading it self over all the
powers and faculties of the new creature. And not only a diffusive light, but a
persuasive, convincing, directive, irresistible light, which dispelleth all the
darkness which is upon the soul, such a light which is the life, being, and
vigor of the spiritual life. For as knowledge is the life, of the natural
soul, so is the light of the Spirit the life of the spiritual soul, giving
life, heat and motion unto it; The light was the life of men. Now because the
light of the Spirit is a superadded light to that natural light which is
within us, the light of conscience, which light consists of the practical part
of the understanding, and the memory, both concurring together; therefore
though the first work of the Spirit is to enlighten our understandings, yet
because our consciences, wherein is the seat of spiritual life, are benumbed
and dead, and the Spirits teachings, according to the practical part of them,
which is the greatest part of them, reach to the conscience; therefore I place
the hearts or consciences, which in Scripture phrase are Synonymicall, the
subject of the light of the Spirit. Correspond with the Word.] The light of the
Spirit, and the light of the Word do not clash one against another, but in all
things do agree in respect of the subject matter, though the light of the
Spirit is far the clearer, ut antea. By which light of the Spirit we come to
know the things of God. Whereupon David prays, Give me, O Lord, thy good
Spirit which may lead me into the Land of uprightness.

Now I come to show how the Spirit teaches.

1. By opening the eyes of the understanding, and making us to see the things
of God. A natural man has eyes, but they be shut, he has ears, but they be
stopped. Now the work of the Spirit is to open our eyes and unstop our ears, that
we might hearken to the things of God. We are by nature like the Egytians in
the Land of darkness, but when the Spirit has opened our eyes, we are in the
Land of Goshen, in the Land of light. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, might give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
revelation, through the acknowledging of him; that the eyes of your
understanding may be enlightened, that ye may know what the hope is of his
calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance in the Saints.

2. By taking away that enmity that is in our wills against the things of God.
We hate the things of God by nature. Now the Spirit shows the excellency, the
beauty, the luster, the pleasantness, the profit that is in God. It removes
those hard thoughts and evil surmises in our hearts, concerning God and the
ways of his worship. It shows us that godliness is profitable for all things,
both for the things of this life and of that which is to come. Pro. 3.17.
That the ways of wisdom, are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. Pro. 22.4.
That by humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, honor and life. That
there is nothing lost in serving God, and that it is the greatest slavery to do
the devils service. That it is better to work out the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, though with much labor and sorrow in the world, than to live in
sin though with the greatest worldly prosperity imaginable. That it is better
to undergo a light affliction here, which is but for a moment, than to undergo
an eternal weight of torment hereafter, and to lose an eternal weight of
glory; for if thou can not endure a short affliction here, how will thou
endure the fire of hell? Romans 2.
It shows us, that to him that works righteousness is peace, honor and life,
but tribulation, anguish and sorrow follows every soul that does evil, both to
Jew and Gentile. The Spirit carries us up on the heavenly mount of
contemplation, and shows us the riches of Gods house, and the treasures of the
new Jerusalem, saying, all these things will I give thee, if thou will worship
God in sincerity and truth. It persuades us of the evil of sin, of the
necessity we have of Jesus Christ, of the beauties of holiness, of the wrath of
God that hangs over sinners, and that there is nothing but the thread of life
(which how soon it may be cut God knows) which keeps them from burning in
everlasting fire. It shows the willingness that is in Jesus Christ to receive
poor repenting sinners. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. It
sets before us the freeness of the promise, Is. 55.
Ho every one that thirsts, let him come and drink of the waters of life
freely. Our buying is but receiving, Buy wine and milk without money and
without price. That God the Father, and Jesus Christ is more willing to receive
us, than we are to come unto him; that God waits to be gracious, Isa. 30.18.
as the Prophet Isaiah speaks; that Gods mercy rejoices against judgment, and
that there is nothing but our unwillingness which hinders the marriage union
betwixt Christ and our souls: It shows us that the multitude of our sins
cannot hinder the effect of Gods mercies, Isa. 55.8, 9.
for Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our ways; that
the Lord is willing to heal our backslidings, Hos. 14.4.
and to love us freely, for his Name sake; that Gods bowels yern over us, when
he sees us wallowing in our blood; Ezekiel. 16.
that if God were not more merciful to us than we are to our selves, we had
perished long ago in our sins: and that if God sees any thoughts of returning
in us, if we would but set our faces Zion ward, Jer. 19.5.
if we did but feel after the Lord, Act. 17.27.
if he did but see us afar off in a repenting frame of spirit, smiting upon
our thighs, Ier. 31.
as Ephraim did, as the father did the returning prodigal, he would meet us in
the way, and fall upon our necks, and kiss us; yea he would bemoan us, as God
did repenting Ephraim: Is Ephraim my beloved son? Hos. 11.8.
is he not a pleasant child? my repentings are kindled together, and my bowels
are turned within me. Says God, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn from his wicked ways and live. Lam. 3.33
God afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men. If we perish it
is not Gods fault, but our own, because we are so cruel unto our selves.
Formerly poor creatures could not endure to think of God. Psalm. 10.4.
God is not in all a wicked man's thoughts, his ways are always grievous. The
thoughts of God are troublesome thoughts unto him; his infinite justice,
exceeding greatness, his impartial dealing with sinners, when he comes to
plead with them for their sins: Says God, I will not at all acquit the wicked;
these are afflicting thoughts to a wicked man: Why? because he thinks that
because God is his enemy, all these his attributes shall be employed to his
everlasting ruin. It is said likewise of the Gentiles, Romans 1. that they liked
not to retain God in their knowledge. But when the Spirit comes it makes the
thoughts of God precious, then the soul can say, as David did, Ps. 94.19.
In the multitude of my thoughts thy comforts delight my soul, that is, in the
multitude of my distracting, dividing, worldly, perplexing thoughts, the
comforts that flow in upon the meditation of thy goodness, and of that
propriety which I have in thee, that thou art my portion, my God, my rock, that
is higher than I, to which I may continually resort, this does comfort my
spirit. The natural man he counts Christ, and the Word, and the conscientious
Minister who deals plainly and powerfully with him his greatest enemies. He
cannot endure to see his beloved sin reproved, to hear of his Dallilah, to
hear of hell, of the wrath of God, and of the day of judgment, no, it is as
bad as death to him to hear of these things. He cannot bear it, that Christ
must be his Lord, the Spirit his teacher, the Word his rule, and Gods glory his
end; that he must become a new convert, and that he must leave behind him his
old companions, his old desires, his old customs, his old principles, his old
ends, and his laws, and that he must become another man, altogether new; all
old things must be done away, and all things must become new. Heb. 12.
Now the Spirit teaches, John 3.
that without holiness he shall never see the face of God. That unless he be
born again, he shall never enter into the Kingdom of heaven. That if any man be
in Christ he is a new creature: 2 Cor. 5.17.
That it is impossible to enter into the new Jerusalem with an unclean heart.
Besides the Spirit takes away those objections which are in carnal men's
hearts, against the purity of religion. What needs this preciseness, this
Pharisaism muchness in duty? to be always praying, and always hearing, and
the like: It is a wearisomness to the flesh, it duls the spirit, and makes one
melancholy, it is more then needs be required. As long as our hearts are
upright with God, and we desire to glorify him in all his ways, and we have
upright intentions, this is sufficient for heaven, though we are not so much in
duty as the pharisaicall men are. Now the Spirit setting home the love of
Christ upon our hearts, and showing us what he has done for us, brings us off
from this lure, to a perfect resignation of body and soul to his service.
Moreover, he shows us that we must be holy in all manner of conversation:
(...).
That we must walk exactly, and as much as in us lies, keep every circumstance
that is contained in the Law of God. And truly there is not a more certain sign
of an upright heart, than to have an universal respect to all the Commandments
of God. When out of a conscience to the command of God, we would not commit the
least sin, or omit the smallest duty. When the enmity is removed, and the
prejudice taken out of our hearts, and all our misgivings and misapprehensions
rightly placed, we can easily hearken to the voice of the Spirit.

What things more peculiarly the Spirit teaches.
1. Thou can not know God aright without the Spirits teachings. Male vivitur,
ubi de Deo non been creditur.
A child of God may know more of God in one Chapter of the Book of God, which
is the mind of the Spirit, than all the writings of all the men in the world
are able to show forth without this word of God. It is the Spirit alone that
can ravish our hearts to the love of God in Jesus Christ. 1. Gods love.
That can make us see the height, depth, and breadth of Gods love unto us. Who
would ever have thought that apostates, rebels, enemies, should ever have
become the sons of God, heirs, joynt-heirs, and coheirs with Jesus Christ,
but that the Spirit has made it clear? Behold with what manner of love has
the Father loved us, that we should be called the sons of God. Philosophers
could tell you that the Being of beings, the first mover, the first Cause of
all causes, must be infinite, just, merciful, and the like; but that God
through Jesus Christ should find out such a way of reconciliation, that
sinners should be called the sons of God, and that they should be one with
the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ, and that they should have communion
with him for ever and ever, this only the Spirit teaches.

It is the Spirit only which shows the most holy nature of God. 2. The holy
nature of God. 1 John 1.5.
In God is light, and in him there is no darkness. He is holiness it self,
therefore says God, Be ye holy, as I am holy. We are apt to think that God is
such an one as our selves, that he minds not our iniquities, that he walks
aloft in the heavens, and cares not for the things which are done upon the
earth, but the Spirit has declared unto us, Hab. 1. That God is of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity. Psalm. 5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight,
thou hate all the workers of iniquity. I have read of some Nations, that
because they have thought their Gods to have delighted in some vice, therefore
they have addicted themselves in the imitation of their Gods to the same vice:
Some have thought their Gods delighted in uncleanness, some in drunkenness,
others in cruelty, and therefore they have been drunken, unclean, and cruel;
but we have learned God otherwise by the mind of the Spirit, that there is no
iniquity in the God of Israel: Mercy and truth goes before his face, justice
and judgment is the habitation of his Throne.

The Spirit alone has showed us the exact justice of God against every sin,
3. The exact justice of God.
that the least sin unrepented of, and not washed away by the blood of
Christ, though it be but an evil thought, or an idle word, shall be punished
with everlasting destruction. Origin with some others have thought that it
could not stand with the mercy of God to punish a sinner everlastingly in hell,
and therefore they have jumpt in with the Popish purgatory, thinking that after
the soul has been punished so many years in hell fire, it shall be released
and set at liberty. But this is contrary to the Spirit of God in many places of
Scripture.

2. The mystery of the blessed Trinity.
The Spirit only has showed us the mystery of the blessed and incomprehensible
Trinity. That there should be three persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and
yet these three but one God. There are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. All the great
Rabbis of the world will never attain this mystery; it is only the Spirit that
teaches it. What Pla. to writes of the blessed Trinity, it is supposed he had
it out of Moses his writings or else some other way.
This doctrine of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, that there should
be three persons and but one God. and one God and yet three persons, that the
Father should be God, the Son should be God, and the holy Ghost should be God,
it is a doctrine of faith, and not of reason, a doctrine which ought to be
believed, because the Spirit has revealed it, and therefore not to be disputed
of. The Schoolmen whose foolish hearts are darkened, have become vain in their
imaginations, concerning this transcendent and exceeding great mystery.

3. It is the Spirit alone that teaches us the great mystery of the incarnation
of Christ; that there should be two natures, the humane and the Divine united
together, and yet but one person, The union or the two natures in Christ, is
(...) by a fiery flaming sword, or rather by the similitude of a branch
engrafted into a stock of another tree, where there is not a mixture of the
nature of these trees; nor a constitution of a ^hird out of them, but a drawing
of one of them into the others subsistence. Dr Field.
this is the mystery of mysteries. And without controversy great is the
mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh; justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, believed on in the world, and received up into glory, John 1.14
The Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory, as the
glory of the only begotten Son, full of grace and truth.

Was made flesh.] This destroys the Heresy of the Marcionists, who said that
Christ was not made flesh, (...) Est articulus demonstrativus, notans ipsum
verbum fieri carnem, (...) indefinite sumitur fine ullo articulo, inde notans
eum accepisse totam nostram naturam.
and that he was not, formed in the womb of the Virgin Mary, but that he passed
through the womb of the Virgin, as water passes through a Conduit. And dwelt
amongst us.] (...).
Greek, Had his Tabernacle among us.

There are many other duties which only the Spirit teaches, as justification
by faith alone, the doctrine of the resurrection, of the immortality of the
soul, of the happiness of the Saints in heaven, and of the future torments of
the wicked in hell. The Schoolmen with their fine-spun distinctions and
critical questions, do rather darken the mind of the Spirit in these ways,
than add any further light unto them. Their teachings are like the way of a
serpent upon a stone, very slippery and uncertain.

4. The evil nature of finne.
The Spirit alone has showed unto us the evil nature of sin. It condemns an
evil look, a malicious thought, Mat. 5. He that looks upon a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Ephesians. 5.4.
(...), urbanitas, apud Spiritum est vitium, upud Aristoteleus est virtus. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
He that h^ttih his brother in his heart is a murderer. It condemns jesting and
evil speaking. It is to be observed that that very word which Aristotle calls a
virtue, the Spirit of God terms a vice. Jesting with Aristotle is a virtue,
with the Spirit of God it is a vice. We are commanded to abstain from all
appearance of evil. To hate the very garments spotted with the flesh. To resist
the first motions and allurements to sin: Rom 7. I had not known sin but by
the Law, for I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not
covet. Unless the Word of God had told us, and the Spirit of God had set down
this for a certain truth, that these motions to sin are sin, we should never
have known it or believed it. These first motions were never counted for sins
by any of the Heathen Philosophers, or by the more refined wits of the
Schoolmen, only the Spirit has pricked them down for sins. That they are
sins,
appears by this, because they tempt a man to sin. If concupiscence were not
a sin, it would never tempt a man to sin, for nothing brings forth sin
formally, but sin. Lust when it conceives it brings forth sin, and sin
when it conceives it brings forth death.

Ob. The wages of sin is death, now if lust were a sin, it would bring forth
death, how then is it said that luft when it conceives brings forth sin, and
sin when it conceives brings forth death?

Resp. St James in this place distinguishes the several sorts of sins.
There are some sins consummated and finished, and those bring forth death,
but it follows not that other sins bring not forth death, but that they do
not bring forth death to the same degree as those sins do, for there are
diversities of torments in hell, and the best place in hell is very lamentable.
As he that calls his brother fool is worthy of hell fire, Raca, i.e. a fellow of
no worth, from the word Rik ovacuare.
yet it will not follow that he that calls his brother Raca is unworthy of it,
but that he is not worthy of it in the same degree and measure. Lust it
brings forth death, but not to the same degree that sin consummated does. God
judges the secrets of men's hearts, that secret wickedness which is within us,
and reproves it and makes it manifest to our consciences. Rom 2.16
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men's hearts, according to my
Gospel. It is only the Spirit that condemns heart-wickedness. So says Peter
to Simon Magus, Pray to God that the thought of thy heart might be forgiven
thee. The Laws of man do not reach to the conscience, to heart wickedness, to
the secret inward abominations to which God and thy own conscience are
conscious to. Only the Law of the Spirit does reprove this heart wickedness.
The Spirit of God it condemns hypocrisy, when men will seem religious, and
would be counted true Christians, though their hearts run whoring after their
base lusts: When like a man at Oars, they will row one way and look another:
Pretend for God and for Gods cause, when their design is to carry on the
interest of the flesh, and of the devil. When they will worship God and speak
him fair to his face, and give him a parcel of good words, in a few formal
words, and in an external lip-service, when malice and covetousness, and
carnal lusts are in their hearts. Matthew. 23. How many woes has Christ
denounced against hypocrites! Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites.
External worship is sufficient in man's sight, but God requires the heart and
the whole heart: Matthew. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with
all thy might, and with all thy strength. Hypocrisy is no sin in the worlds
account, but a criminal fault, a crimson sin in the sight of God. Do thou
think to mock God, and to put him off with shadows in stead of substance, with
thy formality in stead of sincerity? Gal. 5.
Be not deceived, do not deceive your selves, and think to put off God with any
thing; the heart of man is full of deceit, deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked. Why be not deceived, why? I will tell you, for what a man
sows, that shall he reap; if ye sow chaff, you shall reap chaff; if you sow
wheat, you shall reap wheat. Hypocrisy is an epidemicall sin in this
professing age. Consider against this sin, Cor secundum Auagramma est Camera
omnipotentis Regis. The heart is the seat of the great King of heaven and
earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. God has two places wherein he
most especially is resident, the highest heaven, and the lowest heart. In
heaven he is by his glorious presence: In an humble heart by his gracious
presence.
1. That all thy endeavors will be utterly lost, unless thou have an upright
heart; if thou praiest never so much, if thy heart be not perfect with thy God,
all thy prayers will do thee no good. As good not at all, as never a whit the
better. 2. Consider, that God judges a man and esteems of him according as
his heart is; if that be sincere, thou art a sincere Christian, but if that be
rotten, thou art unsavory in the sight of God. 3. God answers a man according
to what is in his heart, not according to what is in his lips, when he prays
to him. Thou art a drunkard or a whoremonger, or a covetous wretch, or an
extortioner, etc. and thou come as Gods people do, and sit before him,
and praiest unto him: Why God will not answer thee according to thy prayer, for
it is but lip-service, but according to the Idol that is in thy heart. Ezekiel. 14.
In stead of pardoning thy sins, he will give thee more liberty to gratify
thy lusts. God will answer thee, but it shall be with a curse rather than with
a blessing. Sin it is filthiness in the sight of God: Ezekiel. 36. I will pour
clean water upon you, and purge you from all your filthinessess. Says God,
remove this abominable thing out of my sight which I hate. As it is spoken in
reference to Idolatry, so it may be applied to all manner of sins. Remove
this abominable thing, to wit, sin, either in general, Jer. 44.4.
or this particular sin out of my sight. Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft. 1 Samuel 15.23.
He that sins hurts his own soul. Every sin properly is a destruction to
the soul: Isa. 59 2. Your finnes have separated between you and your God, and
he has hid his face and will not hear. 2 Cor. 6.15. Sin it defaceth the beauty
of the soul, It is a fretting leprosy, which only the blood of Christ can
purge away. The deluge which drowned so many sinners, was not able to wash away
the least sin. Sin it is the greatest evil, because it is worse than the
devil, for it made him to be so. It Is worse than hell, that is but opposite to
the good of the creature, this of the Creator. And if the greatness of the
malady may be judged by the cost and difficulty of the cure, it will easily
appear that no evil is so great as this, because nothing could serve for the
remedy of it, but the infinite precious blood of Jesus Christ. It Is so great an
evil, that there can be no greater punishment of i^, than by it self: When God
would deal with man as a most desperate enemy, he gives him up to sin. There
can be no worse Epithete for it than it self. When the Apostle would speak the
worst of it as he could, he calls it by his own name, Romans 7.13. Sinful sin.
Dr. Wilkins in his Discourse concerning the gift of prayer.
it is a leprosy which infects the whole man, it is that which makes the
inhabitants of the earth to stink and be corrupt in the nostrils of God. It is
that which is the greatest evil, because it is opposite to the greatest good,
God blessed for ever, and brings the greatest evil upon creatures, the
privation of Gods glorious presence for ever: 1 Cor. 6.9. Neither fornicators,
nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor reyilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven. The Morallist defines sin
after this manner, Vitium est quod a mediocritate deflectit, vel in excessu,
vel in defectu. Actual sin according to the Schoolmen is thus defined,
Peccaium actuale est actus indebito modo circumstantionatus, the circumstances
are these, Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando.

But the Word of God calls sin (...), Sin is the transgression of the Law. Every
deviation from the perfect Law of God, in the least punctillo of it, though but
in a thought, in a word, or in one particular action, it is a sin. Regula est
judex sui and obliqui. And the Law of God, it not only shows what is good, what
is right, and what is just, but what is evil, what is unjust, because it shows
us all our obliquities and defects from it.

5. None can teach us to understand the Word of God, but the Spirit of God. The
Word of God it remains always the same, and it is a clear and a plain way in
it self: Till the Spirit removes the scales from our eyes, such scales as fell
from Paul's eyes, we cannot understand the mind of the Spirit. We may prove the
Word of God to be the Word of God by reason, for unless we go by reason, we
shall never be able to convince an Infidel or a Pagan that the Seriptures are
the Word of God. But to make a man understand it, is the work of the Spirit.
What is the reason that having been so much verst in the word, we remain so
ignorant of the mind of the Spirit? Why, it is because thou art void of the
Spirits teachings. The word it is not written upon thy heart by the finger of
God, but as fast as it comes in at one car it goes out at another, and the
devil comes and steals the word out of thy heart. I tell thee thou may have
the whole Word of God by heart, and yet far to seek in the right knowledge of
it. Scriptura omnibus accessibilitis, paucissimis penetrabilis. Aug.
Act. 8. We read the story of Philio and of the Eunuch; The Eunuch was reading
a place of Isaias, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before
the shearer opened he not his mouth. Philip comes to him and said,
Understand thou what thou read? said the Eunuch again, How can I? except
some man guide me: Then Philip expounded the place unto him. But what set
Philip a work to go to the Eunuch? The Spirit said unto Philip, Go near and
join thy self to his Chariot. So I may say to a poor man when he reads the Word
of God, Understandest thou what thou read? Do thou know the mind of the
Spirit in that place? and he may answer me, How should I? unless the Spirit
teaches me, or some body whom the Spirit sets a work for that end. Believe it,
When sensual men that have not the Spirit, let them be never so book-learned,
or head-learned otherwise, speak of the things of God, they speak as some
Geographers write of other Countries, who never were there themselves to see
the situation or the sertility of them, they travel by other men's eyes, and
see with other men's light; and what they write for the most part of it they
take up on trust and record, and have but an opinionative knowledge of them, if
I may so speak, and mix many errors with little of truth. So Learned men void
of the Spirit, the greatest part of their knowledge they have upon trust, and
upon the record of men like Augustine, who as he before his conversion said, I
believe so, because the Church said so, so they believe so, because the fathers
of old said so, or because such and such persons whom they esteem say so, not
considering the light of the Spirit, which is greater than the light of reason,
or any other light whatsoever. But the spiritual man speaks experimentally what
he se^^ by the light of the Spirit within him. Every spiritual man can say, and
only he can say so, I know what I speak; I believed, therefore have have I
spoken. My record is true, because I have the record of the Spirit. What I have
heard; seen and felt of the word of life, that I speak, Romans 9.
and it is a certain truth, that a godly poor man, let him be unskilful in
humane Learning, yet if he has but that unction of the Spirit that St John
speaks of, he is able to discourse of the things of God more savingly,
experimentally and powersully than the greatest Clerks and Rulers of the world:
1 Cor. 1.20. Not many mighty, not many wise, not many noble are called, but God
has chosen the base things of the world to confound the honorable, and the
weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. God did choose
for his disciples, not the learned Rabbis of the world, as the Scribes and
Pharisees were, but a poor company of Fishermen and Tent-makers, delivered
this Book unto us. God called Amos from following the sheep, to go and
Prophecy to Amaziab. And this God did to stain the pride of worldly wisdom,
showing, that he stood not in need of an arm of flesh to accomplish his design
upon the earth, but that by weak and inconsiderable means in themselves, he was
able to bring about the greatest designs. What is the reason that the greatest
Scholars are most to seek in the things of God, especially in those things
which accompany salvation? Why, as Solomon speaks, they leaning to their own
understandings, and exalting themselves in the pride of their parts and
abillities, do justly cause God to leave them to themselves, and in the dark,
because they seek not after the Spirit of God, which is the chief thing to be
desired, if they will know the will of God. We usually say, that he that made
the Laws can best tell how to interpret them; so the Spirit of God which made
the Word of God (for holy men of God spoke as they were inspired by the Spirit)
knows best how to explain it. We are to compare spiritual things with
spiritual, and the Spirit of God speaking in one place, with the Spirit
speaking in another, if we would know the scope and intent of the Word. No man
can say Jesus is the Christ, but by the Spirit. Says Christ to Peter, when he
confessed him to be the Christ, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. Now
the Father, as it is clear from Ephesians. 3.5. declared this mystery by the
Spirit, Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy Prophets and Apostles by his Spirit.

As for practical duties, it is the Spirit only that inflames the heart,
enlightens the mind, breeds compunction, and brings sundry comforts. That
teaches us to despise earthly things, to leath things present, and to seek
after things eternal, to fly honors, and to suffer scandals, and to place our
hope and confidence in God. That teaches us that great duty of mortification
(If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh) to subdue our
lusts, to overcome the world, to live a life of faith, and not of sense, to
endure afflictions, and to resist temptations.

The Spirit helps us to pray, We know not how to pray as we ought, but the
Spirit helps our infirmities, by making intercessions for us, with groanings
which cannot be uttered. He helps together with and over against us: (...),
collaborantes adjuvat.
The original word imports as when another man sets his shoulder to bear a
part with us in the lifting up of any burden. The Spirit of God removes those
clogs and weights which be upon our spirits, and puts life into the Chariot
wheels of our souls, by raising up our affections, by stirring up the gift of
God that is within us, that we may pray with readiness of mind. And makes
intexcession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Not that the holy
Spirit is a Mediator of intercessions, that is properly the office of the
Son, who is therefore styled, our Advocate, 1 John 2.1. But because the
Spirit of God does stir up our hearts to prayer, and infuse into us holy
desires, stirring us up and instructing us in this duty, therefore he is said
to intercede for us. The Spirit likewise, by causing us to groan and sigh for
our sins, is said to make intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. It is the Spirit alone that must convince us of our sins: When the
Spirit shall come be shall convince the world of sin, Joh. 16.8. (...),
corripio, pervim demonstrationis.
of righteausness and judgment. The Spirit convinces plainly by a
demonstration, showing, Thou art the man, as Nathan said to David, and
powerfully to the conscience. It is the Spirit that unites us to Jesus Christ,
he is the bond of our spiritual union. He that has not the Spirit of Christ
is none of his. It is the Spirit that quickens: The Spirit quickneth, Joh. 6.63.
the Word profits nothing. It is the Spirit that sanctifies, and that
regenerates the hearts of believers. 1 John 5.18.
He that is born of God sins not, i.e. he that is born of the sanctifying
Spirit of God sins not that great sin against the holy Ghost, which is
unpardonable. It is the Spirit that is the true Comforter: Hence he is called
by way of eminency, John 16.
The Comforter: The earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14.
because of his inward testifying act upon our spirits, that we are Gods
children. It is the Spirit that drives out that slavish fear out of our
hearts, making us to come with boldness and with confidence to God: Psalm. 51.
Uphold me with thy free Spirit. It is the Spirit that justifies; 1 Cor. 6.10.
But ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God.
It is the Spirit that preserves the faithful from falling away, by his
preventing and establishing grace, from that hope that is within them, unto the
day of their appearance before Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this
very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it unto
the day of Jesus Christ.

What manner of teachings the Spirits teachings are.
First, They are infallible teachings: The Spirit teaches truly without the
least error or deceit. He is called the Spirit of truth, because whatever the
Spirit teaches it cannot but be truth: John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, which shall abide with you for ever, even
the Spirit of truth. The Spirit is said to lead us into all truth: Joh. 16.13.
When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth, for he
shall not speak of himself, (...). Dux vobis erit. Dux viae. He shall lead you
by the hand, as the Nurse does a weak sickly child; and be a guide unto you in
your way. In the way of truth.
but what he has heara of me that shall he speak, and he shall show you things
to come. If truth it self can lie and deceive, then the Spirit may deceive you;
but it is impossible that truth it self should deceive. God is not as man that
he should lie, or the son of man that he should repent. The Spirit it is God,
as I have proved already, and therefore it is impossible he should lie, i. e.
deceive or fail us in our expectations, when we wait upon him. If we think the
Spirit to be God, and take him for our guide, and we acknowledge him for to be
our counselor, it is impossible that the Spirit should deceive us of our
expectations. Matthew. 24.24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, and if it were possible they
shall deceive the very elect, if it were possible, but it is impossible they
should deceive the elect: 1 John 2.20. They have the unction from the holy one,
and they shall know all things, i. e. all things that pertain to life and
godliness. What is the reason why we believe the Word of God to be true, and as
Chrift says, not the least tittle thereof shall fall till all things shall be
accomplished, but only because it has the stamp of the divine authority of the
blessed Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.
The Spirit teaches all things, yea tho deep things of God. It is called the
Spirit of wisdom: Isa. 11.21. It is prophesied of Christ, That the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, and the Spirit of
the fear of the Lord, shall rest upon him. Wisdom it self, it cannot err, it
cannot deceive. The Spirit it is the fountain of all wisdom: Isa 40.13. Who
has directed the Spirit of the Lord? and being his counselor, has taught
him? v. 14. With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him and taught him
in the paths of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way
of understanding? If wisdom it self, and the fountain of all wisdom teaches
you, you need not fear that you shall be taught amiss. Popes and general
Counsels, and all men, yea the best men may be sound liars, and may deceive,
and put darkness for light, and light for darkness, and may call good evil, and
evil good, and may put truth for error, and error for truth, but it is quite
otherwise with the Spirit of truth, which shall lead you into all truth.

Quest. Do not the people of God. err some times and fall into error, how then
are the Spirits teachings infallible?

Ans. 1. As far as they are taught of the Spirit, they do not err or fall
into any heresy: Gal. 5. Heresies are reckoned amongst the fruits of the
flesh: These are the fruits of the flesn, envyings, strifes, emulations,
heresies; so that errors are not fruits of the Spirit, but fruits of the
flesh. A child of God may be led away with an error for a time, Gal. 2.13. As
Barnabas was led away by their dissimulation, so a child of God may be led.
away.

2. God sometimes out of his justice may permit a child of God to run into
ways contrary to the truth, because he did not prize the Word of God as he
ought to do, and seek it with his whole heart, that afterward being recovered
out of the snare of the devil, he may more esteem the Word of God than
formerly. If a Christian who has lived in England under the means of grace, by
providence should be cast among the Heathen, where there is no knowledge of the
true God, but idolatry and false worship set up in place of it, how would he
esteem the Ordinances of Christ! So when a gracious soul shall be given up to
the delusions of Satan for a time, and afterward be recovered, certainly he
would let go all, ere he would lose this precious jewel of truth.

Quest. It is said that the unction of the Spirit teaches them all things; How
can they err therefore?

Ans. It is true, that is, there is nothing that belongs to life and salvation,
but some time or other shall be revealed to the children of God: The Spirit
does not teach us all the mysteries of God at once, but successively, as we are
able to receive them: We are not capable to receive all truths at one time. It
is with truth, as it is with light, the light grows by degrees, as the sun
ascends higher and higher in the firmament, so the greater is the light, The
Spirit teaches successively.
and the more it is dispersed. Truth comes not all at once into the
understanding, but first one truth comes in, and then another. The Logicians
say, that upon the receiving one absurdity a thousand follow, so one truth
makes way for another. Therefore the perfectionists of these times, who think,
because they say they have the teachings of the Spirit, they know all things,
and that they need not have any body to teach them, they are in a gross
mistake, and as the Apostle faith, while they think they know all things, they
know nothing as they ought to know. Those that are above the Ordinances are
beneath salvation, and those that contemn the ordinary teachings of the Spirit
in his Word, and Ministers, are far to seek in the extraordinary. The Spirit
has babes to nurture, as well as strong Christians, it has several books to
read, to those that are in the lowest form in the School of Christ, and not so
high and lofty as to those that are in a higher degree. The former he teaches
the principles of the doctrine of God, the later those mysteries which have
been kept secret from the foundation of the world. The former he deals with in
a more gentle and tender way, to these he is more rough and more severe. Christ
has his Lambs, as well as his Sheep, and what does he do with them, Isa.
40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with
young. Christ and his Spirit drives on as Jacob did, Genesis 33.13. My Lord
knows that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are
with me, and if men should drive them over-hard one day, all the flock would
die; Let my Lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant, and I will lead on
softly according as the cattle that go before me, and the children are able to
bear. Christ leads us as we are able to bear, and the Spirit teaches us as we
are able to learn. The light breaks in upon us by little and little, and Christ
said unto the Apostles, he had many things to say unto them, but they could not
bear them yet; so the Spirit has many things to teach us, but we are not
sufficiently humbled to receive them. Isa. 42.2, 3
As it is said of Christ, so it may be said of his Spirit, He will not break
the brnised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, until he bring forth judgment
into victory: that is, he will cherish grace and knowledge, though covered over
with manifold imperfections, and very small till they shall come to that
measure of perfection which is appointed for them.

Reply. Does the Spirit teach successively, though he will teach us all things
which pertain to life and godliness? What hinders but that a child of God
may err in many things, and yet the Spirit of God be said to teach him all
things? v. g. A Schoolmaster is said to instruct his scholar in all the
rudiments of Grammar, yet the scholar may commit solecismes and false
concordance; and why? because the Master does not teach him all the elements at
once, but by degrees. So the Spirit, though it teaches all things which
pertain to life and salvation in time; yet because it teaches by degrees. a
child of God may in the mean time fall into error, till the Spirit of God
shall give in a further light into his soul, declaring unto him that his tenent
is an error.

Secondly, They are inward teachings, that is, they reach to the heart. Many
times Ministers teach, but it is not from the heart to the heart, but from the
heart to the head. We may inform your judgments, but we cannot enkindle your
affections, and inflame your hearts with an ardent desire, and fervent love of
the things delivered unto you. The Spirit makes you not only to know the things
of God, but in love with the things of God. A spiritual man can find more
sweetness in reading one of the Psalms penned by that sweet Psalmist of Israel
Davia, than in reading all the merry books in the world besides. Another man
may read the Word of God, but it is only the Spirit that can make us delight
in the Law of God, according to the inward man. Another man may hear of the
excellency of Jesus Christ, but it is only the spiritual man that esteems him
the chiefest of ten thousand, and desires him above all things. When the Spirit
teaches the soul, let it be never so dull of apprehension, let its affections
be as cold as a stone to heavenly things, let him be as Epraim, like a silly
Dove without a heart, let him be altogether averse from any thing that is good,
yet the Spirit shall produce inward heat, life and motion to run in the ways
of God, and not to be weary to go on and not faint. The Spirits teachings will
make hearts as hard as rocks to flow forth with rivers of living water, they
will cause floods to come into the wilderness where no water is. It is
unexpressible what are the kindlings of love, and meltings of heart in a soul
toward God, that has once been touched with this heavenly light of the Spirit
from heaven. What is the reason we remain so dull and so cold under such
powerful Ordinances, and such plenteous showrs of grace? Why, I will tell you,
you want the inward teachings of the Spirit upon your hearts. In the Word
preached you may have light, but you can have no heat, you may have motion, but
you can have no zeal. Where the Spirit is, there is light and heat, you will be
burning and shining lights.

Thirdly, They are evident teachings. 1 Cor. 2.4.
We read of the demonstration of the Spirit; the Spirit when it comes it makes
a demonstration from the effect to the cause, because the Spirit works in us
what it teaches. The way to faith is by working knowledge in our hearts, and
by opening our eyes to see in what a case we are in by nature, and into what a
good condition we are instated into by Jesus Christ. Knowledge is put for
faith, This is life eternal to know thee, Joh. 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom thou bast sent; that is, to believe on thee and Jesus
Christ. We may know we are taught by the Spirit, if we live in the Spirit, if
we walk in the Spirit, if we war after the Spirit, and not after the flesh: 2
Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our Warfare are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty, to the
throwing down of sin and Satan. The Spirits writing upon the heart is in
great letters, not in small, so that he that runs may read it, as it is
spoken of the vision in Habakkuk, grace is written in legible characters. The
Saints of God generally stand in their own light, By others, I do not
understand the world, the wicked world, but the Saints of God. The true Saints
are hid to the world. The life of every Saint is hid with Christ in God. But
one spiritual Christian may easily discern another, because of that likeness,
which each has one to another, and the conformity both of them have no Jesus
Christ their head.
that they cannot see those graces in themselves, which to others are very
plain and visible. True grace loves to lie hid under the vail of humility, the
more it seeks to hide it self, the more it is discovered. The Saints are the
Epistle of Christ known and read of all men. The Spirit does not teach by tipes
and figures, and by shadows, but it teaches the very thing, the very
substance. We read of the manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.7. But the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. Ephesians.
1.17. So the Spirit of revelation, That the God of our Lord Jesus, and the
Father of glory, might give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him. The Spirit it is our remembrancer, to bring all things to our
remembrance which Christ and his Apostles have spoken unto us in the word:
Says Christ, John 14.26.
When the Spirit comes he shall bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever
I have spoken unto you, that is, the things of God shall be made so plain unto
them, as if they had known them of old, as if they were well verst in them, and
the things deeply rooted in their memories. This is quite contrary to those who
say the Spirits teachings are full of mysteries, dark and obscure, and hard to
be understood: What is this but to make the Spirit of God like the impure
spirit the devil? Indeed when Oracles were in use, the devils answers were very
obscure; witness, when Pyrrhus sent to the Oracle to know whether he should
overcome the Romans, or the Romans overcome him, the answer was so dubious,
that he could not understand either of them, before the sword decided the doubt
on the Romans part, Aiote Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse. But the Spirit of God
teaches plainly, and when he speaks, he speaks to the purpose. If the Spirits
teachings should be obscure, who should interpret the mind of the Spirit,
there is none that can resolve the Spirits meanings, but the Spirit it self;
this is the great resolver of all doubts and questions. Would thou be
resolved whether thou art a child of God or no, Gal. 4.
the Spirit will tell thee. God has sent the Spirit of his Son crying in our
hearts Abba father. The Spirit of God witnesses with our spirits that we are
the children of God.

Fourthly, The Spirits teachings are irresistible teachings: Acts 6.10. And
they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which Stephen spoke,
i. e. the writings of God upon Stephens heart, or the teachings of the Spirit
were so evident upon him, that they could not withstand him, or oppose what he
said. When the Spirit comes, it shall convince the world of sin, of
judgment, and of righteousness: It shall convince, if it does not convert. It
shall either drive thee besides thy self,
and make thee despair of salvation, or to go out of thy self, and to trust in
Jesus Christ. There is no opposing the Spirit, when he comes with the
prevailings of grace upon thy heart. It is said of Christ, that he spoke as one
that had anthority, Mat. 7.29.
and not as the Scribes: Why? because he spoke by the Spirit: My words, says
he, they are spirit and they are life. Joh. 6.63.
Let there be never so much opposition in the heart, never so much prevalency
of sin, let the soul be kept never so fast bound and setter'd with the
vanities of the world, with the devices of Satan, and with the deceitfulness of
sin. Yea supposing thou were fast asleep in the midnight of earnall security,
yet if the Spirit comes and joggs, as the Angel did Peter, we shall presently
awake, Act. 12.7.
and the prison doors shall be open, and our fetters shall be knocked off, and
we shall be set at liberty. It is our misery, that when God comes to deal with
his Spirit for our souls good, the Spirit does not find us sitting still and
quiet, and out of the way to heaven, but posting with all speed in a quite
contrary way as fast as we can to hell. We do not only by nature not love God,
but we hate God, and prefer sin and the devil before him. Now, when the
Spirit comes, supposing we are at the very brink of hell, just dropping in, yet
if we hear the voice of the Spirit, that voice which Isaiah speaks of, Isa.
30.12.
a voice behind thee saying, This is the way walk in it, we shall return and be
as firebrarnds plucked out of the fire. The Spirit when it comes to write the
things of God upon our hearts, it does not find our souls a rasa tabula, a
mere blank, wherein there is nothing written; but the rudiments of the world,
of the flesh, and of sin are naturally written upon them, the devil is
engravened and pourtrayed all abroad upon the heart of a wicked man. Now the
finger of God can presently blot out this writing, and unteach us whatsoever
the flesh, the devil, and the world has taught us, and write his own
characters, as it were, with the juice of an onyon, never to be blotted out
again. Joh. 5.25.
It is said in the Gospel of John, the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and live, that is, those that are dead in sins and trespasses, that
are spiritually dead, that have no spiritual life, that do not relish the
things of God, that cannot move one foot toward heaven, when the Spirit calls
(which is meant by the voice of Christ) like those dry bones which the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks of, they shall arise and walk, and live the life of faith, Ezekiel.
36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my ways to do
them. When the Spirit teaches, Isa. 32.4.
the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the
stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly. No natural impediment, no
indisposition can hinder the effects of the Spirit.

Fifthly, They are arbitrary teachings. As the wind blows where it lists,
Joh. 3.8.
so is every one that is born of the Spirit. The Spirit teaches when it
lists, and where it lists. The Spirit is a free agent, bound to none, and
whatsoever he does, Matthew. 11.25.
he does it freely. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because
thou have hid these things frem the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes, even so Father, for so it seems good in thy sight. By the same
Spirit is given several gists, but all these works that one and the self
same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.11.
dividing to every man severally as he will. The Spirit of God, out of a family
perhaps it teaches the Master, and leaves the servant in darkness; the
child, and leaves the father in darkness. And as Christ said in the Gospel of
Matthew, Matthew. 24.41.
there shall be two a grinding in the mill. the one shall be taken and the
other left; so say I, in the same seat, at the same time, there be many a
hearing of the word together, and the Spirit may come and teach one, and leave
all the rest in darkness. What a mercy is it therefore to thee, whosoever thou
art, to thee, I say, that art so highly honored as to have the Spirit to be
thy teacher, that the Lord should open thine eyes to see the ugly nature of
sin, and the excellency that is in Jesus Christ. Why might thou not have
been one of the ignorant, profane world? one that never knew experimentally
and savingly, what it is to believe in Jesus Christ? what it is to sit down at
Christ's table, and to eat of the feast of fat things which he has prepared for
thee? Why may thou not have lived under the dispensations of the old Law,
when the Patriarchs had but the glimmerings of the Spirit, but that thou
should live under the Gospel? And why under the Gospel should thou have a
more plentiful measure of the Spirit, than others? but because it is the
Spirits pleasure it should be so: Even so Father, for so it seems good in thy
sight. As Christ said to his Apostles, though in another sense, Mat. 13.16, 17.
Blessed are the eyes which see the things which you see, and the ears which
hear the things which you hear; so I may say to you that live under the
teachings of the Spirit in these Gospeltimes, Blessed are the eyes which see
the things which you see, and the ears which hear the things which you hear.
And as Christ said to the woman that came to him saying, Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the womb which bare thee, and the paps which gave thee suck; Nay,
says Christ, rather blessed are they which hear the Word of God, and do it: So
say I, Blessed are they that hear the voice of the Spirit speaking in their
hearts, and walk up to this voice of the Spirit.

Sixthly, They are determinating, fixing and quieting teachings. They fix the
soul in the ways of God. They resolve all the doubts and carnal reasonings
which are in our hearts, and quite stop the mouth of flesh and blood. When Paul
had received the Spirit, how courageous was he in the work of the Lord, he that
formerly was mad with fury against the Church of God, how strongly does he row
the other way. As soon as ever Ananias had said, Brother Saul receive thy
sight, Act. 9.
his eyes were opened, and his heart enlarged in the knowledge of God, he
presently goes about his Masters business to win souls over by the evidence of
the Spirit, to the obedience of the word: Yea he was ready, not only to be
bound for the Lord Jesus,
but to suffer for him. A spiritual man he chooses and pitcheth upon mature
and serious deliberation with himself, being helped by the light of the Spirits
teachings, I say he chooses God for his God, and Christ for his Christ, and
the Spirit for his Spirit, and the Word for his rule, and Gods Commandments for
his delight. An implicit faith.
Many Christians have but an implicit faith for what they believe, some believe
the Word of God because they were taught so, and so were instructed by
education: others believe so, because it is the general opinion of most men;
others because this way seems the best to their corrupt natural reason; others
there are, because such a man said so, because they are perhaps engaged to him
in Church-society, when they have no ground in their own consciences, why they
close with this rather than with that. The devil will have a shrewd combat
with this man's faith in the hour of temptation, when he shall come to die.
(...), efflagitavit
The devil has desired to winnow thee, as he did Peter's faith: He will try
thee of what metal thou art made, whether thou art dross or silver, he will
sift thee thoroughly (and if thou art found wanting, as I am sure thou will be
found, for this faith has no foundation) thou shall be cast forth as chaff out
of Christ's floor, to be burned for ever. What is the reason that we drive on so
slowly for heaven, why? it is because of the unsetledness of our spirits. We do
not walk by fixed principles. Go to this point, whether the Word be the Word of
God, were you never under the buffetings of Satan for a while concerning this
thing) hardly any but some times or other have been under such a cloud of
temptation. If you were really fixed upon this principle, that the Scripture is
the Word of God, reading what judgments attends sinners in their evil courses,
and what happiness follows the Saints, there could not be such a general spirit
of prophanness amongst men as there is, and that little care to walk exactly
according to the preciseness of the Gospel. The Spirit quiets our minds
concerning this doubt, by discovering unto us the majesty, purity and
perfection of it. A spiritual man can say, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy
1.12.
I know what I speak, I know that God is true, and that there is no
unrighteousness in him: God is in me of a truth. Besides, have we not
Atheistical thoughts of God, like that fool, Psalm. 14.1. who said in his
heart, there was no God, denying the providence of God? When we see the wicked
men of the world prosper, and we our selves counted the offscouring of it; are
we not ready to say like David, 1 Samuel 27.1.
I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul? or that we shall fall of
everlasting happiness? God has cast us off for ever, calling the servants of
God liars, who speak unto us in the name of the Lord, and to distrust the word
of promise, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, where there are five negatives for
the confirmation of it, I will never, never, never, never, never leave thee nor
forsake thee. Psalm. 73.
Now as David when he went into the Sanctuary of God, he was better
principle'd, and understood their latter end; that God had set them in slippery
places, that they might fall and not rise again. So if we would wait till the
Spirit comes down upon our hearts, we should have all these carnal reasonings,
and these fleshly doubts removed, and we should be settled in the truths of God.
When a man is taught by the Spirit, he does not stand to reason with flesh and
blood (shall I do this, or shall I do that, shall I choose heaven, or shall I
choose hell, shall I choose sin, or shall I choose grace, shall I choose God,
or shall I choose Baal) he does not stand reasoning the case, Shall I be
religious, or shall I not? Shall I trust all upon Gods bare promise, or shall I
close with the pleasures of sin, which are really present? but he presently
renouncing all those carnal reasonings which arise from flesh and blood,
presently sets upon the work of the Lord, knowing that his labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord. So did Paul. Gal. 1. 15, 16. When the Lord had endued him
with his Spirit suitable for his calling whereunto he was called, he stood not
to reason with flesh and blood, but presently sets upon his great Masters
business, Jesus Christ. The great danger there is in consulting with flesh and
blood.
This consulting with flesh and blood hinders many a poor soul from a through
closing with Jesus Christ. Flesh will say, Do not close with Jesus Christ, do
not serve God, you had better take a certainty for an uncertainty, and those
present enjoyments here, and live merrily. In consulting with flesh and blood,
you consult with the enemy of Jesus Christ, of the Gospel of his grace, and
with an enemy to your own souls. Be sure the flesh will decide the controversle
on the devils part against Jesus Christ. Now the Spirit of God determines the
matter on Christ's part against the devil, teaching thee the insufficiency of
all the creatures to make thee happy, and the true happiness only resides in
God, putting thee into the way wherein God is to be found, and preserving thee
in the same, that at length thou may reap everlasting life.

Seventhly, The teachings of the Spirit are consonant to the Word; they agree
with the Word of God. As the mind of the Spirit in one place of Scripture
agrees with the mind of the Spirit in another, and there is a sweet harmony in
the Word of God: So the teachings of the Spirit upon our hearts, they also are
correspondent with the word. Says Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 1.8.
If an Angel from heaven should deliver any other doctrine unto you, than what
you have received, let him be accursed. And the Apostle by a resumption or
ingemination repeats it again; If any man teach any other Gospel unto you than
what you have received, let him be accursed: ^.11, 12.
And why? My Doctrine is not of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Note
this well
As if the Apostle had said, My word which I have delivered unto you being the
Word of God, and seeing I have received it from God, I am certain God will not
send a message contrary to his Word, or send an Angel from heaven to infirm and
weaken that which I have delivered unto you: So I say,
whosoever thou art that pretendest to revelations and mysteries, and high
discoveries from God, if the manifestations you pretend to be to draw you to
the promoting of any thing contrary to the Word of God, or to encourage you in
the ways of sin, and to carry on the interests of the flesh, it is a lying
Spirit, it is not the Spirit of God. I am sure God will not send a message to
contradict his own Word, or give in a revelation which shall weaken and destroy
that word which his Apostles and Prophets have delivered unto us. I could wish
that, the Quakers of our times, who pretend so much to the Spirit, The Quakers
are void of the Spirits teachings.
and yet walk after the flesh, vilifying and reviling the precious servants of
Jesus Christ, their mouths being black with hellish imprecations against the
servants of Jesus Christ, would lay this to heart. Certainly they are void of
the Spirits teachings upon their hearts, if any people in the world are void,
because they are so full of malice against the Word of God, which is the mind
of the Spirit, and so impetuously carried by a spirit of envy (An envious
person is the very picture of the devil) against those who watch for their
souls good, that they may be saved at the great day of account, Isa. 8.11. To
the Law and to the testimony, if they hearken not to these, it is because there
is no light in them. I know the devil can put on Samuels mantle, and he will
bring Scripture in his mouth, as well as the best. He brought Scripture to
Christ, Mat. 4.
but you may easily perceive him by his cloven foot; it is either to tempt thee
to sin, as here he did Christ, or to some error and heresy. The devil is
Gods Ape; The devil is Gods Ape.
and as God has his miracles, so he has his wonders, as appears by the
Sorcerers in Egypt, and he will set up his standard by Gods standard in this
world. If God has his revelations, the devil will have his; but you may easily
difference them by these signs:

1. The devils revelations are but hidden things. How do men in these times who
talk much of the light of the Spirit within them, run all upon Allegories,
wresting the Scripture to their own damnation. 1 Cor. 14.32


2. The devils revelations put men into strange passions and phrensies,
Spiritus Prophetarum subjecti sunt Prophetis, ie. nihil (...). sacient, sed
decenter and ntiliter. Et hoc distinguuntur Prophetae very a vatibus prophauis,
quia illi omnia faciunt quodam furore and ecstafi, alie nautur mente, and
abripiun tur extra sese, ut saepe seipsos non intelligant, inde ambigue etiam
ludunt, quia incerti sunt de rebus. At very Prophetae non ita: modeste, and
sedate omnia agunt, spiritum habeut sibi subjectum, ut nihil indecorum
admittant idco libemer cedunt aliis. Arecius The spirits of the Prophers are
subject to the Prophets, that is, they do nothing disorderly, but with decency
and profit. And by this manner are distinguished the true Prophets from the
false and profane ones, because they do all things with a certain kind of
fury and madness, and are estranged in their minds and snatch besides:
hemselves, that many times they do not understand themselves, and speak
ambiguously, because they are uncertain of the things themselves: But the true
Prophets do not so; they do all things modestly and quietly, h^y have their
spirits in subjection, so that they do nothing ancomely, and can willingly give
place to others.
and I know not what distempers: but the Spirit of God does not so reveal it
self, but teaches in a mild, gentle, and in a quiet way.

3. After the devils revelations there follows great disquietness of mind, and
little settlement of spirit, but they are left in manifold perplexities,
sometimes the light that is within them, as they call it, carrying them to such
a place, and sometimes to another, and whatsoever the light bids them do, that
they must do. As the evil spirit hurried Christ up and down, setting him upon
the pinnacle of the Temple, but the teachings of the Spirit bring peace of
conscience and joy in the holy Ghost, which is unspeakable and full of glory,
Says Christ, When the Spirit comes, it shall speak of me, and shall bring all
things to your remembrance, Whatsoever I have spoken unto you. Whatsoever
Christ speaks, and the Word speaks, the Spirit speaks; but whatsoever the devil
speaks he speaks it of himself, and not according to the word, for he was a
liar from the beginning, he abode not in the truth, and the truth is not in him.

Eighthly, They are effectual powerful transforming teachings. As God by his
word in the Creation did create light upon the earth; God said, Let there be
light, and there was light; so God by one word from heaven, by his Spirit, can
create light in our understandings. As Christ by a-word did raise Lazarus out
of the grave; so God by one word, by his Spirit, can raise us up from the grave
of sin to newness of life. As thou can not hinder the influences of heaven,
nor cause it not to rain when God has unlockt his storehouse of rain, or from
keeping the light of the sun from the world, much less can thou hinder the
work of the Spirit upon thy heart, the influences of his Divine working. Prove.
21.1. The Lord tunneth the heart of man as he turns the Waterbrooks. One
would think that such a one as Saul, a persecutour, should never have been a
Paul, a chosen vessel to bear his Name before the Gentiles. That a Manasseh,
who made Jerusalem to swim with blood, should have been a Convert: That a Mary
Magdalen, out of whom Christ had cast out seven devils, should become a Saint;
but such is the power of the Spirit, that though thou had a legion of devils,
Christ by his Spirit, which is called the finger of God, as Christ says, (
Luke 11.20 If I by the finger of God cast out devils) he can cast them out, and
fill thee with his good Spirit. When Christ comes to a man's house, and says,
This day is salvation come to thy house, as he did to Zacheus, Luke 19.9. let
him be a Publican, he shall give half his goods to the poor, and if he has
wronged any man, he shall make restitution: So when Christ shall come to thy
heart by the Spirit, and cry saying, This day is salvation come to thy soul,
thou shall open and become a new creature, be thy former condition what it
will. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face behold, as in a glass, the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. Here you may observe this rule, A Rule.
That whatsoever is spoken of the word in reference to our spiritual estate it
is to be meant of the word as the Spirit goes along with it: Heb. 4.12. (...),
ad intimos recessus, ad spinae medullam usque penetro. To pierce to the very
back bone, as when a beast is chined.
But the word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword,
dividing between the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts,
and of the intonts of the heart, that is the word in the hand of the Spirit is
so, and not otherwise, therefore the word is called, The sword of the Spirit;
and the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God. As the sword cannot cut
of it self, but as it is in the hand of a strong, and of a skillful man; so
neither can the Word have any effect upon our souls, but so far forth as it is
managed by the Spirit.

Ninthly, They are quiet and comfortable teachings: It Is the Spirit alone that
teaches without noise of words, without confusion of opinions, without
ambition of honor, with contention of arguments. It Is the Spirit alone that in
an instant raises up the humble minded. As it is said of Christ, so it may be
said of the Spirit, that his voice shall not be heard in the streets. The
Spirit has its gentle gales and blasts of love, it does not compel men to
Jesus Christ, but it invites, persuades, allures them, and brings them over in
a loving way. The voice of the Spirit it is a sweet gracious inward voice: It
is a soft voice, which will break the hardest rocks: It is a soulmelting voice,
which will make a soul dissolve into tears, it is not a thundering voice, but a
secret powerful voice, calling us from the world to enjoy communion with God.
Amongst the Jews there was a certain revelation called Bathcol, that is, filia
vocis, because usually when it thundered they had a Revelation: Therefore the
Jews to this day, when it thunders, use to light candles, expecting to hear a
voice concerning the Messiah. Agreeable to this is the place of the Psalmist, I
answered thee out of the secret place of thunder. And when Christ was in his
transfiguration, some said it thundered, others that an Angel spoke unto him:
But the Spirit does not teach in a thundering voice, but in a sweet still
voice. And as God was not in the wind, and in the earthquake, and in the fire,
but in the sweet still voice; 1 King 19.12.
so the Spirit of God, when it teaches the soul, it is by a sweet and a
pleasant voice.

Tenthly, They are abiding teachings: 2 Cor. 3.3. Says Christ, I will send the
Comforter to you, and he shall abide with you for ever. Jer. 31.33, 34. I will
write my Law in their hearts, and put my fear within them, and they shall never
depart from me. 1 Pet 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, of the Word of God which lives and abides for ever. As none
can blot out the Law of nature written naturally on the heart of man, (...),
Communes notiones. Honest vivendum, neminem laedendum, suum cuique tribuendum
for there are certain principles in our hearts, certain general notions
common to all men, to wit that God is to be loved and worshipped, that we
should live bonestly and reverence our parents, and the like. Therefore the
Gentiles when they walked contrary to that natural light which God had put
within them, are said to withhold the truth in unrighteousness: Much less can
thou blot out the teachings of the Spirit. The finger of God writes indeleble
characters. We read of the seal of the Spirit: Ephesians. 1.13.
Now you know a seal is for two things, 1. For confirmation of the Covenant. 2.
For perpetuity; as long as the Bond stands sealed it is in force. As long as
the Spirit has been a Spirit of Adoption to us, we need not ever fear that he
will be a Spirit of bondage again. As long as we have Gods seal upon our
hearts, which stands firm and sure until the day of redemption, we need not
fear but that we shall continue steadfast in the faith of Gods elect.

Eleventhly, They are uniform teachings, that is in respect of the subject
matter, the Spirits teachings are the same, to wit, the things of God, though
the Spirit has not always one and the same way to communicate those things
unto our souls.

Twelfthly and lastly, The Spirits teachings they are the only teachings. As
Peter said to Christ, when Christ asked his Disciples, Joh. 6.68.
Will ye also forsake me, Lord whither shall we go, thou have the words of
eternal life? So whither should we go to be taught the mind of God, but to
the Spirit in the Name of Jesus Christ, to desire him to instruct us by it. As
the men that were sent by the rulers to take Christ, brought word back again,
that never man spoke like this man: Ioh. 7.46.
So when once thou have had the experience of the Spirits teachings upon thy
heart, thou will say indeed and in truth, Never any taught me so, as the Spirit
has taught me.

Now my business is to show unto you That only those that have the Spirits
teachings can know the things of God: Which is proved from one place of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 14, it is said that the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him. In this place
of Scripture you have two parts: First, A plain Proposition, which is this,
That the natural man receives not the things of God, of the Spirit of God.
Secondly, You have the reasons of the Proposition, which are these two: 1.
Because they are foolishness unto him. 2. Because they are spiritually
discerned.



It is said, The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit: The
Apostle does not here speak of Epicures, (...).
whom Peter 2 Ep. 2. chap. v. 12. calls bruit beasts; but of the great men of
this world, excellent for wit, for wisdom, and for moral virtues, as Scipio,
Cato, Socrates, Aristides: Those men cannot discern the things of the Spirit.
Neither does he speak there of those who by the just judgment of God are
delivered up to Satan, (...) opponitur (...), animalis opponitur spirituali.
The Schoolmens questions are for the most part idle and curious, as the most of
their hypotheticall propositions, and the manner of disputations; for
oftentimes they dispute ex alienis principiis, out of the grounds of other
sciences: they confound Divinity and Philosophy; and the Media which they use
oftentimes are impertinent. They trust too much to the testimony of men; they
go very rashly many of them, and speak not soberly enough of the great mystery
of the Trinity, bringing in Philosophical reasons: whereas these mysteries
should rather be adored than searched after. They distinguish were God disting
uisheth not, being full of vain Philosophy, and needless doctrines. Weems.
that seeing, they might not see; who are called men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith; 2 Timothy 3.8. But by the natural man is
understood every man whatsoever, that is not taught and enlightened by the
Spirit. As fleshly is opposed to spiritual, so animal or natural is opposed
to spiritual: So that whosoever he be, let him have the highest perfections of
nature or morality, or common endowments, he is an ignoramus in the things of
God, if he be void of the Spirit. Wicked men they count spiritual things
foolishness. As the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, so the wisdom
of God is foolishness with the world: 1 Cor. 1.25. Though the foolishness of
God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men. So we
read of the foolishness of preaching, in the 21 verse of the same Chapter.
Wicked men count preaching of the Word of God foolishness, and Religion but a
toy, a babble, and as a bugbear to keep us in awe, they cannot savor or relish
any spiritual thing. Besides, says the Apostle, they are spiritually
discerned. Now wicked men who are void of the Spirit, they have not that Spirit
of discerning, which other men have, As a man who has a vicious humor in his
eye, whatsoever he looks upon, it is represented under that humor; as if a man
has the Jaundis in his eyes, all things are presented to his sight under a
yellow color: So wicked men, because they are sensual and have not the
Spirit, as Jude speaks; they look upon all things with a carnal eye, and so
are not able to discern aright. Many times natural men they judge of things
according to their bulk and quantity, they judge of the goodness of a prayer,
by the length of it; of faith, by a mere casting of themselves at all
adventures upon Jesus Christ for salvation, never seeing whether their hearts
are purified by faith or no, Indeed the wicked that have learning may perceive
and know those things of the Spirit, but they know them in a carnal manner,
not in a spiritual manner; and howbeit they may reform their outward courses,
and cut off many acts of sin, and like grace somewhat in their hearts; thus
far, and farther may a carnal man go, being but changed, not renewed. Now
they cannot spiritually discern grace, for in regard of spiritual discerning
they are in the dark, even as the eyes if they would see without light, the
eyesight and the goodness, and the excellency of the ball will not avail to
make them see; so the wicked, even the learned of them all, they cannot see
grace, because they have not the Spirit of discerning light; their learning and
their wit, and all their good parts cannot suffice to descry the things of God
as they are seen by the godly. They seeing, see not, and hearing they might
hear, and not understand. This knowledge of the things of God, this spiritual
knowledge, it is called the Unction of the holy Ghost: 1 John 2.20. You have an
Unction from the holy One, and you know all things. It is called eye salve,
Rev. 3.18. It is called the opening of the eyes, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine
eyes that I may behold the wondrous things in thy Law. It is called the
lightning of the eyes, Psalm. 13.3. Lighten my eyes. It is called seeing, Isa.
29.18. And the eyes of the blind shall see out of darkness. Mr. Feuner in his
mystery of saving grace.
or joined with a true love unto him. They mistake common grace for special
grace, and rest satisfied with the common graces of the Spirit, never minding
whether they have that prevailing degree of grace to love God and Jesus Christ
above all things. They are ready to think themselves the children of God,
because they prosper in the world, and have not crosses as other men, because
they are quiet in respect of sin, and have no trouble of conscience upon
their hearts as other men have. They are apt to conclude that God loves them,
and delights in them, because they have sometimes more than ordinary raptures
of Spirit, and are sometimes stirred up to prayer and the like; because they
have more head-knowledge than many other honest-hearted Christians have. All
these false conclusions come from corrupt flesh, because they are not
enlightened by the Spirit of God. John 2.11. He that walks in the dark
knows not whither he goes. You are all in the dark unless you have the
Spirit. If the people of the world had the eyes of the children of God, they
could not but love grace and holiness, and Christ, and the Word, and the
Ministers, for the beauty and the excellency that is in them. Then they would
say with David, Psalm. 84. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God,
than to dwell in the tents of wickedness a thonsand years: Psalm. 42.1. As the
heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God; when
shall I come and appear before God! They would hate sin for that odious
nature, and that vileness that is in it, but their eyes are vitiated, and in
stead of the Doves eyes of the spouse of Christ, their eyes are bewitched with
the things of this world: Gal. 3.1. O ye Galatians, who has bewitched you! It
is a bewitching with the eyes, as the Greek word imports. It is said of Agar,
that when she was in the wilderness, and the Lad was ready to die for thirst,
that God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water: So though Jesus Christ
that fountain which is open to Judah and Jerusalem for sin and for
uncleanness, be daily put before our eyes, yet if God does not open our eyes,
we shall never see it, we shall never taste of the waters of life. What is the
reason that David prayed so often, Psalm. 119. Open thou mine eyes that I may
behold the wondrous things of thy Law: Teach me thy statutes. Make me to
understand the way of thy precepts. I am thy servant, give me understanding
that I may know thy precepts. Why? Because David knew that he could not
understand the things of God, unless he were taught by the Spirit. When the
earnall men of the world condemn the children of God for their zeal and
constancy in his ways, and for their preciseness in living up to the terms of
the Gospel; they may answer them as one did his fellow in another case for
looking upon a picture; said his fellow, Why do thou gaze upon it so long? O
says he, if you did see with my eyes, and had that skill to discern as I have,
you would gaze upon it as long too: So if you did see with our light, and had
that Spirit of discerning which we have, you would be as eager in the ways of
God, as we possibly can be. Wicked men are not able to judge aright of the
worth of grace, and of the excellency of the things above as they should do,
therefore they prefer Barabbas before Christ, and sin before grace; but the
godly on the contrary they cry out with that godly Martyr Lambert; None but
Christ, Nothing but grace; Give us grace and Christ and it suffices us. Do you
think that men that are bewitched, or that are besotted, or that are overcome
by the power of luft, or that are drunken by the pleasures of sin, or that
have no other light to judge by, but that little spark which is left within
them since the fall, which is over-pressed with the corruptions of sin, these
men are not fit to be competent judges of the mind of the Spirit. Now all men
that have not the teachings of the Spirit, they are either drunken men, drunk
with the pleasures of sin: Ephesians. 4. Be not drunk with wine, but be ye filled
with the Spirit: Or drunken with the cares of the world, as Martha was, who was
cumbred about so many things, There is a drunkenness wherein Nazarites
themselves may be overcome. The very cares of this world, and voluptuous living
have a kind of inebriating power with them. The excess of our affections in
the pursuit and use of any earthly thing, may be called drunkenness. Dr.
Sclater.
that she could not have time to attend to the sweet words which dropped forth
from Christs-mouth: Or they are drunken with self-love, with self-pride, with
self-admiration, with self-applause, and so they lift up themselves before
Jesus Christ. The excess and immoderate use of a thing, especially when the
thing is unlawful in it self, may be called drunkenness; as the Prophet cries
forth, O ye that are drunken, but not with wine, Isa. 29.9. As wise Abigail did
not discover the intent of David over night to Nabal, A simile.
till the drink was out of his head, and he had slept his sleep, so these
swinish men cannot understand the things of God, till the Spirit of God, of
swines makes them men, and of men Christians. Many are sottish children, that
consider not the Lord, nor the operations of his hands. Isa, 1.3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider. They are benumbed, the devil having seared
their consciences with a hot iron. Now for sots and innocents to know the
things of God, it implies a thing impossible to flesh and blood. Indeed
according to the things of the world they may be wiser than the children of
light, but in respect of heavenly things they are sottish children. Ask them
what Regeneration is, and about the new birth, they are as great strangers to
it as Nicodemus was. Ioh. 3.9.
Ask them concerning the teachings of the Spirit, and like those in the Acts,
Act. 19.2.
they will answer you, they never heard of the teachings of the Spirit before.
Likewise men that are sensual, who are led by sense and not by faith, who can
believe nothing but what they see, and can yield to no truth, but what their
blind understandings can reach unto, Arabicum Proverbium, Obstrue quinque
fenestras ut luceat domus, and qui sunt in ea. Shut your five windows, that the
house and all that are therein may shine, i. e. Consult not with your senses,
with carnal reason, which like Sarah laughs at heavenly promises, and looks
only to earthly possibilities: and as the Sun, whose rising discovers the
terrestiail globe to our sight, but hides the stars and the celestial. Dr.
Stoughton.
what they are able to apprehend; these are not able to distinguish between
light and darkness. Now the Spirit subjects our sense to reason, and reason to
faith, that what before we could not close withal for truth, because it was
above our capacity to understand, by the Spirits witnessing with our spirits,
we can more certainly and resolvedly comply withal and believe, than with
those things we see with our natural eyes. The more we have to do with sense,
the less we have to do with God. We find it in natural things, that the more
retired our souls are, and the freer from this body of flesh, and the more
contracted within it self, the higher it soars in the meditation of heavenly
things. Pleasant walks and solitary places where there is no recourse, are
fittest for the soul to be busy within it self, by viewing Gods goodness, and
raising sweet experiences from several creatures, and diverse objects of the
infinite wisdom, goodness and mercy of God in his providence over the world. St
Bernard that spiritual Father, who had sweet Soliloquies between God and his
own soul, much delighted in fragrant places, separate from all company, that
thereby he might have the more freedom of spirit to have communion with his
God. If a soul desires to be guided by the Spirit, let it get from sense as
high as it can; lest like Anselm's bird entangled with the bird.-lime of the
world, the more it flutters to escape, the more it is entangled with the
pollutions of it. Those which have only that little spark of light within them
since the fall,
which is like the snuff of a candle in a dark lanthorn, these are to seek in
the things of God. They may have as it were an Owl-light, but to have the
Sun-light which is promised under the days of the Gospel, that the light of
the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold,
Isa. 30.26.
this they cannot have. But when the candle of the Lord which is within us,
(For the Spirit of man it is the candle of the Lord,) Pro. 20.27
is enlightened by a further light superadded by the Spirit from the book of
providence, from the book of the creatures, from the book of our own hearts, we
are able to draw many spiritual conclusions, and are enabled to know the mind
of the Spirit in the Word of God.

Is it so, Uses.
That none can know the things of God, but they that have the teachings of the
Spirit? Then

First, It shows us this, that blindness lies upon the mind of the greatest
part of the world, of the greatest part of Christians, because the greatest
part of them are void of the Spirit. That they are so, I shall prove by
Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
There is no inslavery, no thraldom; no bondage, and therefore in Romans 8. the
Spirit of adoption is put in opposition to the spirit of bondage. The Spirit is
called a Spirit of liberty in three respects.

1. The Spirit of liberty.
Because it has rescued us from a state of bondage. 2. Because it has put us
into a state of liberty. 3. Because it gives us liberty and freedom of spirit
to come with confidence and boldness into the presence of God. Before we have
the Spirit we are in bondage, 1. To sin. 2. To the beggarly and slavish
rudiments and customs of the world.

To sin, and so the Spirit, as it delivers us from the state of bondage, it is
called a Spirit of holiness, a Spirit of sanctification. His servants we are
whom we obey; in the service of God there is perfect freedom, but in the
service of the devil there is the greatest slavery: What more slavish than to
serve a lust? What greater bondage can there be than to have the devil our
Master? When the Spirit of God has sanctified us and renewed us, then we bear
the Image of our heavenly Father, according to that place in John, He that is
born of the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.6.
and he that is born of the Spirit is spirit; that is, he that is born of the
flesh, bears the image of the flesh; and he that is born of the Spirit, the
image of the Spirit. As he that is born of corrupt flesh is corrupt, so he that
is born of the holy Spirit of God is holy. Likewise we are delivered from the
rudiments of the world, and those superstitious ways wherein the world
walks. How many are there kept in bondage to old customs in the worship of
God, to Ceremonies and serving of God after the tradition of their fathers;
that stand upon places and outward form, more than the inward and more
spiritual part of worship? Some cavil at the Churches, calling them
Steeple Houses, and the Pulpit a Tub, and the servants of God Tub-preachers. If
the Church of God be a Steeple-house, what place may we term their private
meetings? wherein the subject matter of their discourse is to broach and vent
forth new fangled notions, nothing material to the salvation of their souls,
and how they may vilify and cast contempt upon the true worship of God, and
upon the servants of Jesus Christ. Others put too much upon these places, as if
there were an inward holiness in them, as if God would rather hear them there,
and answer them for the place sake, rather than at another place. Under the
Gospel there is no place more holy than another, for it is not the place that
makes the duty holy, as it was under the Law, when the Altar sanctified the
gift, and not the gift the Altar; but duties now put a dignity upon the place,
and not the place put a dignity upon the duties. So that this place, the
Church, while we are praying it may be called the house of prayer, and while we
are doing Gods work, and God is manifesting himself unto us, it may be called
the house of God: As Jacob called the place where he had his vision, The house
of God. But yet you must observe this by the way, that under the
Gospel Dispensation, there is not so much put upon places, as there was under
the Law. God under the former dispensation did more immediately limit his
presence to one place, though not always, for God is found of all them that
diligently seek him, but his visible presence is more reserved to the Temple,
and to his shining forth between the Cherubims, over the Mercy-seat: 2 Chronicles.
6.20. God is said to put his Name into the Temple, and the Psasmist says,
Psalm. 80.1. O thou that shinest forth between the Cherubims, in allusion to
Gods manifesting himself over the Mercy-seat! Therefore it was Jeroboams sin
which the Prophet Hosea reproves, that he did not only set up Calves to be
worshipped instead of the true God, but that he set them up in Dan and Bethel,
keeping the people from the place of Gods worship, where God had put his Name.
Yet under this dispensation the Church it may be called a holy place, as under
the old Law many things are called holy in that it is separated and set apart
in a public way, in opposition to meeting houses, for the pure worship of God,
and a joint calling upon him in his own way. The Spirit likewise puts us into a
state of liberty: A state of Sonship it is a state of liberty. Romans 8.11
Therefore we are said to be translated from the Kingdom of darkness into the
glorious liberty of the children of God. If children then heirs, joint heirs
with Jesus Christ. Now you know a child when he is under age, he differs
nothing from a servant, but is under Governors and Tutors, till he comes to be
heir and Lord of all things. A reverent Divine whom I heard occasionally, said
that there were four privileges which attend Adoption. 1. Liberty. 2. Right
and title. 3. Correction: and 4. Boldness. Now how come we to be the Sons of
God, but by the Spirit, the Spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are the
children of God. This spiritual freedom it is not such a freedom as the world
dreams of;
it does not exempt us from the obedience to the Laws either of God or man; The
Spirits liberty what it i.
it is not a freeing us from obeying the Civil Magistrate; it is not a freeing
us from afflictions and crosses in the world: Nay rather it is a sign thou art
a child of God, and that thou art instated into this liberty if thou art
corrected; God chastneth every son whom he receives. The Spirit likewise gives
us freedom and liberty to come with confidence by faith into the presence of
God. Ephesians. 2. For through him we both have access through one spirit unto the
Father. By the Spirit we have access by Christ unto God the Father, so that
whatsoever prayer you put up to God the Father; What prayer is accepted by God.
if it be not a fruit of the Spirit. and tendered up in Christ's Name, it shall
never be accepted. God owns nothing but what is his own. Whatsoever is not of
the Spirit it is of the flesh, Men may be moved with fait speeches, enticing
words, eloquent phrases (as the people of Tyrus and Sidon with Herod's eloquent
Oration, Act. 12.21.) but all the eloquence in the world is no more to God,
than the lowing of an Ox, or the howling of a Dog, if it come not from the
Spirit. Dr. Gouge in his whole Armor of God.
and whatsoever is of the flesh it is our own, it comes from us and not from
God. A child of God he is partly flesh and partly spirit. Now God the Father
for Jesus Christ's sake, in whom they are in Covenant with him he over-looks all
the fleshly part, all their infirmities, all the wanderings and gaddings of
spirit in their prayer, and what is the fruit of his own spirit, that he
receives and looks upon it as a spiritual prayer in and for the sake of Jesus
Christ, and because some of the actings of the Spirit have been seen in it. God
severs the light from the smoke when it ascends up into heaven, the light is
the Spirits, the smoke is ours. Having the Spirit we must go along with him,
pouring forth those desires which he suggesteth unto us: the fire which God
would have continually to burn upon his Altar, came out from the Lord: Rev.
9.24. If sacrifices were offered up with any other fire, that fire was counted
strange, and the sacrifices no whit acceptable, but abominable to the Lord: the
heavenly fire whereby our spiritual sacrifices of prayer must be offered up,
is that holy Spirit which comes out from God: he carries the very Image of
God; we must therefore give unto God that which is Gods.
A child of God upon this ground may come with boldness to the throne of
grace, that God will accept his prayer, because it is a fruit of his Spirit. He
may wrestle with God and never let him alone till he obtain the blessing, or
some gracious answer to his prayer, though not in the same kind he petitioned
for. He can say, I am thy child, thou art my father, I am one with thee by thy
Spirit, I belong to thy family both in heaven and in earth, I am one of them
for whom Christ sweat drops of blood, for I have thy Spirit interceding for me
with sighs and groans which cannot be uttered, and therefore Lord I know that
thou can not deny me my petition if it be for my good, and for the glory of
thy Name. Now is it so, that where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty,
is it not too too evident that the greatest part of professing Christians are
void of the Spirit: Are they not in bondage to some secret lust? Does not their
speech bewray them? in stead of speaking the language of Canaan, do they not
speak the language of Ashdod? In stead of being led by the Spirit of God, are
they not led by the spirit of the world? While they talk of the Spirit, do they
not walk after the flesh? Have they not the Spirit to talk by, and the world to
walk by? Are they not in love with the fashion of the world, and entangled with
the rudiments of it? Can they pray in the Spirit? can they sing in the Spirit?
can they restore a fallen brother in the evidence of their own spirit? If they
can, What means these swarms of lusts in their hearts, of pride, envy,
self-love, contempt of their poor weak brethren, and little regard they have to
the promoting the work of the Spirit in the hearts of others. These with many
others are true notes, that the greatest part of Christians are void of the
Spirit.

Secondly, Is it so, That none can know the things of God, but they that have
the teachings of the Spirit upon their hearts, Then I beseech you to desire God
to give you the teachings of his Spirit. Pray earnestly for that wisdom which
comes from above that St James speaks of, Jam. 3.17.
Which is first pure, then gentle, then easy to be entreated, which is full of
good works. If any man lack wisdom let him ask it of God, for he gives
liberally and upbraideth none. He will not upbraid thy ignorance, thy poverty,
thy former unwillingness and disrespect, if thou will ask it of him. If the
Lord blessed Solomon so much for asking wisdom before riches, 1 King. 3.11.
honor, life, that the Lord gave him a wise heart, together with riches,
honor and life, as an overplus into the bargain, how much more pleasant and
wellcom will thy petition be to God, if thou ask of him spiritual wisdom,
which is not to be compared with the most precious Rubies, or with the finest
Gold. If thou would have spiritual wisdom, desire God to give thee the
Spirit of wisdom to give thee the grace of unction, as well as the grace of
union, that as Jesus Christ had the Spirit of wisdom resting upon him, so thou
may have likewise. To stir thee up to this main duty,

Consider first of all, Fidelis matter utra. que praebet infautulo ubera. Sic
Deus pater non solum dedit filium, sed ctiam dedit Spiritum sanctum. Haec duo
ubera vino sunt pulchriora.
That thou ask nothing but what is agreeable to the will of God: Matthew.
7.11. If ye being evil know how to give good things to your children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the Spirit to them that ask it of him.

2. Thou ask nothing but what Christ has promised. Says Christ, when I go
away the Comforter shall come unto you: So likewise, I will pray the Father and
he shall fend you another Comforter. If Christ who is the Amen of all the
promises, Rev. 1.5.
who is the true and faithful witness, who is truth it self: Says he, John 14.
I am the way, the truth and the life, who has sealed the Covenant with his
own blood, if he has promised the Spirit, he will not be worse than his word,
if thou ask it of him.

3. Consider that Christ was anointed with the Spirit, and received a more
plentiful measure of it for our sakes that we might partake of his fullness, he
was filled with the Spirit, that we might partake of the same Spirit with him.
Joh. 3.34. Non ad mensuram, i. e sieve mensura.
The Spirit was not given unto him by measure, that we might have a measure of
his Spirit.

4 Consider that we are to ask nothing but what we are to expect at Gods hand
under the Gospel. It is said, that the Spirit was not yet given, because that
Christ was not yet glorified; Joh. 7.39.
that is, it was not poured forth in that measure and abundance, as it was to
be given after Christ's ascension. Now Christ being ascended, and sitting at the
right hand of God on high, the Apostles long ago, and the Saints in the
primitive times, having had the first fruits of the Spirit. When the holy Ghost
descended in the form of cloven tongues, we also may expect the gleanings of so
plentiful a harvest. Sicut unctio a capite Aaronis in ipsius membra
descendebat; fic a Christo capite vigor Spiritus sancti in omnia membra
dimanat. As the ointment did run down from Aarons head to the rest of his
members: So from Christ the Head the efficacy of the Spirit flows forth upon
all the members.
To stir you up to desire the Spirits teachings, consider this, that it is a
singular mercy to be taught by the Spirit. Blessed is the soul that hears the
Lord, in or by his Spirit, and that receives from his mouth the word of
comfort. If the Queen of Sheba, 2 Ch^on. 9.7. after she had made trial of
Solomon's wisdom, cried out with admiration, Happy are thy men, and happy are
these thy servants that stand continually before thee, and that hear thy
wisdom: How much happier are they then that heard the gracious words which
proceeded from the mouth of Christ when he was upon the earth, and that have
the teachings of the Spirit upon their hearts! All other teachings besides the
Spirits teachings will avail nothing. Men may pronounce the words, but they
cannot give the Spirit: They may speak mavelous well, but if the Spirit holds
its peace, they inflame not the heart. They deliver the letter, but the Spirit
opens the sense. They bring forth mysteries, but the Spirit unfolds them: They
declare thy Commandments, but the Spirit helps to fulfill them. They show us
the way, but the Spirit gives us help to walk in it: They water outwardly, but
the Spirit gives fruitfulness: Paul may plant and Apollo may water, but it is
God that gives the increase. All other knowledge, if thou have not the light of
the Spirit, will little avail to bring thee any substantial good, or any true
or solid comfort. Consider with me in these several particulars the vanity of
all other knowledge, compared with the light of the Spirit, that hereby thou
may be stirred up to seek to God to give the Spirits teachings upon thy heart.

1. All other knowledge it breeds distraction of mind, and pierces the soul
through with many sorrows: Eccl 1.18. He that increases wisdom increases
sorrow, and in much knowledge there is much grief. When a man sees those many
defects and fallings that are in the world, those corruptions which are in
Church and State, those evils that attend this miserable life; sees the utter
impossibility to flesh and blood that these things should be amended: For says
Solomon, That which is crooked cannot be made straight, Eccl. 1.15.
and that which is wanting cannot be supplied. The best of us fail in many
things, and there are many defects in the world which cannot be supplied in
this miserable life. When a man that has his eyes in his head considers this,
it cannot but be a grief unto his soul. The more a man knows, the more he sees
his own ignorance, when a fool is proud knowing nothing. He sees that for all
his knowledge, he knows nothing in comparison of what may be known, and that in
many things he is uncertain, and that he errs in many things; this is a trouble
and a vexation to his Spirit. Acts 26.24. Says Festus to Paul, Much learning
has made thee mad. Too much study it is a wearisomness to the flesh: And
overhasty pursuit of knowledge has cracked the brains of many men; and when
they attained that they sought after, they have been as unquiet and unsettled in
their Spirits, as ever they were before; yea they have been much more unquiet;
for as we commonly say, what the eye sees not the heart grieves not; so if men
were not more knowing than formerly they have been, there would not be those
actings of fear, of distrust, of strifes, contentions and emulations, as there
are in their spirits. The Poets feign of Promotheus, A Moral.
that having stolen fire from heaven, his carckass was bound to the mountain
Caucasus, where a Vulture does continually feed upon his lungs. The Moral of
it is good, noting unto us this, that when men seek after that knowledge which
will not profit, they do but eat out their spirits with many sorrows. But the
light of the Spirit it is full of comfort; Psalm. 97. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. There is no such comfort like to
that which flows in upon a sanctified knowledge of the things of God.

2. A little knowledge with true grace, is better then all the knowledge in the
world without the light of the Spirit. If thou did know the whole Bible by
heart, and the sayings of all the Philosophers, what would it avail thee
without charity, and the grace of God. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, but
only to know God, and to love him being known. What would it avail thee to
dispute profoundly of the Trinity, if thou be void of humility. It is not
knowledge but grace makes a man glorious in the eyes of God. The Kingdom of God
it consists not in words, but in virtue. The Kingdom of God is within you; it
comes not by observation. If men, religions men, professing Christians, would
bestow so much labor in rooting out of vices, and planting of virtues, as they
do to move doubts and questions, there would not be so much prophanness in the
world, nor so much looseness amongst Professors.

3. Other knowledge puffs up, but the light of the Spirit it humbles: The
Titles that the Schoolmen had, do evidently show their monstrous pride: one was
called Jacobus de Voragine, as though he had eaten up the whole book of God in
reading it: another Doctor Scraphicus and Angelicus; another Doctor Subtilis,
Doctor Irrefragabilis, venerabilis inceptor, Doctor fundatiffimus, Dector
illuminatus, Doctor resolutum.
1 Cor. 13. Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth. As wind in the head
makes a man giddy, so this vain worldly knowledge, it makes a man giddy and
unstable in the truth. It is as leaven, A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump; so a little vain knowledge will swell the heart of man that it can hardly
contain it self. A vain knowing person he never ascribes to God his parts and
abilities, and gives him the increase of his talents, but to himself: As Herod
did when he had made an elegant Oration in the Auditory, he is so far from
giving glory to God, that he suffers the people to cry out, It is the voice of
a God, and not of a man: So it is usual with Scholars, when they have done a
thing whereby they have gained credit; as made an elegant Oration, or done some
great thing whereby they have gained some honor, Dr. Goodwin on the variety of
thoughts.
to be often pondering with themselves the chief things contained in the work,
and to revolve in their minds those commendable speeches which have been given
them for their pains. As the Cow after it has sed, it uses to chew the cud,
so these do as it were chew the cud, by meditating in their minds, with
selfapplause and self-pride, what glorious things they have accomplished, and
what praise they have obtained for them. And as Nebuchadnezzar prided himself
in the glory of his outward pomp, Dan. 4.30
saying, Is not this great Babel which I have built? So these pride themselves
in the glory of their archievements, Have not I done such a curious piece of
business worthy of the name of a Scholar? Pride, ambition and covetousness do
sweetly sleep in the hearts of many Scholars. Cyprian.
What is the reason that in these later times there shall be such an apostasy
from the faith? This is the reason, The true reason of apostasy in these our
days.
because knowledge shall abound, men shall pride themselves in their parts and
abilities, and exalt themselves above the grace of Jesus Christ, and the
simplicity of the Gospel, and therefore cause God to give them over to strong
delusions, that they should believe lies. Ezekiel. 28.3. The proud King of Tyrus,
he thought himself wiser than Daniel, he thought himself wiser and in a better
condition than Adam was in Paradise, yea he did set his heart above God: But
the teachings of the Spirit make a man to ascribe all to God, and to say with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am what I am; and his grace
which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain: but I labored more abundantly
than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. So much
sanctified knowledge, so much grace: For though there may be knowledge without
grace, so there cannot be grace without knowledge: According to the Apostles
phrase, Grow in ^ace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So much grace, so
much humility; so much carnal knowledge, so much pride; so much pride, so much
sin.

4 All other knowledge without the teachings of the Spirit, it does but furnish
a man that he might be a more able instrument for the devil, and to carry on
his designs in the world; because only those who have the Spirits teachings
upon their hearts, have a sanctified use of their knowledge. What a sad thing
is it that God should give men parts and abilities only to be the devils
drudges, and to do his service. When men shall employ their parts against the
Kingdom of Christ, against the power of godliness, and against the Saints and
servants of God; when men shall fight against God with those very weapons which
he put into their hands. The devil knows that these be the fittest men to
manage his cause upon the earth, and therefore he chooses these above all
others, as most suitable to his intent and purpose. If the leading party of the
times, who are eminent for knowledge, and for a wolvish sanctity, who carry as
it were all ^^^ore them wheresoever they come, and are applauded of all men for
their excellent parts and endowments, be on his side; and under the cloak of a
counterfeit zeal and a pretended holiness, can mask over, and palliate over
most abominable corruptions in the sight of God, if this party be on his side,
the devil sleeps, as it were, in a whole skin, knowing that he has able
Proctors and agents that can bear a great sway in the world, to sweep down
millions of poor souls into hell with the besom of everlasting destruction.
What say the Pharisees to the ignorant people when they spoke of Christ; say
they, Have any of the rulers believed on him? Have any of the Doctors of the
Law, who sit in Moses Chair? Have any of the Sect-Masters? Have any of the
Rabbis and of the Gymnosophists believed on him? and those men are wiser than
you? Those should know sure how to judge of things better than you, who know
not the Law of God, but only as you receive it from their mouths? Who were
Paul's enemies but the Epicures and Stoics, and the Philosophers of the world?
Act. 17.18. Then certain of the Philosophers of the Epicures and Stoics
encountered him, saying, What does this babbler say? (...), Seminiverbius.
He seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods. Who was Paul's enemy but
Tertullus the Orator, when he was to plead for his life? Who were Christ's
enemies but the Scribes and Pharisees, when it is said that the common people
heard him gladly? Julian was a great Scholar, yet a great Persecutor, and an
enemy to Jesus Christ, Learned men are but the devils factors to trade for him,
and to gain proselytes unto his Kingdom.

5. All other knowledge will but aggravate your condemnation, unless thou have
the Spirits teachings, at the day of judgment: Sins against knowledge, are
the next sins to the sin against the holy Ghost: Says David, Lord deliver
thy servant from presumptuous sins, Psa. 19.3
so shall I be free from the great transgression. They are sins of a deep
dye, scarlet sins, sins of ignorance, and sins against knowledge, are both
the same for substance, yet knowledge it adds a searlet dye unto them. What was
Belshazzars fault? Dan. 5 22
That though he did know the failings of his father Nebuchadnezzar, yet he did
not humble himself for all this. This is the condemnation that light is come
into the world, Joh. 3.19.
but men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. If I
had not spoken unto you, John 15.22.
says Christ, you had not had sin, but now you have no cloak for your sin.
No sin comparatively in respect of what they now have.
You cannot improve your knowledge aright to the glory of God, and to the
comfort of your own soul, unless it be sanctified unto you by the Spirit.
Knowing persons will have the deepest place in hell fire, and will be more
tormented than any other persons whatsoever; for God will enlarge their
faculties in hell, and their minds shall be enlightened to discern between good
and evil. Christians that live under the light of the Gospel, and have not the
light of the Spirit, shall have a very low place, if not the lowest, in hell
hereafter. Their condemnation shall be greater. Their condemnation shall be
greater than the condemnation of Aristotle, of Pythagoras, and other Heathen
Philosophers, because they live under a clearer light the light of the Gospel;
yet those shall sink very deep into the bottomless pit. Whatsoever is not done
in faith, and proceeds from the Spirit, and is done after a due manner, and to
a right end, to the glory of God, is sin, Now all that have not the Spirit of
God, let them have never so much carnal knowledge, they can never do any thing
out of a principle of faith within, and as a fruit of the Spirit, or to the
glory of God, as they ought to do, but merely as reason, or as a common
knowledge guides them, and no higher. Many will curse the time that ever they
had so much knowledge one day, and that they have been so greedy after it; when
to all eternity they shall consider, and have nothing else but to consider how
unprofitably and vainly they have lived in respect of that plentiful measure
of knowledge God has given them.

6. Other knowledge will never satisfy your souls. The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with bearing. The soul is infinite in its desires, in
its aims, and in its intentions. A covetous man is never satisfied with his
riches; an ambitious man with his honors; a lustful with his pleasures; an
Epicure with his delicious fare; The knowledge of all things besides God, are no
more able to satisfy our understanding, than a Peck of Corn is sufficient to
fill up all the vast regions that are under the circumference of the highest
heaven. You may as soon fill a purse with wisdom, as the soul with vain
knowledge.
the Scholar with his knowledge, but still the more they they have, the more
they continually desire. Hab. 2.5. The soul it enlarges its desires as ^ell:
As hell and the grave is never satisfied, so neither is the soul of man with
any created excellency whatsoever. We all desire knowledge naturally, because
knowledge it is the perfection of a rational soul: What is the chiefest
happiness of a Christian, and the highest perfection that the soul can attain
unto, but to know God aright, and to rejoice in that knowledge for ever and
ever? Eves affectation of knowing both good and evil; and to be like God in
knowledge, was the cause of the fall of mankind. The soul it has a large
extent, and is never satisfied with the knowledge of any thing, unless it
lays hold of the most infinite God, who is alone able to replenish the same,
without the knowledge of whom we understand nothing, but are compared to the
beasts which perish.

7. All other knowledge it is subservient to the Spirits teachings, and to that
spiritual wisdom which flows from the Spirit. It is subordinate and inferior
to it: John 17.3. This is eternal life to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. Other knowledge it may serve us about the inferior works of
Christianity, how to live justly, soberly, honestly, to carry our selves
prudently in the eyes of the world, and to do many outward good works of
Religion; but to make us to approve our hearts to God, to believe on Jesus
Christ, to deny our selves, to take up Christ's Cross daily, and to follow him,
this only the teachings of the Spirit can help us to do. It is one thing to be
a good man, and another thing to be a good Christian. Moral men who have
nothing but tivility in them, and a discreet carriage to carry all things
squarely along in the world, may be called good men, who wrong no body, and
live honestly and demurely, and are good for the benefit of the Commonwealth,
either in a civil, or in an Ecclesiastical way, knowing how to direct all
things for the best advantage both to themselves and others: These may be
called good men. But good Christians, servants of Jesus Christ, the called ones
of God the Father, are only those who are the children of light, and have the
light of the Spirit residing in them. The Arts and the Sciences may serve as
the Gibeonites did about the Temple, to perform all the inferiors works of
Religion, as far as sense and reason may be a competent judge; but at the
service of the Altar the principail thing is the light of the Spirit. Logic
shows the way of defining and dividing, and of demonstrating the truth, or the
absurdity of a thing. Ethics further us in the illustration of moral virtues.
Metaphysics help us in explaining the terms of art, which we use in setting
forth the nature of things; and being the highest and the chiefest Science how
to draw conclusions from inferior objects in subordination to the highest, and
to reduce all inferior things to the first cause. How to discourse of God, of
the Angels, of the soul, of the Attributes, of the beings of things in a
Scholasticall way. To know the first principles of things, with several
composed affections which arise from thence; and so to find out principles and
subjects for inferior Sciences. But what is all this to the knowledge of God
in Jesus Christ, to the doctrine of humiliation, of examining our own hearts,
to the great doctrine of morrification, and of the Spirits in-being and
dwelling in us, to the comforting of distressed consciences, to the edifying of
the Church of Jesus Christ, and to the purifying of our hearts from that inbred
corruption that is within us, to the renewing of the Spirit of our minds to
the obedience of the truth. An humble knowledge of our selves is a more secure
way to God, then a searching after critical things; and of all knowledge, the
knowledge of God and our own consciences is the best of all.

8. (...). Basilius Christianae religionis finis ac perfec^tio, non est nuda
(...), sed (...). Qui humilitatem, castitatem, mansuetudinem, temperantiam,
charitatem non a^at, etiam Christum non amat, quia Christi vita nihil aliud
erat, quam humilitas, castitas mansuetudo temperantia, charitas. Gerhardus.
All other knowledge it makes a man either a good moral man, or a good
Mathematician, or a good Grammarian, or a good Linguist, or a good Statesman,
or a good Merchant and the like: But the teachings of the Spirit make a man a
good Christian: Which of these do you think is the best? To be a good
Mathematician, or a good Christian: A good Christian shall be saved, but a good
Mathematician may be damned. It is better to be a good scholar in Christ's
School, and to learn apace what the Spirit teaches us, and daily to grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, to be like him in humility,
meekness, patience, contentment, charity, then to grow apace in humane
knowledge, neglecting that knowledge which is for the good of their souls.
Other knowledge makes a man eminent but for one thing; Aliquis in singulis
nullus in omnibus, but the knowledge that comes from above makes a man eminent
in all things, in all companies, upon all occasions whatsoever he sets about.
The righteous man is more excellent than his neighbor; let him be never so
rich, Pro. 12.26
never so wise, never so honorable, never so mighty, never so knowing
otherwise; let him be what he will be, a righteous person that is acquainted
with God, and with Jesus Christ, is more excellent than him, if he has no more
but a mere scepticall scholastic knowledge in his head. The light of the
Spirit it enlightens the whole soul. As the light of a candle presently
diffuseth it self over the whole room, so this light spreads it self over the
whole man.

9. All other knowledge it is but vanity and vexation of spirit. Solomon who is
said to know every herb from the Cedar of Lebanon to the Thistle that grows
by the wall, whose heart was so filled with wisdom, that there was none like
him before, or ever shall be after him; who wrote abundance of Proverbs, and
had the faculty of deciding controversies, and resolving hard questions, whose
heart God had endued with wisdom exceedingly, yet this Solomon writes this
Motto upon all things, All is vanity. Socrates who was the wisest man in the
world, according as the Oracle pronounced of him, yet what does he say of
himself, Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio, I know this one thing, that I know
nothing: Nothing in comparison of what the Saints know, and nothing in respect
of that true substantial wisdom which will profit me at the last day. Says
true wisdom, Pro. 8.21.
I make him that loves me to inherit substance. By wisdom we are to understand
either Jesus Christ, (...) Jescht, Substantia realitas.
who is the substantial and eternal wisdom of God the Father, or complexly,
Christ Jesus, and that spiritual wisdom which flows from Christ by his Spirit.
Substance] Jesch, substantia, a substantial thing. By substance we are not to
understand riches, as some understand, for in common talk a rich man we
commonly say is a substantial man, but reality and the truth of a thing. By
this phrase, I make him that loves me to inkerit substance, is meant, reality.
Spiritual wisdom is a real thing, it gives a real reward to him that loves
her. Spiritual wisdom is compared to most solid things, to rubies, to the most
precious rubies, and to the finest gold. The word which signifies substance is
put for wisdom; Mic. 6.9. A man of wisdom shall see thy Name. Hebr. A
substantial man. Shall see thy name, i.e. that he will reverence, fear, love
and adore thy Name. Words of sense commonly import their effects with them
All other knowledge it is vanity when you have it, and vexation when you
cannot attain it: It will do you no good at the day of judgment. God at the
day of judgment will not ask you what you know, but what you have done, how
you have lived, and whether you have walked up to that knowledge which God has
given you. By all your knowledge you cannot supplant one vice, you cannot
implant one grace, without the sanctifying Spirit of God. All other knowledge
it is but folly in the sight of God. The wisdom of this world it is foolishness
with God:
It is folly because it fails in obtaining the chiefest good, and the last end.
That is the best wisdom which makes a man provident, and furnishes him with
means to attain the highest end. There is no wisdom but spiritual wisdom, where
by we shall ever come to have communion with God, who is the best object, and
the chiefest good, the first cause and the last end. If it were so, why did not
Socrates, Aristotle, Pythagoras, with many other knowing men in the world,
attain everlasting happiness which they are deprived of, unless God out of his
infinite mercy, by a secret way unknown unto us, receive some of the best of
them into his mercy. For my part I know no other way to salvation but by Jesus
Christ; to know him in his death and sufferings, and to be made partakers of
his resurrection, and to be united unto him by a lively faith on our part, and
by the Spirit on Christ's part, and to worship the true God being rightly known
by us according to that way and method he has delivered unto us in his Word.

10. Multi propter arbo rem scientiae, amittunt arborem vitae. August.
All other knowledge it rather hinders, than promotes the salvation of men: It
puts a rub in their way to heaven. They cannot submit to the plainness of the
word, to the foolishness of preaching, to the wisdom of God. Says the Apostle,
Many for the tree of knowledge do lose the tree of life.
The World by wisdom knew not God, that is, by all their wisdom they could not
attain to a right knowledge of him, neither did they care for knowing of him.
The Gentiles did not like to retain God in their thoughts. Multum ubique
scientiae, conscientiae parum. There is a great deal of knowledge in the world,
but little of conscience.
In denying the wisdom of God they go about to establish their own wisdom which
is folly in the sight of God. The Gymnosophists of the world cannot away with
this to hear that they must be taught by the Spirit. And truly without the
Spirit they are but bats in understanding, knowing nothing as they ought to do.
They make a mock of the Spirit of God. What do you tell us of the Spirit? you
spiritual men see you to it, that you have the Spirit. As Domitian scoffed at
Saint John the Apostle, when he had cast him into a cauldron of oil; with this
saying, Theu art one of the anointed ones: So it is the common practice of
licentious Esans, and all vainglorious persons who boast of their abilities to
scoff at the godly Ministers of Jesus Christ, with this saying, Come let us
hear what these spiritual men say, let us hear what the Spirit speaks in them
to day: And to scoff at the godly, calling them the anointed ones of Jesus
Christ.
As for us we do not care whether we have the Spirit or no. We have learning
enough to help us out. As far as we see, we can discourse better of the
things of God, and speak more knowingly than you can, which boast so much of
the Spirit. Alas, you are poor silly creatures in comparison of us, who are
unacquainted with those things which are far more excellent and admired by
all, than any thing you are capable of. And thus they exalt and magnify
themselves in the pride of their own worth, and in the vanity of their own
imaginations. These men live without God in the world, and are strangers to the
life of grace, and to the power of godliness, to the cross of Jesus Christ, and
to the love of God shed abroad in their hearts. They are all for knowledge, yet
for the knowledge which will not profit, they must be prying into the Ark, and
searching after Gods secrets, but little mind the knowledge of God. Who were
the patrons and somenters of heresies? were they not the Learned men in the
world? Ignorant men could never find out such damnable heresies as have been
vented forth in the world. The Quakers a poor company of silly people, carried
away with diverse lusts, and misled by the delusions of the evil one, could
never dream of such blasphemies which they publish forth, had not the
Jesuiticall party, the offspring of that triple crowned Monster at Rome put
them into their heads, that by sowing discord and dissension amongst the
servants of Jesus Christ, they might overthrow the Church and Commonwealth. In
Scholasticorum scriptis plus argutiarum quam doctrinae, plus doctrinae, quam
usus. Whitaker. In the writings of the Schoolmen there is more of subtilty than
of learning, and more of learning than of use. Non nisi in magnis ingeniis
magni errores. An argument why the Scripture is the Word of God.
Arius a great Scholar, who invented the Arian Heresy, (...), sed non (...),
denying the Divinity of Christ. Nestorius a great Scholar, who broached the
Nestorian Heresy, who divided the Natures in Christ. Eutiches a Scholar, who
broached that Heresy that the two Natures did not remain distinct in their
properties, but were confused and mingled together. Unsanctified knowledge has
always been a great prop to uphold vanities and delusions in the world, and a
great enemy to the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is one clear and
evident sign that the Scripture is the Word of God, because there has gone
along with it, publishing of it forth to the world, such a prevalency and a
power upon the hearts of those with whom they had to deal withal, that let
them be never so great opposers to the Majesty of it, by their contradicting
and blaspheming, yet all their carnal wisdom and policy could not avail, but
they must confess it to be the Word of God, though the pride of their hearts,
and the vanity of their corrupt minds would not suffer them to obey it.

11. God has a time when he will blast upon all other knowledge, but the
spiritual wisdom which comes from the Spirit shall endure for ever. When the
man of sin shall be destroyed, what a treasure of vain and fruitless
knowledge, by the bright shinings forth of the light of the Spirit, which has
so so much been idolized in the world, shall fall into the dust with him? God
has a time to take the wise in their own counsels, and to overthrow the
devices of the crafty. God blasted the counsel of Achitophel against David, 2 Samuel 16.23. Though Achitophel was accounted as the Oracle of God for wisdom,
whose word was usually taken in difficult matters, yet God at this time when he
sets his wit to plot against his servant David, he makes his counsel of none
effect. The Princes of Zoan are fools; Isa. 19.11.
all their knowledge cannot deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath. There
is no evasion whereby thou can shift off God, and hide thy sins from him,
for God knows all the plottings and contrivances which have been in thy heart
all the time of thy life. 1 Cor. 1.27. Hos. 5.3. Notitia judicialis, non
approbationis.
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. Says
God in the Prophet Hosea, I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: I know
all their shifts and policies and delusions which they have invented to excuse
themselves for their idolatry, but when I come to plead with them for the
breach of my Covenant, I will lay the glory of their policy in the dust, and
destroy them with the breath of my mouth. When once the beams of the Sun of
righteousness shall arise upon thy heart, and God shall enlighten thine eyes by
his Spirit, then thou will count all thy former knowledge, which thou did so
much pride thy self in, but dross and dung in comparison of the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

But spiritual wisdom endures for ever, it is of an abiding nature: It is of
an establishing nature, it confirms and strengthens the soul against all the
temptations and assaults it may meet withal. That heart which is filled with
this treasure of heavenly wisdom, is as impregnable as a Castle with bars and
irons. Hereby we are instructed with the methods of Satan: we can search into
the depths of Satan. Rev. 2.24.
Hereby we are furnished with an abiding store of rich grace, whereby we may
hold out in the fiery trial. Wisdom and knowledge is the most durable of any
treasure that is. But when he was deprived of all his outward comforts, riches,
houses, lands, friends, relations, all taken from him, could say, Omnia mea
mecum porto, I I carry all things away along with me, because that stock of
knowledge which he had, none could take away from him. So likewise a Saint of
God has the stock of knowledge and spiritual wisdom that shall never be taken
away from him. I have read of some that have lost that knowledge which they
have got by study and their own pains taking. Corvinus a great Scholar was
brought so low by a violent fit of sickness, that after he was recovered he
forgot his own name; but the Spiritual Wisdom which comes from above shall
never be taken away from you.

2. If thou art taught by the Spirit, it is a sign thou art the friend of God,
John 15.15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not
what his Lord does, but I have called you friends: for all things that I have
heard of my Father have I made known unto you. (...). Christ. Oh how greatly
God condescends to the godly! He speaks to them as a man would speak to his
friend.
Abraham is called the friend of God; says God, shall I hide from Abraham the
thing which I shall do? from Abraham my friend? from him whom I have called by
name to be my servant? It Is one part of friendship to reveal secrets. Happy
soul, if God be thy friend, who then shall be thy foe? God is a friend that
sticks closer then all relations, then Father, Mother, Brothers, etc.

3. If thou art taught by the Spirit, it is a sign thou art in the Covenant of
Grace. It is one part of the Covenant that Believers shall be taught of God.
Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law in their hearts, and they shall all know me. It
is an exceeding great comfort, and a most special spiritual blessing to be in
the Covenant of grace. 1. Because in the Covenant of Grace God makes himself
over to the Believer to be his, as the Believer gives himself wholly, totally,
and finally to be Gods; My beloved is mine, and I am his. Hos. 2.19.
2. If God be thine, and thou art the Spouse of Jesus Christ, then all things
are thine; marriage makes all things common. 3. If God be in Covenant with
thee, all the creatures are in league with thee.

Several signs whereby we may know we are taught of the Spirit.
1. He that has the teachings of the Spirit upon his heart is of an humble
Spirit. We find in Scripture that the holy men of God, both in the Old and in
the New Testament, when they have approached near to God to have any revelation
from him, or after they have had a revelation they have abased themselves, and
have been of a more submissive frame of Spirit. Isa. 6. Job 42. Job after God
had appeared unto him and showed him his own weakness, and his Justice in
proceeding with him such a way, says, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. Isa.
65.5. Is. 34.11.
He does not contemn his weak brother; and like those in Isaiah say, Stand by
for I am holier then thou, but as David, he says, Come unto me, and I will
teach you the fear of the Lord, and what he has done for my soul. He does not
think the better of himself, but the more lowly, and does admire the Free Grace
and love of God unto his soul. See how Paul magnifies the Free Grace of God in
discovering unto him the Mystery of Jesus Christ, Unto me who am less then the
least of all the Apostles, is this grace given that I should make known to the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: Ephesians. 3.8.
So a gracious soul is not proud of the teachings of the Spirit upon his heart,
but counts meanly of himself, and exalts the Grace of God, that such a one as
he who was formerly serving diverse lusts, should be admitted into the number of
Gods Favorites, and to partake of his secrets; he is so far from being proud,
that he will stoop and condescend to the meanest Christian for their souls
good. The heart of man is full of wickedness, it is a nest full of unclean
birds, for if a world of iniquity be in the tongue, Jam. 3.6.
How much iniquity is there in the heart? Now when the Spirit shall lead us
into every cell and corner of our hearts, as the Lord did the Prophet Ezekiel
c. 8. and shall show the still greater and greater abominations, and shall rip
up every fester'd corner therein, and let out all the ill blood, certainly this
cannot but humble a child of God; the more a man sees his own vileness, the
more he admires the goodness of God unto him, and is sensible of the evil of
his sin. Jam. 4.6. (...), Ex adverso seponit.
As God communicates himself to none but to the humble spirit, God resists
the proud, but he gives Grace unto the humble; so none have the teachings of
the Spirit, but those that are humble.

2. If there be the teachings of the Spirit upon the heart, there will follow
more joy then can well be conceived of Archimedes when he had found out a
Mathematical demonstration, cried out (...), I have found it, I have found it;
how much more will thou rejoice when thou shall know the things of God! If
Simon when he saw Christ in the Temple cried out, Now Lord let thy servant
depart in peace, Luke 2.29.
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. O how will thou rejoice when thou shall
see Christ in thy heart dwelling there by a lively faith? It is not Christ come
in the flesh that saves us, but Christ come in the heart, Christ in us is the
hope of glory; Col. 1.27.
Knowledge is better then life, how much better is the Knowledge of God? If it
be such a pleasure to a man to know that which he never knew before, what a
pleasure is it to know by the witness of the Spirit upon our hearts, that God
in Christ is reconciled to us? Says the Spouse to Christ, Cant. 1.2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better then
Wine. These words hold forth three things. 1. The great familiarity between
Christ and his Church; As a kiss is a sign of homage and obedience. Psalm. 2.
Kiss the Son least he be angry. i. e. Obey the Son, do homage to him; so it is
a sign of familiarity and love, therefore, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.20.
Greet ye one another with a holy kiss, you know, friends after long absence
use at their meeting to salute each other with a kiss of love, The familiarity
of Christ and a Believer, is in the kisses of his mouth i. e. the teachings of
the Spirit.
to show their mutual joy at their meeting together again. 2. That this
familiarity and mutual love between Christ and his Church comes in by his Word,
and by the teachings of his Spirit; he does not say with the kisses of his
lips, but with the kisses of his mouth; the word [Kisses] is taken in
Scripture for flattering, soft, and pleasant words, showing forth some love and
charity, Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an
enemy are deceitful. The Churches desire is, that Christ would instruct her by
his Word and Spirit, for his love is better then wine. 3. The love of Christ in
the kisses of his mouth to his Spouse, is better then wine; all the comparisons
in this book of Canticles are drawn from things which do most of all title our
minds and delight our senses; Wine amongst those things which belong to the
taste, is the sweetest. The love of Christ in the teachings of his Spirit, is
better then all things, better then Wine, then Wine which makes glad the heart
of man. If Christ's love in the kisses of his mouth be better then wine, then
certainly the joys which come in by the teachings of Gods Spirit, are better
then the joys which come in by wine; all the joys which come in by these
carnal delights are of a perishing nature, as soon as the act is past, the
pleasure is past. A drunkard as soon as his cup is down, the pleasure
vanishes; but the joys that come in by the Spirits teachings are abiding
joys, all other joys have a sting at the end of them; sin it has a fair
entrance, The disference between the joys of the Spirit, and other joys.
but at the length it bites like an Adder, and stings like a Scorpion; but the
joy that comes from the Spirit is without sorrow, it is not adulterate Wine,
but pure and sweet Wine, Psalm. 122.1. I was glad when they said unto me, let us
go into the house of the Lord. Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. As the Doctrine of Christ exceeds all other Doctrine, so it breeds
a greater delight and joy in the heart then other Doctrines do. He that has
the light of the Spirit will discern therein a secret and hidden Manna which
the world knows not of; As the dew descends upon the ground, and rejoices
the earth, and makes it to flourish; so the Spirits teachings are by the dew
to refresh the barren and drooping Spirit, Hos. 14.5. I will be at the dew unto
Israel, he shall grow as the Lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, Dent.
32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass. As the
dew in Spring and Autumn, when the Air is temperate and clear does fresh the
ground and make the herbs to flourish, and to give a sweet smell; so the
teachings of the Spirit they cause our hearts to rejoice, they come as the rain
upon the dry ground, and as the dew upon the tender herb. Phil. 4.4.
A Christian should always be of a joyful Spirit, Rejoice in the Lord always,
and again, I say unto you rejoice; 2 Cor. 11, 30.
says Paul, I rejoice in my infirmities; what if thy sins were never so many,
Did not Christ satisfy for thy sins? Are thy afflictions heavy upon thy
Spirit, the joys which flow in from the Spirit of God, will superabound and
exceed all thy afflictions, besides the Spirit will teach thee. Heb. 12.10
1. That all thy afflictions are but to make thee partaker of the holiness of
God. Romans 8.28
2. That they shall work for thy good, all things shall work for the good of
them who love God. 3. All thy afflictions cannot hinder God from loving of
thee. God loves a Saint in prison, in nakedness, in famine, in distress; God
loved Job on the Dunghill, Lazarus with his sores, Paul in prison; yea I may
say God is more choice of a Saint under affliction then at another time; as the
Goldsmith looks well to the metal while it is in the Furnace, A simile.
lest that the least grain of silver be consumed with the dross; so God is very
careful lest that the least grain of his servants Graces may perish under the
fire of affliction. 4. That all thy afflictions shall make thy future glory. 5.
That the cross of Christ has sanctified the Cross unto thee.

3. If thou have the Spirits teachings upon thy heart, thou will not grudge at
the dispensation of God to others, but wilt do what lies in thy power to teach
others Thou will be so far from grudging that thou will magnify the Grace of
God, and bless God for what he has done for others as well as for thy self,
Act. 26.27. I would to God, said Paul, that not only thou, but also all that
hear me this day, wete both almost and altogether such as I am, except these
bonds. Likewise Moses when they told him that Eldad and Medad prophesied, said,
Number. 11.29.
I could wish that all the Lords people were Prophets. So Christ, Mat. 18.
Father, I thank thee that thou have hid those things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes, etc. Christ did not envy us his fellow
brethren, neither was he ashamed to be called our brother, neither was he
unwilling to undergo that great work for the salvation of our precious souls,
but he was glad when he saw the fruit of his travail, and it rejoiced his
seed; he shall see the travail of his soul and be satisfied. A spiritual man
owns the gifts and Graces of God in the hearts of others, Luke 1.41.
as well as in his own heart; as the Babe in Elizabeth's womb leaped for joy at
Mary's salutation, so will the new-come Babe within thee leap for joy when thou
shall hear of the salvation brought to light to others. It is the Devils
spirit, and a carnal fleshly spirit to envy the gifts and Graces which are in
others; but it is a sign of a true Christian spirit to acknowledge the least
grain of true Grace in others, and to cherish it as much as we can. Christ
ownes whatsoever is of his Spirit in us, a little faith if it be true shall
have its reward, and so should we do; Christ acknowledged a little strength in
the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.8. Thou have a little strength, and have
kept my word, Rom 9.3.
and have not denied my name. Paul was so far from envying his Countriemen,
that he wished himself accursed from Christ for his brethen the Jews; and Moses
desires to be blotted out of the book of life; Exodus 32.32.
Nay thou will do all the good that thou can whence once God has taught thee
to teach others; says Christ to Peter, When thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren. Luke 22.32. Joh. 1.41.
Andrew as soon as he had found the Messiah, he presently tells his brother
Simon of it, that he might also be one of Christ's Disciples; and if ever the
true Messiah the King of Glory has once entered into thy heart, there will be
such meltings of the heart within thee, that thou can not refrain, but thou
must discover the excellency of Jesus Christ to others. The woman of Samaria in
the fourth of John, as soon as she had found the Messiah, she presently left
her water-pots and went into the City, telling the Samaritans that she had
found the Messiah. So likewise will thou do if ever the Sun of righteousness
has risen in thy heart. So the converted thief he presently strives to convert
his fellow Thief, Fear thou not God, says he, Luke 23.40.
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? The light of the spirit in a
regenerate soul cannot be hid, the more thou smotherst it, the more it rises
up, as the fire the more it is pressed down, by and by it rises up in a
greater flame; Says Christ, No man lights a candle, Mat. 5.15.
and puts it under a Bushel. So the Spirit it does not create a new light
within us for nothing, but that we might shine to others and light others, and
that others might see by our light, and be warmed by our fire. Ministers are
the lights of the world in a more eminent way, as being public lights, lights
set upon a hill that all may take notice of them.
They are the Beacons of a Nation to foretell those dreadful Judgments which
are coming upon them for their sins if they do not repent. They are to call
upon private Christians, that they hang out their lights to the world, that
others seeing their good works might glorify their Father which is in heaven.
Mat. 5.16. Here private Christians are lights.
Every private Christian is to hang out his light in a private way, and to show
to others what God has done for his soul, As every man has received, so let
him freely give, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal. This is quite opposite to the Pharisaical temper of the
Separatists of our times;
they hold it unlawful to have any spiritual commerce with a wicked man, as if
they themselves were too worthy to speak unto them, and to pray with them and
for them, and so they are more worthy then Christ; or as if they were so wicked
that they were past all cure and remedy. Mr. Baxter.
If wicked men should be shut out of Gods thoughts of love and mercy, as they
are out of the affections of the separatists, hell would enlarge her self
exceedingly. It is true we are to make none our companions but the godly, says
David, I am a companion of all them that fear thee, Psalm. 119.63.
but yet for the good of their souls, we must not be strangers and unacquainted
with them. How know thou, O thou Religious soul, but that by thy good
conference, holy life, and pious walking with God, thou may gain thy
brother, and win him over from his vile course of life to a conscientious
performing of the will of God. Christ kept company with Publicans and sinners,
but it was for the good of their souls. O that there were not a too censorious
Spirit in the hearts of Gods people to count them forsaken of God, and not
amongst the number of his Saints, who are cast out by them out of their
societies. If we were of the right stamp, we should as the Apostle, Become all
things to all men in a lawful way that we may win all. Yea it is impossible, if
thou have the teachings of the Spirit upon thy heart, but that thou should
make mention of the name of the Lord. The Prophet Jeremiah. when he had a word
from the Lord to deliver to the people he could not keep it in, though he
strove as much as he could to do it, it was as fire in his bones till it was
revealed. Jer. 20.9.
It is a great burden to a gracious soul, that he cannot hold forth the truths
of God, as the Spirit has held them forth to his own soul. It is one of the
greatest troubles to a saithful soul, when he comes to dye that he has not
been so serviceable to the Church of God as he might have been, if he had
improved that light and those talents which God has given him to the best
advantage. We must have charity toward all, we must wish well to all, pray for
all, relieve all according to our abilities; we must love all; we must love our
enemies, but familiarity with all is not expedient; we must edify all, and
strive to convert all to the faith of Jesus Christ. Now there be none so fit to
edify others as those who have the spirits teachings upon their hearts, Gal.
6.1. Ye which are spiritual restore a fallen brother in the spirit of
meekeness. A spiritual man is best acquainted with the evil nature of sin, and
what shame and sorrow it brings along with it, with the wrath of God, and with
the excellency of Jesus Christ, and that beauty and comeliness which is in his
ways.

4. If thou art taught by the spirit, thou art a man of another spirit then
thou were heretofore; as it was said of Caleb, he was a man of another spirit,
Number. 14.24.
so thou will be of another spirit. Were thou before carnal, now thou shall be
spiritual. Were thou of a malicious spirit, thou shall have a spirit of love.
Were thou of a proud spirit, contentious, high minded spirit, thou shall be of
an humble and of a meek spirit. Were thou under a spirit of bondage, thou shall
be under a spirit of liberty, a spirit of adoption. Were thou of an unclean,
froward, perverse, foolish spirit, thou shall be of a clean, mild, and of a
wise spirit. Were thou of a base cowardly frame of spirit, that thou were
ashamed to make mention of the name of the Lord, thou shall be of a courageous
spirit, full of a holy zeal for the glory of God. Were thou of a fearful,
doubting, drooping, sad, sorrowful dejected spirit, thou shall be of a merry,
joyful, and of a lightsome spirit. It is said that after Moses came down from
the Mount, his face did shine, he had been a talking with God, and afterward
his face did shine; So every faithful soul after he has been in the Mount of
contemplation, and has had the spirit instructing him in the things of God,
his heart does shine with the oil of Grace, and his life does show forth the
praise of him who has called him out of this state of darkness into this
mavelous light.

5. He is of a meek spirit that has the teachings of the spirit upon his
heart, Psalm. 25.8. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he
teach his way, Isa. 28.18, 19. In the day shall the deaf hear the words of this
book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of
darkness; The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor
among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel. Psa. 149.4. The Lord takes
pleasure in his people, he will beautify the meek with salvation. Isa. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad
tidings to the meek to bind up the broken spirit. Moses Numb. 11.3. Who is
called the meekest man of all the men that were upon the earth, had the nearest
approach to God of any that we read of in the book of God; he spoke with God as
a man speaks with his friend, or as one man speaks to another, He spoke with
God face to face. We must be children in our own account, if we would be taught
by the spirit, Psalm. 131.2. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a
child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child, i. e.
As a child is gentle and submissive, you may do what you will with a weaned
child; so he was of a tractable spirit ready to yield and to submit to Gods
dispensations whatsoever they might be unto him; Says he, Mat. 18.4.
He that is not as a little child, shall never enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. 1 Cor. 14.20.
A little child in respect of meekness and gentleness, and love and amity,
according to the Apostle, In malice be ye as children, but in understanding be
ye men. The poor receive the Gospel; The poor in spirit that tremble at the
word of God, that are wrought upon by a kind work of the spirit upon their
hearts, that dread the exceeding goodness of God, and think themselves
unworthy of any mercy at all at Gods hands, who can undergo any thing what God
is pleased to impose upon them, confessing that God punishes them far less
then their iniquities deserve, that God cannot inflict too severe a punishment
on them for their sins, Signs of poverty of spirit.
and that if any thing besides hell it is a fruit of mercy, and who groan under
the burden of their sins, and under the apprehension of Gods love unto them who
are willing to receive any thing from Gods hand; These are the fittest men to
be instructed from heaven, if we could perfectly go out of our selves, and
purge our selves of all created love, we should have the flowings in of Divine
grace upon our hearts abundantly. If the spirit should teach wicked men, it
were but to cast darts against a rock, It is reported of Tigers, that they
enter into a rage upon the sent of fragrant spices: so do ungodly men at the
blessed savor of Godliness. It is reported of some Barbarous Nations, who when
the Sun shines upon them, shoot their A^^ows against it; so do wicked men at
the light and heat of godliness, Burroughes.
which are so far from admitting any entrance, that they cast back the darts
against him that shoots them, but the meek spirited man is ready to receive
whatsoever the spirit shall dictate unto him. What ever is written upon a proud
and a carnal heart, it is as if it were written upon the sand, now you know
what is written upon the sand every blast of wind is apt to deface; so every
blast of temptation will blot out whatsoever is written upon a carnal man's
heart, but what is written by the finger of God upon a meek spirit, it is as it
were engraven in marble never to be done out again. Therefore I know no greater
sign that some that pretend most of all to the spirit in these times, are most
of all void of it, because they are of such a railing, contentious, froward,
perverse, malicious spirit; I am sure they were never so taught by the spirit
of God, for the spirit of God is a spirit of love, a spirit of meekness, a
spirit of gentleness; meekness is a fruit of the spirit. While they speak of
perfection and living without sin in this life, Phil. 3.13, 14.
they cry down the Apostle Paul who thought himself not prefect, (...). A
Metaphor drawn from those who run in a race, who when they approach the Goal,
press forward with all their might, their Arms and Legs to touch it.
but still pressed on to the mark of the price of the high calling of Jesus
Christ. As long as we are of the Laodicean temper, and think our selves rich
and wanting nothing, we are never like to come to Christ to buy raiment of him,
and to have that spiritual eye salve whereby we may discern the things of God;
but when we are like Christ, meek and lowly, then we shall find rest unto our
souls. God deals with men as he finds them, Psalm. 18. With the froward thou will show thy self froward, Mat. 11.29.
and with the upright thou will show thy self upright. Many times Gods people
are of crabbed and knotty spirits, that God for the present is as it were at a
stand what he should do with them, O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee! Hos.
6.4.
O Judah what shall I do unto thee! Now as the Carpenter plains the piece of
wood, so the Lord plains their hearts; mountains shall be turned into valleys,
and the Lords way shall be made straight before him, and of rugged spirits they
shall become smooth and the froward spirits become meek and quiet, that the
Lord Jesus by his spirit might be pourtrayed in their hearts; as the piece of
wood when it is plained and made smooth is apt to receive any form whatsoever
the Carpenter pleases; so our hearts when they are once softened by the Spirit,
and smoothed by the planer of affliction, God can mould them and fashion them
as he pleases. A meek spirit is of a docible disposition, ready to receive,
and most apt to retain: most thankful for what he has, and ever mindful of
its own unworthiness. Now here for to prevent mistaking, I should show the
nature of meekness, to wit, what this meekness is, Several kinds of meekness.
but I shall only show the several kinds of meekness, which are four.

1. A natural meekness, arising out of the constitution of a man's body. 2. A
moral meekness, arising from good precepts, instructions and examples. 3. A
stoicall meekness, which is a sameness of spirit upon all occasions, this is
rather a stupidity then a meekness. 4. An artificial meekness, which is when
men can restrain their passions, though their heart is as full of envy as it
can hold. Such was Esans meekness to Jacob. 5. A true meekness, A true meekness
what it is.
which is a spiritual frame of heart, whereby a man gives no provocation, and
is ready to receive any, and whereby a man moderates, subordinates, and governs
all his anger to the glory of God, and to the good of others. Meekness is
passions jailer. True meekness is not always the same, but when Gods glory is
blasphemed, or any ways diminished, then it turns to zeal and an holy anger.
Exodus 32.20, 21, 22.
Moses the meekest man upon the earth, when he saw the idolatry of the
Israelites, he broke forth into an holy anger, being grieved in his spirit for
the dishonor done to God. 6. If thou have the Spirits teachings upon thy
heart, thou art one that fear God: Psalm. 25. What man is he that fears the
Lord, Tiberius Gaesar thought no man fit to receive his secrets; and yet the
Lord vouchsafes the godly his own secrets. None but Noblemen, Lords and Dukes
might be made partakers of State-secrets; the godly are heavenly Lords and
Nobles, and the privy States men of heavens Court. Such honor have all the
Saints to know the things of God.
him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. Mal. 4.2. Unto you
that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his
wings. The fear of God it puts a bridle to our lusts and corrupt affections
which choke the things of God. As an unruly horse may be curbed with a bit and
a bridle; so the fear of God it is as it were a bit and a bridle to curb the
extravagancy and the breaking forth of sin. The fear of the Lord is to depart
from evil. As a brick wall keeps in the waters from overflowing the ground
and banks, from breaking in upon the meadows, so the fear of God puts a stop to
the breaking forth of many a sin, which otherwise we should commit. Now when
the strength and the power, and the dominion of sin is taken away, the Spirit
comes in with more freedom into the soul. When Joseph was tempted by his
Mistress unto uncleanness, he having the fear of God before his eyes, refused
her with this saying, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against
my God! Genesis 39.40, 41.
Because of this he is clapped up by a false slander of his Mistress into prison:
But the Lord was with Joseph in prison, and showed him mercy. And Joseph
because he feared God, had the spirit of revelation given him that he could
interpret dreams. He expounded the chief Butlers and Bakers dream, and Pharaohs
dream. And the Lord honored him in the sight of Pharaoh and all his servants.
By humility and the fear of the Lord come riches, Pro. 22.4.
honor and life. Daniel because he feared God, Dan. 9.24.
and would not consent to worship other gods, the Lord revealed unto him the
expiration of the seventy years captivity which was at hand. And Noah because
he feared God, Heb. 11.7.
an hundred and twenty years before the overflowing deluge came, had this
secret committed unto him, that God did intend to drown the world for that
deluge of sin which was then in it. By faith Noah being Warned of God, being
moved with fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his house, and thereby
condemned the ungodly World. The salvation of the Lord is nigh them that fear
him, that glory may dwell in our Land. The fear of Gods glorious Majesty, and
unquestionable authority, puts the soul into a fit capacity to be taught by the
Spirit. As long as a man is presumptuous, self-confident, and thinks himself
somewhat when he is nothing, there is no place for any doctrine of Jesus
Christ. God usually puts men into great fears and terrors, and then raises
them up, before he communicates himself unto them: Jer. 3.33. I will put my
fear before them, and write my law in their hearts. Several kinds of fear.
There is a fourfold fear.
1. A natural fear, which in it self is not sinful, because God has put this
affection of fear into our hearts. So Christ feared to die.

2. A servile or a slavish fear, when men fear God, not for his goodness, but
only for his justice and his greatness: Contrary to the Prophet, who says,
Fear the Lord and his goodness. Hos. 3.5.
When they fear God as a consuming fire, but not as a gracious Father. When
they fear to offend out of a sense of hell, and not out of any love they bear
to God.

3. A filial fear, when men fear to offend God who has been so gracious a
Father unto them, who has done them so much good, and showed them so much
mercy. When they consider what an ocean of love was showed unto them by God,
when they lay wallowing in their blood, by pitying them in their condition, and
showing them mercy in Jesus Christ. The love of God constrains a Saint to an
obedience of him. And a child of God has such ingenuity in him, and such a
son-like affection to God his Father, that he would not willingly grieve him
for the whole world.

4. A reverentiall fear, so the Angels in heaven they are said to fear God,
because they do him reverence. The Saints reverence God, Rev. 4.10.
casting down their Crowns before him that sits upon the Throne. That vast
disproportion between God and the creature, he being the fountain and we the
streams; who has his being of himself, depending upon none, and we continually
depending upon him; cannot but work a reverence and a godly sear in the hearts
of those that love him and embrace him.

7. If thou have the Spirits teachings upon thy spirit, upon thy heart, thou will still desire to have further discoveries of the Spirit upon thy heart.
Thou will much be exercised in all those ways and means the Spirit uses to
come down. Much in private prayer, in that heavenly duty of spiritual
meditation, much at home with thy self, and less gadding abroad in thy desires
and affections. There was a time when the children of Israel said unto Moses,
Exodus 20.19.
Speak thou unto us and we shall hear, let not the Lord speak unto us lest
perhaps we die. But when was this? When the Lord came down upon mount Sinai,
with thunderings and lightnings to give his Law unto his people. But now under
the Gospel when the Spirit is poured forth abundantly, a child of God rather
cries out with the Prophet Samuel, Speak Lord, 1 Samuel 3.10.
for thy servant hears. Let not Moses, or thy servants only instruct me, but
rather do thou speak, my Lord God, by thy Spirit in my heart, who art the
enlightner of all the Prophets, for thou alone with them can perfectly
instruct me, but they without thee can profit nothing. As Mary sat down at
Christ's feet to hear the gracious words which proceeded from his mouth, so thou will wait at the Ordinances to have more flowings in of the Spirit upon thee.
When a soul shall remember, at such a time such a spiritual truth was
imparted unto me, at such a time, and in such a place I was convinced that such
a thing was a sin, and by the power of the Spirit overcome to a forsaking of
it: that such a thing was a duty; that I was settled in my mind concerning such
a Tenet; that I had a fuller assurance of Gods love upon my heart than
formerly; this will make the soul pant and breath after a more full
manifestation of spiritual things. As David cries out, Psalm. 42.2.
When shall I come and appear before God? so thou will cry out, When will the
time be that I shall have another teaching of the Spirit upon my heart! Psalm.
63.2.
Lord, let me see thy outgoings in the Sanctuary, as formerly I have seen. Let
me hear thy voice, O blessed Savior, for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely. Teach me thy statutes, show me wisdoms path. Instruct me
in the way that I should walk in. Show unto me the joy of thy salvation, and
uphold me with thy free Spirit.

8. He that has the Spirits teachings upon his heart, is of a heavenly mind,
and can perform all duties in a spiritual manner. As it is impossible for a
man at once to look upwards toward heaven, and downwards toward the earth; so
it is impossible for a Christian with one and the same judgment and affection,
to look upon earthly and heavenly things. He counts the riches and honors and
pleasures of the world, but as crumbs cast to dogs; but as trivial things not
worth the mentioning, in comparison of the enjoyment of God in Christ. He is
resolved not to be put off with those common mercies, and not to receive his
good things in this life; but he tramples upon all these things under the Moon,
as mutable, and that pass away, having his eye fixed upon that eternal weight
of glory in heaven, and upon that Crown of bliss and happiness reserved for
him. A simile.
As children when they come to be men they put away childish things,
bowling-stones, counters, and all other vain and foolish sports and pleasures,
and become more serious and solid, weighing what will become of them, and how
they may live in the world; so when thou art taught of the Spirit, thou will
abandon all former delights when thou were in the flesh, and count the world
thy enemy, which would have kept thee from Jesus Christ, yea the memory of thy
vain conversation, when thou livedst according to the course of the world, will
be bitter unto thee, and thou will count all the things of this world but toys
and trifles in comparison of the true and the heavenly riches. When a
spiritual man has the things of this life, he does not set his heart upon
them, he does not trust in them, Mat. 6.33.
he looks upon them but as additionals, and as a handful over and above into
the bargain of eternal life; but his heart is where is treasure is, even in
heaven. In the fullness of all things his heart is empty: and in the want of all
things he can enjoy all things in Jesus Christ. The more the understanding is
enlightened to see the excellency of a thing, and the necessity of it, Whether
the will follows the last dictate of the practical understanding.
presently the will closes with it. And though in outward things the will does
always follow the last dictate of the practical understanding, for Medea
said, -- Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor. --
Yet the will of a Saint cannot but follow the last dictate of the practical
understanding taught by the Spirit. Now the Spirit it puts a new face upon
things; it takes away the false painted mask which the world and our own
corrupt hearts had cast upon those transitory things, and that vizard Satan had
put upon them, and shows us the emptiness, the insufficiency, the vanity, the
mutableness, the inconstancy, and the perishing nature of them, that they are
weak inconsiderable things which cannot afford the least solid joy and comfort.
That the pleasures of sin and the world are but as the cracklings of thorns
under a pot, which blaze for the present, Eccl 7 6.
but suddenly are out. That all the creatures are but broken cisterns, Jer.
2.13.
pits which can hold nothing but muddy and defiled comforts. Besides the Spirit
it teaches us the fullness of God, the sufficiency that is in Jesus Christ, the
joys that flow in from above, and what a mass of glory is treasured up for us
if we continue faithful unto the death. Mark 14.25.
That the time is at hand when we shall drink the new wine of eternal
consolation with Jesus Christ in the Kingdom of heaven hereafter. When a man
has a spirit of discerning, to discern between the true riches, and the fading
riches of this world, and the Spirit has enlightened his understanding, and he
sees the what things are prepared for him hereafter; if he love God and keeps
his Commandments. He is more Saint-like, and is as it were a stranger upon
earth, seeking rest and finding none, till he come to his Fathers house and
finished his course. One that is taught of the Spirit, can do all duties in a
spiritual manner. He can pray in the Spirit, sing in the Spirit, walk in the
Spirit, live after the Spirit, war after the Spirit, rejoice in the Spirit,
and subdue his sins by the strength of the Spirit. His affections, desires,
aims, and intentions are heavenly. You may see a spiritual man by his going,
by his talking, by his eating and drinking, by his company, by his continual
course and progress in his life. Watch him narrowly,
and you may see somewhat of the Spirit in his common carriage: he does not
mind the world: he lives as it were a stranger upon earth: all his discourse
is about his fathers business, and of heavenly things. He cares not so much
what becomes of his body, so his soul may prosper. All his delight is with the
excellent, and with those that fear God. He is often upon his knees confessing
his sins, and abhorring himself for his iniquities. He is much with God, and
little with the world, and if it stood with Gods good pleasure, and the
Churches good, he could be absent from the body, Phil. 1.23, 24.
that he may be present with the Lord. Self-denial is the great lesson he is
continually a conning; sin is his greatest burden, the world his purgatory,
Jesus Christ his only joy, God his portion, and heaven his rest.

Now I come to show what are the extraordinary teachings of the Spirit, that so
we may know the one from the other.
1. A man has then an extraordinary teaching of the Spirit upon his heart,
when he is certain God will give him the same thing he asked of him in prayer,
in the very same kind and manner he asked it of God: when he is fully
persuaded, and verily believes that God will grant him the very same thing
which he asked of him. It is an extraordinary work of the Spirit upon the heart
that must produce such a strong confidence in God, that God will give him the
very same thing he desires. When a soul can say, I know that God hears me
always, and will hear me in this thing, and give me my hearts desire,
especially when there is no promise in the word made to that particular thing
which he prays for: As suppose thou had a friend sick, and thou praiest for
his recovery; and have such a strong confidence in God by the Spirit, that thou
undoubtedly believe that he shall recover; such a confidence had Luther, when
he wrote to Myconius, hearing that he was sick, that without he should recover;
so he did, according to Luthers prayer. So had Elijah when he prayed for rain;
and Jesus Christ when he did his miracles.

2. When a soul has that Plerophory, that full assurance of faith without all
doubting; then he has an extraordinary teaching of the Spirit upon his heart.
When he can say with Job, I know that my redeemer lives; Job 19.25
and though worms destroy my body, yet I shall see him with these very eyes. 2 Timothy 4.7.
And with Paul, I have fought the good fight of faith, I have finished my
course, hence forth there is laid up for me a Crown of life, etc. When a soul
can say by the full evidence of the Spirit upon his spirit, without the least
wavering or doubting, I know that both in life and death Christ shall be unto
me advantage. When a soul can merrily and cheerfully rejoice in the expectation
of the glory of God. Many precious Saints are without this full assurance till
they come to die, as that godly Martyr Mr Glover was, who was full of fears and
doubts till he came to the stake, and then out of a sense of Jesus Christ, he
cries out, He is come, he is come. That is, Jesus Christ was come with his
extraordinary comforts unto his soul; the Spirit of God sealing unto him the
pardon of his sins, and the love of Jesus Christ unto his soul.

3. When a soul has such a spirit of zeal, courage and magnanimity in the
ways of God; that though he were the Butt of the whole world, and the
laughing stock of men and Angels for the cause of God, and were persecuted on
all sides, yet he patiently can undergo it for the sake of Christ. These are
Saints of the first magnitude, who have more than ordinary to other Saints,
flowings in of the Spirit upon their hearts. Such were the Apostles; Luther,
Ignatius, Athanasius, Gregory, Nazianzen, and the like. Tempore Athanasii totus
mundus gemuit sub Ario. The Martyr Antipas, who is spoken of in the Revelation
of St John, Rev. 2.13.
who dwelt where Satan had his seat, and kept himself unspotted amongst that
wicked and perverse generation, and witnessed to the truth with the loss of his
life, had an extraordinary measure of the Spirit upon his heart.

4. When men have an infallible Spirit, so that whatsoever they say is truth,
and as it were an Oracle from God; and when upon all emergencies they have
Divine influences from the Spirit of grace, then they have the extraordinary
teachings of the Spirit: When they have an infallible Spirit, so only had the
Apostles. For they being universal messengers of Jesus Christ, not tied to one
particular place, but to plant Churches in several places, and to pen one part
of the Word of God, which was to be a standing rule to the end of the world,
they were guided by the infallible Spirit of God; so that they could not err
in things which belong to faith and piety. Only the Apostles were infallible in
their doctrine. Popes and general Councils may err, and have erred grossly
from the faith. Also when upon all exigencies they have the supplies of the
Spirit of God, then they have the extraordinary teachings of the Spirit, so had
the Apostles: Luke 12.11. And when they bring you unto the Synagogues, and unto
Magistrates and Powers, take ye no thought, how or what thing ye shall answer,
or what ye shall say; For the holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what
ye ought to say. Whether the Saints in the Primitive times who suffered for the
Gospel, or the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days had not these influences of the
Spirit upon their sad exigencies, when they were brought before their cruel
persecutors, to answer for themselves, is beyond all controversy. Certainly
silly men and women, I mean, in respect of any deep knowledge, could never on a
sudden express their minds so excellently concerning the things of God; had
they not more than ordinary at such a time the teachings of the Spirit upon
their hearts: witness that woman of Exeter, mentioned in the Book of Martyrs,
with many others.

The times wherein the Spirits teachings are most manifest.
1. In times of affliction thou art most of all sensible of the teachings of
the Spirit upon thy heart. In themselves they manifest nothing to the soul but
the displeasure of an angry Judge, intending to destroy them; but the Spirit
concurring along with them, and showing us the mind and will of God, they are
precious cordials and purgations for the sin of our souls. If afflictions
could make us hearken to the voice of God, and savingly instruct us and teach
us those things which concern our everlasting peace, why do not many wicked
wretches who live under the scourge of the Almighty all their days? who have
one wave of affliction after another upon them, learn obedience by the rod, and
understand the mind and intent of God. Afflictions in themselves are neither
good nor evil, but accordingly as they are improved by us through the help of
the Spirit according to the will of God. Now although the Spirit has written
the things of God long before upon our hearts, yet the manifestation of those
things most of all is apparent to us, when God does instruct us by his rod,
together with his Spirit, that those graces which for a long time were not
discerned by us, being pressed down by affliction, may send forth a precious
smell in the nostrils of our God, and to the sense of others. We learn by
afflictions; 1. To see those things which we never perceived to be in us
before, to wit, the actings of divine grace in us, supporting us and carrying
us along cheerfully through this valley of Baca; and the actings of our spirit
toward God again in way of filial affection, and son-like obedience under his
hand, being taught by the Spirit what the mind of God is concerning them. As no
man knows the vileness of his heart, till God is pleased to let Satan have
his liberty to tempt him, and his own hearts lusts to draw him aside: So none
can know the prevailings of grace upon his own heart, and the efficacy of
divine teachings, and the trial and experience of those things which are
written upon his heart till God shall bring him under the fiery trial. The
Spirit has taught us that all trust and confidence is to be reposed in God
alone, because God alone is able to deliver us, and that we may thereby be quit
and set free from all those distracting fears which do molest us: Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy ways unto the Lord, that thy thoughts may be established. Now our
confidence in God is then most of all exercised, when all other props and
stays do fail us, and we cast our selves under the arms of Almighty God. We
know not our own strength against the temptations of sin and Satan, that we
are fortified with the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.
to wit, the shield of faith, the helmet of hope, the breastplate of
righteousness, the sword of the Spirit, the Spirit of prayer and supplication,
the inward support and aid of the Spirit of God, and the continual prayers of
Jesus Christ interceding for us at the right hand of his Father, that our
graces fail not in the hour of tribulation, till God shall smite us with his
rod. By afflictions the teachings of the Spirit of God upon our hearts are most
known to others. Rev. 14.12.
Here we may read the patience of the Saints, the sincerity of their hearts,
the power of divine grace, and the sweetness of the comforts of the Spirit upon
their hearts, when we see them cheerfully, willingly, and joyfully submitting
themselves to the good pleasure of God. 2. By afflictions we are more and more
acquainted with the evil nature of sin which has brought such afflictions
upon us, with the holiness of God which cannot away with sin and sinners, and
with the exact justice of God against it, in so severely punishing of it, with
the benefit that comes by seeking Gods face, and by walking up to the light
which God has put within us. 3. The Spirit of God is very active upon the
hearts of believers at such a time, in rooting out the remainders of original
corruption, and in the exciting of those things which he has put within them.

2. Near the time of death. Sweet have been the discoveries of Gods Spirit upon
the hearts of his children when they have been near the time of their
dissolution, for these reasons.

1. Because near such a time Satan and all our spiritual enemies will muster
up all their assaults to weaken a believers faith, hope and confidence in God,
especially when the believer has been a heinous sinner formerly, and after his
conversion has fallen into some gross sin to the wounding of his own
conscience, and to the quenching of the blessed Spirit for a time, though the
sin is done away by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the pardon of it sealed by
the testimony of the Spirit, yet the devil will be pudling in this old sore,
and persuading him to the contrary, telling him that his conversion was never
real, because since he has fallen so foully in the flesh. The devil tempted
Christ when he was near the time of his suffering, to drive him from his hope
and confidence in God his Father. Says Christ, The Prince of this world comes
and has nothing in me. Joh. 14.30
Christ was perfectly holy, so that no temptation could take hold of him to
overcome him,
or to taint him with the least sin. But we poor creatures, when the devil
comes to tempt us, have something in us, we have a great deal of unbelief
abiding in us, we have a body of sin and of death, and hereupon our bullwarks
would easily fall, our confidence in God would easily give place to unbelief,
were not the Spirit of God which is in us, stronger than him who by way of
eminency is in the world, 1 John 4.4.
to wit, the devil. Now God on the other side fills a believer with continual
fresh and renewed supplies of his Spirit, and with new experiences of his love
unto him, bringing unto his remembrance all former loving kindnesses past
between God and his soul, what a great work was wrought upon him in the work of
conversion? what various dispensations of Gods providence he has undergone,
and all to the benefit of his precious soul: what heavenly Soliloquies have
been between God and his soul in private Prayer and heavenly Meditations, what
reiterated conquests he has had over his domineering lusts, and what spiritual
wisdom to discern the sleights of the Devil! How often he has had the witness
of the spirit upon his heart, though for a season the spirit has withdrawn its
testimony! What groans and sighs, and daily complaints under the sense of the
burden of his sins! What change has been wrought upon him considering his vain
conversation while he was in the flesh, what experimental truths, both
Theoretical and Practical for the establishment of his soul in grace, have been
imparted unto him, and what future hopes of glory he has enkindled in his
breast by the operation of the spirit, that so his faith and hope might be in
God alone at the hour of death!

2. To express those fears which are within us arising from that original
corruption, and from that unbelief which is in the best of Gods servants, which
do most of all show themselves at such a time. A believers fears are commonly
more then his hopes, when the hopes of a wicked man, and of a presumptuous
sinner overcome all his fears. Fear it is a distracting passion filling the
mind with a multitude of trembling, amazing, astonishing, tumultuating,
perplexing thoughts that a true child of God many times is in great doubts
when he comes to dye; but yet the spirit of God will bring in at such a time,
such sweet experiences of Gods love to his soul, of what God has done for him,
that though he may not have the full assurance of faith which is without any
doubting at all, yet he shall have sufficient motives and encouragements to
keep him, as from sinking and despair, and upon firm grounds to repose himself
in God for salvation upon the account of Jesus Christ. Perfect love casts out
all slavish fear, and when once the soul is well grounded in this principle,
that God loved him in Christ before the foundation of the world, of which love
he has had some foretasts thereof by the earnest of his spirit in his heart,
there is no ground left for despair, but for a firm belief that God is his,
and he is Gods; God keeps his strongest arguments to oppose the greatest
conflicts.

Now I come to answer those doubts which arise from the Spirits teachings on
the hearts of Believers.
1. Quest. How may we distinguish between the teachings of the spirit, and that
common Illumination spoken of in in the sixth of the Hebrews 4. verse, which
persons being so enlightened may fall away finally to the perdition of their
immortal souls.

1. Common illumination never descends to particulars, but remains only in
generals. A carnal man may know what faith is, what repentance is, what
humiliation is, what self-denial is, what sincerity is, what new obedience is.
He may know all those things in a general way, but he can never come to
particulars by way of propriety unto himself. He cannot say I believe, I
repent, I am truly humbled for my sins, I have learned the lesson of
self-denial, I am sincere, I am obedient to the will of God; but the light of
the spirit within makes a Christian to say experimentally, feelingly, out of
that abundance of comfort, which he has by reason of the experience of those
things upon his soul, that Christ is mine, and I am his, I have given glory to
God by believing, I have worked the works of God, I have had the spirit of God
leading me into the Land of uprightness. Romans 4.20.
I have that heavenly fire of love enkindled in my breast by the divine sparks
of light from heaven, Psalm. 143.10.
which will burn for ever, still ascending to be united unto God in heaven. The
valley of Baca is turned into a valley of vision, though not the immediate
fruition. The teachings of the spirit do make a Christian go to particulars,
because what the spirit teaches, if it be a habit, or a qualification
connatural to the soul as spiritual; the spirit works the same quality in it,
The spirit teaches us to believe, and the spirit works faith in us, for
faith it is the gift of God.

2. Common Illumination produces but a common faith which is rather
presumption then true faith, a common love which is rather lukwarmness then the
ardent love which is a fruit of the spirit, a common joy which is rather like a
flash of lightning, then that Meridian joy of the Saints of Jesus Christ, a
common humiliation, which is rather an Ahabs humiliation, a legal conviction
upon the soul by the terror of the Law, then any true genuine sorrow for the
displeasure done to God by their sins, a common hope which is rather self
conceitedness and vain confidence, then that lively hope which purifies the
soul, a common well-wishing to leave their sins then a settled determinate
resolution to forsake them, and to turn to the Lord God with all their hearts.
As a man's knowledge is, so is his faith, so is his love, so is his obedience.
Now this knowledge which arises from common illumination, it never savingly
works upon the heart to an hearty obedience of the things known, it is never
joined with true Grace; but that knowledge which comes from the teachings of
the spirit works a true faith in the soul, and is ever accompained with all the
saving effects of the blessed spirit The Apostle joins Grace and Knowledge both
together, Grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; 2 Pet. 3.18.
For where there is a sanctified knowledge, there is true and saving Grace.

3. Common Illumination never makes a man serious in the service of God to
serve him constantly, let his condition be what it will; but as his joys and
his outward comforts are, so are his services unto God, as when the Mood and
the Fit takes them, then they will seem Religious, like the Lunaticks which are
mad only at the full of the Moon, when any profit or honor, or any advantage
goes along with the serving of God; or when nothing is offered which may
displease their carnal minds, then who but they in an outward profession for
the serving of God; but the teachings of the spirit make a Christian resolute
in the ways of God, like Noah, that his whole life shall be nothing else but a
continual walking with his God. A true Christian, let his outward state and
condition be what it will, yet he will be sure not to forget his God, his
Maker, his Preserver, his All in All, in whom are all things, and in whom he
enjoyes all things; but like Zachary and Elizabeth, as far as he can he will
walk in all the commandments of the Lord blamelesly.

4. Common Illumination it breeds not the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, whereby a man upon good and solid grounds, may truly believe that he
has an interest in Jesus Christ in the Covenant of grace, and in all those
privileges which belong to the Saints, because the spirit of sanctification
abides upon him, but merely an opinionative, self-conceited, vain glorious,
presuming confidence that Christ is his and he is Christ, though no regard be
had to those qualifications which are required in those, in whose hearts Christ
dwells by his blessed spirit. Every hypocrite that has been once enlightened,
and tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come will
lay claim to the privileges of the Saints, and of the benefits that flow upon
the account of the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ, though their hearts
were never truly wrought upon to a full and a final closing with Jesus Christ,
and they never had the witness of the spirit upon their hearts, that he is the
child of God; but the teachings of the spirit bring in unto the soul solid
reasons founded upon the word of God, and upon the experience of the Saints,
whereby from the foregoing premises he can draw a true and a real conclusion
that he is Christ's, and Christ is his. Justification and sanctification are
inseparable, according to that golden chain of man's salvation, Romans 8.30. Whom
he justified them he also sanctified; so that besides the testimony of the
spirit, he has those inherent principles of sanctification within him,
whereupon he may evidently conclude that he is no changeling, but a new born
creature a true Citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem, a true son amongst the
Native sons of Zion.

But some weak Believer may say, how may I distinguish between the Witness and
the testimony of the spirit, that I am the child of God; and that vain
confidence and presumption which is in wicked men's hearts, who say they are the
children of God, when they are not?

3. The spirit does not only bear witness, but fully persuade us of this very
thing upon solid reasons which we find true by our own experience that we are
the children of God; therefore says that knowing Apostle Saint John, 1 John
3.14. 1 John. 4.13.
We know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.
Hereby know we, that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit. But wicked men who are full of carnal confidence and sinful
presumption have no sweet experience of saving grace upon their souls, or any
testimony, much less a persuasion of the spirit that they are the children of
God; The grounds of carnal presumption.
but this presumption arises from a bare conceit of their good estate, still
hoping well of themselves, or from the delusion of the Devil, who has besotted
their minds with his sinful Sophistry.

2. The spirits testimony is founded upon Gods word, and not upon any testimony
from our selves.

3 Wheresoever the spirits testimony is upon the hearts of any, there follows a
hatred of sin, zeal for the glory of God, a care and conscience to serve God in
all well-pleasing; for as some eminent Divines do say, though I do not pin my
faith upon any man's sleeve, but only as the light of the word and the light of
the spirit teaches me; the doctrine of assurance will not make a Christian
secure and idle in the work of the Lord,
but more watchful over his ways, and more thankful for so great a mercy,
being constrained by the love of God to the obedience of the truth; and that
the preaching of the Cross of Christ, what love and mercy God the Father and
Jesus Christ, what power and wisdom was put forth in that great work of man's
Redemption is of a more prevailing nature then to preach the terrors of the Law
against sin and sinners, to bring men out of their natural condition, though
both ways must be used, even by fear plucking them forth out of the fire of
hell.

2. Quere, Whether or no are the spirits teachings, or the light of the spirit
in the heart of a Believer a sufficient plea for him to cast off all
Ordinances, means of grace as unprofitable things under so clear a dispensation?

I answer no,

1. For as Jesus Christ in explaining the Law of Moses did not abrogate the law
or derogate any thing from the use and majesty of it, Mat. 6.
but only clear it from those foul aspersions which the Pharisees had cast upon
it; so the spirit in teaching us the things of God, and in enlightening our
minds to understand his will, does not take away the use of the word, but adds
a further light unto it, that we may understand the mind of the spirit in it,
and that all those prevarications by reason of the darkness of our
understanding may be rightly placed; The Sun is full of light, but a blind man
cannot see it. So the word is clear in it self, but because our understandings
are darkened we cannot understand it. Now the spirit of God does five things in
order to the word of God.

1. It explains it. 2. It gives a further authority unto it. 3. Shows us the
majesty, The spirits actings in reference to the word.
purity, and excellency of it. 4. Makes us to prize it above all things. 5.
Enables us to keep it.

2. Because the word of God acknowledges no Spirit but what works in and by
the word, Gal. 5.2. Received ye the spirit by the Law, or by the hearing of
faith? Did ye not receive the spirit by the preaching of the doctrine of saving
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ? The spirit teaches, which is consonant and
agreeable to the word of God; so that the word and the spirit both concur
together, the spirit as the principal agent, the word as the instrument which
can do nothing without the spirit to teach us the will of God; and to work in
us all those saving Graces which accompany salvation.

3. Because the word of God in the Scripture is set down as a standing rule
according to which we must frame our lives unto the end of the world, 1 Timothy
3.13. Till I come give attendance to Reading, (...). Attendere cum diligentia
cu ram adhibere.
to Exhortation, to Doctrine. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self
wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear unto all. 16. Take heed unto thy
self, 1 Pet. 1.23. Mat. 5.18.
and unto thy doctrine; continue in them, etc. The word of God which lives and
abides for ever. Not the least tittle of the word of God shall fail till all
things be accomplished, some of which things will not be fulfilled till the end
of the world. The Sacraments also are in use and have their efficacy for that
end for which they were appointed by God in his Church, to the end of the
world. 1 Cor. 11.26.
By the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we are to remember the Lords death till
he come; so that till Christ shall come again at the last day in glory, power,
and majesty, we shall stand in need of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for
the confirmation of our faith, and to remember the death and sufferings of our
blessed Savior till he shall come to judgment. Prayer also is a standing duty
required of all Christians while they are on this side heaven, that thereby
their faith and hope in God might be exercised. We are commanded to pray
continually, that is, to let no time wherein this duty is required of us. 1 Thessalonians. 5.


4. Because a Believer stands in need of continual food and nourishment, that
the tent of the word, and the Bread and Wine Sacramentally so understood should
be continually put in his mouth whilst he is under age in respect of that
perfection and ripeness he shall attain unto when this mortal life shall be
swallowed up in glory, that his soul might be nourished up unto everlasting
life. Likewise here bebelow we stand in need of many things, strength of grace
to overcome sin, patience under adversity, the arm of God to support us under
all our weaknesses, heavenly comforts, daily supplies of the spirit of grace,
renewed arts of Divine assistance continually, bread for our bodies, food for
our souls; therefore we ought to make our requests by prayer unto God daily for
all temporal and spiritual blessings.

Obj. When we have the greater light, what need have we of the lesser, when we
have the Sun-light, what need have we of the Starlight, when we have the light
of the spirit, what need have we of the light of the word, when we have that
which supplieth all our wants, what need we pray, what need have we of the
Sacraments, the spirit can supply all our wants without the use of the means?

4. In respect of our selves the light of the spirit is to be preferred before
the light of the word, but seeing that the light of the word is subordinate to
the light of the spirit, and that the light of the word, and the light of the
spirit do not differ in respect of the subject matter, but only in respect of
manifestation, and the spirit enlightens in and by the word, therefore the
light of the spirit does not take away the use of the light of the word;
besides the comparison does not hold, because the collation between the light
of the Sun and Stars, and the light of the word and of the spirit halts, and is
imperfect. The spirit enlightens our minds in and by the word, but the Sun
shines of its self, and not in and by the Stars. The spirit likewise though it
can supply all our wants without the use of means, yet it never ordinarily does
without the use of the means; God gives his spirit only to those that pray for
it, and when we have the spirit, we are still to desire God that his spirit may
exert his power upon us, and act in us and by us, that we may not only have
the spirit but feel the operations of the spirit upon our hearts. God knows
what we want before we pray, and can give us them without our asking, but God
will have us pray that thereby we might acknowledge his power, his goodness,
his mercy, and the like, and that thereby our faith and patience might be made
manifest. If upon the account of the indwelling of the spirit in the hearts of
the godly, they should forbear to pray. I would know of those who say so, why
the Spirit of God is termed the spirit of prayer and supplication, as in the
prophecy of Zachariah, Zech. 12.10.
but only because it stirs up in us good desires, and holy affections, and
puts words into our mouths, acceptable words, whereby our petitions may be
accepted of God. Let them likewise answer the portion of Scripture if they can
in the sixth of the Ephesians 18. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all Saints.

5. If we should only hearken to the voice of the spirit, and to the spirits
teachings in our hearts, there would be no certainty of the true Religion, when
there can be no Character given by which the spirit of Christ might be
distinguished from our own proper spirit, as from the spirit the devil which
sometimes transforms himself into an Angel of light. That is, the pretenses of
a man's own spirit, or of the devil in the hearts of others may seem so true and
real to a man himself, as if they were doctrines taught by the blessed Spirit.

Now how should we try the spirits whether they be of God or no? but by the
word of God.

Obj. It is a true sign of Divine instinct, when of that which we believe or
do we are persuaded of, and rooted in without any ambiguity or doubting.

Ans. This is a false sign, for the Turks and Infidels are as much obstinated
and settled in their own doctrines and Traditions, yea more settled then most of
those Christians who pretend so much to the spirit.

Q. But some may say, though we grant you that the teachings of the spirit do
not in themselves make us to be above the Ordinances of God, and the means of
Grace, yet may we not then when we come to be perfect Christians, highgrown
Saints, and have lived under the teachings of the Spirit along while, may we
not then cast off the use of the Word, the Sacraments and Prayer, and only
depend upon the Spirit for his supply?

I answer, No.

1. Because the best grown Christians in this life are not above the teachings
of the word; but ought to mind the light of the Word, as well as the light of
the Spirit: Romans 1.14. I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians,
both to the wise and to the unwise. Heb. 5.14. But strong meat belongs to
them that are of age, Strong meat, the Word and Sacraments.
which through long custom have their wills exercised to discern both good and
evil. 1 John 2.13. I write unto you fathers, because ye have known him that is
from the beginning, etc. 1 Pet. 1.1. The Apostle Peter writes to the elect
ones, and to those who are born again, as appears by the fourteenth verse of
the same Chapter. 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak as unto them which have understanding.
Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded. 1 Cor.
11.26. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. Till we all
meet together in the unity of the faith, and the acknowledgement of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the fullness of the stature of
Christ; which fullness shall not be till after this life, as appears by that
place, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.11. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part, but
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
abolished.

2. Because the highest grown Christians in this life are in their infancy, as
it were till they arrive at heaven.

Ob. What do you say to that place in Joel, Joel 2.28.
where it is said, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. And to that place in the
Prophet Isaiah, where it is said, Isa. 30.26.
that the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun seven fold: And to that place in John, 1 John 2.27.
where it is said, that you have rectived the unction of the holy one, and you
need not that any man teach you.

Ans. I answer, that in these places of Scripture is only held forth a more
plentiful giving of the Spirit under Gospel Times, than under the former
dispensations: Therefore it is said, that the Spirit was not yet given, because
Christ was not yet ascended. The performance of which prophecy was upon the
Apostles, together with other elected Saints, Act. 2. Hence then is no place
given for Enthusiasms, because it is usual with the Prophets of the old
Testament, when they did speak of the restoration or amplification of the
Church of God to set it forth Tropically under figures and shadows, Zach. 14.
Mal. 1.11. with many other places. For that place in the Epistle of St John, it
holds forth unto us this, that for those fundamental truths which the Saints
had received from him, from which the false Apostles did seek to remove them,
they needed not again to be re-established in, these truths being set home upon
their spirits by the Spirit of God, but only words of exhortation to stir
them up to execute and to put in practice those fundamental truths which they
had received.

Ob. But what say you to that passage of Scripture in the 2 of Peter 1.19.
where it is said, We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do
well that ye take herd, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

Ans. The Apostle in these words does not take away the use of the word, and
other means of grace; but the scope of the place as I gather from the context,
rather tends to the establishing of the word, and other means of grace, till
Christ who is the morning star, the day star in the morning of the
resurrection, shall arise in the hearts of his elect ones after a more glorious
manner than when they were in this body of flesh, in this world, which is
rather a state of darkness than of the light, in comparison of that light of
knowledge, of joy, and of comfort, which shall be to the Saints in heaven. To
explain the words. The Apostle having before in the foregoing words declared
the certainty of the doctrine of the Gospel, both from his own experience, and
from the testimony of God the Father; now in these words he confirms the
certainty of it from the consent of the Prophets under the old Testament. As if
the Apostle should have said, The Doctrine of the Gospel is confirmed by the
Prophets of old, therefore the Doctrine of the Gospel is most true and certain,
therefore if ye mistrust me in commending the Gospelunto you, I remit you unto
the Prophets of old, whose doctrines are a more surer word than this testimony
of mine in respect of your selves as yet, unto which word of Prophecy you do
well to attend, as a light which shines in a dark place; as to that light
which now under the state of nonconversion and of blindness may do you some
good, till the vail is taken off from your hearts; and Christ the morning
star whom you so much despised arise upon you by his blessed Spirit to unfold
this word of prophecy unto you, which will then not be a light in a dark
place, but a true light unto you indeed, Christ by his Spirit having unvaild
your hearts, that you may see that was the Messiah of the world, that was the
true Christ, whom you have crucified; and of which this more sure word of
Prophecy, or all the Prophets have spoken of. How this interpretation and
explanation of the words may take with many, I cannot tell, but as yet, till
God shall give in a further light upon my soul, I think it most agreeable to
the mind of the Spirit. Aretius, Lucifer est plena Christi cognitio, postquam
drsinet usus Propheticae doctrinae. The day star is the full knowledge of
Jesus Christ after the use of prophesying shall cease; which is, if it be meant
of all believers, then the words must be thus understood: That when the time
comes,

1. When Ordinances shall cease, and the means of grace shall cease, which will
not be till the end of the world, till the dawning of the morning of the
resurrection, the day star shall arise in our hearts, that is a full and
perfect knowledge and enjoyment of Christ.

2. If in respect of the Jews to whom he wrote scattered up and down the
Nations, then the words may be thus interpreted: That they do well to attend to
the word of prophecy which speaks of Jesus Christ, as unto a light in a dark
place, that is, as yet though but a darkish dispensation, till Christ the
morning star shall arise and take the vail from off their hearts, that so
they may see he was the very Messiah of the world whom they have crucified, of
whom the Prophets of old have foretold.

Qu. Whether are the teachings of the Spirit upon our hearts a sufficient call
for us to undertake the Ecclesiastical Function? No.

1. Because then all elected, converted persons should be Pastors of Churches.
1 Cor. 12.17.
And if all the body were an eye, where is the ear? for all true believers are
taught of the Spirit.

2. Because the Spirits teachings are not revelations of high mysteries of
things to come, a declaring of the whole mind and will of God in respect of
every circumstance, a furnishing a man in a general way to know more than is
meet for him as a private Christian to know, but a writing of all those things
in his heart which pertain to life and godliness, and which are necessary for
him to know as one that must be saved by Jesus Christ.

3. Because a man may have the Spirits teachings upon his heart, and yet be
ignorant of many truths of God, because the Spirit teaches successively, ut
antea.

4. Because we never read in Scripture that any took upon them to be public
Pastors of Churches, but only as it were auxiliaries and helps for the
promoting of the work of the Lord in the planting of Churches in the Primitive
times, as Aquila, Priscilla and Apollos were, unless besides these teachings
they had an immediate call from God, or a mediate by man, yea though they had
extraordinary teachings upon their hearts.

5. Because besides the inward call of Gods Spirit, which is a secret testimony
that God has set him apart, and endowed him with gifts and graces suitable for
such a work, there is required an outward call, which is a designation,
approbation, and setting him apart peculiarly for the work of the Pastoral
charge and office, the Church and people of God electing him, in whose hearts
he has approved himself by his pious life and wholesome doctrine; and the
Presbyters by the laying on of hands ratifying their election, and confirming
him in his Office, Acts 6. v. 3. with v. 6. 1 Timothy 4.14. Yet the inward call,
the call of Gods Spirit, is the principal call, because thereby a man is sure
that God has appointed him for this work, who will bless him in it, if he be
faithful unto the death. Happy is that servant who goes forth in the Name of
the Lord his God, that is, in the authority of his God, God will bless his
labors, and give him the reward of his work.

12. Every Christian ought to walk up according to his light, and that measure
of knowledge which he has received. Woe be to those that walk not up to that
light which God has given them. Luke 12.47.
He that knows his Masters will and does it not shall be beaten with many
stripes.

1. They that have only the light of nature to see by, ought to walk up
according to their light. By the light of nature we know that there is a God;
that this God is one only God; for there can be but one cause of all causes,
who is the first cause of all causes, of whom all causes depend in esse and in
operari; one that is infinite, in whom the perfections of all the creatures do
meet, as all the lines do in the center: that this God is to be worshipped; and
that this God is to be worshipped after his own way and method, for who dares
be so impudent to prescribe Rules and Canons of Gods worship, but God himself:
Hence we know naturally that as there is a God, so that this God has his word,
wherein he delivers his mind how we ought to serve him, and after what manner
to do him homage. By the light of nature we know that we must live honestly,
justly, that we must wrong no man, and give every one his own. The Gentiles who
withheld the truth in unrighteousness, Romans c. 1.
and disobeyed the light of nature, were punished with a dreadful judgment
from God, being given over to a reprobate mind to commit all iniquity with
greediness. Those that walk not up to the light of nature shall be damned, as
well as those that sin against the light of the Gospel, though their damnation
shall be the lesser: Although the light of nature is not a sufficient light for
salvation, yet I conceive that if the Heathens would but improve that natural
light which they have unto the glory of God, God would come in with a greater
light for the salvation of their souls.
And who knows but that if the Heathens did improve that light which they have
to Gods glory; but that God might break in upon them with a greater light, with
the light of the Spirit upon their hearts. The work of nature is the work of
the God of nature, according to the Philosophical Axiom, Causa causae, etiam
causa causati. Etsi hoc axioma cum grane salis accipiendum; and if God did see
us walk up to that light, God would come in with a greater light upon our souls.

2. The light of conscience, every man ought to walk up according to the light
of his own conscience. Pro. 20.27
Says Solomon, The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching all
the inward parts of the belly. God has set up a candle in every man, whereby
in some measure he may be able to distinguish between good and evil. This
candle of the Lord is conscience, searching all the inward parts of the belly;
which conscience is both a witness and a Judge; a witness to testify to our
deeds accordingly as they be; and a Judge to absolve us or condemn us for them.
Miserable is the condition of those persons who have their consciences
continually accusing them: Says God to Cain, Genesis 4.7. It lies at the door
like a Mastiff-dog.
If thou do well shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do evil, sin lies
at the door. Sin by a Metonymy, for the guilt of sin: The guilt of sin
lies at the door, it lies at the door as a Mastiff dog lies at the door, it
will let thee have no rest day nor night, it will haunt thee up and down in thy
bedchamber. Says Solomon, Pro. 10.20
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for the bird of the air shall tell
the matter, and that which has wings shall carry the thing. This bird of the
air is our own conscience, which will never let us alone till we have confessed
them. Woe be to those that sin against their own consciences, their sins
will find them out, and will torment them. Blessed be they that endeavor to
keep a good conscience void of offense toward God and man, that will approve
their hearts as in the sight of God, that would not violate the peace of their
own consciences in the omission of any known duty, or in the commission of any
known sin for the whole world. A good conscience is a continual feast. He
that would keep faith and a good conscience, let him be sure to walk up
according to the dictates of it.

3. To the light of natural improvements, moral educations, wholesome
instructions, good examples, pious conversations. Woe be to those who walk not
up to the light of natural improvements, that by their studies, good
conference, offices, conditions, employments, have much improved that light
which they had according to the contemplative part of it, and yet never truly
have digested this light with the incomes of it, by turning it into practice,
for the benefit of their souls! Perhaps they have got a great deal of knowledge
by reading, by good education, holy counsels, observance of others, and yet are
never the better in their lives and conversations. He that increases knowledge
increases sorrow, unless true sanctified grace be joined with it. And all
those good instructions, moral educations which thou have had from thy
parents, Master, friends, relations and others will but aggravate thy
condemnation one day, unless thou art reformed by them. The good examples, and
the pious conversations of others, do but reprove the hardness of thy heart,
and will rise up in judgment against thee at the last day, because thou have
been admonished by their righteous dealings. Noah in preparing an Ark according
to Gods Word condemned the old world of unbelief, and of stiff necked
impenitency. Every pin the good man drove into the Ark, was a secret reproof of
their unbelief. Woe be to those that hate the light of counsel, of instruction,
of reproof, and of exhortation. Consult that dreadful place, Prove. 28.1. He
that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy.

4. To the light of the word which includs both Law and the Gospel. 1. Sad is
their condition who have only the Law to be their light, and yet sin against
this Law; that know they should not commit adultery, and yet commit adultery,
they should not steal, and yet will steal; they should not profane the
Sabbath, and yet will profane the Sabbath, that know they should not serve
idols, and yet will serve idols, etc. How many sore judgments, and grievous
captivities do we read of in the old Testament which God brought upon his own
people the Jews for the breach of his most holy and righteous Law. They had the
Law and the Prophets, in which Prophets some Gospel, which intermingled, though
little in respect of that light which we have, and yet their sinning against
the light of the Law, and the word of Prophecy delivered unto them did so
incense the Lord against them, that he often plagued them with sore judgments
for their revoltings.

2. To the light of the Gospel. See the sad condition of those souls that walk
not up to the light of the Gospel in the second of the Hebrews 2.3. v. For, if
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be preached by the
Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. Sins against
Gospel light are crying sins in the ears of God. By how much the greater
engagements of mercy; by so much the more hanious will our sins be. If we walk
not up to the light of the Gospel, we sin against a more clear and evident
light, against such a light which discovers such love of God unto us in Jesus
Christ, which can never be expressed. Against such a light which holds forth
the clearest testimony of Gods good will to sinners far beyond the apprehension
of men and Angels. Such a light which the Angels themselves desire to behold,
prying into and adoring the infinite wisdom of God revealed in it. Such a light
which if we sin against it, will for ever render us altogether inexcusable at
the last day, so that our mouths shall be muzzled as the man's was which came to
the feast without a wedding garment, being not able to speak a word for our
selves. Such a light, which if we walk not up to, will sink us deep into the
gulf of misery, and the blackness of darkness for ever. Such a light which if
we walk not up to, but maliciously resist and oppose, we render our selves
guilty of that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, being condemned in our
own consciences, and obnoxious to our selves that we deserve eternal vengeance
for the slighting of it. Such a light which if we do not obey, makes us guilty
of the highest unbelief, the most notorious ingratitude, the greatestwant of
charity, the most out-crying rebellion of the greatest hardness of heart, and
of the most malicious hatred that possibly can be. He that rejects the light
of the Gospel, forsakes his own mercies he has bid adien to God, to Christ,
to the Spirit, to the Sacraments, to the promises, to the privileges of the
Saints, yea to the Saints themselves being without hope for the present, Ephesians.
4.17, 18.
being turned from a Christian to be like those Gentiles who walk in the
vanities of their minds, having their understandings darkened, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should shine into their hearts. (...).
Ephesians. 3.6. (...). Ephesians. 1.3 Justitia Dei Dom. 1.17. Divina Virtus and
potentia. 1 Cor. 1.24.
Such a light in which is revealed the manifold wisdom of God, the riches of
his grace, the righteousness of God, Divine power and virtue, the truth of God.
Against such a light which is the ministry of the spirit, for the Gospel it is
the ministry of the spirit, and not of the letter. Against such a light, which
if we walk not up to we mightily incense the great Jehovah of heaven and of
earth. Do you think that if a great Monarch should send to the poorest beggar
that he has under his dominions, having been a notorious rebel, traitor and
apostate from him, A simile.
a message of reconciliation unto him upon promise that if he would accept of
pardon upon the supposition of amendment of life, he would not only be
appeased with him and receive him into favor, but make him as it were his Son;
if this miserable creature should refuse the pardon upon such noble terms,
himself being exceedingly worthy of death; would not this render him guilty of
the highest ingratitude, and of the greatest contumacy, if he should not close
with this most courteous offer of grace and favor; such stubborn hearted
sinners are they, who walk not up to the light of the Gospel. We are all of us
by nature miserable, poor, and wretched creatures, enemies, rebels, traitors,
and apostates from God. The King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, who is Lord over
heaven and earth, sends unto us by his only son a message of reconciliation
upon condition that we will receive this his only son, who has dyed for us to
redeem us from the captivity of sin and Satan and from the curse of the Law,
and from eternal death, for our only Lord and Savior, and serve him only and
obey him, and keep his commandments, unto which gracious message, if we would
but repent of our former rebellions, and endeavor to believe on Jesus Christ is
annexed a most gracious promise of everlasting happiness, that we shall be his
sons, and that he will give us a Kingdom, a Crown of Glory, an everlasting
inheritance; and that we shall reign with Jesus Christ our elder brother and
with himself for ever and ever. Now what rebels and stout-hearted sinners are
they? who shall not accept of this gracious offer upon so small conditions? The
conditions are only to repent for our sins and to receive Jesus Christ for our
Lord and Savior to rule, and govern us by his Word and Spirit. Who would
refuse such an honorable, good and gracious Master, such a noble service which
has a most copious reward annexed to it? In the service of Christ there is
perfect freedom, but in the devils service the greatest slavery, Then are you
free indeed, John 8.6
if the Son shall make you free. Do not stand off I beseech you, close with
this gracious offer, accept of these conditions, lest that thereby thou
incensest God against thee to destroy thee; if thou refusest this offer of
reconciliation, thou shall never have the like again, for in rejecting it, thou
sinnest against the remedy which God has provided for the sin of thy soul by
trampling under foot the precious blood of the Son of God, and art thereby
become guilty of the death of Jesus Christ; and of thy own eternal
condemnation. Walk up to this precious light, seek not to put out the candle of
the Gospel, lest God in wrath for thy idleness, thy unprofitableness, thy
stubbornness come and put it out himself. But walk in the light as long as thou
have the light, repent of thy sins, repent from thy sins, leave thy sins which
have crucified Christ, which have been nails and spears in thy Saviors side,
and as thou art willing to be saved by him, so likewise be thou governed by
him, that Christ might be thy Lord as well as thy Savior, lest otherwise by
the hardness and impenitency of thy heart, thou treasurest up to thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and the righteous revelation of the judgment of God
by despising the riches of Gods Grace revealed unto thee in the Gospel of his
Son. R m 1.2, 3, 4.


5. To the light of the conviction of Gods spirit, walk up to the light of the
spirit convincing thee of thy sins. The spirits conviction is the spirits
setting home upon the conscience, some sin by undeniable arguments, A
description of the spirits conviction.
and by an evident demonstration derived from the Word of God, whereby the
sinner may know that he is guilty of the same sin, together with some dreadful
place of Scripture, holding forth the terrible judgment of God upon those who
commit such a sin, that thereby he might be drawn to a loathing, and to a
forsaking of it. Sad is their condition who have such a conviction upon their
hearts, and do not comply with the conviction for the forsaking of their sins.
That think by merry company, by worldly employments, by long continuance to
shake off this conviction from their spirits. Better had it been for thee, that
thou had never been born then that thou should live all thy days in the
commission of any known sin, or in the omission of any known duty, that spirit
convincing thee of thy sins. Motives against this sin. 1. Motives to close with
the spirits conviction.
That in not complying with the spirits conviction, thou opposest the spirit in
its first werk tending to thy conversion upon thy soul. The spirit convinces
before it converteth; the spirit of bondage must go before the spirit of
adoption. The thundering and terrible voice of the Law before the sweet and the
still voice of the Gospel; the Arrows of the Almighty within thee, make way for
the sweet oil of consolation; in resisting the spirits interest in this work,
thou opposest thy own salvation. 2. In opposing the light of the spirit by way
of conviction upon thy soul, thou will bring by little and little, such a
brawniness upon thy conscience, such a hardness upon thy heart, such a deadness
upon thy affections, such a customariness in sinning, such an indisposition and
averseness upon thy soul to any good thing, that the meats of grace which
should have been for the food of thy soul, shall b^thy poison; every Ordinance
unprofitable, and thou shall be a burden to the earth, an abominable creature
in the eyes of God; the spirits quench-coal, an utter enemy to all goodness,
and when thou come to dye Magormishabib a terror, and an astonishment unto
thy self; another Francis Spira, another Judas, another Saul when thou come
to lie upon thy death deb. 3. This not walking up to the light of conviction
will be an unconceiveable torment and vexation of spirit unto thee in the
flames of hell fire. When thou shall have nothing to do else, but to consider
how foolishly, how vainly thou did spend this transitoty life in fulfilling
the lusts of the flesh, and besides which will be the greatest misery, when
thou shall with anguish of spirit, and with gnashing of teeth consider, that if
thou had closed with such a spiritual truth committed unto thee in a Sermon,
perhaps the Minister beseeching thee, inviteing, exhorting thee, persuading
thee with tears in his eyes to leave thy beloved sins, and to embrace Jesus
Christ under the penalty of eternal condemnation, and had complied with the
conviction of the spirit at such a time upon thy heart thou had escaped this
place of torment. All convictions, impressions, motions of the spirit which the
damned souls have had in this life, all powerful Sermons, all opportunity for
the advantages of their souls, all good counsels, exhortations, beseechings of
friends, relations, acquaintance, all that progress which they have made in
Christianity, and that if they had gone but one step farther they might have
obtained heaven, if they had not loved this present world too much, and with
the young man in the Gospel, loved their possessions above Christ, they might
have been while now they are in extreme misery; and when above all this the
consideration of the spirits conviction, how that they were convinced in their
own consciences by the act of the spirit setting home this sin, I say, when all
these means of grace) advantage, and precious opportunityes with superadded
convictions shall be upon their spirits, as then they shall be in a most
eminent matter, their affections being quickened and raised to the full vigor
of them, God is the immediate inflicter of the souls punishment in hell.
their memories strengthened their understandings enlarged, and all their vain
hopes and confidence ruined to their exceeding grief and misery, they will
weigh heavier then the sand of the Sea, and did not infinite power support them
under this unconceiveable torment, as well as infinite justice inflict this
torment by way of vengeance and in full fury upon them the damned spirits could
not subsist one moment. What language do you think you should hear, supposing
you were at hells gate? Such as this, O wretch that I am! what a foolish, silly
wretch was I that I did neglect so great salvation, that I did shift off the
spirit striving and pleading with me from time to time convincing me of my
sins, saying to morrow, and next day I will begin a new lesson; I will redeem
the time, I will bethink me of eternity; but this morrow never yet came till
now it is too late, time being swallowed up in this Ocean of eternity. O what a
sluggard was I, to shift off the blessed spirit with such fond, foolish, and
frivolous excuses, to make every thing an objection and a doubt to keep me off
from an obedience to the truth. What a mad fellow was I to create fears, where
no fear was, and to think that Gods ways were full of bitterness; and that
pleasure of sin exceeding sweet, to make offense, and stumble at a crucified
Christ, to believe the devil, to hearken to flesh and blood, and to follow the
course of this present evil world. O that I had those opportunities and those
precious means for the good of my soul again afforded me, how would I live? How
would I walk up to that light which God has afforded me, always praying,
reading, doing good, and working out my salvation with fear and trembling? But
alas, there is no more time, there are no more seasons of grace afforded me;
God is departed from me in respect of any future merry for ever, hell has shut
her mouth upon me; and therefore, O that I had to my everlasting comfort
complied and hearkened to the voice of the spirit contending with me; That I
had walked up to the light of the spirit, then it had been otherwise with me to
my perpetual joy, then it is now to my eternal misery? Thus the wretched sinner
laments it self when it is too late, and wishes it had never been unless he had
been better, because he improved not those talents, and walked not up to that
light which God had given him.

Reasons why every soul ought to walk up according to its Light.
1. Because God judges every one according to his light, Romans 2.12. For as
many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law, and as many as
have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law, that is, those that are
without the moral Law written upon tables of stone, but have only the Law of
nature written upon their hearts (though the moral Law is nothing but what is
founded upon nature as appears in the 15. verse. For the Gentiles which have
not the Law, i. e. the moral Law do by nature the things contained in the Law)
if they sin against the Law written in their consciences, shall only be judged
according to that Law; and those that have the moral Law shall be judged
according to the moral Law; but those who have the light of the Gospel, shall
be judged according to the light of the Gospel, 16. v. In the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men's hearts according to my Gospel; And those that have
sinned against the light of conviction, and the strivings of the spirit shall
be judged according to that light, and according as our light is, so will be
our condemnation, Mat. 11.22.
It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment then
for us who live under the light of the Gospel, and the spirits convictions,
because our light is the greater. And for those who live under Gospel light, it
will be more tolerable for those at the day of judgment who have lived under a
powerful Ministry all their days, and have had more influences of the spirit
upon their hearts, and have had the spiritual Manna continually falling round
about their houses, as the inhabitants of the famous City of London have who
are blessed above all other Nations with spiritual blessings, then those who
are less watered with showers of Grace from heaven, if they shall let slip their
opportunities, and sleep out the day of visitation which is afforded them. The
Lord takes notice of every Sermon we hear, and of every prayer we have prayed,
of every time we have received the Sacrament, of every impression we have had
upon our spirits, of all those counsels, exhortations, admonitions, reproofs,
corrections, instructions we have had; of all that natural knowledge we had,
with the improvements of it, of all the prayers and beseechings others have
made, and put to God for us; of all those secret checks of conscience, of all
those various acts of providence in the course of our lives; mavelous
deliverances from dangers, from sicknesses, from imprisonments; in providing
for us when all other helps and means have failed; of all those resolutions we
have made of better obedience, upon some notable conviction upon our spirits;
of all our services performed unto him in private and in public; and of all
that conference and communion we have had with the Saints; of all that progress
we have toward heaven, and that if we had gone but a step or two further we
might have been happy; and according to the several gradations of our,
spiritual advantages upon the neglect of them, so shall our condemnation be.
God will judge us for every Sermon, wherein we have not met him in a Sermon,
for every prayer wherein we have not met him in a prayer, for every receiving
of the Sacrament wherein we have not met Christ in that Sacrament. We are then
said to meet God in a duty, when upon the right improvement of it, God comes
nigher to us in ways of further discoveries upon our hearts, or our hearts are
drawn nigher to God and to Jesus Christ in way of heavenly mindedness, and
sonlike obedience.

2. We ought to walk up to that light which we have, because God has to this
end given this light unto us, that our evil deeds being made manifest, we may
loath our selves for them, and avoid them for the time to come. Wicked men they
hate the light, Joh. 3.20.
because their deeds are evil; they know that it is the nature of light to make
manifest; and thereupon if they should come to the light, their consciences
would be awakened, and the peace of their besotted spirits lul'd asleep in
gross ignorance, carnal security, the pleasures of sin, and by the devil
would be disturbed. But the godly on the other side, they rejoice in the light,
in the light of the Word, in the light of the Spirit; and bless God for the
time that ever they were acquainted with the evil nature of their sins, and
with the experience of Gods infinite goodness unto them in Jesus Christ. A
righteous man fears not the terrors of the Law; 1 Timothy 1.9
for the Law was not made for him, but for the rebellious, disobedient,
murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers: And he rejoices in the glad
tidings of the Spirit: He desires to be taught by the Spirit, and daily to be
nurtured up in the School of Christ, till he shall come to the perfection of
the Saints in glory. He that does truth comes to the light, Joh. 3.21.
that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wronght in God.

3. Because if a man's spirit gives him in, that such a thing is a duty, though
it be nor, or such a thing is a sin, though in it self it be not a sin, yet
if he walk not up according to that verdict his conscience gives in of it,
unless the Word of God speaks directly against it, and it be directly opposite
to the analogy and proportion of faith, he sins in not so doing. Says the
Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; Romans 14.23.
that is, whatsoever we do doubtingly and ambiguously, being in distrust
whether the thing ought to be done or no, if we do it, we sin in so doing. We
should do nothing but what we verily believe ought to be done. In these two
cases we may follow the light of our own consciences.

1. In things indifferent, which are neither simply commanded, nor simply for
bidden.

2. In things which do not positively contradict the doctrine of faith and
piety, and the express Word of God; or a direct and an immediate consequence,
plain to the capacity of all understanding men void of any prejudice against
the truth, drawn from solid and evident places of Scripture pat to the purpose
we have in hand. But if any man shall pretend a Tenet, or a Custom, or a
Doctrine to be received, believed, performed and practiced, because his own
conscience gives him in it is so, or ought to be believed and practiced, though
he has an express command to the contrary in Gods Word, I say that this man's
heart is full of Atheism and unbelief, and grossly deluded by the devil, and
though his erroneous conscience gives him in, it must be so, yet he sins if
he does it, because it is directly contrary to the Word of God. Now if a man
sins, if he walks not up to the light of his conscience in some cases, though
it may be erroneous; then much more he walks not up to the light of the Word
and of the Spirit, these are infallible lights without the least error and
deceit. Lord God we beseech thee, that seeing our hearts are so apt to deceive
us, and to be deceived; the world to flatter us, and the devil to beguile us;
and because we live in unstable times, full of delusions, wherein the mystery
of iniquity begins to work, and Satan's agents are now transformed into Angels
of light, that our hearts might not be bewitched with these mere phantasmes,
and ghosts of piety, with these shadows in stead of substance, but give us that
spiritual eye salve, whereby we may discern the cunning sleights of men who
lie in wait to deceive; and that Christian prudence to foresee the evils that
are coming upon the earth. Psalm. 43.3. Send forth thy light and thy truth, we
beseech thee, thy light is a true light, and thy truth is light, that by thy
light we may see light, and by the teachings of thy Spirit upon our hearts, we
may be so established in the ways of God, that neither the Errors, Heresies,
and Blasphemies that are abroad in the world may taint us, nor that desolation
which is coming upon us for our sins, unless they be washed away with the
tears of repentance, and with amendment of life, may drive us from our hope and
confidence of God, but that patiently enduring the chastening of the Lord,
because we have sinned against him, by that witnessing act of thy Spirit,
evidently teaching us that we are thy children; in the midst of all these
heart-quaking times we may rejoice in the expectation of future happiness.

FINIS.

