Zimri's Peace: OR, THE TRAYTOR'S DOOM and DOWNFALL.

Being the substance of TWO SERMONS PREACHED AT APETHORP In the County of
NORTHAMPTON.

By JOHN RAMSEY Master of Arts, and Minister of East-Rudham in the County of
Norfolk.

Now the rest of the Acts of Zimri, and his Treason that he wrought, are they
not wrtten in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 1 Kings c. 16.
v. 20. Si totus orbis adversus me conjuraret, ut quippiam moliar adversus
Regiam Majestatem, ego tamen Deum timerem, and ordinatum ab eo Regem, offendere
temere non auderem. Bernard. Epist. 170. ad Ludovicum Franc. Regem. LONDON,
Printed for Charles Adams at the Talbot in Fleetstreet near St. Dunston's
Church. 1660.

C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

POTENTISSIMO SIMVL AC PIENTISSIMO PRINCIPI CAROLO Secundo, Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensori Integerrimo, and indefesso
Geminas hasce, easque Gemellas Conciones, multis abhinc annis public e
suggesto, Honoratissimi Comitis Westmorlandiensis, summeque Honorandi
Mecoenatis Horatii Townsendi Militis Baronetti, Auribus instillatas and
infusas. Nunc vero Typis excusas, oculis omnium obvias and expositas. Horrendae
Proditionis, et quam Sol unquam vidit, Conjurationis Sacerrimae; in hisce
Angliae Oris, non ita pridem (proh Dolor) long lateque grassantis, Indices
simul ac vindices. Ministerii sui qualis qualis, exile quidem and Levidense
Testimonium, Votivae tamen pacis Arram, and debitae Fidelitatis Tesseram:
Subditorum minimus, and Orator Humilimus D. D. C. Et una cum seipso
Commentationes and conciones istas ad sacrae Majestatis pedes devotissime
devolvit.

JOHANN: RAMSEYVS.

The Traitors Downfall.
2 KINGS Chap. 9. Verse 31. And as Jehu entered in at the Gate, she said, The
Text.
Had Zimri peace, who slew his Master?
THese words are part of a Story; The Introduction.
and History is a Relation of things past, done, or spoken; a rehearsal and
recital of the deeds and sayings of the Sons of Men. Such a Story we find here
in the Text, a commemoration of that Salutation and greeting, which was
interchanged betwixt Jezebel and Jehu; and of the nicking and nipping speech,
wherewith she entertains and welcoms him, as he comes riding in his triumphant
Chariot, with his pransing Coursers in the streets of Jezreel.

But seeing Hilar. de Trin. Lib. 4.
Intelligentia dictorum ex causis dicendi est monstranda, as Hilary speaks, And
one special means of opening and unfolding Scripture, is the observation of the
context, the connection and coherence of the foregoing and following passages:
It will not be labor in vain, or time misspent to recourse and look back to
the beginning of the Chapter.

And if we cast our eyes upon the first six verses, we shall there find one of
the Children of the Prophets, dispatched and sent by the Prophet Elisha, as the
Father of the Society and Master of the College, with a very important errand,
and weighty message touching the anointing Jehu King over Israel. And that,
first given in command and charge in the three former; and then accordingly
acted and executed in the three latter verses. And he arose and went into the
house, and he poured the Oil on his head, and said unto him, Thus says the
Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee King over the people of the Lord,
even over Israel, v. 6.

Nor was this anointing of Jehu a bare external rite, and empty Ceremony, or
Symb^lical only and significant; but energetical and operative after a sort, by
divine dispensation and benediction, accompanying his own Ordinance. God
pouring in the spiritual Oil of Sovereign excellencies and Regal Endowments and
Abilities into his Heart at the self same time that the material Oil was poured
upon his Head.

No sooner was Saul anointed by Samuel to be Captain over God: Inheritance,
but God gave him another heart, 1 Samuel c. 10. v. 9. Such a sudden change did
this unction work in Jehu, who was thereby strangely metamorphosed and
transformed into another man: furnished with the spirit of wisdom and strength,
the spirit of courage and resolution, all those Heroical parts and Arts which
might any way qualify and enable him to those high Designs and Achievements
wherein he was employed and engaged: The utter destruction and ruin of Ahab 's
Posterity Root and Branch, Head and Tail, Cum necaretur maximi filius
acclamatum est; ex pessimo genere, ne catulum quidem habendum. Jul capitolinus.
Et expessimo genere ne minimum catulum relinquendum, (as the Romans spoke of
the butchering of Maximinus and his Family) leaving not so much as one Whelp
alive of such an untoward and unlucky Litter.

This was God's Commission to Jehu, 2 Kings 9.7, 8. And thou shall smite the
House of Ahab thy Master, that I may avenge the blood of my Servants the
Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord, at the hand of
Jezebel. For the whole House of Ahab shall perish, and I will cut off from Ahab
him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel.
And having received his Commission, he does not demur and pause upon it, and
consult with flesh and blood: He does not the work of the Lord negligently, non
keep back his sword from blood, and so incur the penalty of a curse, Jer.
48.10. But he forthwith buckles and girds himself unto the work; he makes
post-haste and yet not more haste than good speed. Secrecy and celerity are the
two wheels of great actions. Jehu's Chariot was carried on with both these, and
marched faster to Jesreel than same could fly, whose wings he had clipped, by
stopping all intelligence, that so at once he might be seen and felt of his
enemies. He drives furiously, v. 20. Draws his Bow with his full strength,
smites Jehoram betwixt his Arms, the arrow com^s out at his heart, and be sinks
down in his Chariot. v. 24. commands Bidkar his Captain to take his dead corpse,
and cast it in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jesreelite, v. 25.
Pursues after Ahaziah King of Judah, who attempted an escape by flight, is
smitten at the going up to ^^ur, and dies of Megiddo, v. 27. And having removed
and made away a pair of wicked Princes, conjoined in their deaths, as they
consorted together in their Idolatry. Jezebel being startled and staggered at
the first report and rumor of so astonishing and amazing news, she painted her
face, and tired her head and looked out of a window, v. 30. And with a colored
and painted speech, bespeaks him in this manner, upon his incursion and in road
into Jesreel, in the words of the Text. And as Jehu entered in at the Gate she
said, Had Zimri peace which slew his Master?

The Text presents two Persons at one view, Jezebel the Queen Mother of Jehoram
the King deceased; And Jehu the surviving King, who reigned in his stead;
together with the speech of one to the other.

The parts of the Text are two: The Division of the Text.
1. The Speaker, Jezebel, in the Pronoun She. 2. The Matter of the Speech, Had
Zimri? etc.


The Speaker in the Text is Jezebel, 1. The Speaker Jezebel. (she)
in the Pronoun (She) Acursed Woman, as Jehu styles her, v. 34. cursed in her
death, Thrown out of a window by the Eunuch, trodden under foot by Jehu 's
horses, and her forlorn Carkas devour^d by Dogs, to a very small reversion of
her skull and ^e^t, and the palms of her hands, v. 33, 34. as if an head that
plotted and hands that practiced so much mischief, and see^ so swift to shed
^l^od, were not meat good enough for Dogs to eat. N^^^her was she more accursed
in her death th^n life. A notorious Id^la^^r, the Daughter of Ethbaal King of
the Zidonians, and a Zealous Worshipper and server of Baal, 1 Kings 16.31. A
cruel and bloody Persecutor, that slew the Prophets of the Lord, 1 Kings 18.13.
Threatened Elijah with the loss of his head, and made him flee for his life, 1
Kings 19.2, 3. And yet this Idolatrous and bloodthirsty Jezebel lets fall, and
drops down a sound and wholesome speech, touching the certainty and equity of
divine vengeance, which pursues Murderers and Usurpers (...), it traces them
hard at heels, and even hunts them to destruction. An Observation noted upon he
qualification of the Speaker. A wicked person may sometimes speak well.


Observe then from hence (...). Athenaeus Diphue sophist. lib. 5.
That a wicked person may sometimes speak well. I say, sometimes; but not
always: (...). Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 6.
for, One Swallow makes not a Summer; nor does one speech or action, though
never so holy and good, infallibly demonstrate, or clearly evidence the
unspotted innocence and unstained integrity of the Party.

The true and faithful Servants of God are habitually good, and yet actually
bad; as were Noah, David, Peter, and some others: they tread awry now and then,
and in some things do amiss. And it is most true of them, who though sound at
the Core, yet have some specks and spots of corruption; which is noted of the
Pomegranate Non est malum punicum, in quo non est aliquod gratum putre.
There is none so clear and sound, wherein there is not a rotten kernel. Wicked
men, on the other side, are sometimes actually good, and habitually bad.

And so was King Abimeleck in taking Sarah into his custody, and so far
justified and acquitted by God himself, Genesis 20.6. I know thou did this in
the integrity of thy heart. There may be the innocence of a particular speech,
or action, where the person is extremely vicious and abominable Aug. de
Baptismo contra Donatistai, lib. 6. c. 2. Quicquid verum a quocunque dicitur, a
Spiritu Sancto dicitur. Ambros. 1 Cor. c. 12. v. 3. Omne verum a veritate verum
est; est autem Deus veritas. Augustine. lib. 83. quaest. q. 1. Cur Deus famulum
suum cum quo ipse tanta and talia loquebatur ab alienigena passus est admoneri?
In hoc Scripturo nos admonet per quemlibet hominem detur consilium veritatis,
non debere contemni, Augustine, lib. Quaest. supra Exodum q. 68.
In arundine sterili solet uva pendere. We may happily, though rarely, meet
with a sweet and pleasant Grape upon a dry and withered stalk, (as Augustine
speaks of the Donatists.) For howsoever our Savior tells us, Mat. 12.35. A go^d
man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things; yet does
it not necessarily follow, that who so brings forth this good treasure of
works and words, should ipso facto, aut dicto, be forthwith a good man.

There was not any of the true Prophets that had clearer Visions and
Revelations of Christ, than the false Prophet Baalam, who is marked out by S.
Peter to have gone astray and loved the wages of Iniquity, 2 Pet. 2.15. Vbi
been, nemo melius; ubi male nemo pejus. An Angel of Heaven could scarce speak
better, nor the Devil himself do worse. Cunning Caiaphas spoke he knew not
what, like St. Peter in the Mount, and yet being High Priest foretold the
expediency of Christ's death, John 11.50, 51. wherennto himself was accessory
by consent and counsel, and so was a Prophet and Murderer both together. Sunt
in impiis quandoque Dona Dei, sine Deo. Wicked men may have the spirit of
Prophecy; and many shall say unto Christ at the latter day, Lord, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy Name? Mat. 7.22. They may have besides (I say not) the
spirit of prayer, which consists in the fervor and ardency of spirit, and is
an inseparable effect, and fruit of the Spirit of Adoption. Galat. c. 4. ver.
6. Yea, they may have a rare, and extroardinary gift of prayer so as to
express their own, and other men's desires to God, ex tempore, and a sudden
with volubility of tongue, fleetnes and fluency of language, variety and
quaintness of expressions, enlarged and lengthned devotions, to the admiration
of others, and sometime to the deceiving of their own souls.

There is a Spirit of prayer, which is the portion of Gods children; and the
gift of prayer a common, and a general gift, and no way concludes a sincere,
and sound Christian. Such graces as these, Gratiae gratis datae, non gratum
facientes, as Divines style them that are freely conferred upon us; not in
reference or order to our own salvation, but for the instruction and
edification of the Church; the common good, and benefit of others: These, These
(I say) are to be found in wicked and ungodly persons. The subject of the Text,
Jezebel, an Heathenish Idolater, and outrageous persecutor, lets fall a
pertinent and pithy speech. That is the second general part of the Text.

2. The matter of the speech.
The matter of the speech, Had Zimri, etc.

That may be considered two manner of ways.

1. First, in Thesi, simply and absolutely in it self. 2. Secondly, in
Hypothesi, in reference and relation unto Jehu, to whom it is here applied.
1. 1. In Thesi
Observe we in the first place, the matter of the speech in Thesi, and so it
affords us these three specialties.

1. Therein we have three specialties.
The Traitor, Zimry. 2. The Treason, slew his Master. 3. The success and issue
of his Treason, and that laid down by way of interrogation, Had he peace?
The first circumstance, that presents and offers it self in order, is the
Traitor Zimry, and may be looked upon in a threefold relation.

1. 1. The Traitor in a threefold relation.
As a Servant to his Master. 2. As a Subject to his Sovereign. 3. As a Captain
to his General.
First, 1. As a servant to his master.
as a servant to his master, For if Elah was the master, then Zimri must needs
be the servant.

So he is styled, 1 Kings c. 16. v. 9. His servant Zimri. Master and Servant
are Relatives, which necessarily, and mutually infer, and remove each other.
And for a Servant, (...). Arist. p^^it. lib. 1. c. 3.
who is a living instrument, the peculiar p^ss^ssi n of his Ma^ter, whose
office consists in a civil subordination, and dependence upon his will and
pleasure; For him, (For him I say to conspire against him, and lay violent
hands upon him, is a kind of Treason, that which the Law terms a petite or
p^t^y Treason.

Secondly, 2. As a Subject to ^^s Sovereign.
we may reflect upon Zimri in relation of a Subject to a Sovereign.

And for a Subject to turn Rebel, take up Arms against his Prince, dispose of
his Kingdoms, and to depose him from his Crown and Dignity: But above all, to
imbrue and wash his hands in the Royal blood of his sacred and ann^inted
person, This is, Alta Proditio, high Treason, the highest of all other; Who is
the head of all Authority and Power, and has Nec Caesar far p^iorem,
Pompeius ve parem. Lucan.
no superior, nor equal. This is the drawing forth of the sword against him who
first put it into their hands, the killing him with his own Sword, yea, the
murdering him with the Sword of Justice.

Thirdly, As a Captain to his General
We may take notice of Zimri in the notion of a Captain to his General,
Captain of half his Chariots. So we read of him, 1 Kings, c. 16. v. 9. One who
stood obliged unto him, not only by respective favors and benefits, but by
solemn and sacred Oaths. One who had fworn faith and fealty unto him, as the
Roman Soldiers did to their Emperors. Arrianus desert. in Epictet. lib. 1. c.
18 August. de Tempore, Sermon. 181.
(...), says Arrianus. And for a common Soldier, or inferior Officer to stab
and slay his General, is not only marder, but professed and downright perjury,
a perfidious violation of Oath and Covenant.

And that which caused him to break all these Bonds, A doctrinal Proposition
drawn from the consideration of the Traitor.
both Sacred, and civil, and to bring upon his own soul the inexpiable guilt of
so many heinous and enormous crimes, was an itching desire of Rule and
Lordship, yea, an ambitious and aspiring humor to sway the Scepter, wear the
Crown, and set down upon the Throne. An humor, That an aspiring desire after
Sovereignty serves as a Ladder for men to climb up to treason and murder the
highest staff of it.
or tu^^r that possesses the spirits, a plethorie of over hot blood that
runs in the veins of many, and so far inflames their activities.

That they who in other matters, wherein their private interest is not
concerned, are forward enough in the precise observation of the most exact
rules of equity and justice; yet will they make no scruple at all to baulk the
common Road and beaten track and turn aside out of the way if it be to catch at
a Crown. Su^t^n. in Jul. Caes. ex Eurip. p. 23.
(...). If at any time it be lawful to be unjust it must be for the gaining of
a Kingdom, as Caesar was wont to speak. Yea, so profusely prodigal have some
been of their lives, that they have been solicitous unto importunity, to
purchase a Crown for others with the loss of their own head. Tacit. Annal.
lib. 14. p. 312. Pro Regno velim Patriam penates conjugem, flammis dare.
Imperia pretio quolibet constant been. Sen. Trag.
Occidat, dum imperet, Let my son kill me, so he may King it, and be a
murderer, that he may prove a Monarch. It was the reply of Agrippina to the
answer of the Oracle that her Son Nero should reign, but with the death of his
Mother.

How many Plebeians have we among the vulgar, and common sort of people, mere
mushromes, Toadstools, Sons of the earth, and the growth but of one night, who
do secretly wish in their hearts with Absalom, 2 Samuel c. 15. v. 4. O that I
were made a Judge in the Land; the Supreme and Sovereign Judge, Who are not
more unworthy than incapable. And as for those that are the extraction of
Nobles, of a long continued descent and pedigree. They are but vile persons, if
compared with the Royal Line. And it was a majesticall speech of Queen
Elizabeth, every way like her self, and well beseeming the person that uttered
it; being earnestly, yet humbly moved by her Council to declare her Successor,
not long before her death, Thronus meusfuit Thronus Regum, nolo ut Vilis
succedat mihi Annal. Eliz. Camden.
My Throne has been the Throne of Kings, and I will not in any case that a
vile person should take my room.

For the falling of the blood extra vasa, out of the veins into the body is not
more dangerous in the natural; than the falling of Sovereign power and
Authority in the body politic into their hands who have none of the blood
Royal in their veins, and are no fit vessels for the receiving of it.

This rising and climbing spirit of Ambition is a sin of an high nature, A
fruit of the flesh. and must be mortified. And as the Apostle speaks of worldly
wealthy men, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into many temptations. He
says not they that are rich, but they that are fully resolved and bent upon
it, ultimata voluntate, Vnde habeas quaeral nemo, sed oportet habere. Juvenal.
Satyr. 14.
they that will be. The like may be affirmed of them, Neque id quibus modis
assequeretur, dum sibi regnum pararet, quidquam pensi habebat. Salust. of
Catiline. Bell. Catilin. p. 9.
who will be great and mighty, high and honorable, come what will come, Etiam non
annuente Deo, (as the Great Turk most blasphemously threatened overthrow to
Sigismond late King of Poland) either with, or rather than fail, without God.
These are the men that fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish
and hurtful lusts, that drown men in destruction and perdition. O that men were
as holy and heavenly ambitious of that Kingdom which cannot be shaken, a Crown
of glory, a Crown of life, as they are of the Crowns and Kingdoms here on
earth. O that men in a serious muse of thoughts would look paledeath in the
face Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede, Pauperum Tabernas, Regumque Turres. Horat.
Carm. lib. 1. Od. 4.
which with the same foot knocks at the towering Palaces of Kings and Princes,
and the clay houses of the poorest peasants, and meanest Cottages. Oh that men
would thoroughly meditate upon that frightfull speech of our Savior, Mat. 16.26.
For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul?
Or what shall be give in exchange for his Soul? Oh that men would sadly apply
and lay to heart St. Bernard's advice and counsel to the Queen of Jerusalem,
Qui prodest paucis diebus regnaresuper terram, and regno coelorum aeterno
privari? Bernard. in Senten.
What does it avail or benefit to reign for a few days on the face of the
earth, and from thence to be thrown into hell, to be cast into utter darkness,
where there is nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

The second Circumstance noted in the matter of the speech is the Treason it
self He slew his Master. The Treason. Now the rest of the Acts of Zimri, and
the treason that he wrought. 1 Kings 16 30
That was King Elah who walked in the sins of Jeroboam, as his father Baasha
bad done before. 1 Kings 16.13. One who drank himself drunk in the house of
Azra his Stward. and was slain in his drunkenness. v. 9, 10. And yet though a
gross Idolater, and a voluptuous Prince, he was his lawful King and Sovereign.
For Dominion and Rule is not founded in any personal qualifications; the
piety, probitie, grace and goodness of the party, but in a rightful claim and
title, and in Divine Power and Providence the only dispenser and disposer of
it. Inde est Imperator, unde et homo antequam Impetor. Inde potestas illi, unde
and Spiritus. Tertul. Apol. Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and
Reges constituuntur. Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 24.
By me Kings reign, by me Princes rule, Pro. 8.15, 16. So Wisdom speaks in the
person of Christ, the eternal wisdom of God the Father. Our blessed Savior
strictly urged the payment of Caesar's Tribute money. Render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. And paid it in his own person when he was
necessitated to borrow it and take it up as it were at interest, at the mouth
of a fish. Mat. 17.27. Christus it a jussit, ita gessit. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. Romans 13.1. Submit your selves to the King, as
Supreme. 1 Pet. 2.13. And yet these Caesar's, Higher Powers, and Kings, spoken
of by Christ and his Apostles, St. Paul and St. Peter, were no other than cruel
Persecutors, bloody Tyrants, and Heathen Emperors. Those Ravening wolves that
woried the sheep of Christ, and the nursing fathers of the Church, both these
are from God. Qui dedit Regnum, Constantino Christiano, dedit etiam Juliano
Apostatae. Augustine.
That God who set the Crown upon the head of Constantine a Christian, conferred
the same Empire upon Julian the Apostate, says St. Augustine. As Augustine
Christened his base child with the name of Adeodatus, who though he was begotten
in fornication, yet does he acknowledge and own him as the gift of God: So may
it be said of Paynim and Pagan Princes, who in respect of spiritual
regeneration, and new birth, are Bastards and no sons, yet are they a Deo dati,
and could have no power at all, (as Christ told Pilate) John 19.11. except it
were given them from above.

There are two particulars that exaggerate and aggravate Zimri's Treason. A
double aggravation.


The first is the excellency of the person against whom it was committed. The
excelency of the person.
King Elah, One whom God honored with his own name. I have said ye are Gods.
Psalm. 82.6. Gods by representation. Gods by deputation, mortal Gods, his
Vicegerents and Lievtenants upon earth. Colimus Imperatorem, ut hominem a
Deosecundum, and solo Deo minorem. Tertul. ad Scapul.
Solo Deo minor, dum omnibus major, says Tertullian. King Elah was greater
than all, and only less than God himself. That had Supremacy and Sovereignty
of power over others, and none over him. For to immagine and fancy a Suporior
to the Supreme, somewhat before the first and above the Head, is not only a
contradiction in state, but in common reason. And though there be higher than
the highest. Eccles. 5.8. Yet this is not man, but God.

A second aggravation of Zimri's Treason, A second aggravation. The quality or
kind of the Treason.
is the quality and kind of it. It was not a bare Nam scelus intra se tacitum,
qui cogitat ullum, Facti crimen habet, Cedo si conataperegit. Juv. Satyr. 13.
thinking evil in his mind, and that is a foul fault in Solomon's Divinity.
Curse not the King, no, not in thy thought, Eccles. 10.20.

Nor was it only a speaking evil of Dignities, which is severely interdicted
by God himself, Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the
Ruler of thy people. But it was the doing of evil, the worst of evils, (...).
Hom. Od. (...). E^stath. in loc.
the shedding of his precious blood. How tender was David of Readiness life, his
professed and open enemy, who even thirsted after his destruction? How did his
heart smite him for the cutting off Saul's skirt? 1 Samuel 24.5. And when Abishai
his General entreated and begged his leave to smite him dead with his spear,
he repulseth the suggestion of so horrid disloyalty, not without indignation
and detestation of the fact. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: For
who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be guiltless?
1 Samuel 26.9. Optatus contra Parmen. lib. 2.
Repressit cum gladio manum, et dum timuit oleum, servavit inimicum; says
Optatus. David withdrew his hand, and sword at once, and whilst he dreaded the
oil of Sovereignty, he saved the life of his deadly enemy.

The Primitive Christians were true and loyal subjects to their Liege Lords
and Emperors, those who destinated them as sheep to the slaughter, and shed
their blood like water. in so much that Tertullian, a learned Advocate of
theirs, proclaims their innocence and patience to the whole world, and
challenges even to the defiance the rabble of Heathen, to disprove it if they
could. Nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, vel Cassiani inveniri potuere
Christiani. Christianus nullius est Hostis, ne dum Imperatoris. Tertul. ad
Scapul. c. 2.
A Christian is no man's foe, much less his Princes and Sovereign's. Christians
could never be detected for Albinus, and Cassius, and Niger's crimes. They were
never known, nor proved murderers. They were no Zimries that slew their master.

From which treasonable fact of his we may infer five Doctrinall Corolaries
and Conclusions. Five Corolaries.


First, The first Corolary. To abominate the bloody tenet of the Papists.
learn we to abominate the desperate Doctrine, and bloody Tenet of the Papists,
who break one of God's Commandments, not the least, but the greatest, and teach
men so, Mat. 5.19. And so fall under the guilt of the most fearful sin and
punishment. These are not only murderers in fact, but in plea, the Authors,
Fautors, Patrons, Proctors of it. Who stiffly defend and maintain it as
necessary, lawful, meritorious of a plenary pardon of sin, and which is more
than so, of the highest degree of happiness. Non licet Regem tolerare
Haereticum. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romans pontif. c. 7. Praecipimus singulis
subditis, ne Elizabethae obedire audeant. Bulla Pii quinti adversus Elizab.
It is not lawful to tolerate a King that is an Heretic. They are the words
of Cardinal Bellarmin that great Champion of Rome, We will and command that
from henceforth none of Queen Elizabeth's Subjects shall presume to obey her It
is the tenor of the Bull of Pope Pius the fifth against Queen Elizabeth. And
that blasphemous Letter of Cardinal Como to Parrie, that welsh Assassinate, is
never to be forgotten. Who after a tedious conflict of doubtful thoughts,
being at last resolutely determined, to dispatch the Queen, he impiously
acknowledges and owns it, as an heroical motion kindled in his heart by the
holy Spirit, wishes him not in any case to quench the holy fire within his
breast, and assures him of Heaven for the recompense of reward. What is this,
but to make God the Author of sin? Wherewith they most impudently calumniate
the Doctrine of the Protestants.

Surely the Heathen shall rise in judgment against the men of this generation,
and shall condemn it. Well fare honest Papinian, who was a better Christian
than they, who being charged upon his Allgiance to undertake the Apology of
the Emperor Caracalla, in the case of fratricide, the butchering of his brother
Geta, could by no means nor menaces be persuaded to it. But put it off with
this return, Idioque vir immortali gloria dignus securi percussus est, quod
Cauram injustam defendere noluisset. Ael. Spartian in vit. Caracal.
Non tam facile esse parricidium excusare, quam patrare, That it was not so
easy a matter to excuse parricide, as to committ it.

The Traitor Zimri in the text slew King Elah, that was all, he did not argue,
nor plead for it, no way justify and maintain it, much less boast and glory
of it. But as for our Romish Zimries, the Jesuits, they are as much before him
in that diabolical art and Doctrine of King-killing, as they come after him in
time. Yea, they are a note above Elah, who fell by the Sword of Zimri. And as
the Apostle speaks of the abominable wickedness of the Gentiles, Romans 1.32.
(...) (...). Gr. Schol.
(...). They do not only do the same, but have pleasure, or applaud those that
do them.

A second Corollary or Cocnlusion deducible from Zimri's fact may be this. The
second Corolary. Wicked men have a just title to earthly blessings.
That wicked and ungodly men ( such as Elah was) have a just right and title to
these outward blessings. I say not barely, that they have a spiritual right in
the Court of Conscience, and in the sight of God, who out of that (...), the
general and common love which he bares to men as his creatures, Makes his Sun
to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the
unjust. Mat. 5.45. God collates and confers them as a free gift of his mere
bounty and goodness, and what is so bestowed is usually accounted and reckoned
as our own. For if Dominion be founded not in grace, but in Divine providence,
And there is no Power but of God, Romans 13.1. Then wicked Rulers must needs have
a good right to that power and Authority wherewith God in his general
providence does instake and invest them.

But I shall only touch, and not handle that thornie question touching their
spiritual title. And yet doubtless, they have a civil right in the Courts of
Justice among men founded in Inheritance, Purchase, or Conquest, and that
confirmed by praescription of a long continued possession and enjoyment; and
cannot be disseised, nor deprived of it, without a violent violation of order
and government in lawfully established Polities and Commonwealths. And so King
Elah, though an usurping Tyrant, if not in his first entrance into the
Kingdom, which descended upon him as the next Heir, but in the after
administration and exercise of his power: yet he might have a rightful claim
and title, This may serveto reconcile the seeming repugnancy of those Texts of
Scripture, I gave them a King in mine anger, Hos. 13.11. which is meant of Gods
providential will They have set up Kings, but not by me, Hos. 8.4. which is
spoken of his will of approbation.
Reigning by Gods permissive and providentiall dispensation, at the least,
though not the will of his approbation and good pleasure. Otherwise it had been
no robbery, nor Treason in Zimri, to dispoil and dethrone him, to shoulder and
justle him, not only out of Empire, but life.

A third Conclusion that may be collected from Zimri's fact is this. The third
Corolary. Outward success is no good evidence and assurance of a just plea and
title.
That outward prosperity and success is no sure and sound argument of a just
and equitable cause; I say, no sure and sound, yet a very plausible and
prevailing argument, that wins and gains much upon the the vulgar sort,
giddy and shallow people, who wanting the depth of judgment to search into the
causes, and dive to the bottom; forthwith conclude, in a precipitate and
headlong manner, That to be lawful, which is lucky, and holy, what from
experimented success they find to be happy. And now we call the proud happy,
Yea, they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are even
delivered. Mal. c 3. v. 15. Prosperum ac foeliae scelus virtusvocatur. Seneca
Herc. fur. Honesta quaedam Scelera, successus sacit. Sen. Hippoi.
Happy villainy is clothed in Scarlet, and Christened with the name of virtue.
And hence it was that the Sicilian Tyrant, and arch Church Robber, Dionisius,
having pillaged the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, and forth with sailing into
his Country with a prosperous gale of wind; he laughed in his sleeve, and let
fall that dry frump and jeer, See how the Gods love Sacrilege.

Wene success a concluding argument, it might very well be pleaded by Cutters
and High way men. The Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke God
are secure, into whose hand God brings abundantly. Job. c. 12. v. 6. An
argument that might be produced, by those of Zimri's gang, Rebels and Traitors;
whereof holy Jeremiah complains very pathetically, Jer. c. 12. v. 1. Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are they all happy that deal very
treacherously?

And if we inquire and search after the cause, why the course of this world is
carried on in a tumultuary huddle, and in a confused and disordered manner.
Perhaps, this is in the number of those misterious Counsels and purposes of
God's will, that are written and sealed up in that clasped book of life, and
shall not be opened till the latter day, Vbi quicquid nos nunc latet,
manifestum erit. says St. Austin. When the reason shall be apert, and evident,
Why this man is Elect, another Reprobate? Why one dies as an Embryo in the womb
and tomb of his mother, another in his infancy, a third in his youth, and a
fourth in his old age? Why the son of the Adultresse is babtized, and the child
of the chaste, and loyal spouse departs this life without baptism? Why one man
lives poor and needy, another rich and wealthy? Multi committunt eadem, diverso
crimina fato. Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit hic Diadema. Juv. Satyr. 13.
Why one man is advanced to the Throne, another cast down to the Dungeon and
dunghill? Why Zimri in the text slew his Master and reigned in his stead?

A fourth Corolary that may be drawn from hence, A fourth Corolary. God sweetly
abuses man's sins to his own righteous end ((...).) Greg. Nyssen.
this. That God often times most sweetly abuses the wickedness of wicked men to
his own most holy will and purposes. This work of Divine providence, Gregory
Nyssen fitly terms, (...), the abuse of evil. For what is abuti, to abuse a
thing, but to use it contrary to the nature and condition of it? Which if it be
good, such an use is an abusive use. If evil, such an use thereof is an useful
and commendable abuse. As when a Grammarian makes a rule of Anomala's. A
Rhetoritian a figure of a solaecism. A Logitian a true use of fallacies. A
Musician an harmony of discord, and a Physician an wholesome treacle confected
of deadly poison. Thus does God abuse the sins of men to the manifestation of
his own glory, of his wisdom and justice, both in one. Like unto an expert and
cunning workman that frames a very artificial, and curious piece out of knotty
and cross grained materials, and that with dull and blunt tools. Or like unto
a prudent, or able General, that contrives an Engine of a desperate Stratagem
to the utter ruin and overthrow of an Enemy that was the first inventor and
devisor of it.

It is very observable concerning Jeroboam's sin, how God punished it from time
to time, both in the first Authors and Fautors and Abettors of it, who as he
made Israel to sin, so he made all his posterity and succession to suffer and
smart for it. For Nadab the son of Jeroboam walked in the way of his Father,
and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. And Baasha conspired against
him, smote all the house of Jeroboam, and left him not any that breathed. 1
Kings 15.27, 29. Baasha and Elah did the like, and trod in the footsteps of
Jeroboam's and Nadab's sin. And Zimri here in the Text slew all the house of
Baasha, and left him none of his Kinsfolks, nor of his friends. 5. A fifth
Corolary. Politic wickedness and state sins seldom go long unpunished.
1 Kings 16.10, 11.

The fifth and last Corolarie that may be inferred from Zimri's Treason is this.
That politic wickedness, state sins, mysteries of iniquity, (for there are
such mysteries, not only in doctrine, but practice, and in the state, as well
as in the Church) very rarely go Raro ante. cedentem scelesinm, deseruit pede
paena claudo. Horat. lib. 3. carm. Od 2.
unpunished. Jeroboam was no sooner set down upon his Throne, and scarce warm,
in his new gotten Kingdom, who distrusting the validity of his Tenor, and
Title, and fearing the defection, and falling away, of the Ten Tribes, by their
going up to Jerusalem, to worship, year, by year, who in all probability, would
fetch their King, where they had their God. But He devises this politic
Engine, this mysterious piece of Idolatry, by setting up two Golden Calves, the
one in Bethel, the other in Dan. And that under a specious, and plausible
pratence, of the peoples Ease; saving them the roilsome labor, of a tedious
journey. It is too much for you, to go up to Jerusalem. Behold thy Gods O
Israel, which brought thee up, out of the Land of Egypt. That was Jeroboams
insinuating, and inveigling complement, with the people. 1 Kings c. 12. v. 27,
28, 29. But what was the success, and issue of it? How did it speed, and
thrive with him?

Were not these Golden Calves of Jeroboam, which he made use of, as props and
butteresses, to support, and uphold his Kingdom, a ready means to ruinate and
pull it down? The Spirit of God, assures the truth of it, in express terms.
And this thing became Sin, to Jeroboam, and his house, even to Dies, hora,
mementum, sufficit evertendis dominationibus, quae adamantinis radicibus
videbantur esse fundata. Isaac Causab. Epist.
cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.

Pass we from Jeroboam, to King Jehu, who was passionately zealous, for the
Lord of hosts, destroyed Baal out of Israel, and did unto the house of Ahab,
according to all that was in Gods Heart. 2 Kings c. 10.28, 30. And yet
nevertheless, he is marked, with a black coal, and branded to all posterity;
verse the 29. Howbeit, from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin, Jehu departed not, from after them, to wit the Golden Calves,
that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan. For the Lions of Gold supported the
Throne of Solomon, but the Calves of Gold, the throne of Jeroboam, and his
Successors. This was a State sin, in Jehu intentionally and purposely
committed, to amortise and rivett him the surer in his Kingdom, not
considering, or believing, in the mean time, That God who built his throne
without hands, could uphold it, without any such studs or shores, or being any
way beholding, to Idolatry. And Jehu, who would needs piece out Gods
providence; with his carnal policy, was like a foolish Gamester (as is well
observed by one) The Holy Stat. p. 392.
who having all the game in his own hand, steals a needless card, to assure
himself of winning the stake, and so out of greediness loses all. And albeit
God for his zealous resolution, and impartiality of execution, intailed the
Crown unto his sons and Grandchildren, unto the fourth Generation; Yet these
Golden calves of Jeroboams direction, were as the suing out of a fine, and
recovery, which did quite void it, and cut it off,

The toleration of diverse and different religions, in the same State, and
Kingdom is a politic kind of Idolatry, and may not unfitly be paralelled, with
those Golden Calves, A Golden Sin, or at least, of a double guilt. With fair
and spetious pretenses, very plansible and pleasing to all sides, and
interests, every way powerful, to disseminate, and disperse it self, to gain
strength, and to make a faction and a party, in the variety of professions. And
yet nevertheless, this Ideo mala omnia rebus humanis quotidie ingraevescere,
quia Deus hujus mundi effector and Gubernator, derelictus est Quid susceptae
sunt, contra quam fas est, impiae religiones. Lactan. Institut. l. 5. c. 8.
Toleration of religions, is in Gods account, and estimate, a sin intolerable.
And being a just, and jealous God, of any Rival, Competetour, or Co-partner,
who will not give his glory to another, it will not, it shall not, pass
vengeance proof, nor escape unpunished.

The third specialty, III. The Third circumstance of the Tert The success, and
issue of Zimri's Treason.
considerable, in Zimri's treason, pointed out in the speech of Jezebel, is the
success, and issue of it, and that laid down, by way of interrogation, Had he
peace? which has the force and strength of a pure negation, a positive and
peremptory denial, wherein there is a kind of amplification, and heightning of
the speech, and there is more intimated and employed, then mentioned in formal
words, and it is all one, in effect, as if Jezebel had expressed her self, in
proper and emphatical terms, Zimri had no peace at all, he was far from
enjoying it Nemo unquam imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis a^^bus exercrit.
Tacit. Histor. l. 1. p. 417.
His feet were swift to shed blood: Destruction and misery were in his ways:
And the way of peace had he not known. Romans 3.6. v. 15, 16, 17. This was the
success of Zimri's treason and hints, and and holds forth unto us, a fourfold
punishment. A fourfold punishment of treason.


The first punishment, of treason, is the horror, and terror, of an unquiet,
and restless conscience. A want of that inward, and spiritual peace, the bird
in the breast, The first punishment. The horror of an unquiet and restless
conscience.
that sings so sweetly, the Garden of Eden, a spiritual Paradise, and an Heaven
here upon Earth. An inward peace, which is as much to be preferred, before the
outward, as that, above all external, and temporal mercies. Nor is it a want of
peace only, but is likewise accompanied, with astonishment and amazement of
mind, anxiety and anguish of heart, confusion of thoughts, jealous
apprehensions, ghastly fears, the raging and roaring of a perplexed Spirit.
Like unto so many racks, and strappado's, that distend each joint, and rend and
tare one limb from the other.

There is no peace, says my God to the wicked. Isa. c. 57, v, 21. No
tranquillity and calmness of mind. No serenity and smoothness of Spirit. And if
there be any at all, Ipsa tranquillitas tempestas est. The very calm, is a
weather-gall, and the breeder of a storm. These fears and terrors are
multiplied and increased, according to the several kinds and degrees of men's
wickedness and are most extreme and intolerable, in notorious and flagitious
sinners, as Traitors and Tyrants; Si recl^dantur Tyrannorum mentes posse aspici
laniatus and ictus, quando ut corpora verberibus ita saevitia, libi line
malisconsultis animus dil^ceretur Tant. Annal. l. 6. p. 190. ^uos di^i conscia
facti men's kabe^ a^tonitos, and surdo verbere caedit. Ocul. um quatiente animo
tortore fl^gellum. Juv-Satyr. 13.
whose bowels, if they were ripped up and laid open, there are nothing to be
discerned, but blows and butcherings, (as the Historian speaks of them) who are
lashed and scourged with deaf strokes, haunted with Fiends and Furies, and
hunted as with greedy and yelling blood hounds to their own destruction. Evil
shall hunt the violent Man to overthrow him. Ps. 140. v. 11. An eminent example
whereof we have in Theodoricus, King of the Goths, Who having barbarously
butchered Symmachus and Bo^taus the splendour, and glory of the Roman Senate, in
a most immane and inhumane manner; such was the strength of his imagination, or
rather, the force of his guilty conscience, that he conceived and fancied the
head of a very great fish, that was served up to his table at supper, Pros^pius
in Gothecis.
some few days after, to be the head of Symmachus, whom we had so lately made
away, gaping upon him with a wide mouth, the teeth hanging over in the nether
jaw, the eyes wildly staring in a grim and stern manner, and threatening him
with dier ^ull and dreadful vengeance. And being affrighted with the
strangness of the monster, shaking and quaking in all his joints, he betakes
himself into his inward chamber, throws himself down upon his Namque animus
impurus neque vigiliis, neque quietibus sedari poterat, ita conscientia, mentem
excitam vexabat. Salust of Catiline Bell. Catil. p. 22.
bed, commands a great pile of clothes to be heaped upon him. And having
confessed and bewailed to Elpidius, his Physician, the horridness of the fact,
which did so much remorse and afflict him, The second punishment of treason.
Unsetledness, and distraction of Government.
he soon ended his miserable and wretched life.

A second punishment of treason is Quibus quieta movere magna merces videbatur.
ll. cat. p. 30.
unsetledness and distraction of Government. Sudden and boisterous changes,
like violent Earthquakes in nature, causing strange shakings and tremblings, a
good while after; and it is long er'e it setleth upon the old basis, and stands
firm and sure as before. Such shakings and tremblings, we may observe in men's
Spirits, upon the tumultuary ejection of lawful Sovereignty, and the forcible
entry of Tyrants and Usurpers, repining and murmuring at the present power,
Othoni compositis rebus, nulla spes, omne in turbido consilium. Tacit. Histor.
lib. 1. p. 412.
to the height of impatience and discontent, and greedily longing after that
which is past, bringing it back again in their affectionate wishes, with an
Antigonum refodio, and if it were possible, they would dig up King Antigonus
out of his grave, and see him once more upon his Royal Throne. These are but
the beginnings of sorrows, intestine quarrels, and garboiles, are set on foot,
open wars are commenced, one pitched battle fought after another, and much
blood shed on both sides, as it was in the civil wars of England, betwixt the
two houses of York and Lancaster, the white and the red roses. Till that red
rose became white, with the blood which it lost, and the white was died red,
with the blood which it shed.

Aut bellum, aut bello pax ea deterior. Such a confused temper of government,
as was sometimes in the Kingdom of Israel, 2 Chronicles. c. 15. A third punishment.
The brevitie and shortness of their reign.
And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that
came in, but great vexations, were upon all the inhabitants of the Countries.
And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City. For God did vex them with
all adversity.

A third punishment of treason and Traitors, is the brevity, and shortness of
their reign. And hereof we cannot have a more pregnant proof then Zimri, in the
text, who reigned, They have only a taste of empire with Galba, and tu Galba
quandoque degustabis imperium seram, ac brevem potentiam significans. Tyberius
of Galba. Tacit. annal. l. 6. p. 198.
Seven days in Tersah, 1 Kings c. 16. v. 15. And what are seven days rule on
Earth to the servitude, and slavery of the torments in hell, to all eternity?
This is that just doom, wherewith God repayes, such as Zimri was. Ps. 55. v.
23. Bloody, and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. And herein,
God deals with them, by way of retaliation, who make their way to a Kingdom, by
the blood of others, and soon after are made away by the loss of their own; so
true, is that grave observation of a sage Historian of our own. Sir Walter
Raleigh of Edward the Fourth. Praeface. p. 8.
Those Kings, who have sold the blood of others at a low rate, have but made
the market for their Enemies, to buy of theirs, at the same price, and hereof,
the heathen poet was not ignorant.

Ad generum Cereris, sine caede, and vulnere, pauci
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Tyrants are seldom long lived, and it is rare for them, The fourth punishment.
A miserable and a cursed death.
to dye a natural and dry death.

The fourth and last punishment of Traitors, is a miserable and cursed death.
This, is every way as remarkable, as any of the former. And it came to pass,
when Zimri saw the City was taken, that he went into the palace of the Kings
house, and burnt the Kings house over him, and died. 1 Kings c. 16. v. 18. He
who formerly had kindled a fire in the Kingdom, by shedding of the Kings blood,
now indles a fire in the Kings house Incendium meum ruina extinquam. was the
speech of Catilire Bell. Catil. Salust. p. 43. (...) Nero apud Suet. p. 354.
Et incendium ruina extinguit, ( as Canaline sometime spoke) he quenches the
flame, with ruin, the loss of his own life. Wicked men often times come to
unnatural and untimely ends, yet none more strange and formidable, then Rebels
and Usurpers. They do not dye, the common death of all men, but go down alive.
into the pit with Corah and his accomplices. Numb. c. 16. v. 29. Sicut nec digni
vivere, ita nec mori iis concessum ante sepulti, quam mortui. Optat. l. b. 1.
who, as they were most unworthy of life, so they had not the favor and
privilege to dye, they were buried before dead, ( says Optatus) and had hell
for their grave.

A notable example whereof we have in the Tyrant Maximus, who having rebelled
against, and murdered Gratian his Liege Lord in France, and proclaimed himself
Empe-, rour in his room, he quickly lost that dignity with his life, in that
famous battle, fought by Theodosius the great, and him near Aquileia,
concerning whom Ambrose lets fall this observation, Maximus oceisus est nunc in
inferno decens exemplo miserabili, quam durum sit arma suis principibus
errogare. Ambros. in ora^. funes. de eait. Theod^s.
Maximus is slain, and being now in hell, he teaches us, by his no less
miserable, then memorable example, how dangerous it is for subjects to take up
arms against their lawful and awful Sovereign.

Secondly, the matter of Jezebells speech, may be considered in Hypothesi, in
reference to Jehu, to whom it is here applied, as if it were another parallel,
of the same kind and kindred, with that of Zimri, who are here resembled, and
compared together. This is the main scope, and aim of Jezebels speech, Jehu in
the guilt of Zimri's sin. The matter of Jezebels speech in hypothesi.
And so Junius glosseth upon the words in his annotations, Junius. in Loc.
O alter Zimri, and yet (as she conceives) the same. But betwixt Jehu and
Zimri, there is a broad and wide difference, both in the matter of fact, and
manner of doing, as will easily appear, upon survey of the story. 2 K. c. 9. v.
6, 7. For God anointed Jehu King over Israel, appointed him to smite the house
of Ahab, empowered him with a commission, for the doing of it. And it is the
Commission granted by the Prince to his Ambassador, that does authorize and
enable him to negotiate with a foreign State, and qualify and legitimate his
transactions, which being undertaken of his own head and private motion, were
altogether unlawful and unwarrantable. God commanded the people of Israel, to
borrow jewels of Gold and silver, and to spoil the Egyptians, and it was this
particular and extraordinary command that did relaxate, and loose the bond of
the ordinary and common law, and so acquit them of theft and robbery. Had not
God strictly enjoined Abraham to take his son, his only son Isaac whom he
loved, and to offer him upon an altar, who was after a sort unnatural, that he
might approve himself religious, it had been a barbarous and a bloody
sacrifice, Si defenditur non esse peccatum privatum habuisse consilium
indubitanter credendus. Bernardus de praecept. and dispensat.
had not God anointed, and commissionated Jehu to lay violent hands upon
Jehoram, dispensed with the general and standing rule, had he not suspended and
stayed the obligatory power of the law in respect of those determinating
circumstances of hic and nunc, time and person: it had been an abommable, and
every way a most detestable murder. The case of Jehu was extraordinary and
singular by it self, and God granted him a peculiar privilege under the
privyseal of a special command never afforded Zimri or any other.

For though many of the Kings of Israel and Judah came to untimely ends, and
fell by the hands of Soldiers, and servants, yet did Deus nusquam legitur,
caedem Regum Israelis and Judae approbasse, in^o de Homicidis suppl^^ium
sumebatur. Pet. Mart. loc com clas. 4. cap. 20.
God never allow, or approve, command or commend the fact, but inflicted
condign, and deserved punishment, upon the heads of the Authors. What though
Ehud killed Eglon? Judges c. 3. v. 21. Yet was this done, ly an extraordinary
impression and impulsion of Spirit, and that by him, who was the ordinary ruler
and Magistrate that then judged the people of Israel, Against Eglon, a public
and professed enemy, betwixt whom there was open war. And as he might have been
lawfully slain in a pitched field and battle, so might he be as justly made
away, by a politic and cunning strategem. And as for the fact of Jehojada, who
commanded the death of Queen Athalia, 2 Kin. c. 11. v. 15, 16. that had
poss^ssed her self of the Kingdom, by destroying all the seed Royal, and
reigned as a Tyrant, and an Usurper. v. 1.3. This may be said, by way of
Apology, and in defense of the fact, and in answer to the exceptions that are
brought against it. That Jehojada being the high priest, was not a private but
a public, not a mere ecclesiastic, but a civil person. And both the law of
God, and of the Land interdicted a stranger, and prohibted a woman to sit upon
the Throne. And that which may be added to the former, he was linked in
affinity with the royal issue, being uncle to the Young King Joash, by the
marriage of Jehoshebeth the sister of Ahasiah, 2 Chr. c. 22. v. 11. And so
bound by virtue of his relation, and alliance, to vindicate and maintain his
rights, and to protect him in his minority. Nor was it the single act, of
Jehujada alone, but done by the joint consent of Peers, and Princes and
adjudged by them the just punishment of Athaliahs Treason, who being the
traitor her self, yet cried out treason, treason, 2 Chr. 23.13. And the only
means to securethe Kings life and person. Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 4. cap. 20.
Vnum tantum Jehu contra dominum suum armavit, A Doctrinal conclusion. Peculiar
examples are not to be turned into general and common rules Privilegia
paucorum, non faciunt communem legen.
quod ut peculiare fuit, ita in exemplum non est trahendum (as Peter Martyr
well observes,) It was Iehu, none but Iehu, that God armed with authority
against his Lord, and master, And as it was a peculiar fact, so must it not be
drawn forth into example. From whence we may observe this doctrinal conclusion.
That the peculiar examples of extraordinary persons and actions, are not to be
turned into General and Common rules, nor do they serve as patterns, and
presidents for our imitation. For many things were done by them in case of
absolute and unavoidable necessity, As David's eating of the Shewbread, not
lawful for any but the priest, Or by special leave and license, which must not
be extended and stretched beyond the present time, and particular occasion. And
for us to do the like, and to shroud and shelter our selves under the covert of
their authority Non proveris imitatoribus patrum sed pro Simiis eorum
habebimur. Pet. Murt. Loc. Com.
we shall rather render our selves their Apes, (to borrow the words of Peter
Martyr) by an affected and counterfeit resemblance then true followers of their
examples: Ehud killed Eglon, what then? Therefore a popish Shaveling may kill a
King? That is the inference of the Papists. Miriam, Deborah, Huldah, and many
other devout women of former times, were inspired with the Spirit of prophecy.
The Prophet Amos was a heardsman. The Apostles of Christ simple and unlettered
fishermen: and yet chosen as select messengers to publish the glad tidings of
the Gospel, and to preach the word unto the people. And why may not private Lay
men, Handycraft Laborers, ordinary Mechanics and Tradesmen, who have neither
competencie of inward gifts and abilities (though passing under the name of
gifted men) nor yet the honor to be outwardly called as Aaron was, why may not
these (say some) prove able Ministers of the new Testament? And teach publicly
in the congregation, for instruction and edification of others? Who sees not
how inconsistent and incoherent how irrational and concluding, such
consequences are? And that there is no Strength, nor Sinews in them? And why
may we not discourse and reason, in the like manner? God some times opened the
mouth of a silly Ass, and spoke by the mouth of a dull Beast, and by him,
rebuked the madness of the prophet. Sampson killed a thousand Philistims with
the jaw bone of an Ass, and refreshed his thirsty and fainting Spirits, with a
fresh spring of water that issued out of the jaws. And may not the same God
cause the waters of life to spring from betwixt the tongue and teeth of such
kind of Creatures? True indeed, he may, and can, but to reason from the power
of God, to his will, what he has done to what he will do, the first
constitution, forming and framing of a church, to that which is already
constituted, settled and grown up, to some degree of perfection, is altogether
fond and ridiculous. God can bring the greatest works to pass, by the weakest
means, and unworthiest instruments. All gifts, perfections, callings, are alike
unto him, and yet God does not approve and allow the inward calling without the
outward, nor outward without inward, neither power without authority, nor
authority without power. And in an ordinary and regular course the power and
abilities of an inward, and authority of an outward calling must of necessity
go together. It is not only possible but more then probable, that some few Such
an one was Olympia, Fulvia Morata of Ferrara in Italy.
women may be superior to many men in wit, memory, Rarae eruditionis faem nae
quae graece and Latin Seribere eleganter, and in utraque lingua versus pangere
dediscerit.
tongues, arts, and yet for all these, it is not permitted to women to speak in
the church, 1 Cor. 14.34. It is a shame for them so to do. v. 35, And that
because they are incapable of an outward calling.

There are two grand and general causes, of many enormities and gross errors,
Thuan. Elog. viror. doct. p. 42.
doctrinal, practical in opinion, and action, the vulgar distempers and
epidemical diseases, of the present times. Two causes of gross errors.


The first is a misconstruction of Divine providence, and dispensations. As if
these were a square, and rule of our actions, A misconstruction of divine
providence.
and lawful in the doer, which God by his providential and permissive will,
suffers to be effected, and brought to pass.

This Argument might have been taken up by Zimri, in the Text. Pilate that
unjust Judge, Christum absolvit judicio, cordemnavit mysterio. Ambros.
who absolved Christ, in his own judgment, and yet condemned Him unto
judgment, might have pleaded it. Who had his power from above, and was
acknowledged from Christ himself, when he stood arraigned at his Tribunal. John
19. ver. 11. Thou could have no power at all unless it were given thee from
above. The accursed Jews, the Traitor Judas, might have held it forth, who did
whatsoever the hand and counsel of God determined before to be done. Acts c. 4.
ver. 28. And Christ was delivered by the determinate foreknowledg, A second
cause of gross errors. A misapplication of the impulses of the Spirit.
and counsel of God, and yet, taken by wicked Hands, Acts chap. 2. ver. 23.

A Second grand and general cause of many enormous, and gross errors, is the
misapplication of the inward impulses, and motions of the Spirit. When men
cover and color their exorbitant, and irregular courses, with the special
excitations, and extraordinary impressions, of the Spirit. As if it were not
they that are the doers, but the Spirit that is in them. What spirit do they
mean? That of God, or their own private Spirits? May it not be fitly applied to
them, wherewith our Savior chareth his Disciples Luke c. 9. ver. 55. Omnino
Spiritu quodam res geritur, an ex Deo sit n^scio Erasde Luther. Epist illust.
Bilibald. p. 198.
You know not what manner of Spirit you are of. And if it be the Spirit of God
it is a Spirit of Unity, and Verity, a Spirit of Meekness, and Gentleness, a
Spirit of Humimility and patience, a Spirit of love and peace. Let us try the
Spirits (as the great Apostle Saint John advises) try we our own spirit,
whether it be the Spirit of God or no, by these signs and Symptoms, and would
we keep our selves sound and whole from the common distempers, and diseases of
the times, let us stick close to the Apostles rule, 1 Thessolonians c. 4. ver.
11. And that you study to be quiet, and to do your own business. The word is
(...), importing a zealous Kind of ambition, as of our chiefest and heighest
honor. Let us (...), interpose and inter meddle only, in our private and
proper affairs.

Take we heed, that we move not eccentrically; out of our own Orb and Sphere,
not run beyond our teder, nor stray and straggle, out of the compass of our
personal and particular callings.

Thus have you heard of the Traitors, the Treason, The Application, by way of
parallel, betwixt the ^^der, and the yovnger Zimri.
and the sad success and issue of it. And it were an easy matter to find out
Zimri's match, and parallel, even in this Nation of ours, in the forementioned
Specialties, but I forbear to bring the Text home to any man's person, as Nathan
did the parable to David, Thou art the man. Nor shall I need to particularise,
or exemplify it seeing the bare reharsal of the text without any other
comment, or descant, is a sufficient application. It is the speech of Saint
Ambrose touching Ahabs oppression and tyranny, who first killed Naboth, and
then took possession of his Vineyard.

Nabothi historia tempore vetus est, usu quotid^a^a. Ambrese De ^a^^h Jesrael.
c 1.
Non unus Achab natus est, sed quod pejus est quotidie nascitur, and nunquam
huic saeculo moritur. Even so there are more Zimri's then one. We of this
Kingdom have had Deciles imitandis turpibus ac pravis omnes sumus, and
Catilinam quocunque in populo videas quocunque sub axe. Juv. sat. 14.
our Zimri, as well as the people of Israel, and as Saint James speaks
concerning Job, c. 5. v. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have
seen the end of the Lord. So we have heard of the most bloody and barbarous
Treason, of an assassinating Zimri, and have seen the end of the Lord, a
wretched and a woeful end. So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, Judges. c.
5. v. 31.

(...). Learn we from hence a threefold lesson.

The first, is the sure doom and downfall of treason, and ambitious aspiring
after Sovereignty, A threefold lesson.
which the higher it climbs, The sure doom, and downfall of treason.
the lower it falls, like to that tree in the poet.

Virgil. Aenead. 4.
Quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas tantum radice ad tartara tendit.
As it advances, and lifts up the top, and threatens even heaven it self,
with the sublimes of it: So it grows as much downward with the root, and tends
unto hell.

Secondly, The exact justice of God upon traitors.
observe we Gods exact justice upon cruel Tyrants, and blood thirsty Traitors,
in paying them home with their own coin, and in retaliating a condign and
suitable punishment. And herein, God manifests and magnifies the equity of his
proceedings, Rev. c. 16. v. 5, 6. And I heard the Angel of the water say, Thou
art righteous O Lord, because thou have judged thus. For they have shed the
blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink. For they
are worthy. Where, the Justice of God is celebrated, not only in judging, but
in judging thus, and in recompencing blood with blood. Neque enim lex justitior
ulla est, quam necis artifices art perire sua. Ovid.
Which forced that confession from the mouth of Adenibezek Jud. c. 1. v. 7.
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and great toes cut off, gathered
their meet under my table. As I have done, so the Lord has requited me.

Thirdly, Gods infinite wisdom and overruling providence.
in defeating the plots, and policies of rebellious and treacherous, Zimri's,
in taking the wise in their own craftiness, and in turning the Counsel of
Ahitophel, into foolishness.

And whereas they, by cutting off the head of our late Sovereign, (as if they
had been of the same mind, with that monster Caligula, who wished Vtinam
populus Romanus unam cerv^^em haberet. Sueton. in calig. p. 249.
That the common wealth had but one neck) intended with the same stroke, to cut
off the hope of sucession, and Sovereignty it self; yet that royal stemm and
stock, has proved like unto that tree, in Virgil, Virgil. Aenead. 6.
Primo avulso, non deficit alter,
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo.


Though one of the principal arms has been lopt, and chopped off, by the fatal
blow, of the bloody axe: Yet is there another golden branch, that is grown up,
in the room of it, and long, may it flourish, with one of the same metal.
There is not a rarer mirror and miracle of divine providence then Moses, and
is described to the life by Saint Stephen. Acts. c. 7. v. 35. This Moses whom
they refused, saying, who made thee a Ruler and a judge? The same did God send
to be a ruler, and a deliverer by the hand of the Angel, which appeared to him
in the bush. How fitly may this be applied, to the late case of the King and
Kingdom. That gracious and dread Sovereign, whom they refused, saying, Let us
break his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords from us. Nolumus hunc regnare,
we will not that this man should reign over us, with them in the Gospel, not
him, but Barrabas; A robber and a murderer, (as the Jews sometime spoke of
Christ.) The same has God sent to be our Sovereign Lord and King, by the hand
of the Angel, that appeared to him in the bush, In the Royal Oak. And maugre
the might, and malice of his most desperate and deadly enemies, has made good
to him, what he formerly affirmed, of his Servant David. Psalm. 2. v. 6. Yet
have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion So that he may justly admonish his
implacable and restless Enemies, in the self same words, wherewith Joseph
bespake his unnatural brethren. Genesis c. 50. v. 20. But as for you, ye thought
evil against me, but God meant it to good, to bring it to pass, as it is this
day to save much people alive. And has not God been pleased, to save much
people alive, by restoring him to his crown and Kingdom, without the loss of
any one man's life, Zach. c. 4.6.
or limb, without the unsheathing and drawing of a sword, The doxology.
in the quarrel. Not by an army, nor by power, but my spirit, as God once spoke
of the building of the second Temple by Zerobabell. Now unto him, that has
saved much people alive. That has saved our Sovereign from his enemies, and
from the hand of all that hated him; and has done exceeding abundantly for him
and us, above all we could ask or think; to him be glory, and dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

