THE ROYAL PILGRIMAGE, OR THE PROGRESS AND TRAVELS OF King Charles The Second,
Through the most and greatest Courts of EVROPE.

By an Eye Witness.

LONDON, Printed by John Morgan, 1660.

The Royal PILGRIMAGE Or The PROGRESS OF King Charles the II.
AFter the last Campagna in England at Naseby Field, and the Defeat of my Lord
Goring presently after at Lamport, to which succeeded the Disbanding of my Lord
Hoptons Army in Cornwall, to whom the King had committed the Care of the Prince
in that exigence and distress of Affairs; It was directed by his late Majesty
of blessed Memory, that the said Prince should be transported into the Island
of Scilly; accordingly he imbarqued himself with my Lord Hopton, and some of
his principal Servants and other Gentlemen at St. Michaels-Mount, and arrived
safely at that Island, where he was to attend his Fathers Orders in reference
to his own Person, and the concerns of the Kingdoms.

While he was there, he took order for the Government of that Isle, and placed
therein Sir John Greenvill the Son of Sir Bevill, to command in chief in his
Majesty's name, who upon conditions in 1650. surrendered the same to the then
called Parliament.

Upon Avisoes from England, that there was some Loyal Endeavors on Foot to
restore his Father, he Sailed into France, and was entertained there by the now
French King, but with that coldness and remisseness of respect that no way
suited to his Spirit, or his due greatness.

He had not been long there, but part of the Parliaments Fleet then commanded
by Colonel Ramsborough, returned to their Allegiance, and revolted from the
service, whereupon the Prince presently left the French Court, and put himself
on board that Fleet in the Admiral called the Reformation (which was afterward
lost about the Island Majorca, Prince Rupert being aboard her, and himself and
three others hardly escaping) and lay some while in the Downs, till it was
agreed that he should land some Forces, and attaque Deal and Sandwich Castles,
which accordingly he mastered, with as much bravery and Gallantry of the
Seamen, as ever they yet manifested.

But notice of his formidable arrival being brought to London, the Earl of
Warwick was forthwith ordered to equip all the shipping could presently be made
ready to oppose him; at his appearance it was thought fit for the Kings Fleet
to sail for Holland, and accordingly they anchored in Goree, where the
Parliament Ships attended them, and required of the States of Holland either to
have them delivered, or put to Sea to fight, judging that the Mariners for
want of pay had deserted their respective ships; but the Hogens durst not then
venture upon such an action, while the Kings interest seemed yet to be
promising.

The Prince then went to the Hague to his Brother the Prince of Orange, where
indeed he was civilly and magnificently treated, with all the demonstration of
kindness imaginable, which continued during that Princes life, and his
sojournment in that Country. From thence he writ that Letter to his Father
which is printed at the end of the Kings book. Hither came unto him my Lord
Loughborough, Colonel Massey etc. presently after the Kings death, about which
time Dorislaus was killed there by one Major Whitford a Scotchman and his
associates.

Immediately after came unto him the Commissioners from the Kingdom of Scotland
tendering unto him their Fealty with several propositions, whereupon ensued a
Treaty which was the next year concluded on at Breda, a Town belonging to the
Prince of Orange, and the King by the name of Charles the second, solemnly owned
there by them; during which Treaty, my Lord the Marquess of Montrose was
defeated in Scotland, and barbarously executed, to the dishonor of that
Nation, and of Argyle especially.

He departed about June 1649. out of Holland by Brussels, where he was nobly
entertained to the French Court again, where he staid not long, being weary of
Cardinal Mazarines neglects, but took shipping for the Isle of Jersey, where
for a while he resided in Elizabeth's Castle, the Governor whereof was Sir
George Cartret, where the Commissioners from the Kingdom of Scotland made their
addresses to him, and desired that he would be pleased to repair to Breda in
order to perfect the Treaty. By the way, we may not forget that gracious
deliverance God gave him in his passage back again from thence, the Vessel
wherein he was, being with a sudden gust of wind almost overset, had not one
accidentally standing by the Sails, cut the ropes that held them.

At his arrival in Holland, I may not omit one passage. Before his departure
from thence, came unto him an Envoy or Messenger from the French King, his
Errand I do not very well remember, but it was some insignificant complement,
and pressed hard for Audience, at last my Lord Chancellor Hide procured it, and
when he had told his Story, he expected the King would have made him an answer,
but the King dismissed him without a word; at his next Audience, he was very
urgent for an answer, but no other than before, while the Monsieur was
overheard to say, that the King he knew well enough could speak French, to
which his Majesty was pleased to reply, that once indeed he could speak French,
but had lately studied to forget it all, intimating the disrespects he had had
from that Court. So much by the by.

From Breda he went to Schiveling near the Hague, where he took shipping for
Scotland, Old Martin Van Trump setting him on board, and commending the care
and preservation of his person to his Son young Trump, who commanded the Fleet
that transported him, which consisted of four Sail of Dutchmen Men of War, the
King himself being in a light Sailing Frigot of thirty six Guns. He landed in
the North of Scotland after a dangerous voyage, being cast upon the Coast of
Norway, and mist the English Fleet that lay to attend his landing very
narrowly, they having Sailed from thence but five hours before.

Presently after his arrival in Scotland, he was Crowned on the first of
January 1650. at Scoon, Mr. Robert Douglasse preaching his Coronation Sermon,
his Affairs there are so well known to every body, that it is needless to
recite them here.

Neither is it more to our purpose to mention his expedition to Worcester, his
valor and great mind manifested in the Action at that place, let us rather
busy our thoughts with the admirable goodness of God in his wonderful escape
from the clutches of the persecuting RUMP, and that Rebel Oliver.

Which way soever he escaped by the conduct of Mrs. Lane, (the general received
opinion) he arrived about the end of October, 1651. at Diep in Normandy, and so
on to Roan; upon the news of his arrival at Paris, all the great ones of that
Court (the late Duke of Orleans himself in person) went out to meet him, and
congratulate his safe return. But this fair weather lasted but a while, and the
King wisely removed himself from his French unhospitable harbor, but before he
went, he did as good as establish the Crown of France upon his Cousins head, by
bringing the Duke of Lorrain to a neutrality, when the Prince of Condee and the
Spanish Army had advanced beyond Paris; but I think he was never yet thankt for
it.

His next stage was the Low Countries, to his Sister of Orange, for the Prince
her husband was deceased, where he resided till the Peace made betwixt those
States and Oliver, by which he was (as it were) banished their Dominions, as by
the like compact with Mazarine, he was the French.

He retired thence to Colen a City of Germany, upon the Rhine, to be near at
hand his concernments, which were to be taken into consideration at the Diet at
Franckfort upon the election of the new Emperor, whither he went privately,
and walked the streets incognito, before the meeting of the States of the
Empire, and Foreign Ambassadors.

He sojourned also a while with the Duke of Newburgh, a Prince to whom the King
is highly engaged for his manifold high obligements received from him during
his abode there, Mannings Treason was discovered, who kept correspondence with
Thurloe, Nolls Secretary, and betrayed the design of Mr. Penruddock in the West.

I may not omit that at Colen that Rogue Hannam with his accomplices, robbed him
of all the Plate he had, which the Burgers found out, and returned him again.

From thence he betook himself to the Court at Brussels, being thither invited
by the King of Spain, who was then newly entered into a war with Oliver, and had
by him a Court assigned for him at Bruges in Flanders, with a Princely
maintenance to uphold it, where he remained some three years, till the late
enterview of the Favorites upon the Frontire, where he was in private present,
and from thence past on to Madrid the Court of Spain, and was there
magnificently treated by that King.

Thence posted he back again to St. Jean de Luz, where that impudent fellow
Lockhart made oath he saw him at Mass, but had the reward of a Scot, not to be
believed. In his return from thence through France, he was caressed all the way
by the great ones of that Kingdom, and adored as a rising sun, and at last
safely and happily returned to Brussels, where he now remains, waiting the
good hour of our returning to our obedience.

Now what obstinate perverse disobedience can object any thing against this our
rightful Sovereign, whom so great experience, the knowledge of all places, men,
and manners, acquired by his own view, have so fitted and accomplished to Reign
and Rule well, it having been the only study in his Exile: God has made him
the better, and we the worse by his absence.

Anglia read virum, raptatum a tempore legum
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and urbes.
England Restore thy Prince, who since these times
Of Treason, has tired all, Men, Manners, Clines.
FINIS.

