The Ranters Bible OR, Seven several Religions by them held and maintained.

WITH The full particulars of their strange Sects and Societies; their new
places of meetings, both in City and Country; the manner of their life and
conversation; their blasphemous Opinion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
and their burning of his blessed WORD, and sacred Scriptures; the names of
their new gods, and worshipping of the Sun, and three black Clouds; with the
manner of their idolizing them, North, West, East, and South; their drinking of
healths to the Devil, and disposing of places in Hell; their blasphemous Creed
and Letany; their Savage Opinion to ly with any man's wife, either in houses,
fields, or streets, in the presence of hundreds of people; their Declaration in
Kent; the apprehending of 30 of them near Uxbridge, with their trials and
examinations, and the routing and dispersing the rest of their fellow ranters
near Lin in Norfolk: A strange voice from heaven speaking to one Mr. Roulston,
a London-Ranter, upon his going from White-Chappel, to meet some of his
Fellow Creatures at Hackney, and the great things that happened thereupon, to
the admiration of the Reader: the coming in of 700 since the second of this
instant December, their Recantation, Oath, and Protestation. And Mr. Roulston's
Letter to his late fellow-Ranters, with his Advice and Proposals, to be
published in all Cities, and Market-townes, throughout England and Wales.

Published by Mr. Gilbert Roulston, a late Fellow-RANTER.

Imprimatur,

J. DOWNAME.



diagram showing the movement of the sun and stars

London, Printed by J. C. and are to be sold in Cornhil, near the Exchange, and
at Temple Bar, 1650.

The Ranters Bible, etc.
GReat are the troubles of this Age, in respect of that persecution on all
sides, that hardly one opinion can afford another a good word. And what is the
reason of all this? Sure it is not of God, but of the Man of sin, who was a
murderer from the beginning: This spirit of persecution has not ceased to
work, since Adams fall, going amongst rich and poor, high and low, to set them
at variance, and divide them in judgment; and as God is the Author of all
good, so the Devil is the Author of all evil, being now very busy and active
in this Nation, for the depriving of the poor people of their Soul-salvation,
sowing the Atheistical Seed in the hearts of diverse, by which means they are
too prone to fall from their former principles, studying and practicing
newfound devices, and Hel-bred stratagems, as will appear by this ensuing
Relation, wherein is contained a description of the several Sects, Societies
and Factions of the new Generation of those called Ranters, both in City and
Country, and the particulars of their several Tenants, viz.

I. On the 16. of November. 1656. A great Company of these new Generations of
Vipers, called Ranters, were gathered together near the Soho as Westminster,
where they exercised themselves in many royatous and uncivil actions; and after
some hours spent i^ feasting and the like, they stripped themselves quite ^aked,
and dansing the Adamites Curranto, which was, That after 2. or 3. familist
Giggs, hand in hand, each man should embrace his fellow-semale, in the flesh,
for the acting of that inhumane Theater of carnal copulation, which is so
gloriously illustrated in the sacred Scriptures, to be one of the greatest
sins, in bringing them to the very brinks of perpetual damnation; in defense of
which abominable and lascivious act, they hold it a tenent lawful, to lie with
any Woman Whatsoever: These are a sort of Ranters, called by the name, Of the
Familists of Love, who would have all things common, and hold it a Paradise to
live so, because their Discipline allows, to court naked, in which they blush
no more, then Adam at his first Creation, Genesis 2.5. This Opinion a native
German first practiced in Holland, 40. years since, and coming over into
England, proved a Diabolical Instrument, in soweing the seed of Satan, in the
hearts of many about London, telling and persuading them, that it was a great
sin, to cleave either to one man or Woman, that there was neither God nor
Devil, Heaven nor Hell, and that they ought not to worship any thing visible or
invisible, but the Sun, which in this wise, he persuaded them to do; that after
they had taken their fill in this, [savage] pleasure of Paradise, (as they call
it) they should turn themselves North, West, East and South, (according to the
sign here inserted) and that was a remission, promised, for their inhumane act
of Ranting. The Ranters new God.
North East West in South



II. Another sort of Ranters are called by the name of Shelomethites, who hold
swearing but a Complement, and blasphemy a badge of honor, accounting that
Fellow Creature, the greatest and most worthy, that can invent the chiefest
Oaths, springing from the bitter and fiery lake of Hell and Pluto: Of this
wicked Generation, a party of them were lately discovered near Uxbridge, who
upon examination before a Justice of Peace, confessed. That they held it lawful
so to do, resolutely breaking forth in most bitter and unchristian like
language against all those who endeavored to turn them from these desperate
and soul-damning opinion; but since their restraint of liberty, diverse of them
have detested against this diabolical way, protesting, against their infernal
tenants, and Hel-bred principles, and utterly disavowing any fellowship or
society with them for the time to come; and promising a discovery of all others
of the like nature, resident in those parts, or elsewhere.

III. Another sort of Ranters are called by the name of Clements, who are
persuaded that after death (notwithstanding their lascivious actions, as
aforesaid) they may repent in the world to come; and that it is then sure
enough to seek Gods mercy, which absurd and false Opinion, causes diverse,
both in City and Country, to attend to this blasphemous Crew, and wholly to
cast off their blasphemous principles of Christianity, and sobriety of life: O
the ignorance of these times! that men should fall from the ways of truth and
comply with the spirit of darkness.

IV. Another sort of Ranters are called by the name of Athians, who affirm,
that when the body dies, the soul perishes, and both shall be received again
at the day of judgment: which Doctrine is something like that which lately
possessed diverse about Lin in Norfolk, who at a meeting the 17. of November.
last, would needs take upon them to maintain this point to be just and right;
but others of their late Brethren, after a serious and great dispute, wholly
denied this tenent, and publicly declared, That in respect of that condition
in which the soul is stated, (which being immortal cannot die) shall be
increased, but never changed: To which principle above 100. came in, there
present declaring themselves enemies to all those who persisted in that
blasphemous opinion; insomuch, that some of those that refused to re^eive
conversion, were apprehended; others escaped; but, in fine, they all received a
blow, and were all subdued and ro^ted.

V. Another sort of Ranters are called by the name of Nicholartanes, much like
the former, who lived promissiously, like Beasts, no man having his own proper
wife, but using any Woman at their pleasure, and thirsting after their
proprieties and estates: These are not only plunderers, but Robbers of their
very skins and bones.

VI. These sorts of Ranters are called by the name of Marcious, who believe
that there are two Gods, one the Author of all good, the other of all evil
things; which Sect Paipiripes, in his time, called The first born of the Devil,
and in these latter times, too too many hold these erroneous Opinions, there
being a Generation sprung up, who have a great respect to observe the
traditions of men, but deny Scriptures, holding this dangerous Discipline,
(which the mad and ranting Ranters, calls his B^^le,) That Swearing, whoring,
Roaring, Revelling, Bl^spheaming, and the greatest vices they can imagine, are
the only actions of honor to bring them to happiness; and in which happiness,
they assume to themselves a right, by drinking Healths to the Devil, and
casting lots for the disposing of places in Hell; but some amongst the rest,
being indu'd with the spirit of Grace, upon the carouzing of the Cup about, in
like manner aforesaid, at a meeting near the Wild in Kent; when it came to
their turns to drink, refused the same, saying, From this wicked Company of
Atheists,
And from their wicked plots and conspiracies,
Good Lord deliver us all.


Where upon this infernal Crew, began to utter many bitter rexecrations, and
blaspheaming Vows and Protestations, to send them headlong to the Devil, which
the reformed Ranters, before spoken of, hearing, imediately fell upon them, and
beat them exceedingly, uttering these words, Where is your Devil and dark
Angels, that can delive^ you out of our hands; for although we were a long time
blinded by the Man of sin, we are now by the tender mercies of Jesus Christ,
and by the influence of his Divine Spirit, restored again unto light; and
therefore are resolved to partake no longer with you in your abominable and
detestable vanities, etc. Which words struck such a terror to their former
Fellow Creatures, that they all unanimously resolved to lead a new life, to
withdraw from the Gulf of Hell, and to betake themselves to the true
Soul-saving Gospel Road, and so with great alacrity and joy parted quietly,
betaking themselves to their respective places of habitation.

VII. Another sort of these notorious Ranters, both in City and Country, are
called by the name of Selentian Donatists; who hold an opinion, that neither
the word of God, (for the ^ible they burn nor any under the Canopy of Heaven,
can make so perfect a Church, as their (...) Discipline; denying all powers,
and refusing to submit to any Government, erected either by Kings or
Parliament, being of an opinion, that the Moss whereof God made the Elements,
was coeternal with him, and that Christ in his Ascension uncloathed himself of
the flesh of Man, and left it in the Globe of the Sun; and thereupon hold this
erroneous Tenent, that it is only lawful for them to idolize and adore the Sun,
and the 3. Clouds, wherein its splendour is sundry times eclipsed and darkened,
being of this idolatrous and dangerous Opinion, that after this life there,
their bodies shall rest for ever. These sort of Ranters, are of a vainglorious
opinion, steering their ways and actions, by the concourse of the Stars; for
toward the Evening, so soon as the bright^^^ met, called the Shephard-star,
appears, they frequent their Babylonish meetings, the said Star being the word
and sign, given out by these infernal Creatures, for the calling in of their
diabolical Flocks; and upon their dissembling together, they exercise
themselves in nothing else, but lacivious and unapparalleld vices, accounting
it no sin for hundreds of Men and Women (savage-like) to lie with each other,
publicly all together, either in Houses, Fields, or Streets, which is their
constant course upon several meetings. And one amongst the rest, of these
ranting Crew, observing the time when the Shepheards-Star should appear; to the
end, he might give his personal residence amongst them; upon his going from his
own house in White-Chappel, to Pluto's Flock, enfolding each other near
Hackney, he heard a loud voice sounding in his mind, as follows, Leave off
thy abominable ways, and return from whence thou come; for after all such
things only wicked men seek. And as he heard this voice sounding in his heart,
so also his Conscience accused him, that he was one of those wicked men,
spending his precious time in lacivious, shameless, and intemperate societies
with other Women: whereupon, he imediately fell down on his knees, praising the
great God of Heaven, for this his great change and conversion; and upon his
imediate resurrection, betook himself to privacy for a time, writing this
ensuing Letter, to his former Ranting Associates.

Dear Friends,
IT has always been the subtilty of the Serpent, that old Devil, since Man had
a being, to seek to deceive and destroy him, and to take him off from his
being, and his well-being, and as God uses all means to do Mankind good, so
Satan seeks by all the means he can to do them hurt, in every age; and so
much the more, as the light does appear in every age, transforming himself like
an Angel of light, that he may appear glorious in them, when he is nothing in
substance, and in this age more then ever; because his Kingdom and black Angels
begins to be full of darkness; he sees its high time to stir, or else to lose
all, and is now laboring to overthrow the foundations of your faith, by taking
you off from searching the Scriptures, by denying the word, and burning the
sacred Writ, etc. utterly detesting against Christ and his truth, which truth
we must all yield to, or else you are damned: And for (...) part, I do wholly
embrace it, denying and abhorring the wicked course of life, which formerly I
delighted in, with you, for the space of 7. years, and odd months; during
which time, I conceived my self to be in a happy condition; but being near to
the very edge of the brink of the infernal lake and bottomelss pit of Hell,
then came the Lord God in a terrible voice into my heart, saying, Leave off thy
wicked ways, and return from whence thou came, for after all such things even
wicked men seek: These words I heard dolefully sounding, even when I was coming
to your Diabolical meeting, which caused me to return back: And therefore
friends, I do humbly implore you, in the name of Jesus Christ, to leave off
your wicked ways, and to lay hold on the truth; for he that acts against
truth, acts against God: His truth is the greatest Champion, and breaks all the
Armor and Weapons that it fights with; for it is a soul-saving Weapon, and no
Weapon formed against it shall prosper; to those that yield, he shows mercy,
and to those that will not, his blows are mortal: Therefore dear friends, be
not found fighters against God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none
to help; for on whomsoever this stone shall fall, it shall grind him to pieces.
Now the Lord Jesus Christ give you understanding in these things, and so I rest,

Yours in the Lord, G. R.
White-Chappel December. 4. 1650.

REader, since the writing of this Letter, above 700. are come in but by reason
of a new Treatise preparing for the Press, I shall insist no further at
present; but refers thee to that subject, which contains a 7. years
Chronicle of all their ways, lives, and actions.

FINIS.

