THE DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS PRINCE RUPERT, Lord High Admiral of all the
navy Royal, belonging to the Kings Majesty CHARLES the II. Wherein he
clears himself from many Scandalous Ramours which have bin cast upon his
Reputation.

Likewise his Highness Resolution and Intention; Together with the rest of the
Officers of the Navy Royal.

Touching the Death of the late KING, the illegal pretended Power of
PARLIAMENT. and their endeavors to Inthrone the now King CHARLES the second.

ALSO Showing their intentions to maintain the Laws of the Land, the Liberty
of the Subject, and just Rights and Privileges of a lawful Parliament.

Signed by the Princes own hand aboard the Navy Royal, new Riding an Anchor
upon the Downs, the 19. th of March, 1649.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

A Declaration of his Highness Prince RUPERT.
THe bloody and inhumane murder of my late dread Uncle of ever renowned famous
memory, has administered to me fresh occasion (if I had no other motives which
might further my indignation against the usurped power in England, to be
assistant both in council and the best of my personal power, as bound by
affinity to my dear Cosen now Charles the second King of great Britain, and
all other his late Fathers Dominions) to take vengeance upon those
Arch-Traytors, pretending the name of Parliament, and keeping a perpetual
Sessions, of blood-thirstinesse and murdering Massacre at Westminster. They
being not in any capacity or have they the least color of honesty, law, or
reason, to give them, save only a Libidinous lustful will, maintained by the
unjust Sword of usupation, hemmed in with disloyalty, and skinned over with an
hipopocriticall pretended freedom of Religion, and Subjects liberty, making
show of levelling equality, though no power of a King (which is most rightful
both by the written word of God, and fundamental Laws of England) whatever
could ever be more tyranically, aspiringly ambitious, and barbarously impious
then theirs. Who whatever Promises, Oaths, or Covenants were formerly, or now
at present, are their Actions manifest, their intentions to be cruelty,
tyrannous, and their rule Arbitrary, every way illegal, and more extorting
from the Subjects then the government of a moderate Monarch could in any wise
be, who is bounded and begirt both with Law and discret Council; Nay, the
greatest tyrant of a King cannot act such tragical villainies, as a vast number
of mischievous wretches which are bent to wickedness may. Of which truth the
Assembly of Traitors and rebels an westmin. have given sufficient testimonies,
there never being heard on in all antiquity the like subversion that is now
intended and with Rebellions force prosecuted in England, viz. First, To
murder their lawful King. 2ly, Banish their now King, his Brother, with all
those which love or adhere to him, exempting them from mercy, and making them
by meek Acts traitors to them, who are Rebels to their King. This me thinks
should move all men who are not destitute of understanding (and have common
sense) to see how those audacious Rebels have woven their ends, and exploded
Loyalty with acclamations, that Rebellion (which is as the sin of Witchcraft)
is become a virtue, and murder an Act of mercy. Moreover me thinks it cannot
choose but be visible to all eyes (unless wilfully blind) that the numerous
Issue of my deceased Uncle will still procure means to keep the Kingdom in
broils, either with wars still in it, or threats and invasions, which will
be altogether as terrible to the Subject as War it self can be; so long as my
dear Cosen now CHARLES the second, the lawful King of England, Scotland, and
Jreland etc. or whoever shall succeed him which have any alliance to the Crown
of England) are in being.

I hope therefore and for many reasons to be alleged on my part, that there is
no honest loyal heart in all the Kingdom of England or elsewhere, that can
with any Justice or known truth lay any capital crime to my charge, although
it has been the constant endeavors of some of the English Nation (who are
naturally prone to hate Strangers) to seek with false Calumnies and scandalous
accusations, to blast and blemish my integrity to my Uncle and his Royal
family, by challenging me with treachery to him and his party, to the contrary
of all which, his late Majesty was well satisfied that I was honestly real and
wholly his. Thus much I thought fit to speak in my own behalf hoping it will
be taken from mine own mouth as a character of my fidelity, which has been
much scandalized by black mouth (...), which never speaks well of any, and
that I thank God is a thing which I have had my share of in England, for
venturing so freely and often my life for their Libert es, as I take God to
witness was ever my intention, never looking for any preferment at all to raise
my fortunes above ordinary by the English nation, which I am confident there
are diverse now living in England, which have had constant knowledge of my
Actions can justify. I having had many preferments proffered me which I have
refused, desiring the advancement of my Uncles cause might be first promoted,
and for my own particular I dedicated my life to his will, and did never
intend, to make a greater price of my Service then his late Majesty and
Council might adjudge me to deserve. Neither has the abuse laid upon me by
my Uncles pretended friends been sufficient. But the gross Lies and forgeries
of that Rebel ^e^t at Westminster, have branded me with the very worst of
crimes that possible any man might be charged with. As that I was barbarously
cruel and did tyrannically use not only Soldiers but likewise Country People,
by Plunder, rapes, thefts, etc. with many more exorbitances, as Ravishings of
M^ydens, and destroying young Children, all which was to no other end then to
wound my reputation, and make me abominably odious to the vulgar, whose brains
itched with a desire of novelty and were ever willing to embrace any falsities.
But to clear my self from all these, I did it was well known to many ever
detest and hate such proceedings, holding them to be the greatest and most
inhumane barbarismes that could by any Christians possible be invented. But I
finding the disposition of the English Nation, both pretends friends and open
enemies of my late Uncles, to strive nothing more then to cast a perpetual
odium upon me, and seeing my self unfortunate in most of my adventures, I do
seriously protest it was often my desires to have left that high employment of
General, and to serve my Uncle in a lesser and lower degree of Command. But it
was ever the will of my dread deceased Uncle (of ever honored and famous
memory) whose love was still to me entire and whose affections I found ever
inviolable (to his Subjects good) to have me continue in the Command which his
Majesty had been graciously pleased to confer upon me, which as I shall answer
at the day of judgment, I did improve to the best of my power without any
treachery, deceit, or dissimulation in what kind soever; and for my
unfortunatenesse, I hope, it was excusable, it not only being incident where I
had Command and was Personally present, but in all other Places where my late
Uncle had any power of soldiers. Yet notwithstanding I was the Butt whereat
envy shot its Arrows, and all my Uncles losses were generally laid to my
charge. And I looked upon by many (who were not sensible of my integrity) as a
treacherous and perfidious seller of my late Uncles Cities, Castles, Towns, and
Garrisons, yes even his Armies, when it was evident to all, that no man
whatsoever either private Soldier, or Officer, did hazard more his life and
further engage his Person then my self; and how treacherous dealing and
underhand compliance with my Uncles enemies could be attributed to my charge,
for such Acts I know not, and doubt not all honest rational men will be
satisfied, and their judgment confuted by these my real expressions, which I
call the Almighty Judge of heaven and earth to witness is no other then truth.

Now for my judgment in this new war, in behalf of my dearly beloved Cosen,
I do protest and really speak it I did ever intend to do him any service and
employ my best endeavors for his inthroning as bound by Consangvinity, but more
particularly engaged by reason of former favors received from his late Royal
Father, my murthred uncle, and though it was my intentions to serve him as I
have hear spoake it: yet I do ingeniously confess it was never my desire to
be employed in this great and weighty command of his Majesty's Admiral, but
should willingly have been well satisfied with an inferior place where I might
have had the freedom, in part to bring such great Traitors and Rebels to
condign punishment, who had a hand in the murder of my late Uncle, and do
still persist in their perverse ways of Rebellion and Cruelty, and my reasons,
why I did not wish so great a command were these; viz. I know and was
ascertained, my self had been rendered odious to many English who did not
thoroughly understand my real intentions, but only believed lies and forged
reports of my mortal Enemies framing. And I did likewise consider that my
undertakeing the Admiralty, might be a means to draw away the affections of
his Majesty's Subjects, by reason such rumors had been upon me. These and many
other reasons, (which now I will omit) did moove me several times to refuse
what at length his Majesty's Council of Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who are
about him: did in a manner force it upon me, which peradventure at first
displeased some aspiring Spirits, who gapt for that employment which now I
have: and will by the grace of God, to my power manage as may be most
profitable for my Cosen, his now Majesty, and for the speediest settlement of
him in his late Fathers Throne. I will now desire your patience a little longer
and do intend (God willing) to give mine and the Gentlemen's about me their
Intensions and resolutions, both for present proceedings and future actings, so
long as God shall enable us so to do; and we do hereby declare and protest
to all the whole Kingdom, what we with our fortunes (and that which is most
dear to us even our lives) will prosecute, and to the utmost of our power
perform to a tittle, the particular beads are as follows, viz.

1. We do protest and declare, That we will use all possible means and
employ our interests for to inthrone King Charles the second in his Kingdom of
England, and all other his Dominions, which were his late Fathers, and with all
our force power and strength, his Royal Person will endeavor to defend
maintain and keep. And will ever to the utmost of our powers preserve him
from the Treacherous attempts of usurping Rebbels, upholding and suporting so
much as in us lies all his Regal authority, Kingly rights, priveledges, and
prerogatives, which of due belong to him as successive King of England, and as
have been enjoyed by his predecessors of our later ages, viz. Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and his late Royal Father of famous memory.

2ly. That we will ever be careful to preserve the ancient and Fundamental
Laws, Statutes, Customs, immunities Privileges, and Freedoms of each
Subject of this Kingdom of England. And will never yield consent or assent to
have them violated and broken, nor any Arbitrary rule introduced, save only
such wholesome Laws as a Parliament freely elected by his Majesty's writ: (and
causisting of King, Lords and Commons) shall think fit to constitute.

3ly. That we will ever be ready with our lives and fortunes, to defend the
power of Parliament (when legally chosen) and its Just rights and Privileges,
to the utmost of our power will preserve and keep free from violation and
never (as now there is over the Iunto at westminster) constituting any power of
Sword upon them, whereby to make them act contrary to the Subjects good, for
our private gain: such constraining force being contrary to the known Laws
of this Land. And the most arbitrary and tiranicall act, that may be invented:
there being now no Law save such as a Rebellious Army of Sectarian Murderers
will please to have.

4ly. And for the City of London in particular, we do declare and protest we
will not hinder their trading by See, for Wind, Coals, or any other
necessaries, so long as the Captains, and Masters, of such Merchants Ships,
shall pay unto us all such dues and Customs as do belong to his Majesty, and
likewise that they do acknowledge him for their King, and lawful heir to the
Crown of England: by striking sail to his Admiral, and yielding obedience to
his commands, as one lawfully authorized by his said Majesty, Charles the
second King of great Britain.

5ly. That we have no intention to injure or hurt the person nor diminish,
take away, confiscate, or make forseit the goods, estates, or lands, of any the
inhabitants of England, who will leave their Rebellion, and engagements of
Treason, (now so earnestly agitated) submitting themselves to his Majesty as
becomes true Subjects, and as men boundby their several oaths of alegeance to
be true to their King, his Heirs and successors: nay further the Covenant
has the same influence of obligation upon all such who will not be perjvred.

6ly. And lastly, that if any Mariners, Watermen, or Soldiers, shall desert
that Conventickle of Traitors at Westminster, and repayr to us, they shall be
rewarded according to their Qualities, and have employment befitting them.
Likewise any Gentleman, or other of inferior Rank, who are willing to serve
their King, if they will repair to us, shall be entertained with much respect,
tho they have formerly been our Enemies, yet we will procure an Act of
Indemnity for them. All these things God-willing, we do intend to prosecvte
to the utmost of our powers, and doubt not but that God and all good men will
be assisting here in.

So God save King GHARLES, the Second.
FINIS.

