A DECLARATION Of His Highness Prince RUPERT.
NOt that His Highness thinks to justify himself to those who by that must
condemn themselves: nor that he believes any thing he has done needs a
Declaration, does he publish this to the world: but he thought it might not be
unnecessary to the service of his Majesty (in order to which all his actions
have been directed) to let the world see that he has faithfully served Him,
and that his enemies had no other reason for his accusation, than that they
found it necessary for their defense. His Highness is not ignorant how great a
difficulty he has undertaken in satisfying the people, who are as severe in
the actions of others as they are partial in their own, and who censure all
by success; which judgment, how unjust it is, the meanest understandings,
even those brought against him, must confess. Yet with these disadvantages
must he now appear, and he is confident that through them all he shall let the
misinformed Kingdom see that his honor is as much above the malice of his
enemies as their competition. His Highness will not go back to the beginning
of these times, nor particularly mention his actions in this war, although he
believes he may without vanity say, that neither integrity nor industry has
been wanting in any of them; nor that there has scarce been any service where
he has not appeared in his person and his care; which how succesfull it has
been in several occasions the Kingdom will be his witness, and where the
event has been contrary, His Majesty and the Armies will acquit him of his
part in it. And he esteems it his happiness to have served the King in
difficult times, where he has appeared with him in good and ill-fortune,
assisted by the gallantry of those Gentlemen who neither in danger nor
disfavour have forsaken him, of whose affections he shall ever make a just and
proportioned acknowledgement. But since (as it is the fate of those in the
condition of his Highness) he has had his actions imperfectly, if not
maliciously related, examined at a distance, and accordingly censured: since he
is become the subject of every ones passion, how unjust soever, and of every
opinion, although never so weak; His Highness thought it was a right he owed
the Kings service and himself (whom he will ever consider last) to publish in
the following narrative the integrity and reasons of his proceedings, that it
might appear, that as his Highness has faithfully served the King, he has
not served him unadvisedly, but like a soldier, as well as a man of honor.
And all the world, even his enemies shall see, that his actions (to say no
more) have been as far from injuring His Majesty's cause, as theirs from
defending it.

A Narrative of the state and condition of the City and Garrison of Bristol,
when his Highness Prince Rupert came thither; of the actions there during the
Siege, of the Treaties and Rendition thereof.
HIS Majesty, after the Battle of Knasby, retreating toward Hereford,
intending to recruit his Army by new-levyes in those parts; His Highness,
Prince Rupert, crossed the Severne-Sea, to visit his Highness the Prince of
Wales; and by his personal presence, to inform himself more fully of the
condition of his Majesty's Forces in the Western parts. In his return, he
passed through the Lord Goring his Army, thereby to settle and order things so
there, as might most advantage his Majesty's future service: and immediately
after, his Highness intending to provide for a train of Artillery, and other
necessaries for his Majesty's Army, repaired to Bristol, where the then present
constitution of the Garrison had by the establishment Contribution settled for
3600 men, for that and the subordinate Garrisons, as Nuney, Portsend Point,
etc. But at his coming thither, the presidiary Soldiers (which went by
reputation, for 800, or 900 men, and for some reasons unknown to his
Highness, it was not thought fit or convenient by them who took upon them the
power to have them called to a Muster) were really in the judgment of honest
and judicious persons, whose safeties were concerned in it, betwixt 500, or 600
effective. The Auxiliary and trained Bands, by interruption of Trade and
Commerce, by the Pestilence then raging there, by their poverty and pressures
laid upon them, were reduced to 800; and the Mariners, for want of employment,
betook themselves to other parts, or to the Enemy.

The Commissioners entrusted for the Contribution, and support of the Garrison,
upon the Enemies approach abandoned the Town, and many considerable persons
had liberty given them, and quitted the Town, which much weakened and
dis-heartned the rest.

For the securing of that place, his Highness drew in so many, that made the
Garrison 2300 men upon sight: But after the Enemy approach't, his Highness
could never draw upon the line above 1500, and it was impossible for his
Highness to keep them from getting over the works, and many of those were
new-levyed Welsh, and unexperienced men.

The Line which was to be defended, was above four miles in compass, the
brest-worke low and thin, the graffe very narrow, and of no depth; and by the
opinion of all the Colonels (whose judgments and votes were required upon all
important occasions) not tenable upon a brisk or vigorous assault.

The great Fort, which had the reputation of strength, lay open to Brandon-hill
Fort, which being taken, would from its height with the Cannon, command the
whole plain within it, and that wanting water was not to be kept many days.
For the like consideration of danger to the Line from another part, his Highness
built a redout without, which on that side prevented the enemy from erecting a
battery, as likewise three other during the Siege, and drew a line of 500 foot.

After the misfortune which happened to the Lord Goring his Army, the loss of
Bridge-water and Sherborne, and upon his Majesty's sudden recesse out of Wales,
his Highness not having received any command or intimation to follow him, he
thought it might be more conducible to his Majesty's affairs for him to remain
there; and conceiving that the Enemies design after their former successes,
might be for Bristol, gave express orders, for all Inhabitants to victual
themselves for six months: and upon a strict survay, there were 2500 families
then remaining in the City, whereof 1500, through indigence and want, could
not provide for themselves. To supply this defect, his Highness caused 2000
bushels of Corn to be imported out of Wales. For further supply, his
Highness, upon the certain approach of the Enemies whole Army, commanded out
parties to drive in all the Cattle thereabouts; of which there were an
indifferent number.

The Ammunition was scant (considering that in the Forts, Castle, Line and
Streets, there being above 100 Cannon mounted) the quantity of powder
exceeding not 130 barrells: and at his Highness first coming thither, there
was not in the public magazine musket-balls for three hours fight, wherefore
he caused immediately great quantities of Lead to be cast into Bullet; and the
manufacture of match was quite down, and set up by his Highness during the
Siege.

His Highness having made all possible preparations, consulted with all us,
the Colonels of Posts, for our opinion concerning the tenablenesse of the Line:
our judgment general was, that notwithstanding, the Works and Line were very
defective, the circuit large, our numbers few; yet if we could repel one
general storm, the enemy would be discouraged from attempting the second time,
and the season of the year might advantage us, and incommodate them.

Upon this uncertainty his Highness made offer, that for his own person he
would attempt to break through with his Horse, with such Officers as could be
spared, leaving such as were requisite for the Fort and Castle.

This by all us the Colonells of Posts, and Officers was thought neither safe
nor honorable. In the second place he offered to put himself upon the defense
of the Castle and Fort, all the Officers were clear of opinion against this,
that in regard of the Nobility, and Gentry and such of the Town as had appeared
well affected, and the horse and foot which the Fort and Castle could not
receive, had thereby been left to the Sword of the Enemy, and in regard the
Fort and Castle in our opinions were not tenable against their army.

In the third place seeing that neither of the former ways could be taken, we
were all resolved to fall upon the best general defense that could be made of
the whole, wherein we might all share alike. These were the resolutions of all
we Colonells and Officers of the Posts, Castle and Fort, his Highness leaving
the free debate unto us, himself not being by, upon our own desires.

These were the results at a council of war, only I do not well remember that
the weakness of the Castle and Fort was at that instant, while I was present,
taken into consideration.

Signed, F. Hawley. John Russell. Somerset Fox. Will. Murry. Hen. Osburne. Hen.
Tillier. Mat. Appleyard.



The State and condition of the Line of fortifications about the City of
Bristoll, as likewise of the great Fort (as appears by the subscriptions of
the Engineers, who had taken an exact survay of them were as follows.
THe Line generally was three foot thick.

The height of it five foot where it was highest.

The graffe commonly six foot broad, and where it was widest but seven.

The depth in most parts four foot, and five where deepest.

Between Pryor-hill-Fort, Stokes Croft-gate, and beyond the little River
toward Laffords-gate, in which places the Enemy entered, not five foot high.

The graffe five foot broad, and all that part of the line much decayed.

The ditch of the great Fort on the right hand the gate before the face of the
Bulwork, was not four foot deep, and eighteen foot broad, so that horses did
go up and down into it.

The highest work of the Fort was not twelve foot high, and the curtens but
ten.

Within one hundred foot of the Fort, there was a deep hollow way, where the
enemy might lodge what numbers he pleased, and might be in the graffe the
first night, and in that part the Fort was minable.

Brandon-hill Fort, was about twelve foot above the level of the great Fort
and that being not able to make any long resistance, the Enemy gaining it,
would command the other.

The Hedges and Ditches without the Line were neither cut, nor levelled, so
that they lodged their men securely near our works, at their first approach.

We do here under our hands attest the particulars above written to be true.
B. De Gomme Engineer General. John Mansfield Engineer.



The resolution being then taken for a general defense, his Highness disposed
all the Colonells to their several Posts, and Forts upon the line. His
Highness being thus sollicitous for the securing of the place, the Enemy upon
the 22 of August appeared before the Town, upon Pine-hill to the South side. To
encounter them his Highness sent a party of horse commanded by Sir Richard
Crane (who in that action received his deaths wound) a little before that
Bedminster was fired, upon intelligence the Enemy intended that nigh^ to
quarter 2000 men in it, and notwithstanding the fi^^ the Enemy drew thither,
and plied their small shot all ^^ght.

August. 23. his Highness caused a traverse or blind of earth to be made
within the drawbridge without Temple gate, and the same day a battery was
raised in the Marsh for securing the River, and scouring the fields beyond it.
The Enemy began some brestworkes, and a battery on the hill without
Temple-gate, with a traverse cross the way to hinder our sallies.

In this time the enemy omitted no opportunity to solicit the minds of the
Inhabitants, Trayned-bands, and Auxiliaries, and to that purpose sent secretly
in these lines following, Signed and sealed by Sir Tho. Fairfax, and Oliver
Crumwell, as likewise further instructions to the Citizens of Bristoll, for the
delivery of Bristoll to the Parliament.

We do hereby promise and engage our selves, that all such Citizens of
Bristoll, now Inhabiting within the said City, which shall from henceforth
forbear to resist the Army under our command, in the attempting to enter the
said City, and the Lines of defense, and Forts made about it, and shall appear
to do their best endeavor for the delivering in of the same into our hands,
for the use of the Parliament shall (in case the said City be delivered into
our hands) be secured and protected by the authority of the Parliament, in the
enjoyment of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, as freely as in former times,
and as any other persons under the obedience of the Parliament, notwithstanding
any past Acts of hostility, or any other thing by them done in the former
delivering up of the said City to the Enemy, or maintaining of it against the
Parliament, or otherwise in assistance of the Enemy. For assurance, and in
testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals, this 25 of August.
1645.

Subscribed and sealed by, Thomas Fairfax. Oliver Crumwell.



Further instructions to the Citizens of Bristoll that shall endeavor the
delivering up of the City to the Parliaments forces.
1. THat if any doubtful expressions, or defects be conceived to be in the
notes sent in under our hands, the said Citizens shall have any other draught
to the same purpose, signed and sealed by us in as full and ample rearms, as
themselves shall devise and send forth to us.

2. That what liberty, freedom or immunity the said Citizens shall find
needful to promise to any common Soldiers, or Officers of the Enemy within
the Garrison (not exceeding the degree of Colonells) for the more sure and
speedy delivering up of the said City unto us, shall be fully made good by us.

3. That they fall to some speedy resolution, and attempt for the purposes
aforesaid, because else we shall fall to some attempt by our own Forces, and
(if thereby through Gods blessing it be taken) we shall hardly be able to
withhold the Soldiers from doing that violence and damage to the City, which
we earnestly desire and study to prevent.

4. For the particular way of their attempt we must expect advertisement from
them, and cannot particularly direct them, but in general we offer that it may
be either by seizing the Prince, or possessing or delivering up some Fort, or
Work which we may enter, or setting open some Port, or by a general rising
to assault and oppose the Princes Forces, or otherwise as they shall find any
speedy opportunity, and upon the perceiving of any such rising, or attempt of
theirs within, we shall apply our Forces accordingly to enter for their
assistance, and if by any such means of theirs we enter, we shall undertake to
secure the City from loss or violence by our soldiers.

5. If they think themselves by their own force able to master the Enemy, or
by any design to make themselves masters of the commanding Forts without our
assistance, we shall not bring our Army into the City, unless they desire it.


Upon the interception of which papers his Highness caused several suspected,
and active persons to be restrained, which prevented the design, and withal
by his personal presence secured the great Fort from surprizall.

In the mean time his Highness to interrupt the Enemies working made several
sallies, all which succeeded according to design.

August 26. Soon after a storm being expected by the Enemies drawing great
bodies of horse and foot, his Highness double manned the Line, but nothing
followed.

August. 28. Five Parliament Ships entered Kingrode, and fore't Captain Boon,
who commanded the tenth Whelpe to run up the Severne for security.

August 29. The Enemy was making a bridge over Avon to conjoine their quarters.

Sept. 3. His Highness began a work, or cutting off within the Line by
Laffords-gate.

Sir Thomas Fairfax his Summons.
SIR, For the service of the Parliament, I have brought this Army before the
City of Bristoll, and do summon you in their names to render it, with all the
Forts belonging to the same into my hands to their use. Having used this plain
language, as the business requires, I wish it may be as effectual with you,
as it is satisfactorie to my self, that I do a little expostulate with you
about the surrender of the same, which I confess is a way not common, and
which I should not have used, but in respect to such a person, and to such a
place. I take into consideration Your Royal Birth, and relation to the Crown
of England, Your honor, courage, and the virtue of Your Person, and the
strength of that place, which You may think Your Self bound, and able to
maintain.

SIR, The Crown of England is and will be where it ought to be, we fight to
maintain it there, but the King misled by evil Counselors, or through a
seduced heart has left His Parliament, and His people; (under God the best
assurance of his Crown and Family) the maintenance of this Schism is the
ground of this unhappy War on your part, and what sad effects it has produced
in the three Kingdoms, is visible to all men. To maintain the rights of the
Crown of England jointly (a principal part whereof is that the King in
supreme Acts concerning the whole State is not to be advised by men, of whom
the Law takes no notice, but by His Parliament the great Council of the
Kingdom; in whom, (as much as man is capable of) he hears all his people as
it wereat once, advising him, and in which multitude of Counselors lies His
safety, and His peoples interest; and to set him right in this, has been the
constant, and faithful endeavor of the Parliament, and to bring those wicked
instruments to Justice that have misled Him) is a principal ground of our
fighting.

SIR, If God makes this clear to you as he has to us, I doubt not but he will
give you a heart to deliver this place, notwithstanding all the other
considerations of ho^, courage, fidelity, etc. Because their consistency (...)
^se in the present business depends upon the right and wrongfulnesse of this
that has been said: and if upon such conviction you should surrender it, and
save the loss of blood, or hazard of spoiling such a City, it would be an
occasion glorious in its self, and joyful to us for the restoring of you to
the indeer'd affection of the Parliament, and people of England, the truest
friends to Your Family, it has in the World.

But if this be hid from your eyes, and that through your wilfulness, this so
great, so famous, and ancient a City and so full of people be (by Your putting
us to force the same) exposed to ruin, and the extremity of War, which yet we
shall in that case as much as possible endeavor to prevent) then I appeal to
the righteous God to be Judge between You and us, and to require the wrong.

And let all England judge whether the burning of its Towns, ruining its
Cities, and destroying its people be a good requital from a person of your
family, which has had the prayers, tears, purses, and blood of its Parliament
and people, and (if you look on either as now divided) which has ever had
that same party both in Parliaments, and amongst the people most zealous for
their assistance, and restitution, which you now oppose, and seek to destroy,
and whose constant grief has been, that their desires to serve your Family
have been ever hindered or made fruitless by that same party about his Majesty,
whose counsels you act, and whose interest you pursue in this unnatural war

I expect your speedy answer to the summons with the return of the bearer this
evening, and remain

Sept. 4. 1645. Your Highness humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.


His Highness reply was only to know whether he would give leave for a
messenger to go to his Majesty to know his pleasure, which occasioned Sir
Thomas Fairfax to return this answer.

SIR,
THe overture of sending to the King to know his pleasure I cannot give way to,
because of delay; I confess your answer does intimate your intention not to
surrender without His Majesty's consent; yet (because it is but implicit) I
shall send again to know a more positive answer from your self, which I
desire may be such, as may render me capable to approve my self

Sept. 5. 1645. Your Highness humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.


Whereupon his Highness sent him these following Propositions; for during a
Treaty we might strengthen our works within, hear from the King, and had he
assented unto our demands we should have required a confirmation of them by
the Parliament, which protraction of time would have been our advantage.

At the Council of War, present
Prince Rupert, Lord Hawley, Lord Lumley, Col. John Russell, Sir Matthew
Appleyard, Colonel Tillier, Colonel Fox, Col. Robert Slingesby, Col. Walter
Slingesby, Col. Murrey, Lieut. Colonel Osborne.
SIR,
Whereas I received your Letter for the delivery of the City, Forts, and
Castle of Bristol, and being willing to join with you for the sparing of
blood, and preserving of His Majesty's subjects, I have upon those grounds and
none other, sent you these following Propositions:

1. That my self, all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemun, and
Soldiers, of Horse and Foot, that have served either His Majesty or Parliament
in England, or elsewhere, as likewise all persons whatsoever, men or women, now
resident here in this City of Bristol, Castle, and Forts thereof, shall have
free liberty to march away out of the said City, Castle, and Forts, with
their Arms, flying Colors, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Pistols cockt,
Swords drawn, Matches lighted on both ends, Bullets in their mouths, and as
much Powder as they can carry about them, with all their Bag, and Baggage,
Horses, Arms and other Furniture, ten pieces of Cannon, fifty barrels of
Powder, and Match and Bullet proportionable.

2. That neither my own Person, nor the person of any Nobleman, Commander,
Officer, Gentleman, or Soldier, or any other of mine or their Retinues, be
searched, molested, or troubled, upon what pretense soever, but left to their
liberties, to depart or stay as it shall be most convenient for them.

3. That none of your Army whatsoever shall entice or persuade any Officer or
Soldier of mine from their Regiments or Colors, with any promise of
preferment or rewards.

4. That all such Officers and Soldiers that are hurt, and sick, and cannot
now march out of this City, Castle, and Forts, shall have liberty to stay
until they be recovered, and then have safe conduct to go wheresoever they
please, either to any of His Majesty's Armies, or Garrisons, or their own
houses, where they may live quiet, in the interim they being sick and hurt may
be protected by you, and have civil usage.

That all prisoners taken on both sides since the beginning of this siege be
forthwith set at liberty.

6. That my self, and those abovementioned be not required to march further
in a day, then what conveniently we may, and that a day or two of rest may be
allowed upon our march if we shall find it requisite; and that we be
accommodated with free quarters during our march, and a sufficient convoy to
any of the Kings Armies or Garrisons which I shall name, to secure us in our
quarter, and upon our march, from injuries and incivilities that shall any way
be offered unto us; and likewise that there be one hundred and fifty
carriage-horses, and forty Waines with sufficient Teames provided for carriages
of all sorts.

7. That no person here in these Articles mentioned shall be in their march,
Rendezvous, or Quarters stopped, searched, or plundered, upon any pretense
whatsoever. That two Officers be appointed by you, the one for accommodation of
free quarters for Officers, Soldiers, and others, and the other for providing
of horses and carriages for our baggage and train.

8. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Citizens, Resiants, and any other
person within the City, Suburbs, or liberties of the City of Bristol, shall at
any time when they please have free liberty to remove themselves, their goods,
and families, and to dispose thereof at their pleasures, according to the
known and enacted Laws of the Land, either to live at their own houses, or
elsewhere, and to enjoy their houses, lands, goods, and estates, without any
molestation, and to have protections for that purpose; and this Article to
extend to all whose estates are sequestered, or not sequestered, and that they
may rest quietly at their abodes, and travel freely, and safely upon their
occasions, and for their better removeall they may have Letters of safe conduct
with horses and carriages at reasonable rates upon demand.

9. That all persons abovementioned may have liberty to go beyond the seas at
any time within three months, as their occasions shall require.

10. That the Lines, Forts, Castle, and all other Fortifications about or in
the City, be forthwith slighted, and the City stated in the same condition it
was before the beginning of this unnatural war, and that the Parliament during
this war place no garrison in it.

11. That no Churches be defaced, that the several members of the foundation
of this Cathedral shall quietly enjoy their houses, and Revenues belonging to
their places, and that the Ministers like wise of this City may enjoy their
Benefices without any trouble.

12. That no Oaths be imposed upon any person now in this City, Suburbs, and
Liberties, other then such as are required by the ancient and enacted Laws of
this Land.

13. That the Major, Sherriffes, Aldermen and Citizens, within this
Corporation of the City of Bristoll, shall be free in their persons and
Estates, and enjoy all their Privileges, Liberties, and Immunities, in as full
and ample manner as formerly at any time they did before the beginning of this
War; And that they have freedom of trade both by land and Sea, paying such
customs and duties as formerly they have done to His Majesty, and that no
Mulct nor Fine be imposed upon any person mentioned in this Article, or
questioned for any Act or thing done before the day of our marching forth, upon
any pretense whatsoever, And that noe Freequarters be put upon them without
their own consents.

14. That all other persons whose dwellings are in this City, and now absent,
may have the full benefit of these Articles as if they were present.

15. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, who have Goods in this City, and
now present or absent, may have liberty at any time within three Months to
dispose of their Goods as they please.

16. That there be no Plundering, or taking away of any man's person or any part
of his Estate under what pretense soever, and that Justice, according to the
known and enacted Laws of the land, be administered to all persons within this
City, by the civil Magistrates.

17. And for the performance of all these Articles, J expect such Hostages to
be given as J shall accept of, and hereunto J desire your speedy answer.

Sir by this you may evidently perceive my inclination to peace, and you may be
assured that I shall desire nothing but what shall be with relation to his
Majesty's honor, and the saftie of the Kingdom, and what may become Sir

Sept. 7. 1645. Your servant RUPERT.


Upon perusal of which Sir Thomas Fairfax returns this answer.

SIR,
I Have perused your Propositions, wherein some things are doubtfully expressed,
other things inconsistent to the duty I owe to them I serve, notwithstanding to
the end I may give assurance, that I earnestly desire to save effusion of
blood, and the ruin of a City, and people, that may be so serviceable to the
Crown and Kingdom; If your Highness please, that Commissioners may treat
between us concerning the accommodating of things, I hope to make it evident to
the world, that what shall respect the honor of a Soldier, due civilities to
all men, the good and welfare of the people of that City, both in passing by
what is past, and restoring them to the Privilege of all other subjects, and
to the immunities of their City, will readily be condescended unto by Me, as
becomes a Gentleman and a Christian. And to the end no time may be lost, I have
here enclosed sent you the names of three Commissioners, who upon the return
of Hostages of equal condition unto me, shall attend your Hignner sufficiently
instructed to conclude on my part; Provided the said Treaty be ended by nine
of the clock this night, and to this I desire your Answer within the space of
an hour, and remain

September. 7. 1645. Your Highness humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax.
The names of Commissioners, for whom if a Treaty be admitted, I desire a safe
Convoy by this Bearer.

Collonell Ireton, Commissary General of Horse. Colonel Fleetwood. Colonel
Pickering.



His Highness replied in these words.

SIR,
I Thought I had sufficiently explained my self in my Propositions, and that
there was nothing doubtful, or could be inconsistent with the duty you owe to
them you serve, but since it seems otherwise to you, I desire you would set
down your doubts and exceptions in writing, to which you shall have a speedy
answer from,

September. 7. 1645. Your servant, RUPERT.


Which occasioned this following Letter, and Propositions from Sir Thomas
Fairfax.

SIR,
I Perceive by your last, that you decline any Treaty by Commissioners, and for
me to send you in writing my doubts, land exceptions to your Propositions, and
expect your answers, were a way like to give occasion to many new Messages, and
delays, to avoid which, and to bring these overtures to a speedy resolution, I
have here sent you what I am willing to grant, beyond which, I may not go, and
what I demand, from which by Gods blessing I shall not recede; I have observed
the order of your own Propositions, and upon every one have granted what is
honorable for your Highness, or the safety and welfare of the City to have,
and fit for me, in honor and faithfulness to them I serve, to give, and this I
have set down, as near at I could in your own words, so far as I found
them clear, though with some repetitions of the same things. By all this I
hope I have sufficiently evidenced my tenderness of blood, and of this City,
and have cleared my self before God, and the world, from what evil shall
ensue upon your refusal; If you except the terms, having here sent two
Copies sealed and signed by me, I shall expect that you return one of them
Signed and sealed by your self, also to be brought back to me this day by six
of the clock in the evening at furthest, otherwise I shall conclude your
refusal, and account my self absolved, save from the desire of being, Sir,

Stapleton 8 Sept. 1645. Your Highness Humble servant, Tho, Fairfax.


Articles of agreement for the Surrender of the City of Bristoll, with the
Castle and Forts thereof, between his Highness Prince Rupert, and his
Excellency Sir Tho, Fairfax, made Sept. 8. 1645.
THat his Highness Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers,
Gentlemen and Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever now resident in the
City of Bristoll, and the Castle and Ports thereof, shall have free liberty to
march away out of the said City, Castle and Forts, with their Arms, flying
Colors, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Pistols cockt, swords drawnt,
Matches lighted, Bullet in their mouths, every Foot soldier his Bandiliers
full of Powder, with Match proportionable, and every Horseman his Flaske full
of Powder, with all the Bag and baggage, Horses and furuiture, four pieces of
Ordnance, twenty barrels of Powder, match and bullet proportionable.

2. That none of the Persons aforementioned, or of their Retin, es shall be
searched, molested or troubled upon what pretense soever.

3. That none of the Parliament Army whatsoever shall entice, or persuade any
Officer or Soldier belonging to Prince Rupert, from their Regiments or Colors
with any promise of preferment or reward.

4. That all such Officers and Soldiers that are hurt or sick, and cannot now
march out of the City, Castle, and Forts, shall have liberty to stay until
they be recovered, and then have safe conduct to go wheresoever they please,
either to any of his Majesty's Armies, or Garrisons or their own houses, where
they may live quiet, and that in the interim they shall be protected by Sir
Tho. Fairfax, and have civil usage.

5. That all Prisoners taken on both sides since the beginning of this Siege,
be forthwith set at liberty.

6. That the Persons above mentioned, that are to march away shall have a
sufficient Convoy to any of the Kings Armies or Garrisons which the Prince
shall name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristoll, to secure them in their
march from all injuries and incivilities that shall or may be offered to them,
for which march they shall have eight days allowed from their marching out of
Bristoll, and free quarter by the way during the same space, and shall have
carriage horses, and Waines with teames provided sufficient for Carriages of
all sorts from quarter to quarter, they giving caution forthwith to return the
same immediately.

7. That none of the Persons above mentioned shall be in their said march,
rendezvous or quarters, searched (...) plundered upon any pretense whatsoever;
and that two Officers shall be appointed by Sir Thomas Fairfax, the one for
accommodation of Quarters for them by the way the other for providing of horses
and carriages for the baggage and train.

8. That all the Citizens of Bristoll, resiant within the City, Suburbs, and
Liberties thereof, and all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen, and others resiant
within the same, that have not otherwise been engaged in Arms, or hostility
against the Parliament then in defense of the said City, Castle, or Forts,
shall freely enjoy the liberty of their persons, and also of their houses,
lands, goods, and estates at their own disposal, according to the known and
enacted Laws of the Land (they continuing from henceforth either in the said
City, or elsewhere under the obedience and protection of the Parliament) and
this Article to extend to those of them whose estates are sequestered, as well
as those that are not sequestered and that they may quietly rest at their
abodes, or travel freely and safely upon their occasions, and for their
removal of their goods, shall have such liberty, as is hereafter provided in
the fifteen Article.

9. That all or any of the persons abovementioned, who shall desire to go
beyond the Seas upon their private occasions, and shall give assurance from
henceforth not to bear Arms or act any thing against the Parliament, or to
the prejudice of their Affairs, shall have liberty to pass to any place
beyond the Seas any time within three months.

10. That no Garrison save the Citizens themselves shall without their consent
be put into the City, except in the Castle and Forts, and what force shall be
placed, therein shall be maintained at the charge of the State.

11. That no Churches be defaced, that the several Members of the foundation
of the Cathedral in Bristoll, shall quietly enjoy their houses belonging to
their places, and for the Revenues of them, as also the Ministers of the City
for their Benefices, they shall be in the same state and condition with other
Clergy men of their quality continuing in the protection and obedience of the
Parliament.

12. That no Oaths other then such as are required by the enacted laws of the
Land shall be imposed upon any person, that now is, and shall continue in the
said City, Suburbs, and Liberties, either by the General, or any other by his
authority.

13. That the Major, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and Citizens within the Corporation of
the City of Bristoll shall be free in their persons and estates, and enjoy all
their Privileges, Liberties, and Immunities in as full and ample manner as
formerly before the beginning of this War, and shall have freedom of trade
by Land and Sea to all places, and with all persons not in hostility against
the Parliament, paying such Duties and Customs to the Officers appointed by
the Parliament, as formerly they have done to his Majesty, and that no Mulct
or Fine be imposed on any person mentioned in this Article, nor any of them
questioned upon pretense of any act or thing done or committed before the date
hereof, the Kings Forces marching forth as aforesaid, and that no free quarters
shall be put upon them without their own consents.

14. That all other persons whose dwellings are in this City, and now absent,
shall have the full benefit of these Articles as if they were present, provided
that such of them as are elsewhere in Arms against the Parliament, do come in
within one month after the date hereof.

15. That all Noblemen. Gentlemen, and others who have goods in the said City,
and are now present or absent, shall have liberty at any time within one month
to dispose of their said goods as they please, except it be Arms or Ammunition.

16. That there shall be no plundering admitted under what pretense soever, nor
any taking away of any man's person, or any part of his estate contrary to these
Articles, and that Justice according to the known Laws of this Land be
administered to all persons within this City by the civil Magistrates.

17. That in consideration hereof, the City of Bristoll, with the Castle, and
all the Forts and Fortifications thereof, without any sleighting or defacing
thereof, and all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and other furniture and
provisions of war therein, without diminution or imbezlement (excepting what
is allowed to be carried as before) shall be delivered up to Sir Tho. Fairfax
on Tuesday morning next by nine of the clock, at which time the Prince with
all the persons mentioned in the first Article that march out, then naming what
Army or Garrison of the Kings he will march unto.

18. That none of them in their marching out, or before, shall plunder, hurt,
or spoil the town, or any person in it, nor carry out any thing but what is
properly their own (except before excepted.)

19. That the Convoy, and two Officers to be sent with the Prince (as before)
in the sixth and seventh Articles, shall not have any violence offered or done
to them by any of the Kings forces during the said eight days allowed for the
Prince his March, and seven days more for their return to the Army.

20. That sufficient Hostages shall be delivered immediately upon Signing
hereof for performance of those Articles on both parts,

Signed and Sealed. Tho. Fairfax.


Wherein his Highness finding sundry omissions of several clauses, and some
Propositions totally left out, returned him this Letter with the Postscript.

SIR,
ALthough I conceive my former propositions so well grounded upon honor and
justice, as that I cannot well recede from them, yet for preventing of effusion
of blood, and for the welfare of this place with which I am entrusted, I am
willing so far to assent unto you as to leave the Castle undemolished, but for
the other forts and lines, to have them absolutely slighted, and for all the
other arricles to stand firm as I proposed them, to which if you will assent,
I will then send Commissioners unto you to regulate, and settle all things
between us, which will occasion me to rest.

Sept. 8. 1645. Your servant Rupert.
SIR, I have returned you your propositions again, finding many alterations and
omissions in them, very prejudicial to those whom I am obliged in honor, and
am resolved to protect.




But Sir Thomas Fairfax being constant to his own Propositions gave this
answer.

SIR,
I Have offered what is fair for your honor, and the townesmens immunity, and
for what I demanded, I can accept no less, except I should grant all for
nothing, and though for that point of the Townsmen security, I shall be most
willing to supply any thing that might be thought wanting in my offers, yet to
admit a new consideration upon your propositions, would tend to and (I doubt)
end in nothing else but further delay, for by all your letters, and the whole
carriage in this businenesse, I find the advantage of time wholly, or chiefly
intended. As you have thus far had your end therein, I have not lost mine, that
is, to make my proceedings more clear, and innocent before God and the world,
and having done this, I can with a clear confidence trust God for a better
issue in an other way; you have my resolution, which if you accept not, I
desire nothing further but the return of my trumpet by noone, and that he may
not be detayned as formerly. I remain Sir.

Sept. 9. 1645. Your highness humble servant Tho: Fairfax.


Hereupon his Highness and the Commanders, resolving not to break off nor
conclude the Treaty until that they might hear from the King, unless forced
thereunto, returned this Answer.

His Highness his Answer.
SIR,
HOw fair your offers are to my honor, I hope you will give me the liberty to
judge, finding you wanting in your care of the Noblemen, Commanders, and
Soldiers that are under my protection, of whom I am bound to have an equal
care with my self, and am sorry to find so ill a construction made of my fair
proceedings and intentions in this my intercourse of Letters; since you
interpret that a delay, which on my part was but a compliance to what you
propounded, tending to the prevention of effusion of blood, and to the good of
the Kingdom, to which the sleighting of the Castle, Forts and works was the
most conduceable means, since that can only settle this City in the condition
of its former peace, and might have bin a leading president to the happiness
of the whole Kingdom. Thus you may see the reallity of my ends, which since
you took the liberty to question, give me leave to tell you, that yours have
not been such to me as you have professed before God and the world, by what I
have seen under your hand and seal proposed to others, nevertheless I shall
never decline to embrace any overture that tends to the general peace of this
Nation, and in particular of this City, and those under my protection and
command, which is the only endeavor and study of Sir.

Sept. 9. 1645. Your servant Rupert.


UPon the tenth of September the enemy stormed the line generally, about two in
the morning, and his Highness having received intelligence a little before of
it, all were in a readiness to receive them, they entered the line where the
Townsmen and new-VVelch were, as at Stokes-croft gate, where the Officer in
chief who was Major of the Town was slain in the place, and at Laffords
gate, where many of the Officers and Soldiers were taken and killed, and the
same time they stormed Pryor Hill Fort, and took it, which was the loss of
the whole line, they being beaten of in the other parts of the Town, then the
day breaking we found them in full possession of the line and fort, which
caused our horse and foot to retreat to the great sort, who were presently
commanded into the City to make that good, leaving the other works
sufficiently manned, as Golsons fort, Brandon hill, and the new Redoute with out
the line; finding our selves in this condition, and considering the engagement
of those within the City and Castle, and that the Lord Hawley, Sir Matthew
Appleyard, and Colonel Slingesby with their men were in danger to be cut off,
the enemy being between us and them, his highness was moved by the Officers to
entertain a treaty in time, before those were lost, his Highness condescending
thereunto, sent a trumpet to Sir Thomas Fairfax to know whether he would treat
or not, who accepting it, Commissioners were nominated on our part, Sir William
Vavasour, Sir John Men's and Colonel Henry Tillier, the first thing proposed
was a cessation of arms, and in the mean time every one to keep his post.
They first proposed his Highness former propositions, but our condition being
then altered, and they sensible of their own success, would not admit them,
but would treat upon new propositions, which after long debate were as
follows.

Articles of agreement between the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of
his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Excellency Sir Thomas is Fairfax, for the
surrender of the City of Bristoll. Sept. 10. 1645.
1. THat his Highness Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers,
Gentlemen, and Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever now residing in the
City of Bristoll and the Castle and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said
City, Castle and Forts thereof, with Colors, Pikes, and Drums, Bag and
Baggage; The Prince his Highness, all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Officers in
Commission, with their Horses and Arms, and their servants with their Horses
and Swords, and Common Soldiers, with their Swords, the Prince his lifeguard
of Horse, with their Horses and Arms, and two hundred and fifty Horse besides
to be disposed of by the Prince, And his lifeguard of firelocks with their
Arms, and each one of them one pound of powder, and a proportion of bullet, and
that none of the persons, who are to march out upon this article shall
plundered, searched, or molested.

2. That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be sick or wounded in the City,
Castle, and Forts, shall have liberty to stay until their recovery, and then
have safe conduct to go to his Majesty, and in the interim be protected.

3. That the persons above mentioned who are to march away shall have a
sufficient convoy provided for them, for their security to any such Garrison of
the Kings, as the Prince shall name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristoli,
and shall have eight days allowed for their march thither, and shall have free
quarter by the way, and shall have two Officers appointed to attend them for
their accommodation, and twenty wagons for their baggage if they have occasion
to use the same.

4. That all the Citizens of Bristoll, and all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen,
and all other persons residing in the said City and suburbs of the same, shall be
saved from all plunder and violence, and be secured in their persons and
estates, from the violence of the Soldier, and shall enjoy those rights and
liberties which other subjects enjoy under the protection and obedience of the
Parliament.

5. That in consideration hereof, the City of Bristoll with the Castle and all
the Forts and fortifications thereof, without any slighting and defacing
thereof, and all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and all other furniture and
provisions of War (excepting what is before allowed) shall be delivered up to Sir
Thomas Fairfax on thursday the eleventh of this month, by three of the clock
in the afternoon, without any diminution or imbezlement, his Highness Prince
Rupert then naming to what Army or Garrison of the Kings he will march too.

6. That none of the persons who are to march out on this agreement, shall
plunder, hurt, or spoil the town, or any person in it, or carry out any thing
but what is properly their own.

7. That upon signing these articles Colonel Okey, and all persons now in
prison in the City of Bristoll, the Castle, or Forts of the same, shall
immediately be set at liberty.

8. That sufficient hostages, such as he shall approve, be given to Sir Thomas
Fairfax this night, who are to remain with him until the City be delivered
unto him.

9. That neither the Convoy, nor Officers sent with the Prince, shall recieve
any injury in their going or coming bache, and shall have seven days allowed
for their return.

10. That upon delivery of the town sufficient hostages be given for
performance of the articles on both parts.

Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of his Highness Prince.
Rupert, William Vavafour, John Men's, Henry Tillier.

Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax. E. Mountague, Tho: Rainsborow, I. Pickering.



But in that particular point of laying down our fire arms, there could be no
conclusion made without his Highness pleasure first known, who thereupon called
all the Commanders to deliver their opinions therein, and upon full debate they
concluded, as by their subscriptions appears, that if better conditions could
not be obtained, then to accept of those

It is our general opinion that if better conditions cannot be granted, we
assent to the leaving of the fire arms, of the private Soldiers.

Rupert, Horatio Carey, Io. Steward, Ed. Manwaring, Tho. Leigh Will. Powell,
John Russell William Monday, Tho. Daniell, Mor Touchet, B. De Gomme, Ed.
Hutchinson, Theo. Kirton. Will. Preity, Tho. Coningsby, Fra. Radcliffe, H.
Ventris, W. Symonds. Rich. Price.



And thereupon there was a full conclusion of the Treaty. The next day upon
some insolences of the Soldiers, his Highness sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax, that
the Articles were violated, and that if there was not a present redress, he
would stand upon his own defense, and rather dye then suffer those injuries,
and thereupon for his Highness satisfaction we had liberty to march with our
arms unto our quarters.

For some days before the approach of the Enemy, and during the whole siege,
his Highness received not any letter from his Majesty, nor from the Prince of,
Wales, nor from any general, or minister of state, until his coming to
Cyrencister, only the Governor of Hereford signified the rising of the Scots,
and their marching toward Gloucester, and a desire to have some ammunition
from him. Notwithstanding his Highness made several dispatches by all the
convenient means he could.

The Well in the great fort was not half finished, the water scant, and
troubled, and far insufficient for the use of the numbers that were there.

It may be objected that notwithstanding the enemies power and force, and their
entering the line, yet the Castle and great Fort might have held out so long
that probably relief might have come, and that therefore there was not any
pressing necessity to precipitate the rendition of those places.

To which this is replied, that any timely relief was utterly improbable,
considering that during the whole siege, his Highness near received any
intelligence from his Majesty, nor from the West, and though his Highness well
knew in what condition his Majesty's Army was, yet if his Majesty could have
drawn together all the power he expected, the enemy could have blockt up the
Castle, and Fort, and have advanced twelve thousand men to have fought a
battle, or else have secured themselves within the line against all
opposition, besides they were so absolutely masters of all the passes, and had
so barracado'd up the ways, that a small force might have hindered a great
Army. And at that time General Poyntz so closely observed his Majesty's
motions that releife was as improbable to be expected as easy to be desired.
And his Highness could not promise himself any more likelihood of succors from
the West, Bridgewater, Sherborne, and other interjacent Garrisons, being
already reduced by the Enemy, and Colonel Massey lying with a considerable
body of Horse and Foot in places of advantage ready to intercept and stop the
Lord Goring. Moreover had there been any probability of relief in any
reasonable time, yet the line being forced Pryor hill Fort an important place
lost, the Officer to whose trust it was committed, diserting it (who never
since that time appeared) the City had thereby been exposed to the ^e and fury
of the enemy, so many gallant men who had so long and faithfully served his
Majesty, (...) his Highness conceived himself in honor, obliged to preserve as
dearly as his own) had been left to the slaughter and rage of a prevailing
enemy.

Nevertheless, although these reasons were of that validity, that his Highness
could but despair of relief, yet another important consideration was in it
self singly sufficient to exclude all credence of possibility, which was that
the Scots, upon removal from Hereford, marched to Gloucester, where their
whole body was the eighth of September, an intermediate place, near which his
Majesty must have marched, and can any rational man imagine them so stupidly
unactive, as to suffer his Majesty to pass so near them without opposition,
considering what effective Forces they had, and their Commanders neither
ignorant or idle to entertain oppertunities for action.

CHARLES R.

WHereas our right dear and entirely beloved Nephew, P. Rupert did at a
council of war, held by us at Newark the 18. of this instant October. there being
then present Our right trusty and welbeloved Cousin, and Counceller Mountague E.
of Lindsey, Lord great Chamberlain of England, Our right trusty, and right
welbeloved Cousin, Richard Earl of Cork, Our right trusty and welbeloved Jacob
Lord Astley field Marshall General of Our Army; John Lord Bellasis, Captain
General of Our Horse guards; and Charles Lord Gerrard, Lievtenant-Generall of
all Our Horse forces; Our trusty and welbeloved Sir Richard Willis, Knight and
Baronet, Governor of Newarke, and John Ashburnham Esquire, Our Treasurer at
War, desire to clear himself for the rendering of the City and Garrison of
Bristoll with the Castle and Forts thereof, and thereupon produced a Narrative
of the matter of fact during the said siege, with the Articles for the rendering
of those places, which being accordingly read and considered; We were then
pleased to say, that We did not believe Our said Nephew to be guilty of any
the least want of courage or sidelity to Us in the doing thereof, but withal
We believed that he might have kept the Castle and Fort a longer time. We
having absolutely resolved speedily to have drawn together all the Forces we
possibly could, and to have hazarded our own Person for his relief; Our
design being so laid as that in probability it would have succeeded, to which
our said right dear Nephew answered, that what ever he did therein, was by the
advice of the Council of war of that Garrison, and that he could not in his
judgment possibly expect such relief, besides he alleged that he had not
received from Us any intimation thereof, but said, that if he had, he would
have maintained those places to the last man, though the tender regard he had
to the preservation of so many Officers and Soldiers, was the chief reason
that induced him to capitulate for the whole, they having so long and
faithfully served Us, all which Our said right Dear Nephew humbly submitted to
Our judgment. Who upon which at a second hearing before Our Self this 21 day
of October, the Lords and others above named being then likewise present, and
upon a serious consideration of the whole matter, We were then pleased to
declare that we were fully satisfied that our said Right dear Nephew Prince
Rupert, is not guilty of any the least want of courage or fidelity to Us, or
our service in that action, and We then gave leave to the Lords and others
above specified, to declare their opinions in that point. Who upon Our leave,
and a full consideration of the narrative formerly delivered, did unanimously
concur with Us, Declaring likewise that our said Right Dear Nephew is not
guilty of any the least want of courage or fidelity to Us or Our Service in
that action.

Given under Our sign Manual at Our Court at Newark this 21 of October, 1645.
FINIS.

