SIR Benjamin Rudyerd HIS SPEECH FOR PROPOSITIONS OF PEACE TO BE SENT TO His
Majesty: Spoken in the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. and R. C. for William Sheares, 1642.

Sir Benjamin Rudyerd his Speech for Propositions of Peace to be sent to His
Majesty, spoken in the high Court of Parliament.
M. SPEAKER,
We do all know, but I beseech you Sir let us consider, That we are in a war,
That a war does always carry a sting of Gods anger in it, That a Civil war is
the height of his fury.

The Romans, a wise People, no Christians were so sadly sensible of a Civil
war as they; who did manage it, would never advertise the Senate of any
success whatsoever: And although they were exceedingly transported with the
glory of a triumph, yet their Laws did not permit any man to enter the City in
triumph, for the finishing of a Civil war. One of the wisest of them said,
Omnia sunt misera in bello Civili, sed nihil miserius ipsa Victoria; All things
are miserable in a Civil war, but nothing more miserable then a Victory it
self. A Civil war is a two-edged Sword, it cuts and devoures on both sides;
if it continne amongst us, we may kill up on another till we make our selves
an easy and scornful Prey to some ambitious Neighbor.

Now we probably foresee, That there is likely to be a great alteration in the
Affairs of Christendom, by the death of Cardinal Richelieu. The King of
France had signed under his hand a Treaty of Peace with the King of Spain: But
the Cardinal by his power and interest brake that Design; it was his last
work. Now, Cardinal Mazarini is admitted into his Employments, an Italian, a
stranger, and therefore may prosecute other Ends; Besides, the King himself
may relaps into a former Opinion: So that if there should be a Peace between
France and Spain, the French will have leisure and opportunity to assist here.
And it has been twice the Fate of this Kingdom to be conquered by
Auxiliaries. It is frequent in Histories, That many other Nations have bin
subdued by those whom they called in to help them. Jf we do not rid our selves
of this War by the Spring, we shall see this Kingdom filled and infested by
Foreign Armies.

Sir, if the King and we were now One, and should join in one way, we should
find work more then enough to make up the torn, broken, shatterd Pieces that
lie presently before us in two Kingdoms: What then shall we do in greater
Distractions, in greater Necessities, in greater Perplexities still growing
upon us?

Jf but Ireland were lost, the Jrish would prove the most dangerous Enemies
that ever this Kingdom had. They would soon grow rich, by the opportunity of
their situation for Trade, they would soon grow strong in Shipping, having so
many good Harbors, and then confederated with other Enemies, what Mischief,
what Ruin may they not bring upon us? But what may sooner come from thence J
will not mention. No man is able to see through the miseries that nearly
threaten us, even ready to fall upon us.

Wherefore (Master Speaker) let us as wise Men, as charitable Christians, as
loving Subjects, send Propositions of Peace to the King. J do verily believe,
that God will bless us more in a Treaty, then in more Blood. His will be done.

FINIS.

