The fatal BLOW Given to the EARL OF Newcastles Army, BY THE SCOTS, Certified
by Letters read in the House of Commons this present Monday, April. 8. 1644.

500 Slain of the enemy upon the ground, A numerous company taken prisoners,
Sir Marmaduke Langdale and most of his chief Commanders slain.

All their Ordnance, Bag and Bagage, And the whole Army utterly ronted.

With A Report by a Messenger sent from the English Commissioners at
Sunderland, with Letters

By William Row. Secretary to the Commissioners.

Printed by Andrew Coe, and published according to Order, MDCXLIV.

The last proceedings from the Scots Army
MAach the 25 and 6 there was a great fight near Sunderland, there was of the
Scots about 300 wounded, some of them slain, and others since dead to the
number of about 60, this was all the loss we sustained in that fight, which
was within some 2 miles of the north of Sunderland: But of the Earl of
Newcastles men there were slain at the least 1500 amongst which were diverse of
great quality: Sir Marmaduke Langdale was slain and diverse of great note, some
of them his Excellency General Lesley gave them the credit of an honorable
burial according to their degreea, amongst which were at the least 30
Colonels, Majors, Captains, and Lievtenants, besides other Officers, and there
were taken prisoners from the enemy almost a hundred. They retreated toward
Newcastle, the Scots pursued them very close, Then the Earl of Newcastles
Forces spread themselves and disperced toward Chestry street and so to
Durham, and quartered toward Bishop Anckland, and Branspith to see if they
could rally their men, but the Scots still pursued them, clearing the way up
the River as they went.

March the twenty seventh, the Scots marched to wards Lumley Castle to clear
the River for Coals, his Excellency the Lord General having then eight pieces
of Ordnance carried from the ships, for before he had only two pieces, save
only his small pieces wherewith good execution was done.

From the twenty seventh of March, to the end of the month, the Scots were
and so are still in pursuit of the enemy: the Earl of Newcastle all this
while: not having taken a man of the Scots Army to my knowledge, but there are
daily many that desert the enemy, and come into us both from Newcastle, and
also from the Army, seven or eight every day: some days more, who take the
Covenant and join with our forces: there has thus come in at the least 200 and
more come in daily: declaring that they were forced against their wills to fight
under the Earl of Newcastle, and that in the fight the Earl of Newcastles horse
did force them to fight, and kept them in with their Canes and Swords: and
hurt, pistold, and slew many that retreated: and they do also affirm, that
there are many more in the Earl of Newcastles Army that would feign come
away, if they had an opportunity.

Since there has been many skirmishes, but none considerable before the date
hereof, but the Scots still pursue the enemy to prevent them as much as they
can from Rallying.

The Commissioners are come from Morpeth, and are all at Sunderland. The last
of the Commissioners came to Sunderland this present Monday, being the first of
April: which is a place where is great strait of provision, so that from thence
Thursday before, Geneall Leshley removed his Quarters, and carried away bag and
bggage: only 3000 he left for that Garrison, and, and er near it, and has
fortified the Town very wellr parsecured all places as he leaves them. But
anothe hint of the enemy lying toward Lumly Castle; has ipsdred the Lighters
from carrying the Coals to the shto; but there was a Convoy to have gone with
them, the ships, had not the battle prevented, but there is no doubt but the
enemy will be removed suddenly, and Coals sent speedily to London: There are
about 120 ships that ride in Sunderland Harbor for Coals, and there is so
great a quantity of Coals already above the ground at the Pits ready to be
taken away, that they are not to be valued: there is so vasta quantity: and
the Commissioners are resolved upon this course, to serve those ships first
with Coals that bring provision; which is but reason, their being such want of
provision amongst our men, not only to supply the Army; but also to encourage
others that come for coals thither to bring provision with them.

Sir Tho: Glenham is in Newcastle, but few co^siderable men of note, nor as
some that come out from thence to our men, certify not above 120 Soldiers
besides the Inhabitants, and they have denied the Earl of Newcastle to come in
or any of his Forcrs: more then what are in the Town already, till they see who
shall win the field.

The Town begins to be much straightened of provision, and are out of hope to have
any relief, especially since the Earl of Newcastle is driven Southward, and
the Scots compass the Town both by Sea and Land, in Northumberland and in the
Bishodrick, and they are blockt up by water, our Forces commanding the River.

The Scots are every day at Gatehead which they take great care to prevent the
enemy from burning themselves being possessed thereof, but the enemy Works
there are all pulled down and demolished, only a party are placed to prevent
the enemy from issuing out of the Town to deroy those Suburbs, and houses at
Gatehead.

By all probability, it is not any ways likely that Newcastle can hold out
long; and the Scots do daily eapect when they will sound a parley about the
delivering up thereof.

General Leshley is marched toward Durham, and the Marquess of Argile goes
along with him, and many of the Nobility: pursuing the Earl of Newcastle. A
Regiment lies at Blyth, and two Regiments at Morpeth, who do often issue out
to face Newcastle, and to keep the Country from being further wasted and
spoiled by the enemy.

There are are two Regiments that lie at Sunderland and a Regiment about a mile
off: In Sunderland are about 100 prisoner of the Earl of Newcastles Forces,
Colonels, Captains and other Officers, for common men, they turn them away and
will not charge themselves with keeping of such only those of note.

General Leshley is still in pursuit of the Enemy, not permitting them to
rally.

Thus far the report of John Hardy.

(There is a report that the Earl of Newcastle should fall upon the Scots on
Sund ay last near underland, and that the Scots gave them a repulse, slew and
took prisouers a numerous company of them, and utterly routed them, but this
the Messenger reports not, nor knows of it.)

By the Committees and Commissioners of the honorable houses of the Parliament
of England.

To all Commanders and Officers in the Parliament service both by sea and land.
WHereas the bearer hereof John Hardy was sent from the Parliament to us in
Scotland, and has since continued with us until now that he is to return to
London, these are therefore to require all Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers,
both by sea and land, to suffer him to pass quietly without let or
molestation. And Francis Dobson Mr. of the willing Mind of Hull, is hereby
desired to give him free passage for London.

William Row, Secretary to the Commissioners.

This present Monday April the eighth, Letters were read in the House of
Commons from the Scots Army, certifying that there has been a great battle
between his Excellencies the Lord General Lesleys Army of Scots, and the
Marquess of Newcastle.

By which Letters it is cerfied, that the Scots have given the enemy a great
overthrow.

Slain 500 dead upon the ground.

Taken a numerous company of them.

Diverse of their chief Commanders.

All their Ordnance, bag and baggage, and utterly touted them; and are still in
pursuit of them. So that it is verily believed, that this will prove the fatal
blow in the North to the enemy: who it is verily believed will never be able to
rally again.

Published according to Order.


