The ancient Bounds, OR Liberty of Conscience, TENDERLY STATED, MODESTLY
ASSERTED, AND MILDLY VINDICATED.

1 COR. 10.15. I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say. Quid jam nobis
ulterius relinquitur, si etiam hoc quod voluntate fieri oportet libido
extorquet aliena? Lactan. lib. 5. Instit. cap. 14. Etiamsi Magistratus Legum
suarum Regulis subditos suos, Coercere debeat ne Religioni quam approbat,
aperte maledicant, Cogere eos tamen non potest ad fidem qua istam receptae
Religionis formam approbent. Fides enim persuaderi vult non Cogi, ae nihil tam
voluntarium esse debet ac Religio, nihil a Magistratu Christiano magis alienum,
quam praepostera severitas quae homines hypocritas reddat, ecosque ore
Confiteri Cogat, quod cord non Credant. Prof. Leid. Synops. page 767. Licensed
and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

TO THE READER.
AS is the fining pot to silver, (says Solomon) so is a man to his praise; and
(to accommodate only the morality of this sentence to my purpose) so is a
Book to its title. Wherefore lest I be thought to praevaricate by prefixing
either an improper or imperfect or in significant title to this Book, not
holding forth sufficiently the nature of the Discourse, which (as may be early
descryed) is partly of the Magistrates duty as well as of Consciences liberty:
It appears needful to advertise the courteous Reader, that this Discourse was
intended primarily (as to its ultimate and adaequate scope) only in the nature
of a Plea for the Liberty of tender Consciences; and merely in relation
thereto, (the condition of the Argument devolving it thither) it comes to have
(what it has) to do with the Magistrate; otherwise power and interest
(especially when so eminently subjected) are render and delicate things; and
our Saviors speech of John may be applied thereto, among all Arguments of this
lower Region that are handled, there is not a greater then this; though the
least in that higher sphere of spiritual truths (which God is not jealous of
our prying into, and being familiar with in a holy way) is greater then it. But
sure it cannot be unacceptable either to the wise and judicious (Magistrates,
or others) that count not names of honor a valuable consideration, for loads
of trouble, or to the Conscientious, that look to the work more then the title
to apologize in the Christian Magistrates behalf, to exempt or excuse him from
the public determining Cognizance of differences in Religion (though this by
the way only) and the decision thereof with the sword, as whereby, if it prove
not to be a means separated and anointed by God to such an end, he shall only
be sure unnecessarily to contract debt and sin upon himself. Yet not that I
would tempt the Magistrate to any thing, whereby he might incur the scandal
of Scepticknes and indifferency in Religion, or limit him from lifting up the
head of his own avowed way (above others which he apprehends in some things
alien from the truth) by a more eminent countenancing and ample endowment
thereof with privileges of maintenance, etc. (for as He says; As is the man,
so is his might; and so let his Religion be for outward accommodations;) or
that I would indulge or comply with such an unreasonable expectation in any
materially differing Party to stand upon equal terms of outward advantage,
and to glory equally (with the most received way) in outward Privileges of
publiquenesse and public maintenance (which are but Civil and secular
things, and the Magistrates own that he may do with what he will, and the
truth depends not upon them:) for I wash my hands of these in the sixth
particular of the second Chapter; where as in other parts of the discourse may
be seen as well what I ask, as what I am far from asking. And this I desire
may be carried along and supplied through the whole discourse, and each
particular therein; and if any passage or instance upon particular reason
speak higher, to be restrained hereby and taken down (which is no fault in
an Instance to need it) to a Diapason with the postulation of this Discourse,
made upon grounds of Moral and Universal Reason and Justice.

I have but a word more, and I have done; Let it not seem an unreasonable
request to be believed, that what I have here attempted, (as it is not carried
with any such reflection, so it) was not bred with any approbatory respect in my
heart unto those inventions which now like tares spring up with the wheat, and
wherein many Saints are involved; but what is spoken is (1) in favor of the
persons that differ, not of their errors, for I would please my Brother, but
to his Edification; and while I carry his person before the Lord with love in
my prayers, I desire to carry his errors with complaints. (2) To take men off
from the wrong way of opposing errors, which will be as fruitless as it is
faithless, that they may apply themselves to the use of the right means, as
sure as safe, the Word of God, which requires this Liberty (but accidentally
only serving to errors) for 'its better operation, as Physic does require
open weather, when the humors are stirring, not clung up nor restrained, for to
purge them away. I shall not be offended nor count it strange to hear of much
weakness and many failings in the handling of this Argument (which by the
tenor of this proportion, being so early driven to my Apology, I may well
expect to be multiplied through the Discourse) but I beg but that charity to
be believed, that could I foresee them, I should prevent them with an
amendment, or Apologize for them particularly as for this: whereas now all I
can do is to crave a general pardon. Many Ahimaazes, which I call not so for
impertinentnesse, for they are before me, but for latternesse of setting out,
have overrun me, who was ready more then six months since: and what
similitude of Notions I have with others, is not (I may clear my self and the
matter herein) by any furtive extraction out of them; (though I am a debtor to
them all, and the least of them may add to me who am least of all) but through
the onenes of Truth. And as I have been pressed in spirit, and served with an
opportunity of vacancy from some other business to the vindicating of this
Truth; so in the bearing it forth, I have no less strangely to my self, (if
so safely, and that it appear so to others) observed a special conduct
leading me all along contrary to those prae-engagements (such as they were)
upon my judgment, who had dipped my pen on the other side; I say, I have been no
less strangely led, then the milch Kine that did bear the Arc out of the
Land of the Philistims, taking the straight way to Bethshemesh, the instinct of
Providence superseding the instinct of Nature.

The Series, and Titles of the Chapters.
Sect. 1.
Chapter 1. The State of the Question. Chap. 2. An appendix to the State of the
Question, clearing the Principles of this Book from discharging or discouraging
the Christian Magistrate, to improve his authority for the Lord Jesus, his
truth, and people. Chap. 3. Coercive power (as before stated) disputed against
by a Medium taken from the Consent of all Presbyterian Authors (though also the
Medium be proved by the Authors own reasons) viz. that the Magistrate has not
the Cognizance of differences in matters of Religion, in the sense that is
expressed in the Chapter. Chap. 4. Coercive power more directly impugned. Chap.
5. The Cognizance aforesaid, and Coercive power, both together opposed: and
these three Chapters bitherto are with special Relation to the Magistrate, if
he exercise it. Chap. 6. Against all Coercive power, exercised by whomsoever
for the forementioned matters in Chap. 1.
Sect. 2.
Chap. 7. The Argument Illustrated and Confirmed by Examples and Testimonies;
and first out of the old Testament. Chap. 8. By Examples and Testimonies out of
the New. Chap. 9. By some few fragments of Examples and Testimonies out of
humane Story.
Sect. 3.
Chap. 10. Objections against the premises answered.
A light to the Work.
THere are two things contended for in this liberty of Conscience; First, to
instate every Christian in his right of free (yet modest) judging and accepting
what he holds. Secondly, To vindicate a necessary advantage to the truth; and
this is the maine end and respect of this liberty. I contend not for variety of
opinions, I know there is but one truth; But this truth cannot be so easily
brought forth without this liberty; and a general restraint, though intended
but for errors, yet through the unskilfulnesse of men, may fall upon the
truth; and better many errors of some kind suffered, then one useful truth
be obstructed or destroyed. Besides, truth would not oftentimes be suffered in
the world, if it went not disguised, and if there were not other things like
the truth, therefore this liberty is necessary also to its preservation, (as
well as production) as it is for a Prince or General when he fights to
disguise himself, and habit himself like one of his Soldiers, else all would
lay at him, and fight with neither small nor great but him. When Christ was to
be borne, all the world was to be quiet, and it was so, though immediately
after there was a cruel slaughter; and then if other infants had not been like
Christ, and Christ like other infants, he would have been singled out and
slain; So that as errors must be, that those that are approved may be made
manifest to God and spiritual men, so errors must be that the truth and the
professors of it may be tried, and sometimes also covered from the world, from
their disdain which lights upon common and obvious things; and from their
Odium, that it may be divided and distracted, and may spend and wast it self
against other things then the truth; and so the earth helps the woman, and
swallows up the flood that is powered out against the truth. Moses permitted
divorce to the Jews, notwithstanding the hardness of their hearts; so must
this liberty be granted to men (within certain bounds) though it may be abused
to wanton opinions more then were to be wished.

THE ANCIENT BOUNDS, OR LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE.
SECT. I.
CHAP. I. The State of the Question.
CHrist Jesus, whose is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, both in Nature
and in grace, has given several Maps and Scheames of his Dominions gradually
differing, some greater, some lesser, of all sorts and sizes: Both of his great
Kingdom the world, his Dominions at large, which he has committed to men, to
be administered in truth and righteousness, in a various form as they please;
each of which he clothes himself withal: And also of his special and
peculiar Kingdom the kingdom of Grace. Which kingdoms though they differ
essentially, or formally, yet they agree in one common subject matter (man, and
societies of men) though under a diverse consideration: And not only man in
society, but every man individually is an Epitome, either of one only, or of
both these Dominions. Of one only, so every natural man (who in a natural
consideration is called Microcosmus, an Epitome of the world) in whose
Conscience God has his throne, ruling him by the light of nature to a Civil
outward good and end.

Of both, so every believer who besides this natural conscience and rule, has
an enlightened conscience, carrying a more bright and lively stamp of the
Kingly place and power of the Lord Jesus, swaying him by the light of faith or
Scripture: and such a man may be called Microchristus, the Epitome of Christ
mystical.

This is conscience, and this its division. And of this conscience is the
Question, or rather of the person that has this conscience, and the things he
holds or practices conscientiously; For the power of conscience it self, as it
will not be beholden to any man for its liberty, so neither is it capable of
outward restraint, they must be moral or spiritual instruments that can work
upon conscience. But the exercise or practice of conscience, or the person so
exercising, is properly the object of outward restraint in question.

Now then if we keep but to this term Conscience; Conscience, but a malignant
will and unconscienc't spirit.

Conscience, have the benefit of this plea of Liberty, so as to save their
owners; as first, if they shall be found of a disabling nature, or wanting in
their due proportion of benevolence to public peace, liberties, societies; as
in some of those cases instanced by Mr Palmer; as for instance, Scruple of
conscience cannot exempt a man from any Civil duty he owes to the State, or
the government thereof, but it may well beseem a State to force men to
contribute to their own, and the public good and safety: And though God can
have no glory by a forced Religion, yet the State may have benefit by a forced
service. Again, the service of the State is outward, civil, bodily, and is
perfect as to its end, without the will and conscience of that person from whom
it is extorted; so is not the service of God, which is inward and spiritual,
yea it must be in spirit and in truth.

positive malignity (and that in a high nature and consequence too perhaps) to
societies, as the doctrines of the Papists. The Question is not of these
Principles that are either of the frigid Zone of deficiency, or the torrid Zone
of malignancy, but of conscientious Principles and practices, though perhaps
erroneous, yet not injurious to public good either way.

And of Principles thus allayd and qualified, a power to deal with them, and a
force to be applied to them; yea to conscience it self, the source of them;
for we all agree in this, that there is, viz. Christ's power, and a spiritual
force; but the Question is, whether outward force be to be applied.

Magistrate, Whether it be lawful for him specially, much less, whether it be
less lawful for him then for some other men, or generation of men, to force
in these matters: but whether it be lawful for any man, or kind of men
indifferently. And therefore though there be some arguments applied
particularly to the Magistrate, in the third, fourth, and fifth Chapters; yet
there are far more against force in general, Chap. 6. and from thence the
greatest part of the discourse is carried generally and indefinitely.

Yet neither in these is the Question, may bear any proportion of subserviency
to a work of public Reformation, and whether he cannot do more then another
man toward it. We freely grant he may do much more, and therefore ought; as
the next Chapter will show, which is added as an Appendix unto this; but the
Question is, Whether to other means he may add force.

Nor will it seem unrighteous in our eyes, difference should be made by the
Christian Magistrate (as by every man in his place) between men and men,
according as they judge them to be in truth or error (especially in equal and
settled times, wherein justice and humanity, in respect of their brethrens
necessities and sufferings, not only with them, but for them, shall not
otherwise require) as is more largely expressed before to the Reader. So that
this difference be but by withholding their own favors, and not by taking away
their Brethrens rights, and that it be also but in a due proportion, to the
demerit of their difference, discerning between the greater and lesser, between
disputable and manifest errors, I mean manifest to the light of the godly and
judicious generally. For certainly in those things which are even by the
principles of the powerful side themselves, remote from the vitalls and
fundamentalls of Religion, and of a very controversall nature: for these, I
say, (reserving the personal liberty of every man's judgment to judge thereof
as he finds) there is none or very small difference outward, justly to be made
by the Magistrate, or power of a State; but if honor be to be given to whom
honor is due, and they that do well are by the Magistrate to be 1 Pet. 2.14.
praised, (i.) countenanced, authorized, and rewarded, then if any whit of a
just proportion be observed, and no more praise and honor be detracted from
such brethren, then the demerit of their difference calls for, I hope they shall
neither be put to fly for fear, or dye through want.

Nor do we question, negative discountenance, add positive, viz. to declare
against errors, as well as the Ministers to convince and exhort against them.

Arrianisme, Socinianisme, Familisme, etc. ought not to be restrained by the
Christian Magistrate, and the Assertors and maintainers of them, interdicted
under penalties, the divulging or spreading of them by public preaching or
printing. For though God alone can convince and reduce their consciences; yet
to preserve the acknowledged truth from being blasphemed, and the consciences
of others yet free and disingaged from being scandalized and corrupted, is a
work of love and charity, which the Magistrates arm is requisite, and must
extend it self unto, as indeed alone bearing sufficient proportion to such a
service, as the preventing occasions and removing stumbling blocks of such like
temptations out of the way, which the secular power can do, though the 1 John
2.27.
anointing of the Spirit must preserve their consciences inwardly, and enable
them upon all occasions to discern between things that differ.

vindication, justification, sanction or establishment of any opinion or way so
tolerated, (as no fin nor error, as the truth and Orthodox) as some may
possibly think; especially, if they be used so lightly to discharge their own
respects and countenance to the truth they profess and avow, as counting it
almost enough to do nothing against it: Whereas did they understand their duty
to the truth, and fulfill it, they would see a great door of negative
discountenance opened to them against errors, whereby they might put a broad
difference between them and the truth they embrace, (even as if lively
communion of Churches were known, non-communion would appear a terrible thing)
though a negative discountenance be not all that we allow in some cases: But
by this liberty we only refer men's consciences to God to be convinced in
his time, not ceasing to use all proper means in the mean time: And this
only in those things that pertain only to conscience, making only the state
thereof good or bad toward God.

CHAP. II. Being an appendix to the state of the Question. Of the Relation that
the Christian Magistrates office bears to the Church, and matters of Religion.
TRuth requires that we show how far we agree, as well as wherein we differ.
Though it be easier to say what the Magistrate may not do, then what he may: We
are never more out, then when we go about to make forms and systemes, and be
definitive comprehensive Doctors of that which we must be learners and
proficients in all our life time. Especially in things of this nature, which
may better be perceived and discerned upon occasion from time to time, by the
humble and godly, then digested into a few Rules or Canons. This premised we
acknowledge that the duty of a Christian Magistrate is somewhat more then of
another Magistrate. Civil protection is that which all Magistrates owe,
whether Christian or not Christian, to all quiet livers within their Dominions,
whether Christian or not Christian, as being founded upon such politic
considerations and conditions (setting aside Religion) as being performed on
the Subjects part, it cannot with justice be denied them. But a Christian
Magistrate owes something more to the truth he professes, and to those that
profess the same with him; which duty of his differs only in degree, not in
kind from the duty of another Christian that is no Magistrate. For it is the
duty of every Christian, to improve every talent and advantage entrusted with
him, for the honor of Christ, and good of the body to the utmost, in a lawful
way. So a Christian Magistrate, if he have (as he has) by virtue of his
Magistracy a talent and advantage above other men, he is bound to improve it
all lawful ways, to the aforesaid purpose. To which he is to direct even all
the common acts and parts of his government; for though all do equally share
in the outward benefits of Magistracy, viz. peace and plenty, etc. yet ought
Christian Magistrates principally ex intention to direct their whole
government to the good of the Churches, and the glory of God therein; for as
much as all things are the Churches, and for the Churches. And doubtless,
Magistracy, though an Ordinance of man, yet is a most glorious Ordinance, and
of singular use and service, if rightly applied to the Church; as I shall show
gradually in these steps.

First, Morality is within his Cognizance.
Magistrates do prepare by a good Government for the Gospel; Civility not
rested in, nor mistaken for godliness, makes men in a more proximious outward
capacity for, and disposition toward Religion, in as much as they are thereby
restrained from gross profaneness, and insolent opposition of the truth,
whereby the Word may come amongst them with safety to the persons of those that
bring it; according to which part, Chrysostom says well; That the Magistrate
helps the Ministry, viz. by taking cognizance of all moral vices, and it is
their part not to commend only, but to command a good moral conversation of
their Subjects, at least negative: In which case again Chrysostom says well;
That good Princes make virtue easy, while they both urge it with their
example, and drive men to it by fear and punishments.

But now for supernatural gifts, as illumination, special or common, to make
a man of this or that judgment or opinion; or faith, to make a man of this or
that practice in Religion, may not be required by the Civil sword; it may be
persuaded, induced by exhortation, example, or such means, and that is all. And
so Chrysostom in pursuance of his former sentence, namely, the assistance that
Magistracy contributes to the Ministry, has these words; For we (says he)
teach men loyalty, chastity, modesty, and dehort them from murder,
false-witnesse-bearing, adultery, thefts, but the Magistrate takes cognizance
of them at his tribunal. And Origin in like manner seems to make this the
adaequate object of the Magistrates compulsive power, upon that place, Act. 15.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, to lay no other burden upon you, etc.
But if they will not charge them with more precepts, do they give them liberty
to murders, thefts, perjuries, lust, adultery? in no wise, but of these there
was no need to say any thing; for they are within the Magistrates cognizance,
and prohibited by the Civil Laws. And by the way, wherefore has it the
denomination or distinction of Civil power, but that (ex vi vocis) Civility is
the next, most proper, immediate, and almost utmost care and extent of this
power? For though the Christian Magistrate well discharging his place, does
promote the spiritual good and edification of the Churches, yet not
immediately and directly, but by and through a politic good, as he procures
rest and safety to them, and so they are edified, Act. 9.31. Which is a very
considerable and needful service, while the public worship and the Churches
in the exercise thereof (though according to their being and beauty in the
Spirit, they transcend the understanding and principles of the world, yet) are
circumstanced and habited with such outward relations and considerations as
need such a worldly provision, which Magistracy applying it self unto God,
has therefore (by the rule of proportion, 1 Cor. 12.23. whereby the less
honorable parts have more honor given them) provided a more abundant worldly
honor for the Magistrate (then for Ecclesiastical Officers) for their work
sake. And is not here a great deal of work, and enough to take up a whole man,
and may not very acceptable service be done to God herein, and much good
redound to the Church, while not only the Church has hereby fairer quarter in
the world, but a rude preparation is made for the Gospel?

Thus we have committed to the Magistrate the charge of the second Table; viz.
Materially, that is, The first Table how far.
he is not to see God dishonored by the manifest breach thereof, or any part
thereof; But is that all? No surely; He may enter the vault even of those
abominations of the first Table, and ferret the Devils and Devil-worship out of
their holes and dens, so far as Nature carries the candle before him:
Therefore it seems to me that Polutheisme and Atheistical doctrines, which
are sins against the first Table and Commandment; and Idolatry, (which is
against the second Commandment) such as may be convinced by natural light,
(or the letter of the command where the Scriptures are received) as the
worshipping of Images, and the breaden-god, the grossest Idolatry of all; these
so far forth as they break out and discover themselves, ought to be
restrained, exploded by the Christian Magistrate; for it is that which a
Heathens light should not tolerate, nature carrying so far; Romans 1. and also
blasphemy, which is against the third Commandment, and is a common nuisance to
mankind; and the insolent profanation of the Lords day (though the keeping of
it be not obvious to Natures light) ought not to be suffered by the Christian
Magistrate; for herein (as in the former) no man's liberty is infringed, no man's
Conscience inthrall'd, truth not at all prejudiced or obstructed, while only
manifest impiety and profaneness is excluded, and the peace of those that are
better disposed procured, and scandal avoided by these Negatives. And thus
far the Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae, not to require the Positive
so much, as to restrain the Negative; and all this Nature teaches hitherto.

But thirdly, Generally received Principles.
as belonging to the third Commandment, the Christian Magistrate may, not
only require a conversation and practice moralized according to the Principles
and light of Nature, where they run lowest, as among the Heathen; but as they
are improved and raised by the Gospel, through the common irradiation thereof:
For Consuetudo est altera natura, Custom or Education is another nature. And
look what notions fall upon every understanding, that is so situated, or look
what impressions are made upon every natural conscience by the Gospel, which
ripens and meliorates nature in some degree, and has at least some fruit and
success where ever it comes, though it do not change and sanctify: I say
these fruits, tales quales, the Magistrate is Gods Titheman or Officer to
gather them in for him, and to require a demeanor suitable to such an
acknowledged light, at least negatively, that is, to restrain the contrary,
that so the name of God be not taken in vain. As to instance, though it be not
eruable by the light of Nature, the article of the Trinity, or the person and
Office of Jesus Christ, yet sure to teach doctrine that denies either of these,
where the Gospel has sounded, is not tolerable; Or to deny the Resurrection,
or a Judgment day, etc. I say, the Christian Magistrate ought not to tolerate
the teaching of such Contradictions (in an instructed Commonwealth) to
received Principles and manifest impressions upon all hearts that have lived
under the Gospel within his Dominions. And the reason is, Because these
Principles fall into the same rank and order and consideration with 1 Cor.
11.14.
natural Principles, in as much as they are not only habituated unto men as
natural, but attested unto within by a divinely-imprest Conscience, though but
natural and in a common way. And although in treating hereof, I have reflected
much upon the Principles and light of Nature, and the outward good and
consisting of societies, yet I make not these the only grounds, authorizing
the Magistrate that is Christian (of whom this Chapter speaks) to the premises,
nor the ultimate end and scope he is to aim at therein. For though the light
of Nature be Gods Law in the hearts of men, not to be violated, and the
preservation of societies one end thereof, not to be despised; yet certainly
the Christian Magistrate, as he has his authority from God, so he is to take
the Rise of exercising it from him who has not committed to him the sword in
vain; and he is to aim at the glory of God (the preventing or redressing his
dishonor) in every act thereof, and to punish evil out of that consideration
that it is evil: though God has given him that Rule to proceed by, and to
make out the evil of evil to the world, even the contrariety thereof to the
light of Nature, and the good of Societies. Wherein also God has admirably
showed his wisdom and goodness, both in twisting and combining so the
interests of his glory, (in this sense we speak which is negative) and the
happiness of societies, that this latter cannot be without the former: and in
laying no other burden on the Christian Magistrate for the Materiale, then
what is within every man's Cognizance, and the light of Nature will lead him to.
And though (as is said in effect already) we make not the light of Nature, and
the consisting of societies, the only, nor highest considerations, which the
Magistrate as a Christian is to hold forth before God, and into which he is to
resolve his act, (I say as a Christian, though as a Magistrate he ought to hold
out these Principles to the world, and build upon them; but as a Christian he
is bound certainly (as every man) to make every service as savoury as may be,
grafting them with the best Principles) yet certainly, they may very well be
Harmonicall reasons, and additionall inforcements, even to him that is a
Christian, when the Materiale of his duty is no other then what may be
convinced and enforced by the light and principles of Nature, either ( Prima or
a primis orta) and is but the old Commandment; though if he be a Christian, it
is a new Commandment to him, and according to the formale is distinguished
essentially from the act of a wise and conscientious Heathen.

Fourthly, The external peace and order of the Churches.
The Christian Magistrate owes a duty about the external peace and order of
the Churches to look to that; For though the Magistrate take not Cognizance of
several forms and opinions in Religion, yet of the outward manner and order he
does, and ought, and to bound and rectify that is his place, and to punish
disorder, and all this (what ever noise it makes) is but a Civil thing. For
there are these two things go to Religion; The thing it self, and the
managing of it; Though conscience is not to be forced to or from the thing, yet
the manner of the practice is to be regulated according to peace and
comeliness by the Civil Magistrate.

But all this yet is but extrinsecall to Religion; All means and advantages
for the promoting of the truth on this side of forcing.
may the Christian Magistrate come no nearer? Yes doubtless, he may and ought
to do all that he is able and has opportunity to do in the behalf of the
truth, so that he keep on this side of force; as for instance, He ought to be
Exemplary in the profession of the truth, as Joshua was, Josh. 24.15. As for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord. Wherein (as also in his Exhortation of
the people) he is without all scruple imitable by all in eminent place or
authority, though the faith of their Subjects or Tenants is not to be pind upon
their sleeve, yet if their example, countenance, interest, exhortations will
gain any credit to the truth, it is an honest way to make use thereof. Nay, if
God has given them parts to contend for the truth, and stop the mouths of
gainsayers, they ought to use them, by writing or disputing, as their Charge
will give them leave. They may and ought to propose the truth to all, to apply
means for the reclaiming of those that err, and to send forth Teachers into
blind and ignorant places, where they are not capable of the care of their own
souls: and to call Synods or Assemblies to confer their light in relation to
a work of Reformation, or to the solving of some particular difficulties. In a
word, he may do any thing for the truth, so that when he have done, he leave
men to their consciences that are of a different mind from him, and manage
that difference without offense.

Sixthly and lastly, A defensive power in behalf of the truth.
The Christian Magistrate ought to be a Nursing Father to the Church, to
nourish the truth and godliness. The begetting Father he is not, that is
Christ, the everlasting Father by the seed of the Word. But the Magistrate is
to conserve and maintain the Churches peace and liberty, in the exercise of
their consciences, and worshipping of God in all his Ordinances according to
their light; and so he is to exercise a defensive power for Religion both at
home and abroad.

And this respect he is to bear to all equally whom he judges to be the
children of truth in the maine, though scabby or itchy children through some
odd differences, in which things though he be not to further them or edify
them (wherein he apprehends them alien from the truth) by any compliance, but
to leave those opinions to themselves to stand or fall; yet ( notwithstanding
them) he is to afford to them his Civil protection, they managing their
differences in a lawful peaceable manner (as has been noted before.) I say,
this provided, These differences ought not to impair or prejudice them at all
in the interest they have in common justice and protection; but if any assault
them in an unquiet way, they are to be defended, the assaylants punished. So
that with this difference is the Magistrate to carry himself toward the
acknowledged truth, and the reputed errors, (I mean so reputed by him) he may
and ought to do all he can to promote and enlarge the truth he ownes. He is not
to do ought against the other in controversy, nor suffer any to do ought
against them, save to apply spiritual means, to preach, write, discourse,
dispute, exhort against them, which kind of fighting is allowable among
Brethren, so it be with right spirits.

I expect here to be demanded, What I think of this present Parliament, and of
their action in calling this Assembly, and what I think of this Assembly?

For the Parliament I look upon them under the Notion described and allowed in
this Chapter, as (warrantably and lawfully) improving an opportunity, God has
put into their hands for the increasing of light, and excussion of truth, for
which mind of theirs the blessing of Christ and the Churches awaites them: and
I hope they will not exceed their Bounds.

For the Assembly, I look upon them, not as a National Presbytery of the
Churches in England, but as godly and learned men, congregated by the power of
the State. And I and all the people of God may and ought to seek a proof of
Christ speaking in them, which he may do, by virtue of general promises to
his people to be found of them seeking him and his will, in and by all lawful
ways and means, and of the particular advantage of their ability: as in every
faculty the professors of it that are most exercised in it, are likeliest to
discover truth, though always they do not: but is not tied by any special or
particular promise to be present with them, as he is to a Church, Mat. 18.
therefore I stand ready to embrace any light, that Christ shall please
providentially to minister unto me by their hands; but tie my self by no
means to their arbitrament, further then I see it to be according to the Word;
for Christ never made them the Lords of my faith; no not if they were the
Apostles themselves.

Thus I have given my judgment (at length) in this matter, and I think I give
not much less power to the Magistrate in Religion, then has been by our
modern, and more moderate Writers ascribed to them, who contend on their
behalf for no more, but outward Jurisdiction, and state the Primatus regius
est quo princeps prae est Ecclesiae tanquam caput externae politiae; seu quo
Princeps est primas Ecclesiae quantum ad externam Ecclesiae politiam. Alst.
Primacy of the Magistrate only in the external policy of the Church,
relating only to such acts as these, Synodum convocare authoritate publica,
Constituere salaria Ministris Ecclesiae, (...) Ecclesiae procurare and
conservare per Ministros, Ecclesiarum jura constituere, etc. But including no
such power, as has been disputed against, for that appertains not to the
outward polity of the Church.

And my judgment herein, for the Magistrates intermedling thus far, is
founded upon this Reason or Principle; It is lawful for every man, (and so for
the Magistrate) nay, it is his duty to do all he can for the truth; but it is
unlawful to do the least thing against the truth. Now because by earnest
invitations, hearty recommendations, exemplary profession, general tuition; in
a word, by offering and proposing, not magisterially forcing, commanding,
imposing, much and great and certain service may be, will be done for the
truth, and nothing against: And because by the other way of forcing,
prohibiting, censuring, punishing, (impeacht in this discourse) though
something may light for the truth, and sometimes (as in Austins days is noted
in the case of the Donatists) yet much more prejudice is much more probably
like to redound to the truth: Many a truth snibd, kept low, or quite kept out;
Men confirmed in obstinacy, if in errors, and more prejudiced against the right
ways, through the force that hangs over them, therefore that is lawful, and
this is unlawful.

And in relation to these benefits which the Church reapes, and may expect from
Christian Magistracy, the Churches are commanded first of all when they come
together by way of restipulation, and for the further continuance and increase
of this shadow, under which they rest, to pray for Kings and all in authority,
because they do, and that still they may, through the benefit of their
government, lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.

CHAP. III. The Question thus stated, we proceed to prove the Conclusion.
THe Magistrates Cognizance of Religion, and the differences therein, is not
the Conclusion disputed against in this discourse. It is sufficiently done
already by many able men, and all the Presbyterian Authors agree with us in it,
allowing him only that which is to be allowed every man, viz. to lead forth
his act (what ever it shall be found to be) under the conduct of a particular
or personal Cognizance, but a public Magisteriall binding Cognizance they
deny; therefore to do this were but actum agere. Nevertheless, because some
few considerations have been ministered to me in my own thoughts concerning
this, I thought good to offer them being not many; as also because the
Cognizance disproved may serve as a Medium against the Coercive act.

That this public determining binding Cognizance, belongs not to him,
appears. 1. Because it belongs to another charge, viz. to the Church properly
and peculiarly to try the spirits, and judge of doctrines, therefore it is
usurpation of the Churches power and interest to take this out of her hands. 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church is there declared to be the Pillar and ground of the
truth; Not a Pillar, one among others, but the Pillar and stay of the truth; in
allusion to the setting up of the Edicts and Proclamations of Kings upon
Pillars, to the view and notice of all their Subjects: So is the Church the
Pillar of the truth, exhibiting it to the view and notice of all men,
disclaiming and reproving the contrary errors by the Word of God. Thus the
truth as a Rock, bears up the Church, Mat. 16.18. and the Church (in lieu) is
a Pillar bears up the truth: the Magistrate is not the Pillar, nor his Laws
and Proclamations. By the Ecclesia^ cum dico, non unum aut alterum sacerdotem,
aut Ministrum, sed Legitimum ac Christianu^ coetum nomino and innuo. Humfred.
de Relig. vera Conservanda. page 24.
Church here, I mean not Petrus in Cathedra, the Pope in his chair, nor the
Bishops in their Consistory, nor the Angels and Lights of the Churches only,
but the entire Church instituted [in the maine] according to the Gospel.
Further see Rev. 1. where the Churches are resembled by Christ to John in a
vision as golden Candlesticks; Now the Analogy is plain (and not forged) in
respect of holding forth the light unto the world. There be indeed brass and
copper Candlesticks, that hold forth false lights, but the sheep of Christ know
the one from the other, that they turn not aside to the flocks of Christ's
Companions, by a divine effectual instinct, whereby Christ's sheep know Christ's
voice, and will not follow a stranger, Joh. 10.5. 1 John 4.1.

Now mark here, the Church is the Pillar, the Church is the Candlestick,
particular Churches, as well as the Catholic; not the Magistrate, not the
State; If so, the Holy Ghost would not have wronged them, and detracted from
them, by contracting this glorious power and interest to the Church. It is
proper for Kings and Magistrates to ask, and to ask of Christ, as He, (but
more sincerely) in the Ministry of his Word, in his Church administration, What
is truth? and to watch at his gates, and wait at the posts of his doors, yea
to sit at the feet of Christ there; For therefore has Christ given gifts to
his Church, Ephesians. 4.11. And what are those? Why, he gave some Apostles; and some
Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors and Teachers; He gave none
Magistrates; Sure if Magistracy had been one of those gifts, now that the
Apostle was reckoning, he would not have been so injurious and deficient, but
to have put it in. And what are these gifts for? Why, for the perfecting of the
Saints; for the work of the Ministry; for the edifying of the body of Christ.
If for these ends adaequately, then where shall the Magistrate come in? or what
work is left for the Magistrate? I mean in point of authoritative teaching, or
determining the truth. But you may say, This was only for that time while
there were no Christian Magistrates. Nay, read on; Till we all come into the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: So that this
provision was not temporary only, but for perpetuity, therefore sufficient.

Christ is the Judge of Controversies, Characteristicall Tenet, distinguishing
us from the Papists:) that is, Christ by his Word and Spirit, in the true
ministry of the Church, not in the Popes sentence, nor in the Commentaries of
the Fathers, or the Votes of Synods, or the Interpretations of National
Assemblyes, though much help may be had by them, (for what difference (then)
were there between the Papists and us, but that we make many men a Pope, and
they one man?) Now to give the Magistrate this Cognizance of differences in
Religion, were to set up him (after we have pulled down these) as Judge of
Controversies, and Interpreter of Scripture.

This were also to commit unto the Magistrate the better part of the Ministry,
whose office it is, to declare the whole Counsel of God, Asia, and by them
communicates himself to the Churches. Nay, it is to give them a greater power
and office then the Ministry, who are only to propose doctrines, not to impose
them, and to wait with patience, if they be opposed, trying if God will give
repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25.4.2. 2 Cor. 1.24.
to the acknowledgement of the truth. This I say, is their utmost Commission,
to exhort, instruct, rebuke, with all long-suffering and doctrine, not as Lords
of men's faith, but helpers of their joy; and whenever they flash and lay
about them, it is to be only with the sword of the Spirit.

If the determining of Religion, and differences therein, quatenus a
Magistrate, then to all Magistrates, or to the Magistracy of every Country,
then to the great Turk, and Pagan Kings and Governors: But how incapable of
such an interest they are who are aliens from the true God, and his
Commonwealth of Israel, I need not say. The consequence is good, for Quatenus
and ad omne, are terms adaequate and convertible. That which belongs to a man
as a man, belongs to every man.

If you say therefore that it belongs not to the Magistrate, quatenus a
Magistrate, but quatenus a Christian Magistrate, and so make it a flower that
Christianity sticks in his Crown.

I answer, that Christianity being altogether accidental and extrinsecall to a
Magistrate, adds nothing of power (over others in Religion) to him, more then
to another man, but only personal privilege; For Christianity is the same in
all; and why should one man by virtue of his Christianity (for it is denied to
be by virtue of his Magistracy) have power over judgments, and consciences in
matters of Religion, more then another that has equal and perhaps more
Christianity? But the Word of God adds nothing of that nature to a Christian
Magistrate, and let that suffice; for it adds nothing in the same kind, viz.
of Civil power, therefore it much less adds any thing of another kind, as
namely, Ecclesiastical power. For the same subjection, and degree of
subjection, is required of servants, and subjects to Masters and Governors,
without distinction of good and bad, Christian and Pagan, nay though they be
cruel and froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. By Christianity Christ has settled no
advantage of power on the head of the Magistrate, though thereby he commend the
yoke to the subject with an advantage of sweetness. 1 Timothy 6.1. For the
proportion is the same, and it is a found Argument, from a Master to a
Magistrate; that if a believing Master have no enlargement of power over his
servant by believing; then neither has a believing Prince over his Subjects,
(and if not in Civil things, then much less in Religion.) But we see
plainly, the Apostle neither accumulates authority on a believing Master, nor
duties on the servant of such a Master, but makes it a greater motive to obey
the authority they had before. Let them not despise them, because they are
Brethren, but obey them rather. Therefore to conclude this Reason; Christianity
makes Magistrates members of the Church, not Masters of the Assemblies; It
charges them to look to their own opinions, but not to determine and impose
upon other men.

And this I shall demonstrate in the fifth place, Romans 13.3. Where the Apostle
handles this point; For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil, etc. -- if thou do that which is evil, (he does not say, if thou be of
an heterodox opinion) be afraid; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. Where doing evil, is thrice mentioned,
and no other terms used, that should bring a man's judgment or opinion in
Religion under the verge of the Magistrate. And so 1 Pet. 2.14. Submit your
selves unto every Ordinance of man, -- Whether to the King, -- or unto
Governors, as sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. His determination therefore is about these.

This practice of Magistracy, to be the Dictator of truth, moderate with the
sword, lays an unhappy caution, and too effectual an obstruction, in the way
of truth, which comes not in always at the same end of the Town; not always
by the learned and eminent in parts or power Joh. 7.48.
; (Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him?) but even by the Quid?
unius laici sententia quae cum Scripturis consentit, praeponenda est sente^tiae
totius Concilii. Gerson.
people oftentimes. Who embraced Christ, but the poor, but the people that
knew not the Law, in the estimation of the Pharisees? Ought not this to be
considered, that truth be not prevented, by shutting the door she often
chooses to come in at, and opening a stately door which she delights not
always in?

The just care that Christ showed, to maintain the due distinction between
Magistracy and Ministry, the Office Politic and Ecclesiastic, does likewise
impeach this Cognizance of the Magistrate. divide the Inheritance judicially;
Christ refuses, saying, Who made me a Judge? Luke 12.13.
If Christ would not judge in Civil things; Magistrates as such ought not to
judge in the things of Christ.

Hence then we may argue thus; If the highest Cognizance of differences in
Religion be subjected in the Church, and so be only Ministerial, and a
public determining binding Cognizance be not entrusted with the Magistrate,
then there can be no Magisteriall Coercive act lawfully put forth in such
differences; for That the Magistrate should decree punishment, Magisterially,
and yet decerne the cause but after a private manner, will exercise the finest
wit to find a pretext for.
such as the Cognizance is, such of necessity must the Coercive power be, and
not exceed it; therefore as there is only a Ministerial judgment in the
Church, so there is only a Ministerial Coercive power to be exercised in the
Church also; for the subject of the one is the subject of the other also.

CHAP. IV. Containing Arguments, directly concluding against the Magistrates
Coercive act in Cases of difference.
THe Order in which I draw forth my Reasons, is under these four Heads or
Titles in distinct Chapters.

1. Against the Magistrates Cognizance.

2. Against his Compulsion.

3. Against the whole Complexum, Cognizance and Compulsion together.

4. Against all external compulsion in Religion.

The first I have passed already. The second follows.

The immunity and impunity of differing opinions in Religion, Paul's case, who
was impeached by the Jews, of greater Heresy, then any differing Brethren in
these days can charge one another withal: for he pulled down the old Religion,
established by God himself, and preached a new doctrine: Yet see what Pleads
for Paul, in the Consciences of his Judges, who had nothing in them but what
they sucked in with their Mothers milk. You have the story, Acts 23. where I
shall not comment upon the deeds of Lysias, (a stranger to Religion, who yet
delivered Paul both from the fury, and the fraud severally, of those that
pretended much to Religion, and would for Religion sake have destroyed him in
the former part of the Story) but only give you the words of his Letter to
Felix in behalf of Paul, ver. 26. Claudius Lysias, unto the most excellent
Governor, Felix, etc. -- This man was taken of the Jews, etc. -- Whom I
perceived to be accused of Questions of their Law, but to have nothing laid to
his charge worthy of death, or of Bonds, etc. Yet these were strange Questions
at that time. And of the same mind, in the same case, is Festus, Chap. 25.18.
where declaring Paul's cause to King Agrippa, he uses these words; Against whom,
when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such things as I
supposed, but had certain Questions against him of their own superstition, and
of one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. And because I
doubted of such manner of Questions, etc. (observe here the ingenuity of an
Heathen, that will not by a secular sword cut in sunder those knots in Religion
which he cannot unty by a Theological resolution.) Further, on the morrow when
Paul was brought forth, Festus uses these words, ver. 24. King Agrippa, and all
men which are here present with us, ye see this man, about whom all the
multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also here,
Crying that he ought not to live any longer: But when I found he had committed
nothing worthy of death, etc. See the moderation of a Heathen, and the
stability of his resolution against the importunity of multitudes. He is not so
zealous of his Gods, but he will let a Christian live; nay, he will save him
from any that would hurt him; justice so constraines him, that he disdaines the
solicitations of the multitude. O what a check was this to the Jews, from the
mouth of an Heathen! And when Paul had declared his own cause, before King
Agrippa, Festus, and Bernice, and the whole Council, they saw no reason to be
of any other mind, Chap. 26.31. For it is there said, That when they were gone
aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man does nothing worthy of
death, or of bonds: An instance which Christians in these days may look upon
and blush, who think an inconvenient expression deserves a prison. Paul had
made a free confession of his conversation, and of his faith; yet, say they,
This man does nothing worthy of death, or of bonds. They look for deeds, evil
deeds, and thought it unreasonable to punish him for his different opinions.
Now to enervate the force of this Instance and Argument, some man perhaps will
represent my inference thus: These Heathens did de facto permit differences of
opinion, and remit those that were accused of them, Ergo Christian Magistrates
must be as careless de jure. But I urge it not as a fact only, but as flowing
from a principle of reason and justice, that did glow in the hearts of these
Heathen, and so argues strongly from them to Christians; and let any prove it
was from a principle of Heathenisme.

To employ the Magistrate in this kind of compulsion, Spirit, the Word of God:
it is described Emblematically, Rev. 19.21. by a sword coming out of his mouth.
If Antichrist the great enemy shall be consumed with this, sure then it shall
be effectual against the lesser. And the Apostle cries up, not only the
sufficiency, but the mightiness of this means; The weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4.
but spiritual, and mighty through God, ('it is through God indeed, and through
him they are) so mighty, that Christ will not be beholding to King, or
Magistrate, for their power to convert men by, though he may use them to coerce
insolent enemies, and shelter the profession of the truth, as was noted before.
Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit. The Spirit of Christ is the
Churches neck, mentioned Cant. 4.4. that knits Christ and the Church together,
as the neck does the head and the body: and see how it is described there; Thy
neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury, whereon there bang a
thousand Bucklers, all Shields of mighty men. Christ (you see) has not left
his Church without a Magazine, an Armoury, even his Word and Spirit, which is
quick and powerful, wherewithal Christ that mighty man, defended himself
against Satan, and overthrew him: like that sling of David wherewith he
prevailed against the mighty Philistim; and what cannot this sword do, backed
by the Spirit, in the hand of Christ's Ministers and Members?

For the Efficacy of all Christ's Institutions in his Church, lies in the
Spirit, and not in the flesh; As in preaching, and Sacraments; so in
Discipline, so in beating down Errors; it is Christ does all by his Spirit; not
by such instruments, nor in such an order, as to satisfy the wisdom of man,
specious, likely, probable to a fleshly eye, (such as the Magistrates
compulsion may seem to be) but by poor despised things, that so he may bring
down the pride of man, and the glory of the flesh, and may train up his
people in the noble exercise of faith, and may feast himself with the glorious
ascribings of might and power to him alone. But in the way that most men go,
in drawing men to Religion, they leave but little to God; which practice has
indeed a principle in our natures, that shows it self in other things as well
as this. For how apt are we in the point of Justification, to confederate with
the Babel-builders? and a desperate adventure do we count it, to cast our
selves upon the free grace of God in Jesus Christ; so likewise in this business,
we count it presumption in stead of faith, to rely upon God in the use of
spiritual means, without carnal weapons, to bring men to the truth; and
therefore we devise ways, to keep men in, that they shall not stir; But if
this be not of God, it will have the same success that Babel had, God will
come down and confound this pride; Jer. 17.5.
For cursed be man, that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his confidence from the Lord: And this Arm stretched forth to an
Heterogeneous act, will wither and be shrivelled up.

Reas. 3.
It is No^ enim gladiis, aut jaculis, aut m^l^tari manu veritas praed catur:
sed suadedo, and co^sule^do; Quae auteni ibi suadendi libertas, aut consulendi
ratio, ubi qui co^tradicit, pro mercede, aut exilium aut mortem reportat?
Athanas. Epist. ad solit. vita^ agentes.
contrary to the nature of Christ's kingdom, to have the ministry of these
carnal means; For it is a sperituall kingdom, it is an invisible kingdom, and
the Apostle disclaimes (as before) all carnal weapons. A man's ink may be
tempered too thick with humane Elegancies, to write the mysteries of the
Gospel. Christ's kingdom is not of this world, nor served by this world: And as
the manner of this world is contrary to him; so he delights to walk contrary
to the manner of this world, who make their party as strong as they can, but
Christ has chosen (mark, it is upon choice, not of necessity) the weak things
of the world, even babes, to show forth his praise and strength. His Spirit in
the Ministry of his servants, is that glorious Arm, that he puts forth to
conquer all the power of darkness. He Psalm. 50.2.
shines out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, (not out of the Thrones of
Princes as such) and with his Psalm. 43.3.
light and his truth, scatters the enemies of his truth. Christ's vein lies in
this, in clothing weak things with incredible strength, and acting them on to
glorious achievements. Prove. 8.
By me Kings reign; but shall it ever be said, By Kings Christ reigns,
otherwise then as being nursing Fathers to his Church? No; but he rebukes Kings
for his peoples sake, and says, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets
no harm: He first anoints them, and thereby teaches them all things, and then
says, Touch not mine anointed. Christ does not use all means that he could
use, to establish his Kingdom, and enlarge his Dominion. He could have called
for more Legions of Angels, then he had units of Apostles, to have rescued him.
So Christ could use the Ministry of the Civil Magistrate, and make them his
friends, his champions, but he has not pleased so to do. Not many wise, not
many mighty are called, and those that are, he does not use their might nor
authority for any such purpose as to conquer, but nurse for him, by
countenancing, providing, defending, etc. As the vine needs the pole to climb
up by, but yet grows up of it self.

We may bring an Argument a Majori. If Pastors and Teachers, Not that we are
Lords of your faith, but helpers of your joy. Ministers may be too magisteriall
in their teaching, and people may be too implicit in their faith, and in their
obedience to their doctrine: as on the contrary, the one may be too low, the
other too censorious.

It will be granted on all hands, that if Religion be the Magistrates charge,
yet as it is not his only, so neither his first charge; proper charge of
Magistracy: But Magistracy immediately and directly respects the good of men,
their persons and outward being, and Religion only obliquely and Collaterally;
for such an end must be assigned to Magistracy, as does competere omni, hold
among all, and to level Magistracy at an higher and further end, then God
has, or its own principle will carry, is vain. Now this will press after the
other, to be admitted likewise, that the first charge must be first looked to,
and attended upon, and the latter does not disoblige from the former, much
less contra-oblige the former, that is, differing opinions in Religion being
of a secondary and remote consideration to the outward well-being of men, does
not oblige to destroy or to expose to destruction, by mulcts, bonds, or
banishment, the persons of men; for whom, and in relation to whose
preservation, Magistracy was erected. For this is a Rule, The Law of Nature
supersedes Institutions. Men have a natural being, before they come to have a
spiritual being; they are men before they are Christians: Now therefore for
faultiness in Christianity, you must not destroy the man.

It Is also certain, proportion between the fault and the punishment, as that
wherein justice mainly consists; Now this proportion is not, nor cannot be
observed, when you go out of that nature and capacity in which a man has
offended, and punish him in another, as the Magistrate does when he punishes
for such opinions in Religion. As for instance; A man is capable of a
threefold notion, according to a threefold capacity, viz. Natural, Politic,
Religious. He sins or offends in his religious capacity, and has some
heterodox opinions; yet a good subject, and fellow-subject, a good Father to
his Family, etc. Why now such may his errors be, that he may forfeit his
religious notion, and ought to be rejected, as the Apostle says, after once or
twice admonished in vain; but now to come upon his politic being or
privileges, is to punish him in that notion and capacity wherein he has not
at all offended, (except he have disturbed the public peace by the turbulent
managing of his opinion, and then no man may excuse him, but otherwise) as he
was a good subject before he drunk in this opinion, so he is never the worse
since; therefore to deny him room in the kingdom, or to seize upon his
person, or to come upon his estate, is as to punish one man for another man's
fault. Therefore seeing the Magistrate cannot reach the mind, and judgment,
and conscience, with his punishments, which is the offender, he ought not to
punish the outward man; Errors being properly sins without the body.

CHAP. V. Containing Reasons against the whole Complexum, viz. Cognizance and
Compulsion together, in the sense before mentioned.
CHrist never appointed nor anointed Magistracy to such a work, neither ever
came it into his heart so to do; add them; (for that were to be more careful
then Christ, and wise above that which is written) and therefore Christ will
not Illa vero quae a spirituals Christi Regno aliena sunt, effect us qui ad hoc
Coeleste Christi Regnum pertincnt producere nequeunt, proinde quod
institututione divind ad cos produce^dos non sunt sanctificata.
bless them therein.

If this honorable burden of all the Churches belong to the Magistrate, it is
either by the law of Nature, or by Institution; Not by the law of Nature, for
that is the same every where, and would state it as well in a Heathen
Conqueror, as a Christian King. Not by Institution; for it is none of those
gifts mentioned, Ephesians. 4. if any where else, let it be showed; And if it can no
where be showed, then either it belongs not unto them, or one of these three
worse consequences will inevitably follow; viz. how does Christ render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, (who commands us so carefully that we
should) in concealing this their honorable interest? 2. How is he faithful in
all his house, if he have left but this one duty uncharg'd upon Magistrates? 3.
How shall the Word of God be found perfect, and able to make the man of God
perfect, thoroughly instructed to every part of his work, if it instruct him
not in this duty of the Magistrate?

Now then if this care do not appertain to Magistrates, we shall in vain cast
it upon them, or they assume it to themselves; for Christ will bless his own
Ordinances, and concur with them, but not men's inventions: he is engaged to
the one, Isa. 55.11. but he declines the other, Zach. 4.6.

The intermedling of the Magistrate in this kind, State-notion, which while it
seems to strengthen Religion, does indeed Iste null aratione instructus, vi and
potetia omnes cogit, adeo ut statim nulli non appareat, ipsorum sententia^, non
secundum Deum, sed humanam esse. Athanas. Epist. referring to the Arrian
Magistrate.
eat out the native authority and majesty of it. It is the honor of the truth
of Christ (that which was the honor of Christ the Truth,) not to receive
honor from men, in this kind; it is a prejudice which the wisdom of the
Parliament will not do to an ancient law of the Kingdom, to enact that for
law which is a law long since. Religion and every particle of it, is enacted
already by an higher authority, then any earthly King or Magistrate; and if
that will not sway the conscience to obey, what can the laws of men do? can
these cobwebs catch those that the nets of God cannot?

This course likewise would lay a stumbling block in men's way, to profane the
things of God, by doing them out of obedience to men, comfort, through
jealousy of the Principle, occasioned by this ingrediency of man's power
therein.

From the frustraneousnesse of such means, Egregiam vero laudem, etc.

Lastly, present Magistracy is good and orthodox, but there arises a Pharaoh
that knows not Joseph, a Magistracy that knows not the truth; now will errors
walk on every side, (when heterodox Magistrates are exalted) and that not by
permission, but by Commandment, and you shall be forced to them, and so whipped
with your own Rod.

CHAP. VI. Containing Arguments against all external force in matters of
Religion, or Compulsion in general.
Christ's people are a willing people, therefore not forced, Psalm. 110. as may
also be drawn from that Metaphor, applied to Ministers, who are called Fishers
of men. Fishers allure by the bait, and do not compel the fish with
violence; there is an innocent guile, but compulsion cannot be innocent. It Is
an obvious principle, that Religion is to be persuaded, and not forced upon
men: God persuade Japhet (says the Patriarch) to dwell in the tents of Sem; and
David says to his people; If it seem good unto you, let us fetch back the
Arc. That service that is not Sed nec Religionis est cogere Religione^ quae
sponte suscipi debeat, non vi. Cum and hostiae ab animo libexti expostulentur:
Ita etsi nos compuleritis ad sacrificandum, nihil praestabitis Diis vestris,
nist co^tentiosi sint: co^tentiosus autem Deus non est. Tertull. ad Scap. cap.
2.
free, is not acceptable to God, who loves a cheerful giver; and therefore the
peoples consent is also noted in that place, 1 Chronicles. 13.4. And all the
Congregation said, that they would do so, for the thing was right in the eyes
of all the people: and when the Tabernacle was to be built, how carefully is
that Clause added, That every man bring what he brings willingly, and with his
heart? Exodus 25.2. and Chap. 35.5. otherwise it was not to be received.

mystery under the Law, when David was not permitted to build God a house,
because he had shed much blood in war? 1 Chronicles. 22.8. But Solomon, a man of
peace was designed thereto. Was not this partly, (for I say not 'twas the
adaequate reason) to warn us not to use violence, to make men Religious?

That zeal of the outward of Religion that is hurtful to men's persons, is a
breach of that exemplary Rule of Christ, I will have mercy and not sacrifice.
Moreover, The Sabbath was made for man, (says Christ) not man for the Sabbath;
and as much may be said of all the outward of Religion: then I must not for
the Sabbaths sake, destroy man, for whom the Sabbath was made; for the Sabbath
was made to advance man's happiness, not to take away his being, because his
opinion of the Sabbath differs from other men, and perhaps from the truth also:
the Sabbath is to help a man to what he has not, not to take away what he
has. Though we grant an outward restraint of all, for avoiding of scandal, as
is aforesaid.

What ignorance and pride does it savor of, cannot make one hair white or
black? And is it not God that must give repentance to the acknowledgement of
the truth? 2 Timothy 2.25. What can man do but prove (whether God will) by the use
of due means? and what is the means of faith? the sword? Nay, but the Word:
Faith comes by hearing. Believers are not Joh. 1.13.
borne of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God. A man cannot
believe at his own will, how much less at another? Who can reveal and
infuse supernatural notions and truths, but the Spirit? (1 Cor. 2.) which the
Spirit does not by force, but by allurement rather or attraction.

And that is another Reason; Piae religionis proprium est, non cogere, sed
suadere: siquidem Dominus, non cogens, sed libertatem sua^ voluntati
permittens, d^cebat quide^ vulgo^ omnibus, si quis vult venirepost me;
Apostolis vero, number and vos abire valtis? Quae autem ibisuadend libertas aut
consulendi ratio, ubi qui contradic^t, pro mercede zut exilium, aut mortem
reportat? Athanas. Epist. Deus coactam confitendise aspernatus est voluntatem,
siquidem Deus universitatis est, obsequi^ non eget necessario, non requirit
coactam confessionem; simplicitate quaerendus est, confessione discendus est,
charitate amandus est, timore venerandus est, voluntatis prob^ta^e retinendus
est; At vero quid istud, quod sacerdotes timere Deum vinculis coguntur, poenis
jubentur, sacerdotes carceribus continentur, plebs in custodia catenati ordinis
constricta disponitur? Hilarious ad Constant. August.
The Spirit himself waits, and violates not the liberty of the reasonable
soul, by superseding the faculties thereof, but approves every truth to the
understanding, and moves the will without violence, with a rational force.
Shall man be more zealous for God, then God is for himself. God himself does
not force men, but call them to repentance, and to the knowledge, and
acknowledgement of his Son. Let the extent of that word (Calling) be
considered, whether it will warrant any further means then Arguments,
persuasions, entreaties, (make them as forcible as you can) and if you hold the
fear of punishment over men, it must be the fear of divine punishments: We
knowing the terrors of the Lord persuade men.

Furthermore, Eccles. 7.21. Take not heed unto all words that are spoken, lest
thou hear thy servant curse thee: For oftentimes also thine own heart
knows, that thou thy self likewise have cursed others. So I say, infist not
upon every error of thy brother, for thou thy self know, if thou know
thy self, that thou have errors not a few, or at leastwise, if thou will
believe the Scripture, that says, We know but in part.

And how will you avoid the devouring of one another, Independents? As when the
Assembly were to carry up their Votes, and the Result of their debates
concerning Church Government, I have heard, some contended for the Classical
Government that it must be, and that it is jure divino, and no other: Others,
that it may be by the Word: a third sort, that any Government was indifferent,
and the Magistrate was to determine; and therefore you were constrained to
accommodate the terms of your Proposition to the advantage of your cause, that
a Presbytery may be by the Word of God, else you had lost two parts of three,
who would never have gone, that it alone must and might lawfully be. So here is
Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, as well as both against
a third; and seeing Ephraim and Manasseh cannot consist themselves without an
accommodation, why should not a third come in, and be accommodated with them?

I ask not only whether you may not err, latent, but whether you will not
acknowledge your selves to have been in errors patent? I know you will not
deny it, though I wish and earnestly exhort; that it be more frequently, more
publicly acknowledged by some, with more shame-taking to themselves, that you
have been those Leaders that have caused the people to err; you have preached
for Conformity, written for Episcopacy, pleaded for the Common-Prayer-Booke,
and walked willingly after almost every Commandment. Now you have altered your
minds and practices, retracted your opinions, destroyed what you built,
condemned your selves in the things you allowed. Well then, have you taken your
selves once in an error? learn this wisdom by it, to suspect your selves,
and be not too violent against others. Why may you not in a while see cause to
exchange your present judgment for a better? Why may there not be more truth
yet behind? Is that which is perfect come, or are we come yet to the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ?

Of all things a man may dispute alike. Charran.
say for your judgment, that your differing Brethren have not to say for
theirs? for the controversy betwixt us, is not in such things as wherein one
part must needs be convicted in his own conscience, as sinning against common
principles in all men. You have grounds, so have they; you propose Objections,
they answer them; you are persuaded that you are in the right, and that this is
the meaning, and right understanding of the Scriptures; they think no less on
their own side. Now who shall state the difference, and be the dayes-man
between you, but Christ in his own time clearing the truth, and leaving naked
the errors; except you can prove that the Word of God came out from Verity is
not a thing of our own inventio^ and purchase, and when it yields it self into
our hands, we have nothing in our selves whereby we may challenge it,
possess it, or assure our selves of it. Charron of Wisdom, p. 250.
you, or came to you only?

Again, Is there not a time and a season for every purpose under heaven? Has
not God his time of winking, and his time of warning? And so has not man his
time of ignorance, and his time of repentance?

May not a Truth for a time, lie under the suspicion of an error; was it not
as strange, and displeasing to you not many years since, when some of your
Brethren fell off from Common Prayer, and the Ceremonies, as those ways of
difference, wherein they walk at present? And had you not exceedingly wronged
them, sinned against the truth,

And may not Errors for a time, have the credit of Truths? as many Episcopal
Doctrines, now rejected, might be instanced in; has not every truth its set
time, the fullness of time to be borne into the world; as Christ Jesus the
personal truth had? Would you have thought it fair dealing, if your
judgments and consciences had been superseded by man's authority, and you had
been forced to the renouncing of those things, which you held in such esteem,
while you so held them, and to have embraced the contrary mind and practice of
constraint, which now you do voluntarily? Now walk but by the same Rule to
others, and that is all that is desired.

Dan. 9.24. and 12.4.
times, and not to every time, (as Peter speaks of the present truths) so to
some persons and not to all persons. Isa. 8.16. Seal up the Law among the
Disciples. There are truths then, proper to the Disciples; Truth (indeed, all
truth) in the spiritual understanding of it, is peculiarly vindicated to such,
it is the Churches joynter or dowry. The truth shall make you free. Is every
man a free denizon of Heaven? I deny not but the common notion of many truths,
of any truth, may fall, beside the Church, upon other men (though for the
Churches sake;) but what is a prerogative dispensation, must not be our
ordinary expectation; So some truths are proper to some of the Church, as the
Spirit shall reveal, 1 Cor. 14. and without prejudice to the rest; as when
Christ took the three Disciples into the Mount; so the doctrine of
justification was specially revealed to Paul; the doctrine of evidence of grace
to John; revelation of future things to John the Divine, etc.
however, our expectation or compulsion cannot bring it, and then it is vain;
for the wind blows where he lists, as well in common as in special graces.

Further, Reas. 12.
It will afford no small satisfaction, and have no less then the force of an
Argument with him that considers the rise and root of this compulsive power (in
the particulars we speak of) as too evidently deriving it self either from the
ignorance of those who think themselves to be in the very right, and would have
all men think so of them, that they had attained the resurrection of the dead,
the utmost (...) and period of all possible knowledge and understanding, at
least in the present age, or instant; either, I say, it comes from this, or else
from an arrogating spirit in some, that would tie all men to their girdle, that
cannot endure any should differ from them, lest they should be preferred before
them, that abhor any change of their opinion, though it be for the better,
because that would speak them imperfect; that cannot bring down their
stomachs to follow another, and receive light from their Brethren, affecting
themselves to be called Rabbi, the leading Men and Oracles of the age, (whereas
God has said of no man, Hear him, but of his own Son;) Or else it comes in
others from a covetous spirit, that would make a gain of godliness, a profit
of the Ministry, and so would make all men religious, and conformable to them,
that their Tithes and Easter-bookes may rise the higher; Or lastly, it comes in
not a few from a spirit of rule and dominion, which how does it make us a
scorn and derision to the enemy, while they see even Christians, yea, the
Teachers of Christians, to be like the Fishes in the Sea, whereof the greater
devour the lesser?

The Apostle foresaw and supposed there would be diversity of opinions in men,
until the term appointed, Ephesians. 4. Till we all come into the unity of the
faith. Now where Christ upon the place and case, applies no remedy or means,
but spiritual, such as is there described, without any further provision upon
the supposall of their inefficaciousnesse, but saw good rather to dispense and
tolerate; let us take heed of over-witting Christ.

Nay, there must be Heresies; and it is expedient as well for the exercise of
love, as gifts, and for a foil to and discovery of the truth, and the
professors thereof. What singular thing were it in the sheep of Christ, that
they know his voice, if there were no strange voices, or (which will come all
to one) if the Magistrate did brand all others with mulcts and heavy
punishments? and how shall the Apostles consequence but be prevented, That by
reason of errors 2 Pet. 2.2.
the truth should be evil spoken of, if every error be snapt up presently,
which if it prevent not errors from starting, yet will prevent the scandal of
the truth by them? Are not errors as well as afflictions part of Christ's
discipline, whereby he nurtures his Church? then let this discipline have its
perfect work, till it may be cured by its proper remedy, the sword of the
Spirit. You may as well say, there shall be no sins in the Church, as no
errors.

Is not the practice of compulsion in the particular we speak of, Ephesians. 4.2.
Phil. 3.16.
To forbear one another in love; to walk whereunto we have attained by the
same rule; quietly waiting till God reveal what is behind, and clear what is
in controversy? Is it not to go contrary ex diamentro, to those arbitraments
of the Apostle; Romans 14.13.
Not to judge one another (then sure much less to prosecute one another) in
meats, and drinks, or concerning a holy day; as considering that Ibid. ver. 6.
he that eats, eats to the Lord, and gives God thanks, and he that for
bears, goes according to his conscience too, and if right in the maine, may
be acceptable to God also?

In policy it is the worst way in the world, Antinomians likewise have stumbled
at our churlish exacting Preachers of the Law, Isa. 32.6.
Who made empty the sonle of the hungry, and caused the drink of the thirsty
to fail: And who knows but if force were removed, and a league made, and free
trading of truth set on foot, and liberty given to try all things; straying
Brethren on the right hand might be reduced? for as much as we know, that as
sin takes occasion by the Commandment, so do errors by proscription, and to
forbid them, is to sow them, and no readier way to make men fond of them, then
to restrain them by force; for Nitimur in vetitum, we love to be prying into a
closed Arc, and the price of any thing is inhaunced when it is made dainty of;
and so ex contrariis contraria sequuntur. Our first Parents were easily induced
by the Devil, to believe there was more in that forbidden tree, then in all
the trees of the Garden: and men are not so wise as not to deliver themselves
of such a sophistry unto this day.

Reas. 17.
The Apostle requires us, 1 These. 5. To prove all things; that is, as I
conceive, not to gather all things whatsoever before us (as all the creatures
were gathered together before Adam) to form and state a judgment of them; for
this were a work worthy of Solomon; but the Apostle means, that before we
take up any thing in our belief or practice, we first bring it to the bar
and balance, and put it into the scales of an impartial dijudication; and
this is the dignity as well as the duty of a spiritual man, that he judges all
things, and is not concluded by the former judgment of any: and this liberty
is as worthy the vindication as O homines ad servitute^ nati! What monster is
this, for a man to desire to have all things free, his body, his members, his
goods, and not his spirit, which nevertheless is only borne unto liberty? A man
will willingly make benefit of what soever is in the world, that comes from the
East or the West, for the good and service, nonrishment, health, ornament of
his body, and accommodate it all unto his use, but not for the culture,
benefit, and enriching of his spirit, giving his body the liberty of the
fields, and holding his spirit in close prison. Charron of Wisdom. p. 261.
any, in these exonerating times, this liberty of judging. And it is established
upon very good reason; for it makes much to the advantage of truth, both to the
getting, and holding of it; for, What lightly comes, lightly goes, (as we say.)
The Bereans for searching into Paul's doctrine and examining it by the Word, are
recorded by an Epithet unusual for the Holy Ghost to give to men, They were
more noble its said.

Now this liberty of trying and judging is in vain, if there be not a liberty
of profession; and to hinder this, were a most tyrannical usurpation, over
that connection, which God has made between the act of the understanding, and
the will, (whereby Voluntas sequitur dictamen intellectus) and to put asunder
what God has joined together, and indeed to violate the Law of God and Nature.

A man cannot will contrary to the precedent act of judgment, he wills weakly
without an act of judgment preceding; To force a man to a profession or
practice which he wills not, nay, which he nills, is to offer unto God a
sacrifice of violence on the part of the compulsor, and an unreasonable service
on the part of the compelled; and therefore necessarily unacceptable.

God would have every man fully persuaded in his own mind, 14.15. even about
days and meats, and nothing imposed upon a doubting conscience, because it is
great; nor nothing received with a slight credulity, because it is small; but
would have us Romans 14.18.
serve him in every thing we take up to believe or practice, and not to be the
servants of men, in any thing that has relation to Religion.

And this brings in another Argument; Romans 14.4.
Who art thou, says the Apostle, that judge another man's servant? Man in a
natural or politic consideration, is the servant of men, of his Prince, and
the Republique: But man in a religious consideration, is only the servant of
God, and he stands or falls to his own Master. He is the servant of men to
their edification, by holding forth his light and conscience before them; but
he receives neither his law nor his judgment from man: God accepts perhaps
whom man rejects. The day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by
fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. A place worthy most serious consideration, in relation to
the present Question; for there the Apostle speaks in a case very fit and
parallel to what may be existent among us; There may be among us building hay
and stubble upon the true and precious foundation Christ Jesus; Well, what must
man pull it down by force? No; that were to take it out of Gods hand, who will
do it better then we can, Who has appointed a day to make manifest every man's
work.

Consider likewise, Zech. 9.9.
Behold, thy King coming, meek and lowly, riding upon an Ass, the most bearing
and forbearing creature. And elsewhere; Isa. 42.2, 3.
He shall not cry, nor lift up his voice, nor make his voice to be heard in the
streets; A bruised reed shall he not break; Butter and honey shall he eat.
Consider how harshly this sounds, how inharmoniously to other of Christ's
administrations. When he had to deal with Jezabel, an harlot, that seduced his
people to commit fornication, (a worse body there could not be) yet says
Christ, I gave her space to repent, before ever I would threaten her; and
notwithstanding this threat is gone out, it shall not bring forth, if she
repent; for so it is carried, Rev. 2.22. Shall Christ wait, and must not men
wait? Will Christ wait on a Jezabel, a wanton Strumpet, and shall we think
much to wait upon a wanton opinion? Must the servant be above his Master?

And may I not say to these forward forcing men; You know not what spirit you
are of? you forget that you are of that spirit that waited on the old world an
hundred and twenty years in N^^^s preaching; and many other parallel
instances might be given of the Lords patience: and when his date of patience
has been out, and he has drawn up his accusation against a Nation, what has
been the tenor of it but this, Mat. 23.37.
I would have gathered you, but ye would not: I sent my Prophets, rising
early, and sending them, ye killed and stoned them? but where does the Lord
lay it to the charge of Prophet or Magistrate, that they did not force and
compel the people? Indeed when they have neglected their duty of teaching and
giving good example; or when Jer. 23.15.
pollution has gone out from them into all the land, the Lord has reckoned up
that, as good cause why, but no where their not forcing them to an outward
form of amendment, whether they would or no.

How contrary is the present voice, Ad castra, ad insulas, Precibus and
lachrymis? but now that you have to deal with differing Brethren, you dismiss
your good old principle, and commend it to us, to receive your hard usage with
prayers and tears: and you are not contented, with the King of the Church,
that has all power in his hands, to behold Jerasalem, and weep over it, even
over your differing Brethren, whom you count to be in errors, (if they are
so.) How do you forget that you are in the body, and may be tempted, and err
your selves? Do you mete the same measure, you would have meted to you again?
Is the Church in her natural guise (that uses to run before the dog and the
wolse) when she follows her own kind with a sword in her hand? Is not this
masculine property more harmonious, and agreeing to the man of sin, that exalts
himself against Christ Jesus? Pardon us then if such a temptation at least
arise in our hearts to think the scene is quite changed, and you are (as to
this) no longer the persecuted Saints, but the persecuting world.

Many shall run to and fro, Dan. 12.4. As a dog does in following the sent, so
do men in following the truth, and they that will not give this liberty, must
not expect they should disereetly follow the track: We have a Proverb, that
they that will find, must as well seek where a thing is not, as where it is.
Let us look upon the truth as Gods, and not o^^s; and let us look upon our
selves in all our discourses, as hunting after it; every one acting and seeking
for himself, and for his part only, acknowledging that God must lead every
man by a sense and instinct, so shall we give God his due glory, and save our
selves much unprofitable vexation. And this liberty of free disquisition is as
great a means to keep the truth as to find it. The running water keeps pure
and clear, when the standing poole corrupts; that is the sense of the
Proverbiall speech, An Academick, or Pyrrhonian was never heretic. While men
sleep in a carnal recumbency upon their Doctors and Teachers, the Devil sowes
tares; the true temper and proper employment of a Christian, is always to be
working like the Sea, and purging ignorance out of his understanding, and
exchanging notions and apprehensions imperfect for more perfect, and forgetting
things behind to press forward.

Why should not men put on the same kindness, suspects himself, and preferres
others before himself, not imposing his sense nor will upon any? Wherein
should there be free and ingenuous dealing, if not about the truth, which makes
men free?

The Apostle says in a special manner of Christians, that we are called unto
peace; and, Romans 12.18.
For as much as in us is, we are to live peaceably with all men. Mark [with
all men] sure then with Brethren. Let them fall out with us, but let not us
fall out with them, but only as the Apostle did, by spiritual weapons contend
for the truth. God is the God of peace: Deuteronomy. 20.10.
and he commanded his people when they went out to Battle in a just war, they
should first offer peace, for so long. Nay, in that place, before referred
unto, 1 Gor. 7. God would have his people suffer unbeleevers Infidels, not
only in the same kingdom with them, but to live in the same house, lie in the
same bed together, that is, that the breach and desertion should not be on the
Believers part (if there be no other cause, that may require it, but the
unbelief of the other;) and the reason is, God has called us to peace. And
peace is a Character of truth; The wisdom that is from above, it is first
pure, then peaceable, Jam. 1.17. and therefore those metaphorical descriptions
of conversion, by the changing of fierce natures into gentle dispositions, Is.
11. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the kid, etc. As a notable instance hereof may be given in Paul; While he was
in a false way, he drives furiously ( Jehu-like) he rides to Damascus, fetches
letters of authority thence, and is posting to Jerusalem, to silence, and
imprison all that preach Jesus: But when he has the truth on his side, we
find no such carriage in him, but beseeches the Brethren by his gray hairs,
etc. indeed against obstinate seducers, he expresses much zeal, but that is a
spiritual force, not corporal; for indeed the truth needs no such violence to
promote it.

That doctrine or way that is urged with violence, Invitos ad mutatione^
sententiae coegeru^t Ariani, quod hominium est, minime suae causae
considentium, Athanas. Epist. Nova autem ista and ex^^r abilis haeresis, cum
rationibus subruitur, cum ipsaver itate pudefacta concidit; quos non potuit
verbis inducere, eos vi plagis carceribusa; ad se pertrahere annititur; atque
vel ita seipsam quam non fit pia and Dei cultrix manisestat. This prejudice and
suspicion will any way incur that is urged with violence on men.
diffide their cause, to be violent, and that the way is rather of man then of
God; for if it be of God, it shall prevail: What needs this force?

Have thou faith. (says the Apostle) have it to thy self. true principle,
well-beaten and understood, is better then the highest topling practice,
without a principle; as a living dog is better then a dead Lion. Faith without
works are dead, so are works without faith; for faith is the form and life of
the work. Therefore what a poor thing do they contend for, that would bow
the practice, and what arrow-spirited men are they, that are content with a
conformed practice, though there be a contradicting principle, whereby a man
judges himself and his imposer of weakness and of sin? 2 Cor. 5.11.
We are made manifest to God (says the Apostle, and 'twas a great matter that
he could undertake so far) but does that satisfy him? No, but we trust also
(says he) that we are made manifest in your consciences, else the Apostle would
have had little joy in them, or boldness toward them, notwithstanding all
their outward conformity.

The practice of forcing straitens men in their liberty they have as they are
men and Quid jam nobis ulterius relinquetur, si etiam hoc quod voluntate fieri
oportet, libido extorquet alicna? Lactant. lib. 5. Instit. cap. 14.
reasonable creatures, who are borne with this privilege and prerogative, to
be led forth always under the conduct of their own reason. Which liberty is
much enlarged by being Christians: Therefore the Apostle says, The spiritual
man judges all things; which is not only the Clergy man, but as Alsted
glosses well, Spiritualis homo, (i. e.) vere Christianus. And to the test and
trial of such does Paul submit his doctrine, 1 Cor. 10. I speak as unto wise
men, judge ye what I say. And 1 Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speak two or
three, and let the rest judge: Upon which Alsted, in relation to another
Argument, thus; Quo etiam pertinet locus ille celebris, ubi omnibus in Ecclesia
Christi congregatis, qui viz. munere ac dono prophetandi, (i.) docendi,
praediti sunt, potestas loquendi; reliquis autem omnibus potestas judicandi
conceditur; that is, Unto all in the Church, to whom is given the gift of
prophesying, that is, of Teaching, is granted the liberty of speaking; to all
the rest, the liberty of judging. To this Argument I will add the words of a
late, and (for ought I know) yet living Author.

The true office of a man, his most proper and natural exercise, his worthiest
profession is to judge; Why is he a man discoursing, reasoning, understanding?
Why has he a Spirit? to build (as they say) Castles in the air, and to feed
himself with fooleries and vanities, as the greatest part of the world does?
Quis unquam oculos tenebrarum causa habuit, Whoever had eyes given him to keep
them shut? No doubtless, but to understand, to judge of all things, and
therefore he is called the Governor, the Superintendent, the keeper of Nature
of the world, of the works of God. To go about to deprive him of this right,
is to make him no more a man, but a Beast. If not to judge, hurts the simple
and proper nature of man, what shall it do to a wise man, who is far above
the common sort of man? To judge singularly and excellently is indeed the
peculiar part of a wise man, not of everyman. It is strange that so many men (I
speak not of Idiots, and the weaker sort, who have not the faculty and the
mean to exercise it, but of those) who either are, or make show to be
understanding and sufficient, deprive themselves willingly of this right and
authority, so natural, so just, and excellent, who without the examining or
judging of any thing, receive and approve whatsoever is presented, either
because it has a fair semblance and appearance, or because it is in
authority, credit, and practice: yea they think it is not lawful to examine or
doubt of any thing; in such sort do they debase and degrade themselves; they
are forward and glorious in other things, but in this they are fearful and
submisse, though it do justly appertain unto them, and with so much reason,
since there are a thousand lies for one truth, a thousand opinions of one and
the same thing, and but one that is true, why should not I examine with the
instrument of reason, which is the better, the truer, the more reasonable,
honest, and profitable? -- It is to play the part of profane men and beasts,
to suffer our selves to be led like Oxen -- What can a wise or holy man have
above a profane, if he must have his spirit, his mind, his principal and
heroical part a slave to the vulgar sort? -- Why should it not be as lawful
for one to doubt and consider of things as doubtful, as it is for others to
affirm them? -- How should we be capable to know more, if we grow resolute in
our opinions, settle and repose our selves in certain things, and in such
manner, that we seek no farther, nor examine any more, that which we think we
hold. -- They know not that there is a kind of ignorance and doubt, more
learned and certain, more noble and generous then all their science and
certainty. -- There is a generation of men, that if they be constrained to
change their opinions, being altered, they are as resolute and obstinate in
their new, as they were before in their first opinion, not knowing how to hold
any thing without passion, and never disputing to learn and find the truth,
but to maintain that which they have sworn and bound themselves unto. These
kind of people know nothing, neither know they what it is to know, because
they think to know, and to hold the truth in their sleeve, 2 Cor. 8. -- It is
fit that weak men, that have not strength to keep themselves upright upon
their feet, be kept up with props; they cannot live but in bonds, nor maintain
themselves free, a people borne to servitude, they fear Bug-beares, or that
the wolf will eat them, if they be alone. But in wise, modest, and stayed men,
it is quite contrary. -- hoc liberiores and sulutiores sumus, qui^ integra
nobis judicandi potestas manet. It is a very sweet, peaceable, and pleasant
sojourne or delay, where a man fears not to fail or miscount himself, where
a man is in the calm under covert, and out of danger of participating so many
errors (produced by the fantasy of man, and whereof the world is full,) of
intangling himself, in complaints, divisions, disputes, of offending diverse
parts, of belying and gainsaying his own belief, of changing, repenting, and
readvising himself: For how often has time made us see, that we have been
deceived in our thoughts, and has enforced us to change our opinions? To be
brief, it is to keep the mind in peace and tranquillity, far from agitations,
and vices, which proceed from that opinion of science, which we think to have
in things; for from thence do spring, pride, ambition, immoderate desires,
obstinacy in opinion, presumption, love of novelties, etc. There is an
universality of spirit in a wise man, whereby he takes a view, and enters into
the consideration of the whole universe; like Socrates, who contained in his
affection all humane kind, he walks through all, as if they were near unto
him; he sees like the Sun, with an equal and settled regard, as from an high
watchtower, all the changes and interchangeable courses of things. -- Which is
a livery of the Divinity, and a high privilege of a wise man, who is the image
of God upon earth. Magna and generosa res animus humanus, nullos sibi poni nisi
communes, and cum Deo terminos patitur. The most beautiful and greatest
spirits, are the more universal, as the more base and blunt are the more
particular. -- Every man calls that barbarous, that agrees not with his
palate and custom; and it seems that we have no other touch of truth and
reason, then the example and the Idea of the opinions and customs of that
place or Country where we live. These kind of people judge of nothing, neither
can they, they are slaves to that they hold, a strong prevention and
anticipation of opinions does wholly possess them, etc. Thus Charron of
Wisdom, 2 book Chap. 2. which he speaks of in general as a disposition to
wisdom, but who knows but he might intend it in the nature of the woman of
Tekoa's parable, as an advantage to divine truth; however, I bring it not as an
authority, but as reason.

Furthermore, are there not several statures in Christ, better concocted then
other; and does not one star differ from another star in glory? Even so do
men, and so will they, (do we what we can,) in the accuratenesse of their
knowledge, and in the clearness of their apprehensions. Some can only see a
rule of Discipline in the Scripture confusedly and indistinctly; like the
purblind man, that saw men like trees walking: (and in truth it is most proper
for them to cry for a toleration, and he had a hard heart that would deny it
them) Others see more clearly the perfect draught, and all the lineaments
thereof, not through the excelling of their own wit, but the teaching of
Christ's Spirit, yet not assuming to themselves a greater measure of it then the
other, who perhaps in other things may see more then they by the same Spirit, 1
Cor. 12.8. etc.

Lastly, I shall conclude the positive part of this Discourse, with opening (in
some measure) the design of Christ, in establishing no other, more specious,
better satisfying order and means, for the propagation of the truth, and in
excluding force and power and authority humane, from ministering in his kingdom
in this particular, leaving this and all that has been said, to spiritual men
to judge, who can compare spiritual things with spiritual.

It is in this matter as it is in the Government of particular Churches, the
adversary carries it the same way, and turns upon the same common hinge of
humane reason, and must be answered the same way in both. They diffide the
sufficiency of a particular Church to manage its own affairs, and why? because
they have so few Officers, and in some Churches perhaps but one, and he none of
the greatest Scholars, and the Brethren a company of illiterate men, and a good
mess of government these are like to make. This error proceeds now, from not
considering, where the strength and sufficiency of this poor flock does lie,
which is, not in themselves, were they as eloquent as Apollo, as logical as
Paul, but in Christ their head, who is by his special promise present with
them, Mat. 18. Where two or three are gathered together in his Name. The Lord
is in the midst of her, therefore she cannot be moved, Psalm. 46. And the
government is upon his shoulder. Now hence (I say) is the mistake, through not
considering, that the Government of the Church by Officers, is but
minisieriall, and that they are guided and acted by Christ, and he puts wisdom
into their hearts, and right words into their mouths; as once he fitted
Bezaleel and Aholiab for the work of the Tabernacle. The same does Christ now;
for he is ascended upon high, that he might fill all things, and he does fill
carefully all his own Institutions with force and efficacy; and they do not
wisely that judge of them according to their appearance, for so, they are the
most contemptible unlikely things in the world, but could you see the virtue
and power that Christ conveyes secretly under them, you would fall down before
them. So I say now in this matter of suppressing errors, (as before qualified)
which we say, must be only by the Ministry of the Spirit, by the Word of God,
which in the hand of the Spirit is quick and powerful, by brotherly
admonitions and earnest exhortations, and holding forth the contrary light,
doctrinally and practically, etc. Now alas, say our carnal hearts, what are
these like to do? It Is true; look upon them in the outward appearance only,
and they promise little, but men do not consider, that these are but the veil
and covering of that arm and power which must do the deed. For God himself
is Judge, Psalm. 50.6. Christ Jesus is the Prince of light and truth, the
decider of Controversies, Dictator to his Church, and in the observation of
Gospel Rules, he discovers himself unto his people, and by and through his
people to those that err. The Oracle in the Temple spoke not, 'twas but a
form or image, but God spoke in the Oracle. The Scriptures themselves are but
a sealed Book, except Christ by his Spirit speak in them, and by them, to our
understandings and hearts. What matter is it what the form be, if God fill it?
What of strength or force does the sleeve or covering contribute to the arm?
There is no means of any efficacy without Christ, and the smallest means is of
absolute sufficiency through Christ; and what means should be blessed by him but
his own means? We forget that Christ will have his Church in all their
ordinances, affairs, and administrations, to show forth his death; that all
things and persons in the Church must bear a suitablenes and correspondency to
Christ crucified, the head of the Church. It is spoken particularly of that one
Ordinance, and chief one the Lords Supper, that it is to show forth the Lords
death; it is true of all Ordinances; Christ will have his people in the carriage
and managing of all his and their affairs, perform his funeral rites, and
obsequies, and hold forth an Emblem of his death to the world; and therefore
it is said, The waters of Shiloah, that is, the Ordinances of the Church, run
softly, Isa. 8.6. a pace for a funeral, and they are not clothed in the light
and gaudy colors of this worlds excellency and glory, but in the most possible
simplicity and lowliness; And I Brethren, came not (says Paul, who could have
afforded it as soon as any man) with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, etc.
For I, determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2. Mark here the ground and root of the whole matter, (I
mean of the simplicity of Christ's ways and Ordinances,) it is Christ
crucified. Christ's death is thus avenged upon the glory of the world, whilst
the power and greatness of this world is reprobated and rejected from the most
noble uses and honorable services, namely, from ministering in his kingdom:
Go, says Christ to man's wisdom and humane Eloquence, I will have none of thee
in preaching my Gospel; and return into the scabbard, says he to the
Magistrates sword, I will have none of thee to cut the way for my truth,
through woods, and rocks, and mountains, through stony hearts and implicated
reasonings. Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord. Thus
Christ reprobates parts and learning, and the most specious and likely means,
(shall he be crucified, and shall these be in their flower and blossom?) and
he brings down the mighty things of the world, by the Here may be pertinently
and commodiosly inserted a story out of Ruffinus, of a Philosopher that evaded
all the learned Arguments of the Divines, and was converted by a plain
illiterate man; which I shall do in his own words. Cum pro studio Religiosi
Imperatoris, ex omniterra sacer dotes Dei coissent, opinione commoti,
Philosophi quoq^ and Dialectici valde nobiles and opinatissimi convenerunt. In
quibus quidam insignis in art Dialectica per dies singuloe, confl^ctatus summi
certaminis cum Episcopis nostris, viris adaeque in Dialectica, no^
improbabiliter eruditis, movcbat, and ficbat ingens specbaculum convenientibus
ad audiendu^ doctis and literatis viris. Nectamen ullo genere Philosophus
concludi a quoquam poterat aut conftring. Tanta etenim dicendiarte, objectis
quaestionibus occurrebat, ut ubi maxim putaretur astrictus velut anguis
lubricus labcretur. Sed ut oftenderet Deus, quod non in sermon regnum Dei sed
in virtute consistit, quidam ex confessoribus, simplicissimae naturae vir and
nihil aliud sciens nisi Jesum Christum, and hunc crucifixum, inter caeteros
auditores Episcopos adorat, quiciam vidisset Philosophum insultantem nostris
and callida se disputationis art jactantem, poscit ab omnibus locum, velle se
paucis cum Philosopho ser mocmari. Tum vero nostri qui simplicitatem viri, and
imperitiam de sermon duntax at nossent, pavere, and velut pudorem quendam
pati, ne forte apud callidos homines risu^ officeretur sancti simplicitas.
Perstitit tamen senior, and hinc movet sermonis exordium. In nomine, inquit,
Jesu Christi Philosophe aud^quae vera sunt; Deus unus est qui ficit Coelum and
terram, quique homini quem de terrae lime formaverat, spir it um dedit:
universa quae videntur, and quae non videntur, virtute verbi sui creavit, and
spiritus sui sanctificatione firmavit. Hoc Verbum ae Sapientia quem nos Filium
dicimus, humanos miscratus errores, ex virg^^e nascicur, and per possionem
mortis, a perpetua nos morte liberavit, ac resurrectione sua aeternam nobis
contul^^ v^^am: quem and expectamus Jud cem omnium quae gerimus esse venturum.
Credis hoc na esse Philosophe? At ille velut si nunquam ullum sermonem
contradicends didecisset, itaobstuposactus vtrtute dictorum, mutus adomn^a hoc
solum potu^t respondere, it a sibi videri, nec aliud verum esse quam quod
dixerat. Tumsenior, si haec (inquit) ita essecred^s, surge and sequere me ad
Deminicum, and hujus fide signaculum suscipe. Et Philosophus cenversus ad
discrpulos suos, vel ad eos qui audiendi grat^^ convener^n^: Andite (inquit) o
Eruditi viri: Donec verbis mecum gest a res est, verba verbis opposui, and quae
dicebantur dicendiarte subverti. ubi vero pro verbis virtus processit ex are
di^entes, non potuerunt resistere verbavirtuti, nec komo adver sari potuit Deo.
Et ideo si quis vestrum potuit in his quae dicta sunt sentire quae sensi credat
Christo, and sequatur hunc senem, in qyo locutus est Deus. It a Philosophus
Christianus effectus tandem se gratulatus est victum. Kuffi. l. 3. c. 3. And
there is this good note adjected in the Margent; Ubi sunt nunc qui sophisticis
argutus opus esse putant ad convincendos Philosophos?
weak; and things that are, by things that are not, that no flesh may glory in
his presence, but he that glories, let him glory in the Lord, that neither our
faith, nor the Ordinances success, should stand in the wisdom of men, nor in
the likelinesse of the means, approving themselves so to man's understanding,
but in the power of God. These and such like are the Reasons rendered in the
first and second Chapters of the first Epistle to the Corinths; and these are
enough (I conceive) to satisfy a moderate understanding. For my own part, I
must profess it is the Clue of thread that carries me through this Labyrinth,
it is the Pole star, by which I steer my judgment, and by which my doubts
are resolved satisfactorily. I see reason enough for that slender and abject
provision, which Christ has made (in the worlds account) for the propulsing of
errors, and for that mean form and guise, wherein all Christ's Ordinances
appear unto us, when I look upon the death of Christ, or upon Christ crucified.

SECT. II.
CHAP. VII. Illustrating the Argument, with Examples and Testimonies out of
divine and humane Writ.
HAving stated the Question, both on the positive and negative part of the
Magistrates duty, and proved it with Reasons; I proceed further to confirm and
illustrate this Argument with Examples and Testimonies. Beginning with the old
Testament, and therein with Instances of Heathen Kings, (whose Religion, and
the Jews were diametrally opposite) whereby it may seem this to have been a
principle in Nature,) that yet upon grounds of ingenuous reason, as well as
policy, (though we deny not a providence in it) not only permitted the public
exercise of a contrary Religion, (which is more then we plead for) but also
gave fair quarter to the Church, and all liberty, yea authority and
accommodations for their religious engagements; yea, endowed them and their
worship with great privileges, immunities, and advantages; then which
Instances, nothing could possibly be alleged by us, more pregnant, pressing,
provoking, upbraiding, constraining, to those, between whom and us there is the
same Religion, truth, and worship substantially, though some lighter
circumstantiall differences.

These are especially Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes; I might add to them
Ahasuerus, who though a stranger to the Church, Ahasuerus.
and to the true God, yet not only protected the Church, destined to
destruction for their Religion sake; but gave them a free avengement of
themselves, of his own profitable subjects their enemies, Esth. 9. to the
slaying of seventy six thousand men. And the book of Daniel is not without some
passages, which might be referred hither, and good use made of them; as namely,
Nebuchadnezzar.
Nebuchadnezzars exalting men of a Religion contrary to the Babylonians, in the
Provinces, and making all the great Affairs of the Provinces to run through
their hands, Dan. 2.48, 49. And a second time if not to a further degree of
honor, Dan. 3.30. And these things done by Politic Princes, that wanted not
serious regards to their own safety, stability, floutishing; and were
Conquerours over these captives, (whose terror could not make these Princes
afraid, as Elibu speaks, Job 33.7.) nor had they any politic engagements to
their Religion, further then the satisfaction of these their Subjects in this
particular, and their more willing subjection, and the union and peace of their
kingdoms thereby; and they went on in their own Heathenisme themselves,
though they indulged thus to the Church.

But I shall content my self to set before you those three before mentioned,
Cyrus.
beginning with Cyrus, whose Story, so far as concerns our purpose, you shall
find, Ezra 1. to this effect; That he made a Proclamation throughout all his
Kingdom, and put it in Writing, wherein be gave free liberly to all the people
of the Jews his Captives, to go up to Jerusalem, and build the house of God
there. And whosoever remains (he adds) in any place, where he sojourneth,
let the men of his place help him with silver and with gold, and with goods,
and with beasts, besides the free will-offering for the house of God, which is
in Jerusalem. Moreover, he made restitution of all the vessels of the Temple,
plundered by his predecessor Nebuchadnezzar.

One would have thought a Proclamation of liberty, and no more, had been
enough, and doubtless that alone would have been most thankfully accepted by the
godly Jews, and they would have acknowledged that this Prince had indulged a
great and special favor to them; but these further acts of grace might well
make them say; as, Psalm. 126. When the Lord turned again our captivity, we
were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our
tongue with singing. Nay the Heathen could not choose but say, The Lord has
done great things for them: and truly say they, The Lord ^^th done great things
for ^s, whereof we are glad. And who could blame them for being glad?

But I look it should be objected; Cyrus did not this of himself, but was
extravrdinarily stirred up hereunto by God, (his own words importing so much)
and that he was acted in this thing above the consideration of all politic
reasons, and the regard of his own Religion: Therefore what Cyrus did upon
such an extraordinary motion, cannot be reasonably expected from Princes now,
that are not so stirred up and acted extraordinarily by the divine hand, but
they must be faithful to their Principles received, and Religion established,
and must indulge no other liberties or favors, then may consist therewith in a
rational and prudentiall way.

I answer. Cyrus was stirred up by God; Answ.
but first God would not stir him up to an unlawful or an uncomely thing, if
that act of him being of one Religion himself to accommodate another had been
such, God was not so put to it, he had other means to have brought this to
pass, then by the sin of any man, especially then by becoming a tempter
thereto himself. Let not any man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of
God, for God cannot be tempted, neither tempts he any man: therefore if this
was a temptation, 'twas not of God, if it was of God, 'twas no temptation.

2. Gyrus was stirred up, but 'twas not by a Prophet that we read of, nor by a
vision, nor any extraordinary way. The Holy Ghost tells us he was stirred up,
but perhaps none of his Court, nor his Princes could tell he was stirred up by
the Lord, nor he himself, the Lord might carry this force so secretly under
rational and prudent considerations: And no question he did, and showed Cyrus
reason for what he put him upon. And do you think there were not politic
Objections made against this act of Cyrus, by his Statesinen and Counselors
(as there were to Artaxerxes, with whom they prevailed for the suspending of
the work that the Jews had begun,) and was it likely Cyrus answered all these
Objections to his careful Counselors, with the mere instigation he had to it
without reason?

3. We need not fear to affirm, that Cyrus had reason for what he did, and
did move upon reason in this act, (though reason alone would not have done it
with him, there was the special blessing of God upon that reason, and his
effectual instigation of Cyrus heart, making it facile and yielding unto that
reason) and we may assign the reason partly what it was, at least probably:
it is couched in the act, which was an act of Justice as well as of grace: For
these poor Jews had in Cyrus his predecessors time, been wrongfully carried
away captive from their own land, and the worship of God, and detained ever
since in a strange land, and disabled to set it up again of themselves, and
therefore Cyrus might well through the workings of a natural conscience, hold
himself bound to restore both persons and utensills, and to supply what ever
inability or insufficiency that accrew'd to them through their captivity: and
no doubt also but this Principle, which it seems by the stories in the Bible
was a received one in those ancient times, did glow in Cyrus his heart, that
every Nation would willingly walk in the Name of their God; even as himself
would; and it seemed to him hard measure to restrain them, and therefore
though as a Heathen, and so one that had chosen and pitched his Religion
already, he had no obligation to any other Religion but his own, yet out of a
principle of common justice, to do as he would be done by, he might hold
himself bound to do what he did.

But it may be further objected, Cyrus was in a false way himself, and all
that he did in this way of dispensation, he did it for the truth, and if he had
done more, and left his own way, and joined with the Jews, it had been but his
duty.

I answer, some men in our days, he did over-doc his duty, nay he did contrary
to his duty; if the duty of every Magistrate be, to be so zealous of his own
conscience and way, as to tolerate no other; as they affirm.

But it will be said further, Cyrus was convinced of the God of Israel to be
the true God.

Grant that, instituted worship of the God of Israel? was he convinced of that
too? Why did he not then go up himself with them to Jerusalem? No, but Cyrus
was a Heathen in worship still: Or, Why might not Cyrus have said, I know and
acknowledge the true God as well as you, and do worship him, therefore you
shall worship him after the same manner as I do? No, but he leaves them to
their consciences; else, if he had tied them to his heathenish rites in
worshipping the true God, they had been but sorry gainers by his conversion.
Lastly, Cyrus was convinced that the God whom Israel served was the true God;
and is that thought by you as a sufficient reason for all the favor he
indulged them? Why then I appeal to you, whether you have not the same and
much more reason to indulge as large privileges to your differing Brethren, of
whom you never had such a sinful scruple, (I in charity think) whether they
worshipped the true God.

Therefore to conclude this Instance; It seemed reasonable to Cyrus to do what
he did in way of favor to the Jews, though he himself was of different
principles from them in worship. For God scarce acts his own people to any
thing without reason, (much less against reason) how much less other men, who
are not prepared with such a principle of resignation, and submission of will
and reason, and all to him, as his own are or ought to be?

The next Instance is of Darius, Darius.
who (upon the occasion of the Jews adventuring upon the work again, after
the proscription of Artaxerxes, and a long cessation thereof, Chap. 4.) is
consulted with by Letters from Tatnai, and Shetherboznai, Governors on the
other side the River, what to do, whether to suffer them, or to hinder them;
and you have Darius his answer, Chap. 6. which is to this purpose; That as upon
search, he found a decree of Cyrus, authorizing them to build; so he charges
Tatnai the Governor, etc. Shetherboznai, and their companions, to be far from
hindering them, but to let the work of this house alone, and let the Governor
and Elders of the Jews build it, in its own place: Mark, how all is left to
their consciences: Yea moreover besides the former indulgence and dispensation
of Cyrus, he decrees that of the Kings goods, even of the tribute beyond the
River, forthwith expenses should be ministered to them, (that they be not so
much as hindered or retarded) yea and sacrifices day by day.

Observe here, it is not permitted, but commanded, not to be considered, but
forthwith executed and obeyed by the Kings Officers, not to be lent, but to be
given, not to be rai^ed of the people by tax, but to be taken out of the Kings
revenue. O unparallell Darius! against many a Christian Prince and Magistrate
shall he rise up in judgment, that snib and keep down their own freeborn
subjects, in the exercise of the same Religion that themselves profess, for
differing in a Circumstance comparatively. Well, the depth of Darius policy is
this? that they may offer sacrifice, and pray for the life of the King and of
his children. Darius thought it but reasonable, that if they did accommodate
him and his children in their prayers, he should accommodate them in offering
sacrifice. Beneficium postulat Officium, and Officiwn relates to Beneficium.
Do ye expect our prayers, and will not let us offer sacrifice? How can we
sing the Lords song in a strange land? How can we pray for you, but as we are
bound to pray for enemies, that God would turn their hearts, and break the
rod of their oppression? But shall not our hearts indeed be lifted up in the
day of your showing kindness and speaking friendly to us, to pray for you? We
promise not that we will do it. Or do you think we cannot pray, or that our
prayers are nothing worth, will not stead you at all? or do you not need our
prayers? We go on. This Decree he ratifies (does not only recommend an Order
for their accommodation) but under the pain of a most exemplary death, to him
that should disobey this Word, even the Timber should be pulled down from his
house, to make a Gibbet to hang him on, and his house to be made a Dunghill,
Ezr. 6.11. Concluding with a general curse, pronounced upon all that should
put to their hand to alter or destroy that house, ver. 12. be they Kings or
people.

Will you see now O Magistrates, what you are to do, and where to use your
sword and authority, even against those that hinder the building of the house,
that will not suffer the poor Saints that are instructed, to build the house
according to the pattern, that they have taken out of the Word, but work them
disturbance and persecution. Such you ought to punish; why? not because they
are of a differing mind and way from us, no more then you ought to punish us
for being of a differing mind and way from them, but if they hinder us in this
work of building the house of God, which they know not but we are stirred up
of God unto (we say we are) and directed by him therein, (we trust we are and
shall be.) Therefore let them take heed in the fear of God what they do
against us: and think not you may alter the house, no more then destroy it, or
that you may hinder us any more then we may hinder you.

The third and last Instance, Artaxerxes.
is of Artaxerxes (not that Artaxerxes by whom the building was proscribed, but
another after him) who sends Ezra with a large Commission and authority to
Jerusalem, to this effect, Ezra 7.11. To take with him the residue of the
people, Priests and Levites, that would freely go, (he thought it not
reasonable to force them to go, though they were of the Church by birth and
Nation.) Observe that by the way [ all that are minded of their own free will
to go up, ver. 13.] and to carry with him the free will offering of the King
and his Counselors, in gold and silver, and all the silver and gold he could
find in the Province of Babylon, with the free will offering of the Priests and
people, to furnish himself for sacrifice, and to do with the overplus what
seemed good unto him; He had also vessels given him for the service of the
house, and a liberty to take out of the Kings Treasure-house, whatsoever more
was needful, (and charges his Treasurers accordingly to furnish him) if it
were to an hundred ^^dents of silver, etc. And whatsoever is commanded (says
he) by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done. I beseech you, what were
Artaxerxes his engagements to God and his worship, who was a stranger thereto,
that he should be more bound to take care of his house, and that every command
of God concerning it and his worship there, should be diligently observed; then
Christian Magistrates and people are now adays? Observe how punctual his
natural conscience tells him the servants of God must be; and what provision
he makes that they might be punctual; and will you now on the contrary, blame,
fine, imprison them, for observing punctually what their confciences say is
commanded by the God of Heaven? Furthermore, he exempts all the Ministers of
the House of God from all Taxes, and authorizes Ezra to place and displace
Magistrates, for the advantage of the true Religion, which he commends to him
to promote and spread, as far as ever he can, ratifying this Commission under
the pain of heavy punishment, to all that should oppose, according to the
degree and quality of their opposition:

But Cyrus did this slavishly; for he adds, Why should there be wrath against
the Realm of the King and his sons?

Cyrus did this for fear of wrath, for conscience sake, and not for wrath
only; as the Apostle says in another case, or God is able to bring you under
the sense and fear of wrath as well as Artaxerxes. Did God subject him to this
fear (who was a Heathen, and was therefore more remote from such a duty) for
not furthering, and will he not judge Christians and Christian Magistrates (as
they will be acknowledged) for hindering the work of his house? Nay, if they
do not further and encourage all they can, that all things may be done
accurately and precisely, that the God of Heaven has commanded, leaving it to
spiritual men to judge, who alone are able.

Christ Jesus is the Prince of Peace; where he is kept out, there is trouble,
and wrath. Therefore imitate at least, and go ^^ far as these Heathens
herein; so shall we pray for the King and his sons, for our Rulers and
Governors, under whom we live peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty:
and shall bless God, as Ezra does, Chap. 7.27. Who has put such a thing into
our Governors hearts, as to beautify the House of God, which is at Jerusalem.

There is much the truly conscientious expect from our Governors, in the name
of the Lord, after the president of these Kings; Not a toleration only, but an
accommodation, encouragement, and sufficient Protection from all molestation
and damage. The Lord enlarge your hearts in proportion to this great duty and
opportunity.

CHAP. VIII. Containing Examples out of the New Testament.
WE come to the times of the New Testament, Sub Principib. Maccabaeis and
little successoribus diversae Judaeorum sectae, Pharisae, Sadducaei, Essaei, and
sim^les libere vigueru^t and satis amice inter se vixerunt. Alst. de Eccl. l.
4. c. 14.
beginning from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when there were I know not
how many sects, Cassideans, Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, Gaulonites and
Herodians: These all differing from one another, as materially as Christians
do now adays. Some holding no resurrection, no Angels, or Spirits; others,
holding all these, etc. yet they lived by one another; yea, and our Savior
Christ, who lived among them three and thirty years, and upwards, whereof
three years and more he spent in the Ministry, never (that we read of) stirred
up the Magistrate to reduce them to an unity, never instigates those that were
in the right, or nearest the truth, to prosecute the other: Our Savior did
neither fear them, nor spare them, but among all his woes that he pronounces,
there is none against Magistrates for not forcing.

Further, Joh. Baptist.
John's Disciples were in a great error, had an envious eye upon Christ, and
would have had their Master to have been the Messiah. What does John do to
convince them, and to right our Savior? Does he cudgel them into the true
faith, or sway their assent by his place and authority? No: but he Joh. 7.19.
sends them to Jesus, to be convinced by his word and works; and observable is
our Saviors carriage: When these Messengers came to him, and made their errand
known, he does not require (as at other times) their Faith to bear upon his
naked testimony of himself, but he demonstrates what he was, both by
effectual words and works, and so is made manifest in their consciences, as
the Apostle says elsewhere of himself.

Here was toleration, and giving time in Fundamentals, how much more may there,
ought there to be the like in more circumstantiall differences?

And our Savior foretells that there should arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, that should work signs, and counterfeit the true Ministry, and
deceive many. But what word ever dropped from Christ's mouth, of violence to be
used against them, as to drag them before the Magistrate, or the like? No, but
he bids us beware of them, and tells us, By their fruits we shall know them,
Mat. 7.16. And so again, ver. 20. By their fruits ye shall know them. It was
our Saviors pleasure, that there should be a Christ and a Christ, Prophets and
false Prophets, Apostles and false Apostles in the world; and that the one
should be distinguished from the other, not by any brands or eare-markes, but by
their fruits, and that the one should at length be overcome and extinguished by
the other, not by might, nor by power, but by the Spirit. Even Michael
contending with the Devil, brings no railing accusation, but the Lord rebuke
thee.

And so what differences were there after our Saviors departure, in the
Apostles days, about observing days, eating meat sacrificed to Idols,
Circumcision, covering the head or face in worship, and the like; some of which
were Church-differences; and how does the Apostle endeavor to compose them,
but by argument and reason, by reproving, exhorting, convincing? and where he
meets with contentious spirits, what says he? We have no such custom, nor any
of the Churches of God. Others were differences that diffused themselves
further, then in one particular Church, taking unstable minds up and down
(perhaps) every where; as the opposition of the Law to the Gospel and
Circumcision, etc. Now how did the Apostles behave themselves here, who were
armed and instructed with a greater power and authority for the vindicating of
the truth, then ever any since, either Civil or Ecclesiastical persons; and
when occasion was, showed it, striking Ananias and Saphira dead in the place,
for lying in the face of the Holy Ghost, and their own consciences? I say, Paul
in sundry cases.
how did these men behave themselves? Why, Paul is very hot (as one could wish)
in his Epistle to the Galatians, he works his head, and writes, and chides,
and insinuates, and exhorts, and denounces; If an Angel from Heaven, etc. He
was as warm as the Apostles were, when they called for fire from Heaven; as
warm as any are now in the case of Church Government; but his zeal expresses
it self the right way. Indeed, he has one smart passage, I would they were
even cut off that trouble you, but he calls not upon man to cut them off. Again,
Paul knew in what cause he said it, not in a doubtful cause, wherein he might
have been wrong, and they right, but he speaks this in a full assurance and
demonstration of the truth by the Spirit; and it is but a committing the
judgment to God. In other Epistles we find errors and heresies lay in Paul's
way, and in the way of the truth: and thereupon he calls upon the Ministers to
quit themselves, and shows how they had need to be furnished and accomplished,
that they may exhort and convince gainsayers; and they must do it with
patience and meekness, 2 Timothy 2.25. Some indeed must be rebuked sharply, that
they may be sound in the faith. But here is no calling to, nor authorizing any
to exercise any forcible coaction.

And (yet not to have done with Paul) who had spirit enough for the truth, yet
where he might, how did he become all things to all men? to the Jews he was as
a Jew, etc. Not by an unworthy dissimulation, putting on any form, to the
humors of the present company, but by a friendly accord, and walking with
them, notwithstanding those differences; that his presence was no more
dreadful, nor his company any more unpleasant to them, then if he were one of
their own, a Jew, or of the Circumcision. And herein the Apostle held forth an
eminent practice of his own Rule, 1 Cor. 13. who after he had arbitrated in
many Controversies, in the foregoing part of the Epistle, and labored to
compound their differences, and to bring them to an uniformity in the right
order, (which if it may be had, I grant is not indifferently desirable) yet
(says he) show I unto you a more excellent way: and that is the way of charity
and love, as it follows: which is better then to have a man's mind polished with
the purest notions and liveliest apprehensions. Its better for Christians to be
able to exercise abundance of love in differences, then to jump all just in a
judgment. For Music is not made with one string, nor with many strings set to
the same note, but of various notes and strings, rightly set and subdued to a
harmony, is the sweetest music, and of differing Instruments. Indeed, if they
be not so set and subdued, the variety makes but a most unpleasant crashing
confusion: so it is in this case of different judgments, with or without love.
As order is said to be the form of the universe, so love may be said to be the
form of the Church, which makes us all one, and useful to one another in what
we have, pitying and pardoning one another in what we have not.

Lastly, Paul foresaw that as there were great, so there would be greater
errors, Acts 20.29. For I know this (says he) that after my departure, shall
grievous wolves enter in, etc. Also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, drawing Disciples after them. But what course does
Paul advise them to? but bids them therefore watch, and remember how by the
space of three years, he had warned everyone of them night and day with
tears, ver. 31. Yet are we to have (after Paul's example) a serious zeal
against pernicious doctrines, and the obstinate disseminators of them.

CHAP. IX. Of Examples and Testimonies recorded and commended to us by humane
Writings.
SHall we fall down from these times (the sacred Stories going no further) to
the succeeding times continued by other Histories, Eusebius, Theodoret, and
others, out of whom (and especially out of an unparalleld golden Manuscript I
have seen, which I wholly leave to tell his own Tale) many Instances, very
pregnant and commendable, might be produced, principally in the times of
Constantine, and his sons, and both the Theodosius^es, and some other
Emperors, who tolerated diverse ways, and preserved the peace between the
several professors of them; but that it would increase the bulk of this
Argument, far beyond what was intended, therefore I shall content my self with
one only, that indeed an eminent one.

And before I bring forth that, I must vindicate the truth from needing that
one, or any humane testimonies; and though it be lawful to bring them, yet I
would not be brought under the power of such an obligation. But they may stand
us in good stead, thus far, to induce an ear that is inclined to Antiquity and
Authority. And what we see of this kind in dark times, in men void of
Religion, and sufficiently zealous of their own superstition, is like to be
consonant to reason, and the principles of natural light; and so this Instance
or Instances will have much authority with them, and a virtue not only
illustrative, but argumentative. The Instance is this;

Many complaints were brought by them of Asia, Marcus Aurelius Antonius. Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist.
the Elders and Judges thereof, to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antonius, (as
to his Father before him) upon occasion of an Earthquake which did them great
damage,) against the Christians, who by reason of their different Religion were
their envy, and a great eyesore to them, charging these Christians to be the
cause of that Earthquake, (as was their manner upon every misfortune that
befell them, and to cry out against them, Ad Leones) even as now all the
faction and tumult is laid upon tender Consciences; to whom the Emperor
answers thus, -- De motibus autem terrae, etc. Comperi quod in hujuscemodi
rebus, ad illorum invidiam, communes casus transfertis, etc. -- Super quibus
plurimis ex Provinciis Judices etiam venerabili Patri nostro scripserunt.
Quibus rescriptum est ab eo, ut nihil omnino molestiae, hujuscemodi hominibus
generarent, nisi forte arguerentur, aliquid adversum Romani Regni statum
moliri. Sed and mihi ipsi, de his quam plurimi retulerunt, quibus ego paternam
secutus sententiam, pari moderatione rescripsi. Quod si quis persistit
hujuscemodi hominibus absque ullo crimine movere negotia, ille quidem qui
delatus pro hoc nomine fuerit, absolvatur, etiamsi probetur id esse quod ei
objicitur, Christianus; is autem qui crimen obtendit, reus poenae ipsius quam
objecit, existat. The sum of it in English is this; That as for the
Earthquake, he has found by experience, that they do put common accidents
upon their (i. the Christians) account out of envy, and commands them as his
Father had done before, not to work these men any trouble, except they should
be found to attempt any thing against the Roman Empire. If any did causelessly
molest them, the Christian should go free, and his accuser should suffer the
punishment he would bring upon him. Here Is now a Heathen, not only tolerating
a contrary Religion to his own (for he remained a very Heathen still, as the
first passage of his Epistle shows; Ego quidem non ambigo Diis ipsis cu^ae esse
ne quis noxius lateat; Multo enim magis illis convenit punire eos qui ipsis
immo^are nolunt, quam vobis) but countenancing and pleading for it, not only
not impeaching it of faction, but implicitly clearing of it, not only
providing for their escape of unjust punishment, but making an Ordinance to do
them justice upon their causlesse accusers. How shall this Emperor rise up in
judgment at the last day, against many in these days?

How many of the Ancients have fathered this opinion of mine, Austin how he
came to be against us.
I take not upon me to tell. But Austin once for us, afterward gotten from us,
by what means, I shall give you account out of Peter Martyr: Atque haec ratio
fuit cur Augustinus cum antea judicasset, non oportere Magistratum anim
^dvertere in Haereticos, postea mutavit sententiam: Alii enim Episcopi
proferebant multas Ecclesias, quae met^ Imperatorum and Legum, a Donatistarum
factione descivissent, and jam assuetudine cognovissent Catholicam veritatem,
ut nullo pacto vellent ab ea discedere; The Bishops of several places told him
what great success the Emperors force had to reclaim men from Donatisme. But
success alone is not a rule for wise men to go by, in as much as Solomon
says; That there be just men (and so just ways) to whom it happens according
to the work of the wicked, and there be wicked men, (and so wicked ways) unto
whom it happens according to the work of the righteous.

Zanchy puts the Crisis of the utmost extent of the Magistrates authority, not
upon all evil manners, domestical or public, Zanchy.
except they disturb the public peace, or hinder the public good; though
yet they may fall under the Churches Cognizance, yea correction. His words are
these; There are many wickednesses, against which the Magistrate truly
Christian, does not use to proceed, neither is bound by his laws; is also many
evil manners, both domestical and public, which do not disturb the
public peace, on the public good: But the Church ought not to bear these,
but to correct them according to Christ's institution. Now then if by Zanchies
rule, disturbing the public peace and good, is that which brings in the
Magistrate, and gives him Cognizance of misdemeanors and wickednesses, then by
his judgment, errors in faith, or practice of Religion, are not within the
Magistrates Cognizance, except they be such in their nature or managing, as
disturb the public peace. Which is all that we ask.

And how far the spirits of many now are from the moderation of later Authors
and Writers, Alsted.
I might show. Alsted delivers his position thus upon the Question; De pace
Religionis, (ut vocant) seu de liberate Religionis, sive de bono autonomie: An
and quatenus concedi possit a pi^ Magistratu? Vbi licet nos concedamus unam
duntax it Religionem, quam videlicet ipse Magistratus veram agnoscit ex verbo
Dei, ab eodem Magistratu, pro virili conservandam esse, neminem tamen ad eandem
externa aliqua vi cogendum esse docemus: quin potius suam Conscientiis
libertatem relinquendam: Et non nunquam etiam diversarum Religionum exercitium,
si non publicum, saltem privatum, aut clandestinum ex singularibus causis
permittendum esse statuimus. Atque hoc demum sensu pacem and concordiam
externam seu politiam inter Orthodoxos and non orthodoxos, saepe etiam
haereticos simul colendam, ab ipso pio Magistratu procurari, and p^sse and
debere existimamus. I could not wish my judgment more happily expressed, nor
words more accommodate to my sense, viz. That though the Magistrate be with
might and maine to defend but one Religion, even that which he judges to be the
truth by the Word of God; yet none ought to be compeld to that by outward
force, but every man's Conscience to be left at liberty, etc. (I shall not
English it all;) and that a Civil external peace should be maintained by the
godly Magistrate, even between Orthodox and Heterodox. And he gives three Prima
nititur generalibus illis scripturae dictis, qu justitiam and charitatem
studiumque pacis and co^cordiae serio nobis omnibus commendant: and ne quid
aliter adversus proximum statuamus, quam qualiter nobiscum agi vellemus diserte
praecipiunt. Denique ut conscientiis suam libertatem concedamus and
dissentientes in negotio Religionis amice toleremus, omnino mandant, Mat. 5.7.
Romans 12.14. and alibi.

Secunda petitur ab exemplis sapientium and piorum Principu^, tum in veteri tum
in N. Test. etc.

Tertia ab ipsa naturali equitate itemque adjuncta utilitate, quam etiam
experientia quotidiana fere comprobat. Nam praeterquam quod aequissimum est, in
causa Religionis ab omni vi and coactione externa abstinere, ipsis etiam rebus
publicis ut ita fiat, omnino expedit, atque conducit; quippe quae alioqui
facillime turbarentur, and intestinis bellis, ac mutuis lanienis tandem
conciderent: prout hactenus in multis Europae provinciis, Gallia praesertim and
B^^gio, accidisse novimus. Cum contra in Germania, Helvetia, Polonia, and alibi
locorum, in quibus Religionum liberta^ hactenus indulta fuit, istis discordiis
and lanienis, non fuerit locus. Ergo res ipsa perse licita, and bona est,
etiamsi per accidens abusus aliquis accedere possit. Alst. de Eccl. lib. 4. c.
14.


Reasons for his judgment, which I shall transject into the Margent.

And what Reformation this Kingdom had in the late days, it did consist in
the incoaction or spontaneousness of it in the Parliament, Humsred. de vera
Relig. etc.
whatsoever it did in the people; as one reports of it; Nam in senatu, ut
fertur, patuit omnibus ad dicendum locus, nec ulli hominum generi potestas
contradicendi, suamque fidem profitendi interclusa est; imo integrum fuit
cuique liberis velitari ac pugnare sententiis, in quo summa elucet aequitas and
moderatio Principum, qui allicere, ducere, persuadere; non cogere, trahere,
jubere voluerunt; ut impudens mendacium sit, si quis jam dixerit, authoritatem
vicisse, non vecitatem. Illud etiam constat, liberum fuisse adversariae parti
in publica disputatione suas parts tueri, arbitris adhibitis incorruptioribus,
sive voce sive calamo certare, sive opponere, sive respondere maluissent.
Humfr. de vera Relig. conserv. p. 31, 32.

I quote the words, because if they had never been realized, yet the Idea of
such a carriage when men are seeking out the truth is lovely, as being very
equal and rational.

And if I were in David's case, 1 Samuel 21. without my sword and weapons, I might
translate two or three pages out of Mr Edwards Antapology. I shall produce but
a passage or two, p. 168. he has these words; Now the remedies appointed for
these ( viz. Church Matters, and matters of Conscience, and the inward man) are
spiritual and Ecclesiastical, namely, spiritual punishments. Christ says,
My kingdom is not of this world: and the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds, by which the spirit, and the inward man, even every
thought is subjected to the obedience of Christ. Spiritual remedies and means
must be used in the kingdom of Christ, and by them Christ does his work; and
hence in Ecclesiastical Discipline, and those scandals in the Church, all the
punishments in the body, and in the purse, which can be by the Magistrate, have
no place, neither can such means which are of a different kind from the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, produce those effects which belong to that
heavenly kingdom. It Is out of the sphere of the activity of the Political
Magistrate to subdue the inward man, or to inflict spiritual punishment upon
the Conscience, etc. Thus Mr Edwards, and far more, which I must omit for
brevity sake. Therefore I hope he will not think it meet to press the
Magistrates power in the Presbyteries quarrel, relating to Church Matters,
etc. which here he so expressly declines.

To tell what Triglandius, and the Walacbrian and Leyden Professors say in this
point, were to translate Volumes worthy of a distinct labor by it self. For
these that are produced, I have not pulled them from the shockes of any
Discourses of this Argument, already prepared and digested, which were a labor
thanklesse and needless, but have gleaned and gathered these fragments here
and there from places alien enough from this subject (at least designedly,)
that there might be no loss.

SECT. III.
CHAP. X. Wherein Objections are answered.
I Shall begin with the great and maine Objection of all, viz. the Example of
the Kings of Juda, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, who reduced the people to
the true worship, by compulsory means; For it is said of Asa's reformation, 2 Chronicles. 15.13. That they entered into a Covenant, to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers; and that whosoever would not, should be put to death: And of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.32. that renewing the Covenant first himself, he caused also all that
were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. He [caused] them.

To this I might give a manifold answer; Judah, notwithstanding that they did
all seek the Lord God of their Fathers; and it might be indulged to them in
those opinions, though they were compelled to this.

Again, Deuteronomy. 13.9. For 'twas no other then that law that this practice
referred unto; which is the law provided against enticing to Idolatry; to which
law they had given their formal and express consent, to the very letter of
it; and received as a reward the land of Canaan; which also they enjoyed on
that condition. Which law, if the equity of it hold still, (and it were not a
temporary judicial law peculiar to that Nation that was Church and Nation
interchangeably) yet will it not impeach or prejudice the liberty and
forbearance here sued for; we plead not for manifest Idolatry, nor any such
practice a^ is against the light of Nature.

But thirdly, Whatsoever they did rightly, (and what ever they might have done
more, in this kind, perhaps,) yet cannot be drawn into president by us, and
that because there is not par Vid. Trigland. 1 De potestate Civili and
Ecclesiastica. c. 12.
ratio for it now. As I shall show in a fourfold difference of those times,
and these.

First, those were the times of the old Testament, these of the New, therefore
it is not a sound way of arguing from them to us in every thing; If they were
under Tutors and Governors, it does not follow that we must be so, nay the
Apostle says the contrary; if the Church in her nonage was used more like a
servant then a son, must they therefore when they are grown up? How ever it
was that their service was compulsorily required from them, we have a word
that ours should be free, Psalm. 110. Thy people shall be (...) voluntaria. The
word comes from the same root that is used Exodus 25.2 and Chap. 35.5. Where
caution is put in, that all their offerings to the rearing of the Tabernacle
should be most free: and the thing springs from the same equity; and the
example of Gospel-converts confirms it, Act. 2.41. yea, and the rule of such
conversson, 2 Timothy 25, 26.
willing in the day of thy power, which day of Christ's power, is the times of
the Gospel adaequately, though some more special time may (I deny not) be
referred unto, and some more eminent accomplishment of this promise, by a
subdivision of the times of the Gospel.

Secondly, Their worship was carnal, bodily, outward, consisting much in the
conformity of the outward man and practice to certain worldly Ordinances, Heb.
9. to the production and preservation of which the instanced means of the
Magistrates compulsion might bear a great proportion of sufficiency and
efficacy. But the worship of the New Testament is chiefly in the heart, and
hidden man, in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. Which is at the back of no humane
force or power: therefore it is no good argument from that worship to this.

Thirdly, The Kings of Judah (as it is generally received) had a peculiar
Notion from Kings now; therefore it is no good argument from them to these; For
they had not only a Civil notion, but an Ecclesiastical also, which ours
have not; They were types of Christ the King of the Church, and did bear
visibly and execute typically his Kingly office, (even as Priests and Prophets
did his other two offices,) as is manifest by those glorious promises of
dominion and stability, that are made to Christ in the persons of the Kings of
Judah; and to bring home this exception, what is alleged to be done by them in
the foregoing instances of compelling the people, was done by virtue of their
Ecclesiastical Notion. But now the case is otherwise. Our Kings are only the
Ministers of God in the world, (ruling indeed for the Church, not in the
Church, and over it as then,) neither are they anointed in any such Notion as
They were, that is, to execute the Kingly office of Christ in his Church.

Fourthly, and lastly, The people of the Jews were interchangeably a Church
and a Nation, (so that he who was head of the State, was so also of the Church
in a typical way; as he that was a member of the Commonwealth, was by that a
member of the Church, and vice versa) which no people ever since were,
therefore the Argument will not hold from Israel to England, or any other
Nation: and this compulsive power that was exercised by the Kings of Judah
among them, did relate to this Notion. Now then to any other Nation, that
neither is nor can be looked upon under such a Notion, such a discipline is not
applicable: For a spiritual body as the Church, and a spiritual power or
jurisdiction, (as if it be Christ's it is,) are relatives, and as posito relato
ponitur and correlatum: so sublato uno relatorum tollitur and alterum. Now
though I know a National Church in one sense is the apple of some men's eye,
(and Mr Prin of late has endeavored to make a lid for it with a numerous
quotation out of the old and new Testament, Isa. 2.2. Mic. 4.7. etc. But those
places do no more hold forth National Conversions and Churches, then the 12.
Joh. 47. and Ephesians. 1. Joh. 2.2. which speak of Christ's dying for the sins of the
world, yea the whole world, do hold forth universal redemption.) Yet in this
sense they will none of them hold it; That as in Israel, so in England, so in
Scotland the Nation is holy, and all that are borne in it are of the Church
ipso facto, or ipso natu; and if not so, then may not Christ's Kingly Scepter,
which relates only to his Church, be swayed over them all generally. Therefore
Kings or Magistrates may not now as then compel men to Religion: But that
which those Kings did in a typical way, Christ the King of his Church does in
a spiritual antitypical way of accomplishment; that is, as Jehosaphat the type
distributed the knowledge and fear of the Lord by his Princes, (or (...) The
chief ones.
chief Priests, for so the word may be rendered indifferently) with the
assistance of Levites through his Dominions (which was Christ's dominion and the
Church adaequately then;) so Christ Jesus the true King, it is his part, (and
he did it when he ascended, giving gifts to men,) efficaciously to apply and
bring home to his Church the (...) of his Priestly and Prophetical office; and
so might their other acts be paralleld by the Antitype.

Another Objection like unto the former, is Uniformity. Object. 2.
How shall there be uniformity, if there be this liberty?

Unity there is and ought to be, Answ.
and uniformity also is to be endeavored after, because the Apostle says,
Whereto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule, Phil. 3.16. But this
cannot be in all things attained, more then to think the same thing, to which
yet we are also exhorted. There is one body, the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.
and one spirit, even as we are called in one hope of our calling; One Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in us all. Here Is unity over and over, but this does not
necessarily draw uniformity after it in all things. Nay the Apostle says the
quite contrary. But to every one of us is given grace, according to the measure
of the gift of Christ; Not to every one the same gift, nor the same measure. As
not to every Officer, so not to every Church, nor to every Christian; much
less to every man. The rule holds proportionably throughout, Ephesians. 4.4. And
wherefore does the Apostle so urge and insist upon unity, but partly, if not
chiefly to salve up the want of uniformity? as ver. 3. does show. For ver. 2.
he exhorts them to the duty (contended for through this discourse,) of
forbearing one another in love, (that is, in case of differences it must be
supposed) not so much as to censure one another; (much less to prosecute one
another) and as an Argument to this forbearance, he minds them of their unity,
ver. 3. Now what need were there of pressing to unity where there is
uniformity, (Saevis inter se convenit ursis,) where all are of a strain? What
needs a bond of peace, where there are no crackes nor flawes of division?
Neither were the preservation of peace upon such terms thank-worthy among
them. Again, to require uniformity in a compulsory way, is to bind heavier
burdens on the Churches, then Christ has laid upon them: Does not the Apostle
say mercifully, Phil. 3.16.
Nevertheless (that is, notwithstanding all our particular and several
apprehensions) whereunto we have attained, let us walk together by the same
Rule, and if any man be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto him.
To violate unity in the zeal of uniformity, is a bargain as will never make us
rich. Romans 14.15.
Will thou for meat, says the Apostle, destroy him for whom Christ dyed? Gold
may be bought too dear, so may uniformity. And is it not as vain an
expectation to have all men of one apprehension in all things, as to have all
men of the same stature or complexion, or their faces to be all alike? Is it
not the glory of heavenly mysteries, that as the Heavens for height, and the
earth for depth, so they should be of an infinite inscrutability, and exercise
the parts and acuteness of men in an endless variety? But lastly, Uniformity
was the Bishops Argument (and let it dye with them) having in it more of name
then of realty. As the Apostle says in the case of singing, be sure it be done
with a graceful heart, Col. 3.16. Making melody in our spirits, else a
graceful and melodious voice is a bawble, for God is a Spirit: So we may say
in the matter in hand; There is indeed an outward uniformity, but this is
nothing in comparison of the inward uniformity which consists in the having the
same Christ in all our hearts, working the same works of mortification and
vivification in us: and this is not called indeed by so slight a name as
Uniformity; it is Unity as before: Without which, Uniformity is an abomination;
but where unity is, uniformity may be, nay, must be dispensed withal, except
it may be had upon easier termers then compulsion.

And let me advise those that are thus bent for uniformity, and would purchase
it at any rate, in Solomon's words; Be not righteous over much, neither make thy
self over-wise, why should thou destroy thy self? as by such burning and
consuming zeal and solicitude, which will never see answerable fruit; for God
has said, there must be heresies, and there shall be so, and all this
over-care will not add one cubit to the Churches stature: And it is against
your own happiness to have a will thus engaged to impossibilities: You cannot
possess your selves in peace. God sings a requiom to himself in all these,
for all things succeed according to his purpose, and when we have showed due
care, and used all due means for preventing, for reclarming errors, we should
be quiet too. For that which is crooked, can no man make straight, and that
which is wanting, cannot be numbered. Take heed of an evil eye; Pro. 28.22.
He that hastes to be rich, says Solomon, has an evil eye; So likewise has
he whose eye will be satisfied with nothing but uniformity; it is an eye that
covets an unattaineable happiness, though I know not whether I may term it
happiness, and whether it be not a greater happiness, that Saints differing in
the judgment and practice of some things, can yet love one another, and keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace notwithstanding. Eccl. 2.24.
There is nothing better (as Solomon says in another case) then that a man eat
and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor; so say I, nothing
better then to rejoice in that proportion and degree of truth and peace which
God gives one to see: and know this, that as he says of prosperity and
adversity, so the proportion holds of truths and errors: God has set the one
over against the other, to the intent that man should find nothing after him,
(i.) that we might resolve our full contentment and joyful rest into Jesus
Christ alone.

Further, that place is objected against the desired liberty, Object.
Tit. 1.11. For there are many unruly and vain talkers, especially they of the
Circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped.

But I am almost in an agony between compassion and indignation, Answ.
that godly men should make Scripture lackey so to their own conceits against
the laws of all genuine interpretation. I am for stopping of months too. But
there are more ways of stopping men's mouths then one; as if you stop not your
eyes and ears I shall acquaint you. Men's mouths may be stopped, not only by
force, but with arguments. Romans 3.19. That every mouth may be stopped, and all
the world may become guilty before God. What stopping is that there? Do we not
say, then a man's mouth is stopped when he has nothing to say, when he is
convinced or confounded with a power of reason brought against him? Look but a
little higher then the text, and see whether this be not the stopping there
meant; For from ver. 7. the Apostle is showing how a Bishop must be qualified,
not only outwardly, ver. 7, 8. but inwardly, ver. 9. Holding fast the
faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine,
both to exhort and convince the gainsayers. And it follows immediately, for
there are many unruly, and vain talkers, and deceivers, etc. whose mouths
must be stopped. Need I now show you, how their mouths must be stopped? Is it
not plain, it is the Bishops Office, not the Magistrates: Not Lord Bishops, but
laboring Bishops; not by his fifth, bin by sound doctrine; not by conventing
them before the Magistrate, but by convincing them in their consciences. Now
dear Brethren, if any of you have oppressed this Scripture with the
unmercifull load of a Magisteriall restraint of conscience bearing upon it, and
if your mouths be now stopped, open them again, and free the truth that has
made you free.

But how shall errors be restrained, Object.
if ye allow not Coercive power?

To restrain errors is a good work, Answ.
but it must not be done by unrighteous means. If Gods glory may abound
through my lie, it does not make it lawful for me to lie: But how shall
errors be cut off? How? by the Word, which is the sword of the Spirit, and it
is for want of faith applied to this means, that we see so little fruit of
it; and it is the policy of Satan to hide the efficacy of this means from us,
and by making us zealous of a false, to divert us from the use of the true and
proper means. Look upon the Word as an institution, and what can it not do?
The Word of God is quicks and powerful; and you will never subdue errors, till
you take to this course. The Devil joys to see us upon courses of violence
against the persons, even of erroneous men; what, is it because he hates
errors and heresies? No, by them he also reigns, as well as by vicious
actions; But he had rather ye should fight against them with the sword, then
with the Word; and the reason is, because the Word is Gods means, the sword is
man's; the Word is an Institution, the sword is our invention: the Word is a
spiritual means, (and those are mighty, as the Angels are above men) the
sword is a carnal means; God stands engaged to make good his Word, and then
it is no matter how weak and unlikely the means be, if God be bound for it;
It Is the Institution bestows that force and efficacy upon it; If God institute
a bit of bread, and a sip of wine, in such a use of it, to strengthen my faith,
it shall do it. Those brave men, Soldiers and Armies, mentioned Heb. 11. had
not obtained those great victories and achievements, but through faith; and
had they been far weaker then they were, yet with faith they had done never the
less. The most specious probable means without an Institution is nothing; the
poorest with an Institution is almighty.

Ask not then, How shall men be preserved from errors? for if they be
interested in Church Fellowship fixedly, they have the provision of many
Institutions, and Ordinances, to be employed for them, and applied to them: the
doctrine, practice, prayers, parts, and utmost help of Elders and Brethren,
with the special blessing of the relation, in and upon all and each of these.
Psalm. 133. For there the Lord commanded the blessing, etc. But if not so
interested, or not so distinctly, or not in so pure a Church, that
conscientiously practices that mutual inspection, and care of one another: yet
God has not left himself to any of his servants without witness of a due
care of their souls, in this concernment, nor left any of his people without
sufficient means. 1 John 2.20.
Ye have an unction which teaches you all things, is not spoken peculiarly to
Church Members, though in a larger proportion perhaps to them but God takes
care of all his elect: if it had not been so, Christ would have told us; If it
were not so, Christ would not make a si possibile of their being seduced, Mat.
24.24.
They shall deceive, if it be possible, the very elect. Let Us not distrust our
cause, nor the truth in conflicting with errors, Tandem vincet veritas, Truth
shall overcome: and let us not distrust Christ, but that as he kept his own
while he was with them on earth, and recommended them to his Father at his
departure: so he will not fail to keep them now, that all power is given into
his hands, the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. Let Us commit this
trust to Christ, so shall we engage him: a man will look to be trusted, or he
will not count himself engaged.

But we see many of the Elect (for ought that we can judge, Object.
woe dare not think otherwise of them) are carried away with the present
errors.

No better a ground or consideration would I desire to mollify any reasonable
man toward men in Errors: Answ.
The Elect are subject to them, therefore exact not too strict an account of
all men. If there are many that shall live in heaven notwithstanding their
errors, it is no sin to let them live on earth.

But we shall have no peace in the earth. Object.


Whose fault is that? Why, Answ.
cannot ye live peaceably by differing Brethren? The fault of variance,
strife, and envyings, lies not in the judgment, but in the will, not in the
head, but in the heart.

But differing opinions will be contending for victory. Object.


If there be pride, not else: Answ.
Prove. 14.10.
Only through pride comes contention. Opinions may strive, yet men may agree.
There may be pugna logicalis, and yet pax moralis.

But civil wars and seditions have sprung from different opinions. Object.


I grant opinions may be managed and actuated by turbulent spirits, Answ.
in a seditious, factious, tumultuous way: and in such case the Magistrate must
come in indeed: and none should run faster to call him then I would: if any
party or kind of men, do either treacherously undermine, or violently assault
their Brethren, that live securely by them, inoffensively exercising their
consciences, I conceive it is a matter to be punished by the Judges; be the
assaylants never so much in the right, and the sufferers in some errors, yet
modestly and harmlesly managed.

There is another Objection, Object.
and no mean one, though of a particular nature and force, relating not to all
persons concerned in the common cause of the argument of this discourse, but
peculiarly to us in these three united Kingdoms, and that is the National
Covenant, which is charged home in the Antapology, and made to speak (for
there are that can make any thing speak what they list) against the desired
liberty.

But first, if this Covenant be applied no otherwise then was at first
intended, (which without greatest ingratitude and uncharitableness I cannot
admit,) in being thus made a bar and prejudice against the free disquisition
of truth, (as in effect it is) I know not how the Authors of such a project
could be innocent. But to wave the intention, there is nothing more obvious
then the practice to ensnare and illaqueate tender Consciences by this
Covenant; first, compelling them to take it; afterward, conjuring them by it
to a false Obsequium.

Who knows not that an unlawful oath or Covenant, is better broken then kept:
Therefore justify the matter of the Oath and Covenant, or the Bond will
dissolve it self. If the Parliament (because it is charged very boldly, I say
not presumptuously upon them) have taken an oath to do an unlawful act, they
must not be stirred up to that act in pursuance of that oath and Covenant.
Therefore first make good this, that it is their duty to prosecute all different
Brethren, else in charging a Covenant (so to do) upon them, you lay a snare
which the foot of so judicious a Parliament will not be held by.

But not to compound the matter thus: We cannot yield you that sense you put
upon the Covenant: Nor will any expression or expressions therein, considered
in their several place and relation, amount to such a verdict as you give in
most confidently: If they should, as I must confess then, that I was deceived,
and so shall hold my self obliged in no other sense, then I understood it when
I took it; So I shall profess my desire to repent of my rashness in taking
it, though I did it without the least appearance to my best judgment, of any
contradiction to my principles.

To come to the Test therefore, there are four clauses in the Covenant urged
against this liberty; (for a toleration we own not, permissio non est nisi
peccati, and it is in such matters wherein the Magistrate is authorized, nay is
bound to restrain, which here I humbly conceive he is not, without prejudice
to his just greatness.)

The first clause is of Endeavoring the reformation of Religion, in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Government, and
Discipline, according to the example of the best reformed Churches.

The second Clause is of Endeavoring to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship, and Catechizing.

The third; That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons,
endeavor the extirpation of Schism, and what ever shall be found contrary to
sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, lest we partake of other men's
sins.

The fourth and last, is the Endeavoring of the discovery of such as have been
evil Instruments, by hindering reformation of Religion, or making any faction,
or parties among the people, contrary to this league and Covenant.

I shall first take some Exceptions to the manner, Answ.
and then answer to the matter of this Objection: and because there is more ill
manner in it then strong matter, therefore the first part of my Answer will be
longest.

The manner is full of exception, as rendering the Author and urger thus, guilty
of Partiality, Tautology, subornation of sense, dis-service to the State, and
want of love to the Brethren. This charge I neither lay nor prosecute against
him in Foro externo, in the Magistrates Court, but in Foro Conscientiae.

First, Partiality, clipping and partially representing not only the
Parliaments sense, but even the words of the Covenant, (as it he had got up
again the Index Expurgatorius) quoting only the words that make for his own
turn, and leaving out what does and ought to go along with them. This in two
particulars. 1. Leaving out those words belonging to the first Clause, viz.
[according to the Word of God,] which is set before the example of the best
reformed Churches, as being the only pattern and regulation for us and them:
and we do not jurare in exemplar, swear to the pattern of the best reformed
Church in the world, further then it shall approve it self by the Scriptures.
Follow me, as I follow Christ. So that so far are other Churches from being the
only Rule, that they are not so much as a socious Rule: that is, they go not
in an aequipage with, but are subordinate to the Word, and of a secondary
consideration and imitation after the Word of God: and the leaving out of these
words, I might well call the clipping of the Covenant, for it takes away the
Ring of the Coin (as it were) wherein the letters of Inscription (that show
whose this Covenant is, and who and whose we are that make it, and give the
specificall difference, or characteristicall distinction between it, and a
Popish implicit faith) are contained. The other particular left out is in the
latter end of the Covenant, which yet referres to the whole obligation of each
person respectively, viz. that he shall by all lawful ways and means, and
according to his place and calling, endeavor to observe and perform the
tenor of the Covenant, viz. to bring the Churches to uniformity, and to
extirpate schism: As for instance, it is the godly Magistrates duty, their
place and calling, to send forth Ministers into the dark places of the Land,
and to set up lights to guide men's feet into the ways of truth and peace, and
reclaim them from errors: and he cannot be urged upon his calling to punish
or compel gainsayers. And the Ministers place and calling is to improve his
parts and opportunities, in season and out of season, by exhorting, rebuking,
instructing, with all long-suffering and doctrine, and he is to go no further,
not to deliver up to the Judge and Executioner. So that here is nothing but
fallacy in urging the Covenant thus, in putting men upon that absolutely, which
is desirable and to be prosecuted only conditionally, viz. Conformity to and
uniformity with other Churches, if they be in the truth, and it may be done
with the Word of God; and fallacy likewise in prompting men to do that omnibus
viis and modis, as they say, which is to be done only regularly and orderly,
as every man's calling leads him.

2. Tautology, which is a consequent of the former error; for by leaving out
these words [according to the Word of God] in the first Clause, he has
destroyed its particular nature and distinct kind, and has made it run into
the second Clause: that whereas the first Clause in the Covenant sounds
reformation, now as he has maimed it, it sounds no more then uniformity, which
makes it the same with the second Clause, as by comparing the two Clauses above
may be seen.

3. Subornation of sense, and that in these particulars, viz. Interpreting the
nearest conjunction in his second Clause, to be an absolute conjunction and
identity. If we be agreed of the same Church Officers with the reformed
Churches, and have cast out the old usurpers as they have done, if we have
cashiered the common-Prayer-Booke as they, and all the foolish Ceremonies, and
Organ-pipes, and Copes, and Vestments, and distinction of places, displaced our
Altars, broken our painted glass and Crucifixes (all which have been done but
since this Parliament, and upon this Covenant many of them.) Now I say, if this
be the nearest conjunction, with the reformed Churches, which the Word of God
in the Interpretation of our Consciences, will allow; do we not save our
Covenant, though we cast not our Churches into such Classical, Provincial and
National forms of administration as they? 2. In applying those terms and
Clauses of [Schisme and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine,
and the power of godliness, and evil instruments, hindering Reformation,
making factions, and parties among the people] unto the Congregationall men:
Against whom if the Parliament did indeed level these battering Clauses, I am
much mistaken, only I must crave leave to say then, 'twas not fair to draw
these men into a Covenant to destroy themselves.

Fourthly, Dis-service to the State, in weakening the hands, and discouraging
the hearts, of such a considerable number in the City and Kingdom, (who under
God and the Parliament, have been the life of this cause so many ways) by
turning the whole train of the Covenant against them, as if there were no
Papists nor Malignants to discharge it against. And it seems this is but the
birth of that challenge against these men (to be the Sanballat's and Tobia's in
this present work and engagement) which was the prodromus some months ago.
And is it not a great dis-service to the State, to bereave or go about to
bereave the Kingdom of the strength of so many cordial persons, servent
prayers, willing purses, brave Commanders, and valiant Soldiers, which are of
this way and judgment: and to do it at this time when we have need of no
subdivifions, a common enemy waiting for us both? Could more pernicious advice
be given with more probable success for ruin then this, to divide the sound
party among themselves? I call not this dis-affection to the State, (for truly
I judge not so of the man, but that he spoke and wrote herein he knew not what,
nor of what consequence) but certainly the greatest dis-service to the State it
is, that a man of no greater interest and influence could do. I call not for
Justice, but for Repentance.

Lastly, the highest breach of love and charity is this that could be, to apply
the forementioned terms and things to this sort of men: as let all the world,
or any indifferent man that is not baptized into the same spirit of gall and
wormwood, consider and judge.

Now to the matter of the Objection (avoiding what might be returned) that the
Covenant may with as fair a construction, and as genuine and unforc't an
interpretation, be urged against the Presbytery, and for the Congregationall
way as otherwise.) I answer briefly thus; That the Covenant binds no man, nor
number of men, no State or Church, for their parts respectively, to any
pattern or degree of Reformation, Conformity, or Uniformity with other
Churches: but what shall satisfactorily to them and each of their Consciences,
appear to be according to the Word of God: And such a Reformation do the
Congregationall men desire, pray, preach, endeavor for and after, (therefore
are no enemies to Reformation, as is alleged by the Objecter) in pursuance of
their Covenant, as they should and would have done, if there had been no such
outward Covenant obliging them. I will not fear to appeal to you: would we
have men driven in droves to the Sacrament still, and the precious and the vile
commixed together? Would we have idle drones and Idol Shepherds suffered in
Congregations, and the dark places of the Land remain still full of cruelty?
Would we have the Bishops Courts and Consistories continue? Nay, had these ever
been down, if we had not under God, as a forlorn hope, first given them
battle? How then have you the face to say, we hinder Reformation, when we
are for a further and purer Reformation (your selves being Judges?) You would
sit down on this side Jordan, we would advance, not only so far with you, but
pass over Jordan: how then do we hinder you? Sit you quiet if you will not
help us as we have helped you; and do not say (to help your selves and excuse
your own ingratitude) that we are enemies to Reformation.

These are the most material and obvious Objections that I have met withal,
and could gather in with either sense, my eye or ear: Only there is a passage
in the Antapology, that I must give an Animadversion upon, viz. That by virtue
of many Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament, the example of the Kings
of Judah, etc. The Parliament is bound to establish, and to command obedience
to that Reformation which is judged (to wit, by the present Synod) most
agreeable to the Word, and to suppress and hinder all other.

Now these places in the New Testament (I confess) made me listen: (for of the
old Testament and Now, there is not eadem ratio, nor of the Kings of Judah and
of England, as has been showed before) but if the New Testament conclude us
under such an arbitration, we are gone. I turned to the places quoted, and
shall desire no more of any man, but to turn to them, and satisfy himself.
The Scriptures are, Romans 13.4. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Timothy 5.22 2 Epist. Joh. 11. Rev.
2.20.

For the first of them, I have already prevented it, and showed that it
assigns deeds and works to the Magistrates Cognizance, not opinions in
Religion.

For the next, Ephesians. 5.11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. It is nothing more then an admonition to
all Christians, in as much as they are the children of light, to have no
fellowship with the sins before mentioned in that Chapter, fornication,
uncleanness, covetousness, etc. But what is this to different opinions, or to
the Magistrates act of suppressing such.

For the third place, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be
partaker of other men's sins; keep thy self pure: It is an instruction to
Timothy, and all such whom it may concern, that are called to lay hands and
ordain Officers, that they ordain only worthy men. This reaches not yet the
Magistrate, nor within a mile of him.

For the fourth place; 2 Epist. Joh. 10.11. (for I will give him a verse more
then he quotes, and yet not fear the cause) If there come any unto you, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him
God-speed. For he that bids him God-speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.
First, this is written to a Lody, not to the Magistrate; then he requires only
a Negative of her, viz. not to be a partaker by any countenance, but he
requires not to prosecute such a one. We must not receive such into our houses,
but must we therefore cast them out of their own houses, or native Country,
or put than into the prisonhouse? And who are thus to be shook off and
discountenanced? Why, whosoever brings not this doctrine, that is, if he bring
another doctrine, as it is Gal. 1.5. another Gospel that overthrowes this; Not
if he differ in the understanding of some controvertible place. Now do not
those men against whom this Scripture is urged, bring this doctrine with them
in as pure and spiritual a discovery of it as others? Because they differ in
point of discipline, do they set up another Gospel? If you judge so: then bid
them not God-speed: but yet God does not bid you speed them out of the Land.

For the fifth and last place, 2 Rev. 2.20. Notwithstanding I have a few things
against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel, who calls her self
a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, etc.
Now will you see who and what she was that was suffered, both a strumpet, and
a diabolical instrument of seduction, and that to fornication; (here was fact,
as well as faith,) and to eat things sacrificed to Idols: and will you consider
likewise by whom she was suffered, by the Church of Thyatira, it is she is
blamed or her Angel, and sure what ever Church should retain or suffer such a
Member without the application of the censures to her, deserve an Epistle from
Heaven, to be written unto them in blood: and such a Member may be no ways
sheltred under any Church relation, from the sword of the Magistrate.

Thus you have heard these Witnesses speak, what think ye? do they speak
to the purpose for which they are brought? Does it appear by these places in
the New Testament, that the Magistrate is bound to ratify the Decrees of the
present Synod, and proceed against all that vary from them with severe
punishment? Or is it not rather as the old Proverb; Parturiunt, Montes nascetur
ridiculous mus: Mountains in expectation, bring forth mice in the Conclusion?
The nearest-sounding Scripture, and but in sound, is that to Timothy, Lay hands
suddenly on no man; But if he might easily mistake a Bishop for a Magistrate,
yet sure there is a great deal of difference between laying hands, and laying
no hands; and it is a Non-sequitur that would be hist at in the Schools; The
Bishop must not ordain every one that is offered: Ergo, the Magistrate must
order every one that differs.

But I know upon the last Scripture, viz. Rev. 2.20. he will think he has a
good ground to state his Ecclesiastical Coercive power at least; For that
Christ deals with the Angel, and charges him with suffering Jezabel, therefore
if there be not a Civil power, yet there is at least an Ecclesiastical power
to deal with seducers. Now for such as she, 1. We have before granted that an
Ecclesiast call power is not sufficient to deal withal, but the Civil
Magistrate is also to interest himselse. 2. That there is a Church Power to
deal with men in point of faith as well as fact, I deny not, though I state it
not where the Presbyterians do, that is, not in a Combination of Churches, but
in a particular Church: (for Christ does not threaten the Angels of Ephesus and
Smyrna for Thyatira's fault, who yet all did belong to one Regionall, though
not to one Classical Presbytery: Nor do I state it in the Eldership alone,
but within the whole body. For though the Epistle be directed to the Angel of
the Church of Thyatira, yet it is intended (as all the others are) to the whole
body; which appears clearly out of the Epistles themselves: Not only that
what is written to the Angel, is of concernment to the Church, but is written
to the Church. For is it written to the Officer only, I know thy works, and
charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and the last
to be more then the first, or is it said to the body of the Church? To whom (be
it one or more) this is said, to him or them is it said in the next verse,
Notwithstanding I have somewhat against thee, etc. If it be the Church that is
commended for her works, and charity, etc. then it is the Church also, that is
here blamed for not exercising the power committed to her against Jezabel. So
likewise the Epistle to the Church of Smyrna is directed to the Angel, but is
the Angel only spoken to in the 10th verse, Fear none of those things that
thoushalt suffer, behold the Deviall shall cast some of you into prison? And so
I might instance in the other Churches. But that general Proclamation shall
serve to evince it, which is before every Epistle; Let him that has an ear
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches: Not to the Angel only, but to
the Churches. It is sent first to the Angel, as a principal part of the
Church, whose Office also it is to receive from Christ, and to communicate to
the Church. Therefore when Christ says, I have something against thee, he
means against the Church for suffering Jezabel. So that as we have found an
Ecclesiastical power, so we have found for the subject of its in^^esion, a
particular Church or body; and for the object of its application, its own
members, as Jezabel was. But now for othe^s, a particular Church, and there is
no other ministering Church has only the power of substraction, withdrawing
from them, or rejecting them; A man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second admonition reject; which is an act, whereby a Church or a Member
reserves themselves, exercises not any power over others. In practice of which
Rule, as a light to the understanding of it, Ecclesiastical History furnishes
us with the Instances of the Quod apud Eph^sum, cum Balneas lavadi gratia
fulsset ingressus, and vidisset ibi Cerin: hum, exilucrit co^tinuo non lotus,
and discesserit, dicens, Fugianus bincne and Ba^ncae ipsae corruant, in quibus
Cerinthus lavatur, veritatis inimicus. Idem etiam ipse Polycarpus Marcioni
aliqua^ do cum occurrisset, diceti sibi Agnosce nos, Agnosco (inquit)
primogenitum satanae. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Apostle John, and Polycarpus, professedly avoiding the society of Heretics;
but not exercising any power over them, or against them.

And this law of Church Discipline is consonant and harmonicall to right
reason, and to the Rule of Civil administration: Where a man is tried by his
Peers: and it is fit he should be so in spiritual things judged by his
fellow members. And there is no reason or justice, in subjecting a Church or
member to a foraine jurisdiction. Advised and consulted with, other Churches
may be, ought to be, the nature of the case for weight, difficulty, and
difference requiring it.

But to come to the business. There be two branches of our Brethrens (the
Presbyterians) claim. The one is power of judging, determining, imposing
doctrines, and conclusions upon all men and Churches. 2. The other a power of
transmitting, and delivering over to the Magistrate, and stirring up his power
in case of disobedience to them.

Now for the first of these, in vain is it said, Try all things, if a Synod
may impose: For either the trial relates to a particular judgment to be made,
and that judgment to a practice to be confirmed, or not; If not, as good not
try, if I try only for trial sake, and if when I have tried I am but where I
was, to wit, I must be concluded by others vote and imposition; If yea, then to
what purpose is the imposition? for if I approve it, the imposition is
needless, if I reject, it is fruitless. 2. They that have right and power of
imposing, are Lords of my Faith; but so are not any men, the Apostles
themselves assumed it not: For by faith ye stand. Take away a Christians
judicious faith, you take away his legs, his standing from under him. 3. In
vain did the Bereans try the Apostles doctrine, and unduely were they
commended, if that doctrine were imposed upon them. 4. If ye Presbytery have
power to impose doctrines, then they must have power of Excommunication over
all those on whom they impose: For power of commanding, without power of
revenging disobedience, is a ridiculous shadow and image of power. It is like
Jupiters leg, sent down to be the King of Frogs, which they leapt upon and
scorned. But this power of Excommunicating, we have found a proper seat and
subject for it already, even a particular Church, and till our Brethren show
out of Scripture, a subordination of Churches, I need say no more; and if they
do that, then I will say with them.

For the other branch, instigating the Magistrate, which is not to be
understood of transmitting such things to him as do pertinere ad mores,
(wherein he is of himself conscious of his duty and obligation, and needs no
instigation) but of things pertaining properly to Conscience. In which cases,
as Ministers are not instructed with any external force and power to be
exercised by themselves against men; sure also they ought not sevire per alios,
to stir up the Magistrate against them. For the Office of the Ministry
bears no relation to temporal punishment. The Magistrate is properly the
Minister of God for wrath; but it is fit for Ministers to say as Christ, Luke
9.56.
I am not come to destroy, but to save alive.

It is a reason given for the Office of a Ruling Elder in the Church, added to
the Teaching Elders, namely, to avoid the prejudice and Odium that would fall
upon the Ministry, should they discharge that part which is a hard and severe
Office; as being to inquire into the conversations of the flock, and each
member, and to observe their faults, in manners, and otherwise, and deal
roundly with them therein, laying the axe of severe reproof to the root of
every sin. Now if this be a work of that nature, that God in his wisdom
has priviledg'd the Ministry from, lest it might make their persons, and so
their doctrine less acceptable, (the Ministry having need to be like one that
has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument) and in consideration
hereof, has for this work founded a distinct Office in his Church; shall we
think those Ministers provide wisely for themselves, and the acceptance of
their Ministry, that will thrust themselves into a more dis-affecting Office,
namely, to be Promoters, Tell-tales, Appparitors, or Summoners to the Civil
Magistrates Courts? We know how apt men are to receive the truth in respect of
persons: Ministers had not need then, to incur needless prejudice. We know
how Ministers personal faults, make their doctrine to be loathed, slighted,
and dis-esteemed. I Will never hear him, says one, he is an usurer; and of
another, he is very worldly, and covetous; There is indeed an uncomelinesse
more then ordinary, in the match of such vices with such a calling: High talk
becomes not a fool (says Solomon:) and is not this as deep and effectual an
exception against a Minister, Oh, he is a cruel man, he made such a poor man
fined, and he caused such a one to be cast in prison for a little difference in
opinion, when they agreed in the maine, and his wife and children were ready to
starve the while? (Will not this bring the curse of the poor suffering
Families upon them?) And he is a proud man, he will break the back of any,
that will not be of his mind? Oh how does this prejudice the wholesome truths
that such men may deliver? And how far are those Ministers that give such
occasion, and with whom such considerations prevail nothing, from Paul's spirit
and temper, who that he might create the greater opportunity to himself among
the Corinthians, would not use that power that he had of living upon them, and
being burdensome to them: and content himself with a fallacy, 2 Cor. 12.14.
That the Fathers must lay up for their children: so careful was he even to
over-doe, in removing prejudices that might be (though not justly) in carnal
minds against his doctrine.

Secondly, We have Sed nemo ad Regnu^ Christi aruditoru^ ignorant, Dominum non
advenisse in hunc mundum, ut esset Legis and gladii, sed gratiae tantum and
Evangelii Minister; praedicaretque onmibus peccatorum poenitentiam, and
remissionem; non afficeret suppliciit flagitiosos. Martin Bucer. de Regno
Christi. l. 2. c. 33. upon the place.
Christ's example, that would not have forborne his duty, nor could no more when
he was made under the law, dispense with it, then we can with ours; for he came
to fulfill all righteousness. When they brought to him the Woman taken in the
act of adultery; they that apprehended her, were there to witness it: Christ
does not now accuse her to the Magistrate, nor does he bid them to do it, but
he does what was fit for a Minister, a bringer of good things to do: He
exhorts her to repent, Go and sin no more. And did he omit the proceeding
against her out of incogitance or forgetfulness? No; for he says, Has no man
accused thee? She answered, no; Neither do I, says Christ, only go and
sin no more. I know Christ got an ill name by this, The friend of Publicans
and sinners, but he cared not for that, he went as far as his office led him,
and he advanced his Fathers business by that carriage.

To conclude, it is a Rule which I have observed in prudent Parents, not to
encourage their children to inform of one another faults, (but let the
servants do it) because it does not nourish love, but dis-affects them toward
one another: and it is a good Rule, which we ought to observe in this higher
relation, between Pastors and people, which should be carried with all the
freeness that may be.

NOw if there be light in the things that have been brought, and that they
conclude for a greater liberty then Viz. The Congregationall judgment.
some Brethren want, I hope you will save them the labor of asking their
liberty at your hands. Not that we shall think them hard terms to ask and
have, or that we would not be beholden to you. If you will have it of grace as
well as debt, or not of debt, we are content so to receive it. We acknowledge
it is of the Lords free grace and mercy that we enjoy that liberty that we
do, that we have enjoyed it thus long, as it were a breathing space: and that
our Parliament are not as 1 Samuel 25.17.
sons of Belial, that a man cannot speak unto; Nay, far enough from that, great
is our boldness toward you, and our hearts are enlarged, both to you and for
you. We never go before the throne of grace, but we carry you in our hearts
and prayers along with us, and present you together with our selves in these
works and labors of yours; and are full of hope, that God who has concurred
with you thus far, and acted you to so many worthy and memorable degrees of
service to him and his Son Jesus Christ, has not conceived that displeasure
against both you and us, as to reserve your f^^ther Counsels to shut that door
of Christian liberty that was first opened to us by your means. And let it not
be imputed to us as arrogance, if in the day wherein our selves are but
Probationers, our Principles speak for others as well as our selves. Common
humanity requires if there be a (...), a redundancy of any thing whereby we may
profit others also, that we should extend the overplus unto them, and that it
should not run out to loss: But the Royal Law of love commands us not to
seek our own things, but every one his Brothers weal, and to serve them
before our selves, accounting it a morblessed thing to be instruments of their
rest and peace, then to enjoy our own. We shall bless God, if he shall [so
far clear] us and our way in your thoughts: but our peace and liberty will not
fall with that rich and full contentment into our bosoms, except all that
walk conscientiously and inoffensively, may enjoy the same with us. Now he who
is the Father of lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect gift,
fill you with wisdom and ability to discern between the interests of man, and
man's greatness, and the interests of God and his glory, that you may
administer rightly in this matter, as in all things; that we may have more and
more cause to bless God for those quiet and peaceable lives we lead under you,
in all godliness and bonesty: and that the Lord when be comes may find you
Luke 12.43.
so doing.

FINIS.

