PRINCE RVPERT HIS DECLARATION.

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.

PRINCE RVPERT HIS DECLARATION.
IT will seem strange (no doubt) to see me in print, my known disposition
being so contrary to this scribbling age; and sure I had not put my self upon a
Declaration, if in common prudence I could have done otherwise.

I need not tell the world (for it is too well known) what malicious lying
Pamphlets are printed against me almost every morning, whereby those busy men
strive to render me as odious as they would have me, against whom doubtless I
had sooner declared, but that I well knew this mutinous lying spirit would be
easily convinced, but never silenced, which, as it cease at no time, so it
spares no person. And this was too manifest to me, by those bold, odious and
impossible untruths forged against His sacred Majesty, their own King and
Sovereign (and my Gracious and Royal Uncle) who is only guilty of this, that
he is too good to be their King; and to deal clearly, this was it furnished me
with sufficient patience, thinking it but reasonable, that I should be
slandered as well as His Majesty.

But since it has pleased my Lord Wharton to tell the whole City of London
openly at Guild Hall, and since to tell it all the world in print, that one
great cause of their preservation at Edgehill, was the barbarousnesse and
inhumanity of Prince Rupert and his Troopers, that we spared neither man,
woman, nor child, and the thing which we aim at is pillage and plundering, and
the way which we would come by it is murdering and destroying; since such a
charge as this comes from such a mouth, I hold my self bound in honor to
speak and tell that Lord, that as much of his speech as concerns me, is no
truer then the rest of it, which for the most part is as false as any thing
that has been spoken or printed in London these two years: and had I known
his Lordships intention, I would have asked his reason either before or now at
Keinton, if his Lordship had but stayed so long as to be asked the question.

But me think I hear the credulous people say, What? was not the Kings
Standard rescued from them by force? were there so many as 20. of our men
killed by all the Kings Canons? was not our right wing long under the power of
their Canons, so as some 17. shot of Canon shot against them, and yet not a man
of ours so much as hurt? Nay, were there not 3000. slain of the Kings Army,
and but 300. of ours? If these abominable untruths (with many more like them in
his Lordships speech) be all true, then shall he freely charge me with
barbarousnesse and inhumanity; but if these be most gross falsities (as many
thousand worthy Gentlemen will take their oaths they are, then I must profess
I am sorry that any Baron of the English Nation should utter such fowl
untruths, to deceive the poor abused Citizens of London with false reports,
and so slander us. It Was ever my opinion, that no valiant man would speak a
known untruth; nor can I blame his Lordship or any others faint-heartednesse
in so bad a cause as theirs is, which doubtless is the reason why such
Noblemen and Gentry in His Majesty's Army, who hitherto had spent all their
days in peace, could then fight so valiantly ex tempore, not valuing their
lives, and forgetting their dearest relations; so as our enemies in their
hackney railing Pamphlets were forced to say, The Cavaliers (to give the Devil
his due) fought very valiantly: And indeed, had they not showed rather too much
valor, our enemies had had less bottom whereon to sound any untruths,
whereof I take this relation to be one of their masterpieces of forgeries, for
that they slew as many of ours, as we did of theirs, is as true, as that they
beat us at Sherbourne Castle and at Worcester.

Now for barbarousnesse and inhumanity to women and children, wherewith his
Lordship and those impudent unpunished papers cried daily in the streets do
continually slander us, I must here profess, that I take that man to be no
Soldier or Gentleman, that will strike (much less kill) a woman or a child,
if it be in his power to do the contrary: And I openly dare the most valiant
and quick-sighted of that lying Faction, to name the time, the person, or the
house, where any child or woman lost so much as a hair from their head by me,
or any of our soldiers. In a battle, where two Armies fight, many one has
unfortunately killed his dearest friend, very often those whom willingly he
would otherwise have spared; and whether any woman or child were killed in
this fight is more then I can justly say: I am sorry if there were. I speak not
how wilfully barbatous their soldiers were to the Countess Rivers, to the
Lady Lucas in Essex, and likewise to the like persons of quality in Kent, and
other places: Whom have we ever punished for speaking against us, as they most
Jewishly whipped to death a Citizen of London, for saying no more then what was
included in His Majesty's Proclamation. But since they name plundering, whose
moneys? nay, whose Arms have we taken away, unless theirs, who actually had,
or at least declared they would use them against His Majesty's Army? And for
that little cloth borrowed for our soldiers (wherewith their Pamphlets make
such a noise) His Majesty by Gods help will see it better paid for, then any
thing they have taken upon public Faith. What house have we ransacked, as they
did the Earl of Norhamptons? mangling and cutting in pieces rich chaires,
beds, stools and hangings; drinking as much and as long as they were able,
then letting the rest run out upon the floor, when as the very Earl of Essex
his house at Chartley suffered not the least damage by us. What Churches have
we defaced, as they did at Canterbury, Oxford, Worcester, and many other
places? whose pockets have we picked ever to the value of three pence, under
pretense of searching for letters, as they lately did in Glocestershire, and
particularly this last week at Windsor and Vxbridge? Is it not their usual
practice first to plunder a man's house of all plate and moneys, and then
imprison him as a Delinquent, for no other fault, but because he stood loyal
to his Prince; as if it were too little to take a man's est^te, unless also
they rob him of his innocence? Have they not now stuffed all the prisons in
London with Earls, Lords, Bishops, Judges and Knights, Masters of Colleges,
Lawyers and Gentlemen of all conditions and Countie^? for what (God knows)
they themselves know not: insomuch as now they are enforced to find our new
prisons for the Knights, Aldermen, and substantial Citizens of London, who
are now thrust in thither only because they are suspected to love their King?
Have they not by imprisonment or threats muzzeled the mouths of the most grave
and learned Preachers of London? witness Doctor Featly, Doctor Hayward,
Doctor Holdsworth, Master Shute, Master Squire, Master Griffi^^ ^^d many others
(for so I am informed these men are) because they preach that which their
conscience tells them is the known truth. And who are countenanced but
ignorant and seditions teachers, who (like the Mass Priests of old) call
mightily on the people for their plate and money for their patrons and
themselves? who, besides their daily Pulpit treasons, vent such other
Divinity, as if Luther were living, he would blush to call them Protestants:
And if this be not cruelty, injustice, and tyranny, let God and posterity
judge. Mow for any looseness or incivility in our soldiers more then what is
incident and common to great Armies, I vvish they would not mention it, lest
some impartial readers, who know their courses, understand it to be meant by
some of their great Reformers, who are that way as notoriously guilty as any:
And for my self, I appeal to the consciences of those Lords and Gentlemen,
who are my daily witnesses, and to those people wheresoever our Army has
been, what they know, or have observed in my carriage, which might not become
one of my quality, and the son of a King. And whereas they slander us for
Popish Cavaliers, I vvish there were no more Papists in their Army then we
have in ours; but to me it is no vvonder with what face they can slander us for
men disaffected to the Protestant Religion, when as their grand Reformers
refuse to come to Church. For His sacred Majesty I have been a frequent
witness here in England (and all the world knows he never showed himself
otherwise) and therefore hold it to be my part and duty to tell them, that His
Majesty is the most faithful and best defender of the Protestant Religion of
any Christian Prince in Europe, and is so accounted by all the Princes in
Christendom. And what a gracious supporter has he been in particular to the
Queen of Bohemia (my virtuous Royal mother) and to the Prince Elector, my
Royal brother, no man can be ignorant of: if therefore in common gratitude I
do my utmost in defense of His Majesty, and that cause whereof he has
hitherto been so great and happy a patron; no ingenuous man but must think it
most reasonable: And for my self, the world knows how deeply I have smarted,
and what perils I have undergone for the Protestant cause, what stately large
promises were offered me would I consent; and what a wretched close
imprisonment was threatened, if I refused to change my Religion, when I was
captive to the Emperor of Germany, enough to satisfy any man of moderation:
But if it be not sufficient, I would to God all Englishmen were at union
amongst themselves, then with what alacrity would I venture my life to serve
this Kingdom against those cruel Popish Rebels in Ireland: for though I will
never fight in any unrighteous quarrel, yet to defend the King, Religion and
Laws of a Kingdom against subjects, who are up in arms against their Lord
and Sovereign, and such (all good wise men know this and that of Ireland to
be) though the pretense look several ways; such a cause my conscience tells
me is full of piety and justice: and if it please God to end my days in it, I
shall think my last breath spent with as much honor and religion, as if I
were taken off my knees at my prayers. I think there is none that take me for
a Coward; for sure I fear not the face of any man alive, yet I should repute
it the greatest victory in the world to see His Majesty enter London in peace,
without shedding one drop of blood: where, I dare say (God and His Majesty are
witnesses I lie not) no Citizen should be plundered of one penny or farthing,
whereby that ancient and famous City would manifestly perceive how desperately
it has been abused by most strange, false and bottomless untruths, for which
some body (without repentance) must be ashamed at the day of Judgment, if they
escape a condign legal punishment in this world: I therefore conclude with
this open profession (and I am confident our whole Army will say Amen unto it)
he that has any design against the Protestant Religion, the Laws of England,
or hopes to enrich himself by pillaging the City of London, let him be
accursed: And so, whether peace or war, the Lord prosper the work of their
hands who stand for GOD and King CHARLES.

RVPERT.


