An Elegy upon the death of the right Honorable and most renowned, ROBERT
DEVEREVX, Earl of ESSEX and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley,
Bourchier and Lovaine, late GENERAL of the Forces of the PARLIAMENT of
England, who deceased the 14. of September, 1646.
CAn Englands noble Champion [ESSEX] die?
That kept us safe from hostile Tyranny)
Can he (I say) from us to's dust depart,
(Never to return) and we not lay't to heart?
Can we (whose Shield he was) not sensibly
Bewail our loss of him with weeping eye?
O Heavens forbid! unworthy Nation we,
Should we of his great worth unmindfull be.
Though he is extinct, yet let Posterity
Keep up his name, that did (our Liberty
Safely for us and them to keep) expose
Himself, unsafely, to the rage of Foes.
He pricked the timpany of their great pride,
Teaching refluxes to the flowing-tide
Of those that fought so for Prerogative;
Therefore, (though He be dead) His Name will live.
He first did lay our present Strengths foundation,
(Which prospers well) to unslave our British Nation,
And often did hazard's life in bloody fight,
Yet knew no quarrel but the public right,
For which he forced Foes fortitude to flight:
Therefore we grieve his Obsequie to write.
He that the Victor was, is now the Prize:
For he which gat us many Victories,
Is vanquished himself, and forced to lie
At feet of death, who has the victory.
"See then that Prowess, though it purchase praise,
"Purchase it cannot health, or length of days.
"Both great, and good, yea valiant men must die,
"When death (impartial) strikes them, they must lie
"In dust: the passing bell will tole for them,
"That rang, erewhile, the Beggars Requiem.
"The way he is gone, is not a way untrod,
"But is decreed by the eternal God,
"To be the way, that every man must go:
"As Well a Friend, as he that is a Foe.
"Death takes excize of all, and his is paid,
"His soul's at's place, his body's to be laid
"Where they in their best judgments do think fit,
"Who with what else he left, have right to it.
But is there not more in good ESSEX'S death
Then yet I Have said? let us fear he is gone from the earth
As one we were unworthy of: because
Our sins against Gods sin-forbidding Laws
Have the Almighty incensed and made him frown,
And in his wrath against us, to cast down
This so great Pillar, that he might be set
In better place, and there more glory get,
For sins (we know) bring sorrows back with fears.
And we may now lie pickled up in tears,
For that our Patriots so fast do dye
Before our peace be made up perfectly.
"Great God! let thy offended wrath surcease,
"Behold thy people, send thy people peace:
"Turn not so fast our Nobles into dust:
"Be merciful (dear God) as well as just.
"If thou proceed to do as thou'st begun,
"We shall be dross when all the gold is gone.
"'It Is thou, it is thou alone, did send this Grief,
"'It Is thou, it is thou alone must send reliese.
"O then recruit our loss, increase our friends;
"And so for what thou'st done make us amends.
"To thee alone our Sorrows do appeal,
" Earth has no wound too hard for Heaven to heal.
William Rowland.

AN EPITAPH FOR HIS TOMB.
ALL you who pass here by draw near;
And with your tears bedew what is here.
For they have as marble eyes as hearts,
That cannot weep a tear in parts,
But, like dull Stoics, quite forbear,
When they do see, and read, or hear,
Who lies herein: that ESSEX is
The man, an Earl renowned by his
Most noble birth: whose father Queen
Eliza had in great esteem.
And he himself, by Parliament,
To b'Englands General had consent,
And fought our Battles. Now he is dead,
Do not you rudely over Him tread,
Who has So stout a Champion proved,
And was therefore So greatly loved,
That Fame has his victorious brows
Often duly crowned with Laurel boughs.
Who then to grieve will spare the cost,
That England such a Peer has lost?
And that no more of that same Blood
Is left, to do England more good.
William Rowland.

AEtatis Suae 56
A MOVRNEFVLL CLOVD Over vaylinge the face of England for the sorrowful death
of his Exelence Robert Deuourux Earl of Essex and Ewe Vicout Herryford Lord
Ferreres of Chartley Boucher and Louaine Lord General of all the Parlaments
forces, and and dyed ye 24 of September 1646.

BASIS VIRTVTVM CONSTANTIA

depiction of tomb

Hic jacet in tumulo, praeclaro Sanguine natus; ROBERTUS DAVEREUX, Miles
fortissimus Armis.



W. R.

EPITAPHIUM in obitum ROBERTI DEVEREUX, Nobilissimi and Illustrissimi ESSEXIAE
COMITIS.
ESSEX Castellum Patriae, fortissimus HECTOR,
Belligerans valide, generoso Stemmate natus,
CIVIBVS and murus, necnon tutela COLONIS,
Bellonae Conjux armatos duxit aperte,
Et Patriae fixus, Regique fidelis in ARMIS,
Candida Magnificis floruerunt cuncta potenti,
INVICTVS, stabilis, necnon quo justior ALTER
Haud Pietate fuit, nec Bello Major and Armis.
Vota, process, lachrymas, jam desine (Candide Lector,)
Invito scelere, ac fortuna reposuit Altis:
Parce tuis lachrymis, donarunt Numina CAELOS:
Flebilis in tumulo, multi doluere Colores.
Epilogus.
Coeli animam, terrae Corpus, fortesque dolorem,
Et Mundus Nomen, claraque facta ferunt.
XIV. Calend. November. M.DC.IVL. Tho. Thorn Londinensis.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed by R. Austin. 1646.


