JUDICIAL ASTROLOGY, Judicially Condemned.

UPON A SURVEY and EXAMINATION Of Sr: CHRISTOPHER HEYDONS Apology for it, In
Answer to Mr. CHAMBERS.

And of Will. Ramsey's Morologie in his pretended Reply (called Lux veritatis)
to Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES his Demonologie.

Together with the Testimonies of Mr. W. Perkins Resolution to the
Countryman; Mr. John Miltons Figure-Caster; and Dr. Homes his demonologie,
all here exhibited against it,

Seconded and backed by 1. Evident Scripture. 2. Apparent Reason. 3. Authority
of Councils. 4. Justice of Laws. 5. Arguments of Fathers, Schoolmen, and
Modern Learned men. 6. Concessions of Ptolomy, etc. friends of Astrology. 7.
And the wicked practices of Astrologers themselves.


ISA. 47.13. Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
Monethly-Prognosticatours stand up and save thee from those things that shall
come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them;
they shall not deliver themselves.

LONDON, Printed by Roger Daniel for Joseph Blaik-locke, in Ivie-lane. 1652.

To the Christian Reader.
SInce the Sun of Righteousness arose from the Sea of Bestiall persecution,
and the Kingdom of patience (Revel. 1.9.) became a Kingdom of power, wherein
the Lamb begins to reign, who is over all God blessed for evermore, we may
easily perceive the clouds of blasphemous opinions, and diabolical practices
arise daily, from the Bottomless pit; laboring to eclipse his glory;
especially from the judgment, and practice of those subtle Engineirs of Satan
the ASTROLOGERS, whose religion is the same with Jacob Behmens, the
German-Conjurer, as appears by Master Lilly's recommending his Works so highly
for Gospel light, in one of his Almanacks. They talk much of Christ: But what
is THEIR Christ, but the appearance of God in every Creature; a Dog, or a Cat,
by consequence; as Bothomly, in his dark and light side of God (lately burned
by public command) most blasphemously avouched. They talk much of self-denial.
But what is that think you? Not the denial of inordinate affections, but of the
eternity of humane bodies as Master L. preacher of O. T. in F. (who is
rejected for a notorions H. yet rants in Blasphemy) affirms saying (as they
all hold) whatsoever had a beginning, shall have an end. laying the body of our
Blessed Savior, and of all the Saints, equal with the beasts that perish.
They blaspheme the Holy Ghost, saying that the spiritual knowledge of Christ
in the flesh, by which he is justified (1 Timothy 3.16.) is carnal; perverting
that saying of the Apostle, that he knew not Christ after the flesh, as if he
had denied him in the flesh. When as there is a large difference, between
knowing of Christ IN the flesh, and AFTER the flesh, or ACCORDING to the flesh,
that is, Judaicall administrations, or humane wisdom, which is not according
to the Word. This is that Antichrist 1 John 4.1, 2, 3, that Spiritual
wickedness, which (because Rome works according to humane Tradition) has left
the foundation, and gotten another Christ. This is that sin of Turker, who
are now under a vial, yet acknowledge Christ to be (...), that is, the breath
of God; denying his humane body to have suffered, but a Jew in his stead; and
say, Mahomet is above him. This opinion produces diabolical practices, as
Sodomy, Witchcraft, and JUDICIAL ASTROLOGY (which may be done by the Hebrew
Characters as well as by the Stars, onley it is not so cleanly a conveiance, as
some have confessed). Hence are the entire-professours thereof given up to vild
affections; and their very reason is different from that of natural moral
men. The diabolical communion they have in the Spirit of Antichrist, with each
other, makes them so confederate that a saucie boy, as if the devil had
anointed him with brimstone, for his unnatural itch, not to be conversed with
by Christians, writes so learnedly against the gravest Doctors, and Pillars of
the Church, of Jesus Christ. And hence is it, that Master Lilly boasts in his
Almanac, that a boy of seventeen years of age, shall shortly transcend the
ablest Divines in Christendom, in preaching by THEIR Spirit. Hence it is that
Jacob Behmen commends the Lilly of the wonders, and he HIM; like Nemo and
Vulcanus viz. hic laudat versus illius, ille suos (Martial.) though they never
saw each other. Hence they (...) shuffle in their abominations (...) (2 Pet.
2.1.) like jugglers, into the minds of people; who being taken with admiration
at the success of their ambiguous Prognostications (like that of the Oracle of
Apollo, Aio te Eacidem Romanos vincere posse) run after them to their own
destruction.

You that fear the Lord, and are built upon our Scripture-Christ, let me
entreat you, 1. To take heed of fellowship with them especially in spiritual
things. What fellowship has Christ with Belial, light with darkness? 2. Go
not to them for Counsel; for so you desert God as Saul, when he went to Endor.
For which cause the Lord does signify in his word his special displeasure
against him. 3. Remember that of Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. God permits their
Predictions to come to pass, on purpose to try you. 4. Take heed of stumbling
at the way of Christ's power in our Army, for these men's being friends to this
present government. For it is prophesied by the Scriptures, that they shall
arise from among us (Act. 20.30.) that shall speak (...), Herefie must be for
the manifestation of the approved. 2 Cor. 11.19.

I commend you all, dear brethren in the Lord, to the protection of the
Almighty, and to the MAN Christ Jesus, whom the Lord has appointed to judge
the world in righteousness (Act. 17.31.); praying with all prayer, and
Supplication in his spirit, that you may follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes:
and that since judgment does begin to turn to righteousness, the upright in
heart may follow it: and that the Lord would tread down Satan, Witchcraft, etc.
under our feet; and according to his promise (Zech. 13.2.) cause all the
FALSE-PROPHETS and VNCLEAN-SPIRITS to pass out of the land; which is the
prayer of

Fournace November. 15. 1651. Yours in Christ Jesus WILLIAM ROVVLAND.

JUDICIAL ASTROLOGY Judicially Condemned.
A word by way of Preface.
AS the Husbandman first chops off, and kicks aside the brush and rubbish that
he may with his Axe come at the root of the Oak; so must I deal with Will.
Ramsey; wholying in the way, must be first spurned aside before I can come to
Sir Christopher, as Will. has ordered his Method.

THE SURVEY and EXAMINATION of Will. Ramsey's EPISTLES, and the foul Language
of his Book.
THe Doctor has spoken so much, and to so good purpose, in his Demonologie
against Judicial Astrology, and Will. Ramsey so little to it, whereby to
enervate any thing of that Treatise (it still standing as an impregnable
Bullwark) that as to him, there is little left for me to say, unless it be to
tell W. Ramsey so much; and to reprove him for his ill handling the Question;
that deceived souls may be reduced.

Poor Will. it seems by his Pamphlet, he was distracted when he penned it. For
he confesses in his Epistle to All Well-willers etc. that he was more
perplexed, and troubled at that instant of time his Treatise was penned, then
all his life. So he. O strange distemper! and as strange a fantasy, that
counts the time of his penning of eleven sheets, but at the rate of an instant.
He confesses further (ibid.) that his Genius was weak; and that he went, or
ran from house to house, and made it where ever he came. By which words, I
profess I do really suspect, Will. Ramsey went about to his Brethren
Astrologie-favourers, to beg, or borrow some Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; but
lost some of it as he went home. See anon whether I speak not really true. Out
of all let the judicious Reader make the Crisis of the man's Cranie. Collate his
Epistle to the Reader, with his Book, and you shall see suitable fits and feits.
Where (poor man) he sins grievously, sometimes in his raving, and sometimes
in his mopish melancholic fits.

In his raving, Ira furor Inevis est. Hor.
he miserably fomes at the mouth, with the froth and spittle of Malicious,
Fool, Ignorant, Knave, Babbling Priests, Wretch, etc. some of which he drivels
and slavers on M. Raunce (for writing against Judicial Astrology) the rest on
the Doctor, and all Ministers without distinction. He is so bold a youth in
his Title page as to style himself Gent. I am informed that in comparison he is
but a Boy.
which I should have construed Gentile-man, or at least Gentleman, but that
his language is the language of a Peasant or Boore; unless the Astrologer
excuse himself, that he was then under the powerful influences of the
Constellations, Canis major minor, Taurus, Aries, Lupus, Leo, Scorpius,
Serpens, Draco, etc. Never any in their sober wits, have accounted D. Homes
ignorant, or fool. And of malice against Astrologers, the Doctor must needs be
free, in that he professes that the Astrologers never did him (that he knows)
any personal wrong before the penning of his Demonologie, whereby to kindle any
malice against them in his breast, and to vent it in that Book. His Treatise of
Demonologie fairly testifies for him, wherein he does soberly handle the
question of the unlawfulness of Judicial Astrology; touching upon no man's
person. And there also professes his love to the true Mathematics, even as
with great delight he studied them in the Universitie. And further, I can
assure the Reader that he calls God to witness, that mere pressures of
conscience, to discharge his faithfulness to Christ (as he is a Teacher to
one of his Churches) in declaring against sin and error, for the
preservation, or reduction of poor souls, made him write. But as was the manner
of the times in the reign of Arminianisme in England, to question any man's
learning, though the ablest Scholar, if he spoke against their Tenets; so now
are the manners of Astrologers, to call their betters every way by the names of
fools, ignorant, etc. if they do not sing to their tune but contrary. You shall
hear by and by Will. Ramsey despise Fathers, Schoolmen, Councills, See his
book. c. 2. p. 38.
etc. that speak the least word against Astrology.

When Will. Ramsey is in his mopish fits, I cannot, I ingenuously confess,
either gather that he says any thing at all to the Head he propounds; or what
it is he would have said: For instance, let the Reader consider well that head,
chap. 1. sect. 6. p. 33. Astrology profitable for health. Nor can I reconcile
Will. Ramsey with Will. Ramsey, there is such contradiction in his words. For
page 11. line 25. me thinks says he, Doctor Homes being a wise man, (the
phrase signifies an habitual wisdom, as it is spoken without limitation and so
left universal) yet in the very next page, but twenty three lines after, he
calls Doctor Homes a fool. If he say the Doctor was a fool in condemning
Astrology; then W. R. further like one impos contradicts himself. For in his
Epistle to the Reader parag. the third, he confesses, that of his knowledge
many Discreet Gentlemen would sometimes condemn Astrology.

Finally this Epistle, and his whole book compared together will sufficiently
argue, that the man was miserably lost in his reason when he penned it. For what
are those Astrologicall predictions that D. Homes levels his Demonologie
against, but of such things, as which either they themselves are (as to us)
accidental, as the success of businesses, or their causes are internal, as
men's wills, and free choice, as to undertake a journey, build, etc. or not.
Thus D. Homes in his very entrance upon the point of Astrology; chap. 1.. 1.
and. 2. And in the very next page, viz. 112. he allows conjecturing, and of
things whereof any natural reason can be yielded; as (says he, quoting and
consenting with D. Willet etc.) there are natural signs in the simple bodies,
as the heavens and air, of the alteration of weather, as into winds, or rain,
etc. as also in compound bodies, either vegetable, of seasons to set plants, or
trees; or in humane bodies of convenient time to let blood, or purge. These are
immediate effects in nature, of the Celestial bodies. There are also mediate
effects, as Comets, which show siccity, heat, and combustion; so the Crow cries
against rain, because the clammy moisture of the air affects and afflicts him
in the clinging of his feathers, etc. But the Doctor does there deny signs of
humane events. So also in page 160. of his Demonologie he opens his he art wide
to show what he means by the Astrology against which he raises his battery of
reason, viz. against such an Art or Science (as Astrologers would have it
called) that undertakes to predict and foretell what shall befall MEN, and
CITIES, and COMMONWEALTHS, in relation to HVMANE affairs, ARBITRARY actings,
SPONTANEOVS and voluntary transactions, that depend upon the movings of men's
wills. To the same effect the Doctor speaks in his 113, 165, 167, pages of his
Demonologie. And therefore it is WILL. RAMSEYS ILL CUSTOM OF TELLING UNTRUTH
(to call it no worse, though justly I might) to say, the Doctor or other
Antagonists to Judicial Astrology know not, or do not ponere what they mean,
when they speak against Judicial Astrology. The Doctor as clearly, as if
written with Sunbeams, does often inculcate what he allows, and what he
disallows, as even but now has been plainly declared; The state of the
question.
adding often in his Demonologie, that all Natural Predictions (which the
Astrologers would cram in to their Judicial Astrology, with contradiction
enough) is to be called, and considered in a way of Art or Science, either as
METEOROLOGIE, or PHYSIOLOGIE, or pure ASTRONOMY according to the nature of the
subject under consideration.

Thus you have heard the Doctor as plain (as they say) as a Pack-staff; now
let us hear what those predictions are that Will. Ramsey is pleased in his
Epistle to the Reader to disavow or grant. Which are the very same that the
Doctor denies or grants, and William speaks them in higher words then the
Doctor. I will give them unto you in his own words. His heads upon a just
particular account are six. 1. Says he, the rules of Astrology does (so W.
Ramsey is pleased to join a Nown plural and Verb singular together; but this
is a small matter with him, who after is miserably out in his Latin, Greek and
Hebrew. But for present, I was forced to touch his English upon whose score it
lies, because I promised to give you his mind in his own words) I say, Will.
Ramsey says in the first place, that the rules of Astrology does not meddle
with vain contingencies; or such as have an indifferent respect to the
opposites, as depending upon unknown, or indeterminate causes, which may happen
one way or other. 2. Will. Ramsey says, Man's will is not subject to the
influence of the stars; neither has Astrology to do with it, but accidentally
so far as the soul with the faculties thereof follow the temperature of the
body, which (the friends of Astrology themselves acknowledge) is impeded and
altered so many ways, as that Astrologicall predictions of man come to
nothing. See the Doctors Demonologie chap. 10.. 4. 3. Neither does Astrology
meddle with the Providence of God. 4. Or show cause of miracles. 5. Or meddles
with the secrets of God, for they are past finding out. Astrologers are but men
that contemplate natural causes. 6. Astrology or the influence of stars have
no fatal necessity, except some contingency be mixed therewith; for this were
to deny the providence of God. Thus W. Ramsey; whereof the last is delivered
with that wonderful contradiction of fatal necessity and contingency.

But you have them as he gives them.

Now let the Reader that has a mind to understand the right, compare the
Doctors, and W. R. his stateing of the Question together, and he shall find
those six things before said, set down by William in that his Epistle to the
Reader, fully to agree with the Doctors Tenet in the main. Therefore W. R. in
his great warfare in his ensuing Pamphlet against the Doctors Demonologie,
either as a distracted man departs from his own principles; or else plainly
fights against himself; let William take his choice.

And if he be like some of his brethren he will choose the former. For however
they state the question in words, I am sure they practice in deeds quite
contrary; undertaking to know by the stars who, and where are the Thieves and
stolen goods of such, and such a robbery; the cattle and Drovers that carried
them away, from such and such a ground, at such a time; and the like feits; and
these they practice for money. Yea they are bold to predict the events of
wars, the successes of marriages, and thousands of such mere humane events,
which the Scripture pronounces uncertain to us. The battle is not to the
strong, nor the race to the swift. Promotion comes not from the East (stars)
nor the West (stars) etc. but all fall out as Gods providence disposes. Yet
those Astrologers will boldly undertake to predict such things, as their
Almanacks and Astrologicall Predictions, etc. do testify. By which writings
they gain credit and custom of miserable seduced souls, to fee them and feed
them with money for mere impostures, as many of their Clients do daily
complain; saying, the Astrologers had their money (not forbearing to name the
men and the money,) but they were never the nearer to find that they promised
them. But if this were all that Astrologers did do, it were not so intolerable.
But they have practiced some things that are not to be endured in any
Commonwealth, viz. to dissuade men of quality from marrying worthy Gentlewomen,
using lies for their arguments, An intolerable practice of Astrologers.
forgeing those things of the Gentlewomen, to disinable their persons, and to
reproach them in their repute, as are not fit here to be named; but at due time
and place shall be made good before any Court of Justice by undeniable proof.
And at the rate of Will. Ramsey's sounding the Trumpet, the battle is likely
speedily to begin.

And William Ramsey himself, for all his stateing of the question aforesaid,
undertakes to predict many humane events (quite without the sphere of the state
of his question) in his discourse of the Eclipse of the Sun at the end of his
railing reply to D. Homes his Demonologie. Amongst the rest he predicts, In the
last page save one.
that before that Eclipse has finished its effects, Ministers shall be in
less esteem, then they would fain persuade the vulgar, concerning the students
in Astrology. Whatever the Epithets be he gives to Ministers there; he intends
not them for distinction, but for agnomination to them all, good as well as
bad, or else he would not lay the cause of that prediction to be the Ministers
opposing Astrologers, and upbraid Doctor Homes.

And let me tell thee William a prophecy out of the Word of God against
Judicial Astrologers, A Prophecy against Astrologers.
that as Aarons rod swallowed up the Enchanters rods (Exodus 7.12); Balaam was
killed when the Priests and Levites of the Lord were preserved (Numb. 13.22.);
Daniel the Prophet is preserved and honored, when sentence of death was
pronounced against the Astrologers, (Dan. 2. verse. 2.14.27.28. etc. to the end
of the chapter): and the persons having familiar spirits, and the Diviners, and
Exorcists, etc. fell before the Apostles ( Acts chap. 8. chap. 19. etc.): So
these last and greatest sort of wicked men, that lead poor souls from God to
the Devil, from his word to their circles and figures shall (without
repentance) according to all the prophecies of the old Testament against
Astrologers, Magicians, Enchanters, Sorcerers, etc. quoted in the Doctors
Demonologie, perish with Antichrist and all Christ's enemies at the great
destruction of the wicked near approaching, for making way for the Saints
Triumph a while on earth over all their enemies, Revel. 21.8. and 22.15. Now
William, and thy brethren, run your course in Judicial Astrology, according
to your wonted manner of practice at your peril; and venture it whither your
Eclipse, or the light of our Sun (the word of God) will prophecy more truly.

I wonder in what star or constellation, or their postures William could
read this goodly change, that godly Ministers must be discountenanced, and
lying Astrologers (as the Scripture calls them) shall be advanced? His telling
me there of to a of etc. with many the like anticks, figures, gibberish and
cantings, is less, is worse then nothing, unless he could demonstrate to me
(for that is the honor of a true Mathematician to demonstrate most potently) by
reason, why such postures and features of stars and constellations must needs
pre-signifie such and such events, Demonstrationes Mathematicae (...)
pot^n^^ssimae.
of which the Astrologers so confidently predict. To tell me of Traditions,
that of old time for many generations upon such signs, such events have come to
pass; is no more (if Astrologers say true in that) then what Conjurers teach
and practice, viz. draw such and such circles, making these and those figures,
with using of this posture and that form of words and the spirit will rise at
command; which, though true, is called by the consent of all good men,
conjuring, and is diabolical, because there can be no natural reason given of
it, nor a divine rule to justify it. The application in a due proportion is
obvious.

If thus therefore Judicial Astrologers (as ye call them) do constantly in
their practice transgress against W. Ramsey's stateing the question (in his
said Epistle before his Christian Judicial Astrology, as with a strong
contradiction in adjecto he calls it) William has little reason to weary the
readers eyes and ears with irksome and nauseous repetition of that common rule
(liable enough to exception) Abuse should not take away the use; or that
instance, Heresies crept into Religion, should not put away Religion. We have a
Bible for our Religion; no Scripture for Judicial Astrology, as before
stated. And other Astrology (if they will have it so called) that is natural,
not meddling with the six particulars aforesaid (as W. R. resolved the
question) will get them little credit (the mere Natural Philosopher will tell
as much), and gain them less money. You heard before by Austin of himself and
others, and by Master Perkins, and M. Brigges (in the Doctors Treatise of
Demonologie) that Astrology has an innate tendency further, and beyond an
immoration within the bounds of Naturalls, and therefore they repented of their
studies in that way. For that which constantly ends in unlawful practice,
argues the principles to be naught. If a thing were once of good use, but now
of none, but of much abuse, that is warrant for lawful state-powers to remove
it; and Hezekiah's breaking in pieces the brazen Serpent will justify it. 2
Kings 18.4.
So that in things not necessary, the rule is, Abuse must take away the use.
Yea in necessary things, Paul would not eat flesh, rather then offend his
brother, as Astrology does the generality of true godly men, The judgments of
God hang over a nation for the sins of Astrologers and their clients, a State
permitting.
fearing that it will hasten judgment on the Nation; as Saul at last favoring
such kind a-stuff, brought himself and the nation to great ruin: If
Astrologers can not, as those among the Egyptians (when Israel was in Egypt,)
and those among the Chaldeans (Judah being captivated in Babylon) and those in
the Roman Empire (in the time of the ten Persecutions) cause persecution, (as
their practice has been by testimony of histories) yet their own impieties by
that very Art, and their seducing poor souls from fear, and faith in God, do
greatly threaten a common calamity, especially if connived at by the State. So
the Prophet, Isa. 2.6. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people the house of
Jacob, because they be replenished from the East with Soothsayers like the
Philistims. How home this reaches Astrologers, has been discussed in the
Doctors Demonologie: Daemonol. c. 10.. 3. p. 124, 125.
Little therefore can be justly spoken for Judicial Astrology, more then to
say it is all dross, it is all abuse, it is all (as Austin says) A great Error.

Yet W. Ramsey will make an Essay to justify Judicial Astrology (if he can)
but in such a dialect as would make a wise man the rather believe that the Art
is of the Devil, because the Artists in their defense of it speak the language
of the Devil. Not Evil speakers, or slanderers, are says the Apostle Devils,
1 Timothy 3.11. where the Greek is (...), id est, Not devils; and 2 Timothy 3.3.
false accusers, the Greek is (...) Devils. See the like phrase, Tit. 2.3. So
VV. R. here. So some others in their Almanacks or Prognostications. But my
purpose concerning Will. Ramsey's language (at once for all, to quit my hands
of his words, and be free for his matter) is this.

1. I shall most willingly give the day and Garland for railing and reviling
gratis to VV. Ramsey. It may be the poor miserable creature can speak no other
language; he knowing no more then what his Physical and Astrologicall
profession teach him, which savor no other. And if he be a Scot (as some judge
by his name) then it is proper for him to be infinite proud and opprobrious
where he dreams he may domineer. He thinks (to use Virgils phrase) ARIETE
CREBRO, as with the battery of the Ramshead. rather to force the fort of the
Doctors Demonologie, then to win it by the art and reason of School
Polemicalls. Rather (as Alexander M.) to cut the Gordian knot then solve it;
Quint. Curt. de vita Alex.
thereby (as he said) to delude the Oracle, in case he could not fulfill it.
Does Will. Ramsey dream that he only has the wit to jeer, or the sole
liberty to rail in print? or does he dote that he is a man of that composure of
person and parts, that he is shot-free from all darts of Rhetoric? Could I but
match him in profaneness of spirit, and error in judgment, I could repay him
home near from all the Topics of Rhetoric Cicero uses in his invective
orations. But (as Chrysostom said) I fear sin. Yet he might, especially
pretending to predictions, have prognosticated to himself that IF THE DOCTOVR
SCORNED TO ANSWER, HIM, some body else might show William his folly, least
(as Solomon says) he should be wise in his own conceit: And might (like a wise
man) with soft words, but with arguments of steel endeavor to convince
William of the viciousness of Astrology, which God and all good men generally
detest. That William has not taken the like sober, modest, serious way to
defend his art, it has got him nothing. It is to prudent men the sign of a bad
cause, that needs to be defended with bad words; which perhaps, may raise a
great dust, and cast a fogg before the eyes of men partially passionate; but do
loose with men of a pure judgment in the credit of the cause.

2. I shall also pass over (as not regarding) his silly jests and jears
(unworthy nameing) savouring of a light and slight spirit in him, as if some
PEG -- A -- RAMSEY guided his pen not VV. R. Gentleman.

3. For his lifting and laboring to confute the Doctor, puffing blowing, and
panting (as if almost out of breath,) fetching his wind with As I hope, and I
believe, and I do think (so often repeated) I have confuted the Doctor; with
his calling a main (as he recovers his breath) to the Reader, in his Nota,
Nota, Nota been, to attend; I pity both the man, and the Reader that follows
him; that he should be so clamoured by him to run to fee (in comparison) a
NOTHING. Whether I speak truly, let the sequel prove. And had it not been to
tell the Reader so, especially young men in danger to be led away with
Astrologicall impostures, I should never accounted Will. Ramsey worthy any
thing that might be called a Reply, Survey, or etc. And therefore I was loath
Doctor Homes should so much disgrace himself, and credit Will. Ramsey as to
have his name in print to any paper to him. For it is wittily observed by the
Heathen, Ovid. l. 13. Fab. 1
that it was too much honor to Ulysses, being a Coward, that he might contend,
but in words, with gallant, valiant Ajax for the Armor of Achilles. Galenum
non parum errasse puto qui Thessalu^, dum nomen ejus proterit, Aliquem esse
docuerit, and cujus rationem haberet. Cardan. de vita propria cap. 16.
And it was the judgment of the great CARDANVS one of VVilliam's profession
both ways, that famous GALEN ( VVilliam's Master) did much err in so often
mentioning in his writings his frivolous Antagonist Thessalus; for by that
(says Cardanus) Galen did teach men to think that Thessalus was some body, and
at all regarded by Galen.

Let not William or his adherents puff at this, as if but flourishes; but
attend the short Surveyes of his chapters and sections, and then see whether
reason can cry him up, for wit, honesty, or learning.

The Survey of Will. Ramsey's 1. Section of his 1. Chapter.
The Definition of Astrology. W. R. his 1. Section

THat the Reader may the better judge of the controversy between Doctor Homes
and my self, I think best here before I enter upon any part of his discourse,
to set down what this art of Judicial Astrology is, which I undertake to
defend. Ptolomy lib. 1. cap. 1. Of his Quadripartite, defines it thus,
Astrology is that art (joining it with Astronomy, as making no difference
between them, though M. Homes and other adversaries thereunto do) which
teaches by the motions, Configurations and Influences of the Signs, Stars and
Celestial Planets, to judge and prognosticate of the natural effects and
mutations to come, in the Elements and inferior and Elementary bodies. And who
so takes Astrology to be any other thing, is altogether ignorant of the Art,
or guilty of inveterate malice in traducing so noble and admirable a science,
esteemed and allowed of in all ages, and that in great reverence and honor, as
well as the Students thereof (as in its due place shall be made to appear) by
the chiefest and noblest of the people. Though Doctor Homes would fain
persuade the vulgar and ignorant sort of people that it is a Doctrine of
Devils, and unlawful, which shall in its due place be made to appear (as also
the rest of his weak arguments and cavils,) that they are merely malicious,
ignorant, weak, and inconsistent with reason or the thing in question; which
that he may not be ignorant of, as also for the better understanding of the
Reader, I do here more plainly rehearse by way of Quere; viz.

First, whether Astrology, or foretelling, or Prognosticating by the Stars, be
a lawful Art, free from all Diabolical practices and devices.

Secondly, Whether Astrology may not lawfully be studied and practiced, by the
best of Gods people, without offense in the least, either to the law of God, or
man (if they concur with the rules of the Scripture) which is the full matter
in controversy, and to be in this following discourse discussed, handled and
cleared; and if so, then certainly the malicious ignorant condemners of this
Noble and most profitable Art studied by mortals, (as in its due place shall
appear) ought to be severely punished, and that with exemplary infliction, that
posterity may take warning how they condemn what they are ignorant of; and
likewise be encouraged to apply their minds to the contemplation and knowledge
of all Arts and Sciences, especially this most heavenly and divine study of
Astrology, or the language of the Stars.

Now you have heard the distinction of Astrology the subject intended, by it
you may not only see the causes which concur to the constitution of the
nature of the Art, but also the final cause, whereunto all the precepts of the
Art are to be referred; seeing then the knowledge of the effects of the Stars
in the Elements and their bodies, depends of the motions, Configurations, and
Influences of the Celestial bodies, Astronomy or Astrology (for by the
learned, there is made no distinction between them as several Arts, but
generally conclude them (as indeed they are) one and the same Art) is divided
into two parts, the first speculative or theoricall, which consists in the
knowledge of the heavenly motions; the other part is that which consists in
the effects and properties of the former motions, and without this (viz.
Astrology) the other is merely vain and of no use, or to none or little
purpose; the former, viz. Astronomy furnishes the Astrologer with matter and
stuff wherein to exercise himself; the other, viz. Astrology disposes the
matter, and accordingly judges as the case does require, and therefore to be
esteemed the more noble part of this Science.

Thus VV. Ramsey.

SURVEY. Behold here VV. R. at the very first, begins his Pamphlet with 3 gross
UNTRUTHS. For, If Will. Ramsey begins with 3. great untruths, in his entrance,
how shall we believe him in the rest of his Pamphlet^
1. there is no such definition as he affirms, nor any thing in form of a
definition, in relation to Astrology in that place of Ptolomy, as his eyes can
witness, who of purpose read the Preface and first Chapter once and again in
two several Editions. 2. Ptolomy does there (contrary to William Ramsey's
assertion) put a wide difference between Astronomy, and Astrology. For he
begins that his Book thus: There are two things, O Syrus, special and most
chief, by which are made Astrological Predictions. ONE, which is first in order
and power, whereby we apprehend at all times the motions of the Sun and Moon
and other Stars, and their postures amongst themselves, or toward the Earth.
The OTHER is that, whereby we consider by the natural qualities of the Stars
the changes that are wrought in Bodies that are congruous to those postures.
And of these doctrines, the FORMER has its proper Art, albeit the end of the
SECOND be not added unto it, etc.

In which words most evidently, Ptolomy distinguishes Astronomy from
Astrology of the nearest kind, viz. Natural; in so much that he says,
Astronomy is a perfect Art without that Astrology. Yea, and (as it follows
there,) we have this into the bargain, that Ptolomy does sundry ways, and with
several reasons in that Treatise show the uncertainty and imperfection of
Astrology; but cries up the certainty and perfection of Astronomy. 3. The
Learned (contrary to VV. R. false assertion) do make a distinction between
Astronomy and Judicial Astrology, as several Arts. For they thus distinguish.
OURANOSCOPIE, or URANOLOGIE, or OURANOGRAPHIE (the genus) is either Astronomy
or Astrology, Alsted. Eneycl. l. 11. p. 1. c. 1. p. 4. c. 1.
(the species.) Astronomy is concerning the motion and measure of the Stars.
Astrology handles of the effects of the Stars; called also Prognosticall, or
Judicial Astrology.

Add to these three untruths, the impertinencies or equivocations of W. R. in
this his 1. Section; who having defined Natural Astrology, he puts quercs of
the lawful study of, and Prognosticating by Astrology. By which if means
Natural; he is extremely impertinent. For the Doctor allows it (as I have
showed) only he would have it called by another name, as a part of another
Science. If he means Judicial; then he plainly equivocates, defining one kind,
but prosecutes another.

Lastly, VV. R. is what he was at first, an avoucher of untruths, so he began,
and so he concludes the Section; saying, That Astronomy is merely vain, and of
no use without Astrology: Which is most false as his own Ptolomy witnessed
before; and renowned Keckerman is his second; who wrote a famous System of
Astronomy, declaring the excellent use thereof, without handling of any
Astrology at all: which Astronomy for me to commend here, by the enumeration of
its excellencies in particular were to carry water to the sea; or hold a candle
to the Sun. I therefore leave all pure Astronomers, Chronologers, Geographers,
Navigatours, etc. to decry the false Assertion of VV. R.

W. R. his SECT. II. In answer to some cavils of M. Homes his, wherein he
denies Astrology to be warranted by Scripture, proved to be erroneous and
false.
Having thus painted forth the matter and form of the thing intended to be
insisted on, I come now to show you what M. Homes his utmost power and malice
against it is: and first his blind zeal begins to show it self, in persuading
the Reader it is condemned by the Scripture, and no wise thereby tolerated; his
words are, It is no where allowed in the Scripture, under the notion of
Astrology, but every where spoken against as we shall see afterward: and all
that he can show us and make us see, is but six places of Scripture, Ergo, not
every where condemned; and those places neither, but imagined by him to condemn
Astrology, when indeed they serve no whit at all for his purpose, as in its due
place shall be made appear. But by the way, David say, The heavens declare the
glory of God, Psalm. 19.1? and in another place, The language of the stars,
(which is the signification of the word Astrology (...) the language of the
stars; and is it not allowed any where in Scripture under the notion of
Astrology?) Is heard over all the earth, or the uttermost parts thereof, Psalm.
19.3? as if he had said, there is no part free from the power of their
influences; for their power has a general extent over all Nations, Kingdoms,
Countries, Provinces, and Languages. I pray, who can restrain the sweet
influences of the Pleiades? Job 38.31. And did not the stars in their courses
fight against Sisera? Judge. 5.20. One of these places had been enough to have
convinced him of great wickedness, in denying the Scripture does any where
allow of Astrology; for if he never read these places, then he is wicked, and
no less then wilfully wicked, to conclude what he understands not; if he has
perused them, then most malicious to speak against truth; I may even as well
say diabolically wicked, and that he teaches rather the Doctrine of Devils,
for the Devils Doctrine is falsehood; and if he preaches such gross lies as
these, he is the Devils Preacher, and not Astrologers: neither is Astrology a
Doctrine of Devils (as shall he made clear to him before the closure of my
Discourse) as he in his 160. page line 21. is pleased to term it. So then, now
I hope the Reader does clearly see, these his first words of his Discourse, to
be merely envious, slanderous, and malicious, or (at the best) most ignorant;
for it will puzzle all his brains, and M. Raunces, nay and all that dare or
will take their parts, to make any one of those passages of Scripture (he
brings to confute or condemn Astrology) to serve in the least for his turn, as
in its due place shall be cleared.

Then says M. Homes, As other things that are natural, which are brought to
countenance Astrology, are not tolerated by the Encyclopaedia, and general
order and Seats of all Arts and Sciences within their own Spheres, to be
accounted Astrology. For instance, First, (says he) Some urge that we know the
Tides of the Sea, by the state of, and Tempests by other Stars. which I am
confident M. Homes cannot deny, but he will render himself more ridiculous then
already, which he endeavors to do thus; These and of the like nature, are
properly handled in that part of natural Philosophy, which we call Meteorology;
and so likewise are all fiery Meteors, Comets, etc. and so by consequence are
made an integrall part of Physics: for if you will say, because of their
external efficient cause. viz. the Stars, they are to be handled as a part of
Astrology, by the same reason there will be left no such Science as natural
Philosophy, because all inferior Bodies below the Moon (as says the great
Philosopher Aristotle) depend upon the superior Celestial bodies of the
Heavens. In all which he does but show his great mistake in the ground of
Astrology, and his envy thereto; for how can M. Homes prove this is a mere
urging, or an opinion of some, that the is the cause of the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; or that it is rather to be attributed to that part of natural
Philosophy, which is called Meteorologie, and so consequently to be a part of
Physics; when all the World knows, that has any experience or understanding
in Astrology, that he is as far from hitting the mark, as if he had mist the
Butt.

Wherefore for his better instruction, (for I see he is not so well verst in
Astrology as he pretends, or as one that is to condemn it should be) I will
make it appear to him, that the is the absolute cause of the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; and this is the opinion of all or most knowing and learned Writers,
both in this Art and other Sciences; and not only so, but it is so clear to
all the Learned, that his great Friend Picus Mirandula, which was a stronger
Champion (or at least more knowing in the Art then he) against Astrology, does
confess the to be the positive and sole cause thereof.

And thus, if he have any understanding in the Art (as by his writing, I must
confess (as I now but said) I see none) let him take the true time of the Seas
flowing first, and then observe in what part of Heaven the is accidentally
placed by her violent diurn motion, and he shall find it to flow till she come
to an absolute aspect of the place she was in at the first beginning to flow;
and then will continue ebbing till she come to the direct or opposite place in
the Heavens etc. Still let him observe exactly when she comes to the or of the
place of her first beginning, and he shall never err in this point. This is
sufficiently well known to the learned Practitioners, and the sons of Art: yet
note that and other Stars may hasten, hinder, and alter the influence, as he
may see at and of, or the Change and Full; in Spring-tides, and Neap-tides, at
quarters and half-quarters. I would he had not been ignorant of this, and then
perhaps, (this being the beginning of his discourse) he had not undertook to
lay Pen to Paper against this most heavenly, most admirable, and most
contemplative, delectable Study and Science of the Stars and Celestial Bodies.
So by this time he clearly sees how inconsiderate and rash this his sophistical
and fase argument is.

Secondly, says M. Homes, Others say that by Astrology we know Eclipses and
Changes of the Moon; but we say Astronomy does challenge this as belonging to
it, etc. My answer is, that I say, (what ever he tells me others may or do
say) he cannot but know that those that say so are not versed therein, and are
ignorant.

And thirdly, says he, If any one urge that Astrology handles of the
Qualities and Effects of the Stars, we reply, that so does Astronomy, of their
Qualities, namely, of their light and color, and natural Philosophy of their
Effects, in watery, aerie, and fiery Meteors: as much as to say, Astrology is
no Science at all, but will give its property to another Study; if this be not
slanderous and malicious, let the weakest in the world judge: he might as well
then all this while have called it, Natural Philosophy, as Astrology. And then
he tells us, if we admit of the Title Alsted gives to Astrology, viz.
Astrologia planetaria, or Planetary Astrology, and of Doctor VVillets Titles,
viz. Astromancy and Genethliaca; then says he for conclusion by all observe,
that there is no place left for Astrology: by which he clearly renders himself
the most malicious of all wretches, to deny that Art, which above 298. of the
most wise of all Ages have studied and practiced (their names you shall have
hereafter in its place;) both before and since Christ's time; whose antiquity
may be derived from our first father Adam: maintained by Princes and Kings;
reverenced by that greatest of Worthies, Alexander the Great; and not condemned
by any of the Fathers; or the practice thereof prohibited by the Church,
farther then that they should not hereby be drawn from the study of Divinity,
as you shall see by and by. M. Homes me thinks being a wise man, should not
write against, (and that in such a zealous manner) a thing which is not in
rerum natura, or in posse, as in his first Section of his tenth Chapter, he
studies to make Astrology appear; to what purpose then are all his arguments
against Astrology, when he will not admit of any such thing in the world? what
does he write against then? and why does he so much condemn the students
thereof? Because he knows not the validity thereof; because he knows not the
rules and fundamentals thereof; because indeed he is altogether ignorant of the
same; and let him not be angry I plainly tell him so, (plain dealing is best
among friends) for if he did, he would have been so far from writing or
speaking against it, that he would have been more furious and hot with any one
should have condemned it. then I am with him. Railers are called Diabolical,
yea Devils. 1 Timothy 3.11. 2 Timothy 3.3. Tim. 2 3. as we showed before.


SURVEY. One would wonder to hear VV. Ramsey thus rail, and call the Doctor
diabolical, etc. when as the Doctor in his Treatise, gave no man's person the
least ill word. Therefore whether of the twain appears to be more diabolical,
let the Reader judge. And it is as great a wonder to see the Doctors Treatise
of Astrology so orderly digested into Sections, and William Ramsey to so leap
from the one to the other, as if he were confounded in his apprehension; or
else that he would fain rather coosen the Reader, then clear the controversy.
But to the matter.

To that marked with (A) we say, It is enough to make it a speech of truth, and
a true confutation of Astrology; that wheresoever the Scriptures mention
Astrology, there the Scriptures also disallow it: which they disallow in more
then six places of Scripture, or seven, as the Doctor has observed (if
William reckons right) although the Doctor reduced them all to seven heads.

To that at the letter (B) it is so weak a proof of a Scripture allowance of
Astrology, that it is not worthy the answering; only I am willing to make W.
Ramsey see it, if I can. For the Heavens declare the glory of God (as it is
presently there expounded) as they are Gods Handiwork. But the inference of
William; The Heavens declare Gods glory, therefore Astrology is lawful, is so
ridiculous as that with the bare naming of it, it is confuted. For THE LANGVAGE
OF THE STARS which William says, is in another place, I am sure is IN NO PLACE
OF CANONICAL SCRIPTVRE. For Williams Exposition on Psalm. 19.3. it must give
place to the Apostles, Romans 10.18. viz. of Preaching the Gospel, not of
Astrology. For the Pleiades in Job; they are answered after. The fighting of
the Stars against Sisera, Jud. 5.20. Junius expounds to be the Winds, Rains,
Hails, Tempests, etc. caused by the heavenly Bodies, to the discomfiting and
routing Sisera's Army (compare Josh. 10.11. Exodus 9.23.) which makes nothing
for Judicial Astrology. Thus with a touch it appears, that William Ramsey is
deceived in his conclusion to the said proofs, that one of them were enough to
convince, etc. For, nor one, nor all, nor an hundred such, are in any show
sufficient to convince a prudent man of the lawfulness of Judicial Astrology.
And therefore his hope (as he presently adds) that by them the Reader does
clearly see that the Doctors words were merely envious, etc. is Williams mere
dream.

To that of W. Ramsey marked with (C) and from thence to the end of this
Section, we need only say thus. That William is toyling at the Labor in vain,
to show the Doctor that the Moon is the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea; who knew it before ever William did, and it is granted by him in his
Demonologie, (if William will see) only he says, other Sciences show that,
without the help of Judicial Astrology.

And to that audaciousness of William Ramsey daring to say in the face of all
learned men (that shall see his Pamphlet) That those that say we know Eclipses,
and Changes of the Moon by Astronomy, A most gross bold untruth of W. R. about
the fundamentals of Astronomy.
as challenging that to belong to it, are NOT VERSED THEREIN, and are IGNORANT,
etc. I will only say, that it shows such ignorance, or worse in W. Ramsey, as
for civilities sake I will not call it by its true name. Does not famous
Keckerman in his System of Astronomy, as an integrall part of the body of
Astronomy handle the Eclipses of the Sun, in his Syst. Astron. lib. 1. cap. 13.
very largely? And does he not likewise of the Eclipses and Changes of the Moon,
in the same Book, 1. cap. 14. more largely? And does not the renowned
Astronomer Alsted do the same in his System of Astronomy, very largely;
VRANOSCOP. lib. 11. par. 2. cap. 5. cap. 12. cap. 13. cap. 14. with Diagrams,
Figures, Pictures to present them to the eye, as well as with Theorems to
present them to the ear? For how possibly can an Astronomer do his work, to
handle of the measures and motions of the Stars (which is of the definition,
and so of the essence of Astronomy) and not handle of the Eclipses and changed
postures and Aspects of the Planets, etc.

For W. Ramsey and others quoting of Sir Christopher Heyden, we shall after in
a more convenient place in our Survey, show all men that will peruse this
Survey, how they and Sir Christopher, are grossly mistaken.

I need add no more but the reprinting of the Doctors 1. Section of Astrology
word for word, as a full answer to the last part of this Section of W. R. from
(C) to the end; and it will clear and confirm any of the things by me spoken
before; which is to a syllable (if the Printer fail not) as it here follows.

A Repetition of Doctor Homes his SECTION I. Of the nature of Astrology in
some distinctions, descriptions, and observations.
IF I should distinguish of Astrology as Alsted does, calling it, Astrologia
Judiciaria, that is, Judicial Astrology, as Master Perkins, and Master Geree
call it; or should I distinguish as Doctor Willet, that this Art is partly
Theorical, partly Practical, and the practical is partly allowed, and partly
rejected; as if hereby we would separate and set apart for lawful use, the
name and thing of any kind of Astrology; it is of our indulgence, and more then
we need to do. For keeping to our terms, either first to the term Astrology; it
is no where allowed in the Scripture, under that notion, but every where spoken
against, as we shall see afterward. As other things that are natural, which
are brought to countenance Astrology, are not tolerated by the Encyclopaediae,
and general order, and seats of all Arts and Sciences, within their own
spears, to be accounted Astrology.

For instance; first, some urge that we know the Tides of the Sea by the state
of the Moon; and tempests by other Stars, etc. But these, and of the like
nature, say we, are properly handled in that part of natural Philosophy which
we call Meteorology; as also are all fiery Meteors, Comets, etc. of all which
the essential internal causes, matter and form, and one external, namely the
end, belong thereunto, are there handled, and thereby are made an integral part
of Physics. For if you will say, because of their external efficient cause,
viz. the Stars, they are to be handled as a part of Astrology: by the same
reason there will be left no such Science as natural Philosophy, because all
inferior bodies below the Moon (as says the great Philosopher Aristotle)
depend upon the superior Celestial bodies of the Heavens.

Secondly, Others say, that by Astrology we know Eclipses, and changes of the
Moon: But say we, Astronomy does challenge this, whose proper work is to teach
us the Spears, Planets, and nominated fixed Stars, with their motions,
measures, distances, conjunctions and oppositions; whence arise Eclipses of the
Sun, or Stars, and changes of the Moon. I give but a touch upon some
particulars, as an hint to understanding men to conceive of the rest. Thirdly,
If any urge that Astrology handles of the qualities and effects of the Stars:
We reply, that so does Astronomy of their qualities; namely, of their light and
color; and natural Philosophy of their effects in watery, aerie, and fiery
Meteors.

Or secondly, if we admit of another term, or title which Alsted gives to
Astrology, calling it, Astrologiae Planetaria, i. e. Planetary Astrology; then
we demand what becomes of almost all the System of pretended Astrology, if its
ground work be founded mainly on the Planets, the main part of Astronomy? What
then becomes of the notions about the tenth Orb, the twelve houses of the
Heavens, the twelve Signs, with hundreds more of such kind of knacks wherewith
they are wont to build up Astrology?

Or thirdly, If we entertain those other terms and titles that Alsted, and
Doctor Willet, etc. give to Astrology, calling it (...), Astromancy, and
Genethliaca, that is, The calculatrix of Nativities, or Magic; all these are
disgraceful terms; and so unusefull to insinuate a lawful Astrology. By all
observe, that there is no place left for Astrology; but it is as mere a
fantasy as Palmestry.

W.R. his SECT. III. Proving Astrology to be an Art.
ARistotle, lib. 2. cap. 2. Phys. affirms that Astrology is Scientiamedia, a
Science between the Mathematics and natural Philosophy, for the Principles are
merely Mathematical, and in practice are applied to sensible matter as the
Physical subject thereof: moreover he ranks it also amongst the Liberal
Sciences; and annexeth it to Philosophy in such a sort, that he seems
indifferent to use the name of a Philosopher and an Astrologer for the same. So
likewise Averroes in his Commentary on the 12. of the Metaphysics, text 44.
speaking concerning the power of the heavenly bodies, in the procreation and
conservation of all worldly things, and in their mutual consent, and assisting
one another in their mutual operations, he resembles them to good Governors
in a Commonwealth, that jointly concur in one unanimous consent for ordering
the same: His words are, Dispositio in juvamento corporum coelestium ad invicem
in creando entia, quae sunt hic, and conservando ea, est sicut dispositio
regentium bonorum, qui juvant se adinvicem in regendo bonam eivitatem. And in
his Commentary on the second Book of Physics, his second Chapter, shows that
natural Philosophy and Astrology have one and the same subject, and yet are
distinguished by a diverse consideration. And in the third of the Metaph.
Comment. 7. he affirms the knowledge of the Stars to be a Mathematical Art;
and so it has ever in all ages by the most learned Philosophers been esteemed.
I believe M. Homes nor no man else that knows any thing, will deny that it is
one of the Liberal Sciences, and if he will condemn it as none, he must be
content to lose one of them, which were to render himself the eighth wise man;
what Science I pray will he place in the room of it, since he thus endeavors
to excommunicate it, for he tells us it is as mere a fancy as Palmestry? and
yet Galen (one of his learned that he brings to condemn Astrology with the word
Sophisticum, that it is Sophistical, page. 115. l. 11.) as Physicians
themselves report, teaches to know the temperature of the body by the palm of
the hand; and his reason is, because the mind commonly follows the
constitution of the body; thus you may see how he carpeth and catches at any
thing that he thinks will make in the least, for his turn; as also of Alsted's
and Doctor VVillets Titles of Astrology; when the question is, whether either
of them knew the common rules of the Art.

SURVEY. This borrowed Axe borrowed of Sir Christopher is dull: it is most true,
that that of Astrology which has any truth of BEING, is a Science not an Art;
but is to be referred to other Sciences, and to be called by their name,
according to the matter handled; as has been often cleared in the Doctors
Demonology. And if it be a Science, how then can it be an Art? The learned know
they are Species logically opposite. Let William therefore learn it, before he
believe this gross non-sequitur to be good viz. It Is a Science, ergo it is an
Art. And if Aristotle does say (for I can believe William in nothing but what
I see, we have found him so often tardy in notorious untruths) that Astrology
is Scientia Media, and William will (as he does) expound it, to be A Science
between the Mathematics and Natural Philosophy; Sect. (...)
how then does William Ramsey agree with himself before, where he will have
Astronomy and Astrology to be all one? For all liberal Artists do know that
Astronomy is of the pure Mathematics. But William consents that Astrology is
a Middle thing between the Mathematics and Natural Philosophy. But in this
William goes on as he began to TELL UNTRUTHS; for there are no such words in
Arist. Phys. lib. 2. cap. 2. in three several editions in Greek and Latin,
which I carefully read over; and some of them twice over. But this I got and
William has lost by it, in my reading that Chapter. viz. (...) (says Arist.
ibid.) (...) (alii (...) Sed omnes interpretes ^trovis modo legentes, reddunt
Mathematicarum scientiarum vel. facul^atum.
) (...). i. e. those mathematical disciplines or Sciences that are more the
Physics, or nearer to Natural Philosophy are the Optics, Music, and
Astrology. Let W. Ram. therefore cease his anger against the Doctor, for
saying Astrology viz. that which can be owned, viz. natural, is in many
respects to be referred to Physics, and to be called proportionably by the
name of some parts of it, as Meteorology, etc.

That which W. R. affirms out of Averroes on the twelfth of Metaph. is nothing
to Williams purpose. Nor that on the second of Physics; but rather against,
viz. for us touching the oneness of Physics and allowable Astrology; more
justly therefore called Natural Astrology, if it must have any thing of the
word Astrology in its name. For as for the Judicial, it is in the corrupt
fantasy of men and devils (according to the Scripture) rather then in nature.
Nor is that on the 3. of Metaphys. to Williams purpose. We allow the knowledge
of the stars to be a Mathematical Art, or rather a Science; yet we allow not
Judicial Astrology to be a lawful Science. But do give that honor to
Astronomy.

But cui bono, to what purpose is all this waste of Williams words? For if all
were yielded that William speaks to prove Astrology to be a Science, yet does
it not infer that any Astrology is a distinct Science, much less Judicial
Astrology to be any thing at all in rerum natura.

From W. R. endeavor to justify Palmestry; by his confession he had received
it by a report from the Physicians that, Galen did teach to know the
temperature of the body by the palm of the hand, I infer 1. (as I before
suspected) that William borrows his best Feathers (that make any better show
then railing) from other Fowls. 2. That I feel VV. Ramsey's Pulse, that he
neither has read much his Master Galen, nor understands the meaning of such a
speech, as that it signifies no more but that by the Pulse, or by the heat,
dryness, coldness, or moisture of the Palms may be discerned the temper of the
Body, without Palmestries canting upon the Lines of the Hands.

Lastly, William Ramseys questioning Doctor VVillets and Doctor Alsteds
knowledge of the common Rules of Astrology, RENDERS HIM SO IGNORANT NOW, IN MY
EYES, THAT I BEGIN TO REPENT I HAVE GONE SO FAR IN ANSWERING SO WORTHLESS A
MAN, WHO KNOWS NOT THAT WHICH ALL INDIFFERENTLY LEARNED MEN DO KNOW, viz. that
Doctor Willet in his learned Questions on the Pentateuch, and Daniel,
touching Astrology, and Doctor Alsted in his learned Encyclopaedia of 27 Arts
and Sciences, and particularly his System of Astrology do manifest to the
World, that they were not ignorant of the utmost of Astrology.

W. R. his SECT. IV. Proving the lawfulness of Astrology, being not impugned
by the Scripture, nor Councils; but allowed of by the wisest and greatest men.
What has already above been said, is clear to any judicious impartial eye,
that this Art is lawful, where I say, The Heavens declare the Glory of God,
etc. But to clear it more plainly, the Psalmist in his very next words says,
The Firmament shows the works of his hands, Psalm. 19.1. which is clear to me
is meant thereby that he effects by them, (and no other thing) (though I must
confess there are diverse interpretations thereof) my reason is, that otherwise,
every thing which is created does declare the handy work of God; I believe
Master Homes will find Aquinas and Hierome of my opinion: He has heard also,
that there is no speech nor sanguage, where the voice of the Stars are not
heard, Psalm. 19.3. which may serve here again very well for the purpose in
hand; and to speak more plainly, that God does not prohibit mortals from the
study of them; you may see how the holy Ghost by Stephen, in the 7. of the
Acts, verse. 22. speaking in the commendation of Moses, gives him (over and
above the commendation that was aforesaid) that he was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds, which is clear to
any rational man, that if it had been any wise sinful, diabolical, or odious
in the sight of God, Moses would not have applied his study thereunto; or at
least, it would never have been recorded in his praise. I might instance here
Daniel, Solomon, and others, but this is so clear, that to insist longer
hereon, were but vain, since there is no one place in the Scripture that can be
shown to speak positively against Astrology, or the study thereof, more then to
remember us not to give the glory of the Creator to the Creature, etc. as in
the answer to his divine proofs shall appear. Wherefore then since it is
warrantable and lawful out of the Scripture to study this Art, nay and as we
see by experience, warranted by God, in the showing of blazing Stars to
Astrologers only (not to the vulgar and proficient in other Arts) to forewarn
the people of the danger and punishment to come; and if it were not so he might
as well show signs on earth to the illiterate, by common vulgar things; as in
heaven to the learned Astrologer, who only can judge of the effects. Wherefore
then I say, of necessity the Art must be allowed of by Councils, being the
wiser sort of people, especially by the godlier sort of Councils, whose acts
and determinations will be grounded on piety and the Word of God, and if
otherwise; I value not what their censure is; for they are but men and (guided
by their own reasons and opinions) are but frail subject to infirmity and
error, Humanum est errare. He cannot but know also that even the palpablest
truths have been condemned by Councils, either for some self-interest, or for
abuse of the thing condemned; as for instance, the Bacaran Councils (as well as
the Roman Senate) has condemned Astrologers, but how? not because they were
Students in that heavenly Science, but for trusting in Astrology; (and who is
so superstitious, may not lawfully be termed an Astrologer, for Astrologers are
in no sort hereof guilty) the words of the Council is in the Cap. 9. of Bacaran
Councils, Si quis animas, and corpora humana fatalibus stellis credit
adstringi, sicut pagani and Priscillianus dixerunt, anathema sit, Who so
trusts in the fatal necessity of the Stars, as the Heathens and
Priscillianists do or say, let him be accursed. To al which, there is no
Astrologer, but will willingly condescend; for by this, is not Astrology nor
Astrologers in the least condemned, but the abuse of the Art, to give that to
it, which properly belongs to God the Creator of these heavenly bodies; the
decree is against those that trust in them, or believe a fatal necessity, not
that study the knowledge of them, and make a true use of them. So likewise the
Council or Parliament in England, made a Law against those that multiplied Gold
and Silver, why? not because they condemned that heavenly revelation, or
practice of the most blessed Stone of the Philosophers, but they forbad the
multiplication of Gold and Silver, in that they thought it too great a treasure
for any private subject, and to prevent rebellion, commotions and insurrections
in the Commonwealth, like wise Pilots sitting at the Stern, did study to
prevent the Storm which was likely otherwise to shipwreck the safety thereof.
So that I say then, there is no Council, (if they have any spark of Religion,
Learning or Policy) that will show themselves so ridiculous, as to decree any
thing in the least, against either Astrologers or Astrology, taking it as it is
in it self, and not abused; which is not the fault in the Art, but the Artist
in going beyond the Art; for if under the color of Astrology, I study
Necromancy, is Astrology therefore to be condemned as unlawful, because
together with it I study unlawful Arts? No sure, since this is a thing so far
different; therefore it is good to put the Saddle on the right Horse.

And this my argument is thus confimed, for that in former ages, both the
greatest and wisest sort of people were Practitioners and Students in
Astrology; as first we may see by the Egyptians, amongst whom it was not
lawful for any man to take the function of Priesthood on him, except he were
an Astrologer; nor could any be chosen King, except he were of the College of
Priests. And Rhodiginus reports that for the prevention of Treason, there was
none born within that Kingdom, whose Nativity was not brought to the King to be
judged on. And Dion records the same to be practiced by Tiberius; and we see
in Daniel, that the Monarchs of Babylon attempted nothing of importance,
without first asking counsel of the Chaldeans. And the Kings of Lacedaemonia
had none in their Councils neither were any suffered to sit, but who were
Astrologers: and also among the Persians, none was admitted to the Crown, but
who were excellently skilled in Astrology; nay, to this day there is no King
but has his Mathematician about him. So then, it is cleared, that there is no
Council but what is ignorant of Art and Religion, that will condemn or decree
any thing against Astrology, and how it has been esteemed amongst the wisest
and greatest of the people. And that ye may be the better confirmed in what
has been already said; I will give the names of most of the chiefest
Patriarks, Fathers, Kings, Emperors, and Philosophers, (according as that
worthy and noble Sir Christopher Heyden sets them down at the latter end of his
Book, in defense of Judicial Astrology) that have been Students in this noble
Art.

ASTRONOMERS and ASTROLOGERS from ADAM. 1 Adam, 2 Seth, 3 Enoch, 4 Kenan, 5
Mahalaleel, 6 Jared, 7 Henoch, etc. In all about 200.

SURVEY. 1. The Title of this Section does extremely cheat the Reader, whiles
he believes to find W. R. discourse following it, to make it good; which it
does no more do, then Chalk proves Cheese to be Cheese.

To his vain repetition, abusing the sacred Word of God in Psalm. 19. has been
spoken before; only William adds a confutation of himself; that all the
Creation show the handiwork of God. And therefore by Williams own consequence,
all the World should be the proper subject but of one Discipline, viz. of
Astrology.

His BELIEF that Aquinas and Hierome is of his opinion. 1. Begets in me a
belief of a report that was brought to me by a godly Scholar that has some
acquaintance with some of Williams way, but upon another account, THAT William
was helped by some of his Brethren or their Teachers in his Christian
(unchristian-like) Astrology. 2. Begets a belief in me that William cannot tell
where, or what, either Aquinas or Hierome speaks for Judicial Astrology. For W.
R. affirms nothing, quotes nothing, either of the place, or their words. The
Doctor has not so dealt with W. R. and his Brethren. 3. That William mistook
his information, or his informers mistook. For Aquinas has nothing at all, and
Hierome says nothing for Astrology, upon the Psalms. But this I can assure
Will. Ram. that Aquinas in his Sums has much against Astrology. And it were
just to bid him and his Prompters go look it, because they deal so unfairly
with the Doctor, and jugglingly with the Reader, either in non-quoting, or in
quoting Non-ens. But to clear mine integrity to the Reader; it is in Aquinas 2
a. 2 ae. Qu. 95. where Aquinas putting the Question whether the divination that
is made by the Stars be unlawful? 1. He says, SED CONTRAEST, quod
Augustinus, etc. That is, That of Austin is against the lawfulness of
Divination by Stars; Illos Planetarios quos Mathematicos vocant, consulere non
desidebam; and quod tamen Christiana, and vera pietas expellit, and damnat.
In 4. Confess. I did not (says Austin) desist consulting with the
PLANETARIES, whom they call MATHEMATICIANS, etc. which thing nevertheless
Christian, and true piety expels, Conclusio. Contingentium, and casualium
per certitudinem divinatio superstitiosa and illicica est.
and condemns. 2. Aquinas his CONCLUSION is, To divine by the disposition of
heavenly bodies, as by a certainty, touching contingent and casual things is
superstitious, and unlawful, etc. 3. In his RESPONDEO Respondeo, dicendum quod
sicut dictum est, divinationi quae ex opinione falls and vana procedit, ingerit
properatio; daemonis, ut hominum animos implicet vanitati, aut falfitati. Vana
autem aut falsa opinione utitur, si quis ex consideratione stellarum, futura
velit praecognoicere, quae per cas praecognosci non possunt. Pst ergo
considerandum, quid per coelestium corporum inspectionem de futuris possunt
pracognosci. Et de his quidem quae ex necessitate eveniunt, manisellum est quod
per confider: tionem si ellarum possunt praecognosci, sicut Astrologi
praenanciant Eclipses futuras. Non possent dispositiones and motus corporum
coelestium reduci in unam causam communem quae sit corporali, Possunt autem
reduci in unam causam communem quae est providentia divina. Sed alia ratione
disponuntur ^ divina providentia mo^us and situs coelestium corporum, and alia
ratione eventus contingentium futurorum; quia illa disponuntur s^cum^um
rationem necessitatis, ut semper and co^em modo proveniant; h^^c autem secundum
rationem contingentiae, ut variabiliter contingant. Unde non potest esse, quod
ex inspectione syderum accipiatur praecognitio futurorum, nisi sinut ex causis
praecognoscuntur effectur. Duplices autem effectus subtrahuntur causalitati
coelestium corporum. 1. quidem omnes effectus per accidens contingentes, sive
in rebus humanis, sive in rebus naturalibus. Quia, ut probatur 6. Metaphens per
accidens non habet causam, and praecipue natualem, cujusmodi est vi^tus
coelestium corporum. Quia quod per accidens fit, neque est ens proprie, neque
unum, sieut quod lapide cadente fiat Terraemotus. Haec enim, and hujusmodi non
sunt simpliciter unum, sed simpliciter multa. Operatio autem naturae semper
terminatur ad aliquid unum, sicut and procedit ab uno principio, quod est forma
rei naturalis. 2. Autem subtrahuntur causalitati coelestium corporum actus
liberi arbitrii, quod est facultas voluntatis and rationis. Intellectus enim
sive ratio, non est corpus, nee actus corporis organici, and per consequens,
nec voluntas quae est in ratione, (...) patet per Philosophum in 3. de anim.
Nullum autem corpus potest imprimere in iem incorpoream. Unde impossible est,
quod corpora coelestia di^ecte imprimant in intellectum and voluntatem. Hoc
enim esset ponere intellectum non differ a sensu. Unde corpora coelestia non
possunt esse per se, causa operationum liberi arbitrii, possunt tamen ad hoc
dispositive inclinare in quamum imprimunt in corpus humanum, and per
consequens, in vires sensitivas, quae sunt actus corporalium organorum, quae
inclinant ad humanos actus. Quia tamen vires sensitivae obediunt rationi, ut
pater per Philosophum 3. de Anim. and 1. Ethic. nulla necessipas ex hoc, libero
arbitrio imponitur, sed contra inclinationem coelestium corporum homo potest
per rationem operati Si quis ergo CONSIDERATIONE ASTRONUM UTATUR AD
PRAECOGNOSCENDOS FUTUROS CASURALES, VEL FORTUITOS EVENTUS, AUT ETIAM AD
COGNOSCENDUM PER CERTITUDIMEM FUTURA O^ERA HOMINUM, procedit hoc ex falsa and
vana opinione. ET SIC OPERATIO DAE MONIS SE IMMISCET. Unde erit divinatio
SUPERSTITIOSA and illicita.
upon that Conclusion he enlarges much against Judicial Astrology; the sum
whereof (to give it you in his own words) is this. DICENDVM quod etc. i. e. We
must say, (says Aquinas) as has been said before (Art. 1.2.) the operation of
the Devil does pour in it self into that divination which proceeds from a false
and vain opinion, to the end that he may inwrap the minds of men in vanity or
falsehood. And if any man will foreknow future things by the consideration of
the Stars, which by them cannot be fore known, he is the man that follows a
vain, and false opinion. Therefore we must consider, what of future things may
be fore-known by inspection into the Stars. And indeed as concerning those
things which come to pass by necessity, it is manifest that they may be
fore-known by consideration of the Stars; as Astrologers do foretell Eclipses.
The dispositions and motions of the heavenly Bodies, cannot be reduced unto one
common cause which is natural; but may be reduced unto one common cause, which
is divine providence. But the motions and situations of the heavenly bodies are
by divine providence disposed one way, and the events of future contingencies
another; because, the former are disposed according to the manner of necessity,
that they always come to pass, and after the same manner. But the later, after
the way of contingency, that they happen variously. From whence it cannot be,
that the foreknowledge of future things can be taken by inspection into the
Stars, otherwise then as effects are fore-known by their causes. Now there are
two sorts of effects that are exempted from the efficacy of the celestial
bodies. 1. All effects that happen by accident, whether in humane, or natural
things: because as it is proved in the sixth of Metaphysics, an entity by
accident has no cause, especially natural, such as is the virtue of heavenly
bodies. Because that which is by accident is neither an entity properly, nor an
oneness; as for example, whiles a stone is falling there is an Earthquake, etc.
For these and the like things are not simply one, but absolutely many. Now the
operation of Nature is always terminated unto some one thing, even as it does
flow from one principle, which is the natural form of the thing. 2. The acts of
free will (which is a faculty of the will and reason) are exempted from the
efficacy of the heavenly bodies. For the intellect, or reason is neither a
body, nor the act of a corporeal organ, and by consequence, neither is the
will, which is within the reason; as appears by the Philosopher in his third
Book of the soul. Now no bodily thing can make an impression upon an
incorporeal thing, Whence it follows, that IT IS IMPOSSIBLE THAT THE HEAVENLY
BODIES CAN DIRECTLY MAKE AN IMPRESS UPON THE UNDERSTANDING AND THE WILL. For
this were to make the understanding not to differ from sense. From whence it
follows, that the heavenly bodies cannot be a cause per se of the actings of
free will, yet may they disposingly incline to this, so far as they impress
upon man's body, and by consequence, upon the sensitive powers, which are acts
of the corporal organs, which incline to humane acts. Yet because THE SENSITIVE
POWERS ARE OBEDIENT TO REASON (as appears by the Philosopher in his 3. book of
the soul, and in his 1. book of Manners) NO NECESSITY HEREBY IS IMPOSED UPON
THE SPONTANEOUS WILL, BUT A MAN CAN ACT CONTRARY TO THE INCLINATION OF THE
CELESTIAL BODIES, BY THE POWER OF HIS REASON. Therefore, IF ANY MAN shall make
use of the CONSIDERATION OF THE STARS to foreknow CASUAL, or CONTINGENT
EVENTS, or also to know with certainty the FUTURE WORKS OF MEN, this proceeds
from a false and vain opinion, and so the OPERATION OF THE DEVIL INTERMINGLES
IT SELF, from whence the divination is SUPERSTITIOUS AND UNLAWFUL. Thus far
Aquinas; on whom commenting we have learned, and profound Cajetan to boot. Et
ex his patet (says Cajetan) quomodo intelligendum est, etc. that is, By these
it is apparent, how we must understand that celestial bodies are not
overruling our elections or free chusings, and voluntary acts, and how the
consultation of Astrologers about the Nativities of men, etc. are condemned.
For if these things be applied for a certainty of knowledge of contingencies;
or (which is the same thing) if we must use such a figure of the Nativity, etc.
as a law, they are diabolical and condemned. And this Austin intends in his
fourth book of his Confessions. But if they be only to attain a conjecture of
natural inclinations, they are not evil. With all know, that albeit some truth
may be had out of those things, yet THE WAY OR MANNER OF THE CONJECTURE IS SO
WEAK THAT IT IS SCARCELY A CONJECTURE. And this because of humane ignorance, of
the greatest of Causes, both Celestial and next Causes. For the whole of that
we know in these kind of the things, does not deserve to be called A Part (how
small soever) of those things we are ignorant of concerning the same as in
relation to us and still daily are so ignorant until the whole complete course
of heavenly bodies be once gone over. Because the Stars are unknown to us, how
they are one toward another, and their motion is not completed until six and
thirty thousand years be over. I say that daily there is a new situation of the
starry Heaven, which situation yet has never been considered, unto which the
Planets and Stars being referred, who can tell what causality they are clothed
with, or how they cause, change, or destroy. I mention not the Calculation of
Motions, because perhaps it is impossible to have Instruments exactly to know
the rising and setting of Stars, as I hear it from the Astrologers themselves.

As for W. R. alleging Moses and Daniel, he deserves rather a Ferula, then an
answer, because the Doctor has fully answered that those Saints were not
judiciary Astrologers; so that William could not here give us any solid reply.

William Ramsey's proof in this Section, that Judiciary Astrology is not
condemned by the Word of God, is only his passing his Word for it, which is
worth nothing, for how unable he is to keep his Word will appear after. His
alleging that God shows Blazing Stars only to Astrologers is a gross
untruth, confuted by thousands of the vulgar yet alive in England, who saw the
Blazing Starr many nights, that appeared before the Swedish Wars in Germany.
For what hinders, but Shepherds, Sailers, Watchmen, etc. illiterates should
perceive that which is obvious to the common eyes of mankind; and distinguish
a Comet from a Starr by his nearness, motion, and his feather or long tail.

And just as William proves here Judicial Astrology not to be condemned by the
Word of God; just so (and no wiselier) does he prove it not impugned by
Councils; namely by bare facing it down with a bold forehead (whiles that
Councils to the contrary are in his sight) that of necessity the Art must be
allowed by Councils, yet in the same place professes his contempt of Councils,
if they be not of his mind. Is this Williams proof of the lawfulness of
Astrology by Councils? To one of those Councils alleged by the Doctor (for
he alleged two in his Demonology, and might have done more) Will. can say
nothing. To the other he hoped he could; W. Ram. is shamefully out in his
LATIN. See before in this Section at *
but has miserably disgraced himself in not construing a plain piece of Latin
right. For the words of the Council, as Will. Ram. reports them, Si quis
animas, and corpora humana fatal, bus stellis credit adstringi, sicut Pagani,
and Priscillianus dixerunt, Anathema sit; are according to true Grammar, thus
to be rendered; If any one does believe the Souls and Bodies of Men to be bound
to, or necessitated by fatal Stars, as the Pagans and the Priscill^anists do
let him be accursed. So that if you compare Will. Ram. interpretation with
this, which is close according to the Latin, you shall find that he did not
only leave out something, because it might prejudice him; but (which is the
thing I mainly insist upon) he does interpret the Latin most falsely in the
main thing; which condemns any with Anathema, that shall believe that the
Stars have a necessitating power over men's Bodies and Souls; which in plain
English is, to believe the Astrologers to say true, who in their practice, so
teach, and by that undertake to predict humane events by their Judicial
Astrology.

For the Philosophers Stone, he has little cause to call it Blessed, seeing
the attempts about it have undone Will. Ramseys father, Testis M. Roll.
Minister.
who lies in Prison by it. Though the late King bore with his father defeating
him of his expectation, and of scores of pounds, yet other men will not, cannot
bear such wrongs. Nor has Will. Ram. so blessed himself with his father skill,
and the Philosophers Stone, as to enrich themselves, and deliver him.

To his large alleging the honor and antiquity of Astrology, a brief answer
will serve; viz. 1. That till Will. Ramsey or his associates do produce some
true Christians, whiles such, to have been practisers of Judicial Astrology,
all his instances amount but to the Proverb, Ask my Fellows whether I be a
Thief: or to a self contradiction. For the Astrologers W. R. W.L. etc. when
they see their advantage, inveigh against godly and learned Ministers, with the
name of Priests; and H.H. Vox coelorum, in the behalf of Astrology says, the
Roman Laws against Mathematicians and Prognosticatours did mean Chaldeans, and
yet now the Priests and the Chaldeans must be alleged for the honor of
Judicial Astrology.

2. If Will. Ramsey does not here intend a difference between Astronomers and
Astrologers (contrary to his Tenet before) in that he puts both names in the
Title to his Catalogue; yet he thinks learned men may put that difference; so
that if any of them should whip him for his false Scrowl, proving many of them
no Astrologers; yet they may be found Astronomers.

3. W. Ram. Catalogue of them from Adam, etc. is ridiculous. We have no such
thing in the Bible; and therefore can know no such thing. For Greek Homer the
Poet is the ancientest humane Author that is extant. The man flourished about
911. years before Christ. The only Author pretended, of the greatest
antiquity, viz. concerning things so ancient as the beginning of the Empire of
Babylon, and of Ninus the first Emperor thereof, is one Berosus; of whose
writings (says learned Sleidan) almost all men make a doubt, and think them
counterfeit. The most judicious and true Chronologer, leaves out Berosus.
Helvicus puts him in ad annum Mundi 3690. Lib. 7. cap. 37.
which is but about 281. years before Christ, which is but yesterday in
comparison of Adam, Seth, Enoch. Pliny says, this Berosus was an Astrologer.
And of the true, and forged Berosus learned Gesner in his Bibliotheck writes
thus, There are extant in our age five Books of Aniquities, ascribed to
Berosus, but all the more learned judge they are not of Berosus, but feigned by
I know not what Fabler, and set forth in Berosus his name. To this famous
Pezelius on Sleidan adds. Josephus (says he) cites the Histories of Berosus,
l. 1. con. App. and Athenaeus l. 14. The genuine Berosus perished. There
remains the Fictions of Annius Viterbiensis a Monk; neither are the fragments
of Metasthen and Manethon of a better metal.

W.R. his SECT. V. Demonstrating the antiquity of Astrology.
WE have seen already how Astrology has been proved lawful by the Scripture
and reason, not condemned by Councils, but admired and honored in all ages, by
the wisest of the ancients; we come now to show its antiquity, and from whence
it had its first original: Concerning this point, there has been much
controversy amongst Writers, but most hold, that it was first revealed to man
in the infancy of the World by God; Aristotle deriveth it from the Egyptians,
Tully from the Assyrians, others from the Sidonians, Chaldeans, Persians,
Indians, Arabians, and Greeks; but however it is most certain, if we will
believe the ancientest Historiographers, that the Priests and Kings amongst the
Egyptians, the Chaldeans among the Babylonians, the Magicians among the
Persians, the Gymnosophists among the Indians, the chief Philosophers of Greece
and Italy, and the Druides of France were all Astrologers, and esteemed by
those Nations for the wisest men. But Josephus in his Antiquities, lib. 1. cap.
2. deriveth it from Adam and Seth: and that they taught it to their posterity,
and that Seth was so well skilled therein, that foreseeing thereby the
destruction of the World, first by Water, then by Fire, least the knowledge
should perish by the Flood, engraved it in two Pillars, the one of Stone, the
other of Brick; and he farther witnesses that of Stone to remain in Syria in
his own time; and in the 3. Chapter of the same Book, he affirms, that man
lived so long before the Flood (by the permission of God) to learn Arts and
Sciences, especially naming Astrology and Geometry, the which (says he)
Ediscere non potuissent, nisi sexcentis viverent annis, could not be learned
under six hundred years time, for these are Studies that require much
experience, and particular observation, which could not be done on an instant.
Again in his eighth Chapter of the same first Book of his Antiquities, he
further affirms, that Abraham having learned this knowledge in Chaldea being
the place of his birth, when he came into Egypt, he first taught the Egyptians
the knowledge of Astrology and Arithmetic and since the Egyptians have been
most exquisite therein, so that some Historians have believed Atlas King of
Egypt to be the first inventer thereof, others have thought Henoch and Atlas to
be both one, but most Historiographers hold Atlas to be after the Flood. And
that Astrology is derived from Adam.

SURVEY. Antiqui^as sine retitate est vetustas erroris.
Were it not that the Reader might suspect my leaping over something that were
considerable, I would have left out this Section, it being a vain Tautology. We
have already answered to the antiquity of Astrology; and in particular to
Josephus. The Fathers rule is excellent, Antiquity without verity is the
ancientness of Error. All that are here reckoned up to countenance Astrology
were either the worst of men, viz. Heathens, or diabolical Magicians, or
Idolaters; or both, or all (as were the Druides, whom some ancient Authors
call Magos, others idolalatras) or the most uncertain, if not the foolishest of
Traditions (as that of the two Pillars) of which Josephus has store, and
therefore not to be regarded in what he says of such ancient times of Abraham,
as we have given sufficient reason in the Survey of the former Section; or
self-contradictions; as that a man could not learn Astrology under six hundred
years, yet now William, and William, and I know not who will pretend great
skill in it at half sixty: or Ridicles; For naming Adam to be an Astrologer he
might well think, the Reader would judge if he was an Astrologer he was so
after the Devil had given him the fall; and if there were a derivation of
Astrology from him as such, it was in the traduction of sin. For conclusion of
this Section; let me deal truly, seriously, and plainly with William, that it
is brought to me by good hands from his own Brethren in Astrology that they set
him on work, because he was one of the silly mean ones among them, thereby to
disgrace the Doctor. But I will say what others say, that William has but
blown upon the Question. Demonology stands like a Castle of Steel. The
Astrologers have laid their heads, and prompted Will. Ram. but nothing is done
but the disgracing of their own cause.

W.R. his SECT. VI. That Astrology is the most profitable Study reveated under
the Sun to mortals.
WHich I shall endeavor to make clear thus; first, that it is most profitable
for the knowledge of Moral Philosophy, viz. of our selves and others. Secondly,
for Natural Philosophy. Thirdly, for Physic. Fourthly, for Health. Fifthly,
for Husbandry. Sixthly, for giving a reason for Climacterical years (which
other Arts cannot) and other things. Seventhly, and lastly, for Military
Discipline.

First, that it is most profitable for the knowledge of Moral Philosophy, M.
Homes will not deny (if he know any thing in the Art,) that the constitution of
the body, and the disposition of the mind is by Astrology known; so that
hereby we receive a double benefit, viz. First, admonition to refrain what may
prove noxious and hurtful to our health. Secondly, encouragement to apply our
selves to that whereunto we are born apt by nature; besides we may also be
warned hereby of what may cause the mind by ill government to offend others.
And for felicity the chief end of Moral Philosophy; no Art or Science can
compare with Astrology, for it teaches a man what pertains to the goods of the
body and mind, and so also to moderate the unruly affections, whose violence
carries away the mind from that golden mean wherein virtue dwells and keeps
her place; so likewise in the external goods, it resolves a man what hopes or
likelihood by his own industry, or otherwise he has to attain to the riches of
this world; and also teaches him how to increase the same, by what means, at
what time, and in what place it will be best for him, or most profitable to this
intent or purpose. So that then ye see Astrology to comprehend more in one
part, then all the Arts in the World put together, in any or all parts.

Secondly, for Natural Philosophy, it brings no less help hereunto, then to
the former, for hereby the Philosopher comes to know God the upholder, and
immovable Greatour of all things, by the constant inchangeable motion of the
Heavens; and the corruption and generation of all things, by the motion of, and
other Planets in the Zodiac; and that there is a certain prefixed time of every
ones life that is born, allotted by the Stars, and that this is diverse
according to the nature of every Constellation, and the measure of every proper
revolution; as also the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, by the
motion of. He comes also by Astrology to know the rising of Meteors, the motion
of Comets, and innurnerable other things, much conducing to the furtherance of
his knowledge, experience, and skill. But this is so clear, I hasten to what is
further to be said in the praise and utility of Astrology, least I spend too
much time in confuting such weak stuff, as is this discourse of M. Homes,
against so apparent a noble and excellent Art.

Thirdly, for Physic; for all that knows any thing in Astrology, can acquaint
M. Homes, as also his great friend Galen (as most falsely he accuses him (in
his 115. page) to condemn Astrology as Sophistical, when indeed he himself
appears no other at the best, to wrong so worthy a man,) That he that shall
administer Physic when the Sun comes to the Equinoctial points, or in the
Canicular or Dog-dayes and the like, knows very little in the one or the other,
viz. Physic or Astrology; and is rather to be accounted a fool then a
Physician; and further, Galen admonishes men not to trust themselves with that
Physician that is not versed in Astrology; and Hippocates also says, that that
Physician which is ignorant in Astrology, is not fully, nor can he be perfectly
known in his Art; for without Astrology, he shall never be able to give Physic
safely, viz. when to purge by evacuation or vomit, or Phlebotomy, or for what
humors, or in what quantity, neither can he know or come to the understanding
of the chief Pillar of his Art, viz. the true cause of the Malady without it,
neither with it, (if well learned therein) can he err: Besides Galen further
affirms, that Physic given at unseasonable times, does not only little
avail or help, but oftentimes prove very hurtful, even to the endangering of
the life of the Patient; and that these times are only to be known and judged
by the Stars. Fernelius (a learned Physician) does hereunto also condescend,
as also Ficinus; for there is nothing more certain, then that Astrology does
plainly deliver Rules for all the parts of Physic abovesaid, (which M. Homes I
am confident (if any whit read therein) dare not but confess) and not only so,
but also teaches the critical days, without which they cannot be known with
any certainty; wherefore it is, that those Physicians ignorant in Astrology,
conclude the seventh and fourteenth days to be dangerous, when most times they
are deceived, and so consequently apply contrary Remedies to their Patients,
much to their prejudice, if not absolute destruction: the reason is, the by her
various motion comes sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, to her and or
quadrat and opposite part of the place she was in at the beginning of the
Disease, viz. Sometimes she comes to her in seven days, sometimes not till the
eighth or ninth day, other times at the sixth day; and to her sometimes at the
fourteenth day, sometimes at the thirteenth, other times not till the sixteenth
day. I would fain now M. Homes, you would show what Art in the whole earth, is
more beneficial to Physic, then Astrology etc. but I hasten to the remaining
proofs.

Fourthly, for Health, which none but the most ignorant and malicious will
deny, since the constitution of the body is the only ground, wise Physicians
go upon, and look first to; that that foundation being laid, they may then fall
to the rebuilding of the Patient, otherwise (as you have heard) destruction
(like a house founded on the sand) is to be expected. Then consequently the
most envious cannot but confess and acknowledge it to be the most profitable
thing for our health under the Sun. Wherefore then let us see whether the
Husbandman will acknowledge it to be beneficial to him in the way of living,
viz. Husbandry.

Fifthly, Husbandry, and first let me ask him, whether he lops his Trees from
the time the Sun declines from our Horizon, till he again reenters the
equinoctial point? or if he knows not (if he should) that it will not grow
again? or whether he use to sow Pease in the increase of? or if so, whether
they will then ever leave blooming or blossoming? or whether therefore he does
not observe and remember to set them in the wain, or decrease of. Nay, it is
reported of the women in the North, both of England and Scotland, that they
diligently observe a time of the Moon to set their Eggs, that they may all
come to good; and furthermore, let me ask the Husbandman, whether he observes
not a time to graff, and prune his Trees? but this is so common, that to spend
more time hereunto were to no purpose.

Sixthly, for rendering a reason for Climacterical years, it happening by the
profection of the Planets and Horoscope, ascendant or first House (as ye may
call it) to the or aspects or their places in Nativities, or by the motion of
if he have power in the Nativity, for Ptolomy and the wisest in this Art, give
as much power in the decree of several years, as the Sun has in months, or
the in days; and if his course be observed, it will be found finished much
about the same number of years, as the Moons is in days; and further, that in
every seven years comes either to or of his place in the Radix of Nativities.
And further know, that if there be no danger (as we find by experience) of
some men's lives, at these years, they have either some of the beneficial
Planets in their eighth House, or the direction of the ascendant, or Aphetical
places are free from all impediment and affliction, of the interficient and
malignant Constellations.

Seventhly, and lastly, for Military Discipline, History is full of Examples
herein, and for brevities sake (because I will hasten to conclude this first
Chapter, that I may proceed to M. Homes his second Section) I will here content
my self with this one, which the Indian Histories show forth unto us; which is,
that Columbus having the Art of Astrology, and being in a straight for want of
Victual, together with the whole Army of the King of Spain, Ferdinand; and
foreseeing an Eclipse of the within few days to happen; threatened the Indians
he would send infinite Plagues amongst them, if they speedily relieved them
not; in token whereof they should at such a time see the light taken from them,
which they at first slighted, but when they saw according to the former words,
that the Moon began to be darkened and grew so more and more, and being ignorant
of the cause thereof, did not only send them the Victual they formerly
retained from them, but also threw themselves at Columbus feet, asking
forgiveness: So then ye have had (as brief as may be) shown unto you, what
Astrology is, that it is an Art, and a lawful Art, allowed of by Scripture,
the antiquity of it, and the utility of it; there is it may be some Arts, that
may be beneficial or helpful to another; but you see both positively and
conclusively, that Astrology is generally helpful to all Arts and Sciences;
nay, what other Study in the whole World in this point is like it, or able to
compare with it?

SURVEY. Will. Ramsey in his Title might well have excepted Divinity and
Religion (if he has any) and have distinguished of Astrology. For sure the Art
pretending to tell that the Thieves that committed the Robbery about Brainsford
the last Summer, that such a way the woman's Cows were gone. That Mistress -- his
Sweetheart would prove a Shrew, with infinite the like (that may be produced
in time) do not at all conduce to Natural Philosophy, Physic, etc. which
William reckons up.

Its ill a sign by Will. Ramsey's manners that Astrology is profitable for
Morality (unless William will deny he has any Astrology.) And therefore nor
our Philosophers, nor Aristotle the Prince of them mixed any directions out of
Astrology, in their Moral Philosophy. As for the disposition of the mind
William assured us in his Epistle to the Reader. That the will of man is not
subject to the influence of the Stars. And learned Huet in his EXAM. INGEN.
tells us a readier way then by Stars. And of the body, we know the temper,
far better by experience of the effect, then by conjecturals from causes, if
Stars were any certain cause. But Will. Ramsey's Ptolomy in his first Book
tells us among other causes of the uncertainty of Astrologicall Predictions,
That though bodies are affected by the Stars, yet the seed of generation may
alter the case.

As for the predicting what hope a man may have, by his own industry, or
otherways to get goods, it does little tend to Moral Philosophy, and does less
appertain to Astrology, if William be an honest man of his word, in his
particulars he lays down in his Epistle to the Reader before enumerated of
Natural Philosophy, I have several times showed William, that the thing of
natural Astrology is a part; judicial, non-ens, or worse.

And without either, thousands of people that are no Astrologers, or
Philosophers excellently well know God to be the Creator and upholder of all
things; whiles Philosophers and Astrologers have turned Atheists, or worse,
Romans 1.

To say, the Stars alot every man's prefixed time of life, is to entrench upon
Gods Decree and Providence, and to avouch a fatal necessity in the influence of
the Stars; with which William promised us in his Epistle to the Reader his
Astrology should not meddle.

His great Preamble of the usefulness of Astrology for Physic amounts to thus
much upon experience;

1. That there are in this Nation many Christian learned and succesfull
Physicians, who are neither well-skill'd, nor well-will'd to VV.R. his
Astrology. If need be we can give him their names. 2. That the matter of Will.
Ramsey his Judicial Astrology being humane events; as whether a man shall be
rich, and, etc. as before he expressed, and his Brethrens writings and practice
do testify; the natural judgment upon men's bodies is quite hereto general
from it. 3. That thousands of English men, yea, the most of the common people,
that are no Physicians, do well know; yea, feel (without the help of Ramseyan
Astrology) that the Canicular days, etc. are not the best times for taking
Physic, unless upon great extremity; and therefore are no Fools.
His great clattering together of the names of Hippocrates, Galen, Fernelius,
and Ficinus, is but a Scar-crow to scare silly birds, I mean weak-headed Youths
from the truth, and a juggle to conjure them into his Circles by Charms they
cannot understand. For William (according to his manner of unfair dealing) does
neither quote their words, nor the place where they so speak, as he intimates.
And though we have hunted after him, and beat the thickets, yet we can find no
such thing.

But this we find.

1. That Hippocrates says of Astronomy, (nothing of Astrology) that it is not
altogether unusefull for the faculty of Physic. (...) (as his Dialect i^)
(...).
But how does he there make it out? Surely only thus; Because (says
Hippocrates) together with the times of the year, the ventricles of men receive
a change; and so goes on of the difference in health the variety of winds may
make. Now judge, understanding Reader, how little this makes for Judicial
Astrology.

2. Gallen the Commentary upon him (to omit the Sophisticum quoted by Alsted in
Astrology that does so much anger Will. Ramsey) says only this to that point,
Coelum in his verbis, etc. i. e. Hippocrates in these words does put Heaven as
the cause of all vulgar diseases: yet, De Ae^ere locis, and Aliquis. Sect. 3.
and differt; inquit Xenophon, (...): Galen in 1. l. Hip. de morbis vulgaribus.
says Gallen, (correcting his Master) sometimes the drinking of corrupt water
may cause an universal disease. And then goes on to discourse of the several
diseases that befall men in the four quarters of the years, distinguishing
those quarters by the rising and setting of several Stars or Constellations
proper to them. Which is all the hint we have in Gallen to the point in hand.
It Is true the Index puts high titles, and great emphasis on these places. But
you see here what the matter is upon true account.

3. It Is true, that Fernelius says, Purae simplicisque pestilentiae causa,
etc. i. e. The cause of the mere and simple Pestilence is the configutation of
the Heavens by their virtue. But withal he presently avoucheth, Quae neque
temporum mutatione, neque ulla manifesta qualitate, sed solo eventu deprehendi
potest. i.e. That that efficacy of the Heavens cannot be discerned, either by
the change of times, or by any manifest quality, but merely by the event.

4. Williams quoting of Ficinus was to him (to use an Astrological phrase for
their use, though not approved by me) most unlucky of all the rest. For he
though professing himself a Physician does bang Judicial Astrology all over his
vast works. I shall here give but a touch. In his book, in Plotin. cap. 2. the
title of the second Paragraph or Head is, That for many causes the judgment
concerning future things is most difficult. And then begins his discourse thus,
Quod autem nec homo, nec demon, etc. that is, that neither man nor devil is
able by the sole inspection of the Heavens to see the lesser matters accurre
among us, etc. which he there proves strongly by many reasons; too long for me
to epitomize in this intended brief Survey.

Now let the observant Reader judge what Will. Ram. has got by those names he
so rattled together. From them all not such a word as Astrology; much less
Judicial. Least of all any inference that if there be a consideration of the
Heavens for sickness, Physic, etc. that therefore they can tell me where is my
lost Cow; who was the Thief that robbed me.

By this, my soul loathes the silly weakness of the rest in this Section, and
shall kick it off for naught. By experience we all know any observable effect
of the Moon; as all men, Physicians, or others, are often enough deceived in
judging the Crisis merely by that Planet; by reason that the different natures
of the Patients, and various change of Winds and Weathers (to which
Hippocrates ascribes much) etc. do much alter the case. Hipp. lib. 3. Aphor. 5


And Will. Ramseys notion upon Health is to me nonens or non sense, as I have
touched before. For Husbandry, the Clownes can tell more then the Astrologer: as
presently he does intimately confess that he learned Henhouswifry of the
Northern women, not they from the Astrologer.

A very suitable observation, to usher in his Fable of the Climacterical years;
unless he mean that which we have by experience, that every seventh year a man
that observes shall find a great change in his body, in regard of diet, etc.
otherwise that Scripture assures us that every man by Gods decree has an
appointed time. And for conclusion William tells us a Tale of Columbus, etc.
which the Astronomer (without Astrology) can do; only, if he be honest, he
cannot tell a Lie to get Victuals, or Money. But the story and the practice is
tolerable enough in the opinion and practice of diverse Astrologers about
London, etc.

W.R. his CHAP. II.
I Am come now to Mr. Homes his second Section, wherein we shall see how he
vents his malice most invectively all along against Astrology, thinking he
brings the learned to condemn it; but what are the learned Schoolmen, or
great Philosophers to me, or their sayings in this matter, further then they
have truth and reason on their side? If they follow their own opinions and
conceits without sound reason and warrant, I see no warrant or reason why I
should regard either them, their words or quoters.

W.R. his SECT. I. Wherein is further shown the legality of Astrology,
HIs first learned man (then) he begins with is Tostatus, who he says in his
Commentary on Levit. 19. Quaest. 28.29 etc. has these words, the which Doctor
Willet g^ves him viz. Of things which are (as to us) accidental as the success
of business, or their causes internal, as men's will and free choice, as to
undertake a journey, or to build or not build; predictions are not only
uncertain but superstitious: and the same is to be said of casting of
Nativities by the conjunction of the Planets; But if he had considered what
reason or ground Tostatus has for these words, he had never thus laid them
open; and I much wonder he being a Divine, he had not first himself considered
and weighed the Text, which that he may now do, I will here set it down: Regard
not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards to be defiled
by them; I am the Lord your God. Levit. 19.31. Where we clearly see there is no
part of the Text, once in the least mentions or means Astrology; it is
against the seeking after those that have familiar Spirits and Wizards.

W. R. his SECT. II. Wherein is shown that the Stars are Signs and Causes.
HE then brings Doctor Willet in these words, All manner of conjecturing
(which says he is meant by Astrology) is not unlawful, whereof any Natural or
Divine cause can be yielded; as first there be Natural Signs in the Heavens
and Air, as of the alteration of weather, of winds, of rain, etc. This does no
whit hurt Astrology; mark but the words, all manner of conjecturing is not
unlawful, etc. and says M. Homes, see he calls it (meaning Astrology) but
conjecturing only; but does M. Homes conjecture it to be no other? if he do,
it is his ignorance. But let me not forget my self, and spend too much time
about him. It has been already shown, that the Stars have the applause of
power on the natural things of this world, as also the great Ptolomy (whose
word in this case I believe will be taken before Doctor Willets or M. Homes
his) gives his word for it; besides experience also as above showed; (and you
know Experientia docet:) there is no more to be said, but that Astrology is not
(as Doctor Willet says) unlawfnll; neither does he in any wise condemn it,
for in his following words he tells us, There are natural Signs in the Heavens
and Air, which cause rain, wind, etc. The cause of which, is no other then the
influence of the Stars, which if he deny, all Writers on this Art are
contracted, as also the Scripture to boot; if then this be not a strong
Argument, let himself judge.

But to clear this point more fully: What, says Master Homes, is the cause of
Rain, alteration of Air, and the like? If his Master, Doctor Willet, did not
these words show it. me thinks he should not have left the Reader unsatisfied;
and not only so, but have proved the Stars to have no influence thereon, nor
to be causes of these alterations, and then his argument had been good. But
they are causes; And first let me give you Moses judgment herein, who plainly
tells us, The Stars are for signs and seasons, Genesis 1.14. which M. Homes will
say is fulfilled in the words following, viz. And God made two great lights,
the one to rule the day, the other to rule the night, Genesis 1.16. To which then
I answer, by way of Quere, to what end then are these invincible, irresistible
and innumerable hosts of Heaven? were they made for no other use then to gaze
on? the Sun and Moon will sufficiently serve our turn for matter of light, if
we look no further into their uses; but the Scripture further puts this
matter quite out of doubt if we will believe Gods own word, Job 28.31. For he
speaking of his Omnipotent power, asks his servant Job, whether he, or any
one else Can restrain the influence of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of
Orion: On which words S. Austin on Job, refers all men to the study of
Astrology, for the understanding of that place; and not only so, but shows us
that under these two constellations, the Lord does comprehend the influence of
all the Celestial host, figuratively expressing pars pro toto; and to show you
by experience the verity hereof, if you will neither believe S. Augustine,
Moses, nor God himself, except you see and feel; (not to insist long on this
point, which is cleared by such strong and invincible witnesses, one whereof is
able to be sufficient testimony against all Master Homes his learned Judges and
condemners of Astrology,) for confirming and clearing hereof, then I might here
again instance that palpable experience we have of the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea, by the influence of the Moon (as abovesaid); but to manifest it yet
further, let him call to mind the increase and decrease of Shel-fish, the
mutation and variation of times, and innumerable other effects of the Stars,
which (if time and convenience would permit) might (...) recorded, and let him
then study the cause hereof, and he will then without doubt be of another
tenet; let him observe also when and is in or or when and ^ is in or or and are
so posited, and let him tell me then, what alterations they produce in the air
both by Rain, Snow, Wind, Tempests Thundering and Lightning, and the like,
according to their several positions, the nature of signs and houses and
mansions they are in; (which if he be not altogether ignorant of the Art, he
may daily see) These and the like effects, are most vulgarly known by
experience, so that therefore he might even as well have confessed those signs
he speaks of, to be the Stars, and causes their influence, since he does not
nor cannot show me any other thing they are, without wronging and slandering
the Art, and contradicting the most learned therein, as also the Father S.
Austine Moses, nay and GOD himself. D. Homes might as well then have left out
that other addition of Doctor Willets, where he says, That the Stars have not
the same influence in Summer, and in Winter, Spring and Autumn, and so
consequently will conclude them First not to be signs (contradicting Moses, and
the word of God, Genesis 1.14. as aforesaid;) Secondly, Nor causes, Quia ex
unitate causae sequeretur similitudo effectus, Of the same cause there should
follow the same effect; but there follows not the same effect from the same
signs, appears by experience. As much to say, the Stars are neither causes nor
signs, because they produce not fruits in Winter, as well as in Summer, or
because they cause not snow in Summer, or Buds and Blossoms in Winter. O rare
cavil! but since he is already by what is abovesaid, confuted; I shall here
add nothing but this, that since the question is, whether they are causes and
signs, because that passage in the first of Genesis manifelts they are signs, I
will (if he will be convinced by the word of God) here give him to know they
are also causes; I will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth,
and the earth, the corn and the wine, etc. Hos. 2.2. And in another place, the
increase of the earth is referred to the Influence of the Sun and the Moon,
Deuteronomy. 33.14. By all which we may clearly see (unless blinded with malice and
wilfulness) that they are both signs and causes, of all our earthly enjoyments
and happinesses; Et si Scriptura, and ipse Deus nobiscum, quis contranos.

W. R. his SECT. III. Wherein his allegations against the ground of the Art are
condemned; and his bringing S. Augustine and Galen against it, proved
fallacious.
SEeing then it is most clearly so, that the Stars are signs and causes as
abovesaid, what need these envious carpers or malicious gainsayers of the truth
be heeded or regarded? but let these perverse rags of paper perish with
themselves, not worthy the least remembrance. And indeed had it not been
rightly to insorm the vulgar, and to make them see, that high language serves
not to condemn truth, I had buried both them and their filthy rags in perpetual
oblivion; but I hope since they must be remembered, it will be but for their
disgrace, not chronicled for their worthiness, but perpetual infamy.

But this is not all, he comes next to condemn Astrology by Keckerman, and that
with as weak Arguments as he did the rest: Keckerman, (says he) a most learned
Philosopher, and Christian, although he favors some things which men now a
days call part of Astrology, did not in all his two great Volumes in fol. of
Arts and Sciences Jet forth any Astrology. A wise story indeed; because
Keckerman writes not of Astrology, therefore there is no such thing: but if
Keckerman has not, yet as wise and as learned, and greater Philosophers have,
as if the being of Astrology depended on his writing hereof, Look the second
Chapter of this Treatise.
or it were a whit farther from being an heavenly Science and a lawful Art,
because he omitteth it: fine Logic and rare reason, if rightly understood, and
the depth thereof thoroughly searched! because Aristotle knew not the reason of
the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, therefore no body else does, neither is
there such a thing in Nature; and because Moses writes not of the Creation of
Angels; Ergo, there is none: O profound and invincible reason! But to proceed,
(he says) he is sure he has these words against it, Manent tamen, etc. The
Stars abide, as of other sublunary effects, so of effects in man, the common
and remote cause, which many ways may be hindered, not only by the first
cause, God, but also by particular causes, partly in the Heavens, partly in the
Air and other Elements; so that the Predictions of Astrologers are with ifs and
ands, etc. which is as much to the purpose as comes just to nothing; for first,
that God can alter the course of the Stars, there is no Astrologer but will
confess (but whether he will or no, or ordinarily uses so to do, is the
question) so that Master Homes gets little by this querk, since he affirms
nothing that any Astrologer will deny. But if Master Keckerman makes it not
appear what particular causes hinder the effects of the Stars, me thinks for
the strength of his argument Master Homes should have done it; for it stands
not with any reason, that subordinate causes as are the Air and other Elements,
should predominate or rule over the first moving Causes, viz. the Stars; this
the weakest capacity that understands the Art will affirm, and you have but now
heard that the effects of the Stars cause alteration and mutation of the Air,
as we also daily see by experience; and therefore his Assertion, that the
Principles of Astrology are not confirmed on true Principles, is here also
condemned as erroneous, false and malicious; for we see Astrologers seldom
fail in their judgments, except when they swerve from the rules of Art:
wherefore Alsteds assertion also is here no less simple then the rest, who
says, Astrologers are also often deceived; and what then? because a man that
never was at London, misseth his way, once or twice, shall he conclude there is
no such place? sure it should rather teach him to observe diligently his road,
and not turn on the right hand nor the left; and if the Astrologers would as
warily observe their rules, this objection of the ignorant had never been
thought on. But Master Homes, is Divinity false and no wise to be heeded,
because there is so many errors and schisms crept into the Church? or because
every one attaineth not to a full perfection of the Spirit? or because humanum
est errare, man is frail and subject to failings? no sure, experience, reason
and truth teaches us to the contrary. Wherefore he might very well have
omitted these slender reasons, as also that place of Galen, where he says,
sophisticum est, it is sophistical: but how? not as having no verity therein,
but in the superstitious abuse thereof, for you see clearly in the first
Chapter of his Treatise, Galen holds that man a fool, rather then a
Physician, that is not an Astrologer: and in all his works has Astrology in
great esteem and applause, and moreover testifies his own practice hereof,
especially, lib. 3. de diebus decret. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. and the like. So
he brings Saint Austin to condemn it thus in these words, in his Treatise De
Doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 21, 22. est magnus error, magna dementia, et
superstitio: Astrology is a great error, madness, and superstition; it is
clear that Saint Austin here speaks of the superstitious use thereof, as in
attributing fatal necessity thereto, and in too much trusting and confiding
therein, as may appear by what you have already heard S. Austin says of it;
but to clear it more fully, L. 5. c. 4. and 1.20. c. 6. contra Faustum Manich.
S. Austin confesses that before his conversion, he followed the heresies of
the Manichees, who maintained the stars to be adored and prayed unto, and
therefore to reclaim the multitude, which went thus a whoring after the ways
of the Heathen, this good man uses these words to recall them, and unite them
to the belief of God: But I hope M. Homes will not say that Astrologers are
thus superstitious and wicked; he that says Astrology (as I said before) is
any other thing then what is delivered by Ptolomy, in the second page of this
Treatise, knows not what Astrology is; Neither will he affirm I hope, that S.
Austin condemns Astrology, but the superstitious abuse thereof which is clear,
for he delivers five opinions concerning destiny.

First, that by destiny is understood the providence, will and power of God,
and therefore he warns the Astrologers, that they continue their opinions,
but correct their tongues, 1.5. c. 1. De Civ. Pei.
for through custom of speech the vulgar commonly understood nothing by the
word fate or destiny, but the inevitable power of the Stars.

The second is quite contrary to the former, ascribing all to the absolute
power of the Stars, without the will of God: But this opinion derogating from
the omnipotent power of God, and his providence in all our actions, he says
ought to be rejected, not only by those that profess the true Religion, but
which serve or worship any gods at all, though never so false.

The third so attributes to the decrees of the Stars, that yet they believe
them to have this power in such sort derived unto them from God, that thereby
they can, and do determine of us and our actions as they will themselves: which
opinion he thinks is very wrongfully held of heaven, to maintain such
wickedness to be, as it were, inacted in that most shining Senate, that were
the like acted in any Court or State on earth, it were worthy to be subverted.

The fourth opinion is, That the Stars have neither power nor will to operate
on us at their own pleasures, but as they do necessarily execute that which God
imposes upon them; which Saint Austine accounts more intolerable then the
other, for that it teaches us to conceive that of God, which they hold
unworthy to impute unto the Stars, against such he sufficiently declares.

These opinions, Saint Augustine renounceth, as they rather utterly deny the
power and providence of God; or, as they impute absolute rule and dominion of
the Stars immediately over the will of man necessaririly enforcing us in all
our actions; or as they throw all our sins upon God, whilst they make him by
the Stars inevitably to enforce us to evil: wherefore had Master Homes (as it
had befit a learned man) first examined his Authors with good observation and
deliberation, and not so readily taken hold on every thing he finds delivered
by others, that he imagines will serve for his turn; I Am confident, he had not
thus inconsiderately alleged Saint Augustine against Astrologers, for (as I
defined before in the second page, what Astrology is, so the same) Ptolomy
confesses the Stars not to have any fatality, as working by or with a fatal
necessity on the will or soul of man as much as S. Austine himself; giving them
no farther operation in these matters, then the most Orthodox and Learned
Divines do.

The fifth opinion is, Which neither esteems the Stars of their own wills, (as
if they were living souls) to decree future events, nor necessarily to usurp
power over minds, but only to signify the inclinations of the elements, and
of all things compounded of them.

Now that Saint Austine meant not such Astrologers as deny necessity (as Master
Homes would fain persuade the vulgar to believe;) but only ascribe power unto
the Stars to work upon sublunary bodies; is evident by his words, Non usque
quaque absurd dici possit, adsolas corporum differentias, afflatus quosdam
valere sidereos, sicut in solaribus accessibus, and recessibus; videmus etiam
ipsius anni tempora variari and lunaribus incrementis, et decrementis augeri et
minui quaedam genera rerum; sicut Echinos, et conchas, et mirabiles aestus
oceani, non autem, et animi voluntates positionibus siderum subdi: where we see
nothing exempted from subjection to the Stars that is bodily, but only our
spiritual part. And he ascribes not this power to the Stars in general, as
that their specificall virtues are not possible to be known to man, for he
concurreth with Astrologers, that the quality of is cold, etc, as you may
further see at the beginning of this Chapter. So that you may see how falsely
and injuriously he brings in Saint Augustine against Astrology.

VV. R. his SECT. IV. Wherein Astrology is defended against his allegations,
from Master Perkins his words.
MAster Homes comes then to tell us Master Perkins a learned man and famous,
writ a Treatise against it: so did Melancthon, a greater Scholar then he, and
as knowing a Divine, write as much and more for it, then he ever did against
it; what if I should tell him of some that have writ against the Scripture, is
the Word of God therefore false and to be rejected? he says Master Perkins
calls it profaneness, and idolatry; but let the Reader seriously and
diligently but observe what has been here already said, and he cannot but
understand Master Perkins spoke only against the abuse of the Art, not as it
is in its self; against the superstitious confidence and trust in the Stars,
not the learching and studying of the influences and effects of the Stars on
Elementary bodies; and as much as this comes to, all that study the Art will
confess, Ergo M. Homes is mistaken to think by these words of M. Perkins to
condemn Astrology, since he says no more then all Astrologers themselves will
say. Wherefore not to dwell longer here, we come now to his eighth learned man
which condemns Astrology, which he tells us is M. Geree who has (says he)
written a Treatise against Astrology. I could if need were, cite as many, and
more that have written against the Divine Word of God, then he can make appear
has written against Astrology; shall any man be therefore so impudently wicked
to conclude, the word of God is not true, or not to be credited? no sure, this
were altogether as impudently wicked as M. Homes his sequel or conclusion is
ridiculous, sophistical and envious. M. Chambers also writ a book against
Astrology, which I wonder he remembered not also, but that learned Sir
Christopher Heyden returned him such a repulse, as that none of the Antagonists
or ill wishers to the Art, ever durst undertake to give a reply thereunto; for
he does not only refute Master Chambers, but also Picus Mirandula, Melton,
Perkins, and Geree to boot; wherefore I referr all those that would be further
resolved herein, and desire to discern between truth and falsehood, to the
perusal of the discourse it self, it being a piece of that exquisite wit and
learning, that none can be able to surpass it, if (in the whole World) be
worthy to compare with it.

W. R. his SECT. V. Wherein his cavilling M. Briggs, and others, are convinced.
WE now come to hear what he can tell us of learned M. Briggs, against
Astrology, which is briefly thus much, That after an earnest desire to attain
the perfection thereof, he seriously applied himself unto the study, but in
conclusion, when he thought to have had joy of his wearied labors, he was
satisfied with nothing but uncertainty, and meeting an other Astrologer, told
him how he had been deceived in the rules of the Art, who (for his comfort)
concluded also as he did, that there was no certaincy therein, upon which he
left off further studying thereof. Now I would very fain know of any man (which
shall be all the answer I shall give to this sophistical cavil) whether by
these words Astrology be convinced as uncertain, because Master Briggs and
another, (or suppose half a dozen more) could find no certainty therein; when
Ptolomy, Galen, Hippocrates, Saint Austine, and thousands more, found not only
certainty therein, but concluded and agreed that it was the most beneficial
and pleasant Art under the Sun: and whereas he cites Phavorinus against
Astrology in these words, Aut adversa eventura dicunt, etc. which is, They
foretell either things of prosperity or adversity; if of prosperity, and they
fail, then thoushalt be prosperous or happy in hoping for that good, if of
adversity, and hit not right, then thou were miserable in fearing in vain; etc.
which agrees with what he says M. Briggs would undertake to do, viz. To prove
the rules of Astrology contradictory, viz. It shall be so, and it shall not be
so, which is the meerest cavil of all the rest, to say, Ergo, Astrology is
uncertain. I will undertake then a greater matter then M. Briggs, for let there
be what Art or Science that M. Homes can devise nominated (though never so
true) I will undertake to speak as much, nay and with more proof against it,
then all these his learned men has done in this his character of the present
times; (he forgot to put in those that deny the truth; nay, and not only so,
but sophistically and maliciously maintain it to their utmost endeavors,
thinking the citing of S. Austine to be proof enough to terrify the Reader
from undertaking this study, or continuing therein, not observing the words of
his Author, and together with the Fathers to include the Councils; but tells us
not how and upon what grounds and reasons they disallowed of the Art, lest then
his malice be discovered.) Wherefore let me then for a conclusion, as well to
this Chapter, as his cavils, ask him these two questions; whether a man may not
(if enviously disposed) speak against the most manifest truths, nay against the
very word of God, and wrest the Scripture to their own inclinations and
intentions? And secondly, if he be proved hereof guilty, in the next Chapter,
to wrest the Scripture sense to confute Astrology; whether he be not more fit
to be brought under the lash of the Law, then Astrologers? So have you his
learned men against Astrology confuted; we come now to the main point of all,
viz. Whether Astrology be condemned by the word of God?

SURVEY. Thus with large patience have we given long leave to Will. Ramsey to
speak thus much together, without interruption; saving only, that in his mere
impertinencies, and some unmannerly jeerings and railings, these Sections of
his are made by the Re-Printer, in part to keep silence. But to the matter.
What a huge company of Levers in one place does he bring to break an Egg! What
a many of Candles does he light up, in another place, to show us that the Sun
shines; which we saw and acknowledged before he lighted them up! He has shot a
great many sharp words, and with much virulency; but at Rovers, so that he does
not only miss the mark, but also not hit the Butt. Did the Doctor intend in
the least his Quotation of Authors that have been against Astrology, in a way
of argument or proof? His words in the very beginning of his second Section
(which Will. Ramsey has all this while so puddered himself to confute) show
William the contrary, if he had been willing to see. Because (says the
Doctor) the Astrologers give out, that there is no body against this Astrology
but one Perkins, or some one or two more, men not acquainted with Art; or in
the like slighting speeches; it will be very convenient to quicken your
attentions, as to a point considerable, by setting before you the judgment of
several learned men touching Astrology. Indeed if I do here but reprint that
second Section of the Doctor, which Will. pretends to confute, it will be a
sufficient confutation of all these five Sections of William's second Chapter.

D. H. his SECT. II. Of the Opinions of the Learned touching Astrology.
BEcause the Astrologers give out that there is no body against this
Astrology, but one Perkins, or some one or two more, men not acquainted with
Art; or in the like slighting speeches; it will be very convenient to quicken
your attention, as to a point considerable, by setting before you the judgment
of several Learned men touching Astrology, with their reasons. Tostatus, a
great learned School-man has a great deal against it, in his Commentary on
Levit. 19. Qu. 28, 29. etc. Doctor Willet gives us the sum of Tostatus, and
his own judgment thus. Of things which are (as to us) accidental, as the
success of businesses, or their causes internal, as men's will and free
choife, as to undertake a journey, or to build, or not to build; predictions
are not only uncertain but superstitious: And the same is to be said of
casting Nativities by the conjunction of Planets. So Doctor Willet on Levit.
19. in his 41. Qu. the head whereof is, The Vanity of Astrologers, quoting of,
and referring us to Tostatus. The same Doctor, Willet on the same Chapter, in
his 32. Qu. has this discourse: All manner of CONJECTURING (see he calls it but
Conjecturing) is not unlawful, whereof any natural or divine Cause can be
yielded: As first, there are natural signs in the Heavens and air, as of the
alteration of weather, of winds, of rain, etc. And in compound bodies, as in
setting, and planting of Trees; and in humane bodies, as when it is good to let
blood, to purge, etc. These are immediate effects in nature of Celestial
bodies: There are also mediate effects, as Comets which show siccity and
combustions, and so many portend Wars, which is caused by wrath among men,
which comes of siccity and heat: So the Crow cries against rain, because the
moisture of the air affects his feathers: And the Dolphin against a tempest
swims aloft, because the Sand in the bottom is stirred. For these creatures
that are led only by sense, have a quicker feeling of such natural accidents,
then man has, who is most occupied in the use and exercise of reason: For,
Attentio ad operationes secundum rationem, etc, that is, The attending upon the
operations of reason, does take away the attention to the operation of nature:
And therefore FOOLS and SIMPLE persons, that are LEAST GUIDED by reason, are
more sensible of natural things then WISE men.

Again, there are divine and extraordinary signs * which God speaks of, that
shall be for signs at such a time, or of such a thing. As Matthew. 24.29. And the
Dove descending on Christ, Matthew. 3.16. But there is no Judiciary Astrology in
all these.

Doctor Willet adds on the same Chapter, Qu. 33. (to give it you in a word)
thus; Signs observed by men, of humane events, cannot be signs; first, because
Ex varietate causae variatur causatum: The Stars have not the same influence in
Summer, and in Winter, Spring, and Autumn. Secondly, Ex unitate causae
sequeretur similitudo effectus: Of the same cause there should be the same
effects. But there follows not the same effect after the same signs, as appears
by experience. Thirdly, Keckerman a most learned Philosopher, and a Christian,
although he favors some things, which men now a days call part of Astrology,
did not in all his two great Volumes of Arts and Sciences in Folio, set forth
any Astrology; but in his Works has these passages against it, to this effect:
Manent tamen etc. The Stars abide, as of other sublunary effects, so of effects
in man, the COMMON and REMOTE Causes which many ways may be hindered, not only
by the first cause, GOD, but also by particular causes, partly in the HEAVENS,
partly in the AIR, and other ELEMENTS; so that the PREDICTIONS OF ASTROLOGY,
are with IFFS and ANDS. So that it follows not, this man is born under an
unhappy Star, therefore he has a dull wit. So Keckerman, System. Phys. lib. 2.
cap. 3. De Motu Cocli. The same Keckerman in another place has these words.
Disciplina Astrologica, etc. The Discipline of Astrology about the Predictions
by Heavenly bodies, or Stars, is not yet confirmed upon true principles;
therefore no marvel if that part of Astrology, which is conversant about the
predictions of Comets, does rest upon most uncertain principles. It is granted
to Astronomy to use such Hypotheses, or arguments, or principles which are not
in nature, but are conceived only by a kind of similitude: But Astrology may
not use such Hypotheses. The Astrologers assign several Countries and Cities,
to several Celestial Signs; But of Cities plainly, no reason at all appears.
So Keckerman Syst. Phys. lib. 6. cap. 5. De Cometis in genere.

Fourthly, Alsted the great Philosopher of these times, and a Christian, sets
forth a thing he calls Astrology; but see his faithfulness in this; Astrologia
(says he) vitio, etc. Astrology by the vice of man has more vanity in it then
Astronomy. Astrology because of our imbecility is conjecturall. And he adds.
Astrologers are often deceived.: and therefore we do rightly (says he)
pronounce the divinatory part of Astrology to be but Conjecturall.

Fifthly, The great Galen says of Astrology, Sophisticum est, etc. It Is a
sophistical thing; Contrary to experience.

Sixthly, So famous a man as was S. Austin famous for learning and godliness
in his time, having been addicted to Astrology, afterward repents of it, and
renounceth it, in his Treatise, De doctr. Christiana, lib 2. cap. 21. in fine,
and initio capitis 22. His words are these. It is Magnus error, and magna
dementia, superstitio etc. that is, Astrology is a great error, a great
madness, a superstition easily refelled.

Saint Austin brings in another, on Psalm. 63. as a penitent renouncing this
Art, Paganism and Judaisme: For we know that the Scriptures do much forbid it
to the Jews, as the evil of the Heathens, as we shall see plentifully
afterward.

Seventhly, Master Perkins, famous for learning and godliness, as his Works
show, has not only a Treatise against Astrology (though once much addicted to
it) but also gives us his repentance and renouncing of it in his Preface to the
Reader before his resolution to the Countryman. His words are these: I have
long studied this Art, and was never quiet till I had seen all the secrets of
it, but at length it pleased God to lay before me the PROFANENESS of it; nay
I dare boldly say, the IDOLATRY, although it be covered with fair and golden
shows: Therefore that which I speak with grief, I desire thee to note with some
attention etc.

Eighthly, Master Geree, known to me to be a godly and learned man (being
Collegians in the University) has a learned Treatise against Astrology (which
if men read well, they dare not, if they have any truth of grace, give
themselves to Astrology) His Treatise is called Astrologia-Mastix common to be
had for a small matter.

Ninthly, Master Geree avoucheth Master Brigs sometimes Geometry Reader at
Oxford an eminent godly man (a man I my self knew well, and have been at his
Lectures) and a man for his skill in Mathematics, I think I may say (says
Master Geree) that he was second to none. Of this Master Brigs, Master Geree
gives us this account: This loving Friend of mine (says Master Geree) upon a
question moved to him by me, touching Judicial Astrology, told me this
remarkable Story of himself; When he came to Cambridge first, he thought it a
fine thing to be of Gods Counsel, to foreknow secrets, and resolved to have
that knowledge, what labor soever it cost him; and so early applied himself to
the study of the Mathematics, beginning with Arithmetic and so to Geometry,
and Astronomy; and to lay a good foundation he left none of these Arts, till he
had attained exactness in them: The foundation thus laid, he then applied
himself to his main scope, the search of Judicial Astrology; but there he
found his expectation frustrate; THERE WAS NO CERTAINTY in the rules thereof.
When he had tired his body and wits in vain, he was much dejected with the
frustrating of his expectation: At last he repaired to a man in Cambridge,
famous in that Art, and a practitioner in Prognostications by it: to him he
made his moan what pains he had taken to be expert in Astrology, and how the
uncertainty of the rules of that Art did now defeat his hopes: The Astrologers
reply was, that THE RULES OF THAT ART WERE UNCERTAIN INDEED, NEITHER WAS THERE
ANY CURE FOR IT: whereupon Master Brigs relinquisht that study. And he did then
affirm to me, that he would undertake to the skilfullest Astrologer in the
World, that let him set down any conclusion touching any man or State, yea or
WEATHER, and he would prove it CONTRADICTORILY; that is, Both that it would
fall out so, and that it would not fall out so, from their own Rules and
Principles; whence (says he) you may see apparently that there can be no
certainty in the rules of that Art. He further added, that his opinion was; To
those that addicted themselves to the practices of Divining Astrology, the
Devil did at first secretly lend his assistance; and at length, gradatim (that
is gradually) did (unless God prevented) entice them into contract.

Tenthly, Dominicus Nanus, Barthol. Amantius, Francisc. Tortius, Joseph
Langius; have gathered these collections touching Astrology: Astrologia, etc.
Astrology is the Speech of Stars ((...),) But Astronomy is ((...),) the Law of
the Stars; as ascribing more certainty to Astronomy then to Astrology. This
Astrology is said to be invented by Atlanta, King of Mauritanie, witness
Pliny, l. 7. of his Natural History; which if true, is no commendation of
Astrology. Contemplantur Astronomi, etc. that the Astronomers contemplate the
Stars, not as Judiciary Astrologers and Chaldeans, condemned by the Prophers,
but that by the situation of them, they may set forth the set, or standing
times of days, months, and years; the Edipses of the Sun and Moon and other
things most worthy to be known, and most profitable for the life of man. The
vanity of Judiciary Astrology, innumerable wife men of Old. and in our Age have
disallowed. See what God pronounces of Astrologers by Moses Deuteronomy. 18.10. Isa.
44. Jer. 10. Phavorinus in A. Gell. lib. 14. cap. 1. was wont to reprove
Judiciary Astrologers with this Dilemma; Aut adversa eventura dicunt. etc. that
is, Either they foretell that things of adversity shall come to pass; or those
of prosperity: If they say prosperous things, and do frustrate or deceive men,
then thou shall be miserable in hoping in vain: If they say things of adversity
and do lie; then thou shall be miserable in fearing in vain and without cause.
If true things answer to their Predictions, but are not prosperous things, from
thence forward thou art miserable in thy mind before thou art so in the event.
If they promise happy things, and they come to pass, then plainly two
inconveniences will attend; namely, both the expectation of them in suspense
of hope will weary thee; and the hope thou had, will now deflowre, or take
away the grace and beauty of the future fruit of joy. Therefore by no means may
we use those kind of men who presage future things. Andr. Alciat. Emblem. cap.
3. Icare per superos qui, etc.
Exemplo ut doceas dogmata certa tuo.
Astrologus caveat quicquam praedicere; praeceps
Nam cadet impostor dum super astra volat.
i. e. As Icarus flying too high, melted his waxed wings and fell; so the
Impostour Astrologer, by flying above the Stars. Astrology judiciary, or
divinatory, is to be exploded with all its Patrons. So Epiphanius disputing
against the Pharisees and Manichees. So Basil. Hex. Hom. 1. and 6. So
Chrysostom on Genesis Hom. 5. and 6. and on Matthew. Hom. 6. Surely S. Augustine
who had prospered in the business of Astrology, after in his confessions, lib.
4. cap. 3. lib. 5. cap. 3. and 7. and lib. 1. cap. 6. De Doctrina Christiana,
lib. 2. cap. 21.22. 23. De Civitate Dei, lib. 5. initio usque ad cap. 8. Contra
Academ. lib. 1. cap. 7. one while does grievously complain that he was
deceived, in attributing any thing to that Art; another while he does sharply
inveigh against it, and the Professors thereof. Likewise it is forbidden more
then once in the Councils, as in Council. Toletan. 1. Can. 21. Concilio
Barracens. cap. 9.10.26. qu. 2.3.4.

Thus, and thus far the Doctors Section, word for word. Now let the prudent
Reader judge whether Williams five Sections have confuted this; or this them;
or at least, unshaken by them. So that I need add but little as to the
substance; but only briefly to animadvert upon Will. and to illustrate some
brief expressions or intimations of the Doctor.

Not to stay upon that most improper speech of Will. in his second Chapter, to
charge the Doctor with malice against things; as with malice against Astrology
(Malice is of a person against a person); let the Reader only note there, with
a glance, how professedly Will. does slight Learned men, if they do not speak
so as having truch and reason on their side; Will. Ramsey being JVDGE. For
that is the Genuine result of his speech. And by consequence, if all the Learned
men in the world beside Astrologers, should condemn Astrology, Will. would
slight them (as he does in his Book) because he judges them not to speak
according to truth and reason.

To W. R. his first Section of his second Chapter, a word will serve; viz.
only to entreat Will. that so calls on others for consideration, that he
himself would consider that Tostatus, or Doctor Willet does not educe those
words at ( A) out of the text Levit. 19. But are his liberty of expatiating,
upon unlawful Arts in general; and therein to declare his judgment
concerning unlawful predictions. Tostatus and Doctor Willet had more wit then
to take a text of Familiar Spirits, to confute Astrology. Though some
Astrologers are not free from Familiarity with such. And B. C. proves an
implicit compliance. Thus much only has given such a blow to Will. Ramseys
first Section, that the whole Fabric of it falls to the ground in the eyes of
them that will understand.

To his second Section; and first to that Will. says and so labors to prove
that Stars are Causes; the Doctor denies it not, though that man of vast
learning Mars. Ficinus a famous Platonic Philosopher in his works has a Tract
against it. 2. To Williams catching at the word CONJECTV RING of and concerning
things which are natural causes, as of alteration of weather, etc. experience
daily and evidently does tell all men that have eyes to read Almanacks, and to
see the weather; that how natural and necessary soever the causes may be, the
Astrologers predictions of it are but conjecturing, and daily prove false. Yet
neither Doctor Willet nor Doctor Homes do move the question, touching the
thing which (commonly) is called Natural Aftrology. And therefore as they do
not justify Judicial; so they do not condemn natural. touching weather, etc.
and therefore Will. is at the Labour-in-vain; uttering nothing against the
Doctor for me to take cognizance of, till he mentions S. Austins referring us
(as Will. says) to the study of Astrology, in his Annotations on Job. chapter
38. v. 31. But how untruly W. R. reports Saint Austine, let S. Austines words
testify; which are, Intellexisti nexus Pleiades? etc. Number and Astrologia
perscrutenda est ad cognoscendum proprietates istorum Syderum, ut hunc locum
intelligere possimus? Miror et si hoc congruit sermoni nostro. etc. Where S.
Austine asks the question whether we need search Astrology to understand that
place? And wonders if that should agree to his speech elsewhere. And in the
conclusion interprets the place, of moral not natural things. Omnium (says
S. Austine) it a syderum nomine, omnes in ecclesia tales intelligend: sunt qui
conversationem habent in coelis, etc. But the Doctor is not against the thing
of natural Astrology: but, it is judicial Astrology, and the calling of
predicting of natural effects by natural causes by the name of Astrology that
the Doctor is against; and therefore Will. Ramsey in his discourse of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, of thunder, rain, snow, etc. is again at the
Labour-in-vain; or at a combat with his own shadow; and so goes on to the end
of the second Section; For Will. Ramsey miserably mistakes, to say, Doctor
Willet denied the Stars to be signs or causes, as to natural effects (which
the Doctor expressly granted a little before); and as meanly does Will. Viz. Ex
varierate causae, etc. and Ex unitate causae, etc.
go off of Doctor VVillets Two mighty reasons against signs of humane events,
and speaks not one pertinent word to them. Let the Reader compare and judge in
the thing.

Quem penes arbitrium est, et vis et norma loquendi. To Will. R. third
Section, being a great body with little soul in it (as was Doctor Ames his
Character of Bellarmines works (Moles absque nervis) I need not add much to the
substance of what D. Homes has said. For let me but tell Will. Ramsey. that
he has not fairly repeated Doctor Homes touching Keckerman, and he must needs
be non-plus't in his quibble. It was the fault of the Devil he quoted not the
whole period of the Scripture he alleged. And certainly the Astrologer is not
blameless in his curt quoting the Doctor, whose words you may see before are,
That Keckerman a most learned Philosopher, and a Christian, although he favors
some things, which men now a days call Astrolology, did not in all his two
great volumes in folio of the Arts and Sciences, set forth any Astrology, BUT
IN HIS WORKS HAS THESE PASSAGES AGAINST IT, etc. Now this last clause here in
capital letters are left out by William Ramsey to the immediate ruin of all
he says, till he come to MANENT TAMEN a fresh matter. Yea if that Capital
clause had not been in, it had been good Logic and reason to say what the
Doctor concludes; That Keckerman handling of purpose of the main body of Arts
and Sciences, and among them all, the real Mathematics, and leaving out
Astrology, does show, that Keckerman was rather against then for Astrology. Or
that Keckerman did think there was no such lawful Science. Even as if Moses of
purpose had set himself to handle all Pneumatology, i.e. a System of Spirits
and Souls, and handling of the Souls of Animals, and of the Souls or Spirits of
men, and of the Holy spirit, had quite left out the doctrine of Angels, it
would well have inferred there were no Angels. But the whole Bible is not a
System, but a graduall discovery of truths, (according to the growth of the
Church) with explications, and repetitions. And though Moses included the
creation of the Angels in the creation of the Heavens (as Will. Cousin-
Philosopher acutely well observes in his Enchiridion Physicae restitutae), but
expresses them not (that as Divines observe, the sons of men might not dream
the concurrence of Angels in the Creation) till Genesis 18. and afterward much,
that was enough to clear it; Moses owned the being and Doctrine of Angels. But
Keckerman from first to last does not approve of the thing and doctrine of
Judicial Astrology. Now for VVil. answer to Keckerman's MANENT TAMEN etc. i.e.
The Stars abide, etc. unto Cometis in genere, which you have here inserted out
of the Doctors Demologie word for word; let the understanding Reader judge, 1.
Whether Will. Ramsey has confuted it! 2. Whether the Doctor by the rule of
reason or Art was bound to argue out Keckermans assertions; seeing he alleges
him only as a particular example of one learned man among others, that was
against Astrology! 3. Whether Will. does not evidently contradict himself in
saying, That the words of Keckerman are as much as comes to nothing; and yet
presently labors, but in vain, to confute them. For Keckerman does not say,
That the inferior second causes are predominant and rule over the first, and
superior; so as to alter them in themselves; but that they may be hindered by
them. Which is no other, but what all Philosophy, and universal experience
will confess. And William himself confesses in his Epistle to the Reader,
That with the necessity of the influence of the Stars some contingency may be
mixed, etc. And his Brethren in Astrology do usually so excuse their mistakes in
predictions; viz. That so the Stars promised or threatened, but second causes
hindered, or altered the case. Lastly, VVilliam's own dear Ptolomy so often by
him called upon, does assert as much. Cl. Ptel. Predict. Astron. lib. 1. c. 1.
Deinde Regionum diversitas non exigua discrimina in nascentibus efficit, etiam
cum eadem sint semina, ut hominum; et cum eadem coeli constitntio est, tamen
magna est in diversis regionibus dissimilitudo, quod ad corpora, et animos
attinet. i.e. in sum, and in a word, The difference in men both in body and
mind may be great by reason of the diversity of countries though the seed of
birth and the constitution of the Heavens may be the same. But I do ill thus
far to pursue a fly. For how simply does Will. answer Keckermans grand
conclusions upon the premises! viz. That the predictions of Astrology are with
Ifs and Ands; and that Astrology is not yet confirmed upon true Principles; and
that Astrology conversant about Comets, does rest upon most uncertain
Principles. And lastly, That there is no reason appears why Astrologers should
assign several Cities to several Signs. Of all which Conclusions asserted by
Keckerman, Will. Ramsey gives no other confutation, but like that of Doctor
K. confuting B. with B. THOU LIE. William Ramsey in like manner here
replies, The assertion that the principles of Astrology are not confirmed upon
true Principles: is here condemned as erroneous, false and malicious: which
Will. utters, as if he sat Prolocutour in some Papal Council. And that the
Popes FIATUR must go for good, when they tel'd him he should have said FIAT.
And as simply almost does Will. confute Alsted for saying Astrologers are
often deceived. (of the rest of Alsted before expressed against Astrology Will.
Ramsey takes no notice) I say, he confutes him simply; for it many professed
Mariners or Artists endeavor to find Terra incognita, or the Judicial
Astrology -- Vtopia, and cannot find it, 'twere better for them to go more
certain Voyages. And though many Errors may creep into Professors (of which
Will. Judicial Astrology is one, now at he Trial) yet there is no uncertainty
in the Bible. But in Williams Astrological Bible, viz. in Ptolomy, de
praedict. Astro is much uncertainty, and there, even there confessed by the
Author. Humanum est errare, says Will. But though it be so in sudden words,
and rash acts etc. yet learned men have prudently fixed a Rule, that Arts and
Sciences are not tobe composed of uncertainties. No not of single certainties
because infinite. Scire, say they, est per causas scire. Wills Astrology must
have been a Science if any thing. But Ptolomy affirms (ibid) an uncertainty in
it by reason of the contrariety of causes. As for that Sophisticum of Galen, I
said before it was quoted out of Alsted: and I do charge Will. Ram. with a
Sophisticum out of Galen, That a man is rather a Fool than a Physician, that is
not an Astrologer. For, first, experience testifies that there have been and
are many famous successful Physicians that are nothing in Judicial Astrology.
And secondly on the other side, though Will. pretend much skill in Astrology,
yet is he not famous for Physic, or freedom from folly, as his Book (now under
consideration) does amply testify. Yea, the next passage of this Section
testifies. For he never would have mentioned Austin at all; or that place of
Austin, if he would not have the shame of Astrology ripped up, and exposed to
open contempt. But seeing Will. is so imprudent, or impudent, or both, to
pretend that Austin is a friend to Astrology; William shall now have his belly
full of Austin before we part. Austin's words at length, in his second Book of
Christian Doctrine, cap. 22. and 23. are these; Sed ex ea notatione syderum,
etc. that is, But to undertake to foretell the manners, acts, and events of men
from their births, is a great Error, and a great madness. And even with them
that have learned these things (to be unlearned) i, without all doubt, this
superstition confuted. For the Constellations, as they call them, is a not
ation of Stars, how they were, when he was born concerning whom those
miserable wretches are consulted, by them that are more miserable. But it may
be that some TVVINNES are so immediately poured out of the womb, that no
intervall of time between them can be apprehended and noted in the numbers of
Constellations. From whence it is of necessity that some TWINS must have the
self same Constellations; when as of the things they do or suffer there are not
the same events, but for the most part are so different, that the one lives
most happily, the the other most unhappily; as we see in Jacob and Esau.
Neither does it appertain to the matter, for them to say, that that same least
and narrowest moment of time, which distinguishes the birth of Twins is of
great consequence in the nature of things, and the rapacious swiftness of the
Heavens. For though I should grant, in many things that to be of consequence,
yet cannot the Mathematician find among the Constellations by what
observations or considertions of them he professes to foretell destinies.
Therefore opinionatings, or conjecturings by certain signs of things taught by
humane presumption are to be referred to the same as certain COMPACTS AND
AGREEMENTS WITH DEVILS. For hence it is, that men greedy of evil things, by a
certain occult divine judgment are delivered up to be illuded and deceived
according to the merits of their lusts, the deluding Angels coozening and
deceiving them.

Thus Austin in the place aforesaid, gives Astrology a terrible Broadside, how
ever Will. Ramsey would mince the matter. And how untruly he minceth it, let
the upright Reader judge by comparing VVillams flash and gloss, with the Text
and words of Austin himself. From which William flies, and declines the giving
of due satisfaction to them, and most impudently and impertinently tells us
Stories of Austin against Faustus, and of Aug. de Givitate Dei. Just as if a
man should be called to answer at London upon an Action touching Cheese; but he
runs to York, and pleads to the matter of Chalk: However we must follow the
Offender, till he be ferreted out of all his hiding places, and taken. If it
were as Will. Ramsey reports of Austin against Faustus; yet Austin's judgment
after his conversion is to be preferred before his practice before his
conversion. And whatsoever the occasion was of Austins speaking those words (as
it is clear in the said place, there is no mention of Manichees, or of adoration
of Stars) the Question is whether Austin did not seriously and positively
speak those words (which is the intent of Doctor Homes) viz. That Astrological
predicting or foretelling of events from the Births of men is a great error
and madness? And whether it be not now under consideration, that Austin all
along his Works was of the same mind, and that justly, against Judicial
Astrology, be it but as Ptolomy sets it forth, wherein he affirms for it
(which is bad enough and too bad)? And particularly for Austin against Faustus,
William R. does most abominably abuse him. For in his fifth Booth, cap. 4. or
20. Book cap. 6. Austin has not one word of his being a Manichee, or of his
Conversion or non-conversion, or of the occasion of those words. So all Will.
Ram. quotations of Aug. de Civitate Dei to make the Reader (that has not
Austin) to believe the contrary, does but justly lay open Will. Ram. juggling,
the shame of Astrology, and the glory of Truth. Will. Ram. quotation of that
fifth Book of Aug. de Civitate Dei, cap. 1. shall be judge; and I will give it
you according to the English Translation of Aug. de Civitate Dei, (commonly to
be had) that the Reader may see, if he please, whether I deal truly with him or
no? To omit Austin's Preamble, he falls upon the question, word for word thus,
The God of Heaven by his only providence disposes of the Kingdoms of the
earth, which if any man will say is swayed by fate, and mean by that fate, the
will of God, he may hold his opinion still, but yet he must a mend his speech;
for why did he not learn this of him that taught him, what fate was? The
ordinary custom of this has made men imagine fate to be A POWER OF THE STARS
so, or so placed, in Nativities, or conceptions; which some do separate from
the determination of God, and other some do affirm to depend wholly thereupon.
But those that hold that the Stars do manage our actions, or our passions,
good or ill without Gods appointment are to be silenced, and not to be heard,
be they of the true Religion or be they bond slaves to idolatry, of what sort
soever; for what does this opinion but flatly exclude all Deity? Against this
opinion we profess not any disputation, but only against those that calumniate
Christian Religion in defense of their imaginary gods. As for those that make
these operations of the stars in good or bad to depend upon Gods will, if they
say they have this power given them from him to use according to their own
wills, they do Heaven much wrong, in imagining that any wicked acts or in
juries are decreed in so glorious a Senate, and such as if any earthly City had
but instituted, the whole generation of man would have conspired the subversion
of it. And what part has God left him in this disposing of humane affairs, if
they be swayed by a necessicy from the Stars, whereas he is the Lord of men
and Stars? If they do not say that the Stars are causes of these wicked acts,
through a power that God has given them, but that they effect them by his
express command; is this fit to be imagined for true of God, that is unworthy
to be held true of the Stars? But if the Stars be said to po tend this only,
and not to procure it, and that their positions be but Signs not Causes of
such effects (for so hold many great Scholars, though the Astrologians use not
to say Mars in such a House SIGNIFIES this or that, no but MAKES the child
born a Homicide, to grant them this Error of speech, (which they wust learn to
reform of the Philosophers in all their presages, derived from the Stars
positions: (how comes it to pass that they could never show the reason of that
diversity of life, actions, fortune, profession, art, honor, and such humane
accidents, that has befallen TVVINNES? Nor of such a great difference, both in
those aforesaid courses, and in their death that in this case many strangers
have come nearer them in their courses of life, then the one has done to the
other, be notwithstanding born both within a little space of time, the one of
the other, and conceived both in one instant, and from one act of generation.
Thus Austin in Will. Ram. quoted place to a word. Now let the Reader having
all Austin's words in this Chapter at once before his eye, judge whether he be
not absolutely against all judicial Astrology disputing against it (as the
Analysis and method of the Chapter plainly manifests) in a way of Dilemma's
under all divisions, distinctions, and notions; and because not to be admitted
in this or that, or the other way, etc. therefore not to be admitted at all. And
comes up close against Judicial Astrology to explain he means that by the
instance of Twins, the same in conception, and birth, yet exceeding different
in life and death. But let me not forget one passage wherein Will. Ram. does
extremely abule Austin and the Reader; and it is that noted with *** in his
third Section aforesaid, here now under the hammer; the right reading of which
words are those words noted by us with so that contrary to Will. Ram. report
and falsification, Austin is far from encouraging Astrolgers to continue in
their opinions. Austin says only that if any man means by fate the will of
God, that swayeth all things, he may hold this his opinion (speaking in the
singular number) but yet he must mend his phrase of speech. So that Austin does
not mention Astrologers, or if he meant them, yet does he not say, they may
hold their opinions (in the Plural Number) much less their Astrological
opinions. Then Austin would be heautontimoroumenos, a fighter against himself,
a self-vexer. But for all this, Will. Ram. will not leave Austin so, nor will
I the while leave him. For all that Austin has said de Civitate Dei, lib. 5.
cap. 1. and his prosecuting his great argum ent from Twins, ibid. cap. 2.
cap. 3. cap. 4. and the head and sum of his fifth Chapter is, How the
Mathematicians may be convicted of PROFESSING VANITR; and therefore far from
concurring with Astrologers, as Will. Ram. would make us believe in his
marginal note; yet Will. Ram. hopes to collect out of Austin's sixth Chapter of
the same Book something to favor Astrology, Non usque quaque absurd dici
possit, (says William, picking a Daisie here and there, and then stripping off
the leaves of grass about it, I mean his ill translating) Where we see says
Will. Ram. nothing is exempted from subjection to the Stars that is bodily,
but only our spiritual part, etc. and so William goes on, concluding this his
third Section with a mighty outcry against the Doctor, for (as William says)
his false and injurious bringing of S. Austin against Astrology, etc. But
Reader have patience ere thou judge, till I have been at the pains to
transcribe the whole sixth Chapter of Aug. de Civitate Dei as near as I can to
a syllable, as it is in the common English Translation for thy better assurance
of the Doctors truth, which is thus;

It often falls out ( says Austin) notwithstanding that in these
concurrences, and unions of times, Conception, and Constellation, the children
conceived are the one a male, the other a female. I know two Twins of diverse
Sexes both of them alive, and Iusty at this day. They are as like in favor one
to another, as their difference of sex can permit; but in their fashion and
order of life, so unlike, that (besides the actions which must of necessity
distinguish between men and women) he is continually in war, in the office of
a Count, and never comes home; she continually in her Country, where she was
born, and never goes abroad. Nay, which is more incredible, (respecting the
powers of the Stars, and not the wills of God and men) he is a married man,
and she is an holy virgin; he has many children, and she was never married. O
but their HOROSCOPES had a great sway in all things. Tush, I have shown the
power of that to be just nothing already. I but what soever it does it is there
in the nativity that must do it. What and not in the conception, wherein it is
manifest, that there is but one generative act concurrent? For natures power is
such, that a woman having once conceived cannot second any conception, until
she be delivered of the first. And therefore it is necessary, that the Twins
conception fall both in one moment. Were their diverse HOROSCOPES (think you)
the cause that in their birth, he became a man-child, and she a woman?
Wherefore since it is no such absurdity to say, that there are some Planetary
influences that have effect only upon diversity of forms in bodies, as we see
the alteration of the year by the Suns access, and departure; and diverse things
to decrease and increase, just as the Moon does (Crabs for example, and all
shell-fishes besides the wonderful course of the Sea) but that the mind of
man is not subject to any of these powers of the Stars; those Artists now
desiring to bind our acts unto this we see them free from, do show us plainly;
that the effects of the Stars have no power so much as upon our bodies. For
what is so pertinent unto the body as the sex thereof? And yet we see that two
Twins of diverse sexes may be conceived both under one Consteilation.
Wherefore what FONDER AFFECTION can there be, then to say, That that figure of
Heaven which was one in the conception of them both, had not power to keep the
sister from differing in sex from her brother, with whom she had one
Constellation, and yet that that fign of Heaven which ruled at their nativity
had power to make her differ so far from him in her virgins sanctimony. Thus
Austin. And now for shame let Will. hold his outcries against Doctor Homes,
for that the Doctor said Austin was against Astrology. And for shame let
William endeavor no more to gull his Reader with pretense that Austin is for
Astrology. The Battle grows hot; Will. is not able to bear the Shock. And if
yet he, or his followers have not enough of Austin, let them turn to the
Doctors Section of Answers to Objections, and his answr to the last Objection
brought out out of Austin, where twelve places out of Austin are alleged,
which vehemently contest against Astrology, Dormonolog. cap. 10. ^^t. 5.
besides others in the first Section of the Doctors tenth Chapter against
Astrology. Now where is Williams boast and cry of victoria, that Doctor Homes
did falsely bring Austin against Astrology? Go Will. off the Stage for shame.

Will. Ramsey's fourth Section has answered so little, or rather nothing
(worthy to be called an answer) to Doctor Homes his faithful Allegation of M.
Perkins, Bridges, and Geree, in the Doctors second Section before inserted,
which the Reader may now by the help of this Survey compare together; and may
see more (if he please) of M. Perkins in his Treatise of Witchcraft, and of M.
Geree in his Asirologico-Mastix, and in him of M. Buidges (all commonly to be
had) I say Will. Ram. has said so little or rather nothing in form of an
answer to the Doctor concerning these worthy men, that I need add but very
little at all.

Sufficit exiguo strigilatio curta caballo. 1. To Melanchton the Doctor
answers in his fifth Section of confutation of Objections. Paragraph. 2.

Secondly, to Will. cursed comparison of Astrology and the Scriptures together
by the injury done to these to shelter that from justice (so often repeated in
his Lux V.) we answer, that a good man never wrote against the Word of God, (if
some bad ones have, since the reign of Astrology) but generally all good men
write against Astrology. It has been sealed to thousands of thousands by the
holy Spirit of God that the sacred Scriptures are the Word of God
(notwithstanding the diabolical opposition of some bad men) but Astrology is
suspected, yea and asserted by many godly men, that is from, by or with the
Devil in its predictions, or the Devil in, with, or by them; choose you
whether. So Doctor Homes has cleared it out of M. Bridges, M. Perkins, (who
asserts other learned men up to the Apostles times of the same mind) and S.
Austin who in his 5. Tom. C. 291. Edit. Basil. Frob. A.D. 1565. says plainly,
that The Answers of Astrologers are from evil Spirits.

3. To that William distinguishes of M. Perkins Treatise of Astrology, let M.
Perkins his Treatise answer; which to any that shall view it, will quickly make
it appear that he wholly bends himself by all manner of means to prove all
Judicial Astrology to be altogether impious and unlawful.

4. For Sir Christopher Heyden's answer to M. Chambers etc. it will be taken
into consideration anon. Had not William so cracked of it and reprinted it in
this his Book now under consideration, the fame thereof (as great as William
proclaims to be) had not made it known to the Anti-astrologer; but at
William's incitation it may by and by receive a due answer.

To Will. Ramsey's fifth Section touching M. Bridges, that of the Doctors
second Section, before inserted is reply enough; for Will. Ram. has upon the
matter said nothing to it, but only told his Reader most impudently two
bouncing untruths, I might (but for respect to my own civility) call it worse.
Will. Ramsey's first Untruth here is, that Ptolomy, Galen, Hippocrates, Menti^i
eft contrae mentem ^ ire. Aug.
S. Austin, and thousands more found not only a Certainty in Astrology, but
concluded and agreed that it was the most benesicial Art under the Sun. For it
has been written as with Sunbeams, for evidence, that Austin is totally and
universally against Judicial Astrology over all his works. That Galen, and
Hippocrates only spoke a little to Astronomy. And that Ptolomy in his Astr.
Praedict. lib. 1. does grant that many ways Judicial Astrology is uncertain.
For William's thousands more, of his fellow Impostours, they are Anonymi, and
so cannot have the honor to be called by their names; if it were true there
were such and so many. But I have found Will. so often tardy with untruths,
that he is not to be believed in any thing of this nature upon his own word.
Williams other bouncing utruth (if by undertaking he means performing) is this,
That William will undertake to speak as much, nay and with more proof against
any Art or Science the Doctor can devise to nominate (though never so true)
then all his learned men in his Character of the present times against
Astrology. For I suppose that was the sense he intended, or else it is
nonsense. For I confess the man has left it in print (if the Printer did not
wrong him) with a semicircle (I mean half a Parenthesis) and he forgot, and
then flies I know not whether, as if just then in speaking that loud and lewd
untruth he had lost his wits in a passion, or had been confounded in his
intellectuals by the just judgment of God. Turn back Reader, and read him at
** and see whether I wrong him! And if that be the sense he intended, then he
carries a most false tongue and an impudent forehead in his Astrological head.
For he may sooner eat his fingers then with good proof speak against Geometry,
Arithmetic and diverse other Sciences of the Mathematics; whose demonstrations
are infallible (as the Maxim is) and apparently to sense. And for the rest of
Liberal Sciences, their Principles are unmovable; and their bodies
unquestionable, whether they be Arts and Sciences? But Williams Astrology is
questioned in the very Fundamentals of what is essentially proper to it, (as
the Astrologers lay claim) viz. in the Theorems and Canons of predicting and
Prognostications. Yea, the very System may justly be questioned (as the Doctor
has hinted) whether there be any such thing, as Judicial Astrology; or any
Astrology as distinct from other Sciences. For clearly Natural Astrology (if we
may indulge that name) is according to several matters and their
considerations, parts of other Sciences, unto which it is to be referred for
its being.

W. R. his CHAP. III. Wherein the Doctors divine proofs against Astrology, are
examined and confuted.
BUt before I begin, I shall desire the Reader to have a special care to
remember what Astrology is, which is now in controversy, and either to be
confuted and condemned, or defended and cleared; the definition whereof you
have at the beginning of the first Chapter, for otherwise our pains and
arguments are but frivolous on either side; wherefore I commend M. Homes in
that he did not first set down the state of his question, before he began to
consute it; but thinking pleno ore, to condemn Astrology, will be enough to
scare the Reader from the study thereof, leaving him to consider what it is he
condemns, although he be altogether ignorant of the same; and so his words may
have the more force, and take the deeper impression in the Readers heart to
believe what he would fain, and as much as in himlies, studies to mainrain.

SURVEY. Before we hear Will. Ram. any further, something must be said to this
general of his third Chapter, in two particulars. 1. To join issue with
William, to entreat the Reader to remember what Astrology is now in
controversy, viz. That same Judicial Astrology whereby men undertake to
foretell humane events. For as Ptolomy (whence Will. Ram. definition is
pretended to be collected) confesses (ibidem) Multi quaestus causa, alias
divinationes venditant nomine and dignitate hujus Artis, ac vulgo imponunt
multa praedicentes quae non significantur naturalibus causis. i.e. Many
Astrologers foretell many things which are not signified by natural causes,
selling their predictions (under the name of Astrological) for money, making
the common peoto believe them. And Will. Ram. in this his Christian Judicial
Astrology professes by the help of Astrology to foretell whether a man may be
rich, Cap. 1. Sect. 6. Whether a Woman that came to him should have her money
due to her from the Parliament; the Gentleman have his from his uncle, and
where the woman's Husband was that came to Will. Ram. to inquire of him, Cap. 4.
Sect. 3. And so others of them predict in their Books of Prognostications, and
practice in their Chambers of the like humane events. 2. To join with Will.
Ram. in commending D. Homes in that he spoke against Astrology in general,
under that name, for that the Scripture so does, without any distinction; and
Art does justify it; that there is no Judicial Asirology; no distinct Art of
Natural Astrology.

W. R. his SECT. I. Wherein the Drs first Scripture proof, viz. Deuteronomy. 18.10. is
convinced and cleared, no wise to condemn ASTROLOGY.
COncerning his first proof, Deuteronomy. 18.10. I have formerly in my Reply to
Raunces Declaration against Astrology said said something and referred the
Reader, to the learned Sir Christopher Heydon, to be further satisfied in the
rest of his divine proofs, in his answer to M. Chamber, and that so learned a
piece may not be kept from the knowledge of the vulgar, under the cloud of
silence, I will here along in the confutation of M. Homes his divine proofs,
use his very arguments and word (as near as I can) against the same places
alleged by M. Chamber.

His first proof then is Deuteronomy. 18.10. There shall not be found among you any
one that uses Divination, or an observer of times; which words says he, by
the common consent of the learned of all sorts, Signify Astrology and
Astrologers; and for the which sins, the Nations were driven out before the
Children of Israel: Now that you shall see how far M. Homes is mistaken to
think hereby to persuade the world against Astrology I will give you that
learned Gentleman's words against M. Chamber hereon, where he says, Picus
urges that Achinas understands the word in the Original, to fignifie such,
as observe lucky and unlucky hours, which our English translate, A regarder of
times, and Tremelius, Planetarius, and and from hence they think they have
pregnant evidence to condemn Astrology by this Law.

I may reckon up here also M. Homes his Mercer, R. Kimchy, and Schindler, who,
says he, take the words in the worst sense, viz. The curious and Diabolical
Arts, as Magi of the Egyptians, Ergo, says M. Homes, Astrology is not lawful.
But to proceed with Sir Christopher Heydon's discourse hereon, says he, But
notwithstanding all this, I will make it appear, that these Translations are of
small force, and being admitted, little or nothing impeach this Art.

And first, [A]
I encounter them with the authority of Church, even from the time of Moses
until they wrote, being wholly against them. For to begin with the Septuagint,
They have translated the word Gnomen, in this place (...) which signifies
Augurare, or to divine by the voice and flying of Birds; S. Hierome and the
vulgar expounded it, of such as divine by observation by Dreams. Pagnine in his
Translation interprets it Hariolus, by a general name, or such a one, as
divineth at the Altar by Sacrifices. Arias Montanus uses the word
Praestigiator, that is a Jugler or Cofiner, that with Legerdemain deceives the
eyesight. (See that that is also confessed by M. Homes himself) So that
besides all antiquity, and consent of the whole Church against him, we see that
diverse men have diverfly interpreted this word; and therefore I leave it to the
judgment of the Reader, whether we are to give credit to the new Expositours,
rather then to the ancient and learned Hebrews themselves, who best understood
their own Language, or to the common understanding of the Fathers and the
Church, even from the first, until these men (which has been long since)
expounded it otherwise then all that had gone before them. And now to come to
the English Translation, as we have it expressed in our English Bibles; see
with what reason and sound arguments M. Homes is silenced, who is not only
thus mistaken in the signification of the word, but most slanderously intrudeth
Astrologers with, or at least makes them the same with Wizards, and those that
have samiliar spirits; For, says he, so that indeed (as it is in Lev. 20.6.) to
follow such kind of Arts, (speaking before of Divination, by observation of
times, and juggling which he all along concludes to be Astrology, as his
Interpreters there have it) Is to go a whoring (spiritually) from Christ, and
God will (says he) set his face against such, and cut off such from among his
people, weighty reasons against Astrology (says he).

The same Sir Christopher Heydon says, [B]
Concerning our English Translatours, I find they rather leave us in doubts,
then resolved; for whereas here they take the word Gnomen for a regarder of
times, in other places they interpret it otherwise, as in 2 Chronicles. cap. 33.
verse. 6. for Witchcraft, and in the 5. of Micah. For South-sayers. So that in
this inconstancy to themslves, they must either give better reason (then any
thing I know they are able) why in this place of Deuteronomy. it should not be
intepeted as well a Witch, or a Southsayer, as a Regarder of times, or else
such a regarder of times, as makes his election by Witchcraft and Southsaying,
and not by Astrology. Again, suppose the word be admitted, [C]
as the English translate it; yet neither is all regarding of time prohibited,
neither does it prove that regarding of time by Astrology is unlawful, For
Solomon (the wisest of men) says, That the heart of the wise man knows time,
and that to every purpose there is a time, as to plant, to pluck up, to slay,
to heal, to break down, to build, to weep, to laugh, etc. which none but the
fool neglects. As in Ecclesiastes farther in the third Chapter, and more at
large: and he that observes not time, but shall laugh when he should weep, and
sow when he should reap, is unseasonable and makes himself ridiculous.
Wherefore if this be the true interpretation or signification of the word, he
must speak against that superstitious observation of times, which the Heathen
used, and that superstitious people at present do use; the very same I may say
to M. Homes.

But in answer to M. Homes his Expositours, take the interpretation of the word
Gnonan, as the same Sir Christopher Heydon delivers it by M. Edward Lively,
Professor of the Hebrew in Cambridge to Queen Elizabeth: who was solicited by
Sir Christopher Heydon to deliver his opinion and judgment of the Hebrew word,
because it was objected by M. Chamber, that Tremelius did interpret it
Planetarius, wherefore for the Readers better satisfaction, I have here
delivered it verbatim as that worthy Knight has it.

I have looked in all the Hebrew Scripture, wherein that word is used,
examining as well the judgments of the Hebrew Scoliastes in their
Commentaries, as also many of the best Translations, Caldee, Greek, and Latin,
among whom for the signification of that word, I find this general agreement,
that it signifies an unlawful and forbidden Art of South-saying, or Juggling,
or Sorcery, or Witchcraft; but touching the certain and special kind thereof,
there is such dissension and disagteement among them, as that there is great
diversity of opinions, but none comes to Tremelius his mind, for a planetary,
( or of M. Homes his Arabrick versions, which it seems he is loath, or at least
ashamed to nominate.

W. R. his SECT. II. Wherein the Drs second proof is refelled, viz. Esaias. 2.6.
ANd if so, then I may with more confidence affirm his second passage of
Scripture to the less material in all respects, for the blindest of people may
clearly see. it does no whit so much as either hint or mean Astrology, Esaias
2.6. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because they
are replenished from the East, and are Sooth-sayeers like the Philistims; where
is Astrology in all this? The Text tells us. God had forsaken his people,
because they were South-sayers. but as for their being Astrologers, I see
nothing mentioned. But let us see but how he tugs to bring this far fetched
argument or proof to serve his turn; he shows us first that the word clearly
signifies South sayers, which is enough alone to refell all the arguments
therein let them say what they will to the contrary, Vatablus in his Notes
(says he) renders it Diviners; and Junius, Praestigiatores, that is, (says
he) that make show of that they cannot do: you have heard Junius opinion but
now, but what of this? Vacablus says, the word imports Diviners, must this
consequently and infallibly be Astrologers, why not Necromancers, Auguries,
Inchanters, Sorcerers, Auruspicers? Do not all these divine? but I need not
insist longer hereon; for, he answers this point in his following words
himself, The Septuagint (says he) renders it (...), (says Budeus) says he.
A kind of foretelling: as (...) (says they) signifies Divination, and
generally the Caldee, Syriack, Arabic; Arias Montanus, etc. renders it
Augurers or Auguries, Ergo, not Astrologers; but says he, farther because
antiquities tell us that that the Augurers did divine as well by the Aspects of
the Heavens as by flying Birds; Authors of late times commonly use that word
to express Divination in general: O brave reason! because for brevities sake in
Oration, or the like, Authors as he calls them) perhaps use this word,
therefore he will use it (being as he confesses himself general) to condemn
particularly Astrology? and because the Text speaks against Augurers, and
they know the Aspects of the Planets, therefore, it also condemns Astrology?
All that believe shall be saved (says the Scripture) it is clear the Devils
believe and tremble, Ergo, I shall conclude them not damned? rare Logic indeed!

W. R. his SECTION III. Wherein his third Text is convinced, viz. Esaias 44.25.
THirdly, he produces the 44. Chapter of Esaias, v. 25, etc. I am the Lord thy
Redeemer, which do frustrate the signs of Wizards, making the South-sayers
mad, foiling their wise men, and making their skill foolish. This is to as
little purpose brought to condemn Astrology, as it is weakness in him to
allege it or affirm it. How can M. Homes, or any one living, prove Astrology
to be signified by any of these names, when it is clear (as abovesaid) it
depends merely on the natural influences and effects of the Stars? which is
not to foretell by the flying or voice of Birds, observation of the intrails of
Beasts, and the like; nor indeed is it properly to be termed Divination, for to
divine is, or does not naturally signify the foretelling of future events by
natural causes, but by some divine instinct.

But to come to the words in the Text, which he would needs enforce against
Astrology; the same Sir Christopher Heydon, further faith upon these words.
That they are purposely uttercd to advance the omnipotency of God, so greatly
diminished by Idolatry, but to imagine that God would set forth the greatness
of his power, by oppoposing the same against that, which in it self is
fruitless, infirm, and of no force at all, were not only against sense, but in
truth to frustrate the words and meaning of God himself; wherefore it does
necessarily follow, that so long as it pleases him to suffer the course of
nature to proceed without interruption. Astrological signs must be confessed
effectual, and not to be frustrated but by miracle, and by his omnipotent
power, to which that the Stars are subject, all our Astrologers do confess,
and none but an Atheist will deny. For as God is the Creator of all things so
is he the first cause of all causes, to whom all causes are but his
instruments; and therefore as the instrument works not of it self, but when
it is employed by the hand of the Artificer, so the Heavens being Gods
instruments, do not exercise their force upon these inferior things, but as
God does use their Ministry in the Government of the world. And this he says
is taught us by the Prophet Hosea, (as abovesaid) Chap. 2.21, 22. where (says
he) he says, not simply the heavens shall hear the earth, but first, I will
hear the heavens, to show them the power the heavens have over the earth, and
that it depends on God. In which sense, the Scripture says also, God works
all in all things, and that we live, move, and have our being in him. And
therefore whether we respect the natural course of things, or those accidents
which happen besides the order of nature, we are to acknowledge it to be the
supereminent power of God, as the first cause of every thing, which
nevertheless can be no impeachment to Astrology, because God does govern
ordinately, and therefore seldom perverteth or disturbeth that order, whereby
in his eternal providence, he does govern his Workmanship.

W. R. his SECT. IV. Wherein he says the Doctor fourth proof is refelled,
viz. Esaias 47.12, 13, 14.
FOurthly, he brings the 47. of Esaias, 12, 13, 14. Stand now with thine
enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, Let now the Astrologers,
the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticatours, stand up and save thee. etc.
Behold they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not
deliver themselves, etc. This very place (as I would have the Reader observe)
is enough to confute his former injury to Astrologers, in reckoning them no
other then South-sayers, Wizards, Sorcerers, and the like, when he sees clearly
the Lord here makes a particular distinction between the one and the other; for
you see, Astrologers, Monthly Prognosticatours, Sorceries, and Inchanters
paicicularly named.

But to come now to the clearing of the Text which he thinks does absolutely
strike the fatal blow to Astrology; inferring from thence, that Astrology is
opposite to confidence in God, and that Astrologers are much of the same
abomination, with Inchanters and South-sayers, and that they are to be derided,
and no wise to be trusted in etc. But as I said before, the wit of man is not
able to answer these his vain wrests and interpretations of the Scriptures,
better then by that honorable Gentleman Sir Christopher Heydon, I here give
you, as he has it in his second Chapter, in answer to M. Chamber bringing in
the same place of Scripture, and indeed with the same conclusions as does M.
Homes. I will not deny that, because God and his Prophets were not believed by
the Chaldeans, (who reposed in their Magicians, South-sayers, and
Mathematicians) the Prophet here in a scorning Sarcasmus, bids them save
their Empire from ruin, therein contemning their Power, and not their
Predictions, and expressly noting that it shall not be in them to save
themselves from the judgments to come. This I do plainly acknowledge, although
were I disposed to stand upon all advantages with M. Chamber, since both
Vatablus, and M. Calvin in their Commentaries, confess that word Chabar does
indifferently signify such observers of Heaven as were Inchanters thereof; I
could easily avoid him as not disputing ad idem, since not Astrologers simply,
but such as withal joined Magic, seems here to be mentioned. And it is
manifest by the example of Moses, and the Egyptians, and of Balaam and Balack,
that though they were Astrologers, yet they reposed their safety against God
and his people, only in their Magical power, by which (as their Poets and
others report) they profess themselves able to pull the Moon and the Stars out
of Heaven, and so does Diodorus Siculus testific, Lib. 2. cap. 8. that though
they were cunning in Astrology, yet they did only prevent the cvils which they
did foresee, by Enchantments and Charms. For in truth. Astrology professes
only to fore see natural mutations and accidents, and not power to prevent and
save. But to return to that which he most expects, I will admit as much as M.
Chamber himself can desire, that the Prophet here derideth the trust which was
put in the skill of Astrologers (which is indeed M. Homes his chief drift also)
now let him frame his argument, and he shall never be able to bring the
proposition of this Chapter (which is, That Christianity and Astrology cannot
stand together) (which indeed is M. Homes his argument also, concluding
Astrology, to be opposite to confidence in God) within this conclusion. For it
follows not, that because upon some circumstance a thing may be derided, that
it is unlawful. If this were any consequence, then because confidences in
Princes, Psalm. 1.16. in Riches, Psalm. 52. in Horses and Chariots, Esaias 31. in
Cities, Jer. 5. in Physicians, 2 Chronicles. 16. in Negotiation or Trade of
Merchandise. In the last verse of this same Chapter of Esaias, (where the same
words and phrase are used against Merchants, that before were used against
Observers of Heaven, or Astrologers, as Arias Montanus and Tremelius translate
it) is prohibited, derided, and punished; we must hold the permission of
Princes, Riches, Horses, Chariots, Cities, Physicians, and Merchants, to be
against Christianity, and unlawful. He ought therefore first to have
distinguished of the trust that is here derided, and not thus to deceive by any
elench, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, as if all trust were taken
away, because some trust is derided. For in these places, and the like, only
such a trust as excludes confidence in God is understood, and no other. As in
our case, where notwithstanding God by his Prophets threatened the destruction
of the Babylonish Monarchy, it was not believed; but these Heathen presuming
rather upon their own power and skill, in contempt of God broke forth, as
appears verse 10. into these blasphemous speeches, None sees me. Quasi dicat
(says Tremelius) ne deus quidem novit rations meas; Nay God himself knows
not my ways; and again, I am and none else; and verse 7. I shall not sit as a
widow, nor shall not know the loss of Children: Thus denying both God and his
power; while they presume upon their own. But is this heathenish presumption
and confidence to be imputed as a fault to Astrology? or is it not truly to be
reputed the impiety of the Professors, and others, with whom the Prophet
deals? who denying that to God which is due, and ascribing more then they
ought to the Stars, and their own knowledge and power, do that which Astrology
never taught them, and therefore is not guilty of their ungodliness. He ought
then to make a difference between the Heathen, with whom the Prophet has to
do, and Christians against whom he writes; for though it be true that
Christian Astrologers do monthly prognosticate, as is mentioned in the Text,
by the consideration of the Stars; yet is he not able to tax any of them with
that derogation from God, or impiety, which is here derided. For to place
confidence in Stars, as in divine causes and powers, is one thing, and to
esteem them but as subordinate and second causes in nature, is another; the one
makes them Gods, the other but Gods instruments, which (as our Astrologers do
acknowledge with one consent) it is in his power to alter, as best pleases his
divine will; and therefore they are very far from that heathenish presumption
and confidence here taxed, whereby ye may see, that the trust may be reproved,
yet the Art unchecked. For I omit here to show, that monthly Prognostications
grounded upon observation, deduced from causes in nature, have ever been
permitted and suffered, in all well ordered and Christian Commonwealths, so
far as I know; and that not only the Fathers, and those later Divines by me
before remembered, but even M. Calvin himself, in his admonition, with others
(that attribute as little as they may to this Art) do allow thereof, so far
forth as they extend to the state of the weather, of health, plague, plenty,
dearth, and to the direction of the Physician, when to purge by Pill. when by
Potion, when by letting of blood; this being as far as our Prognostications
proceed; which nevertheless would not have been suffered, if God by his holy
Prophet had showed any detestation thereof, or reproved the same as unlawful,
and unchristian. Wherefore when these adversaries condemn the Art for the
abuses of Artists, it is clear that they do but play the Sophisters, deceiving
by a plain fallacy, ab accidente. And lastly, if it be considered what S.
Hierome, Hugo, Aquinas, Lyra, Haymo, and other ancient Expositours, have
written upon the Text, it is most certain, that not one of them is so sharp
sighted as to espy out any thing in this place that may prejudicat Astrology,
but they all defend the same as fully as my self. Wherefore if in this place of
Scripture M. Homes be not as far mistaken as in all the rest of his foregoing
Cavils, and makes not himself appear to the eyes of the world to be a mere
Sophister, let the impartial judge.

W. R. his SECT. V. Wherein his fifth proof is proved weak, as to his purpose,
viz. Jer. 10.2, 3.
F^^^ly, he strives to condemn Astrology by the 10. of Jer. v. 2, 3. but to as
little purpose as in all the rest; the words are, Learn not the way of the
Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are
dismayed at them, etc. whereupon he infers. Astrology not to be lawful,
(because as he thinks God here by the Prophet prohibiteth the Jews to give
credit to Star-gazers) but as I said before, Astrologers do not make the Stars
gods, but Gods instruments; Not in the least attributing fatal necessity to be
in their power: wherefore then consequently he argues not against, nor
contradicts, nor condemns Astrologers by these his Cavils, since they are
as far from being as guilty thereof as himself; nay, and I believe more. But
for the farther clearing of the Text, and the manifesting of M. Homes his
mistake, if not wilful malice, let us hear what the same Sir Christopher
Heydon says in answer to the same place of Scripture alleged by M. Chamber
also to condemn Astrology: Whereupon M. Chamber infers, that the Prophet
wills the Jews to give no credit to the Star-gazers, (and M. Homes, trust or
confidence, p. 134. opposite to the confidence and comfort in God:) But sure he
that makes this collection out of these words of the Text, never (I think)
either gazed or looked upon them with half an eye: for the Prophet prohibiteth
fear; M. Chamber, credit; (M. Homes, trust or confidence;) again, the Prophet
speaks of the Stars themselves; M. Chamber, of the persons that observe
them; (so M. Homes also) wherefore what difference there is between the one and
the other, so far ought we to be from giving M. Chambers assertion any credit
(and how shall M. Homes his then take?

For if he will truly inform the Reader, he knows there is nothing prohibited
in these words, but that the Jews should not learn the way of the Heathen;
which when he wresteth against Astrology, he does both show himself to be out
of the way, and to seek to seduce others, for to the creature, as in these
words, Fear not the signs of Heaven; where the word Fear is not simply
understood but for Religious reverence, and Divine worship: for that it is
often taken in this sense, is no novelty to those that are acquainted with the
speech and phrase of the holy Ghost: as for example Esaias cap. 29. v. 13. And
their fear toward me was taught by the precept of men: where fear is (by Christ
himself, alleging this place of the Prophet, Matthew. 15. v. 9.) expounded for
worship, saying, in vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines men's
traditions: as likewise the very same word is used in other places, for the
idolatrous worship exhibited to false gods: as 2 Kings cap. 17. v. 7. when the
children of Israel sinned etc. it is said, they feared other gods. I could
confirm this by infinite like testimonies, were it not superfluous in so clear
a case: But to prove that the Prophet even here, under this word, likewise
revoketh the Jews from worshipping the heavenly bodies, is yet more evident by
the words following: for after he has in the two next verses expressed the
vain customs of the Heathen, in erecting and adoring chose images which they
worshipped; he likewise restrains them from this second Idolatry verse. 5. in
the very same phrase that he did at the first: Fear them not, for they stand up
as the Palm Tree, but they speak not, etc. whereby there is no color of
wrangling left to him, that disposes not himself to be obstinately perverse:
but of force it must be confessed, that the Jews are here only forbidden to
imitate the Heathen in both these kinds of Idolatry.

["To confirm this more fully, by the consideration of other places: the
Scripture gives us plentiful testimony, that the Jews did follow the Heathen
in their Idolatry to the Stars, but are never reprehended for learning
Astrology of them: wherefore the Prophet Amos cap. 5. prophesied to them long
before, even this captivity wherein the Israelites were held in Jeremies time,
because they had born (that is worshipped) the Images of Siccuth and Chiun.
Abenezra and with him Montanus, understanding the Planet Saturn by Chiun: and
S. Hierome expounding the word Coeab, thinks it to be Venus whom even the
Saracens in his time did worship: but S. Luke Acts 7. v. 42, and 43. following
the Greek does explain Amos, and says, then God turned himself away, and gave
them up to serve the host of Heaven, as it is written in the book of the
Prophets: and you took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your God
Remphaim, figures which you made to worship them, therefore I will carry you
away beyond Babylon: and therefore not unaptly have some Expositours conceived
the Images by which the Prophet does here exprobrate the Heathen, to have been
the images of the Signs, and that not without reason; because that after the
Prophet has restrained them from this heathenish fear of the Signs,
immediately he gives this reason, For the customs of the people are vain: and
declaring wherein, he adds, For one cutteth down a tree in the Forest, etc.
which should want sense, if this verse depended not on the former: thus also 2
Kings cap. 17. v. 15, 16. the History says, they followed the Heathen that
were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had charged them, that they
should not do like them.

W. R. his SECT. VI. Wherein (as he pretends) the Doctors sixth proof is
refelled, viz. Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. has nothing in it, but words, being left
of Sir Christopher unto himself; and therefore his Section is not worth the
setting down, as I dare be judged by the learned of his own judgment.
SURVEY. Thus with long-suffering have we waited in silence, and quietly
permitted William Ramsey to tell out his Tale. But I must confess, had not the
most of that he has said, been the words of Sir Christopher Heyden. or etc.
that was wiser then himself, I do not know how possibly I could have born with
him thus far. For let any wise man judge, whether whiles he speaks, he be not
like Davus iste in the Comedy viz. qui interturbat omnia. Yet though he has
borrowed all the strength he could, herein is his unhappiness, that Sir
Christopher wrote long since; and so his answers do not charge home to repel
the impressions the Doctor, made upon the Squadrant of Judicial Astrologers.
For let but an impartial eye compare what the Doctor has said in his third
Section (which is the Troop against which the former Brigade has fought all
this while) and it will appear that all this while to an an inch it has
fixedly stood its ground; which for the clearer manifesting of what I have
said, I have here verbatim inserted him.

The Doctors SECT. III. The condemnation of Astrology by the word of God, in
several places of Scripture.
THe first place is in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. There shall not be found among you any
one that uses Divination, or an observer of times. An ill thing that it must
not be found among them, not in any one Man or woman of all the Nation: Just as
it is said the name Baali, Hos. 2.16, 17. must be removed, not sounded, because
Idolaters used it, though of the same signification with Ishi, there appointed,
i. e. My Lord, or My Husband: and as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.3. of
covetousness, Let it not be once named among Christians. So the Prophet Moses
here, as from God, charge that there must not be any one among them that
uses Divination, or is an observer of times: both which words by common
consent of the Learned of all sorts, signify Astrology, and Astrologers. The
first word (...) which by our Translatours is rendered, one that uses
Divination (the phrase indeed is strong and emphatical, (...) that is, Divining
Divinations) is, as Mercer affirms, taken for the most part in an ill sense;
and asserteth out of the Hebrew, R. Kimchi, that it contains every Art which
is used to foreknow things future. Shindler affirms to the same purpose, that
in an evil sense it comprehends all things which are done, (...) i. e. by any
curious diabolical Art, as the Magi of Egypt. And Elias says that it signifies
to divine things; which is attributed to Balaam (see Josh. 13.) who because he
could not curse from observation of the natural Stars, but was forced to
bless; he yet expressed himself in his own Dialect, Astrologically, of a
spiritual Starr that should arise out of Jacob. Avenzara, they say, an
Astrologer affirms that this word is a common name to all Diviners, but more
proper to Astrologers. Lastly, The Arabian Version of this 18. of Deuteronomy. v. 10.
renders our word, He that exercises Astrology.

The second word in this 18. of Deuteronomy. verse. 10, (...) which our Translatours
render, An observer of times, is diversely taken; but all close to signify a
prohibition of Astrology. The sum of what the learned Hebrews say (who must
needs best understand their own Language) in brief is this (...) praestigiari
(whence is our (...)) Aben Ezra will have to be derived of (...) A Cloud, as to
foretell by the Clouds; that it will be well or ill to do, or attempt this or
that upon this or that day. R. Solomon derives it from (...) Time, as to
signify observation of times. The wise Ancients derived it from (...) An eye,
and so (...) to signify him that dazles the eyes of the beholder, that he may
see falsehood in stead of that which is true. Their words are (...) etc. that
is, The wise men say, (...) is he who holds the eyes. R. Akiva says, it is
he which computeth times and hours; saying, It is good to go forth to day; to
morrow it is good to negociate, etc. Sanedrim, cap. 7. fol. 65.2. Of these
Kimchi, in Lib. Radicum, makes mention. In the later Etymology are signified
Curious Astrologers, determining by the disposition and operation of the
Stars, certain days to be days of good, merry, and prosperous things: Others
to be days of evil, sad, and adverse things: Thus the learned Hebrews. The
Chaldee renders the said two words; the first, Divineth Divination; the second,
Observes hours, which is proper to Astrologers. Note further, for the
clearing of this first place of Deuteronomy. 18.10. that both our foresaid Hebrew
words are used again by Moses, verse. 4. (and in the same manner translated by
our last English Translatours: where again the Arabic Version renders (...)
Astrologers.) And Moses adds these five strong arguments against the said Art
of Astrological and other unlawful Predictions.

First, that all such are an abomination to the Lord, verse. 12.

Secondly, that such Arts being used by the Canaanites, God did drive them out
before the Israelites, Verse. 12.

Thirdly, that unless men cast away the use of the said Arts, they cannot be
perfect; that is, upright and sincere with God, Verse. 13.

Fourthly, that godly men must differ from Canaanites and Heathens, in the
abandoning such Arts, because God has forbid his people the use of them. Verse.
14.

Fifthly, that instead of such ways of prediction the Lord raises up Christ
the great Prophet, ( verse. 15. compare Acts 3.23.) to foretell unto them what
is meet for them to foreknow: so that only Christ. and they to whom he gives
the divinely inspired gift of Prophecy, must foretell things to come: No Art
may undertake it; for it is opposite to Christ, and presumes upon that which
belongs only to divine Prophecy. So that indeed (as it is in Lev. 20.6.) to
follow such kind of Arts, is to go a whoring (spiritually) from Christ; and
God will (as it is said there) set his face against such, and cut off such a
soul from among his people: weighty reasons against Astrology, without any
intimation from God of any distinction or limitation.

The second place against Astrology, is Isai 2.6. Therefore thou have forsaken
thy people, the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the East, and
are South-sayers like the Philistims. The word (...) here rendered
South-sayers, is rendered by Vatablus in his Notes, Diviners; by Junius,
Praestigiatores; that is, that make show of that they cannot do. Greek, viz.
Septuagint, (...) that is (says Budeus, etc.) A kind of foretelling: as (...)
(say they) signifies Divination. And generally the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic,
Arias Montanus, etc. render it Augurers, or Auguries, which by reason of the
antiquity of the word, and because antiquities tell us that the Augurers divine
as well by the aspect of Heaven as by flying of Birds; Authors of later times
commonly use that word to express Divination in general.

But to come closer to the word; Learned Arias Montanus does (as well as I)
derive our word from (...) that is, Time; yea so does R Solomon derive (...) or
(...) (same word in descent or substance) of whose signifying Astrology or
Astrologers ye heard before abundantly.

The intimations of the sinfulness and prohibition of this Divination, in this
second of Isai are. First, that the Jews therein to the displeasure of God,
imitated the Heathens, and uncircumcised outcasts; as those in the East, that
is, the Chaldeans and the Philistime. Secondly, in that the holy Ghost puts
such a singular note on this sin: He says not they are Swearers, unrighteous,
etc. like the Chaldeans and Philistims; but they are Diviners, like those of
the East, even Chaldeans, or like the Philistims. Thirdly that with a shril and
strong Emphasis the Prophet tells the Jews, though considered in their highest
notion, as the House of Jacob, and Gods people; Therefore for their Astrology,
etc. God had forsaken, or cast down, or sent them away into Captivity: that is,
had past an irrevocable sentence so to do.

The third place of Scripture against it, is Isai 44.24, 25, 26. Thus says the
Lord thy Redeemer and he that formed thee from the womb. I am the Lord that
makes all things, that stretches forth the Heavens alone etc. that
frustrateth the tokens of the liars and makes Diviners mad, that turns wise
men backward and makes their knowledge foolish; that confirms the word of
his servants, and performs the counsel of his messengers. Mark by the way
(before we scan the words in the Original) the Geneva Notes, in the Magin of our
greater English Bibles. Namely, He armeth them (say those Notes) against the
South sayers of Babylon, which would have born them in hand, that they knew by
the Stars, that God would not deliver them, and that Babylon should stand.

But let us come more particularly to the words. First, it is evident here is
mention of Diviners, a word in our English generally taken in an ill sense, to
signify those that by unlawful Arts undertake to foretell future things. And
the Chaldee, Syriack. Arabic Greek, and Ancient Latin, and that of Vatablus
and Junius, render the Text in part, by Diviners, and Divinations. And Vatablus
in his Notes upon this place, says, Mendacium, that is, of Liars, is in Hebrew
(...) that is, of Astrologers. And Junius in his Notes on this place, faith,
Signa mendacium etc. that is, The signs of the Liars, of which see following
in the 47. of Isai verse. 10. and so forward to verse. 14. And sure enough there
in Isai 47.10. Astrologers expressly, and under several other names, and
notions also are bitterly inveighed against, as we shall see after, in the
particular scanning of that place. Let us add to all, a little more particular
sifting of the words of this 44. of Isai 25. (...) Liars is of (...) He
feigned, lied, and by (...) in Isai 44.25. are understood (as Buxtorfe, and R.
Solomon and R. David affirm) (...) Inspicientes astra, Astrologi, that is,
Gazers upon the Stars, Astrologers. And for the other word in the 44. of Isai,
viz. (...) that you have here rendered in English, Diviners; we scanned it
before in Deuteronomy. 18. showing you how the Hebrews, yea, the Astrologer himself
confesses that it signifies Astrologers. The intimations against Astrology in
this Text are, fi-st, that it seems prejudicial to Gods Creation, and
Redemption, and Providence. For when God would here comfort his people against
Astrologers Predictions, threatening evil to them, the Lord that is most wise,
to order his words, begins with this preface; Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer,
and he that formed thee from the womb, that makes all things, and that
stretches forth the Heavens, and spreads abroad the Earth: Intending plainly
thus much; Fear not bondage under evil men and things, as the Astrologers
threaten, for I am thy Redeemer, that redeems thee from troubles, in spite of
all Astrology. Fear not those Astrological Genethliacos, that is, Casters of
Nativities; for I formed thee from the womb: Fear not their Predictions by the
Stars and Heavens, for I spread and roll them as I please: Fear not their
predicted evils, for I make all things, and spread the Earth as I please. So
that God pleads these of his Creation, Redemption, and providential
preservation, against the Astrologers that oppose these by raising false fears
from their lying Arts in the hearts of his people. The second intimation is,
that God does call, and can and will make those Astrologers and Diviners,
Liars, and mad men: all their predictions shall prove but Lies and madness; and
turn their pretended knowledge into foolishness. Thirdly, that the Lord will
confirm the word of his Servants, and the counsel of his Messengers; that is,
the Prophesies of his Prophets, in oppofition to all Astrologers. Astrology
opposes the Word, but that shall overflow it.

The fourth place against Astrology is, Isai 47.12, 13, 14. It is spoken to
Babylon, v. 1. The words are these, Stand now with thine Enchantments, and with
the multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth, if
so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail: Thou art
wearied in the multitude of thy counsels; let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticatours stand up and save thee from these
things that shall come upon thee: Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire
shall burn them, etc.

We see in the general, if we read but according to the English, how
Astrologers under all names and titles are inveighed against by God himself,
and in a holy way of divine taunting of them: The Original also is very full
and home to the same effect: the first word or name in the 13. Verse, (...)
which our English renders Astrologers, is also by the ancient Greek Septuagint
rendered (...), and by Junius also Astrologi, that is, Astrologers whose
business according to the Hebrew, is, to view and behold the Heavens for
Predictions: For the Hebrew word (...) in his prime and native signification
signifies to play the Astrologer. (...) says Pagnin, and Schindler, is the
Root whence comes (...) an Astrologer, Isai 47.13. Let not the Astrologers of
Heaven, etc. stand up and save thee; and this is the righter rendering of the
word. The Hebrew Doctors also expound it Astrologers. R. Kimchi does derive it
from the Arabian Language, in which (...) Alhabram, signifies the Decision of a
matter; as (says he) the Astrologers are so called, who decide and determine
things by the prescript of the Stars. And to put the matter out of doubt, that
the Lord means Astrologers, he uses another word, by which he gives them a
second name, to wit, (...) is Gazers in the Stars. Astronomers look upon the
Stars, to know their color, distance, motion; but Astrologers (says the
Lord) gaze in, or into the Stars; that is, their business is to know the
influence and predictions by Stars, as they pretend. The Chaldee Targum does
also so render it; namely. (...) Gazers in or into the Stars: and their third
name (...) which our English renders Monthly Prognosticatours: Vatablus
renders, Those who declare what shall come to pass every several month. The
Arabian Version of this Verse renders them all three thus. Let them arise and
deliver thee, who presage future things by the Stars of Heaven; who
contemplate the Stars, and foretell thee what event shall be to thee. All (you
see) amounts to this, that without fail, Astrologers are here spoken against.
And how.

First, as opposits to confidence in God: as our Notes on the Bible affirm in
these words. [He derideth (say they) their vain confidence, that put their
trust in any thing but in God, condemning also such Sciences which serve to no
use, but to delude the people, and to bring them from depending on God.

Secondly, as of the same rank, and much of the same abomination with
Inchanters and Sorcerers. Babylon uses both; and as we heard before, from them
that went far in Astrology; that Astrologers that usually hit any thing right,
cannot do it but by help from the Devil.

Thirdly, as a thing to be derided, that any man should undertake to presage
good, when it is the counsel of God to bring evil upon a people.

Fourthly, as a just thing with God to send such to their Astrologers in the
day of evil of judgment on them, to see if they can deliver them.

Fifthly, as that God will the rather bring irresistible judgment on a people
that besides their evils, do believe Astrologers that they shall do well.

Sixthly, that in the day of calamity, especially Astrologers, and those that
believed them shall fall by the hottest fury of the judgment.

The fifth place of Scripture against Astrology is Jer. 10.2, 3. Thus says the
Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of
Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them. For the customs of the people
are vain. (...) a sign or token, does sometimes and especially when joined with
Heaven, signifies a prodigious, portentous, ominous sign. The word is the same,
and the intent of the Text the same, as in Isai 44.24, etc. (before discussed)
that frustrateth the Tokens, or signs of the Liars. The Geneva on our Bibles
on the word [Signes] say thus; [God forbids his people to give credit or
fear the Constellations and Conjunctions of Stars and Planets, which have no
power of themselves, but are governed by him; and their secret motions and
influences are not known to man, and therefore there can be no certain
judgment thereof. Deuteronomy. 18.9.] And the same Geneva Notes on the word
[Customes] say thus; [Meaning (say they) not only the observation of the
Stars, but their Laws and Ceremonies, whereby they confirm their Idolatry] so
the Geneva Notes. I quote them and others the more, that ye may see, not only
mine, but the judgment of the generality of the godly and learned touching
Astrology. I add, as Astrology and Idolatry are conjoined here in the
prohibition, so also was it in the practice of men: for they idolatrously made
Gods of the Stars, as of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc. as the names of our
week-dayes do unhappily to this day signify. And they also did astrologically
use them to foretell by. And indeed in Prediction by them they made gods of
them. For future things are in Gods hands, and not for us to know till he will
make them known by his Word; or perform them, Acts 1.7. The Chaldee Paraphrase
renders that of the Text of Signs thus; And be not afraid of the Signs that
are put in Heaven: which must needs fignifie the Stars: and the Hebrew word
for fear (...) signifies to cast down upon the earth with fear; which must
intimate rather a fear of evil significations, then of adoration. The
intimations against Astrology here, are,

First, that it is the way of the Heathen. Now we, whom God has with so much
cost and care distinguished from the World, must not imitate the World, Matthew.
6.32. Romans 12.2.

Secondly, that the Customs of the people in that and other things, are vain;
and it is not for Gods people to run after vain things but rather as a sign of
their repentance to do as Solomon Eccles. 1.2. and Paul. Phil. 3.7, 8.

3. That the regarding of such things causes in men an evil fear, opposite to
their confidence and comfort in God: so the Prophet intimates in exhorting them
not to fear them.

Fourthly, that to fear any Astrology or signs etc. is an heathenish thing: We
do not as Believers, but as Heathens. Godly men, yea all men that profess the
true God, ought to go to that God, and to him only to know the hidden things
that are future. For it is the privilege of God only, to foretell such things
to come, either by himself or by his spirit extraordinarily in his Prophets;
and therefore not communicated to Stars: and whatsoever we set up, as
imagining they are able to predict such future things, we advance up into the
place of God, which are not Gods; as is manifest by this very thing, that they
cannot really and truly predict such things: and therefore to go to any thing
to know such things to come, but to God himself, is to do as Heathens that set
up false gods, and not as men that acknowledge the true God. All this is fully
and plainly held sorth to us in Isai 41.21.22, 23, 24. In verse. 10. to 21. the
Lord having prophesied and foretola good things to come to pass for his people,
he in a holy manner thus taunteth all other things that are set up by men in
which they put confidence, as if they were Gods to declare hidden things past,
or to come; verse 21. etc. Produce your cause says the Lord bring forth your
strong reasons says the King of Jacob; let them hring forth, and show us what
shall happen. Let them show the former things what they be, that we may
consider them, and know the later end of them, or declare to us things to come:
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know ye are Gods, etc.
Behold ye are of nothing.

We do not count it inconsiderable to our business to discuss here what is the
thing mainly meant in this place; as whether Idolatry or Astrology (sure enough
in Astrology by them that confide in it for Predictions, there is Idolatry
enough, as this Text sufficiently intimates) but we attend the Argument to
confute it viz. because it cannot foretell things to come; because that is Gods
Prerogative alone: and therefore nor Idols nor Stacrs; neither Idols nor
Stars; neither Idolatry nor Astrology can predict things to come: for as
Idolatry is but vanity, as it is often called in Scripture: as the vanites of the
Nations, or Gentiles etc. So Astrology is a lie, Jer. 60.35.36. A Sword is upon
the Chadeans, etc. and upon her Princes and upon her wise men: a Sword is upon
the Liars, and they shall dote. Upon which word learned Buxtorf ( ad vocem
(...) (which is the word in the 50. of Jeremy, only an emphatical article is
prefixed, (...)) signifies Lies and Liars, Isaiah 44.25. by which understand
(...) Gazers upon the Stars, Astrologers, according to Rabbi Solomon: and so
understand that, Jer. 50.36. Rabbi David on the same; and the Chaldee
Paraphrase renders (...) by (...) often times; which (...) signifies Foretellers:
but Jer. 50.36. the Chaldee renders (...) by (...) Diviners: The result of all
is this; First, Astrologers are by God himself called Liars: Secondly, they
that seek to them for Predictions are Idolaters, therein making them gods:
Thirdly, that God has expressed so much against both; both against the
Astrologer and his Clients, because God will vindicate his own privilege, that
he alone is the God of truth that can truly foretell things to come.

The sixth place is Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams;
and the King commanded to call the Magicians, and the Astrologers, and the
Sorcerers, etc. to show the King his dreams: Then spoke they to the King in the
Syriack, tell thy Servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation. The
King answered; The thing is gone from me, if ye will not make known to me the
dream with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be out in pieces, etc. They
answered again, Tell us the dream, and we will show the interpretation thereof.
The King answered, If ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but
one decree for you, for ye have prepared Lying, etc. Tell me the dream and I
shall know that ye can show the interpretation thereof. Then the Chaldeans
answered, etc. There is not a man upon the earth that can show the Kings
matter: there is no King, etc. that asked such things at any Magician or
Astrologer, etc. But as it follows in the Story, God revealed the dream, and
the interpretation thereof to the King: then the King answered unto Daniel, and
said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings,
and a revealer of secrets.

In all which we have these particulars against Arologers: First, that the
Magicians and Astrologers, and the Sorcerers are put together, as Artists of
the same kind. Secondly, that they themselves did confessedly so name and
number up themselves. Thirdly, that all these laying their heads and hearts,
and Arts together, and that to save their lives could not find out that Dream
of the King. Fourthly, that the King calls them Liars. Fifthly, the King gives
a reason; namely, that if they could certainly by any Art, etc. tell the
interpretation of his Dream, they might also tell his Dream. Sixthly, that by a
just judgment of God, ruin is pronounced by the King, against these as
Deceivers. Seventhly, they thought that because they could not tell this Dream,
that therefore no man on earth else could; and that therefore the King was
unreasonable to require of them to tell it; intimating strongly their
incomparable ability and confidence in their wicked Arts, that what possibly
could be done in that nature, by any, could be done by them. Eighthly, that God
according to his Prerogative could reveal it to Daniel; and so confuted the
Lies of the Astrologers, etc. Ninthly, that the heathen King was hereby
thoroughly convinced, that there was no God like the true God, whom Daniel and
all godly men do worship.

Seventhly and lastly, Note the word [Magician] and [Magick] (so often used in
Daniel, and joined there with Astrologers and Astrology) is by the vote of the
Learned generally taken in the New Testament in the worse sense. Matthew. 2. often.
Acts 8. Acts 13. And as often as Ashaphim is mentioned in Daniel, the Septuagint
constantly expounds it by the word (...) Magicians. Now Ashaphim say the
learned Critics, signifies Astrologers, and those which observe the Stars in
the morning or evening twylight. And though (...) may in the general signify
Wise, yet because those (...) were among the Chaldeans and Egyptians, such as
used devilish Arts; it is taken in an ill sense; as of that brood (before they
repented) mentioned, Acts 19.18, 19, 20. Many of them which used curious Arts
brought their Books together to be burned before all men, and counted the price
of them fifty thousand pieces of Silver. The most of these Books (in most
probability) were Astrological Books, for Divination; because, first, the Arts
are called Curious Arts; curious in the Rules and Principles above common means
of knowledge, and curious in their end and use, to predict things that were not
to be known ordinarily. Secondly; they were Book-arts, which are chiefly of
Astrology; few, if any, are written of Sorcery, Necromancy, etc. but come down
from Generation to Generation by Tradition. Thirdly, their price great, viz.
Six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds Sterling, which imports also
Astrological Books, because none others of unlawful and finfull Arts (as they
all are here intimated) are so much valued, as Astrological Books. Fourthly,
its a thing apparently known to men acquainted with antiquity, that these
Ephesians were greatly addicted to Astrology and Book-magick. Therefore the
Syriack and Arabic render Curious Arts by Magic. All which sorts of Arts are
condemned under the name of Sorceries, Revel. 21.8. as those which shall abound
in the last times, before the fall of Antichrist, as by woeful experience we do
already find.

To these things out of Daniel, and the New Testament, I might add much, both
of Antiquities and Criticismes of Languages, to strengthen our Assertion; but
the conveniences of this little Volume constrains me to contract my self.

SURVEY. Now that the Reader has had presented before his eye what William and
his Champion Sir Christopher on the one part, and what Doctor Homes on the
other part have said, I can with more ease and brevity explain the impertinency
and insufficiency of what has been attempted against the Doctor.

To Williams first Section, and first to the Paragraph noted with [A] I answer
that the Replier, W. R. or Sir Christopher Heyden is not as good as his word in
his very first entrance of the Lists: For first he says nothing at all to the
word Diviner. Will, Ramsey brings us false Hebrew and fal^e Greek, to ma^ntain
his false opinion, his false interpretation of Latin you had before.
Secondly, to the word Observer of times (which is given us in false Hebrew;
for the word is not (...) but (...) not Gnonen, or to write it rightlier Onen
but Menonen; and also in false Greek, for there is no such word in the
Septuagint. The nearest that is is (...) but that is wide from the word William
brings, and is not applied to Meonen, but is the last word save one in the
Verse) I say to the word Observer of times, Will. Ram. or Sir Christopher
Heydon does not bring the judgment of the Church from Moses time and downward.
But the Church has been against them, rendering the Text against Astrology. So
the Church in Israel; so the Church of the Jews; so the Greek Churches; and so
the Churches formerly in Syria and Arabia.

First, Because W.Ram. his great ignorance tell, D. Homes, that he the said
Doctor quotes Arabic, but tells not his Author, as if he were ashamed;
therefore to inform Will. when I first quote either the five Books of Moses in
Samaritan, or the Bible in Chaldee, Syriack, or Arabic, I will give him a
touch of aptiquity of each, Now first for the Samaritan, Ex hoc fu^te Hebraeo
(^^quit Guide. Mich. le Jay) Samaritanus Tex^^s ducit originem, non a divisione
religionis, sed ^ Colonia Cuthaeorum, quae in Samaream venerat, sedesque december
Tribuum sub Salmanasara deportarum, 2. Regum, c. 17. Anno Hosts, 9. post legem
Mosis 776. Mund^ 3228. vide ^lur. apud Hieron. in Pr^fa^. lib. Reg. and epist.
ad G^alat. c. 3.
for the Church in Israel, the Samaritan Penteteuch has it (...) (so I am fain
to write it because the Printer has no Samaritan Letters) which more evidently
is of (...) a Cloud, or (...) Time, and is used to signify an Observer of
Times. The Samaritan version (which again I am forced to give the Reader in
Hebrew Letters) is (...) which signifies one that by drawing lines exercises
Prediction, or foretelling, accordingly upon the meaning of the word, the
Learned quote and allege Herodot. Postquam (inquit Herodotus) arts. ommbus
legibus vetitas, exereere coeperint in tantum, aucta est eorum vanitas, ut non
solum observatione syderum futura praedicere etc. profiterentur. Thus of the
Church in Israel, or the seat of the ten Tribes.

Secondly, for the sense of the Church of the Jews give of the word, viz.
Chaldaeus coatextus, celeberrima inter Judaeos Par-phrasis, hine desumpsit
origine^, quod a cap^vitate Babylonic^ exolevisset Ling^a Hebratca neque eam
anapliu intelligerent. G. M. l. J.
the two Tribes called Judah; 1. their Chaldee Targum renders it (...) (near to
the Hebrew) which the Latin Translation interprets Qui observet horas. that
is, An observer of times. 2. Their Hebrew Talmud, and Rabbinical Tracts say
thus on the word, These observers of times were such as did appoint times for
the doing of things, saying, Such a day is good, Such a day is naught; Such a
day is fit for to do such a work; Such a year or month is evil for such a
thing. It is unlawful (say the Rabbis there) to observe times, though one do
no work, but make it known. They are lies, which fools imagine to be true, and
to be the words of wise men. Maim. in Treat. of Idol. Cap. 11. Sect. 8.

Thirdly, the Churches formerly in Syria; do render the word (...) by a
Periphrasis, Of the Syriack Translation of the Scriptures some think that the
Pentateuch of Moses. etc. to the end of Canticles were translated in Solomon's
time, at the request of King Hiram of Tire. And all the rest or absolutely all
(say others) that after in the time of the Captivity of the ren Tribes; and
after that in the time of the Apostles (say others) the re was a Syriack
Translation made. Thus Jesudad Syrus and Greg. Bar. Hebr. Syir in Syro.
Arab-Morim. and alii.
or circumlocution, describing rather the Antic, or strange gesture or
behavior or manner of working in his unlawful Art, then the kind of the
Artist himself; but they render the former word Diviner ((...)) by exercising
Predictions or foretelling, which is the immediate and native signification of
the Sir. (...).

Fourthly, for the Churches in Arabicum conte^tum omnes Orientales ecclesiae
magnopere venerantur. Guide. Mich. 1. J. Sed hinc maximam mutuantur
cenamendationem quod S. Hier orzimi saecuso, quidam e sacris libris hac lingua
scripti reperirentur, quorum auxilio librum Job. in septingentis ferme and
octingent^^ versibus, re^litust.
Arabia (mentioned in the New Testament) they render the word (...) in Moses
Text, by the word (...) Munaggim, that is an Astrologer.

Fifthly, the Greek Churches in their Translation (of whose great antiquity
diverse hundred of years before Christ, and after him quoted by the Apostles I
need not speak, being well known) do render our (...) (so small Editions of the
Sept. that I have seen, which are more then one or two); which Bib. M. Gal 7.
Linguar.
one Translation renders, (I know not why unless in relation to the speeches of
Astrologers) Qni verba observet, i. e. That observes words. Editie Paris.
Sept. cum Aqu. Sym. and Theod.
Another Divinationes observans. i.e. An observer of Divinations; to which let
me add my mite; (...) says Hesych, is Divination. And (...) says Bud, etc.
signifies Divinaculos consulo, to consult with Diviners. So (...) says Lucian,
is Ominatio vaticinii genus. So then Will. and Sir Christopher are quite out in
their Greek, and quite beside the Authrity of the Church, unless by the old
Latin Translation they mean the Popish Church; which is not worthy to be
reckoned in the Balance against the forementioned Churches -- Besides all them,
the Protestant Churches in France in their French Translations, both former and
later render the word by Prognostiqueux, that is, a Prognosticator, which is a
name that Astrologers do willingly take upon them in their Books. So that we
need not regard the Translations of particular men, unless it be to give a word
or item that Will. and Sir Christopher had no reason to put so much weight upon
Hierom. The Vulgar, Paguni and Montanus. For 1. Hierom, alias the Vulgar (for
they were all one at the first, till some late Interpolator corruptly made a
difference) they both render it, Qui observet somnia at que auguria, he that
observes Dreams and Auguries, putting two Nouns under one Verb with a
Copulative, viz. Dreams and Auguries, both which are in the Astrologer, or else
he would not so dote and tell us Tales. But if he observe either, he is here
condemned. See the Roman Antiquities of Augury.
Who but an Ignorant knows not, that the Augurers did prognosticate from the
Aspect of the Heavens, as well as by the flying of Birds (as the Doctor before
hinted). And therefore Auguro or Auguror is commonly used, (as the common
Dictionaries will show Will. etc.) in general to signify to divine, to
conjecture, to foretell, to surmise what will be, to suppose, or guess. And for
those that are more learned then Will. worthy of learned quotations; they may
know that Augurium ratio est, and conjectura futuri; Vid. Calv. Bud. Alex. ab
Alex. Var. etc.
sumitur autem latius pro quavis divinatione, sive conjectura, i.e. in a word,
to signify [any foretelling]. Vad. ejus Lexic. Juridict. and the learned
Authors he quotes.
And that learned J. Calvin has these words, Augures similes sunt
impostoribus, qui Mathematicorum liberali nomine ad umbrantes suas ineptias,
profitentur se fata cujusque nosse, natalitias syderum observationes. i.e.
Augures or Augurers are like to Impostours, who covering their fooleries over
with the name of Mathematicians, as if of a Liberal Art, do profess that they
know every man's Fate, and the Nativity-observations of Stars. But says he
presently, Maleficorum appellatione, etc. that is, Constantius established by
Law such foretelling Mathematicians, that they were contained under the name of
evil doers, forbidding any to consult with them. And where or under what Title
in the Law are they forbidden? Why says he. L. Nem. 5. C. de Malef. and
Mathem. So then the Civil Law also is against Divining Mathematicians. The
Roman Emperors edicted against them more then once; Compare with this the
Doctors Epistle to his Demonol.
and do make them and Augures to be all as one.

2. Pagnin and Arias Montanus (for they are both one and the same Book, and
have the same word; Will. and Sir Christopher needed not to have multiplied
this and the other quotation into four to make a show to knowing men) they both
render the word by Praestigiator. But what has Will. got by this? If it were
as he tells his Tale, that it signified only a Coosener, have the ancient
Roman Laws (but now mentioned) or the daily complaints of the Clients in the
City of London set the Astrologers free from that? But let us tell all the
truth: Praestigiator (says a learned Etymologist) a prae and stige quia
quaedam stigialia facta, prae, id est, ante faciunt. i. e. in a word
Praestigiator has (says he) his name from doing devilish Feats. As Austin
says, (as the Doctor showed in the Demonolog.) Astrologers have their Answers
from his Devil. Add to this, that Guich. says, (...) significat
Praestigigiatorem, qui computat tempora, and horas; making the Praestigiator
and the Astrologer all one. Now for Will. interposing that Doctor Homes
[confessed]; he does not tell you distinctly what he confessed; but I will tell
you, (...) (says the Doctor) which our Taanslatours render AN OBSERVER OF
TIMES is diversely taken, but ALL CLOSE to signisie a PROHIBITION of Astrology.
This is the Doctors confession. There is nothing more in this Paragraph [A]
worthy to be touched: Sir Christopher and Will. Triumphs come to nothing. And
Will. is needlessly angry with the Doctor for comparing Astrologers with
Wizards, if he does both consider that the word is but the old English wise or
wiser. So that if Astrological Will. be loath to be called wise, or would not
have Wizard to be taken according to the common use of the word, viz. to
signify one that in an unlawful way foretells things to come, which God has
or does not reveal, but by divine prophesying he is either not wise, or not
just, or neither.

To the Paragraph distinguished with [B] touching the English Translation, in
brief thus; that though there was one English Translation in Sir Christophers
time that renders in 2 Chronicles. 33.6. (...) He gave himself to witchcraft; yet
there was then also another excellent English Translation (more ancient) extant
to this day, that renders the same, [He observed dismal Dayes] and our last
English Translation, which was (if I do not much mistake) extant also in Sir
Christophers time, He observed times. So here are two for one. But if perhaps
some one place may render it of Witchcraft or Southsaying, it is but putting a
more general word which comprehends the special, and also still keeps the
Astrologer within its Circle, under the lash. For whence is Witch but from the
ancient British word [Wits] as if he should Witchcraft, the skill of Wits; or
from the Dutch (the true Mother of our ancient English Wiichelen or Wiechelen
to foretell. And what does Southsaying fignifie, but (as is pretended) to say
truth, as our English phrase of asseveration, not yet quite worn out does
testify, viz. In good sooth it is so. i. e. In good truth it is so. Now
Astrologers pretend to a great deal of wit, and craft or skill and in
prediction, and according (as they will say) to truth. Therefore so far they
will own the names, or at least the thing under those names. But whereas these
words are commonly used in an evil sense, and therefore accompanied with the
words of an ill signification, all to signify evil Arts, and unlawful
Predictions, they are not much wide that use Witchcraft or Southsaying to
signify Judicial Astrology. Especially seeing oftentimes (as the Doctor
showed out of Austin expressly, and out of Ptolomy intimatedly) Judicial
Astrology does degenerate into, or is accompanied with witchcraft, or
soothsaying. If this will not convince William, or the Reader, we will add a
little System of the mystery of iniquity of ancient Astrology, as J. G. M. A.
in his Notes and Observations upon some passages of Scripture has collected
them; Ptolem. Centiloq. Verb. 9.
which to save labor, and for adding ones vote more against Astrology, I will
give it you in his own words as near as the Printer can follow.

1 Samuel 6.5. Wherefore ye shall make Images of your Emrods and Images of your
Mice that mar the Land, and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel:
peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your Gods, and
from off your Land. When the Ark was taken Captive and detained by the profane
Philistines, the hand of God was sore upon them, and smote them with
Haemorhoids and ebullierunt villae and agri in medio Regionis illius, and nati
sunt mures, and facta est confusio mortis magna in Civitate. So the vulgar
adds, the ancient Greek copies have it not. The later agree not, some Hebrew
Copies acknowledge it not, says Mendoza, as if there were any that did? It Is
found indeed in the Dras, as Chimhi has observed. And it cannot be denied to
the Romanists but that it seems to be wanting, but by no means to be
supplied. 'Twere better the Ark should shake still, then that Vzziah should
hold it up. Howsoevr it is true that there was a plague of Mice as well as of
Haemorrhoids. Concerning which the Astrologers being consulted gave counsel
that there should be made five golden Images of the Mice, and as many of the
disease to give glory to the God of Israel. The number was according to the
number of their Lords, but for the thing it self the expositours howsoever
pass lightly over it, or stop the mouth of the letter with a mystery,
perceiving no more of the natural sense, then a bare trespass offering, but
wondering withal and not without cause, what glory could accrue to the God of
Israel from such a homely present as the counterfeit of a Mouse, or that which
is worse. A thing which the holy Ghost here vouchsafed not to call by its own
name, for the Keri is Tehorecem, Anorum Vestrorum. But the meaning of the
Images is Stoichioticall, and to be given out of the Telesmaticall Traditions.

(...) (says Ptolomy in the (...)) (...). id est, the generable and
corruptible forms are affected by the Celestial, which therefore the Talismans
make use of by observing the entrance of the stars into them.

The meaning is (says Hali Aben Rhodoan) or as the Hebrew translation, (Abu
Giafar) that the forms of things here below are answered with the like
figurations above, and that the Celestial forms have a ruling influence upon
the sublunary, for example, the Scorpion and Serpent in heaven upon those in
earth. Therefore the Sapientes imaginum inspeciebant quando planeta de sub
radiis solis egrediebatur, and ingrediebatur hos vultus, eumque in ascendente
ponebant, and vultum quem intrabant sculpebant in Lapide, et miscebant cum eo
alia ad haec necessaria, faciebantque cum eo ex aptatione veldestructione quod
volebant, etc. Observed when a planet was out of his Combustion, and entered
into any of these forms, then placing the planet in the Horoscope they engraved
the form upon a stone, then adding what else was necessary they fitted it to
preservation or destruction, as they pleased, etc.

These conceits the Greeks termed (...), otherwise (...), from whence the
Arabic Talismath. The Chaldeans from the word in the Text Tsalmanija, Images.
An experiment of the force is set down by Hali upon his own knowledge practiced
upon a Saracens servant in diebus Camorchae Kegis. The servant had been stung
with a Scorpion and was cured by his master with a stone of this kind engraven
upon with the figure of a Scorpion. And the Saracen said, that the figure was
cut when the Moon was in the sign Scorpio, and that the sign was in one of the
four Angles.

The mightiest in operation of this sort was Apollonius Tyaneus, a man of that
note in the Heathen balance, that Hierocles the Stoic put him into the Scale
with Christ himself, nay he accounted him the better man of the two, but which
is sufficiently returned upon him by Eusebius Pamph. Cont. Hteroclem.

But the performances of this man had such appearances of wonder, that they
extorted this doubt from the Orthodox themselves, Justin. Martyt R. sad Orthod,
quest. 24. 245.
(...), etc. If God be the Creator and Lord of the World, how comes it to
pass that Apollonius his Talismes have so much overruled the course of
things, for we see that they also have stilled the waves of the Sea, and the
raging of the winds, and prevailed against the noisome flies and incursions of
wild beasts, etc.

And though Philostratus in that large Legend of his life has no memory of
these things, yet they are constantly ascribed unto this name by Codin. Cedren.
Hesychius. Olympiodorus, the Greek Ms. cited by Leunclavius. The Chronicon
Alexandrinum and John Txetzes, Joseph. Scalig. Ep. 180.
C. 60. of his third Cbiliad. quod omnino legendum (says Scaliger) siquidem
horum (...) notitiam habere placet, et sane lectio non injucunda. Nam in illo
capite Apollonius sculptura Culicum et Ciconiarum culices Antiochiam, Ciconias
Byzantium ingredi prohibuit.

But a fuller Tradition of this matter I shall here set down out of Domninus
cited by Joannes Aretiochenus Melala in the tenth Book of his Chronography.

(...).

In the same times of the Reign of Domitian, flourished the most learned
Apollonius Tyaneus, who got himself a great name by traveling about and making
Telesmes in all places where he came for the Cities and the Countries. From
Rome he went to Byzantium, and entering into that City of Byzus ( now more
happily called Constantinople) he made there also many Telesmes at the instance
of the Citizens, as that against the storks, against the river Lycus which
passes by through the middle of the City, that against the Tortoises, that
against the Horses, and other strange things. Then afterward leaving Byzantium,
he went and did the like in other Cities. From Tyanis he came into Syria, and
so to Antioch the great, where also he was desired by the chief men of the City
to make such Telesms as they had need of. And he made one against the Northern
wind, and set it up upon the East part of the City.

The Author goes on, and at large describes Apollonius his charms against
the gnats and Scorpions, adding moreover that Apollonius walking upon a day
with the chief men of the City, to observe the situation of the place, happened
upon a ruinous pillar, and inquiring into to the purpose of that, the Citizens
related unto him, that in the days of Caius Caesar when the City had been
shaken with an Earthquake, Johan. Antioc. Ms. in Arch. Barocion Bib. Bod.
(...). One Debborius a Talisman to prevent the falling of the City in case an
earthquake should happen again, set up this pillar, and upon that a marble
Pectorall inscribed (...), but which in process of time had been consumed by
lightning, etc. The Citizens therefore were earnest with him, to set up a new
Telesme, but Apollonius fetching a deep sigh (...) refused to make any further
Telesmes against the Earth quakes; but the Citizens being urgent upon him, he
took writing Tables and foretold as follows. (...).

And thou miserable City of Antioch shall suffer twice, and a third time shall
come upon thee, wherein thou shall be consumed by fire even in that part by
which Orontes runs. And it may be thou shall suffer yet once more.

This written, he delivered the Tables to the Citizens, and departed into
Scleucia, and from thence into Egypt, (...).

But the most concerning Telesme to the matter in hand is that against the
Scorpions, (...). Apollonius caused an Image of a Scorpion to be molten in
brass, and set it up upon a little pillar in the midst of the city of Antioch,
and the Scorpions vanished out of all their coasts.

A like Telesme to this was set up at Hempts a City of Syria Apamea, that which
Ptolomy calls (...). Geograp. Nubien, Clim. 3. p. 5.
In the middle of this, says an Arabic Geographer, a stone there is set up in
a wall having upon it the figure of a Scorpion, and when any one is bitten he
brings clay and takes out the figure, which having applied to the place
affected, he is immediately cured.

In the nether Region of Grand Cairo the Crocodiles were harmless, in the
upper they destroyed the Inhabitants. Card. de subt. l. 9. Scal. exercit. 196.
Number. 6. Joan. Bod. ma. demon. l. 3. c. 6.
To provide against this, the Talismans cast a leaden Crocodile, which written
upon with an Egyptian charm they buried in the foundation of a Temple. This
for a long time defended the people but when at the command of Achmet Ben Tolon
the Caliph, the leaden Image was melted, the Crocodiles returned to their own
malice again.

The (...) or fortune of Byzantium stood with one foot in a ship of brass, the
Statue concerned the general Genius of the whole City. The Ship was a Telesme
erected against the dangers of that tempestuous Sea, and while it stood entire
stilled the rage, but some parts thereof being (none knew how) broken off and
conveyed away, the Sea began to be as unruly as before. The cause whereof being
curiously enquired after and discovered, the broken pieces were sollicitously
searched, found out and put together again, and forthwith the winds and seas
obeyed. Zonar. Anna Tom. 3. in Anas.


(...), id est, And that it might be certainly known that this indeed was the
cause why the ships could not safely arrive, the pieces of the brass were
again taken away. Thenceforth whatsoever vessels touched upon the Coast were
driven back by the violence of the winds. This confirmed them in opinion that
the breaking of the brazen ship was that which hindered their Carriages from
coming up to the City. They therefore caused the ship to be most carefully
repaired.

These consecrations (for so also they are called) were more usually but not
only practiced in the East. For Gregory of Tours reports, that at the
repairing of a Bridge in Paris, there was found the Images of a Serpent and
Dormouse in brass, and that at the taking away of these, the Serpents and Mice
came up in great number. More might be added of the Serpentina columna, and the
Statua Equestris ahenea, Leunola. pandest. hist. Tur. N. 130.
set up (this latter) against the Plague in Constantinople, the destruction
whereof has been followed with fearful and periodicall mortalities. But
enough has been said, Mizaldus may be seen, Mizald. Cent. Ms. Gaff. curiojitez
innoyes sur la sculpture Talifm. des pers. c. 6.
and the late Author of the Curiosities.

If we draw all up, the sum will be the Ancient Rite of Averruncation, That
in case a City or Country should be infested with any plague either of disease
or noxious Creature, the Talismans were consulted and desired to erect an Image
of the plague under a certain Influence of Celestial Configuration.

And this I say was the cause why the Philistin Astrologers gave counsel that
golden Images should be made of the Haemorrhoids, and the Mice that marred the
Land, to give glory to the God of Israel.

The Telesme against the Mice according to Paracelsus is to have this manner of
Consecration. Aachid. mag. l. 3. p. 131. edit. Lat. germ. p. 102.
Make an Iron Mouse under the conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and in the House
of Jupiter. Imprint upon the belly Albamatatox, etc. Then place the Telesme in
the middle of the house, and the Vermin shall instantly leave the place. More
then so he promises. Take a live Mouse and tie it to the Iron Image, and it
shall dye immediately. But I undertake not that the golden mice were so
ceremoniously consecrated; yet that they had a Telesmaticall way of preparation
answerable to the beginnings and mediocrity of the Art, my own reason, and
above that the weight of Maimon's words induce me to conclude.

I say (says he) of that of Samuel concerning the Images of the Haemorrhoides,
More Nevich. P. 1. c. 1.
that they were so called not so much from their external form, as from a
secret influence within, remediall against the plague in the hinder parts.

The Astrologers had perceived that this God had been pleased with the Brazen
Serpent, which Moses the Talisman (so they would account him) set up upon a
pole in the wilderness, Numb. 21.8. And I need not stick to affirm, that the
Brazen Serpent against the fiery Serpents was the first occasion (I say not
given) but taken, of all these Telesmaticall practices.

And thus also we may come to know (See Pliny lib. 10. c. 27. Cyrenaici
Achorum: Deum muscarum multitudine pestilentiam inferente, invocant. Why the
God of Ekron was called by the name of Baal-zebub, that is, (...) (as the Lxx)
or the Fly-God. The Greek Copies of the Evangelists for the most part read
(...) Beelzeboul-Deus or Belus Stercoreus. So the Printed Arabic and the
Hebrew Translation of Saint Mat. But I presume not originally. And so Saint
Hierome observed, for seeing the Idiome of Zebul is Syriack, it would have been
expected, that that Paraphrase should not have read as it does, (and
undoubtedly ought) Beelzebub.

But for the reason, if any could be given, Scaliger was likely to give as good
as another, and yet his reason is, that the Scripture put this name upon the
God of Ekron by way of derision, quod in Templo Hierosolymitano Muscae carnes
victimarum non liguriebant, quum tamen Gentium fana a muscis infestarentur
propter nidorem victimarum.

True indeed it is out of the Pirke Avoth, that a Fly was never seen in the
Slaughterhouse of the Temple. And 'twas a privilege of the Jewish Sacrifices
above those of the Heathen. But that therefore the God of Ekron should be
called the Fly-God, is a reason below that man's sagacity. He was properly so
called as the most learned Seldom. But for the cause he confesses. Nequeo
dicere, Syntag. 2. c. 6.
nec mihi quis alius opinor satis potest.

But the Ekronitis were pestered with noisome Flies; To avert this Nuisance the
Astrologers set up the Image of a Fly Telesmatically endued; the people finding
the benefit of this (...), made it a God. The Israelites themselves did as much
to the Brazen Serpent.

Thus far J. G. and the learned Antiquities in him. Judge now whether
Astrology be not Demonologicall, Diabolical, Devilish!

To the Paragraph noted with (C) we say, that if the word be admitted as in the
English, with the judgments of so many Churches, and in so many languages and
reasons upon it as has been declared, the intent of the Text must necessarily
be to condemn judicial Astrogie. And the allegation of Solomon in Ecclesiastes
concerning a prudentiall observing of present providence and times allotted by
God for men to lay hold on, if wsie, is a mere impertinency, as to predictions
of future times, by Astrology. And the distinction annexed is indeed a general
Epithet or name of all Judicial Astrology, that it is all Heathenish, and
superstitious as has been, and will be more made to appear. Williams large
quotation of Sir Chapter his alleging Master E. Lively Professor of Hebrew, etc.
amounts in reality but to this: first, that M. Lively ingenuously confesses,
that among the diversities of men, and their opinions, there is general
agreement that the word signifies an unlawful and forbidden Art, as suppose
of Southsaying juggling, witchcraft etc. which how sufficiently they comprehend
Astrology I did but now declare; and how when diverse words to signify diverse
unlawful Arts of unlawful Prognostication, come together, that which nearest
signify the manner, matter, and means of Astrological Prediction, must needs
there signify Astrology, the Doctor has sufficiently declared. Secondly,
That M. Lively acknowledges the word is taken to signify such as take upon
them to define times of good and bad luck: which is the daily practice of our
Astrologers in these times. Thirdly, that yet M. Lively does not confess all
the truth, either of the readings of the Learned, or the Reasons in Text, to
prove the word signifies Astrology, which the Doctor clearly produces. It was
too common in Sir Christopher's time, for a Professor of the Universities too
much to please Courtiers and great men: of which if M. Lively were free (as my
Charity would willingly think) yet he could but produce his own reading, and
Books then known to him. We have had the Samaritan, Syriack and Arabic
Translations of the Bible brought over since. Thirdly, for M. Lively's opposing
Tremelius, a most learned Christian Jew, whom the learned World admire to this
day, I must justly undervalue him to great Tremelius: and if Tremelius
according to the nature and circumstances of the place does sometimes render
the word Praestigiatores, that is, as M. Lively calls them, Jugglers, that word
(as the Doctor has showed) does very conveniently comprehend the Astrologer.
As for Will. Ramsey's Ignoramus, that Doctor Homes quotes Arabic versions,
which it seems he is loath or ashamed to name; I send Will. to Paul's
Churchyard to the Booksellers, who will inform him of the known Book, and
fame of the Bible in Arabic. The result of Will. and Sir Christophers struggle
upon this 18. of Deuteronomy. 10. that they are content that Witchcraft, Southsaying
Juggling or (at the least) Superstitious and heathenish observation of times.
or any thing else should be there understood, but not Astrology. But that
Astrology must be there meant, the Doctor has sufficiently discussed before,
and I have now added my two mites. And that Judicial Astrology is not free from
all kind of Witchcraft, Southsaying, and Juggling; but guilty of Superstition,
Devilisine, Heathenisme, and profaneness, let M. W. Perkins, and M. J. Melton
speak; whose own arguments, and in their own words you shall have ancn, all to
this very tune aforesaid.

To Will Ramsey's second Section touching the second of Isay v. 6. we need not
say much, because his usual manner of Jigs and Jeares he has said little, yea
indeed nothing at all, to the main strength of the place, which was urged by
the Doctor. If Will. do hope it yet let it not be, that the Reader forget what
Doctor Homes urged from that place, now the Copy of it is before presented to
his eye, viz. Authors of late times commonly use the word to express
Divination in general. But to come closer to the word, learned Arias Montanus
does, as well as I, derive our word from (...) time; yea so does R. Solomon
(...) or (...) (same word in substance and descent) of whose signifying
Astrology ye heard before abundantly. So the Doctor. To all which Will. says,
upon the matter, nothing; nor has he or his Sir Christopher clawd off (as we
say) what was discussed on Deuteronomy. 18.10. to which the Doctor referred us to
better understand this. If the Hebrew word is derived of Time, then in its
native signification it does more then barely signify Divination in general;
it specially relates to Astrology that undertakes to predict touching humane
affairs, by or from the times or turnings of the Heavens. And seeing William is
so peremptory, he shall now have the proper idiom of the Syriack (...) in Isay
2.6. whose special signification is by experience and inquisition to ominate
and foretell; which is the character of the pretended skill of Astrology. And
Williams brave reason is a weak reason that ponderating Translatours should use
words for brevity of oration. It Is true indeed that it is their wisdom as
far as the word will bear, to give the most comprchensive signification,
because the mind of the holy spirit is such. But every general comprehends the
particulars, as he that says William Ramsey to be an animal says true; he
that says he is an ignorant man, etc. says he is an animal; ergo, he that
says he is an ignorant man says true. This is better logic, then Williams
endeavor to make the Scriptures opposite to themselves. Where the word says,
He that believes shall be saved. the circumstances of the place show the
meaning to be of justifying faith in Christ, whose property is, says the
Apostle, to work by love. But by the Devils believing, Saint James plainly
signifies such a faith as works not by love. And therefore if Williams or any
man's faith has no love; it is no better then the Devils faith. That's true
Logic, and according to the mind of S. James. Beside all this, note that W. R.
says nothing to the Doctors reason from the word EAST, proving thereby
Chaldeans or Astrologers to be there meant. We add here nothing touching the
aptness of the word Sooth-saying to signify Astrologicall predicting, because
before discussed.

To W. R. his third. Section touching Isay 44.25. and in it to Sir Christoph.
reason I will say nothing; because the Doctors exercitation upon the words
(set down before in his Demonologie) stands still as a wall of Brass. William
has only alleged a fragment of the text, and in a different Translation
from the Doctor, and our best translation. And Sir Chr. reason, viz. that
Astrologicall signs must be confessed effectual, and not to be frustrated but
by miracle; etc. is a most unwarrantable speech; contradicted by many friends
to Astrology, and by Will. Ram. himself in several expressions in his Epistle
to the Reader. Therefore I have nothing to do here; but to pass hence to the
fourth Section of Will. Ramsey on Isay 47.12, 13, 14. In answer to which if the
Reader will be pleased but to turn back and read the Doctors short discourse
upon that 47 of Isay, he will find that there is little need I should speak
much to Will. and Sir Chr. words here. Briefly therefore. 1. William here
confesses that the Lord here with particular distinction, names Astrologers,
Starre-Gazers and Monthly Prognosticatours. whereby he gives fair way that
this Text may have its full blow at the head of Astrology. 2. That Will. does
think that in the judgment of some, this text may seem to give a fatal blow
to Astrology, yet says never a word himself, to stave it off. 3. He calls in
Sir Christopher to speak for him; in whose words there are several great
mistakes. For 1. Vatablus has nothing at all in his Commentary on that 47. of
Isay 12, 13, 14. touching Chabar. 2. Sir Christopher urging of Chabar and
Calvin, is against himself and his cause. For Chabar is in the 12. verse, to
signify enchantments; and therefore by Sir Christophers argument, there also
Astrology is forbidden (as well as v. 13.) and so also contrary to W. R.
struggle, enchantment goes along with Astrology. 3. In that criticisme on
Chabar, Calvin is greatly against Sir Christophers Astrology, Calvin on verse
13. STENT NVNC. Hic perspicimus quos potissimum consiliarios intelligat
Propheta; nempe divinatores illos, qui vano scientiae nomine sese populo
venditabant, quasi futura omnia tenerent ex ASTRORVM CONSPECTV. Sed de
JVDICIARIA ISTA ASTROLOGIA, and ejus VANITATE prius diximus. Si quis objiciat,
istorum non fuisse pericula cula, quae impendebant amoliri; respondeo horum
monitu idfacturos fuisse Babylonios, si cladem praevidissent. Cum non
praeviderint, sequitur VANISSIMAM ipsorum esse APIEM Frusta vero nonnulli
obtendunt inscitiamartis, non artem ipsam exagitari a propheta. Alloquitur enim
Chaldaeos, a quibus haec soientia profecta est. Sulse autem dicit, coclos ab
ipsis sociari; quia perinde proferunt sua decreta, ac si stellarum
colligatione, and complexu, constrictum tenerent humanum genus. Quanquam si
quis malit incant ores vertere, sensus non male; and verbum (...) utrunque
significat. Etsi vero Astrorum ordinem speculari per se malum non est, longius
quam liceat prorumpere dicit propheta, qui obscuros rerum event us inde
colligunt, ac videtur oblique speculatores istos opponere prophetis, quo magis
detestabiles reddat: quia divinas omnes praedictiones extinguant, etc. So that
by this of Calvin touching (...), William and Sir Christopher are shot with
their own Bow. Wherein Calvin does declare that this place does not only
condemn Judicial Astrology, as opposite to confidence in God but also as
opposite to divine prophesying, as being an Art of very vanity in it self; As
an are that would pretend by the stars to know future events, yet could not
fore know to fore-admonish of the judgments that were coming. And that the
Prophet does not reprove only the ignorance of the art as some would pretend,
but the Art of Astrology it self, in that the Prophet speaks to the Chaldeans
from whom this Science sprung. As a presumptuous art that would bear men in
hand, as if they held all mankind by the colligation and complex of stars,
etc. As likewise the Doctor before showed that a many evils in all Judiciary
Astrology are here forbidden. So that if disobedience to Gods word and
Christianity, cannot stand together, then Judicial Astrology and Christianity
cannot stand together, what tale soever Sir Chr. or Will. Ramsey tells us to
the contrary -- For 1. those instances touching Princes, Riches, horses,
Physiciaus, etc. the Scripture expressly forbids only confidence, etc. in
them; but elsewhere commends the use of them. But does not so speak of
Astrology; but every where it mentions it, condemns the thing -- 2. That of
Merchants in the last verse of that of Isay with Tremilius and Arias Montan, on
it; it comes all to nothing; there is no such thing; unless they mean
laborasti a pueritia, is in 12. verse and last verse, which were but a childish
labor to take off the edge and dint of that mighty Text in verse 13. against
Astrology. I am sure Junius has these words on that 37. of Isay 13. Emphatica
demonstratio, etc. that is, This (says Junius) is an emphaticall demonstration
of the vanity which is in all Chaldaeans and Mathematicians, etc. So that we
argue ad dictum simpliciter, that Judicial Astrology is absolutely forbidden;
because so here; and wheresoever the Scripture names it, it gives it never a
good word. 3. That that on verse 10. None sees; with Tremilius his Quasi dicat
is a mere impertinency: because there one sin is condemned, here in verse 13.
another. 4. To the distinction they would have put between Heathens and
Christians, is a vain motion, when Jews or Christians follow the sins of
Heathens and become as bad, or worse then they, sinning against greater light;
God reproves both alike, and the one and same word of God to be to the end of
the world, is intended against all; as we may see in the Prophets and Apostles
application of the Scriptures, from the beginning of the Bible to the end. 5.
The distinction of making stars causes, and subordinate instruments, comes to
nothing, as in Logic, (for instruments are causes) so in the present dispute
about Judicial Astrology. For Will. Ramsey tells us but now, that Sir
Christopher should tell us that strange untruth, that the influences of the
Stars cannot be altered without a miracle. Which if it were true; the
Astrologers confidence in the stars is very great. And our relick from their
fatal necessity very small, by the word subordination. But Keckerman (as the
Doctor showed) demonstrateth that the influence of stars may be altered by
many petty natural causes below. 6. It Is untrue that all well ordered and
Christian Commonwealths have permitted and suffered Judicial Astrologicall
prognostications; (which is the question in hand, and that which W. R.
professes in this his Lux Veritatis; witness his three Schemes or figures).
The Roman Common wealth forbids it in a law. See the Doctors Epistle before
his Demonology -- And again (as I have showed before) it was forbidden in a law
by Constantius. l. Nemo. c. 5. de Malef. and Mathem. And some of the Kings of
France have questioned Astrologers. And the Epistle before Sir Christophers
Heydens Astrologicall discourse confesses, that in the times of the Kings of
England, that discourse would not be permitted to be printed. Besides some of
Williams brethren in Astrology have been questioned for their predictions, as
they themselves can best inform him. And lastly, if any times or places have
not punished such, it is but their permission and sufferance (as the objectours
words are) which is of unlawful things, properly. 7. It Is untrue that the
Fathers or Calvin do allow Judicial Astrology (as has been cleared by the
Doctor and my self) or that the Astrologers meddle not but with weather,
health, plagues, etc. William, and the yearly Books we have show the contrary.
8. For calling Master Chamhers, the Doctor, or any other Anti-astrologer by
the name of Sophister, it must be retorted. He is a Sophister indeed, that
alleges Aquinas on Isay 47. for Judicial Astrology, when Aquinas has no
Commentary on Isay, and in his sums, he is against it, as I have before
largely showed. He is a Sophister that will say, that will also say Haymo on
Isay 47. is for it; when he is flatly against it, Let Will. see his Author
using Aug^^es for Astrologies before h m. Cicero says, Ac. gurari pro divicure
usu pimu. Cic. de div li.
Stentz] (says Haymo on the place) Augures coeli hoc est Astrologi; qui vulgo
Mathematici appellantur. Qui contemplabantur sydera] and ex astrorum cursu,
lapsuque res humanas arbitrabantur gubernari, and regi, and supputabant menses]
dicendo hoc erit isto, vel illo mense vel anno, etc. not a word for, but all
against Astrology. Finding this falsehood in two Quotations, I thought it not
worth the while to look into the other two (being not at hand, when I should
have perused them) being loath to fling away my precious time upon flamms. Thus
briefly have I touched upon these eight particulars (beside my first intent)
least only the fluency of Sir Christophers Oration should have carried away
the mind of them that love not to go down the stream. Now let Will. as Job
said to his Objectours, Mock on, and crack. Great is the truth, and it will
prevail.

To VV. his fifth Sect. of Chapter 39. touching Jer. 10.2.3. I do answer, that in
this Section also Will. has yet his Spokes-man Sir Christopher to speak for
him. Sir Christopher disputes, and Will. (more suo) railes. But neither of them
speak any thing to the Hebrew or Chaldee of the Text; or to the Geneva Notes
once, or the Reasons, and deductions from it, against Astrology; all which are
to good purpose pressed by the Doctor. See before Will. says, The Astrologers
do not in the least attribute fatal necessity to the power of the Stars. But
Sir Christopher asserted (as we heard before) that their power cannot be altered
without a miracle. And Will. all along avoucheth the certainty of Astrology,
and with many high epithes of a most divine, most heavenly Art, etc. with
several instances of his Diagrams of Figures. Put all together, and it can
spell no less then that (in their opinion) the Stars hold forth a necessity of
certainty in the power of the operations. And though the Astrologers confess
the Stars to be Gods instruments (as the Jews did) yet may they by confidence
in their effects deifie and idolize them, as did the Jews in some of those
places alleged after by Sir Christopher. The Papists confess their images to
be in themselves, but creatures; and therefore assert they worship not the
images, but God in or through them. But the orthodox Christian World do
generally and justly condemn them guilty of Idolatry by the second Commandment,
forbidding any Image to be made in relation to divine Worship. The Jews Exodus
32. could not possibly be so stupid as to think that the molten Calf made of
their own earrings could be a real Deity. They desired Aaron to make it, v. 1.
and that Idol to go before them in stead of Moses, who had been long absent,
that (as they said) they knew not what was become of him. v. 1. And the
Proclamation, verse. 5. of keeping a feast in relation to it, was express thus,
To morrow is (...) i.e. A Solemnity or Feast to Jehovah: yet the Apostle 1 Cor.
10.7. expressly calls their respect to God in, through, or by that image, by the
name of Idolatry, says he, Be ye not Idolaters as were some of them, as it is
written: (meaning in Exodus 32.6.) The People sat down to eat and drink and
rose up to play. The Doctor in his exercitation upon this place of Jeremy,
(presented to the Reader before did effectually urge that the scope of it was to
assert that those that go to the Stars to foreknow future humane events do
therein make them Gods; in attributing to them thereby, prophesying, which is
peculiar to God, either immediately by oracle, or mediately by his
extraordinary inspiration in the Prophets. To which as I said, Will. Ram. has
answered nothing. But I will leave Williams triflings, and come to Sir
Christopher, who argues like a Gentleman, and a Scholar (for whose sake this
Survey is carried on thus far; for without him Will. had lain so naked that he
would of himself soon have sterved, or beaten himself with striving unto death.
All that Sir Christopher says is but two things. First, that this place
speaks of things, viz. Stars, not of persons, viz. Starr-gazers. Secondly,
That adoration of Stars is here forbidden, not Astrological Predictions by
them.

To the first, my Reply is, Persons, viz. Gazers upon Stars are here meant:
for Sir Christopher confesses persons adoring or worshipping the Stars are
here reproved; which adoration could not be without gazing or looking on the
Stars. But as the adoration of them that have worshipped the Stars must needs
begin from the beholding the glory of them, or else they worshipped they knew
not what, so their worship was acted by looking upon them: Job 26.27. If I
beheeld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness my heart has
been secretly enticed or my mouth has kissed mine hand.

Secondly, it is at the beginning and ending of this Text of Jeremy, Learn not
the way of the heathen, and the customs of the People are vain. Therefore
Persons acting in relation to Stars must necessarily here be understood. To
the two particulars of Sir Christopher, that here is forbidden Divine worship
of Stars, etc. not Astrological contemplation and Prediction of and by them; I
say that Sir Christophers first Reason that fear is often used to signify
worship, is too weak for his design here: for first, when fear is put with its
object, unless the object named be the true God or Idol, it does not (that I
know) signify worship: as fear not them that kill the body, Matthew. 10.28. Give
fear to whom fear is due. Romans 13.7. Ye shall fear every man his Mother: Lev.
19.3. Fear not the People of the Land: Numb. 14.9. with hundreds more of
instances; where fear does not at all signify divine worship. But secondly,
(which is far more considerable) Sir Christopher is extremely mistaken in the
Hebrew word, that in Isay 29.13. signifies fear, how different it is from the
word in Jer. 10.2. Sir Christopher Heydon extremely mistaks the English Text;
yea, most inconsiderately runs away with a notion in his own head, that he
regards not the English Text. For this of Jeremy, in both the old Translations
is, Be not afraid for the signs of Heaven; the heathen be afraid of such. And
in our last English Translation it is, Be not dismayed. All most suitable to the
force of the Hebrew word (...), which (as the Doctor you see before admonished)
signifies to cast down upon the earth with fear, which must intimate rather a
fear of evil significations, then of Adoration. And therefore W.R. is
infinitely more to be blamed and shamed, that would not take warning, but own
the allegation of Text with so palpable a gross mistake. For was there ever
such a phrase extant, or imaginable, that to be afraid or to be dismayed should
signify worship? That consternation and throwing or casting a man down with
horror (as rightly Arias renders our word by consternari) should signify
divine adoration? But there is more then that to be considered, which lies in
the phrase, (besides the single word) viz. (...) A signis coclorum ne
consternemini (...) Quod consterncntur Gentes ab iis. which fully imports that
here is meant a passive surprisal or possession with fear (Timor occupat artus)
by reason of the direful aspects of the Stars in the opinion of those that
gaze after them; not an active fear (as (...) in Isay 29.13.) to reverence and
worship (as it is interpreted Matthew. 15.9.) you see then clearly that the Scene
and face of Sir Christophers argument is changed, now the vizard is taken away,
and the paint rubbed off. To Sir Christophers second reason, I say, first, he
has well prompted me, to tell his Client Will. that in that fifth verse of
this tenth of Jeremy, where idolatrous fear, or worship of images is forbidden
the phrase is altered, according to our sense before, viz. (...) Fear not with
an active fear in a way of worship of them, or setting them up in your hearts
for gods; and not (...) Be not dismayed or amazed; as the phrase is in 2. verse.
of fearing the signs of heaven. 2. The Authors of the Geneva Notes were not
engaged in any wrangling (as Sir Christophers phrase is of them that yield not
to him) yet you heard before in the Doctors Exercitation the place presented to
you, how those Notes interpret the second verse. of the Conjunctions and
influences of the Stars, and their Ceremonies or Laws to make a judgment by
them. Nor was Calvin moved by any, or disposed to wrangle, when he wrote his
Commentary on Jeremiah; yet he largely (beyond his wont) does interpret this
second verse. of the tenth Chapter of Judicial Astrology, to the value of near
one whole leaf. or half sheet in folio, in which he has some strong and
stinging passages against it. Ne metuatis, vel ne expavescatis signis
coelestibus: The opinion of Caloin against Astrology grounded on Jer. 10.2.
with his reasons.
hoc est ne fortunam, etc. i. e. Be not afraid, etc. that is, let not men feign
to themselves good or ill fortune, by the position, or aspect of the Stars. If
the Stars do presage to us good or ill fortune, we have cause to be afraid of
them. But the Prophet calls them here Signs in an improper sense; because he
has no respect to their true original, but accommodateth his speech to those
perverse Errors which then prevailed. And we must remember, what I touched
before that the Egyptians and Chaldeans were given to that Astrology, which at
this day we call Judicial, or Judiciary. For the bare name, in it self it may
be easily admitted, but long since. By wicked Knaves it was made a profane
thing. For that Art was adulterated among the Chaldeans. That therefore the
mind of the Prophet may be certainly clear to us, let that Principle stand
fixed, that the Sun and the Moon the rest of the Planets, and the fixed Stars
which are in the Firmament, are Signs. But withal here must be noted the
relation. Wherefore would then God have the Sun and the Moon to be for Signs.
Namely, that the course of the Moon might perfect one month, the course of the
Sun, one year, etc. Again, the Sun as it has respect to the twelve Signs one
while it makes Spring, another while Summer, etc. and other things blonging to
the Order of Nature. But whosoever will stretch out these Signs beyond that,
does utterly confound the order propounded of God. Even as formerly when the
Egyptians and Chaldeans would swear higher then reason did bear, they would
conjecture by the position of the Stars, What should be the events of all
Nations. After that they durst descend to all particular men. Hence sprung the
Nativity-casters. Therefore they first began to philosophize more subtly,
that the Sun when it was under such a Sign, it portended the ruin of the only
child; happy events to another. But these things are without the bound of the
accustomed course of Nature. For instance, to be Summerand Winter, this is
natural and ordinary; but that war is moved by one Nation against another,
this is not of the accustomed course of Nature, nor from thence, but from the
ambition and covetousness of men. Indeed a secret providence of God
over-ruleth; but we speak of causes which may be weighed and comprehended by us
as falling under sense. Albeit this also is to be noted, The course of the
Stars of themselves have no matter of moment. For we see how God varieth times;
we have not equal Winters or Summers neither is there a constant temper: no
year but is unlike to the former; and the third unlike to the second, etc.
Sometimes the air will seem temperate, yet the Plague will destroy: Sometimes
there cannot be found a reason why the year should bring scarcity, and yet men
may be pined. So that God according to his own good pleasure tempers the world
otherwise then any the acutest is able to divine by Stars. But they that will
transcend the bounds that God has set will also conjecture by the Stars
whether war should be in that country, or peace in another. They therefore
that will collect by the Stars the things that are beside the course of Nature,
they surely mingle Heaven and Earth together. Neither is there any doubt, but
that the Prophet chastises this madness, whiles he forbids the Jews to attend
unto the Signs of Heaven, as to be afraid of them. But withal the reason is
to be attended why the Prophet so grievously condemns that Fear which reigned
among the Heathens, to wit, because where this opinion prevailed, That all
events of things depend upon the Stars, the fear of God is taken away faith is
extinguished, etc. For all Astrologers who falsely usurp that name to
themselves, I say, those Knaves, Lat. Nebulones istos dico.
who for their Impostures pretend the name of Judiciary or Judicial Astrology,
do conclude that a Judgment, or determination, or Prognostic, touching the
life of man ought to be made by the Horoscope; as if both fortunes depended on
the Stars. If therefore any man be born at this hour, according to their
opinion, that condition shall abide him; so together they feign a fate, to wit,
some necessity which may hold a man bound to the rule of the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars. For one born when the Sun was in the tail of such a Sign, or when it was
in the head of another, this Nativity portends such or such a fortune; this man
shall be of a short life, the other of a longer. At length they also gather to
themselves more boldness, and will pronounce concerning every day, such an
event waits upon this expedition, etc. After that, when or where the Nativity
cannot be brought into consideration, they subject all mankind to the
necessity of the Stars; behold if thou undertake any Expedition, this or that
day, it shall be well with thee; but if thou hasten before noon, ill success
attends thee. So therefore they divine of the whole life of man, and each
single action; when as God would not have the Conftellations and Stars to be
for Signs to this end or use. Now, as I said, hence it follows, God does not
govern as to reign; so faith is extinguished, and all duties of piety are
reduced to nothing. For whosoever is persuaded that he is bound by this
necessity, that because such is the Horoscope, he must necessarily perish in
that hour, and also necessarily perish by this kind of death, he therefore
being thus persuaded, will he call upon God? Will he commend his life to him?
Again, if any adversity befall him, will he impute it to his sins? Will he
acknowledge that he is called unto judgment by God? Or if it be prosperous
with him, will he be excited to sing praises to God? We see therefore how this
Divination extinguisheth all Godliness; because there will be no faith; and
then no acknowledgement of punishments, no acknowledgement of the benefits of
God, no industry in praying, If once that diabolical Error has possessed or
surprised our minds, that we are subject to the Stars, such is our Nativity,
and further that the Stars each single day and moment portend some kind of
death. This therefore we ought chiefly to think upon when the Prophet
forbids the Jews to be afraid of the Signs of Heaven. Neither is there any
doubt but that the Chaldeans did predict that a new Empire was promised unto
them; so terrified the poor Jews, far well to us. For so the Astrologers spoke
among the Chaldeans. And then on the other part, the Egyptians saw this to be
foretold by the position of the Stars: so it was that the Jews sunck as
spiritless or unsouled. And so it came not into their minds that God had so
often, and so many years threatened them by his Prophets, whiles they ceased
not to provoke his anger against themselves. The judgment then of God they
counted as nothing; and yet the mean while this did astonish them that the
Chaldeans had discerned by the Stars that there would be some change. By this
time we apprehend the mind of the Prophet, where he says, We must not be
afraid of the Stars. I know how many at this day are foolishly curious, and
therefore some way given to Judicial Astrology; and this Dotage has violently
curried away some men otherwise pious, and very learned. But we see what here
God pronounces by his servant. And I wonder that some men are so addicted to
the Stars, who too too philosophically speak of free will. Thus Calvin, whom I
have represented largely, and yet have brought you but part of what he says.
So you have heard a most pious and learned man, uningaged from any wrangling,
clear this Text to signify Judicial Astrology.

Sir Christophers third Reason, that the Jews worshipping of Stars is here meant
(not Astrology) because other Scriptures mention such their worshipping of the
Stars, comes in just account, to no more but this, that because the Jews are
guilty of other sins, reproved in other Scriptures therefore they are
admonished of no other sin, but of the very same here, which connection is as
far wide as the Texts alleged by Sir Christopher are divided in the Bible
from this of Jeremiah. All that Sir Christopher has of any weight to pretend a
piecing up of such a coherence is (noted with) or this of Jer. 10. v. 3. The
customs of the people are vain, for one cutteth down a tree in the forest,
etc. which (says Sir Christopher) should want sense, if this verse depended
not on the former. But the Doctor has very well anticipated this Objection in
his third Section, in his Paragraph on the fifth Scripture, that all Judicial
Astrology includes consequentially an Idolatry, yea, and an internal idolatrous
heartworship of Stars; as has been largely cleared by Calvin; Note further
that, Learn not the way of the heathen; ( v. 2.) is (says Calvin) Praeceptum
generale; the General of the prohibition. The particulars are two. First, the
forbidding of Judicial Astrology, containing heart-Idolatry; fearing with that
fear, that thing and therein; which is due only to God, v. 2. The second is
forbidding Idolomany, Idoloxoyie, containing outward corporal worship of
Images; v. 3. etc. But how does that same For in the third verse. come logically
in? Answer, First, the Prophet thereby takes them off of the ways of the
heathen in one gross practice, viz. Astrology, by proclaiming and instancing
the vanity of the Heathens in another thing that is more gross and palpably
vain; viz. in making and corporally worshipping material Images. Secondly,
Calvin makes up the matter of the particle For, thus; Videtur propheta
abrumpere, etc. i. e. The Prophet seems abruptly to break the sentence, and to
reason unaptly. For he had said in the former Verse, Learn not the way of the
heathen, and be not afraid of the Signs of the Heavens, FOR or BECAUSE the
customs os the people are vain. FOR one cutteth a Tree, etc. The Prophet
therefore seems to make his transition to Idols, as if he had forgot himself.
But we must mark that the Jews were affected with that ancient persuasion,
that, to wit, the Chaldeans and Egyptians boasted that they were the only wise
men; and had procured to themselves that fame among all Nations. For we see
also that profane Writers when they speak of the rise of all Sciences, they
attribute it to the Chaldeans and Egyptians. For among them it is said, was born
or sprang up Astrology, and all Liberal Sciences. There is no doubt therefore
but that the Jews would asscribe so much authority to the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, that their minds being seized upon are possessed with that prejudice
they would see nothing. Therefore the Propher shakes out of them, this
negligence, and demonstrateth that they were foolish, notwithstanding they
would be the only wise men and account others in comparison of them to be
barbarous and silly. Now therefore we see why the Prophet knitteth on idolatry
with that false and adulterate Astrology of which before. So Calvin.

W. R. his CHAP. IV. Wherein he affirms that the Doctors reasons and
arguments against Astrology, is particularly examined and condemned, neither to
consist with reason or truth.
VV. R. his SECT. I. Wherein, as he says, the Doctors fore-fold reason is
convinced.
HIs first reason then is, (to prove Astrology is false) that Astrologers
themselves confess, that either the prudence of amortall wise man, or the
piety of a godly man, or the tutelarity of Angels, or the providence of God,
overruling all things, may prevent their predictions. VVhereupon he concludes
that Astrology is false; for says he, what humane providence cannot do grace
can; if not, Angels may; and where all fail, providence does order according to
the mind of God, etc. To answer this his most weak cavil, I shall begin with
what he sets down last, viz. The providence of God overruling all things,
which he says himself (as well as the other three clauses) is the concession
of Astrologers themselves, and if so, I would demand then what advantage he
has hereby, against Astrology; when he can say no more against it, then what
the Practitioners in the Art do confess themselves? there is certainly none
but wretched Atheists, that will deny, that God has not an overruling, and
restraining power over all things, as well celestial, as terrestrial; but
whether his will and pleasure be to alter the^ir natural courses, is a
question, but he has heard that Ptolomy himself, nay and all Astrologers in
general, do attribute nothing (farther then natural things, which are in
sublunary elementary bodies) to the power and influence of the Stars; He weakly
therefore inferres the Stars not to have power, because God can alter, or is
able to alter their motions, influences and effects. I demand then whether
Astrology be Diabolical, Idolatrous, the Doctrine or Language of the Devils,
or wicked, as these two seeming zealous blades, most falsely, maliciously,
inconsiderately, and ignorantly traduce it? and then I demand, since as the
Philosopher says, ignorance is the enemy of all good learning, whether they
deserve not exemplary punishment, to condemn so noble, so profitable to the
Commonwealth, so excellent, so divine, and so pleasing a study, as Astrology
is teaching and traducing their vile ignorance to the world; and truly as one
of them most wisely said, if he should make appear what he knows of some
Astrologers, the Parliament would make a Law against it, as sometimes was done
in the Senate of Rome; but would he becontent all Divines should be silenced,
because some are Knaves, and prate nonsense, and so consequently conclude no
verity or truth in Divinity? Truly might I be worthy to advise that High Court;
in the stead of condemning and prohibiting this most worthy study, they would
do well to prohibit all such Pamphleters, which without either fear or wit,
undertake to condemn what they are ignorant of; and that none should be
suffered to condemn, or falsely undertake to traduce any Art or Science
whatsoever, without first before the publishing of their writings, to make
appear to the world, that they are thoroughly verst and read in the Art they
undertake to condemn. The verity whereof, as also its legality, I dare
undertake to defend, not only against what they can say against it; but also
all the Divines in England (put together to help them) can imagine or contrive
to say. But to return to our business in hand, Master Homes on his fore-fold
argument, brings this conclusion, that God works not by the stars as
secundary causes, but Ephesians. 1.11. he rules all things after the counsel of his
divine will. If because God rules all things after the counsel of his own
will; he works not by causes: then, to what purpose I pray you are Armies,
and the success sometimes this way, sometimes that, till in conclusion the
victory is fully obtained on one side or other? will he say, (notwithstanding
the various success of the business in time of the war) that it was not
concluded in the counsel of Gods own will, that the victory should be given on
that side?

SURVEY. Now what will this youngling do to go on high-lone, Sir Christopher
having left him: and what shall I do with this Junior-Sophister, his moderatour
being gone? For, from hence forward there is nothing almost to be found in him
alone, but as at first; viz. either Cretensian untruths, or Thrasonicall
vapourings, or sophistical impertinencies, or self-contradictions. For that at
(A) is Wills. UNTRUTH. For Doctonr Homes said not Astrologers, but the Friends
of Astrology. For such only were they that spoke to the Doctor. That at (B)
is also Will. UNTRUTH, For the Doctors conclusion is there in that Argument,
That there is no certrinty in predictions from the stars. That at (C) is
Will. sophistical IMPERTINENCY. For though Astrologers confess one thing in
words, yet they profess clean another in the practice of their Art (as they
call it) as we have heard by comparing VV. R. Epistles and his Book together,
and shall see more presently. That also at (D) is a mere CONTRADICTION of
himself. For he confesses at (C) for himself, and all Astrologers that they
grant that the providence of God overruling all things, may prevent the
predictions of Stars, etc. of the particulars at (A) and yet now at (D) makes
it a question whether his pleasure and will be to alter their natural courses.
That at (E) touching Ptolomy etc. of Astrologers, attributing nothing to the
power of Stars farther then natural things; is VV. R. gross untruth. For
Will. undertakes by virtue of stars to predict other matters, in his Schemes
figures etc. in this his Pamphlet, and at the end of his discourse about the
Eclypse. And Ptolomy says in his Quadrip. lib. 1. cap. 1. that by the stars
may be foretold mores animi tales, and tales eventus secuturas, etc. id est,
the manners of men's minds, and their events; with infinite more to the same
tune, if worth the hearing. That also at (F) is VV. R. UNTRUTH and
impertinency. For the Doctor confesses the thing they call natural
Astrology, and therefore the power of stars; who though he asserts that God
alters their effects, is far from infering that therefore they have nopower at
all. To clear all this the better, see the Doctors Daemonol. chap. 10. Sect.
4. (which is that VV. R. here would have confuted) word for word, Section 4.
Containing reasons or arguments against Astrology. The first is from the
concession of the friends of Astrology. They grant that either of these four
may prevent the predictions of Astrology; namely, either the prudence of a
moral wise man, or the piety of a godly mun, or the tutellarity of Angel, or
the providence of God, overruling all things; much more all four concurring may
anticipate. Now these four swallow up, and gripe within their sphereall things,
especial arbitrary things: what humane prudence cannot do, grace can; if not,
Angels may: and where all fail, providence does order according to the mind of
God, who works All things according to the counsel of his own will, Ephis.
1.11. It Is said, All things; for, not a Sparrow falls to the ground without his
will. And all the hairs of our head are numbered, Math. 10.29, 30. Which our
Savior speaks to comfort Believers against bodily dangers, and corporal
causes of fears. And on the other side, it is not said in that Ephesians. 1.11. He
works all things according to the Stars; which are visible things, and
natural necessary causes; but according to the counsel (which is secret and
invisible) of his own will (which is arbitrary and free.) And to express it
more significantly and emphatically, that God does not rule by a deputation
committed to Stars, especially in things either humane and arbitrary, or
spiritual; it is said he rules all things after the counsel of his own Will.
Which being set over against the many soar invectives the Lord makes against
Astrologicall observers of the Stars demonstrate sufficiently to them that will
understand, that there is no certainty in predictions from the Stars. This
argument might be much enlarged to good purpose; but a word to the wise is
sufficient.

Thus far the Doctor. By which it appears not only that VV. R. did most
falsely report him; but also that VVil. did never rightly apprehend the dint of
the Doctors argument from Ephesians. 1.11. which was, that seeing all humane
future events were ordered according to Gods own secret will: that therefore we
could not by vision of Stars, or inspection into constellations find visible
signs of such humane future events, which before their fulfilling are hidden in
the secret counsel of God. And therefore Williams quibbles on Ephesians. 1. are
merely impertinent, shooting at a Butt the Doctor never set up. As his
frequent comparison of Astrology and Astrologers, with divinity and Divines; is
gross enough of it self, to render it self odious without a confutation.
Divinity is the Judge of Astrology, therefore the offender at the Bar must
not compare with it. And Calvin (we heard before) called Astrologers KNAVES,
that pretended Astrology for their Knavery; but if any Divines be Knaves, it is
not as they are Divines. And therefore if William had his wish, I believe few
Astrology-books, much less his Fustiano-bumbastico-cretian-rubulisticall would
ever attein the honor of the Press. For William (poor passionate ignorant
young fellow) is an unfit piece, the Lord knows, to write confutations; and
more unfit to give counsel to a Parliament, and in a mystery of iniquity
wherein he is a party. It Is true he does (...) bellow out his high Throsonicall
Braggs verbis sesquipedalibus without measure, That he dares to undertake to
defend Astrology against all the divines in England put together. But such an
expression (if he meant not only to dare but to do it) never came out of the
mouth of one that was a Scholar indeed, and morally in his sober wits, upon any
dispute whatsoever. But if he mean to dare to undertake it, but not to do it.
Then I confess I am brought in part to believe him, by that story of the man,
that did dare to undertake to take his flight from the top of Paul's Steeple,
and to fly; though he did it not, but fell down and brake his neck, But I may
not forget to satisfy the Reader in one thing; how neatly VV. R. calls some of
his Astrologicall Brethren (whom he cries up in this Pamphlet) by the name of
Knaves. For the Astrologicall misdemeanors deserving a law of the Parliament
against that Art, were committed by his admired Astrologicall friend.

To those interrogatories at (G) whether Astrology, be Diabolical, Idolatrous,
Knavery, deserving a law to be enacted in England against it, etc. Master John
Melton shall answer in his book called the Figure Caster, which is as follows.

The intent of the Author in this Work is first to confute all FIGURE-CASTERS,
by the Divine Law, Imperial Law, Canon Law; by Philosophy, Commonsense, and
Reason.
Secondly, to overthrow the absurd Opinions of many. Philosophers, Astronomers,
Geographers, Cosmographers.
Thirdly, to unfold the dark and abstruse Answers of the Delphian, rather
devilish Oracles.
Fourthly, and lastly, to show the Sympathy and Correspondency that is between
the Roguish Conjurers, and Romish Impostours, in their Ceremonies,
Superstitious, Deceits, and Cousenages.

MELTONS Figure-Caster.
IT was about the Heart of Summer, (when the Celestial Dog belcht from his
burning Galls infectious Diseases to poison frail Mortality) that I walked into
a Friends Garden of mine, no far distant from this sumptuous (but sinful)
City, to scent the fresh and cool Air, that did breathe on those sweet smelling
flowers. But I no sooner entered into this Microcosm of sweetness, but the
amenity neatness, elegance, and splendor of the Place did so tickle and
delight my senses, that I thought it rather a celestial Paradise, then a
terrestrial Garden.

But, as I was wondering at this Place worthy of wonder, this ecstasy of my
admiration was broken off by the occasion of a noise I heard not far from me,
which at the first was but like the soft breathing of a wind, sighing from the
pregnant entrails of the Earth, but by degrees it began to resemble a Tempest,
sailing aloft in the Air. When it drew nigher me, I perceived this lowdness to
be engendered by the ever-moving Tongues of some twenty Women, that came talking
and walking down an Alley (neighboring very nigh me) and all of them talking
together; so that although I had an itching desire to understand, and an
attentive ear to hear the subject of their Discourse, yet it was as possible
for me to know what they did talk, as to make them leave talking. In the Rere
of these I perceived an ancient Man (on whose head the hand of Age had snowed
white hairs) come with a grave pace after them; whom I entreated, if it lay
within the reach of his knowledge, to resolve me what the cause was so many
people, and most of them Women, should flock together, or what business they
should have in such a remote and by place as that was, so early in the Morning?
This old Father without any pievishness (which is a passion incident to Age)
first smiled in my face, then took me by the hand, and began to open the
mystery of their meeting, and his own being there, in this manner.

Son, said he (for so I may properly call thee, because Smoothness and
Alacrity, the Characters of Youth, sit on thy unwrinkled forhead) these Women
your eyes did lately take notice of, are Creatures so ignorantly obstinate,
that neither the mild entreaty of a Friend can persuade them from their
Follies, nor the bad report of an Enemy dissuade them from their perverseness.
The party to whom they come, is a Bird, of whose kind I think there are but
few living, for he professes himself to be a Wiseman; and the cause of their
coming, is to be resolved either of Money, Silver-spoons, Rings, Gowns, Plate,
or Linen they have lost; some, to know how many Children they shall have;
some, how many Husbands, and which shall love them best; others, about other
business; but in general, all of them to know something, which indeed at last
comes to nothing. And I my self (like an Holy Day Fool) have been there at the
least half a score times, only to give my money away, to be laughed at. Yet I
have words enough; for he will promise more then twenty Courtiers, talk more
for half a Piece then half a score Lawyers, and lie more then twenty
Chronologers: yet with some trick or evasion, he will come clearly off, without
being suspected for an Impostour, especially if he have some man in hand he
thinks he dare work on, as he has done me for example.

For going to the Cross one Sunday morning to hear a Sermon, some Mercurian and
nimble-finger'd Pickpocket, that had more mind of my Purse then the Preacher,
gelt it of sixteen pound; so that I went home lighter by two Stone then I went
out. After I had fretted much, and to no purpose, I used all the means I could
to recover my loss, as by feeing the Keepers of Newgate, who know which of that
Law are appointed to filch in every part of the City; yet still I came home a
greater looser then I went out: for always being in hope to find that which I
lost, I lost more, by bribring one Knave to discover another. At the last, it
was my bad fortune to meet with an old Woman, that put a greater confidence in
the Jews Caballs, and Thalmud, the Shepherds Calendar, and Books of Palmestry,
then any part of the Bible; who advised me to repair to Doctor P. C. in
Moor-fields, at the upper end of this Alley, and if Art could help me to it
again, I should be sure to hear of it. This draught of good News this old Woman
gave me, to quench the thirst of my desire, which I drank in at mine ears as
greedily as a man sick of a burning Fever will the coolest Julips: so giving
this old Piece of Superstition a Tester for her News, I instantly went to
Master Doctor. Who perceiving me to be one that loved Gold well (because Age
most commonly is covetous) thought the better to work upon me, as he did; for
his Doctourship had the Art to hold me in hand three Weeks; in which time, he
made the sixteen pounds I lost, twenty: and when all came to a period, he told
me, that he had labored hard for me, and at the last, by his no small industry
and pains, had found out the Thief that had my Money, but he was fled into the
Low Countries, because there were many Warrants out to apprehend him for many
Thefts and Burglaries he had committed; and if it pleased me to take shipping,
and sail thither, I should be sure to find him at the Labor in vain in Breda.
But this comfort went as cold to my heart, as the Sentence of Death to a man
that stands arreigned at the Bar; for I had rather go five thousand miles by
Land, then five miles by Sea, and if it had been a hundred pounds I had lost, I
would rather have given as much more, then hazard my self by Water. Yet
howsoever I may doubt, nay truly resolve my self, that he has palpably cheated
me: yet it was impossible to find him a Liar, except I meant to take more
pains about it, then it was worth. Therefore as patiently as I am able, I am
going home again, purposing hereafter to take heed of two Pick-pockets; the one
the Diver that met with me in Paul's Churchyard, the other the Doctor in
Moor-fields, that robbed me as well as the first, who in my mind has
deserved, for his artificial Cheating, the Pillory, as well as the other did
the Gallows, for Stealing.

He no sooner had delivered me this Relation, but he hasted away from me:
therefore seeing he was so importunate to be gone, I only showed my self
grateful in thanking him for his kindness; so he went homewards, and I into my
Garden. But now my mind was quite transported from the sweetness of that
Place, and only fixed on the subtilty of the Doctor, and his politic answer
to the old man about the recovery of his money; so that I could not be at quiet
with my self, while I was truly resolved of the Art of this Star-gazer.
Therefore on a morning which was as calm as I could wish my thoughts now were,
I put on a Suit of course Northern Dozens, with all accoutrements that were
most suitable to that homeliness, and with all expeditition went to Master
Doctor, and hastily knocking at his Worships door, there came running down the
stairs with a nimble dexterity (the little Mephistopheles) his Boy, demanding
with whom I would speak; to whom, in a broad Somersetshire language, I
answered, With Master Doctor, upon an earnest business. Upon the delivery of
this Message, this young Spirit, like exhaled Dew, nimbly flew away from me,
who upon an instant, like a flash of Lightning, was in my bosom again before I
could perceive him; and then, without any more Interrogatories, mashalled me up
into his Masters Study, who sat in this manner following:

Before a square Table, covered with green Carpet, on which lay a huge Book in
Folio, wide open, full of strange Characters, such as the Egyptians and
Chaldeans were never guilty of; not far from that a silver Wand, a Surplus, a
watering Pot, with all the superstitious or rather feigned Instruments of his
cousening Art. And to put a fairer color on his black and foul Science, on his
Head he had a four-corner'd Cap, on his Back a fair Gown (but made of a strange
fashion) on his right hand he held an Astrolabe, in his left a Mathematical
Glass. At the first view, there was no man that came to him (if he were of any
fashion) could offer him for his advice less then a Jacobus, and the meanest
half a Piece, although he peradventure (rather then have nothing) would be
contented with a brace of Two-pences. I no sooner came into his Study, but I
did him the reverence belonging to his Doctourship, and stood as long bare to
him, as a poor Country Client that sues in forma Pauperis, will to his hungry
Lawyer. At the last, with the expense of many a Leg, and May it please your
Worship, I told him that the cause of my coming was, that having lately lost at
the Kings Bench Bar in Westminster Hall a Chain of Gold of three hundred Links,
therefore I came to his Doctourship, having been informed, that his Art could
bring it to light again: so putting my hand into my Leather Pouch, I greased
his ever-dry Palms with an Angel; who no sooner had a feeling of my bounty,
but he began to be more liberal to me of his Tongue. And while I stood leaning
on my Staff, he delivered his Emperick-like Oration.

Honest Friend, the loss you have sustained, The Figure. casters Oration?
is so great that I make no doubt, what you now have given, or hereafter shall
give, will nor come forced or wrackt from you, but voluntary and free. For it
is wisdom in Man to adventure small things to regain greater, where there is a
possibility of obtaining. He is not worthy of Money, that will not seek after
it, and he cannot truly judge, how to value so precious a Metal as Gold, that
is not stung with the loss of it. Therefore Sir, your care deserves a redress,
and this Book (meaning his Ephemerides) with my Art and industry, shall be the
instrumental Causes to make you happy in the recovery of that which is worthy
both of my Care and your Cost. And to put you in some hope, if that Man that
had your Chain lives either within the Horizon of England, France, Spain,
Italy, or the Low Countries, I will undertake to show you him, and in what
place, and what company he is in. There is not a Spirit, either of the Fire,
Air, Earth, or Water, but I have at my command as readily as any Gallant has
his Page or Footboy: I can conjure them all together, and make them trot up
and down the City, leaving not a Pickpockets, Gilts, Lifts, Decoys, or Diverse
Hose unsurveyed.

Look here Sir, (with that, he advanced his Mathematical Glass) with this
Instrument, first devised by that learned Man in our Art, Hermes Tresmegistus,
otherwise called Mercury, I can see all things done in Christendom. If in the
day time I look in it, I will as easily see what is done in the City, as the
Sun. There cannot a withered-faced Lady paint her decayed Countenance at her
Chamber-window, and set a fair gloss on it with her Fucusses and Italian
Tinctures, but I see her as perfectly as her she Secretary her Chambermaid.
There cannot a Counter-book-keeper and a Constable share a poor man's Fees, that
the Night before was brought into Prison (because he would not give the
blinking Beadle or begging Watchman a Tester) but I see it as easily as their
Fellow, the Bawd-like Doorkeeper. There cannot a Justices Clerk, that it may
be is more Justice then his Master, take a Bribe of a noted Cutpurse, whose
name peradventure stands at least twenty several times upon record in Newgate
Book, but I perceive it as well as the Doxy that brought it him. In the
Nightime, if I stand with this Instrument in in my hand, I can see what is
done in the City as well as the Man in the Moon. There cannot a Drunkard come
reeling out of a Tavern at twelve a clock at Night, but he is as manifest
before me, as the Drawer that beat him out of Doors after he had spent all his
Money. I can see the commanding Constable and the drowsy Watch fit nodding on
a Stall, while a company of Roaring Boys, alias Brothers of the Sword, come by
first swearing them awake, then out of their Authority, who in spite of their
teeth will crave leave to pass by them. There cannot a Tradesmans Puritanical
Wife rise early in a Morning, under the pretense of hearing a Lecture, but I
know whether she goes as well as the Foreman of her Shop that ushers her. Nay
Sir, I have seen the Pope go in his Pontificalibus with his whole Heard of
Cardinals to S. Peter's Church in Rome, as often as any Citizen has seen the
right honorable the Lord Mayor go to Paul's Cross in London. As for Prester
Jack, the great Mogul, the Sophy of Persia, and the great Turk I can see them
as often as I do my Boy, that is never from my elbow. And all this is done by
Astrology, by sacred Astrology, divine Astrology, the Art of Arts, the Science
of Sciences, for it is the ancient, the most authentic, the most excellent Art
in the World. For old father Adam was both an Astronomer and Astrologer;
Abraham and all the Patriarks: Nay, I will asture you, the Students of our Art
have been famous in all Countries; for Porphyrius and Apuleius derive the
Original of Magic from the Persians, although Suidas will have it from the
Maguseans, and from them he calls them Magi; the Latins call us Wisemen, the
Grecians, Philosophers; the Indians, Gymnosophists; the Egyptians, Priests; the
Cabalists, Prophets; the Babylonians and Assyrians, Chaldeans; the Frenchmen,
Bards: And many excellent and eminen: men have flourished in this Knowledge; as
Zoroaster the son of Aromasius, who laughed when he was born, among the
Persians; Numa Pompilius, among the Romans; The shion, among the Gymnosophists;
Hermes, among the Egyptians; Buda, among the Babylonians; Zamolxis, among the
Thracians; and Abbaris, among the Hyperboreans. A thousand more beside these,
were excellent Astrologers; as Ptolomeus, whom some (though very Fools in their
Opinion) hold to be the first Astronomer that ever was: then Messahala,
Aboafar, Abenragel, Alchibichius, Albumazar, Abraham, Avenezra, Algazel, Hermes
Tresmigistus, Aratus, Higinus, and Thebit; after whom, did arise Maternus, that
famous Mathematian: then, Georgius Purbachius; after whom followed Johannes de
Monte Regio, Alphonsus King of Castile, as his Tables can testify. Was not
broad-shouldered Atlas, that was bigger then the great Porter, an admirable
Astronomer and Astrologer? Was not Erra Pater (whom I had almost forgot) a rare
Fellow at Astronomy? Yes, as this his Table can testify. What think you Sir,
was not this learned Artist deeply read in the large-leav'd Book of Heaven? Do
not you think he could learnedly discourse of the Poles, Spheres, Orbs,
Circumferences, Circles, Centres, Diameters, the Zodiac, the Zenith, the
Artick, the Antartick Poles, Tropicus Capricorni, and Tropicus Cancri? He was
as well acquainted with the Twelve Signs in Heaven, as any Tradesman with
those in Cheapside, and run over the Nature of the seven Planets as nimbly as
the French Vaulter over the Ropes. And I my self, (but that I know this kind
of Learning is out of your Element) could discourse to you what a sullen fellow
Saturn is, (on whom the permanent continuation of all things depend) what a
joviall fellow Jupiter (on whom the fecundity of Agent Causes rely) what a
quarrelling Swash-buckler Mars (on whom the swift expedition of any thing to
the effect does hang) what a hot fellow Sol (whom all Agent Causes follow) what
a wanton Wench Venus (on whom the fecundity of all Material Causes look after)
what a merry fellow Mercury (in whom a manifold virtue does flourish) and what
a mad Lass Luna (on whom the increase and decrease of humane things consist.)
For know, that the rich and golden Harvest that I have gathered out of the
sweet and fruitful Fields of many learned men's Works, and carefully hoorded up
in the Garner of my breast, has made me full and copious in my knowledge; so
that there is no Art and Science, but I am as deeply and profoundly read in, as
those that have taken the Worshipful Degree of Doctor. I am so good at
Physic, that every morning I have whole Troops of mad men, and others, sick of
Sarpegoes, Gouts, Epilepsies, Fevers, and many others laboring under as
dangerous Diseases as these, send their Urine to me, so that never Doctor was
so famous: for when Medicine will not prevail, and that neither Galen,
Paracelsus, Avecin, Hyppocrates, nor all the Heirs of Aesculapius can cure
them; I have a Spirit that will fright any Disease from the most dangerous and
over-spent Patient. My skill in Alchymy is so great, that I can turn any thing
that is brought to me into as perfect Gold as ever came out of the Indies.
Friar Bacon was an Ass, Doctor Faustus a Fool, Ripley an Emperick, and Kelly a
Coxcomb to me; they were not worthy to blow my Bellows, or look to my Stills,
while I work for the Philosophers Stone. But for Astrology, I can do that none
of my Profession besides my self, could ever reach unto: for there is nothing
lost but I can find again; nothing in hazard of losing but I can preserve safe
and sure; I have given Tradesmen Spirits, that have kept their Shops as
faithfully, as if they had twenty Journeymen continually in it. There is not a
part of the Body, but I can give a Spirit to keep it safe and sound. Therefore
Sir, to conclude, assure your self, that if all my Spirits and mine own
endeavors can do you a pleasure (as you need not doubt of my Art) you shall not
fail of your Chain: so merrily return to your Lodging again, and repair to me
to morrow morning, 30, Minutes after 6. and always remember to admire at the
wonderful power of sacred, divine and heavenly Astrology.

A Table made by the learned Astronomer Erra Pater, showing, that the Twelve
Signs and Seven Planets have as great a Predomination over all Trades, and
Callings, which are the Members of the Body of a Commonwealth, as over the Body
of Man.
Saturn Jupiter Mars Sol Venus Mercury Luna Aries; Goldsmiths Haberdashers
Merchants Mercers Drapers Vininers Horners Taurus Butchers Graliers Cooks
Drudsters Tobacco men Players Fiddlers Gemini Sergeants Bailies Highway men
Lifts Cut-puries Gilts Decoys Cancer Brewers Draymen Porters Tapsters Hostlers
Constables Beadles Leo Roaring Boys Young Gallants Courtiers Cutlers Fencers
Armorers Brothers of the Sword Virgo Sempsters Laundresses Chambermaids
Tyre-women Waiting Gentlewomen Flax maids Tobacco-women Libra Grocers Chandlors
Cheesmongers Silkmen Apothecaries Pewterers Plummers. Scorpio Usurers Brokets
Informers Promoters Petty-foggers Sumners Jaylors Sagittarius Fletchers Gunners
Scriveners Smiths Brasiers Iremongers Turners Capricornus Drugsters Milliners
Coach-makers Jewellers Stone-cutters Painters Shoomakers Aquarius Watermen
Water-bearers Cloth-workers Bakers Salters Sadlers Barbers Pisces Oyster-wives
Fishmongers Fruiterers Hosiers Gold-finders Tailors Plasterers

When he had made an end I gave this Answer to the Figure-caster, and the
Confutation of it.

SIr, if you every day should trouble your self, or rather those that hear you,
with these long-winded Exercises, you had need eat great store of Lycoris: and
if you lie so much to every man, as you have done to me, you had best learn of
Symonides the Art of Memory; for these two things are most requisite for those
that talk and lie so much as you do. You have made a large Astrological
discourse, only to make me a Fool, and prove yourself a Knave; for cunningly
in your Exordium you hearten me on to cheat my self: for does not a man
palpably cosen himself, when he gives money to a Knave, that first cheats him
before his face, then laughs at him behind his back; which is the true custom
of all Figure-casters, of whose faculty you profess to be.

As for your Instruments, as your Mathematical Glass, with which you can do
Wonders, your silver Wand, Watering Pot, four-corner'd Cap, are but mere
superstitious Ornaments, either borrowed from the Jews or Romans. And it is a
question, whether the Romish Priests had these from the Roguish Conjurers, or
the Conjurers from them: for just such Ceremonies and Exorcismes the Conjurers
use upon their invocation of Devils, the Papists do in their Invocations; for
they exorcise and conjure their Salt, that it may not lose the savor, and
their Water, which the ignorant people gape for as greedily as a Raven will for
cool air in the midst of July, and this they call Holy Water: then they conjure
their Oil, their Balm, their Herbs, and Plants, that they may have the virtue
and influence to heal the sick and diseased: they conjure their Candles, that
they may not burn blue; and Bees, that they prosper, and not sting any holy or
religious Friar, when he dares adventure his bald Crown nigh one of their
Hives. What is the Christening of Bells, Altars, Pilgrimages, Processions,
Images, Holy Ashes, Holy Pace Eggs, Flames, Palms, and Palm-boughs, Albs,
Copes, and Maniples, Vestiments, Miters, Staves, Fools, and Friars Hoods,
Shells, and Bells, Paxes, licking of rotten Bones, creeping to wooden Images
and Crosses, shaving of Crowns, and a thousand of the like Antic Tricks, but
flat Sorcery and Witchcraft? And do not all these Fooleries agree with the
Conjurers Rogueries? Who always observe the Time of the Moon before they set
their Figure; and when they have set their Figure, and spread their Circle,
first exorcise the Wine and Water which they sprinkle on their Circle, then
mumble in an unknown Language: Do they not cross and exorcise their Surplus,
their silver Wand, Gown, Cap, and every Instrument they use about their black
and damnable Art? Nay, they cross the place whereon the stand, because they
think the Devil has no power to come into it, when they have blessed it:
therefore I cannot be persuaded, but you had your Ceremonies from the Papists,
who first had them from the Jews or Pagans, or they from you, for you both
cosen the poor blinded people after one manner; first, of their Souls, by
drawing them to Superstition. Secondly, of their Estates, by defrauding them of
their Money: for which cause, both of you have devised these Ceremonies. Thus
much for your Instruments. Now for your Authors you pile up on the neck of
each other, I hold not lawful to be studied to an ill intent; and for most of
them, I hold Atheists, and Fellows, whose Works ought rather to be burnt, for
being stuffed full of Blasphemy, then to be read for our instruction, or
knowledge, as hereafter I will show you. As for Adam, Abraham, or any of the
twelve Patriarks skill in Conjuration, Figure-casting, or raising a Spirit, as
you say, I am sure they practiced none. And for you knowledge in Astronomy,
this is my opinion of you, that you have as much skill of the Poles in Heaven,
as you have of the Poles of Paul's Steeple. Your skill in Physic shall by no
means make me (if I chance to fall sick) choose you for my Doctor, except I am
weary of my life; for I shall be in more danger of Death by taking your
Potions, then I shall be of the Disease. But indeed, for a Man that desires
present Cure, I think you are excellent for, because I make no doubt, that you
will hold him long in hand: and in this you and all other Medicasters and
Dog-leaches are happy, because the Sun does always behold your good success,
and the Earth covers all your ignorances. It is a common saying, Plin. l. 29 c,
1. Talis Medicus est Dedecus.
Nullum medicum esse peritum nisi triginta homines ad orcum dimiserit: That it
is impossible for any Physician to be skillful, except he has killed his
thirty men. But for your part I dare swear, if you should kill three hundred
(as it may be it comes something nigh that number, because you have been a long
Practitioner) you would still remain but a Quack-salving Physician; one, that
it may be has some little faint glimmering of the Practick, but nothing of the
Theory of this most learned and deep Art: for being so illiterate as you are,
how can you, (neither understanding the Greek or Latin Tongues, in which the
grounds of Physic were first writ) be so famous as you report your self to be?
Yet there is one thing in your large Oration, that you would make a Man believe
you have some skill in Physic, because you say, that whole Troops of mad men
come to you; in this a man may believe you; for if men were not mad, and stark
out of their wits, they would never come to you for your advice. There is
nothing you have spoken, that I can persuade my self you have said true, but in
this, in professing your self an Alchymist: for I dare undertake, that if a man
bring you a Cart-load of Brass, Iron, or Pewter, you can, in the time a man
will go either into Long-lane, or Hounds-ditch, turn it into as good Gold, as
is in the richest Usurers close shut Pouch in the City. But for the
Philosophers Stone, I think you can find out the Quadrature of the Circle, or
a new way to the East Indies, as soon as find out that: if you can find it
out for others, why cannot you as well for your selves? By this a man may
perceive the Roguery of all Alchymists, and the true nature of their Art, which
indeed is an Art without Art, whose beginning is, stoutly to lie, and whose end
is, miserably to beg. And to conclude, all these Gold engendring Chemists,
Libaviue. Erasmus.
are Archymists, rather Lechymists, and make all those that follow them,
Lachrymists. For your Art in giving men Flies and Spirits to expel all ill
luck from them; I think it as easy to be done, and to as much purpose, as the
License and Power Pope Paul the third gave to Serona Maria Osorio, and twelve
of her Blood, who by the virtue of a pair of conjured Beads, could be forgiven
the third part of their sins, if they said but one Pater noster, although it
was said without Devotion. Also your Spirits for all Trades, and to cure all
Diseases, and to defend every part of the Body, is as pretty and queint a
Deceit, as that of the Romish Religion; who will fell any Vocation a Saint, to
keep, defend, and prosper it: For they hold, that S. Hugh and S. Eustace guard
Hunters from perils and dangers, that the Stag or Buck may not hit them on the
Head with their Horns; S. Martin and S. Urban guard all Ale-knights,
Tavern-hunters, and Drunkards from falling into the Kennell, as they go reeling
to their Lodgings; S. Chrispine and Chrispinus defend all Shoomakers; S. Arnold
preserves Millers; S. Stephen Weavers.

It may-be (Sir) at the first you supposed me to be (because of my plain
Country Habit) a Woodcock fit for your Sprindge: but to be plain with you Sir,
your Worship is deceived of me, for I can perceive you to be an arrant Knave;
for your Tricks are so thin and slight, that a man of a very dim understanding
may see clean through them. Your Discourse is neither knit together with the
Nerves of Understanding, Wit, Art, Judgment, or Discretion, it has no reality
or essence in it: but you huddle a company of Astronomical words together,
wanting both coherence, method, and congruity; you pour out whole Dictionaries
of strange words, talk as though you could repeat Dutch Gallobelgicus, or
English Hollingshead without Book, and lie as if you had held Herodotus Pen
while he writ the Nine Muses. To tell you true Sir, I came not hither to find
out a Chain (for indeed I have lost none) but first to find out, then to
express your Roguery: therefore I think, if you had been a true Wizard, it were
impossible I should put a Trick upon you, that is so excellent at the most
cousening, cheating, and conycatching Art of Astrology. I perceive by your
swearing, I am very tedious to you: but good Sir be patient, for I have given
your Tongue an uncontrollable liberty, to speak in the defense of your Art,
that has been so benesicial to you: therefore I hope you will give me leave
(if not, I now will be so bold as to take it) to speak in the dispraise of it,
because it has been so prejudicial to many. If Figure-casting be an Art, or
Science, why is it not a Liberal Science as well as all the other? Or why is it
not studied as freely and as lawfully as the rest, but that the Professor of
it is forced to fly into such by-places, dark corners, and Garden-allies as
these? If you are ashamed to show the Reasons, I will not, but truly reveal
them; which are, either because the general eye of the World may not take
notice of the foolery of those people, and so give them warning, or that the
Roguery of you that entice them may not be apparent, and so you come to a
deserved punishment: Or that you may be thought more famous in the opinion of
the ignorant, who suppose that such melancholy places best suit with such as
study these Arts. This may appear by the cunning Man on the Bank-side, Mother
Broughton in Chick-lane, young Master Olive in Turnbole-street, the shag-hair'd
Wizard in Pepper Alley, the Surgeon with the Bagpipe Cheek, Doctor Foreman
at Lambeth, and you here in Moor-fields, and many such Impostours, that like
the Birds of Wonder, fly the light of the City.

Again, there is no Art or Science, but the definition shows the excellency of
it. Grammar is the Science of speaking and writing truly, the Fountain and
Original of all Arts. Logic the Art of Arts, the Science of Sciences, that
makes way for the beginning of all Methodes, and an Art that by disputing
finds out the Truth. Rhetoric is an Art teaching to speak elegantly, by
Tropes and Figures. Arithmatick is the Doctrine of Numbers. Music the
harmonious faculty of weighing the differences of Sounds by sense and Reason.
Geometry the Discipline of immovable Greatnesses, and the contemplative
description of Forms. Astronomy a certain Law and Rule, considering the Motion
of superior Bodies. Philosophy the knowledge of Divine and Humane things,
joined with the study of living well. Physic the Art of curing and healing the
sick and diseased.

But for your Astrology, your sacred Astrology, your divine Astrology, I never
read, that any Divine, Father, or Preacher ever gave any commendable
description of it: indeed, some of that wise Sect you profess your self to be
of, have endeavored to illustrate and beautify, with one of whose Authority I
will not allow of, because Divinity (the Queen and Mistress of the Arts) does
deny it. Therefore, because there is no true description of this Art, if the
Students of it will think themselves beholding to me, I will furnish them with
one.

A new and true Description of ASTROLOGY.
AStrology is an Art, whereby cunning Knaves cheat plain honest men, that
teaches both the Theory and Practick of close Cousenage, a Science instructing
all the Students of it to lie as often as they speak, and to be believed no
oftener then they hold their Tongues; that tells truth as often as Bawds go to
Church, Witches or Whores say their Prayers, or never but when the English
Nones and the Greek Calends meet together.

This is the true Description of your Art. Now the virtue and power of your
Art, is to calculate Deaths and Nativities, cast Figures, find out things that
it may be were never lost, gives Fools Flies to win if they can at Ordinaries,
and more of the like, which I will not nominate, because it will be troublesome
to my self, and tedious to your Doctourship (whom I perceive to be as full of
Frets, as a Musician) all which I will prove to be unlawful, to the disgrace
of all the damnable and diabolical Students in that Art: and if I do not
artificially confute and confound all those that can raise a Spirit, and cast a
Figure, and all other Mountebanks, Emperick, and Impostostours, such as you are
that pretend to do it; then let them boldly and confidently say, I am but a
mere Fresh-man, and no true Master in my Art.

Some Principles, conducing to the perfect Science and knowledge of Astrology,
handle the Natures and the Parts of the Zodiac; others, the Qualities of the
Planets; some the Dimensions and abstruse significations of the Houses. The
Astrologers themselves divide the Zodiac into twelve Parts or Signs, having
every part consisting of thirty Degrees of Longitude, and twelve of Latitude.
In these pretty Inventions they show themselves Poets as well as Astrologers,
in feigning so neatly: for can any of them make me believe there are twelve
Signs to be seen in Heaven as visibly as those on the Earth, or that there are
any such Creatures in Heaven, as the crookhorn'd Ram, the goring Bull, the
poyson-spitting Scorpion, any lecherous Crab-fish, unconscionable Scales,
roaring Lion, or hot-rained Goat? Can any of you make me believe there is such
a Wilderness of wild Beasts as these? it may be indeed there is Virgo, because
she is seldom seen on the Earth; but for the angry Bear, snarling Dog,
venomous Dragon, greedy Vultur, hissing Snake, horrible Hydra, fearful Hare,
or Man-loving Dolphin to be in Heaven, I never will believe it: howsoever I
have heard a plain Country fellow stand in defense of it, that if there were
no such things in Heaven, such wise men as Almanack-makers would never put them
forth in Print. But I will laugh at their ignorance, and scoff at all
weatherwise Wizards with Bion the Philosopher, that held those Astronomers and
Astrologers ridiculous, that cannot see Fishes swim in the Sea, yet affirm they
have seen them in Heaven: Or deride them, as Diogenes did.

The same Philosopher hearing a Star-catcher make a long, and (as he thought) a
learned Discourse about the Celestial Signs, asked him if he ever were there,
he knew them so well, or ever had any hope to come thither, he did lie so much?
For is it possible (says he) that you can truly know what is in Heaven, or
what is done there, when in your absence, you cannot see or know what is done
at home? But these are only Jests put upon them, not Arguments to confute
them: but I will prove there are no such things in Heaven as these they talk,
and show the Reason why they feign such things to be in Heaven.

As the diversities of the Circles described in the Spheres are merely
imaginary: so the division of the Zodiac is not material, or of the first
Creation, but only feigned by the will and arbitrament of Astrologers, that
thereby they may know the Beginnings and the End of the Heavens motion. And the
reason that they divide the Zodiac into twelve Signs, neither more or less,
and that every Sign is divided into thirty Degrees, and every Degree into sixty
Minutes; is because this Number is most fit for Calculations, as the
Astrologers themselves do witness: as Hales Avenradon on the Exposition of
Ptolomy, and Abraham Avenozra in his Book of Astrological Reasons, so that they
might, if it had pleased them, have divided the Zodiac into more or fewer
parts, but they would not: which Division is clean contrary to the Doctrine of
the Caldeans, for they teach, that there are not twelve Signs but eleven
Images, so couple Libra and Scorpio together.

A man cannot allege a stronger Reason not to believe these Astrologers and
artless Empericks, then the strange opinions they hold, and to hear how stoutly
most of them will defend the gross absurdities of many Philosophers and
Astronomers: For do you not think Eudoxus and Aratus were mad when they would
boldly affirm, Aug. de Civ. Dei.
that they knew how many Stars were in Heaven, and the Names and Operation of
them all? Were not the ancient Astronomers out of their wits, that held the
Stars were stuck on the Roof of Heaven, no otherwise then artificial Stars on
the top of some sumptuous building? Was it not a foundness in that Epicure,
that did certainly believe, that when the Stars did shine in the Night that
then they were but kindled of God, and when they did vanish away, by the
approach of the Day, that then they were quenched by him? As if we would say,
when we see a man, then he is born; but when he is out of our sight, then he is
dead. What an absurdity was it in Origin, to affirm that the Sun and the Moon,
and the rest of the Stars, were living Creatures, being capable both of our
Vices and Virtues? grounding his wak argument upon the words of Job, Laectant.
coufur. hanc opinionem. in lib. 1. Inst. c. 5.
who said; That the Stars were not pure in in the sight of God: which was not
meant, or spoken, as they were rationable Creatures, but as they were glorious
Stars, and of a most excellent and full brightness, who although they were
never so tralucent and bright, yet they were but dim in the sight of their
Maker. Therefore in my mind, what Astrologers or Astronomers soever they be,
that think Stars rationable Creatures, are worthy to be accounted most
unreasonable and senseless themselves. What a vanity was it in that Astronomer,
that held, that Stars had their motion from themselves? which is most absurd:
for if a Star is moved by it self, then Nature is defective, which never gave
any Figure or Organ to any Star for such a Motion. But Nature never was
defective in any thing, does not abound in superfluous things, or does any
thing in vain: Therefore we must conclude, no Star has the motion from it
self, but has it from God, Motue Stella. rum.
that is the true prime Motor all the wise and learned Philosophers have so
much talked of. What an Error is it in some again, that doubt whether the
World be Spherical, or round, or not? which doubt is most vain and idle: for
this sensible World was made according to the example and similitude of the
Intellectual, the Arch Type and Idea of the Divine Mind; in which is neither
Beginning nor End, Boethius. de consolat. lib. 3. Plato, and Mercus, rius
Tresmegistus.
such as you may perceive in a Spherical Figure. Again, it may be argued
mathematically thus, that it is a fit thing for that Body that contains within
it all things, should have the most capable Figure, which is is Spherical.

Was it not a great oversight in Cicero, Plato, and many other Philosophers to
believe, that there is a musical consent and sound wrought by the ordinary
motion of the Stars and Planets? which cannot be: Ambros. lib. 2.
for the celestial and superior part of Heaven has no Air in it, without
which there can be no sound made; neither do celestial Bodies, while they move
in their Spheres, touch any hard or harsh thing, as the Finger does the Lute or
Harp, which is the cause of such musical and harmonious Raptures. Also to what
purpose was it in many Writers, to hold a difference whereabout the middle of
the Earth should be? But I fear I have erred too far out of the path I am bound
to follow: therefore I will come into it again.

There cannot be a greater argument of the falseness of Astrologers, then the
leadly Antypathy that is between them concerning the Art it self; for some of
them hold, that the Degrees, Planets, Qualities, Apparances, Ends, Exaltations,
Diversitatis qualtatum and influentiarum Coeli ab effectihu^ cognocuntur.
and Fallings, they attribute to the Planets, may be attained to by the
diligent observation of the Effects of the Heavens, who by degrees may come to
the knowledge of the Causes: for they think, that in the beginning of the world
God gave Men so long Lives, that they might give their Minds to Speculation,
whereby they might find out Astronomy, Astrology, and such Arts and Sciences,
which require a long, large, and exact experience. In this I believe they say
true: for some say (it is a sin to belly the Devil) by long observation they may
learn many Experiments concerning Astrology; yet, if by mere experience they
had attained to the Principles, then not once, but often, they should have
observed the same Constellation, which is opposite to the Tenent of most of
them, who hold, that the same Constellation cannot appear wholly again, unless
it be after the revolution of many thousand years: and if they could perceive
them sooner, yet does it not suffice to observe the same particular
Constellation, because seeing the influence of no Star tends upward, it is
decreed by Astrologers, that it is uncertain whether the experimental effect is
to be ascribed to this or that Planet, unless by chance it be to the Sun or
Moon, which are often proposed to us in operation, when oftentimes they are the
influence of a lesser Star, although farther from us. For another Constellation
in superior parts does vary, hinder, and diminish the operation of Heaven in
inferior parts, the disposition of the matter. But suppose the influences of
Constellations may be understood, yet they are not sufficiently made manifest,
as may appear to him that reads the many doubts that arise about Astrology,
concerning the Motion of the Stars, the Firmament, and the Planets. Some grant,
that there is a Heaven above the Firmament: some late Writers make use of and
practice another Heaven; the Chaldeans and Egyptians one Motion, that is to
say, Stellarum fixarum motus tri^ plex.
diurnal to the Stars: Ptolomy adds a second, which is from the East to the
West; Thebit a third, which is from the North to the South: but they all vary
about the time. And wonder not, if they vary about the fixed Star, seeing they
differ about the Motion of the Sun and the Moon, for the precise knowledge of
the Solar Year: and it is needless to report, how much they differ about the
declination of the Sun. Therefore, why should any man believe them, when their
Writings and Opinions differ so far from one another? for it is certain, that
if Astrologers be deceived but in one Degree, in taking an hour, they err
likewise in the Division of the Houses; for the Degree will change the Sign:
then is it necessary that their experiments are deceitful. The Chaldeans (the
most ancientest Astrologers) differ from the opinion of the Egyptians; for the
Egyptians divide the Zodiac into twelve Signs, but the Chaldeans into eleven
Images. Again, some of them disagree in their Degrees: some of them will have
this Planet placed in this House, another in the third, fourth, fifth, or
fixth. Thus is there such a deadly enmity between these heavenly Doctors, that
like so many Masters of the noble Science of Defense, they strive to break the
head of each others Reputation, and stand at defiance with each other. For when
Ptolomy has his Jacobs Staff in his hand, he thought himself as skillful at it
as Turner was at his Rapier and Dagger, and was assured, that Hermes
Tresmegistus durst not stand up against him. When Alchibicius had got hold of
his Astrolabe, he was as safe as Robin the Devil with his Sword and Target, and
durst prognosticate, that neither Albumazar nor Aboazar durst challenge him.
When Abraham Haly, or Thebit, were peeping through their Prospective Glasses,
they did believe, that neither Avenozra nor Algazel durst look them in the
face. Nay, do but look into the humors of our Modern Calculatours, and you
shall find them rail one against another as bitterly as Nash against Harvy;
and why is all this? but because they condemn each other for lying; when Heaven
and Earth, God and Man, know, that he that lies the seldomest, does lie very
often. Some of them will prognosticate, that on such a day very infallibly
there shall be Rain, when it is a thousand pound to a Farthing token, but all
the People dwelling in that Meridian his Almanac was calculated for, but will
find them Liars. Yet, howsoever they do often miss in their Prediction, when
they foretell of the disposition of the weather, of war, of sickness, of the
change of Times, and of Laws; yet I cannot deny altogether, but that futures
may be seen by the Contemplation of Heaven. For there is none can doubt, but
that God, Arist. lib. Metere. rum, and de Generatione.
the great Architect of this visible and invisible World, infused a manifold
virtue and operation in the Heavens: but that many of these Qualities are
secret, and occult, the kingly Prophet David tells us, saying; God numbreth
the multitude of Stars, Corpora inferiora subjiciuntur superiorum and
influentiis.
and imposes several Names unto them. Therefore it is manifest, that things
are named according to their properties, which none but he that made them, can
perfectly and distinctly understand. Yet many Philosophers by their Speculation
knew and observed the general influence of Heaven, by their Motion, Heat, and
Light: which made Aristotle affirm, that this Elementary World is contiguous to
Heaven, and that the Sun, under the oblique Circle, or the Zodiac causes
Generations. Which is not absurd to affirm: for certainly, the thick and gross
Bodies are governed by the thin, and that the influences of the Stars do rule
the differences of Bodies; as in the Suns rising or setting, we see the times
of the year do vary, and by the increase and decrease of the Moon, some
Creatures are augmented and diminished; as Shellfish, at the wonderful flux
and reflux of the Sea. But to be of the Astrologers opinion, that the Stars
have a power over the Will of Man, I never will believe; for the Mind cannot be
subject to the Position of any Star: nor is it at all times true, that the
differences of Bodies are caused by the influence of Heaven: Sexus diversitas.
for two Twins of diverse Sexes may be conceived in the same instant a Man and a
Woman. And though many hold, that there may be a general influence into Bodies,
yet not into the faculties of the Soul or Mind; for a corporal substance
cannot cause an operation in a spiritual essence. But the Reason that many
Astrologers and Prognosticatours err in their opinion (although there be an
influence in the Stars concerning the fertility of the year, of pestilence, of
war, of thunder, hail, rain, fair or foul weather) is, because they do not keep
themselves within the compass of Astrology, but thirsty after vainglory, go
beyond their limits, thinking to presage that by the Stars, which possibly they
cannot do. Again, most Astrologers informer Ages held diverse opinions
concerning the Principles of Astrology, and they (though but Pupils in this
Art) presume to come in with their opinions, because they would be thought
Masters of their Art: and although oftentimes they hit upon the disposition of
the weather, and future things, by the observation of the Heavens; yet at all
times, concerning the disposition of the Corn especially, they cannot choose but
err, because the four parts of the year are so different in quality, so that it
is impossible, but that the excess of the heat in one part of the year, and the
excess of cold in the other does distemper the Soil. Concerning the Predictions
of Diseases, they may the easiest tell: for by the corruption of the Air,
Physic teaches us, many Infections may putrify the Brain. This only shall
suffice for Astrologers. Now I will come to the Art it self, whereby they can
calculate Deaths and Nativities, tell Fortunes, either good or bad: which they
fetch as far as from the twelve Houses they have built in Heaven.

The signification of the twelve Houses of Heaven.
THese twelve Houses are the Tenements most commonly such Astrologers as you
your self do let out to simple people, whereby they purchase to themselves much
Money, and to their Tenants much sorrow. And to tell truth, these twelve
Signs, placed in their twelve Houses, are like a Jury that sit upon the life
and death of Mortality. By the disposition of the first House, by the Planets
and Stars fixed in it, by the natures and diverse effects that are wrought by
them, many wonders are discovered: as to know of what condition he shall be of,
either as liberal as an Aldermans Son and Heir, or as penurious as the Irish
Catch-pole, that will feed his Dogs with Rabbets in Lent, while he sits eating
a piece of poor John: it can tell of what Vocation or Calling a Man shall be
of, either a Stubble-bearded Barrister, and wrangle stoutly and loudly at the
Bar; or whether he shall be a Soldier, and fight bravely, if a man do but
scorn for to pledge him a deep Health untosome of his White-Frier Mistresses,
etc.

By the second House you can foretell of the prosperity or adversity of him
that is born: whether he shall be a rich Citizen, and break three or four
several times of set purpose, either of set purpose to cosen the World, or
out of mere poverty; whether he shall be an Heir, and inherit his Fathers vices
as well as his riches; or whether he shall be a Merchant, and loose his Goods
on salt Seas, or have them drowned in the Canaries of some Tavern.

By the third House you can judge of the secrecy of the Conscience, whether it
be good or bad toward God, or Man. In my Conscience they err from the truth at
the least a thousand Dutch Miles, because the Holy Ghost tells us, that No mar
knows whether he deserves Hate or Love; so that by this we may perceive that
the secrets of the Conscience are only known to God. Therefore this madness of
the Astrologers is not only to be confuted, but burnt for an Heresy. Besides
this wickedness, they hold there are two most fortunate Planets above all the
rest; which are Venus and Jupiter, and that Venus gives the felicity of this
life, and Jupiter of the life to come, which I utterly disallow of: for if a
man follow such a wanton Wench as Venus is, he shall in small time lie sweating
in some Hospital, or groaning in some Barber Chirurgions house, which I think
can be no great felicity; and he that follows the humor of joviall Jupiter,
shall find, and quickly know, that it deserves that place which is contrary to
Immortality. So that by the assertion of these Astrologers, whosoever is born
when Venus reigns shall live in this World most pleasantly, in spite of ill
Fortune: and when Jupiter reigns, he shall live in the World to come, although
he live never so wickedly, for you make no exception, but indefinitely say,
They shall.

Maternus was as mad, or rather as wicked as the rest, who writes and affirms,
that when Saturn is placed in Leo, men live long, whose Souls afterward shall
go to God. Mark but how considently and arrogantly he speaks this, which I will
confute with the words of our Savior, who says; Whosoever will enter into the
Kingdom of God, must keep his Commandments. And not whosoever will enter into
the Kingdom of God must be born when Saturn is in Leo. Albumaezar also is as
devilish as the rest, heaping impiety on impiety; affirming that he that prays
to God in the hour which the Moon with the Head of the Dragon is joined to
Jupiter, shall obtain whatsoever he asks. If this sacrilegious Foolery is
true, why do not the Astrologers themselves observe this hour, that they may
pray that they may never more err, or that they may obtain so much Riches that
they never after may be forced to set their Lies to sale, or that they may live
no more on the four-penny reward of some Suburb-sinner, for casting her hot
water; or the six-penny gratuity of some old Maid servant that would be loath
to die a Virgin: or they may pray that they never more sell their good Fortunes
to Oyster-wives and Butter-women for greasy two-pences? But by this Argument
that you cannot follow that you prescribe to others, a man may smell your
Roguery to be as rank as a Mountain-goat.

By the fourth House, you will judge of the essence of the Child that is born,
how long it shall live, and how well; if it shall be as long-lived as a Raven,
or Stag, or as short-lived as a Goat, or Cock-Sparrow.

By the fifth House, you can judge, how he shall live, and affect his Parents,
whether he shall love his Father better then his Mother, or his Mother then his
Father. Ptolomy thinks you may judge by the tenth House, but Malleus ab
Ascendente.

By the sixth House, you will know of what Profession it shall be of, either a
Fool or a Physician, a Parasite or a Courtier, a Beggar or an Alchymist, a mad
man or a Musician, a Thief or a Tailor.

By the seventh House, you will judge what Wife he shall have, either a
delicate young plump Helena, that looks as merry as May, and as jocund as June;
or an old decrepit Lamia, that is as frosty as February, and as dull as
December; whether she shall be as mute as a Fish, or have a Tongue as loud as a
Fish-wife.

By the eighth House, you will judge how unfortunately a man will die, either
on the water, like a Pyrate, or in the water, like a Fish, or on a Tree like a
High-way-man, or on the Bough like a Bird: whether he shall be sterv'd to Death
in a Prison, like some Prodigal; or in some Burdello, like a French Monsieur,
or a Spanish Don, whose Bones the Neapolitan Dog has picked so clean, that they
would serve well some Gilder to burnish with.

By the ninth House, you can judge, whether he shall be a Traveller, as famous
as our English Coriate or outlandish Peter Columbus; what fortue he shall have
in his Travel, what Fashions he shall wear.

By the tenth House, you can judge of the state of the Mother.

By the eleventh House, you can judge of what Complexion he shall be Sanguine,
Chollerick, Phlegmatic, or Melancholy, or what hair he shall be of, of a
brown or Abraham color, as the English; of a yellow, as the Dane; flaxen, as
the Irish; or black, as the Spaniard.

The twelfth and last House, where he shall dwell, and what Neighbors he shall
have.

Thus have I run over the twelve Celestial Houses, whereby you can infallibly
foretell of our good or bad Fortunes, according to the nature and influence of
that Planet that reigned at our births, in which you are most lamentably
deceived: for you say, There is no man born but he is born either under an
Auspitious or Malevolent Star, and according to that Planets influence he is
born, under, he shall thrive and prosper; also you say, that every Planet bath
but one influence, either good or bad. Now that this is false I instantly will
prove. I have heard of two Bretbren that were Twins; now there is no Astrologer
will deny, but that these Brethren were born under one Constellation, because
they were born within the space of one Minute, and being born under a
malevolent Star, they must be both unfortunate; and under a smiling and luckie
Star, happy. But not long after the birth of these Twins, there was a
Fortune Tellers did calculate their Nativities, and told the Parents of these
Children that they should both be fortunate, because he perceived they were
born under a fortunate Planet, which proved contrary to his predictions: for
these wanting means belike to supply their Wants, being come to men's Estates,
did against some good Time, (although they had no Lands or Tenements of their
own) take up other men's Rents either on Newmarket-heath or Salisbury-plain; who
for those Facts, to be short, were taken, carried before a Justice, by him
committed to Prison, the next Sizes were brought to their Trial, convicted,
condemned, and judged to be hanged. Now all this while their fortunes were
equal, but contrary to the prediction of the Astrologer; but belike the Star
that reigned at their births had a double influence, which is contrary to your
Writings, for when these Brethren were brought to the place of Execution, and
ready to be turned off, there came a Reprieve for the youngest, who was carried
back again to prison, had his pardon, and afterward became an honest man; but
the eldest with the loss of his Life satisfied the Law.

There was another Astrologer did divine, that one Donello Forobosco a
notorious Thief should be hanged, which did come something nigh his prediction,
for he being a hungry Lazarello de Tormes, robbed Market-women, and Country
people of Chees-cakes, and Buttermilk, for which Fact he was apprehended and
condemned to be hanged; so coming to the Gallows, he studied how he might
escape that Destiny; at the last, seeing his time, he flung Ginny-Pepper in the
Hangman's eyes as he came to put the Nooze over his Neck, lept off the Ladder,
and showed himself a very nimble Footman, for he ran away, making toward the
Sea, which was nigh the place of Execution, and endeavoring to swim to save
himself from those that pursued him, the Cramp took him in the great Toe: and
so, whereas by the Law of Nations, and the opinion of the Astrologer he should
have been hanged, he was most unfortunately drowned: and thus these learned
Astrologers were deceived.

It stands to great reason, that these Artists cannot at all times tell other
men's fortunes, when they cannot foretell of their own good or bad luck: for
there was an Astrologer made a prediction of Henry the sevenths Death, (but
some attribute this to Alphonsus King of Arragon) and that should die on such a
year. The King hearing of the South-sayer, sent for him, and asked him if he
were an Astrologer, and could tell fortunes, to whom he answered, Yes. The King
again asked him, if he never did foresee by his Art that there was imminent
Danger, that much about that time should hang over his head, meaning the
Astrologers, to whom he answered, No. Then the King replied, Thou art a foolish
Figure-caster, for I am more skillful then thou art; for as soon as I saw thee,
I instantly prophesied thou should be in prison before night, which thou
shall find true: so the King instantly sent him thither. But he had not been
long in custody, but the King sent for him again, to know, if he could cast a
figure truly, to know how long he should be in prison; to whom he still
answered, No. Then the King said, Thou art an illiterate fellow, that neither
can foretell of either good or bad luck that shall befall thy self; therefore I
will conclude, thou can not foretell of mine. So forthwith set him at
liberty, giving him many disgraceful words. Yet howsoever these Examples touch
the Reputation of those that profess your Art; yet I will not infallibly say,
that such things were never done, although it be not ordinary to do them; for
it is almost incredible to believe, yet I persuade my self that it is true what
Zonoras declares, that the day before Julian the Apostata died, a certain man
lying in a solitary place by himself, saw a heap of Stars in the Element, which
he said, did express these words, Hodie Julianus in Persia occiditur. That this
day Julian the Apostata is slain in Persia. And the time being afterward
noted, it was perfectly known that he died that day. But this I take to be an
extraordinary Revelation.

Another Astrologer did foretell a Prelate, an Acquaintance of his, that he
should have a great fall. Therefore the Prelate, that he might be more safe
(knowing the Astrologer to be a learned Man) would never go higher then the
lowest Room of his House; would never dine, or sup, but sit on the ground; when
he went to Bed, would lie on the ground; hoping by this wariness, to change the
position of the Star that did threaten him: but it was in vain for a while
after News was brought him, that he was deposed of his Bishopric: who
instantly cried out, Now the Astrologers prediction is come to pass, for indeed
I can fall no lower.

Byron, Marshall of France, was told by a Wizard, that a Burgundian should be
the death of him: upon which prediction he gave express Command, that not a man
of that Nation should come nigh him: but all would not help, for he found the
prediction true, by the loss of his head, which a Burgundian cut off, that was
his Executioner. These two last seem to savor somewhat of the Devils
subtleties, and the Astrologers Amphibologies.

There was another Wizard (as it was reported to me by a learned and rare
Scholar, as we were discoursing about Astrology) that some tweuty years before
his Death told Cuffe our Countreyman, and a most excellent Grecian, that he
should come to an untimely end: at which, Cuffe laughed, and in a scoffing
manner entreated the Astrologer to show him in what manner he should come to
his end: who condiscended to him, and calling for Cards, entreated Cuffe to
draw out of the Pack three, which pleased him; who did so, and drew three
Knaves: who (by the Wizards direction) laid them on the Table again with their
faces downwards, and then told him, if he desired to see the sum of his bad
fortunes reckoned up, to take up those Cards, one after the other, and look on
the inside of them, and he should be truly resolved of his future fortunes.
Cuffe did as he was prescribed, and first took up the first Card, and looking
on it, he saw the portraiture of himself, Cap a Pe, having men compassing him
about with Bills and Halberds: then he took up the second Card, and there saw
the Judge that sat upon him: at last, he took up the last Card, and saw
Tybourn, the place of his Executiou, and the hangman, at which he then laughed
heartily; but many years after, being condemned for Treason, he rememembred the
fatal prediction of the Wizard, and before his death revealed it to some of his
friends. If this be true, it was more then Astrology, and no better then flat
Sorcery or Conjuring, which is devilish.

There was another (with whom I will end) that was told by a Scholar, Anonimus.
that he should have his brains beaten out: but he was so wary of himself, that
he would not lie in a House for fear the Roof should fall on his Head,
resolving to lie in a Tent; but that Resolution lasted not long, for he durst
not trust himself there, for fear the great pole, that went cross over it,
should knock him on the head: then he resolved to lie under some Tree, but then
he feared, if he should fall asleep in a windy night, the Tree might fall on
him. He durst not go into any Town, least a Tile should crack his Crown: so
that what place soever he went into, he still was very wary of himself. At the
last, as he was walking in a hot Summers day in the Fields, he was forced to
put off his Hat, and having a bald head, a strange bird that was in the Element
having an Oister in her Claw, thinking it to be some white Stone, let it fall
on his head, and so beat out his brains. Thus for all his care and providence,
he came to his untimely end, and fulfilled the prediction of the Astrologer, or
rather Conjurer, if the Tale be true, which I scarce believe.

Thus Sir, you see, I will not so much disparage your black Art, as to say,
that you cannot foretell of things to come, calculate Nativities, or do strange
things, though not by it, but by the help of the Devil, who abuses you: but I
say, they ought not to be done, Jerome in Com. super pre-phetam Sophoniam.
because as S. Jcrome says, You lift up your self against the knowledge of
God, giving your selves to a feigned Art, imputing every Accident that happens
in a Year or an Age, Greg. in Hom. Epiphaniae accepia occasion ab apparitione
Stellae quam Mag^ viderunt in Orient Nate Domino contra Matheresaticos,
oratiouem texons.
to the rising or setting of Stars, thinking that humane affairs are managed by
the course and falling of the Stars, Ambros. in 4. lib. Hexa. August
and while you promise health to others, you are ignor ant of your own
punishments. Again he says, that to seek out the course of the Stars, and the
events that follow them, is the scandal of Egypt, and plain Idolatry. S.
Ambrose says. He that thinks to express the several qualities of Nativities,
and will tell what disposition the Child shall be of as soon as it is born, is
both a villainous and vain man, because it is most wicked and impossible to do.
S. Augustine says that these Astrologers and South-sayers hold, that all
things good or bad happen by fortune, which is both wicked and heathenish: for
the Gentiles called Fortuna, Dea, or a divine power, not considering any man's
merits, but gave Riches to one, and misery to another. And the better to
express her, they made her Image according to the form of a Woman, sitting in
the middle of a Wheel, always turning it, having the right side of her face
bright, the left obscure, yet both blind; showing, that those she favored,
were merry and jocund, but those she hated, discontent and melancholy. Her
blindness showed the indifference both of the good and bad: by the Wheel, they
did show the prodigious change of this unconstant Goddess, which is impious,
and against all Christian Faith: for we ought to consider, that all the ill
that happens to us have their original from our sins, and all the benefits and
good that come to us, from the mercies of God, and not from this or that
malevolent or smiling Star, or from the frown and smile of Fortune.

But if you will have these Accidents good, or bad, that happen in the minute
of an hour, and sometimes in larger and lesser distances of time to Foxtune,
she is very predominant among us, and like one of the most powerfullest Planets
reigns and rules over our Nativities and Affairs. For it is some men's fortune
to be Citizens, some again to be Cuckolds; some men's fortune to be Courties,
some to be Flatterers; some to be Scholars, some to be Fools; some to be
Lawyers, some to be Knaves; some to be Usurers, some to be Devils; some to be
Captains, some to be Cowards; some to be Beggars, some to be Alchymists; some
to be Heirs, some to be Fools; some to be younger brothers, and some to be
wisemen. Again, it has been many a Gallants good fortune, to have a brave Suit
of Clothes on his back in the morning, yet it has been his bad fortune to have
them in the Lumbard before night. It has been many honest men's good fortune to
have a fair Wife, yet it has been his bad fortune, not to know truly how many
Children he has had by her of his own getting. It has been many a roaring
Boys good fortune, as they say, to kill his Enemy in the field, yet it has
been his bad fortune to be hanged for it the next Sessions.

Thus you see your Goddess Fortune has a great predominance over this lower
world the Earth: yet howsoever I will not believe these things happen by
fortune, and the mere influence of the Stars; therefore let all men avoid them,
for this opinion causes many to affirm there is no God. S. Augustine will not
allow of your Astrology, but calls it a mere vanity; and those that profess
it, Aug. contia Mathematicos in capitulo quinio and in fine capitis.
Enemies of the Truth: he says, that the Devil first found out this Art, and
those that are curious in it are Enemies to God, because it breeds many
superstitious Opinions in Men and Women, especially the ancientest, which they
hold as Canonical, and as lawful to be observed and followed as any part of
Scripture, of which I will reckon up some.

S. Augustine calls your Art, a Sacrilegious Foolery an unlearned Learning,
Lab. 2. de doctrina Christiana.
and a kind of Fornication with the Soul. S. Jerome makes mention that Pope
Alexander the third, finding a Priest that found out a Thief that had robbed
the Church, by the inspection into his Astrolobe, suspended him from his Order
for that Fact for a year together, saying, it was a most heinous sin for a man
of his Order, to exercise such an unlawful Study, although it were for the
good of the Church.

Thus Sir, you see your Art is forbidden concerning telling of fortunes, or
finding out things that are lost, etc. And in forbidding the practice of this
Art, is also included all those for whom it is practiced; for many people in
these days cannot break his Shinnes, have his Nose bleed, lose a Game at Cards,
hear a Dog howl, or a Cat wawl, but instantly they will run to the Calculatour,
and have him turn over his Ephemerides, and his annual Calendars, flust full of
Lies and superstitious Observations. I will ccunsell all those therefore, that
would know their fortunes, Calendarium ve^^m and perpeiuum.
to look to that everlasting Calendar, the sacred Bible, for the Astrology they
shall learn there, never tells false, but will certify them, that the cause of
their ill fortunes is their sins; and the good, the Mercies of God: that will
tell them of the nature of Summer, that is of their Resurrection and Salvation,
and the true condition of VVinter, that is Death and Damnation. If they study
this Book, they will quickly learn to be excellent Calculatours, and learn what
will become of them if they do ill, and what if they live well, it will tell
them the Causes and the Cures of every Disease that does infect the Soul. Yet
for all this, it is the true condition, rather superstition of the world, to
put their confidence rather in Astrological fallacies, then in the Holy Ghosts
verities, drawing from the Stars the Events of future contingencies, ascribing
what good soever befalls us to the influence of some lucky Planet, and not to
Gods Mercies; and what mischief soever to the position of some malevolent Star,
and not to our sins, we put our confidence in Astrologers, Stars^, and Planets
for a few experiences, and never hate for their innumerable fallacies: but this
is especially hereditary to Women, because by succession it came from their
Mother Eve, who by her vice of curiosity or levity, or admirable facility
rather then fatuity, was deceived by the Serpent, in defiring to know future
things, which folly descends naturally to Women, who will rather believe a
Mathematician then a Divine; so that these Calculatours if among a hundred
Errors they happen but upon one Truth, then without any suspicion they may lie
a thousand times after, yet these foolish, credulous, Francis. Peirar.
and Apple-eating Women will believe them.

Sebastian that writ bitterly against Astrologers, says, it is an Art against
the Law of God, and full of deceit and villainy. For, says he, Go to any
Doctor of the Mathematics, an tell him thou have had very ill luck all thy
life time, and desire him to tell thee under what Planet thou were born, and no
doubt his Answer will be that thou were born either under malicious Mars; or
that Saturn was Apostolical and Retrograde: when you have been with him, then
go to another, and tell him that you have had very good fortune, and desire him
to tell thee what Star reigned at thy birth, and it will be very strange, if he
do not tell thee as the first did, either under Mars or Saturn; who to prove
himself an Artist, will turn over huge Volumes, by which he will show, that it
is nocessary that you must have good fortune, being born under those Stars the
first said were ill, and in a Circle drawn together in every part, by which he
will take diverse and sundry occasions to speak any thing. Now if they chance to
miss any thing in their predictions, they have a pretty evasion to shun the
suspicion of Lying, which they draw from the interrogatory part of Astrology.

The opinion of Astrologers is, when the mind of Man is spurred to the desire
of knowing any thing; that suddenly it cannot be done by election, or
consultation, but the influence of the Constellation that hour consisting in
Heaven. And when any man consults with an Astrologer, by a figure in Heaven the
hour of interrogation being found out, the Astrologer can answer truly of any
thing sought for, or demanded: As whether an absent Friend be alive or dead; if
a Legate or Messenger, that is sent into any Country, shall return home again
safe and well, and whether he will dispatch that matter he went about
prosperously and an innumerable many of other things, that humane curiosity
does doubt of: to which sometimes they may answer truly, although they often
lie, and are never found fault with for it; for they have found out a way,
whereby they can sufficiently excuse themselves to those that are ignorant and
simple in these things. For they say, that if any man, being doubtful of any
thing, does with a natural motion and radical intention ask them any thing,
that then they can resolve them of any Question they ask. Now if they miss, and
cannot answer directly and truly to what was propounded to them, then they say,
that he that asked that Question, did it not with any natural motion, or any
firm or radical intention to be resolved, but only to try their Art. Thus
oftentimes they deceive, and are deceived in their Answers; not by the defect
that is in their Art, but by the levity of him that did ask the Question: and
thus they excuse themselves: which are mere Tricks for Evasion, and have no
ground at all from Reason.

But I admire what Excuse the Egyptian and Chaldean Astrologers could find,
Chaldaei Astrologi Nobuchodonosor somnium dicere nequierunt.
when among such an infinite number of them, not one of them could truly answer
touching the Dreams of Pharaoh and Nabuchadnezzar, when Joseph and Daniel could
answer directly? Aegyptiaci Divinatores somnium Pharaonis dicere non potuerunt.
Do you think this was done by any inspection, or peeping into an Astrolobe, or
observing any Constellation? No: for it was done by the revelation of Almighty
God; therefore it was past the Rules of your Art. There is another neat
Delusion, whereby they benefit themselves very much; which is, by the
observations of the Heavens to know, if it be fit or convenient for a man to
travel, or do any other business in: which is most superstitious and
diabolical. For they will not have a man eat, drink, be merry, take Physic, or
travel, marry, join friendship, send forth a Messenger, buy, sell, put on new
Clothes, begin the Alchymists work, set Boys to School, go to Law, hawk, hunt,
fish, or go to the Bathe, but they will have them to do it under some
Constellation, and will set forth Rules when to do these things, and when not.
If they can do these things, I wonder they do not set forth a Rule, and choose
an Hour and Constellation, under which a man may die well, and avoid Hellfire,
and enjoy the Joys of Heaven: but I think their Art has nothing to do with
this. Yet I will not deny, but that the influences of the Stars have an
operation in the differences of Bodies: for what is more belonging to the Body,
then to exercise Husbandry, to cut down Timber for Building, while it is not
too full of Sap, and to observe the Times and Seasons when they should be done.
But those observers of Time are to be laughed at, that will not go out of their
house before they have had counsel of their Almanac, and will rather have
their house fall on their heads, then stir, if they note some natural effect
about the motion of the Air, which they suppose will vary the lucky blasts of
the Stars, that will not marry, or traffic, or do the like, but under some
Constellation. These sure are no Christians: because faithful men ought not to
doubt, that Divine Providence, from any part of the World, or from any time
whatsoever, is absent. Canonica inhibitio 26. q. c. 7. Divina Providentia.
Therefore we should not impute any secular business to the power of the Stars,
but to know, that all things are disposed by the arbitrament of the King of
Kings. The Christian Faith is violated, when so like a Pagan and Apostata any
man does observe those Days which are called Aegyptiaci, or the Calends of
January, or any Month, or Day, or Time, or Year, either to travel, marry, or
to do any thing in: for whosoever he be that believes these things, has erred
from the Christian Faith and Baptism. S. Augustine in his Enchiridion says,
that it is a great offense for any man, to observe the time and course of the
Moon, when they plant any Trees or sow any Corn: for he says, None puts any
trust in them, but they that worship them; thinking, that the position of some
Star ought to have an influence in them according to those things they believe
concerning the Nativities of men. This me thinks, is most simple and
ridiculous; for thus I will argue against them. If this be true which they
hold, that it is good to sow Corn under such a tuckie Constellation, what is
the reason then, that after the Corn that is scattered on the Earth by the
laborious hands of the Husbandman, that after so much Grain is come up
together, look green together, ripen together, and fit for the Sickle, that
some of it is blasted, some quite choked up, some devoured by Birds, some by
Beasts, some trodden down, and some of the Ears pluck from their stalks by men
that come by that Field they grow in? How comes it to pass then I say, that
some of this should go safely into Barn, and some of it again be devoured and
spoiled? which me thinks, should not be, if the same Constellation under which
it was sown had but one influence, which should be good, and not a second,
which was bad.

But I will now let these things pass (because I make no doubt but I have
strongly confuted them) and come to the last, but the wicked part of Astrology;
which concerns the making of Astrological Images, and to what purpose they are
made: where I will show, they have no force or virtue from any Star or
Constellation, but that the Devil works about them, and in them, causing them
to be made under a Constellation, that the impiety of their Idolatry may the
more secretly be hid.

The vanity of Astrologers about their Images.
THe Fabric of Astrological images are made under a certain Constellation,
either to avoid hurtful things, or to entice profitable things, for to diverse
uses they are made. Some are made for the destruction of some things: as if you
would remove a Scorpion from a place, you must carve the Figure of some
Scorpion either in Stone, Wood, or Iron, under some convenient Constellation,
and inscribe on it an effectual Name, signifying the Name of the thing that is
to be avoided, and the Name of the Sign ascending, and of the like in diverse
parts of the image, with many other Observations, which for brevity sake I will
now let pass. For a contrary effect, you must have a contrary Constellation,
and a contrary Operation, as in the like images, pertaining to Love, Enmity,
Health, or the like. And although there are many Effects caused by these
images, as experience teaches us, Non virius imaginis sed operatio daemonis
producit effectum.
yet they are miserably deceived, that think it done by the virtue of any
Constellation, when it is done by the mere operation of the Devil: For not the
virtue of the image, but the operation of the Devil, works the Effect. And
learned Averrois writing against Algazel the Astrologer, says, that these
images have no virtue from the Stars, because artificial things are not capable
of any influence, neither are they any cause of a natural operation: for
Quality is in the Predicament of Actio. An image therefore made of any earthly
substance, is nothing but a massy Effigies, and capable of no Action. And in
like manner, those images that are buried in the midst of the place where their
Operations are expected, are contrary to natural Reason. And other things that
are observed in them, show as great vanity: as, when some men's Names must be
with the left hand, some with the right; some images must be buried with their
faces upwards, some with their feet upwards: which are all signs rather of a
Compact with the Devil, then any other natural cause; as in the Negromantick
images of Angels, or rather of their inscription of Devils, and other unknown
Names and Characters. Also, the use of their Suffumigations and invocations are
signs of a Compact and League with the Devil.

The prodigious impiety of the Dominick Friars in the Fabric of these images,
would make a History bigger then the Iliads: for they have made by their
Magical tricks weeping Statues, by which they wrought many Miracles, which they
learnt of the Priests of the Idols of the Gentiles, who have deceived many, as
may appear by the Alexandrian Statues, destroyed by the Christians: for when
they overthrew the Phane of Syrapis, there were images found both of Wood and
Brass, whose inward parts were made hollow, and with instruments were fastened
to the Roofs of their Churches and Temples, from whence they spoke. And since
the time of Popery, there have been found in Churches images that have had Eyes
put in by Art, that would weep, and let Drops of Blood trickle down their
faces, sweat blood, and would twinckle with their Eyes to the People, by the
help of instruments, and would wrythe their heads and Necks backward and
forward, according to the will of the Priests that invented them, to beguile
the People, and enrich themselves. These Puppets had no Tongues, but only
moved and stirred, making signs to the People, many of which, the Cardinals
erected, adorned, and commended, to instruct the People: which were nothing but
Deceits and Tricks of these holy and religious Fathers, still to detain the
people in ignorance, and that they should not smell out their Knavery. Also,
many of these Scab-shin Friars (when any rich man died, that had left their
Abbeys and Monasteries nothing to feed their fat Guts with) would place some of
their Accomplices in a Vault they had made of purpose under the dead man's Tomb;
so that when any of his Sons or Kindred came (as the Custom in those Times
was) to pray for the soul of their deceased Father, or Kinsman, they should
hear a dreadful voice under the Sepulcher, telling him, it was the Spirit of
him that was but lately buried there, and that his Soul could never be at rest,
while such (the Friars had most mind to) were given to the Monastery: so that
the blind people believing this to be the Spirit of their father, or Kinsman,
would instantly go home, and confirm those Lands on their Monastery. Thus poor
Souls, they were often deluded by such counterfeit Voices of some subtle Friar,
or as knavish a Companion of their Fraternity. Therefore if there be any in
these Days (especially old Men and Women) that believe the Souls or Spirits of
the Dead walk, let them but read the Scriptures, and they shall find it to be
most false: for that affirms, that the Souls of the Good instantly go to
Heaven, and of the Bad to Hell; therefore their Spirits cannot wander. Again,
the Soul that is in Heaven minds no earthly matter; and it was never known,
that any Soul ever returned out of Hell; for the Poets themselves say,

Nullus reditnrus ab Orco. But these images and Tricks of the Friars do but
resemble the statues of Negromancers, made with great toil and labor. For
Friar Bacon was many years, before he could make his Head speak. And the image
of Albertus Magnus was to be wondered at, which he made in the full and perfect
shape of a Man, who with the wheels and other Engines that he had cunningly and
artificially wrought in it, made it speak and pronounce words as distinctly, as
if they did proceed from a Man endued with Sense and Reason. This Statue, when
Thomas Aquinas was sent into his Chamber, where it lay hid. heard it speak very
articulately; which when he heard, then looking for it, and finding it, and
viewing it very seriously, at last struck it with a Club, and brake it all to
pieces. Which when Albertus heard and saw, he cried out, and said; Thomas, thou
have destroyed the Work of thirty years labor and pains. Now can any man
judge, that either Bacon or Albertus made these under any Constellation, or
that it spoke by the influence of any Star? if they do, they are wretchedly
deceived: for it was either by a material Engine, or the Devil that spoke
within them, brought into them by their Art. Therefore we may persuade our
selves, that all these images, made by the Art either of a Friar or
Negromancer, are unlawful to be made of them, or used of any other. But if we
must allow any statue or image, they must be those of Pasquil and Morphirius,
on whose breasts were no Lie-Bills, as the Popes called them, Phil. Camp.
Medita Cent.
but True-Bills of their Villainies. statues were of stone, and the Verses
carved on their breasts, were bitter and Satirical, sharply reviling the
Sorcery, Sodomitry, Simony, Incest, Murder, Witchcraft, Poisoning, and
Sacrilege of the Popes and Cardinals whereupon the Gentlemen of Rome wittily
said, that it was not lawful for men to speak there vices, the stones did
proclaim them. But Pope Adrian would have taken an order, and have them flung
into Tyber, if Suessanus the Legate of Charles the Emperor who favored them,
had not prevented him; who said to his Holiness, that if they were flung into
Tyber, the Crocodiles and Rats, and other monstrous Serpents would catch them,
and sing them. To which Answer some report, the holy Father stood as mute as
one of his Cardinals Mules: but some report, that he began to be angry at
Suessanus Answer, and in a rage suddenly said, that he would have them burnt,
to whom the Legate wittily replied again, saying, If you burn these images,
their Ashes will not be blown through the City, but into other Countries, so
that the people will take occasion to celebrate and reverence those Ashes for
the writing sake, and so it will come to pass, that they being dispersed
through the world, the sins of Rome will generally be known to all Nations. At
this second Answer, his Holiness was more perplexed then before, and seeing he
could do no good, either by Drowning or Burning, he bid them stand in the
Devils Name. But I have made too long a Digression, therefore I will return
again to our Negromancers, and now I have spoken of their images, I will
briefly and plainly lay open the viperous Generation of Negromancy, which are
Idolatry, Divination, and vain observation, with all the hellish brood that
proceeds from them.

The damnable Offspring of Negromancy.
I Dolatry is a divine worship, attributed to idols, which idols are statues or
images, which the Gentiles worshipped with divine honor, believing there was
some Divinity in them, by reason of their Answers and wonderful Effects the
Devil wrought in them. Such were the images of Hermes Tresmegistus, otherwise
called Mercury, in which they did believe, that by a kind of Art the Souls of
Devils and Angels were included, under a certain Constellation, which Divinity
and Natural Philosophy does reprehend: for they hold that a Spirit cannot
possibly be vegitable, or can substantially inform artificial Bodies. For the
Soul, as Aristotle says, De Anima.
is an Act of a natural Body, not artificial: for a man cannot by any matter,
as Herbs, Wood, Stone, Words, or Constellation, expel a good or bad Spirit, or
being called, that it can come presently, and dwell in an idol; because
corporal things cannot by any natural order have any operation in incorporal
things. There have been some of the Gentiles that have not only attributed
divine honor to statues and images, but believed them to be Gods, for some
virtue, or magnitude of their Acts these statues represented; as to Jupiter,
Hercules, Venus, and the rest, and other Monsters of this kind. Also they did
not only honor corporal, but incorporal things, as intelligences, Angels, and
the souls of heavenly bodies, which they call Aeria Animalia, and they did not
separate the Souls of men from divine honor, which is most devilish. This
kind of idolatry at these days is used among our Antagomsis the Papists, for
they pray to Iron, Wood Gold, Silver, and wooden images, that have neither
sight, feeling, sense, life, or operation in them, and have as small influence
in them after they are made, either by the Carver, or Goldsmiths hand, as they
had when they first were in a massy lump, either in the Tree or Mine.

The second Daughter of Superstition is Divination, by which our Astrologers
miserably labor to know of future things, Lib. 8. E^ym.
either good or bad. These are they (I sidorus says) report themselves to be
full of Divination, who by craft and device foretell of things to come, by the
effects which proceed upon necessity from Causes, unless they are especially
hindered of God, certainly proceeding from the cause of Nature: as the Eclipse
of the Sun and the Moon, and the Effects which proceed from these Causes may be
foretold of by as probable conjecture, as well as a Mariner may foretell of a
Storm, that will arise by a dark Cloud, that is either before or behind him.
Have not many old women told by the unhappy conditions of a Boy, that he would
be hanged, and has it not fallen out right? Have not many grave Matrons
foretold, that young wanton Lasses would prowe Wag tails, and has it not come
to pass? Have not many men by the damnable Tricks they have seen in Catchpoles,
foretold, that they would prove Knaves, and has it not been true? Yet these
are but mere Conjectures. Again, Astrologers boast they can divine, which is
most false; for the Prophets themselves foretelling of future things by
Revelation of God, did not divine but prophecy; for Divination is always taken
in the worst part, because in it the operation of the Devil does always come.
Lib. 2.
For Bonaventure says, to ask counsel of the Devil is a great mischief. The
species of Divination by which they can fortell of future things are many.
Sometimes they do it by plain invocation of the Devil, Pr stit z^m.
who with their execrable Exorcismes, Conjurations, Characters, and Figures,
and diverse other Ceremonies, and to speak more truly, Sacrifices at diverse
times do call the Devil to give them Answers, who by diverse manners and forms
appear to them, who as subtlely and deceitfully does answer to those Questions
propounded to them, as may appear by these Examples. Pope Sylvester the second,
that with small Learning had attained to his Pontificalibus, being greedy long
to enjoy that Sea, by this devilish kind of Conjuration raised up the Devil,
Papa Pater. Polyd. Virg. l. 5. de rerum inventione.
and ask this Counsel how long he should live. To whom the Devil answered, that
if he did take heed of Jerusalem he should live a long time. Pope Silvester now
thought himself long lived, because he determined never to see Jerusalem: but
four years after he came to his Palace of Sanctae Crucis, he lay in a Chamber
unknown to himself, called Jerusalem, then instantly being mindful of the
Devils Answer, he said, that he should, as he did not live long after. Also
Alexander the sixth, Gui^c.
whom the Devil did help to his Popedom, promising him that he should live
December and Octo in his Popedom, upon Composition that he should be his after
that time was expired. Now these Numbers were over generally expounded of
Alexander touching his Years, for he supposed the Devil meant by Nine and Ten,
Nineteen Years, when the Devil meant but Nine Years and Ten Months, which was
much about the time he came to claim his Right of the holy Father. Also
Albertus Scotus doubting of his fortunes, raised up the Devil, and asked him,
Lord of Placeny tia.
concerning the security of himself and his state, to whom the Devil thus
subtly and intricately answered, Domine stes securus, inimici tui suaviter
intrabunt terram, and subjicientur Domuitui; which as the words now lie, bear
this interpretation in English. Sir, you shall stand secure, thy Enemies shall
peaceably enter into thy Kingdom, but shall be subject to thy house. Therefore
he did hope well of this Answer, and made no doubt of the Victory; but the
Devil did not promise him the Victory, but the Overthrow and meant thus, Domi
ne stes securus, so did divide the word Domine into Domi ne, again, inimici tui
sua vi ter intrabunt terram, subjicient ur, that is, ignem Domui tui; so the
Devil did expound it, thus any man else would do the syllables, being so
divided and cut a pieces. Thou shall not stand secure at home, thy Enemies
three times (...) their Forces shall enter upon thy Land, and shall overcome
with fire; and so was Albertus deluded. Also the Oracles of Apollo were but
mere Witchcrafts and delusions of the Devil, giving Answers from a hollow place
of the Temple, after the Priests had sacrificed to him, who did most commonly
speak nothing but Amphibologias nodosas and flexiloqua responsa, deceiving many
that came to it, because his Answer did still include a double sense: so that
if a man did read over all Chrysippus Volumes, concerning the Oracle of
Apollo, he should not find one Answer but did include a twofold meaning, of
which I think it not impertinent to remember two or three of them.

Francis Petrach makes mention in his Morals, that Nero asking counsel of
Apollo at Delphos, desiring to know how long he should live; this Answer was
made him, Lib. de Mora.
that if he did take heed of seventy three years, he should live a long time.
When Nero did hear this Answer, such a security did rock him a sleep, that
fearing nothing, he did glut himself in delight, because he thought he should
not die before the prefixed time of the Oracle, so that his mind was ravished
down the swift Torrent of an insolent vanity and vain insolency, pampering
himself with high Diet, Music, and delights that please his Senses, but being
in the Meridian of his happiness, in a minute he was flung down into the
Dungeon of Disgrace, for he heard the popular Voice curse the Name of Nero, and
celebrate the Name of Galba, by whom he was disceptered, and who at that time
was just seventy and three Years of Age. But one of the prettiest Tricks the
Devil played by his Oracle, Valerius Maximus makes mention of; for he
reports, that a Sophister to make himself merry, came to laugh at the Oracle
of Apollo in Delphos, and asked him if he should find his Horse he had lost. To
whom the Oracle answered, that he should find his Horse again, but if he did
not take heed, he would take him such a kick, that would break his Neck. At
this Answer of the Oracle, the Sophister went away laughing, because it
promised him to find a Horse he never lost. But as he traveled into his own
Country, he fell into the hands of King Attalus, to whom in former Time he had
done some wrong, and was commanded by him to be set upon a Stone, called Equus,
a Horse, from whence he was flung headlong down, and brake his Neck; fulfilling
the Oracle of Apollo. Thus much for the Devil and his Oracles, Cui nomen erat
Equi.
which always were some such cunning Delusions, whose end was commonly
mischief. Sometimes you dodiuine by Dreams, and that is called per somnia.
Natural Philosophy and Divinity do manifest the cause of Dreams; Somnium.
Dreams sometime proceed from the fullness or emptiness of the Belly, sometimes
by illusion, sometimes by revelation, and sometimes by cogitation and
revelation. Also, the diverse habitudes of the Body does administer diverse
causes of Dreams; so that melancholy men often dream of horrible and fearful
shapes and forms of Devils. Chollerick men, of cutting Throats, of Quarrels, of
Stratagems, and firing of Cities. Phlegmatic men often dream that they are in
fear of drowning, and sometimes dream a sweeter Dream then this, that they are
eating Honey, which is caused by the Phlegm which is naturally sweet,
distilling to the palate of the mouth. Incubus morbus noctu quiescentes
infestans quum scil cet externa quadam vis quiescentes videtur evadera and
viluti suo pondere pressos gravare. Nasciiur hoc morbigenus copia vaporum
exvoraeuaie and cruditate (...) caput redundantium.
The Sanguine Complexion, from the abundance of Blood causes men to dream of
the Incubus, which Physicians hold is the cause of a future Apoplexy: And that
is the reason that many ignorant people that are of Sanguine Complexion, and
feed on Flesh, Eggs, Veal, and drink Wine, and such like, which causes Blood,
that believe that in their Sleeps they often feel the Nightmare, or an
Incubus, which is nothing else but a Disease arising of Vapors, disturbing
those that are at repose in the night, whose external force does seem to evade
their senses, and to press their Bodies with their ponderous weight, and this
is the reason that Physicians hold that the Incubus is a sign of future
Apoplexy, because the Apoplexy is a stupefaction of the Nerves in the whole
Body, with a privation of the sense and motion.

Again, Apoplexia. stupefactio nervorum totiue corporis cum privatione sensus,
and motus, a verbo Graeco, (...), quod est percutio aitonitum reddo.
some hold that the cause of dreams arise from the business and affairs a man
is most employed in the day time, so that the impression of them sticking in
the Table of the Fantasy, makes a man dream of those things in the Night which
he has done in the Day. as for example: Men given to drink much, often dream
that they are in the bottom of some Noblemans Seller, drinking Healths. And men
according to their Employments dream of their business over Night. Your Lawyer
he dreams of Angels, a most blessed dream, and if he chance to talk in his
sleep, it is most commonly of Demurs, Habeas Corpusses, Scisseraries, Writs,
Latitats, and Procidendoes. The Physician he dreams of a great Plague, and if
he talks, it is of nothing but Purgations, Vomits, Glisters, and Pills. I knew
a Player dreamed that his Brains were beaten out with the Cork of a Groat
Bottle of Ale, and as he was speaking the Prologue it hist at him, because he
spoke it so scurvily. The Cutpurse and Catchpole most commonly dream of a
Michaelmas Term, for that is their best time to pick Pockets and cheat in; and
so of all the rest according to their Employments: therefore this makes me not
of Simonides opinion, who held that all Dreams are sent from God, which all
honest men will deny, because they know that God is not Author of any ill.
Again, Dogs and Kine dream, especially when they have lost their Whelps and
Calves, who suddenly will wake out of their sleeps, and howling and lowing into
diverse places to find them. Nor must we believe these Negromancers in their
devilish work of working in our Fantasies by Dreams, that they can do any thing
that is true, as when they cause us to dream of Gold, or Silver, and we chance
to find it instantly, to affirm with many old Women that all Dreams are true,
for this is but a Trick of the Devil to bring us into Superstition: which Trick
is not much unlike that he has put upon the Papists, making them believe that
at the sight of the Cross he cannot be quiet, but must fly away from it; but
there is no true Christian will think that the Devil is afraid of a piece of
Wood, Gold, or Silver, but flies from the Cross of purpose to draw them into
the Superstition of adoring the Cross, and kneeling to it in stead of adoring
him that once hung on the Cross: for although it be a Cross, yet it has no
more virtue and influence in it then when it was a piece of Wood, Stone, or
Silver. Thus then you see we must trust to no Dreams, except they come by the
inspiration of God and the Holy Ghost; of which God spoke in the 12. of
Numbers. I will speak to him in a Dream, this was now by a good Angel, that God
warned Joseph to fly into Egypt. And oftentimes God suffers the evil Angel
to delude the minds of men, so that many times they have been banqueting with
gallant Ladies, and by the fantastical illusion of the Devil, think that they
have been in the company of diverse Women that rid on the backs of Cats, Dogs,
Hogs, or that they have been sailing on the main Sea in Ships no bigger then
Egg-shells; and that in the peace of midnight they have traveled through many
parts of the World. Holy Job prays against such illusions, saying, Thou do
terrify me by dreams, and do shake me with horror by visions. There are
many Monks as the Golden Legend testifies, that report this of their holy S.
Dominicus, that his Mother before he was born dreamed that she bare a huge Dog
in her womb, holding a burning firebrand in his mouth, who entering into the
world set it on fire. This Dream the holy Monks did thus expound; that the
Vision was not vain, seeing Preachers in the Scriptures are called dogs. But I
will give them a truer Exposition then this, not sparing their holy Order. It
was certain that this Dominick was the Author of one of the four Mendicant
Orders, and the first that found out the burning and firing of the Professors
of the Gospel. Therefore his imitatours have peculiarly challenged to
themselves the Inquisition and many other such places, to exercise their Fire
and Sword. And so by this was signified the burning Firebrand Dominicus held
in his mouth; by which an infinite company of godly men were consumed into
Ashes. Thus by this dream did the devil delude Dominicus Mother, and many more
that did belive the interpretation of it by the Monks. But in general, dreams
are not to be believed, for they are most wicked and odious in the sight of
God, that think so; as may appear in the 19. of Leviticus, Deuteronomy. 23. ibid. 18.
Ecclesiast. 24. and many other places of the Scripture. Thus much for your
divination by dreams. Sometimes they do divine by a Spirit; and that is called
Pythonissa. Sometimes they answer to that they are called for by diverse
Figures, Men or Women set in polished stone, Iron, Brass, Steel, Glass, or the
Nails of ones hand; and this is called by the general Name of Geomancy: And
most commonly to such as these, they choose out Women and Children. And I my
self have known many old Women old dog at this kind of divination; who hold,
that if the Nails of the hand grow yellow, it is a great sign of ill luck; and
that specks are the true signs of future ill luck. If these Apparitiors appear
in the Water, then it is called Hydromancy. These I have heard are very
incident to Catch-poles, Eum-bailies, and the like, when they are duck'd under
Water at a high Tide at one of the Temples. If these Apparitions are in the
Air, then it is called Aeromancy. If in the Fire, Pyromancy. If by the Bowels
of Beasts, offered up on Altars to the devil, it is called Aruspicium. But if
by Incantations, the devil seems to rise and answer to Questions propounded to
them, then it is called Negromancy. In this worst Superstition, Blood is also
used; and the Reason Isidorus gives, is this because he desires divine
worship; for in the old Law, Blood was offered up to God. If by the chattering
of Birds, or by the voice of any other Creatures, they foretell of things to
come, it is called Augury. This kind of divination is most blasphemous,
odious, and against the honor of God: For they fain, that with a divine
instinct, Birds, and Fowls, with their Motions, Chatterings, Croakings,
Winding, or fore-right slying portend either good or bad luck: which the
Ethnicks themselves did laugh at, and contemn. For Hector in Homer sharply
reproved Polydamantus, who delaied his fight, expecting an Augury; to whom
Hector said, Vnum esse Augurium optimum, Patriam fortiter defendere: There is
one Augury which is the best, stoutly to defend thy Country. Also this kind
of divination was very frequent among the Jews, and was laughed at, and crossed
by that learned and courageous Jew, Mossolamus; who being in the Wars, was told
by an Astrologer, that he should march no farther, until he had received an
Augury from the next Bird he should see come flying over his Army. But the Jew
scorned the help of the Bird, and laughed at the skill of the South-sayer,
instantly taking his Bow in his hand, and as the Bird came croaking over the
Army, slew it, then spoke these words, Do thou think thou superstitious
South-sayer, that this Bird, ignorant of her own safety, could tell of the
event of our Wars? If it could have foretold of things to come, it would never
have come nigh this place, to be slain of Mossolanus the Jew. If they foretell
of things to come, by the moving of diverse Members of Beasts; then it is called
Auspicium. Also, when a man speaks any thing to another without any intention,
and as it were in jest: as to say, He will be hanged, drowned, killed, or the
like; if this come to pass, then they call it Omen. If they foretell of things
that shall happen by signs that they see in the Lines of a man's hand; then it
is called Chyromancy. This Art many old Women are learnedly experienced in, and
will tell any Man or Woman, for meat, drink, or money, what shall befall them.
If they foretell of any thing that shall happen by the signs they see in the
shoulder-blades of Beasts, then it is called Spatalmancia. There is also
another kind of divination, which is by Lots: which Lots are made, by drawing
out points of an uncertain number, with their Faces turned toward the Moon,
with other Observations to as little purpose as this. The Dutchmen are very
skillful at this, and have cousened the English of infinite Masses of Money, by
their selling of Papers; so that there was not one among forty, though he came
never so merry to the Lottery, but he should be sure to go away Blank. Thus
Sir, have I laid forth the Brood of divination; now I will come to the
Observations. It is a disputable Question, whether by words or deeds the Devil
will be compelled by Negromancers, or whether being called by them, they come,
because of some League that is between them? If Devils appear, forced by
Negromantick witchcrafts, why do not Negromancers make them come against their
wills? which sure they cannot; which is a sign, that there is a League and
Covenant concluded between the Devil and Conjurers either manifest or occult,
why else do Negromancers dedicate their Books to the chief Devils, whose Name
they often use, but only to make a Covenant with the Devil, that when they
call them by those Names, Charms, Characters, Exorcismes, and the like, they
may appear themselves, or send some of their inferior Devils as soon as they
hear them. These then are approved signs and marks of a Covenant: and that the
Spirits may show themselves to have a geater power, sometimes they seem very
unwilling to come, either because they would make the inchanter more zealous,
or that he may delude simple people: for he is a Liar, and the Father of Lies.
And now I hope it will not be impertinent to confute the Opinion of many, who
will not believe, that there are any devils but those that are in Hell: but I
am persuaded, that in every corner there is a Spirit. I proceed a little
further, to show, why under a certain Constellation at certain times. and in
certain terrible places, Apparitions appear rather to Women and Children,
rather then to Men. Such matters as Conjurers use, do not compel Devils, but
rather are signs of a League compacted between them. For as S. Augustine
says, The devils take their habitations in bodies, that God, not themselves,
created; and are delighted in several bodies for variety sake, not as
creatures with Aliment, but as spirits with signs, which signs are delectable
in variety; as sometimes by Stones, Herbs, Wood, living creatures, Verses, and
Rites; and men are often delighted with these things. Which the Devil
perceiving, seduce them either by subtle or crafty means, or by Apparances, in
fawning and Friend-seeming shows, or beautiful and amiable shapes; as they
have appeared to some men in the Forms of Lamiae, which are but mere
Phantasma's of fair women appearing in that beauteous shape, feigning
themselves to be in love with young men, who have been so often conversant with
them, that at the last they have brought them to destruction. But I think there
are few Lamiae in these days appear, except they be substantial ones, which are
Whores, who well may be compared to these midnight delusions; For they will
profess love, and never leave a man, while they have brought him to some
Hospital. Neither could the Devil do these things, but that he prieth into the
heart of man, and then feeds them with that which most delights them. Thomas of
Aquin teaches, that by these corporal things they can the more easily bring to
effect that to which they are called, and they desire this, that their Art
might be held more admirable: and for this case, being called under any
Constellation, they rather will appear, But why to Virgins, Children, and such
weak Creatures do such Appearances show themselves more then to others, but
that they may bring them into an opinion of their Divinity, and that
prestigious Witchcrafts and delusions may soonest tempt them that have the
weakest Faith? And to make them afraid, they appear in the Night, as it were in
hollow Caves and Caverns of the Earth, Deserts, dark and solitary Chambers,
whereby the fear of these melancholy places, and the unseasonable time of the
appearance of the Devil, may the more terrify them. Thus the policy of the
Devil still works on the weakest and silliest kind of people. Avec. 6. de Not.
Avecin shows how the Senses may be deluded. The general means is this; Spirits
work nothing extra nos, without us; for it is easy for Spirits to make many
bodies of the Air, which earthly bodies may wonder at. For Erasmus reports a
pretty piece of Magic performed by a Roman Priest (who had it not out of any
place of the Scripture I am sure) that invited a company of Ladies to a
Banquet, In Epicureo.
bidding them bring good stomachs with them. The Ladies came, were welcomed by
him, entertained by delicate Music, and were seated at the last at the Table
according to their Births. There were such variety of rare and strange Dishes,
that they thought that others, not their own Nation, did furnish their Table:
they eat well, drunk well, and were merry; and which is better then a piece of
Cheese, Pippins, or Carroways, to close up the mouth of the stomach after
Supper, they were welcome. When this Feast, rather this Fast was ended, and
(which is not very usual with Courtiers) Grace being said, they rendered the
Priest hearty Thanks for their Banquet, and went home. But they had not been
there at the most half an hour, but their stomachs began to call upon them for
meat, for they were all as hungry as if they had eat nothing at the Banquet:
therefore did much wonder at themselves, that they should have such a great
desire to meat, seeing they did but newly come from such a royal Entertainment.
But this queint delusion the Priest afterward revealed to them: For although he
invited them to a Feast, yet they had never a bit of meat; For his Art did
delude both the Eye, that thought it saw such things, and the Pallat, that
seemed to taste those delicates. I my self have seen a Fellow, that would make
people believe, that they saw Orange trees spring out of his Forehead, having
Birds sit and sing on the Boughs, which in an instant would vanish away again.
This Fellow was at Cambridge drinking at the Dolphin, and made a Drawer that
filled him bad Wine, believe, that he would geld him, if he would not bring him
of the best Claret in the Cellar: which the Drawer laughed at, and the more to
cross him, fetch of the worst he could find. This Juggler swore he would be
even with him before it be long; but the Drawer went away laughing, bidding him
do his worst. But the Conceit came at the last, like a Jest in the last Lines
of an Epigram; for when the Drawer lest thought of it, as he was running down
stairs to fetch Wine, he felt something trickle down his Thighs, at the first
thinking it had been some Wine he had spilt on his Breeches, but putting his
Hands into his Hose, he pulled them out bloody again; so that he came running
up stairs, and with a wide mouth came roaring into the Room where we were
drinking, crying, the lame man had gelt him, and that he was utterly undone. At
the first this Vox exclamantis did beget such a Laughter in us, that we were
not able to speak to him; but yet at the last, by giving the Fellow good words,
and good Wine, he made him a perfect man again. This was but deceiving of the
Senses, and so not done, or if done, the work of the Devil. Lib 9.
Rhodoginus makes mention of one Syreneus, that would run his Horse a straws
breadth a Mile together, and make him amble, curvet, trot, pace, and gallop
within the compass of a Bushel. Martin Berrhaus reports, that he saw a Dancer
carry two men on his shoulders, two on his arms, and one upon his neck, yet
would dance and vaunt with such agility, that a Baboon with his drinking-glasse
could not tumble nimbler.

Rhodoginus and Erasmus makes mention of an Indian, that by a trick he had
learnt of a Witch, l. 12. c. 40
would shoot through the narrow circumference of a small Hoop-ring, standing a
furlong off.

Julius Piscarius reports, Quiuti. l. 2. c. 2.
that a Dice-player (who commanded, that after he was dead, his skin should be
made a Cafpet for Gamesters to play on, his bones Dice to play with, and
Tressels for stools to sit on) by a Magical trick he had, would cheat the
most cheatingst Gamester.

Therefore, if these that are but Mataotechnia, vain imitations of Art, seem so
wonderful to people beholding them on Stages and Theaters: how less
miraculous is it, if the devil by Elements can make stranger apparences, or by
secret inspirations delude the sense, by framing the Phantasmes of Images, by
which he will deceive men running, Phantas.
sleeping, or walking?

Why may not these Spirits be turned into as many shapes as Diomedes companions
were, that were in the Island called Diomede, not far from the mountain
Garganus, that is in Apulea? Why not as well as Ulysses companions, that were
turned into beasts, and whom Circes the famous Sorceresse enchanted? Why not as
well as the Arcadians, that were turned into Wolves? Why may not there be a
transmutation in these incorporeall spirits, as in these terrestrial bodies?
And why may not there be as strange Metamorphosis in these days, as there was
in the days of Ovid and Varro? nay I will stand to it, that in these days
there are as mavelous changes and more true, for I have known a Gallant that
at the age of fiveteen, has been a pregnant witty youth, but before twenty he
has been turned into a right Asinego. There have been many Citizens that have
been very handsome personable men in the morning, who before the Exchange has
been done, have been turned into monstrous beasts. There are many tradesmen
that at their first setting up have been very honest men, but after the third
or fourth breaking, have been turned into most fearful Sergeants. I have known
many that have been accounted wise fellows in the University, that have no
sooner peept into the Temples, or one of the Innes of Court, but have been
transformed into monstrous Asses. Then seeing there is such a transmutation in
earthly bodies, why should we think it so strange and rare in incorporeall
spirits? Yet these and the like are not recited as if they were true, but to
show how the senses may be deluded. and the like may appear by those women that
oftentimes are persuaded that they are riding on the backs of beasts. Yet for
all this, I will not grant there is any virtue in the words or charms of a
Negromancer to raise up these forms. Also there is no virtue in those
ceremonial Exorcisms, with which Priests exorcise Wine, Salt, Water, and the
like, which I will manifestly show you. First, in respect of the Matter, for
the Matter is but Air, or Water, or Ink; which can have no virtue in them, for
by that reason, every substance of the like kind should have the same virtue.
Secondly, in respect of the Accidental Form, which is nothing else but a
configuration of diverse Characters, either in writing or speaking, for
Philosophy teaches that Accidental forms have no Action of themselves.
Thirdly, in respect of the thing signified, as the word fire to burn this
paper, or the word Death to kill this Man, or the word God, to save this Soul,
or to raise up any dead body; which cannot be: for the name of God cannot do
it. But God must be invocated by true Faith, whereby he is often pleased to
grant our requests. But Conjurers and Astrologers use the name of God in
another kind, and other Ceremonies, which rather drive away divine Grace and
Virtue then procure it, and so much the more they sin, by how much the more
they take the name of God in vain, and to the worship of the Devil. Therefore
to conclude this Treatise of Divination, I will prove both by the Divine,
Imperial, and Canon Law, that it is not lawful to be used.

The Divine Law says: Thou shall not suffer such Malefactors to live. A man
or a woman in whom the Spirit of Divination is found, let them dye the death:
Let them be stoned to death, and let their bloods be upon their own heads. Also
the Holy Ghost in another place says: Let that Soul that is inclined to
Southsayers be slain in the midst of the people. The Imperial Law commands,
that they should be beheaded, or be put to any kind of punishment the Judge
shall think most convenient and fitting.

The third daughter of Superstition is vain Observatition, which teaches to
know future things either good or bad, as to tell whether a man condemned to be
hanged, shall dye that death or no, which is but a mere roguery and cheating.
For this notorious Art, is nothing but a vain superstition, Canen exira de
sortilegiis partosum. Ars notoria.
nay indeed a most notorious piece of Roguery, working by Figures, Characters,
and unknown names also containing many speeches, concluding in them strange and
unknown significations, which a man must learn and repeat, always observing a
continency in his Diet, and sometimes to punish and macerate himself, would not
do amiss, if he mean to attain to the perfect knowledge of this science,
Quest. 96. Art. 1.
which Thomas Aquinas quaest. 96. art. I does utterly deny: For, he says, he
that does use this, can attain to no such kind of knowledge, and that the Devil
invoked by it, cannot infuse any knowledge, or illuminate the intellect,
although he is able to deliver the rudiments of some kind of Art; for the devil
does only work to infatuate and befoole them that exercise or study it. Nor is
it available for any Doctor in this Art, to produce the Examples of Daniel and
his fellows, who abstaining from meat and drink, came to such a perfect
knowledge; for they did not abstain from those meats by the vain observation of
this notorious Art, but least that they should be defiled with the meat of the
Gentiles, which was forbidden them by God: therefore not without desert they
were endued with knowledge above the rest. And Solomon begging knowledge of God
to govern his people, did obtain it of the Holy Ghost. Other vain Observations
of this Art, divine Augustine has learnedly confuted. Lib. 2. de Doctrina
Christiana.

Thus far Milton.

W. R. his SECT. II. of CHAP. IV. wherein he says, the Doctors Objection
touching the diversity of Twins, is refelled. As also some other quirks against
Astrology examined and convinced.
HIs second Argument or Reason against Astrology is, from clear experience in
Twins conceived at the same instant, and born in the same hour or less. Now M.
Homes had done well to have made this his clear experience, as clear to his
Reader, by demonstration or example, and not to content himself with his bare
word, this is but one Doctors opinion; but will he say, born both together;
Aristotle, Pliny, Cardanus, Dodoneus, etc. But let me ask him what he thinks
of the Story of Proconesia, who as the story goes, lying with her Master, and
his Man her Fellowservant, both in one day; conceived by both, Man. Wherefore
the first part of his Argument is not available; neither (upon good
consideration) will his following words; somewhat less then an hour; clear
experience of, sophistical Cavil. And whereas he alleges, that Pharez and
Zara did put forth themselves interchangeably in one hour; but how he can prove
it was in one hour, is I believe too hard a Task for him to do, he having no
Warrant therefore, from the Word of God. But all this is nothing to the point,
for though Zarah put forth his hand first, and for distinction had a red Thread
tied about it, yet he plucked it back again, and Pharez was born before him,
Genesis 38. v. 29. He brings the Example of Jacob and Esau to condemn Astrology,
Esau was born first, and after him came his Brother Jacob; and that this is
clear, the Scripture further says, The Younger shall serve the Elder, Ergo,
they were not born at one instant of time, and therefore I may very well
conclude, that this Cavil serves no whit to the condemnation of Astrology;
since for ought he can prove to the contrary, (or any one can tell) they were
born many hours distant, and so consequently they must needs have several
Significatours at their Birth, which will cause very much diversity of manners,
fortunes, form, and shape, etc. But if he will tell me there was so small
difference in the time, as that Jacob had hold on his Brothers heel; I say,
that yet notwithstanding, does this prove them to be born at one and the same
time; but that there was so much time betwixt their Births, as may cause much
difference in most matters of their Lives: but admit this Objection, any
understanding man knows it could no wise stand either with the safety of the
Mother or Child, that he should be thus born with one hand before all the
body. And again, since it is no wise possible in nature, that Twins should be
born both at the same instant of time; this his frivolous Cavil is of no use,
unfitly brought for the matter in question; and altogether inconsistent with
reason.

But this by the way; we come to his example of Jacob and Esau, which he says,
by reason of their Differences, confuteth Astrology: but if he could prove all
the difference that possibly could be imagined, yet is not this a sufficient
ground for him to condemn Astrology, since it has nothing to do with Divine
providence, common course of Nature; which may evidently appear, that this
Birth of Jacob and Esau is, by the story of their Conception, which you may see
was absolutely a thing beyond the power of Nature; for their Mother Rebecca
(the Scripture tells us) was barren: wherefore this being so, this I say
alone, is enough to silence all that he can say against Astrology, Jacob and
Esau. But sure, notwithstanding, if one should particularly examine their
lives, one should hardly find such great difference between them as could
justly be allead ged to condemn Astrology; qualities, they were both Princes,
if to the number of their Wives and Children, look into the Antiquities of the
Jews, viz. Philo, and you will find their Children were alike in number within
one, and we know that Jacob had Leah, Rachel, Billa, and Zilpah, to his Wives,
four: and Esan, Bathshemah, Mahalah, Adah, and Aholibamach, four: also, if we
again look to their Riches or Wealth, one Country was not able to contain them
both: but if any one say, they differed in the matter of their birthright: I
answer, Astrology is not to decide or premonstrate, or foreknow the cause of
Divine matters, neither the secret will of God, which that this was Gods secret
will, there is none but knows; they were both roots and foundations of two
great Nations: but as this makes neither for, nor against Astrology, It may be
(says he) they will read us a Lecture of difference from magnitudes and
motions, which Answer I must confess suits just well enough with the Question,
Ptolomy, lib. 3. cap. 7. of his Quadripartite, where he shall be clearly taught
the Reasons of Differences in Twins, and convinced of his erroneous Cavil, that
they are born at the same instant of time; it is not from magnitudes or
motions, though somewhat might be said thereon, and that so much, as that I
believe would trouble him to answer; Astrology, if so (says he) if the be less
then the Earth according to Keckerman at least twenty times, and the rest of
the Planets below the, as twenty seven times less then the Earth, and twenty
two times, how then shall these at any posture, at one and the same time effect
or signify any thing to all the world? It is the opinion indeed (and with very
much reason) of all the Mathematicians and Astrologers that ever writ, that
these three Planets under the Sun are less then the Earth, but amongst the most
learned of them there is much dispute of the certain magnitude thereof; but how
equivalent this Quirk is against Astrology is wonderful! A Candle is not able
to give light to a Bowl, dexter and sinister, and, to all and every part or
utmost parts of the Heavens (that are millions of times bigger then both them
and the Earth) according to their several motions? And has not these Aspects
as much power and influence, as a perpendicular? and whereas he asks, what is
the difference of Natures in Twins? when the superior Planets are
proportionably bigger then the Earth, but sure he never read that part of
Ptolomy, which I before cited, concerning the several Significatours in Twins,
which is the only cause and reason that can be given for his frivolous Quirk:
but as he questions to bring his bald Arguments about, so he answers his own
Questions in hopes to confirm them; If (says he) this is because of the swift
external violent motion of the Stars; why then I again demand how the Stars can
have time to make any distinct impression by any particular influence on one
born, especially on one who perhaps may lie in the mouth of the womb partly
born, partly unborn; for a quarter or half an hour, or many hours; when the
motion of the Zodiac is sixty times sixty miles in an hour, which is sixty
miles complete in one minute.

But to answer to this weak Cavil, I shall say no more, but that though the
Heavens be so swift, yet in comparison of us it is not so much as an inch is to
ten thousand Miles; for we see by daily experience, that the (who is also by
the same violence (contrary to his own natural course) carried in like manner)
does not as to us move at all in two or three hours;

And for his long continuance of the Infant in the mouth of the womb, VV
this may somewhat refell, but there is no Astrologer that will take that part
of a Birth, or the beginning of the Mothers Travel, to be the Ground or Radix
of the Infants Nativity; but that instant in which He or She is perfectly
separated from the womb, and entered the elementary world, since no man can
properly call that a Birth, which is but half expelled, or but half perfected,
when also sometimes the Infant may draw back again.

Says he, If Astrologers will plead any thing to help themselves herein from
the slowness of other motions of the Stars, that are natural to them, viz. that
the fixed Stars, move with so slow a motion from North to South back again, as
that their courses are not finished in less then seven thousand years; Now I
would very fain know of any rational man, how this Answer of his in the behalf
of Astrologers, is able to avail them a rush, or himself in his purpose, viz.
How then can any age since the beginning of the world have experience, what the
conjunction of the Stars may produce? This is a great Conquest indeed, but how
slender an Artist he herein renders himself, let the judicious judge, since it
is most certain that these stars we call fixed, move not at all; Ergo, are
nominated fixed, for they move unanimously together in their sphere, which is
about seven thousand years finishing its course, not the Stars; but suppose
they do move, yet they move not by several motions, as the one being slower or
swifter then another, for they are all alike distant each from other
continually, and if these come not to aspect nor conjunction of the Planets;
yet the Planets come to configuration with them, as Saturn comes in
configuration of them once in 29. years some odd months and days; Jupiter in
twelve years, Mars in three years, Sol in one year or twelve months, Venus and
Mercury in the like time or there abouts, the Moon in twenty eight days and
some odd hours. I hope then this experience may be learned in a far shorter
time then seven or eight thousand years; and since these is so apparently and
vulgarly known, it is sufficient ground for any one to take the exact position
of the heavens, either in Twinns births or any others, without the error that
these motions he speaks of can cause, which indeed is none at all.

SURVEY. The annexing of the Doctors second Argument will be a sufficient
reply to these extravagancies of Will. Ramsey. The Doctors second Argument was
word for word, thus.

The second Argument is from clear experience of Twins conceived at the same
instant, and born in the same hour, or less, and it may be, put forth
themselves in part, at the womb interchangeably in that hour, (as Pharez. and
Zara did, Genesis 38.) yet before God put any difference by any inward change by
grace, the Twinns may be of an apparent vast difference of complexion as we see
in Jacob and Esau. And experience knows of other Twins, either both natural
or both spiritual, that far different events in the world have befallen them.
Where then is the certainty of Star-predictions? Where is the verity of
Astrology? It may be they will read us a lecture of difference from magnitudes
and motions of Stars; that some are bigger then the earth some lesser; again,
that some finish some motions in 24. hours; others not other motions in so many
scores of years, or more. But if this be their defense, the matter of
predicting Astrology is thereby made to be more incredible. For if (as they say
with Keckerman) the Moon be less then the earth, at least twenty times, and
the rest of the Planets below the Sun proportionably, as Venus twenty seven
times less then the earth, and Mercury twenty two; how then shall these at any
posture, at any one and the same time, effect or signify any thing to all the
world? For all the Astrologers in the World will undertake to prognosticate
from these Planets upon all men on Earth, born at one and the same hour. If
the Sun as they confess, be about an hundred and sixty times bigger then the
Earth; and all the Planets above the Sun proportionably; as that Saturn is
fourscore and eleven times bigger then the Earth; Jupiter fourscore and fifteen
times; Mars one time bigger, with one third; how then is it that there is
difference of natures and events in thousands born at the same hour, and
especially n Twins, as we said before. If they say that this is because of the
swift external violent motion of all the Stars Planets, and Fixed; that they
are hurryed round the Earth by the first moveable from East to West, etc. in
twenty four hours; which is to run sixty times sixty miles in every hour, then
we demand how can the Stars have time to make any distinct impression by any
particular influence on one hour, cspecially on one who perhaps may lie in the
mouth of the womb, partly born, partly unborn, sometimes in the head and
foreparts, sometimes in the hinder parts, for a quarter or half an hour, or
many hours. Or what Astrologer upon the swiftness of those motions, and the
slownesse of the birth, which cannot be born in an instant, but at best
gradually, shall be able to prognosticate punctually that such Stars, with such
inflnence, did so complexionate such an Infant at such a Minute of time? For by
the computation aforesaid, the Stars run in the said motion, in every minute of
the hour sixty Miles. If Astrologers will plead any thing to help themselves
herein, from the slownesse of other motions of the Stars, that are natural,
and internal to them; as that all the fixed Stars (which are known by their
twinkling to our sight) move from North to South (as they say, so Alsted) in
three thousand five hundred years, and back again in three thousand five
hundred years, so that they finish not that motion under seven thousand years;
how then can any Age since the beginning of the World have experience what the
Conjunction of the Stars may produce? So for the motions of the seven Planets:
If they say (as Keckerman, etc. affirm) that the Sun has three Orbs: First,
that in which the Sun it self is fixed, and is the middle Orb, and is
excentricall to the World; that is, The World, or Earth is not just in the
middle of it; by reason whereof the Sun is sometimes in the Perige, namely
nearer the Earth for some months; and sometimes in the Apoge, to wit, more
remote from the Earth, for other months. And in this Eccentrick Orb the Sun
moves, as they say, according to the succession of the twelve Signs from West
to East, not finishing that motion under three hundred sixty five days, and
about six hours. And withal as they assert, that by reason of this Orb the Sun
moves as in relation to the center of the earth, one while swifter, another
while slower; that is to say, it moves slower whiles it is on the Northern part
of the World, lingering there an hundred eighty six days, eight hours, and
twelve minutes; but runs swifter on the Southern part of the World, dispatching
its race in an hundred seventy eight days, one and twenty hours, and twelve
minutes; and so stay es longer with some of the Signs (as they say) and less
while with others. And that secondly, The Sun has, as they say, a supreme Orb
contiguously adjoined above to the aforesaid Orb. Thirdly, an inferior Orb, in
like manner adjoined beneath to the said middle Orb, both partly Concentrick,
partly Eccentrick (the use of which two Orbs, as held forth by Astronomers, I
shall not here stay to relate.) And the motion of those two extreme Orbs, is,
as they confess, very slow, so that they finish not their course, which is
like some motion of the eighth Sphere, under forty nine thousand of years (as
Keckerman affirms.) All which makes me again demand, how any men could ever
attain to a certain experience of Conjunctions of Stars, seeing this number of
forty nine thousand extends it self to an age above seven times older then the
creation of the Stars.

It would be two tedious to recite all the several Orbs and motions of all the
other Planets, according to the common opinion; as, that the Moon has five
Orbs, some of which move swifter then those of the Sun, putting her twice every
month in her Apoge or exaltation, and twice in her Perige or descention, with
differences in both, that in the same Apoge it is sometimes higher and
sometimes lower, and so in the same Perige; and has one motion that is not
finished under eighteen years, seven months, and about twelve hours.

That Saturn has a motion whose course takes up thirty years; Jupiter one of
twelve, Mars one of two, Venus of one. And Mercuries motion (as Ceckerman
affirms) Est admodum varius imo magna part adhuc incognitus; that is, It is
wonderful various, yea for the most part yet unknown. Now lay all these
varieties and uncertainties together, and then judge what certainty of
experience there can be had of the conjunctions of Stars, just so long and so
much, as to make such a sure impression of such influences and efficacies on
men in the birth, as may duly and truly prognosticate, that so shall such a man
be, and do; but so another, especially in Twins. Thus the Doctors second
Argument. By which it is apparent that Will. Ramsey did neither rightly take,
nor truly report the dint of the Doctors Argument, but runs out into many
extravagancies; which notwithstanding, for the better clearing the coasts round
about the Argument, we will a little take into consideration.

To that at (A) about the Doctors not bringing of an Example touching Twins;
we say, that the Doctor did bring examples; See the Doctor second Argument
(before inserted) at the mark (**); which if need be might be named; though he
then forbear in civility to the persons and their generations.

To that he adds of one Doctors opinion; it is sufficient for me to show Will.
false tongue, by minding the Reader that Doctor Homes did show Doctor Austins
opinion touching Twinns, that the consideration of the diversity of them, born
so near at the same time is a great Argument against Astrology; as is to be
seen in the Doctors Demonology Chap. 10. Sect. 5.

At the end of that Section, in answer to the Objection, that Austin should say
Astrologia perscrutanda est, etc. inserted after in this Treatise. See also in
this Chapter following. And if it has not been enough to give Will. Ramsey
Austin by retale, yet by this time in this Reply he is given him in wholesale,
with his large discourse upon that Argument of Twinns, against Astrology, (in
answer to Will. Ramsey Sect. 3. of chap. 2.) the said Will. Ramsey will have
his belly full of two Doctors opinions, jumping in the same truth.

In that at (B) in asserting that Twinns are not conceived at the same instant
of time, and his Vtopian Quotations of Aristotle, Pliny, Cardan, Dodon at (D.)
in tending to make us believe what he could not show, Will. Ramsey shows his
ignorance, though he pretends to be a Physician (a sucking one). For in reason
the formative part of the womb must needs be most tenaciously shut up for
cherishing the conception as soon as the semen is clasped within it. And
ancient experienced Physicians have demonstrated it to the eye by corporeal
diagrammes. Add the authority of that universal great Scholar in all Arts,
Sciences, and Divinity, Augustine, and the learned whom he quotes. Possidonius
a Stoic (says Austin de Civit. Dei cap. 2.) and one much affected to
Astrology, labors to prove that the two Brethren whom Hippocrates supposed
to be twinns, by the samenesse of their diseases, at the same time, were both
not only born, but also conceived under one and the same constellation, which
must needs be in the same moment, or else the constellation is altered, in
regard of the swift motion of the heavens, running (as the Astrologers
confess) sixty miles in a minute of an hour. And Austin in his sixth chapter
says expressly and peremptorily, That it is manifest, that in conception there
is but one generative act concurrent. For natures power is such, that a woman
having once conceived, cannot Second any conception, until she be delivered of
the child. And therefore it is necessary that the Twinns conception fall both
in one moment.

To that at (C) and (K) of Will. Ramsey contending that Twinns are not born
together, or at the same instant; it will be sufficient to say, no man did
affirm it, and therefore Will. Ramsey does but fight with his own fantasy.

For Will. Ramsey his Legend of Proconesia, at (E) it comes to nothing, if we
dare believe Learned pious Austin, before Will. Ram. his ignorance. Austins very
words are these, de Civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 2. Twins cannot possibly have diversity
of Fathers. And learned Lemnius a Physician, shows other reasons of the
different faces of children of the same Father,

To that at (F. G. H.) of the difference of a few minutes, and the
impossibility of the same instant to finish the birth of Twinns, as if the
Doctor had forgot that all Locomotive motion is in time; Austin shall answer;
Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 2, and 3. whose very words are these Neither
Possidonius, nor any Patron of this Fate in the Stars, can tell what to say in
this case of Twinns, if he will not illude the simple, and ignorant, with a
discourse of that they know not. For, that they talk of the Space of Time,
between that point they call the Horoscope in both the Twins Nativities; it is
either not so significant, as the diversity of will, acts, manners and fortunes
of the Twinns born do require; or else it is more significant then their
difference of honors, state, nobility, or meannesse will permit; both which
diversities they place only in the figure of Nativities. And if they should be
both born ere the Horoscope were fully varied, then would I require a Unity in
each particular of their fortunes, which cannot be found in any two Twinns that
ever yet were born. But if the Horoscope be changed, ere both be born, then for
this diversity I will require a difference of Fathers, which Twinns cannot
possibly have. Frustrate therefore is that notable fiction of the Potters
wheel, which Nigidius (they say) answered one that plunged him in this
controversy, whereupon he was called the Potter. Turning a Potters wheel
twice, or thrice about as fast as he could, he took ink, and in the turning
made two marks (as it seemed) in one place of the wheels edge, and then staying
the wheel, the marks were found far asunder one from another upon the edge of
the wheel: Even so (says he) in the swift course of heaven, though one child
be born after another in as short a time as I gave these two marks; yet in the
heavens will be passed a great space, And that (quoth he) is the cause of the
diversity of conditions, and fortunes betwixt two Twins. here is a figment now
far more brittle then the pots that were made by the wheel. For if there be
thus much power in heaven (and yet cannot be comprehnnded by the
constellations) that one of the Twins may be an heir, and inherit, and not the
other; how dare those Astrologians give such presages unto others that are not
Twins, when, as they are included in those secret points in Nativities, which
none can comprehend? But if they say they do prognosticate this to others,
because they know it belongs unto the known, and discerned spaces that pass
in Nativities, and that those moments that may come between the births of two
Twins, do but concern slight things, and such as the Astrologian uses not to
be troubled with: For no man will ask the calculatour, when he shonld sit,
walk, or dine? how can this be said, when we show such diversity, in the
manners, states, actions, and fortunes of two Twins.

To that at [I] touching Pharez and Zara, the reply is easy and home: that what
space soever was between their births, and which soever was born first; yet
being they did in part interchangeably put forth themselves at the womb, which
was the exposing of themselves to the influence of the heavens according to the
Astrologers doctrine, (putting so much weight upon men's births) as likewise
Jacobs continued successive birth after Esau; Jacobs hand holding Esau's heel;
so that the first is not wholly born, till the other be born in part, is
argument enough, to prove that the Aspect of Constellations upon the birth of
such Twins, is exceeding uncertain; and so the Astrologicall prediction as
groundless. Which Austin does notably argue out, (which may serve for a full
answer to W. Ram. his frabble about Jacob and Esau) thus: Aug. de Civi. at. Der
lib. 4.
In the ancient memory of our forefathers (to speak of them of note) were two
Twins born, so near together, that the second held the first by the heel; yet
in their lives, manners, and actions, was such disparitie, that that very
difference made them enemies, one to another. I mean not this, that the one sat
when the other stood; nor that the one slept, when the other waked; these
belong to those first marks and moments, which they cannot comprehend, who
erect those figures of nativity for the Astrologers to judge upon. One of them
bound himsef to serve for wages, the other served not at all: the one was loved
by his mother, so was not the other: the one lost his honor, and inheritance
(a matter of great moment among them) the other obtained it. And how great a
difference was there in their marriages, wives, children, and goods? Exceeding
much. Thus Austin, whom we have reason to believe far before false tongued W.
Ram. [at L. M. N. O. P. R.] or his Forged Philo (as the learned call him) whom
W.R. there quotes; or his Ptolomy quoted at [S] At [T] Will. Ram. consuteth
himself. For if as a Candie being less then a Bowl, cannot shine light round
about that Bowl, so the Planets that are less then the Earth, cannot shine
round it; how then, can they pour down any influence at the same minute on the
whole round of the Earth, in which many thousands of infants are born, whose
nativities all Astrologers will cast, and from them all, undertake to predict?
And for his intimation that the dexter and sinister, that is, the oblique and
indirect Aspects of Stars have as much power and influence, as those that are
direct and perpendicular; it is contrary to plain sense. For the sun does not
so enlighten or heat with its oblique aspect, as when it is perpe ndicular over
us. And the Moon comes to her loss of light, and to be of less operation, by
the oblique aspect of the sun on it, and of it on the Sun; in comparison of
the Moon at full; ut which time (as Will. confessed before) the powerof the Moon is
greater on things below,

But because there has been such often mention of Astralogical influences: The
dangerousness of Astrogicall doctrins and influences.
let us enquire of the Astrologers themselves, what these influences are. For
by their vote, they seem to be no less then a part of Magic and Incarnation, or
the appertenance thereof. Agrippa in his book of Occult Philosophy tells us,
that Omnia inferiora esse Ideata a superioribus Ideis etc. that is, H. Cor.
Agri. Oc. Phil. I. 1. c. 11.
That all inferior bodies are Ideated or exemplified with inferior Idea's, by
the superior idea's. An Idea is a form above bodies, souls, minds, and to be
but one simple, part immutable, indivisible, incorporeal, and incorporeal, and
eternal. And that the nature of all Idea's is the same. They say that Idea's
are first in God himself, by way of cause, and that they are distinguished
among themselves, by some relative considerations only, lest whatsoever is in
the world, should be one thing without any variety; and that they agree in
essence, lest God should be a compound essence. In the second place, they place
them in the very Intelligible it self, that is, in the Soul of the world,
differing the one from the other by absolute forms. So that all the Idea's in
God indeed are but one form; but in the soul of the would, they are many. They
are placed in the minds of all other things: whether they be joined to the
body, or separated from the body, by a cetain participation, and now by degrees
are distinguished more and more. They are placed in nature, as certain small
seeds of forms infused by the Idea's. And lastly they place them in matter as
shadows. Hereunto may be added, that in the soul of the world, there be as
many Scienciall Forms of things, as Idca's in the mind of God, by which Forms
she did in the Heavens, above the Stars, frame to her self shapes also, and
stamped upon all these some properties; Therefore, on these stars, shaps, and
properties, all virtues of inferior species, as also their properties do
depend: so that every; species has it is celestial shape or figure that is
suitable to it, from which also proceeds a wonderful power of operating, which
proper gift it receives fromit's own Idea, through the seminal forms of the
soul of the world. etc. The same Agrippa in the same book, cap. 13. has these
words Provenit ergo virtus primo ab Ideis etc. i.e. The form therefore and
virtue of things come's first from the Idea's, then from the ruling and
governing Intelligences, then from the Aspects of the Heavens disposing, and
Lastly from the tempers of the Elements disposed, answering the influences of
the heavens, by which the elements themselves are ordered, or disposed. These
kinds of operations therefore are performed in these inferior things, by
express forms, and in the heavens by disposing virtues, in Intelligencies, by
mediating rules, in the original cause by Idea's, and exemplary forms, all
which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect, and virtue of
every thing. And the same Agroppa in the same Treatise lib. 2. cap. 53. (whose
title is, That no divination without Astrology is perfect) writes thus. We have
spoken (says Agrippa) in the foregoing Chapters, of diverse kinds of
divinations, but this is to be noted, that all these require the use, and rules
of Astrology, as a key most necessary for the knowledge of all Secrets, and
That all kind of divinations whatsoever, have their root and foundation in
Astrology, so as without it they are of little or no use. Therefore whether the
Physiognomists look upon the body, or countenance, or forehead, or head, or the
Southsayer sercheth by Dreams or Auspicy, that the judgment may be right the
figure of heaven is also to be enquired into etc. And in his next chapter, he
shows how Astrology concurs to help divination by lotts. He that will have
more of this, let him read Cornelius Agrippa his occult philosophy, of which we
have here given you a taste: by which you may evidently perceive the
diabolicalness of Judicial Astrology and the abominable meaning of Judicial
Astrologicall influencies. And therefore we had little need affore to bestow the
pains to answer W. Ram. about the signification of the words, Augurate,
inchant, witchcraft, etc. when Cornelius Agrippa one of Will. Ram. Astrologicall
tribe openly confesses that Astrology concurs to All Divinations of what Sort
soever.

But to go on with W. R. silly discourse at [T] whereas (says Will.) the
Doctor asks what is the difference of natures in Twins, when the superior
places are proportionably bigger then the earth, but sure he never read that
part of Ptolomy, concerning the several significato rs in Twins which is the
cause of his frivolous Quirck.

Now Reader, is this an answer to the Doctous. I pray thee read before, that
marked with * (where the Doctors words do fitlyer put the question that W.
Ram. here reports) and then judge. Surely thou may easily conclude that as
W. Ram. cause is astrologicall Inchautment; so his defense is base juggling. He
tells us the Doctor has not read Ptolomy; and before, at [S] he tells us that
Ptolomy l. 3. cap. 7. of his Quadripartit. shows us the reasons of the
differences of Twins. But nor here nor there does he produce a line out of
Ptolomy to convince the Doctor, or to clear the mind of the Reader. He tells
the Doctor before quoting the words of Keckerman and etc, he should have made
good the matter of those quotations: But W. Ram. here neither gives us the
words of his quotations, nor his own applications, that we might have an hint
to what to give an answer. And therefore I must pass from this, leaving only a
story with William; but I think I must be fain to apply it for him. One Mr. F.
C. of H. in Hartford-shier, a rich Gentleman, and a Scholar of much reading,
but greatly affected with a retired life, was wont to say unto me; I might
(said he) have been a Justice of Peace, and have had offenders brought before
me, and when I had wanted wit, what to do with them, I might have bound them
over to the Quarter Sessions. So W. Ram. undertakes to be a judge in this great
Question of Judicial Astrology, (too heavy for his infant shoulders) and when
he finds he wants wit what to answer to many objections, then he referres the
Reader to Ptolomy, or to Sir Christopher Heyden.

To that at [V] Will. shall answer Will. here he says, though the heavens be
so swift, yet in comparison of us it is not so much as an inch to ten thousand
Miles: and backs it with a lie apparently against sense, viz. we may see (says
W. R.) that the Sun does as to us move at all in two or three hours. And but a
little before at [F] quite contrary he has these words, All that know any thing
in Astrology, know that four minutes of time in the Birth, gives near upon a
years time in directions. Let them reconcile this with that, who can. It Is no
help for Will. to talk of Quoad nos, as to us, when he is to answer quoad rem
to the nature of the thing.

Romae Tybur amat, vento sus Tybure Romam. He shoggles in the socket of his
principles: when he is non-plussed with the swifnesse of the heavens: then to
us their motion is but slow, viz. not so much as an inch to ten thousand miles:
(which is a gross untruth. For according to our ordinary sun-dials on walls,
and towers, the sun runs a degree, that is three thousand six hundred miles
in an hour, which is an inch upon the Dial.) And when Ill Will is confounded
with the slowness of the motion of others of the heavens, then four minutes
difference of time, gives near a years time in direction: Which is also a gross
untruth quoad veritatem rei, if we speak according to the truth of the thing,
and not according to the Diabolical traditions, received by Judicial
Astrologers. For not any of the Planets, much less the fixed Stars, do finish
their daily motions in four or four hundred minutes, as we heard but now; but
in each hour containing sixty minutes, run three thousand six hundred miles.
And none but the Moon wholly finisheth any other motion, in a Month. And in
every minute, the whole constellation of all the Stars, is quite different,
the heavens running in their daily motion in each minute, sixty miles.
Therefore strong must the principles of Judicial Astrology be, that lay the
stress of their certainty of their Astrologicall predictions upon the Aspect of
the heavens; yet will now (suppose at this pre sent minute) prognosticate from
an aspect that is passed three minutes after, that is, is gone ninescore miles
off; for W. Ram. (if we follow his words) takes in four minutes, into one and
the same consideration. And who can truly tell the exact time of his Birth so
near as four, or fourteen minutes? And though the great swiftness of the
Heavens were (as Will. Ram. says) in relation to the circumference of the
Heavens, and not of the Earth: why then does Will. and his Fellow Astrologers
consider their motion such as it is in relation to earthly Bodies here below?
Why do they distinguish of their Motions by minutes? Do they not confess (that
which they cannot deny) that every half, yea quarter of a minute, by the
Conjunction of other Stars (how slow soever the Ascensions of some may be)
there is a new, specifically different beam of influence, radiated upon the
Earth, all taking their circular turns to dart their efficacy, though upon the
same Centre-point, if the Earth aad its Bodies were so small? So that let the
Heavens be never so swift, their varieties of influences does touch by turn the
things below. Only here is the Knot (which the Doctor put) not yet solved;
how such sudden touches of influences, coming on, and going off, as in a
moment, should make any change on the Complexions of men on Earth, so as to
specificate them to such a temper by proportion to the temper of the Heavens at
such a minute, if the temper of the Constellation of the Heavens at that minute
could possibly be known?

To Will. Ram. [instant] of separation of the Infant from the Womb, to be the
Radix of the Infants Nativity; we need say no more: but 1. That locomotive
motion is the time, not in an instant, Tempus est mensura motus. Arist. 2. That
if a minute is in reason (as has been argued) too short, by reason of the
swift motions of the Heavens, to make, or make known any specifical different
impression upon the Infant, how then shall an instant (that is too small to be
any part of time) be long enough to be the Radix of a Prognostication from the
Nativity.

To Will. Ram. his [I would fain know, the non-moving of the fixed Stars, and
the Planets consiguration with them] noted with [X, Y, Z] a few words will
serve. He needed not have been so fain to know, if he had observed the Doctors
Argument before; or to have put the Quere, he would fain know, if like an Artist
he had given the Doctor a Logical distinct Answer. His poor suggestion of the
fixed Stars motion, once round the Earth. every four and twenty hours, adds
nothing but confusion to the solution of the Argument, to Astrological
Predictions, and to William his own words. For presently at [Y] he says, that
the Stars we call fixed, move not at all, etc. Surly Will. Ram. would fain tell
us some News if he could: but we cannot gather up any thing but Contradictions.
For 1. do not the Planets as well move in and together with their Spheres, as
well as the fixed in theirs. 2. If the eighth Sphere be about seven thousand
years finishing its course, then of necessity so long are the Stars fixed in
that Sphere, finishing their course. 3. That if some Planets and some fixed
Stars should come into configuration in less then seven thousand years, yet
perpetually in every minute many other Stars successively intermingle
themselves so, that a distinct and certain Prognostic, or experience touching
humane Events cannot be gathered from any posture of the Heavens.

W. R. his SECT. III. of CHAP. IV. Wherein the Doctor endeavors to prove
Astrology of no truth or certainty, as also its Rules and principles, are
themselves of less truth, or ground, nay and indeed senseless.
HIs third Argument against Astrology is, to prove the Maxims, Theorems,
Axioms, and Canons of the Art, inconsistent with truth or foundation; but
first he denies absolutely any such ( viz. Ground or Principles) at all to be
in the Rules of Astrology, but with what apparent falsehood, that is done,
shall appear to the World by these Examples following, being some few Questions
and Resolutions, which by my own experience I can against all malicious
Adversaries affirm to be most punctually true; wherefore I have thought good
here to divulge them to the World, that such envious Carpers at this most true
Art, may be for ever silenced, or at least that their perverseness may be
apparently and vulgarly known in their colors; but see how in veterately they
traduce it, notwithstanding millions of the like Examples, which they know not
otherwise what to say for themselves, unanimously (this surpassing the natural
capacities of their profound judgments, when they so clearly see themselves by
experience convinced) they presently say, It is impossible this should be true!
Sure this is very strange? Nay, I am confident this could not be done by Art!
this is a plain dealing with the Devil! It is Witchcraft! and the like simple
and malicious Censures, or rather Scandals hereon, Will. Ram. draws three
Schemes or Figures. One to show a Gentleman, whether he should receive some
Money from his Uncle which he expected. The second, to resolve a Gentlewoman
(that said no Astrologer would undertake to resolve an unbelieving Quaerent)
whether she should receive any Money from the Parliament? The third, to resolve
an incredulous Gentlewoman also: viz. Where her Husband was, and when he would
return? And in all these Will. Ram. says the Prognostications proved true. And
he brings them to confure the Doctour's third Argument. For besides these, all
the rest in this his third Section, has no show of an Answer; and therefore
not worthy the transcribing, or reprinting.

SURVEY. We will give you in Answer to this Section.

1. The Doctour's third Argument word for word. 2. We will show you Will. Ram.
juggling in the said Schemes or Figures. 3. We will give you Proofs that under
Astrology is couched the Assistance of the Devil; and the Quaerents or
Consultours confidence in that diabolical Art, as necessarily concarring to
have a true Prediction. 4. The sum, or main Heads of M. Perkins Resolution to
the Countryman; showing the wickedness of Astrology.
1. The Doctonr's third Argument. The third Argument. All Rules of Sciences and
Arts (by the fundamental Position of Artists) are Axioms, Maxims, Theorems,
Canons, etc. that is, Most worthy, and most special Principles, I experiments,
or Rules, for their verity and certainty. But such are not the Rules of
Astrology. First, because of the for said various varieties and uncertainties
of Stars, both in their own motions, and in comparison with others, Secondly,
because no man knows the particular qualities or essicacies of all the Stars.
No Artist yet ever undertook to speak of more then the seven Planets, and some
few nominated Fixed Stars of some few several magmtudes; leaving out millions
that are neither named nor knewn. Yea Thirdly, thousands of Stars cannot be so
much as seen a minute together; as the Philosophers confess in their Discourse
of Via lactea, the Milkie way in the Heavens, to be seen in a most starry
Night, especial in Winter. Fourthly, because all the Stars do shine upon the
Earth at once, jointly and promiscuously; so that they that are under them
cannot by any Rule from Nature know what influences shall be predominant in
their Effects. Fifthly, they have more time to alter the Complexions of young
People from the Cradle to Manhood, carried and walking abroad. I say, to alter
their Complexion by radiation and influence; then to stamp an unchangeable
impression upon them in the secret Chamber of their Birth; as we see many
natural Men and Women, not differenced by grace, much altered from Melancholy
to cheerfulness etc. So that if some Stars in one Position, in an instant at
Birth have a power to imprint; other Stars, and perhaps more prevalent, have
likewise a power to blot out that in many years, and to instill a new one.
Sixthly, there are many Causes below between us and the Stars to alter the
influence of the Stars, or interrupt their native operation; as the various
Complexion of the Air, diversity of Winds, the different postures and
situations of men, as sometimes under a direct, sometimes under an oblique
radiation, etc. Seventhly, Astrologers depend on Clocks and Dials, to know the
posture of the Heavens at the hour of their prognosticating; which Dials and
Clocks often are false, which may make a wide difference in a minute, in which,
as we heard, some motions of the Heavens run sixty Miles. Eighthly the
Astrologer cannot be able to allow exactly for the exaltation in the Apoge and
descension in the Perige of the Planets, with their swifter motion in the one
then in the other, so as ^o determine justly how much power of prevalence they
may be in their influences at such changes. Ninthly, man can never certainly
conclude of a particular Event from a Cause that is most universal, most
remote, and ^o but a partial Cause of the thing predicted. But the Stars are no
other but such a kind of cause of men's Complexions and Actions; and theresore
are no sure Grounds of Prediction concerning the future affairs of men. The
Parents Complexion, divine Dispensations, occasions, and opportunities among
men, and a man's own obedience or disobedience to God, have far more influence
into man to dispose him to be, or do this or that, then all the myriads of
Stars. Tenthly, Astrology contending for such a power of Stars over the Soul of
man (which is the Principle of all Actions) infers as if the Soul of Man were
ex traduce, generated by the Parents.

First, contrary to many Scriptures, Psalm. 102.18. The people that shall be
Created shall praise the Lord. Eccles. 12.7. The spirit returns to God that
gave it, whiles the Body returns to Earth. Hebr. 12.9. We have had Fathers of
our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much
rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits?

Secondly, contrary to the Rules of Art. Reason, and Experience, Coelum non
agit in animam, etc. The Heavens cannot act directly upon the Soul; nor can a
man's Body complexionate, alter, or master his natural spirit. So that the
(...), intelligere, and (...), velle, the Acts of Reason and Will do not depend
on Sense. For in sleep, we have strong Actings of Reason: and when awake, in
the time of deepest rational meditations, the Senses are useless, and their
Acts suspended, as if we did neither see nor hear.

2. Will. Ram. his juggling in his Figures.

It is well worth our observation to see Will. Ramsey juggling in these his
Schemes or Figures, compared with his Epistle to the Reader, and some Passages
in his Book. In that Epistle he has these particulars: 1. That Astrology does
not meddle with Contingences. 2. Man's will is not subject to the influence of
Stars. 3. Neither does Astrology meddle with the providence of God. In his
first Chapter, Section, he defines Astrology to be that which teaches to
prognosticate by the Stars of Natural Effects, etc. But here by his Figures in
this Section, he undertakes to tell of Events purely humane, and altogether
depending on God's providence in the acting of Man's will; viz. whether the
Gentleman should receive his Money from his Uncle; the Gentlewoman receive hers
from the Parliament; and the other woman know where her Husband was, and when
she should see him again? Now let all the World judge whether Astrologers do
not juggle with us; professing one thing, but practicing another, in the way of
their pretended Art?

3. Proofs of the concurrence of wicked Magic, or Enchantment, and of man's
confidence or desire, and consequently of the Devils assistance with and in
Judicial Astrological predictions.

H.C. Agrippa an Astrologer, in his second Book of Occult Philosophy: cap. 60.
has these words, Non ab alia causa, quam a coelesti, terrem orbis virtutes
provemunt. Hinc Magus, etc. that is, The virtues of the terrene Orb. proceed
from no other cause then celestial. Hence the Magician that will work by them
uses a cunning Invocation of the Superiors, with mysterious words, and a
certain kind of witty Expression, drawing the one to the other, etc. Hence
says Aristotle, in the sixth Book of his Mistical Philosophy, that when any
one by binding or bewitching, does call upon the Sun, or other Stars, praying
them to be helpful to the thing desired, the Sun, and other Stars do not hear
his words, but are moved after a certain manner by a certain Conjunction, and
mutual series, whereby the parts of the World are mutually subordinate the one
to the other, etc. And though the said Agrippa did in some show retract some of
his devilish Inchamments, or Superstitions; yet in that Retraction he
retracteth not this, but there affirms it, viz. Magna cum Astrologia sic
conjuncta, atque cognita est, etc. that is, That Magic and Astrology are so
conjoined, and of near kin, that he that professes Magic without Astrology,
does nothing, but wholly errs from the way.

The Book named the Centiloquy asserteth, that No Astrologer is able by mere
Art, without the help of a familiar Spirit, to foretell any particular Event.

Ficinus proves, that Judicial Astrological predictions are managed not by
Art, but by instinct.

Jamblicus boldly affirms, (Lib. de Mist.) Est impossible judicare certos,
etc. that is, It is impossible to judge of certain Events, when as we cannot
comprehend the concurrence of all Causes, unless we attain it by inspiration,
etc. and disputing against Porphyry, says, that The Lord of the Figure is a
Devil.

Philostratus writing the life of Apollonius lib. 3. c. 13. (the most famous
Magician and Astrologer) says, that Arcanas libationes per quas Astrologicam
facultatem, etc. that is, Jarchas (the chief of the Indian Wizards called
Brachmanae) did privately communicate to Apollonius the secret sacrificings by
which they did find out the Astrological faculty, and skill of divining.

Touching elevation of mind (either in confidence or desire) hear Cornelius
Agrippa in his second Book of Occult Philosophy. and his 22. Chapter, Nihil
materiales, etc. that is, Material Numbers and Figures can do nothing in the
Mysteries of hid things, but representatively, by formal Numbers and Figures,
as they are governed, and informed, by Intelligences, and divine Numerations,
which unite the extremes of the matter, and spirit to the will of the Elevated
Soul, receiving through great affection by the celestial power of the
Operatour, a Power from God applied through the Soul of the Universe, and
observation of celestial Constellations, to a matter fit for a Form, the
mediums being disposed by the skill and industry of Magicians. And in the same
Book, Chapter 54. the same Agrippa has these words, Now, that there is in
Man's Soul a sufficient power and virtue to direct such kinds of Lots (of
Divination) it is hence manifest, because there is in our Soul a divine virtue,
and similitude, and apprehension, and power of all things, and all things have
a natural obedience to it, and of necessity have a motion and efficacy to that
which the Soul desires with a strong desire; and all the virtues, and
operations of the natural, and artificial things, obey it when it is carried
forth into the Excess of Desire, and then all Lots of what kind soever are
assisting to the appetite of such a mind, and acquire to themselves wonderful
virtues of passages, as from that, so from the Celestial Opportunity in that
hour in which the excess of such a like Appetite does most of all exceed in it.
And this is that ground and foundation of all Astrological Questions, wherefore
the mind being elevated into the excess of any desire, takes of it self an
hour and opportunity most convenient and efficacious, on which the figure of
Heaven being made, the Astrologer may then judge in it, and plainly know
concerning that which any one desires, and is inquisitive to know.

Thus you see how the Mathematicians themselves cast great Blots and Blurrs
upon Judicial Astrology; and that in relation to the particulars before
mentioned, viz. of the concurrence of Magic, of the desires and confidence of
Clients and Actours, and of the Devil himself. And therefore well may all
ingenious men for ever be ashamed to speak in the behalf of Judicial Astrology.

4. Hear what Master Perkins says, concerning the unlawfulness of Astrology in
his Book entitled his Resolution to the Countryman.

A Resolution to the Countryman, proving it unlawful for him to buy or use
our yearly Prognostications by W.P.
Not convenient to have Prognostications Reasons: 1. Concerning the buyer. 1.
Immoderate care, joined with distrust in God. 2. Contempt of the providence of
God, in not reverently regarding it.
2. Concerning the maker 1. His unability in Prognosticating proved 1. By the
true end of the heavens. 2. By want of good experience. 3. By ignorance of
particular causes.
2. His manifold untruths. 3. His impieties and profane speeches, and actions,
not seeming a Christian. 4. His tricks of deceit.



GOod Reader, I have thought it convenient (for some special causes) in this
short Treatise, to disclose a part of my mind unto thee, concerning the making
of Prognostications, and if it might be, to persuade thee, not to spend thy
money in buying any of them. I have long studied this Art, and was never quiet
until I had seen all the secrets of the same: but at the length, it pleased
God to lay before me, the profaneness of it, nay, I dare boldly say Idolatry
although it be covered with fair and golden shows. Wherefore, that which I will
speak with grief, the same I would desire thee to mark with some attention. My
reason shall partly concern thee, partly the Prognosticatour himself.

1. First on thy behalf. I reason thus.

1. As a man does see the blessings of God upon him, so he must also labor
with a careful diligence to maintain the store of this life. But because the
affection of man is carried headlong unto a greedy covetousness; this defire of
overmuch carping and careing, must be bridled with two strong bitts. First, all
our care must extend it self no further, then the present day. Secondly, in
careing we must not trust unto our selves, but six all our confidence in the
mercy and providence of God who blesses all, and without whose goodness,
nothing can come to pass, do what we will.

1. As touching the first, we have the direction of our Savior Christ: who
teaches us to pray on this wise. Matthew. 6.11. Give us this day our daily
bread, whereby we are given to understand, that we are only to seek for the
present time, resting with this persuasion, that he which has blessed us this
day, will also to morrow, and the next day show his like goodness unto us.
Again, in the same place, our Savior Christ speaks on this wise. Matthew.
chap. 6. v. 34. Care not then for the morrow: for the morrow shall care for it
self: the day has enough with his own grief. By this welearn, that God will
provide for every day all things necessary, though we do not increase the
present grief, with caring and casting in our heads how we shall live in the
time to come. Now tell me what is the cause that thou yearly do buy a
Prognostication, and one of those, which tell the strangest things: Is it
because thou have a delight to read the style of Prognostications? Or because
thou would learn to Prognosticate? Or because the pictures and Characters
which they make, delight thy mind? it were folly to be persuaded of this,
seeing the very cause it self is manifest. Thy whole desire is to fill thy
coffers, and to heap up wealth, thou art afraid lest thou shall become poor,
therefore thou greedily buyest thee Prognostications, and continually searchest
all the corners of them, to see the state of the year to come, even thus in
mind reasoning with thy self. I can never be quiet, nor take my sleep, until
such time as I have known the state of the year ensuing, that I may frame my
business accordingly: This next year there will be much rain, it will rot corn
upon the ground, it will be spoiled, I will keep my corn until the next year
following: I find that corn will be dear about half a year hence, I will not
sell my corn now, but keep it, that I may have plenty of money for it, and
sufficient beside, to maintain my house: the sea and land is calm and quiet
this year, the next year many shipwracks and troubles in many countries will
fall, now I will fraught my ships that then I may be quiet. These imaginations
are lively arguments of thy diffidence, and despair in the goodness and loving
kindness of God. If thou fear God, love God, put thy whole trust in God, thou
art content to refer thy whole preservation unto the hands of God: now, these
proling and ranging conceits of the time to come, argue that either thou never
think on God, or at the least perswadest thy self, that either he will not,
or cannot help thee. Wherefore seeing the having of Prognostications, comes of
so wicked causes, as is the greedy desire of prosperity, and wealth, and
argues some kind of diffidence in God: when thou read these my words,
examine thine own heart, if thou find my sayings true (as certainly thou shall)
never hereafter desire to know the state of the year beforehand, except it be
for the seasons of the year, which I am persuaded, thou may in some part,
without any skill, even by thine own experience.

2. Concerning the contempt of Gods providence, thus much I say. The
Prognosticatour, if he be asked whether he confess the providence of God, he
will with all his heart confess it: but by his deeds he does deny it, for all
the things whatsoever, which can happen in a whole year, he attributes them to
the stars, and so he publishes his predictions, always mentioning stars,
never, or very slenderly, making any signification of the power, and justice,
mercy, and everlasting wisdom of God. And surely, even for the very paring of
thy nails, for the cutting of thy hair, for the putting on of thy shoes, for
taking a journey two or three miles from thine house, for obtaining at Gods
hands thy request, for making thy bargain with thy neighbor, for all thine
actions be they never so small: these wise men (if thou will ask their advise)
will give thee counsel from the stars. Now when these their irreligious
predictions shall be had in thy bosom, and read of thee daily, thou being a
man unlearned and worldly given, never hearing any mention of the special
providence, and hand of God in every thing, but long discourses of the virtues
of Planets, and signs, do never think upon the wonderful and most infinite
power of God, working after a special manner in every matter, but are drawn
straight ways into an admiration of the Astrologer, and a great fear of the
constellations of heaven. An experience of this I found in thee, about two
years ago. A learned man (yet in this case far deceived) wrote an Astrologicall
discourse of the conjunction between Jupiter and Saturn, wherein he showed of
great alteration in every thing to fall. At this thou wast sore aghast, thy mind
was encumbered with fettling thy goods to set them in order against that day:
thy song for half a year was nothing else, but, the conjunction the
conjunction: the day being come, what staring was there and gazing into heaven,
to see the meeting of those two Planets: Now all this while, where was Gods
providence? where was that trust and rejoicing in him? Wherefore me thinks
that in a Christian Commonwealth, those only books should be published for thy
use, which might beat into thy head, and make thee every hour and moment to
think on the providence of God: Contrariwise, to tell thee the means which God
does use, to thunder out the aspects and constellations of stars, and seldom
to mention of his providence, makes thee to fear, and admire, and love the
means, quite forgetting the work of God in the means. This fault was very rife
amongst the Israelites, who came yearly unto Astrologers and wise men:
Wherefore that which is spoken by Jeremy chap. 10. v. 12. unto them, is also
spoken unto thee. Hear ye the word of the Lord, that he speaks unto you, O
house of Israel: Thus says the Lord, learn not the way of the heathen, and be
not afraid for the signs of heaven, though the heathen be afraid of such: In
like sort, God forbids his people of England to give credit, or fear the
constellations and conjunctions of Stars and Planets which have no power of
themselves, but are governed by him, and their secret motions and influences
are not known to man, and therefore there can be no certain judgment thereof.
If thou will not hear and follow this which I say, see what will ensue. Thou
see that the greatest matters which these Diviners and Prognosticatours
foretell, fall out flat otherwise then they say, to their perpetual shame.
Truly I am persuaded, that it is the judgment of God upon them (although they
cannot see it) who makes them, when they think they are most wise, to be most
fools. For so the Lord used the wise men and Astrologers of Chaldea, as he
speaks by his Prophet Esaias, chap. 44. v. 24. I am the Lord that made all
things, that spread out the heavens alone and stretch out the earth by my self,
I destroy the tokens of Soothsayers, and make them that conjecture fools, and
turn their wise men backward, and make their knowledge foolishness. Do thou
then O careless and miserable man, think to escape the same, or greater
punishment being a cause of this fault, for if none desired to know what is to
come, none would busy themselves in that vanity. Wherefore read the word of
God in the 18. of Deuteronomy. verse 9. When thou shall come (says the spirit of God)
into the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not learn to do
after the abominations of those nations. In the words following Moses numbreth
nine abominations.

As 1. To make his child go through the fire. 2. To use witchcraft. 3. To
regard times, this is thy fault. 4. To mark the flying of fouls. 5. To be a
Sorcerer. 6. To be a Charmer. 7. To counsel with Spirits. 8. To be a
Soothsayer. 9. To ask counsel at the dead.

All these horrible abominations being rehearsed, mark what follows. Deuteronomy.
18.9. For all that do such things are an abomination unto the Lord, and because
of their abominations, the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee: now
seeing most of these abominations, and especially the third is used of us, why
should we not fear the like judgments upon us, unless we will repent, and
that with speed.

2. The reasons which concern the Prognosticatour, and may avail to the
persuading of thee, not to buy any more of their unprofitable books, as these
which follow, First, their unability in Prognosticating: Secondly, their
manifest untruths: Thirdly, their impieties: Fourthly, their tricks of deceit.
What? can they not foretell that which is to come? can they not make
conjectures of that which is like to ensue? No surely. And I will use arguments
to confirm it unto thee.

The true use of the heavens consists in many points. 1. To declare the glory
of God. The heavens (says David, Psalm. 19.2.) declare the glory of God, and
the firmament shows the work of his hands. It is an Alphabet written in great
Letters, in which is described the majesty of God, and that by these four
special points: First, the Majesty of the work it self. 2. The infinite
multitude of Stars. 3. By the wonderful variety of Stars. 4. By the greatness
of the Stars.

2. Secondly, it makes sinners and wicked men inexcusable before the judgment
seat of God. Romans 1.20. For the invisible things of him (says Paul) that is,
his eternal power, and Godhead are seen by the creation of the world being
consiaered in his works, to the intent that they should be without excuse.

3. Thirdly, they serve to the appointment of times, as day, night, month,
year, which are both measured and described by the course of the Sun, and Moon,
and other Stars. Genesis 1.14. And so the feast of the Israelites, and the
computation of the year in our Church, depends thereupon, and without them
there would be great confusion both in the common wealth and Church.

4. Fourthly, they serve to be signs, that is to foretell things to come. And
they are signs either of extraordinary things, or things which be ordinary.
When they are signs of extraordinary things, then there is and appears in
them some extraordinary work of God: as appears in these examples which
follow. At the suffering of Christ, not only the vail of the temple rent, and
the dead rose forth of their graves, Matthew. 27. but also the Sun was wholly
eclipsed, the Moon being in the full. At which sight, Dyonisius Areopagita, a
good Astronomer spoke these words: Either the frame of the world is destroyed,
or the God of nature suffers. The Prophet Ezekiel. cha. 32. v. 78. being
commanded to prophecy the destruction of Egypt. he first puts down such
extraordinary signs: Before the second coming of our Savior Christ, there
shall be signs in the Sun and Moon, and in the Stars. Lastly, the extraordinary
going back of the Sun signified the lengthning of the life of King Ezekias.
Secondly, the Stars are signs of general things, which happen ordinarily every
year in nature among us.

As of 1. Approaching and declining of 1. The Spring. 2. Summer. 3. Harvest. 4.
Winter.
2. Ordinary weather in these quarters. 3. Ebbing and flowing of the Sea. 4.
Seasons of 5. Plowing. 6. Sowing. 7. Setting. 8. Planting. 9. Cutting. 10.
Felling. 11. Reaping.


I say general, because the particular estate and affairs of men can in no
wise be fore-signified by the stars. I say ordinary, because the things which
fall out seldom, and are besides the common course of nature, as plenty of all
things, famine, plague, war; eversions of Kingdoms, etc. Do not depend upon
the Stars. For the confirming of this, I have three reasons: First, in the 1.
of Genesis v. 14, 15. God says, that he made the lights to be signs, and yet
the same God in the 47. of Esaias v. 13.14. says, he will destroy the signs of
them which divine: flatly forbidding us to use Stars, as means to judge of any
thing to come, saving only of those, of which they are expressly made signs of
God in the creation: all which are put down before. Secondly, this is manifest
by the order of the creation: Genesis 1.12.14. The third day God created upon the
earth herbs and trees, and the earth brought forth fruits and was fertile: the
fourth day God commanded lights to be made in the firmament of heaven, to
separate the day and the night, and to be for signs and for seasons, and days,
and months, and then it was so, and then God saw it was good. Out of which I
gather that it cannot be a sign causing famine, or plenty and fertilenesse,
because fertility went before the creation of the host of heaven. Also of
wars, and plagues, and the particular estates of men, they can be no signs,
because man was not yet created, and yet even then they were signs. Some will
say they were no signs of those matters in the creation, but now they may be,
and are: No, for the works which God created, he now preserves, neither
increasing, nor diminishing any thing in them. Philo Judaeus in his book de
opificio mundi, says, he was persuaded that God foreseeing the minds of men,
given to search strange matters to come, did in this order create the heavens,
to confute and disprove their imaginations. Thirdly the Heavens and Stars were
made for the use of man, and man is their end, so that it is absurd to imagine
they have any force in the affairs of man. Now then Prognosticatours if they
will foreshew of strange things to come: they must undo the work of their
Creator, and give unto it new uses, otherwise they shall not be able to
Prognosticate as they yearly do.

The providence of God is his decree by which he appoints how every thing
shall come to pass. The continual execution of this decree is ordinarily by
means, but often without means, The means which God uses are either general
or special. General are these by which he governs all the whole world, and
every particular thing, which concerns this life: unto this kind are referred
spiritual creatures, called Angels, by whom the Philosophers say the heavens
are governed, and we see that whole Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities have been
kept and defended by them, as also consumed and destroyed. Again, the stars
and heavenly bodies are used of God to govern and order things here below, as
it is the 19. Psalm. Nothing is hid from the beat of the sun. And by the
Prophet Hosea. the Lord speaks thus I will hear the heavens, the heavens
shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, the corn shall hear
Israel, But this instrument is only a general instrument, and has his work
in ordinary matters of nature. Beside these means, there be many other by which
God rules the world. In the beginning he set man over the whole world, that he
might have rule over fishes, fouls, and beasts, and al things else. He appointed
husbands to govern their wives, he set the firstborn before their brethren, as
Cain before Abel: Princes over Cities, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and therefore
by reason of their dignity calls them Gods. There be Governors of Families,
Fathers over their Children, Masters over their Servants. Yet God has more
near care in preserving and governing his chosen, as appears in the 43. of
Esaias. Thus says the Lord God that created thee. O Jacob: and he that formed
thee O Israel: fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by my
name. thou art mine: when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee,
and through the floods, that they do not overflow thee, When thou walk
thorough the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle
upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of I srael thy Savior. This
is also manifest by that Sympathy which is in the Lord, when his children are
afflicted as appears by the 11. of Zechariah He which touches you, touches
the appleof mine eye, And in the 9. of the Acts, Saul Saul, why persecutest
thou me, that is, my elect. Wherefore therebe also special means by which he
more carefully governs the elact. As be Angels whom Paul to the Hebrews
calls Ministering spirits: it is certain they defend every one of the elect
particularly. Hitherto may be referred the preaching of the Word of God, the
ministering of the Sacraments.

All these means God's provid ence uses, first that he might show his
goodness toward us: secondly, that he might be known to be the Lord over all,
thirdly, that we might be thankful, because he not only himself governs us,
but also makes his creatures to serve our turns. But this must be noted (as I
said before) that in all these secondary causes, beside their natural work,
which God has given them, there is also the special work of God his special
hand showed. God works not by second causes, as Magistrates govern their
Common Wealths by their inferior officers. For they so govern by them, that
they do nothing or very little themselves; and peradventure, never know what is
done. God governs not the world so, but in every particular work, he has his
particular stroke. That the thunder burns, moves, hurts, it is the
general providence of God: but that it burns, or hurts this or that man,
on this or that part, in this or that manner, it is the special providence of
the same God. The Lord has showed his special providence in one excellent
example. If the hatchet (says God) fall forth of the hand of him which loppeth
the tree, and kill a man in the way, I the Lord have killed him, God also
governs the world immediately, and his providence works without means, and
many things he brings to pass against all means, which is manifest by that of
Matthew, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out
of the mouth of God.

Now to come to our Prognosticatours, and Moon-prophets, how shall they be able
to know what will come to pass hereafter? For first, the Heavens being only
one particular Instrument of Gods providence, amongst many, they cannot
certainly and truly say, this thing or that thing proceeds from the Heavens.
Secondly, they cannot determine whether God in extraordinary matters, as
Plague, Famine, Barrenness, distempered Weather, Earthquakes, Wars, etc. Does
work immediately, or with means: if with means, they cannot determine, whether
the Heavens, or Angels, or men, or any other things be the means of his
providence. Thirdly, if they were able to know what the Heaven works
naturally, yet they were never the better; for God beside the power of the
Heavens has in all things his particular working providence, altering, and
framing, and bending as Wax his Instruments to his good will.

The third Reason the want of experience.

If our Prognosticators have any means to foretell things to come, they have
those means either without experience, or with experience: if they have them
without experience, then must thou account all which they do to be foolish
Dreams, and deceit. For all kind of humane Learning which is profitable, and
has use in the Life of Man, is taken from often observations, and experience.
If it be said, that they have their Directions in prognosticating from
experience, and that of all times; I will convince them thus: True experience
of the Causes of Things is an often observing of the Effects of the same
Causes, with this Ground, that they can proceed from no other thing. The
Physician says Rheubarde, does purge Choler. Well, how knows he this? he
has often tried this, and that in old men, young men, children: and has
found, that in the Bodies of all Men, the Cause of purging this Humor, could
be ascribed to nothing else. Wherefore he may peremptorily conclude, Rheubarde
purges Choler. Our Prognosticatours, in the Heavens can have no such
experience. For they cannot observe often the same position of Stars in the
Heaven. The order and cause of the fixed Stars and Planets, which we find in
the Heavens this day, the next day will be changed, and never the like again.
They will say, in deed, although the same position of the whole Heaven never
happen, yet the same Conjunctions of notable Stars, the same Risings and
Settings, and the same Constellations of the chiefest Stars are marked often. I
say again, that when these Eclipses and great Conjunctions happen the rest of
the Stars being otherwise affected then they were before, and having new
Positions, may either increase or diminish their Effects, or else hinder them,
and quite take them away. As we see when the Sun casting his beams into a
Chamber, the light of Candles, and Torches, and Fires do make it shine dim, yet
these being absent it will shine bright. Again, they are not able to say, that
Constellations, which they have marked, are Causes of those Effects which
follow, as Wars, Diseases, distempered Weather, Earthquakes, Famine, etc. For
in those things which happen together, the one is not the cause of the other.
When Nero played upon his Harp, Rome was on fire; yet Nero's playing on the
Harp was no Cause of the burning of Rome. Also these Effects may have other
Causes in the Heaven, then those which they mark, and they may come immediately
from God, they may come only from the will of man: wherefore seeing that they
cannot assure themselves that those Eclipses, and Conjunctions are the Works of
such Effects upon Earth, and they cannot have often Observations of the course
of Heaven, their Rules of Predictions are feigned and supposed, and not built
upon true experience. Let a man which knows not one Herb, take all kinds of
Herbs, and put them into a great Vessel, yet so, that there be more of some
Herbs, and less of other some; let him beat them all together, and make a
compound virtue of all their virtues; Can he now tell the nature and operation
of every particular Herb? Can he divide and sever by any help the virtue of one
Herb from another? No indeed. The same thing may be said of the Stars of
Heaven; all their Lights, and all their influences (as they term it) are in the
lower Bodies: more plainly, every earthly Body has in it all the secret
powers, and working of every particular Star: so that they make (as it were) a
compound operation rising of all, or of the most of their virtues joined
together? for the Astrologers hold, that although the Light may be hindered by
the thickness of the Body, yet the heavenly influence pierces through all.
Therefore they are not able to sever, and learn the nature of these Stars,
except they can stop the influence of what Stars they list, and bring them into
what compass they will. Yet thus much I will grant them, that they may have a
little knowledge of the virtue of the Sun, and Moon, and some other Stars: as
we see those Herbs in the former composition, whose virtues be the chiefest,
though not fully, yet somewhat do represent their nature, and show themselves
above the rest. But what is this to the purpose? If I confess the operations of
the Sun and Moon. If I shall grant that Saturn is in nature cold and dry,
Jupiter warm and moist, Mars hot and dry, Venus cold and moist, Mercury in
nature mixed, the notable fixed Stars in the Zodiac to be of the nature of the
Planets, and to have manifest operations, as the rising of the Dog to make heat
and tempestuous Seas, the rising of Arcturus to make rain and showers, Pleiades
to be of the nature of Mars, and the Moon, etc. what will all this suffice to
make a Prognostication? for seeing all stars have their own powers, and
peradventure also the least stars, which we make no account of, have great
Effects amongst us (as one Grain of Musk in the Apothecaries shop makes a
greater smell then all other Powders, be they never so many) nothing will the
knowledge of the operation of some stars prevail, the rest being not known and
never regarded. They will say, they have some experience, but yet imperfect. I
have showed how they have no true experience at all: and their imperfect
experience makes them perfect Liars.

The fourth Reason, the ignorance of Causes.

A man which will judge rightly of any matter by the Causes, must not only
consider the common Causes, but he must also with them confer the particular
Causes of all things which happen amongst us, so he shall judge aright. In
Heaven the stars be common Causes of all things amongst us, because they show
their virtue on every matter, one way or other. The same things have their
peculiar efficients, and matters, and forms, by which, and not by the Heavens,
they are made that, whatsoever they are. These proper Causes, because their
natures be unknown unto us, I cannot see how the Prognosticatour is able to
foretell any thing to come, in good and convenient manner, laying aside all
deceiving, and forging of untruths. To make this more plain, I will use this
similitude, Suppose an Hen to sit upon many Eggs, some of her own, some of
diverse other Fowls; she impartoth her heat equally unto them; at the length she
hatcheth, and some of her Chickens are Cocks, some Hens, some Crows, some
Partridges, some Doves, some black, some white. some like and live, some die,
some are killed of the Kite, some are roasted. No man (I think) will profess so
much skill, as to say, that he by the considering of the Hen and her heat which
is a common Cause of the Chickens, and all that befalls them, is able to
tell, why of this Egg came a Patridge, of that a Crow, why this Egg had no
Chicken, why that had a dead Chicken, etc. except he do therewith all adjoyn
the consideration of the particular Effects. The Heaven is as it were a Hen,
fostring under her Wings all earthly things, imparting his virtue and heat unto
all. Can our Prognosticatour, by the erecting of Figures, by considering the
Disposition of every Planet in their Houses, and the significations of every
thing, judge, why this man is wealthy, that man a Beggar, why this Nobleman
dies this Year, none the next Year, why it is naught to travel this way good
to travel that way, why these Diseases abound, and not other why Corn shall be
dear this Quarter, not the next, why this Week is fair and temperate, that
Week, that Month unseasonable and tempestuous. Tiuly, it is a thing flat
impossible. They must hereun to adjoyn the particular nature of the Country,
the particular Causes both in men's minds and bodies, as, education, place,
honesty, birth, blood, sickness, health, strength, weakness, meat, drink,
liberty of mind, learning, etc. and all other special circumstances; which
they never do, as we may see in their Prognostications: and if they would do
it, yet they could not. Wherefore I must needs say this, that their folly is
great in publishing their Prognostications: and thou also greatly to be blamed,
which by thy greedy desire give them great occasion to be unprofitably
occupied.

To show more briefly and plainly of their unability in prognosticating, Hos.
2. although I grant the Stars have great force, yet I say they cannot judge of
things to come. And there be six Impediments.

The first Impediment is, imbecility of wit, for as man's eye from the Earth
beholding the Heavens and the Stars, perceives them not in their just
quantity, but as very small Lights: for indeed the Sun is a hundred and
threescore and six times bigger then the Earth, Saturn ninety times, Jupiter
ninety and five, Mars one and an half, the Moon is the thirty and ninth part of
the Earth: the biggest fixed Stars contain the Earth an hundred and seven
times, the Stars of the second magnitude ninety, the third seventy times, the
fourth magnitude fifty and four times, the fifth magnitude thirty and five
times, the sixth magnitude eighteen times. So the weakness of man's
understanding is not able to conceive and learn the things which the Heavens do
bring to pass on Earth.

The 2d Impediment, the infinite number of Stars, which no doubtall have great
power, although we do not find it. For the Prognosticatour only makes one
thousand twenty and eight Stars, and of these he takes only heed unto a very
few: which is as though a man should judge the power of an Army, by the power
of one or two Soldiers and Captains, not by the power of the whole company.

The third Impediment, is the infinite varieties of the virtues of Stars, and
the parts of Heaven, which Astrologers grant to be: yet they do not know them.
As touching the nature of the Fixed Stars, they know nothing but by color,
which is red, leady, white, pale, etc. resembling some Planet. And because they
know not the virtue of all Stars, and every part of Heaven, they are not able
to judge any thing but to their own shame, no more then the Physician is able
to know the nature of the compound Medicine without the knowing of every Simple.

The fourth Impediment, the manifold and daily change of the Motions,
Positions, and Configurations of the Stars: for if a man could tell both the
number and nature of Stars, yet the variety of Positions breeds Trouble, and
hinders right judgment: because by this means the powers of Stars are
increased, diminished, and changed. And these Rules which served for ancient
times to foretell things, will not serve us, because all the Fixed Stars have
changed their places, and the reft are daily changed.

The fifth Impediment, the infinite variety of inferior things, which do
hinder, pervert, change, receive, or not receive the virtue and Predictions of
Stars as the nature of the Soil, the disposition natural of Air, orders and
Constitutions of the Commonwealth, occasions, education, institution, kinds
of meat and drink, etc.

The sixth Impediment, the will of man, which freely in common matters chooses
this and refuses that. There are many things which are caused without any work
of Stars, only by the will of man, and study, as we see in Socrates,
Demosthenes, and other, etc.

Thus much shall suffice to show that they cannot prognosticate of things
ensuing; now follow their manifold untruths, and most false Rules. In
disclosing them I will keep the same order they use in their Almanacks.

In the first or second leaf of their Books thou shall find a Picture of Man's
Body with the twelve Signs round about it they call it the Anatomy of Man's
Body, showing how the twelve Signs have Government of the same, for the Moon
or any other Significatour of any thing being in the Sign, they say, that it is
dangerous to box, to sear that part, or to let blood in it, which is subject to
the dominion of that Sign, All these are nothing but vain Fables, as I will
manifestly prove.

1. Whereas they call it an Anatomy, me thinks, it is a butcherly Anatomy; nay,
that of the Butchers is far better, for they join Head and Appurtenance
together; these men being sparing give Aries the Head, Leo and Cancer the Heart
and Lungs, As for the Liver, I know not which Sign has it, peradventure in old
time men had no Livers. At the Anatomy of a Carrian, Crows deal friendly, for
every one has somewhat; but in the division of Man's Body, Signs play foul
play, for Capricorn has got nothing but a pair of Knees. It is like that the
Signs scrambling for their portions, Capricorn being slow got nothing,
hereupon compassion being had, there was a gathering made, and Sagittarius gave
the lower part of the Thigh, Aquarius the higher part of the Leg which both
together make the Knee. But to deliver thee without all doubt, mark these
reasons which follow. I. The signs cannot have any such dominion over man's
body: I make it manifest thus. There is no corporal heaven in deed above the
firmament, yet because the firmament or eighth Sphere has many motions, to
give reasons to those motions, the Astronomers have feigned two heavens above
the firmament, the Christaline heaven, and the first moveable or tenth Sphere,
which they divide into twelve parts, which parts they call signs. Now, I pray
you tell me, The 12. Signs feigned.
is it possible to conceive that an imagined part of any imagined heaven void
of all stars, shall either have in it self, or give unto other Stars power to
govern the parts of man's body? More reasonable was that man, who being asked
what was the cause of the sands in Sandwitch haven, he answered the building up
of Tenterton Steeple. Secondly the government of the Signs in the body is not
taken from experience in nature, but feigned long ago by some drowsy pate, and
now because it has a cloak of antiquity, it is allowed. More natural was this
kind of way, that hot signs should govern hot parts, cold signs cold parts,
earthly signs earthly parts. So Aries should govern the heart and the vital
blood, not the head, and the rest of the signs those parts which are of their
nature and disposition. Thirdly great experience of many men daily confuteth
this rule. For many learned Physicians, and expert Chirurgians have by infinite
examples found, that if a man be let blood in the sign, or lanched, or boxed,
or seared, no harm ensues, nay they have given testimony that the patients
have found even then great comfort. Wherefore let not these things trouble thy
mind any more, but let them be numbered even amongst vain and unprofitable
fables.

2. Next after follows Elections of days and hours, necessary for all
matters as follows.

Special days to Prepare humors. Let blood. Purge with Vomit. Purge with
Electuaries. Purge with Potions. Purge with Pills. Cut hair. Comfort the virtue
Attractive. Comfort the virtue Digestive. Comfort the virtue Retentive. Comfort
the virtue Expulsive. Bathe. Put children to School. Travel. Marry. Hunt,
Hawk, Fish. Plant. Geld Cattle. Lay foundations.

Here, I pray thee, mark their naughty dealings, how they abuse thy ignorance,
to make themselves skillful, and to do more then they can do. For, if the
judgments of the best Astrologers may be taken, certainly most of these
elections cannot be prescribed to thee, unless they know before hand the
figure of thy Nativity. For all Election, which concern thy person, must be
moderated (to speak as plainly as their toys will suffer me) by the direction
of the root of thy Nativity, and by the monthly and diurnall progressions of
thy present Revolution. If any of these pretend some evil, the particular
election may be a means to increase, and to bring it to pass. For example,
suppose thou being a man toward marriage, in the Almanac thou find a good
day noted by the Prognosticatour to marry in: thou take thy opportunity:
after a while, thou art weary of thy life: the first day of thy marriage was
the last day of thy joy. What is the cause of this? All the Planets which were
signifiers of thy marriage in thy nativity, were then evilly affected, and
peradventure also, at the first thou wast born, they received some disgrace. So
then thou may lay all blame, partly upon thy self for believing and partly
upon the Prognasticatour, who deceived thee. But to come unto particulars, the
elections of days to purge the body with any kind of purgation, and to comfort
the same, are most rediculous. Why do they not also prescribe hours of eating
meat? Why do they not appoint the kinds of meats and drinks, which we must eat
and use daily? If thou see that God does daily bless the enterprises of those
Physicians, which never regard those elections in ministering to their patients:
never esteem of them, let them go as lies to the Devil from whence they came.
Concerning the elections of days to sow, to set, to plant, to lop, they are
also foolish: the general observation of the season of the year, in which
these things are to be done is sufficient. And S. Augustine in his book de
civitate Dei laugheth at the folly of them, which choose particular days to do
their husbandry, as though some certain positions of stars had some special
influence to the things which are sown then. His reason is, because many grains
of corn being cast into the ground together, springing up together, and riping
all at one time: yet some of them are blasted, some are eaten of birds, some
are trodden down under foot, some stand and are never touched. The rest of the
elections, and especially that of laying foundations is most absurd. They say,
that if an house, a city, a town have his foundation when the stars be well
affected, the inhabitants shall have prosperous and quiet living: if when the
stars be evil disposed, then trouble and disquietnesse. They have no
experience of this, but that only which is most false, for they know not the
foundations of cities and towns, neither the positions of the Stars when they
were built. Let Rome and Venice be examples, because these are most alleged of
Astrologers, the time in which they were built is uncertain, and the Planets
are falsely set in the figure of the foundation of Rome, because Mercury is
contrary to the Sun, a thing flat impossible. Again the folly of this is thus
manifest, that an house, or city, or commonwealth may remain, the people being
gone, as it is in the time of plague, and banishment, and conquests of Princes:
And the inhabitants also may be safe and remain, the building quite ransumed,
and beaten down, as we may see in Carthage, the people and commonwealth
remained, the City quite defaced. That all elections are unlawful, Saint
Augustine wrighting unto Januarius, proves it forth of the fourth to the
Galathians, by these words: Ye observe months and times and years (Therefore
says he) let us not observe days, and years, and months, and times, lest we
hear this of the Apostles: I am afraid lest I have taken labor in vain with
you: for he rebukes them which say, I will not go, because the Moon is thus or
thus moved, or I will take my journey that I may have good success, because
there is such a position of Stars: I will not do my business this month,
because such a Star governs this month: or I will do my business this
month because such a Star rules. How then shall a man do, not to break the
word of God? Art thou a man that desire to lead a Christian life? Then take
the example of Paul, Romans 1.10. as a pattern to govern all the actions of thy
life: without ceasing (says he) I make mention of you in my prayers:
beseeching that by some means, one time or other I might have proserous journey
by the will of God to come unto you. So thou if thou have any business in
hand, any journey to take, any thing to buy or sell, or any other matter: never
regard the constellations of Heaven, commit thy self to the only providence of
God, in whom thou have thy life, and motion, and being, who directs all thy
steps: pray unto him privately with thy self to bless thee and all thy
actions, that they may tend to his glory, thy welfare: thou shall find that all
thy enterprises will have better success, then if the whole host of heaven,
and all the Prognosticatours of England had promised never so much prosperity.
Now let us show their absurd folly in Prognosticating of the state of the
year: of which their predictions are either general for the whole year, or
special for every day. In their general predictions are considered either the
grounds of them or the matters which they foretell. Their grounds are
especially two. 1. The figure of the revolution of the year, erected when the
Sun enters the first minute of Aries. 2. The figure celestial for the time of
the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon: for upon these twain, say they, depends the
whole state of the year. In their celestial figures they consider the
erecting of them, and the finding of the Lord of the figure. The erecting of
the figure, contains very many absurdities.

1. They follow that way, which Regiomontanus did invent, never as yet proved
by any experience, and flatly differing from those ways which of ancient
Astrologers were used: and were invented by Gazulus and Campanus. Nay
oftentimes it makes the Planet or fixed Star to signify a flat contrary thing
to that which these two other do.

2. The casting of the heavens into twelve parts, signifying twelve distinct
kind of matters is ridiculous, because it being imagined, and void of stars,
can have no force. Yet (some will say) other stars being in those places may
have and signify such or such effects. I answer, that if Stars of diverse
natures coming to such an house always signifying some one kind of thing, then
the house must of necessity give some force unto the Planet: and so it shall
have not only an augmenting, but also an effectually working power, which
Astrologers deny, and no reason can prove.

3. They make the twelfth and eleventh houses being higher above the horizon
then the first, to be of less force then it: and the fourth house to be of
greater power then any above the Horizon not Cardivall: and the end of the
ninth to be more in power then the beginning of the eleventh house: all which
are against reason, because a Planet the more perpendicular his beams are, the
more is his force. They answer, although the force of the light be greater, yet
the secret influence is less, and the first house has more forcible influence
then the twelfth or eleventh. If the influence be secret how can they know it?
again, they can by no good experience show that those houses have more
influence then the rest: this influence makes against them. I say they cannot
prognosticate because they know not one stars virtue. For whereas they say,
that the Sun, and Moon and Planets have most force. I answer that it is by
reason of their light, not their influence, which is small, and there is far
greater in the smallest fixed Stars. So that the fixed Stars although they have
no light, or very small light perceived, yet they have most influence. And so
these men must needs dream because they judge by wrong causes. Well, their
figure being framed and distinguished with fair characters, then go they on to
find the Lord of the figure, that is, that Planet which has most dignity in
the figure.

The dignities of the Planets, are found out by these means especially 1.
Houses of Planets. 2. Exaltation. 3. Triplicity. 4. Terms. 5. Stars. 6. Houses.
7. Freeness from Combustion. 8. Directions. 9. Velocity of course. 10. Sazimi.
11. Some aspects of other Planets,


These toys be so foolish that a reasonable man would not vouchsafe to refute
them: yet a word or twain. If the houses of the Planets shall be battered and
pulled down, all the rest of their worship and dignity will lie in the dust.
Aries and Scorpius are appointed the houses of Mars, Taurus and Libra the
houses of Venus, Gemini and Virgo the houses of Mercury: Cancer the house of
the Moon, Leo the house of the Sun, Sagittarius and Pisces the houses of
Jupiter, Aquarius and Capricornus the houses of Saturn. What reason do they
give of this? Leo and Cancer, say they, are the houses of the Sun and Moon,
because they resemble the nature of these Planets, and because they come most
near our heads: such reason they give of the rest. What feeble grounds are
these: As in the North part of the World Cancer and Leo resemble the nature of
the Sun: so in the South part, in the contrary Climats, Capricornus and
Aquarius do resemble their natures. Also in every country some diverse signs be
either vertical, or else come near the top of the country; and so all signs
shall be the houses of the Sun and Moon. Now then, the Sun being displaced, I
cannot find how the rest of the Planets can keep their hold. To go further, the
exaltations of Planets in like manner are the very dreams. They suppose
Exaltations be those degrees in which the Planets were in the beginning of the
world. But why should those places give more force then any other? And if they
could give more force, yet they have falsely assigned them. For the Sun was not
in Aries when it was created of God, but was placed in Libra, which I prove by
this reason. God created Man and Beast in perfect age, giving unto them all
kinds of fruits being then ripe, so that in the beginning was the time of the
year, which we call Harvest. Now, because God never afterward changed the
Seasons, and we find that in the time of ripeness the Sun is always in
Libra, we must needs also say that his place in the creation was in Libra. In
the 23. of Exodus God commands that the Feast of Tabernacles should be
celebrated in the end of the year when the Israelites had gathered their fruits
out of the fields. Wherefore it must needs be that Harvest was in the beginning
of the year (the beginning and ending being both together) and so by counting
backwards we shall find that the Sun was in Libra in the beginning of the
World. To this agrees Josephus de antiquitate Lib. 1. cap. 3. Rabbi Eleazar
upon Genesis and Rabbi, Abraham; Aben, Esra upon the 7. of Daniel.

The rest of the dignities of the Planets consist of principles more weak then
water. First, what is more unreasonable to a reasonable man then this, that
swift motion should give unto a Planet two dignities, and slow motion two
debilities,: it seems to be plain contrary. For a swift course hinders the
force of the Planet, a flow course helps the same: and the stations of any
Planet make an effectual and sensible operation. A cole of fire in a man's hand
if it be shaken about very much, it heateth very little, if it be shaken more
slowly, it heateth more: but if it ly still, it burns violently. Beside this,
also experience confirms my Assertion. In the year of our Lord 1513. the Sun
entering into Pisces was almost in Trine Aspect with Saturn stationary, a
little while after, there was a great Frost and Snow continuing many days: and
when Saturn began again to be direct, the Weather was indifferent warm. In the
year 1518. In April Jupiter almost in secunda statione beholding Saturn in
statione prima caused a great heat, considering the time of the year. In the
year 1520. Saturn (as I said before) being stationary made such a cold, that
spoiled the Grapes, and made Wine dear. Upon these Examples, and many other I
may conclude, that the work and influence of Planets, is most felt when they
are stationary; because their virtue is fixed (as it were) in one place by
reason of the slow motion.

Combustion is in like sort a feigned thing, What reason can Astrologers give,
why it should give unto a star 5 debilities? They talk how that experience
teaches them, that Planets being under the beams of the Sun do lose a great,
nay (some say) all their force. It is a manifest untruth. For, Mercury being of
the nature of that Planet with which he is conjoined, if he go from conjunction
with Saturn unto the Sun, he gets no debilities thereby, but rather losing
the feeble and unfortunate nature of Saturn, receives a more strong and
fortunate nature of the Sun. If any man say against me that Mercury combust
has no force, he deceives himself. For if he be not hindered, he naturally
will cause Winds, being combust he not only engenders Winds, but causes
tempestuous Winds and foul Weather. In Aries, Taurus, Cancer, he makes
Tempests; in Virgo, and Scorpius, raging Seas; in Sagittarius, Capricornus,
Aquarius and Pisces, Rain and Snow. Again, when many days together there has
been fair weather, the Sun if it come to be in conjunction or any other Aspect
with Saturn makes very foul Weather, and therefore the Aspects of the Sun and
Jupiter are called, Apertiones portarum per pluvia. This could not come to pass
if Saturn had his force diminished by the beams of the Sun. A Planet also being
in Cazimi, that is, being within sixteen minutes of the Sun's middle has
thereby five Dignities, which cannot well be, if that Combustion give five
Debilities. For the Planet is in the middle of his Combustion, and the Sun
casts his beams and force very vehemently upon it. These Suns show how absurd
a dream Combustion is: yet if it were a good and sound principle of Astrology,
and gave unto every Planet five Debilities, yet it could not be proved, that
liberty from Combustion should give five Dignities, being only a mere absence
and privation of the other. Magnes at the presence of the Adamant, is hindered
from drawing Iron: yet if the Adamant be away, the attractive virtue of the
Magnes is not increased. Here I might with ease confute the triplicities of
Planets, Directions, Aspects, Applications, Preventions, Refrenations, with
many such like; but my intent at this time is only to show thee some untruths
of our Prognosticatours.

Thus much of the Grounds of their Predictions, now follow the matters of which
they prognosticate, and they are very many: nay, there is no matter almost, of
which they will not give their verdict: but how they do this I will briefly
make it manifest unto thee, that their Lies and their unchristian dealing may
be more loathed of thee.

1. They foretell of Comets, Earthquakes, Famines, and Plagues, etc. but they
do it as the blind man which casts his staff he knows not where. No man as
yet ever knew the true Causes of these. As for Comets and Blazing stars, they
do not rise of the influence of any stars, neither are they any earthly things,
but are in Heaven, most commonly far above the Moon as by Geometrical and
Astronomical Demonstrations may be proved: how this comes to pass the Lord
only knows. And surely they do thee great injury, that when as no doubt, God
does lighten them, and send the rest extraordinarily, as threatening tokens of
his sore displeasure, yet they will rock thee asleep in the Cradle of security,
by telling that such tokens came from the ordinary course of the Heavens.

2. They foretell all things which happen in civil affairs amongst men, as
these which follow: As,

Love and hatred of Kinsfolk. Marriages. Increase of Farms and Livings.
Injuries and Quarrels. Raising of Rents. Exacting of Subsidies by Officers.
False Rumors. Imprisonments. Hard entreating of Ecclesiastical Persons. Buying
selling, undermining. The studying of Sciences. Friends fall out for Trisles.
Solemn progresses. Favor of Noblemen. Men shall fall, Body, and Goods into the
Princes hands. Merchandise unprofitable, etc.
These and such like proceed only from the will of man: the Constellations of
stars are neither signs nor Causes of them. Some will say Non imponere
necessitatem, sed inclinare Stellas, that is, That stars do not constrain, but
only incline the minds of men: a most wicked saying, although most commonly
spoken of, and defended. For the inclining of the will of man is only the work
of God, as the holy Scriptures do teach us, The heart of man (says Solomon)
purposes his ways, but the Lord directs his steps: Prove. 1.6, 9. O Lord
(says Jeremy the Prophet) that the way of man, is not in himself, neither is
it in man to walk, and direct his steps: Jer. 10.23. He speaks this, because
that Nebuchadnezzar purposed to have made war against the Moabites and
Amonites, but hearing of Zedekiahs Rebellion he turned his power to go against
Jerusalem, therefore the Prophet says, that whereas he had otherwise purposed,
yet this was the Lords inclination and direction. Again, in the Proverbs we
read this; that the heart of the King is in the hands of the Lord, as the
Rivers of water he directs it whether he will. Prove. 21.1 It will be said,
that although God properly and immediately inclines the will of man: yet also
some small inclination must be given unto the Stars, and that immediately. For
say some, Constellations work upon the Elements by the four first qualities.
Elements work upon, and alter the compound Bodies and humors. Compound Bodies
by their qualities change the Senses. The Senses being altered, the
understanding is altered. The understanding lastly alters, and inclines the
will of man. Therefore Constellations incline the will.


This Reason is not much unlike that which the drunken man makes, serving as
well for the defense of his Vice, as the former for approving of truth in
Divination.

He which drinks well, sleeps well:
He which sleeps well, thinks no harm:
He which thinks no harm is a good man:
Therefore he which drinks well is a good man.
The deceits and untruths which be in their Reasons, are very many.

1. The stars work upon men's bodies, yet so that the nature of the Country and
Soil, the Meats and Drinks have most commonly greater force. Why are the bodies
of Gentlemen of England and poor laboring men of diverse dispositions? Are they
not both in one Country? Do not the Stars show their force in them alike? Yes
truly, but the kind of life and diet prevails. In the same Region why are
they, which dwell upon hills, of other temperatures then they, which dwell upon
plain and champion ground? why do not the same influences of Stars make them
of like natures? is it not because the nature of the soil prevails: So then,
when as there be many causes effectual, and differing in altering men's bodies,
to build an argument upon one cause is most unreasonable.

2. The stars work upon the Elements earth, water, air, by making heat, cold,
moisture, dryness. The elements, how work they on men's bodies: They will also
say by making heat, cold, moisture, dryness: which is most untrue: for the
hotter and dryer the Elements be, the colder and moisture by nature are men's
bodies. According to the saying of Empedocles: Nature placed a hot Body in a
cold Country, and a cold Body in a hot Country.

3. The Philosophers say that all causes are either per se or per accidens, Now
the heavens being causes of the alteration of the senses per accidens, they
must not be causes of the inclination of the will, either per se or per
accidens, but per accidentis, accidens, which is most ridiculous,

4. This long chain by which they link the will of man to the stars, if it
shall be applied unto particulars it must needs break: for the actions of the
will is buying, selling, travailing, lying, heaping up wealth, murdering,
spreading of falls ruomrs, offering of discourtesies, hating of kinsfolks, and
such like, which our Heaven-gazers foretell, have no coherent with the first
qualities, heat, cold, moisture, dryness: neither can they any way proceed
from them, and therefore the stars cannot be causes of them, for they work
only by these qualities.

5. This reason is nothing to their purpose: for because they grant that a man
may freely resist the inclination of the stars, and he may hinder that, unto
which the stars bend his will, how dare they presume to say this or that will
come to pass. The heathen men gave up themselves to their own lusts and
vanities and followed every little and vain inclination: and of them, in this
order, did ancient Astrologers among them divine that this or that time, such
actions, such vices, such enterprises, such affairs should be among them. In
like manner our English wise men, speak of us as though we were beasts, not
reasonable men, as though we never heard the blessed Gospel of God, never
tasted of the grace of God, never learned what is good and what is bad, never
labored to subdue our lusts and affections, always turned too and fro with
the blast of any influence, working very slenderly in us.

Thus much of Civil Affairs. They make mention also yearly of the diseases
which shall reign: but the way which they follow, is taken forth of the barren
and uncertain rules of the old Astrologers, who do so ascribe unto every Planet
certain Diseases, that if need shall requite, they may refer the same disease
unto any signicatours, as in the Plague, the putrefaction of humors is
attributed unto Jupiter; the sharp Fever unto Mars, the madness which
follows unto Mercury, the whole Plague unto Mars. In the Plurisie the
inflammation of the blood between the skin called Pluritis, and the ribbs is
attributed unto Jupiter, the suppuration of the Blood unto Saturn, and the
whole Plurisie unto Jupiter, In the Jaundies the inflammation and corruption of
humors, unto Jupiter, the yelow humor in the gaul, unto Mars, the obstruction
of the parts unto Saturn the whole Jaundies being white, unto Mars, blak, unto
Saturn. And so in every disease, they use this inconstancy and ambiguity in
Prognosticating. It is a rule among the Astrologers that if the Planets
signifiers of diseases be well affected, then there shall be no diseases but
health: if they be evilly affected, then diseases follow. Our Prognosticatours
never mark this rule but howsoever the Planets be affected they straightwayes
pronounce that such diseases shall reign. For example the last winter quarter,
it was said by one of them, that the diseases which should afflict men's bodies
were rheums, coughs, cold lasks, swelling of the face and throat, falling of
the Colmel, sore eyes, deafness, the stone, gout, dropsy, green sickness.
madness, quartern fevers. etc. And all the Planets, signifiers of diseases in
the quarter were indifferent well affected: wherefore thou have not one cause to
fear their threatenings, but rather to be sorry for their continual deceits,
wishing them minds that they may one day see their own folly.

Concerning the time when the constellations take their effects, our
Prognosticatours say that some take their effects, the same year, some not the
same year but long after, as great Conjunctions and Eclipses, for they say if
the Moon be eclipsed one hour, she works her effect a month after, if two
hours, two months after: and the Sunn for every hour it is eclipsed takes his
effect an whole year after. Truly this rule which they follow, must needs be
against all reason. For why should not all conjunctions and oppositions of the
Sun and Moon disserre their effects as well as those conjuctions and
oppositions in which the Sun and Moon is eclipsed? if they show forth their
power immediately after, why should not these also do the same? Moreover the
Epignosticall Astrologers who have conferred the course of the heavens, with
Histories, show very manifestly, that Eclipses do not deferr the time of
working their spite upon the Earth.

In the year of our Lord 1419, the Sun was Eclipsed in Aries, and presently
after showed all his force. There was a great sedition in Prague that year: In
Paris an uprore between them of the City and the University, and two thousand
Scholars were slain, then also Wenzeslaus King of Bohemia being in a great
Palsy dyed. In the year 1524. There was a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Scorpius and also a great eclipse of the Sun in June, which took their
effects the same year: Charles King of France driven forth of his Country:
war between Danes and the men of Sleswick. There was a great plague in
Germany, Civil dissension amongst the Princes of the Empire, and them which
took the part of John Husse. 1452. An eclipse of the Sun in Sagittarius, his
effects began presently, and lasted a great while: Even then Constantinople was
taken by the Turk. The Hungarians and Bohemians besieged Frederick the
Emperor. 1473. the 27. of April: the Sun was eclipsed in Taurus Mars being
in Aries and Jupiter in Sagittarius. The same year in Summer was such heat and
dryness of weather, that woods even withered, and one might wade over deep
rivers. In the years of our Lord. 1476. 1460. 1469. 1486. 1502. 1518. And many
years after their were both great conjunctions, and strange eclipses, which
took their effects presently, not one, or two, or three years after (as our
heaven-gazers bear them in hard). All these examples which I bring against
them, I have not feigned, but taken forth of those books which they have in
greatest estimation, and could, if need should serve, bring an hundred more,
all to show their lies when as they commonly say thus, There shall be an
Eclipse this year, marry I will not here determine his effects, but reserve
them to be declared in my Prognostication one year or two years hence, when it
will take place.

To know where the effects of the stars shall take place, they have appointed
unto every sign certain countries, as over Europe they have set the fiery
Triplicitie, over the Oriental and North parts of the Asia the airy
Triplicity: the watery Triplicity over Africa, over the South parts of the Asia
the earthy Triplicity: and so every peculiar sign has his dominion over some
parts of those. Now therefore, when a conjunction or eclipse is in any of these
signs the Cities and Countries subject unto them feel the force of that
constellation especially. This is a most manifest untruth and may be confuted
by many reasons. 1. The nature of the signs is not the same now as it was in
times past and by the confession of the best learned have other effects. now,
then they had in the days of King Ptolomy: yet we see the nature of Countries
and people to remain the same still, as may be seen by reading Tacitus, Plime,
Casar, Strabo. 2. America which is half the world, has no signs appointed over
it: why? it was found out of late. True it is, but this is an argument that the
Rules of Astrology, are absurd, and were the bare inventions and imaginations
of idle brains, For, there is no doubt, but that America his parts and I lands
as Bresilea, Peru, Pari, Terra Florida, Java Major, Java Minor, Puloana,
Pavilonga, Subath, Massana, Mattan, Juvacana, Cozumella Jamaica etc. have felt
the force of these Constellations, which they attribute to some parts of the
old world. Because these Countries be about the middle Zone, and have both
Planets and signs full over them, and therefore if the Stars threaten any
strange thing to come, they must especially feel it. 3. Experience the cause of
all acts is against them, as is manifest in these examples. 47. years before
the Nativity of our Savior Christ there was a Conjunction of the higher
Planets in Scorpius. and then was civil war between Caesar and Pompey: And
the change of the Empire was in Europe. But according to the institution of
Astrologers all these troubles should have been in Africa, because Scorpius
has his dominion there. In the year of our Lord. 34. there was a great
Conjunction of Planets in Leo, and then (faith one very profanely) was the
Gospel preached through the world, But if he make this Conjunction to be a sign
of the preaching of the Gospel, then it should more have been preached in the
parts of Europe then Asia, which is not true. In the years of our Lord. 331.
and 1127. There were great Conjunctions in Virgo, and yet the Countries subject
to this signselt no harm, but Italy was troubled with the Popes superstitions,
and Arrius his heresy broached. There was a meeting of Planets in Sagittarius.
73. years after Christ, when as Otho, Galba, vitellius, and Vespasian troubled
the Roman Empire, yet there was no where more grievous wars then in
Palestine, and no greater slaughter then of the Jews, who are subject unto
Scorpius and not unto Sagittarius, In the year 1464. a Conjunction of higher
Planers was in Pisces, under whose dominion, although Europe be not placed, yet
it most felt the smart by troubles and civil wars. So 1576. and 1577. Two
eclipses of the Sun, the one in Leo, the other in Capricorn, took their effects
in Germany: when as Leo and Capricorn do not rule that Country. It is vain to
show the absurdity of this rule by more examples, these shall be sufficient.

This shall suffice to have spoken of their general Predictions, now follow
their special determinations of the state and temperance of the weather,
wherein I will set forth first of all a most manifest and absurd contradiction,
which most of them make, and that is this. They use (as I have said) to set
down their judgments of the whole quarter, that it should be either moist,
hot, cold, or dry: afterward judging particularly they disprove by particular
days that which they said before. In the year of our Lord. 1581. one said that
in the Autumn quarter should be a great drought, yet I perusing his particular
judements upon the days of the quarter, I find it should have plenty of rain.
In the year last past another said, the summer should be so hot and dry that
wells and rivers should be dried up, and fishes be scarce, and Cattle die for
want of water: yea the same party in his particular judgment of the weather,
makes 20. days of the same quarter, at the least rain and misling, and 30.
other either temperate or very cold.

In one word, the judgments which are set down, of the weather, they are more
tolerable then the rest: yet as long as the would endures, no man shall be able
to prognosticate truly what weather shall be in every day of the year. The
causes of this I have set down before, and need not now to repeat. Wherefore
they might leave of any longer to busy themselves in this kind. And it shall
be sufficient for thee, leading a christian life, to know the general and
ordinary estate of the parts and seasons of the year.

The third Reason Impieties.

Besides all this the impious speeches and ungodly practices. which these men
use, might move a christian man to loath there Predictions. First, yearly some
of them do foretell whether men shall study and embrace, or forget and neglect
true Religion. What a filthy and divelish thing is this, not to be suffered in
a Commonwealth where the Gospel of Christ is preached. Every man naturally is
the child of wrath, the unprositable servant, dead in all kind of sin, his
understanding is enmity against God, his affections are tebellious against his
will: none does good, no not one: not one has any faculty to receive or keep
true Religion: we are as saws in the hands of God, as the Propher Esaias
speaks: how then become we religious? by the only work of God. No man can
come to me (says Christ) except the Father draw him. And as God draws us
first unto true Rehgion, so he also makes us continue in the professing of the
same, as S. Paul says, he which has begun a good work in you, will finish the
same etc. By what means does God do this? by the outward preaching of the law
and the Gospel, and by the inward working of his holy spirit: other means the
Scripture never mentions. On the contrary part, if any man refuse the Grace
of God, and will not embrace the true Religion, it proceeds from the hardness
of his own heart, and wilful rebllion. Seeing therefore the rebellion of man
comes from his own will, and the embracing of true godliness from God alone 2. Corinthians. 4.34. Why date they presume without great impiety to adjoyn the
Constellations as Adjuvants either unto Man or God in this divine work. Again,
these Predictions are very perilous, for if a man be wickedly given, they
hinder him from the acknowledging of his sin, because they make him lay par: of
his faults upon the stars, when as all indeed come from his own soul: and if a
man be a penitent sinner, and feel the Grace of God; yet being weak in faith
and conscience, they make him not to put his whole trust in God, and to love
him with all his soul, with all his strength, but allure him in some part to
attribute that unto the stars which is the only work of God, and not of any
Creature.

2 They use to foretell what Vices shall reign, as in these Examples: As, There
shall be much unlawful and secret whoredom. Great robbing by Highways sides.
Wanton and young women shall sit in their Ladies laps, by reason of their
Goddesses well placing. Many shall use deceit and cousening.


By these and such like, lewd and dissolute people, take occasions, and are
stirred up to live profanely, and to follow those vices unto which, the lusts
of their nature carry them.

The fourth reason tricks of deceit.

A Juggler which takes upon him to do strange things must use many slights,
least if the stander by shall see his Tricks of legerdemain he be descried, and
all his former cunning turn to his shame. Our Prognosticatours understanding
this, have thought it convenient to use in their kind some tricks of deceiving
Juglers, I can call them by no better name, for so they are indeed. First,
publishing their Predictions in thy behalf, they use such absurd, unknown, and
insolent words, as (I think) never the like were read or heard amongst us in
England: as are these which follow: 1 A Prognostication Astrologically
calculated for the Pole Artick for such a City whose longitude and latitude is
thus. 2 Quartil Revolution. 3 Rectified for the motions and Aspects of the
Meridian and Elevation. 4 Capricorn in quality cold and dry, melancholy, in
taste bitter, nocturnal, feminine, meridional, of the earthly Trigon. 5
Mercurialists, Jovialists, Martialists. Hiema Solstice Aestival, Verval,
Autumnal. 6 Pars torturae coupled with the Dragons tail. 7 Taurus a Sign of the
earthly Trigonisme, naturally cold in the Sign Horoscope; and Virgo of the same
stamp the sign of the prevention preceding. 8 A sign of the same triangularity
Jupiter Lord of this Revolution resident with Venus in domicilio deorsum ab
Angulo cadente. 9 Planets retrograge. 10 Cardivalor a succedent position. 11
Lunary defect. In his Dodecatimorian. 12 Names of strange Authors;
Proclus, Alchindus, Messahala, Zael, Albohazen Haly, Albumacer, Albubater,
Guido, Bonetus, Hispaleusis, Firmius, Abraham, Avenezra, Trismegistus; with
many other wondrous Doctors, having a great deal of small learning, and being
far born, as in Caldea, Persia, Arabia, Jury.

1 Thou will say, What means all this? Here is great Learning no doubt, it
passes my capacity: who would not have an Almanac, if it were for nothing but
for this, to see and hear how profound our Prognosticatours are? Thou far
deceivest thy self; for they perceiving well, that their Deceits and Lies may
be soon espied, have invented strange terms to color them, and to cast a myste
before thine eyes, that thou may not see their naughty dealing. For any man
the more true and honest he thinks his matter, the more desirous is he to
speak plainly to the understanding of all.

2 It was a point of the Knavery of the Devil, otherwise called Apollo, as the
Heathen men asked his counsel, to answer doubtfully, because when as he was
ignorant of the Event, yet would not, but seem to know, as in this Answer.

I tell thee Pyrrhus the Romans may conquer.

It is understood two ways, either that Aeacides might vanquish the Romans, or
the Romans Aeacides. Our Prognosticatours have chosen a very good Pattern to
follow, their dealing with thee is the like: when they doubt and cannot tell
what to prognosticate, then they use two ways of foretelling, either to speak
that which is true every way, or that which is true every year. For the first,
amongst many Examples, I will put one or two that thou may see their dealing
in true, not forged Examples.

1 The conjunction of Mars and Saturn threaten Wars, but Jupiter will mitigate
the same; as a man should say, the Prognosticatour tells true, except he tell
a Lie. 2 1585 We shall have a very dry Winter, if peradventure any floods and
store of Rain do fall, they shall proceed of former Causes. 3 This Summer
quarter is like to be for the greatest part dry and hot, yet it is neither to
be too hot, nor too cold, but indifferent. 4 Neither fair, nor foul, both
together. 5 Fair and calm, but little misling. 6 Clouds portending Rain and
Snow.
Examples of those Predictions, which may agree to every year are common with
them as these.

1 This year Artificers must take heed of too much straining their Backs. 2
Take heed of venturing in slippery places boldly in building. 3 Old men shall
die. 4 Death of Sheep and other Cattle, this year shall be. 5 Sundry Diseases
are like to reign amongst many which will sweep away many. 6 False Rumors,
Imprisonments, Tortures. 7 Brethren and Sisters shall love one another. 8
Sundry men and women shall be trouble with pains in the Eyes. 9 Much strife
amongst men and women. 10 Small love amongst Kinsfolks. 11 Much unlawful Lust,
this year, and secret Fornication. 12 Some Ecclesiastical Person shall be in
trouble, and some Nobleman shall die, this is ever at one place or other. 13
Many ship-wrecks, and other stirs on the Seas. 14 Many shall addict themselves
to the study of Necromancy.
Thus far M. Perkins.

SECT. IV. of CHAP. IV. Wherein the Doctor thinks the ground of the Art
wholly shaken and overthrown, by affirming it merely imaginary, viz. the ninth
and tenth Sphere, and in them the Zodiac, therein proves and shows his own
ignor ance the more apparently manifest.
BUt what does this so phistical Cavil avail him, to the subversion of the
verity or certainty of Astrology, when the motions and Effects of the stars are
known? but even as well may he condemn the Rules, and Precepts of all Arts,
which are also gathered by experience and Reason, as Astrology, because the
signs of the Zodiac are devised by men; but the reason they attribute these
Names, as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and the like, to the Constellations of the
Heaven, is by reason of their forms and particular virtues, expressed under
these figures; for Ptolomy has delivered the nature of the particular stars in
them by themselves, as also their particular Complexions and efficacies, as
also the Houses, exaltations, triplicities, terms, and faces, and other
Dignities, of the signs, as they follow the nature of the Planets: and since
these are known, to what end are all these his Cavils, whether there be a ninth
or tenth Sphere? for let there be none at all (as he says) nor any think
called a Zodiac (as he would fain persuade the World) yet since clear
experience and practice evinceth him, as also demonstration that there are such
Constellations (call them what you will) his sophistical weak Argument will no
wise serve his turn; for I may as well deny there is a Dog a Bear, both lesser
and bigger, a Swan, a Crown, a Waggoner, and the like; as he denies there is
not a Bull, a Ram or a Lion in the Heavens, when it is not desired literally
(by any Astrologer) to be understood: * that not proved.

SURVEY. First, that men may see whether Will. Ram. has not been impertinent
in his Answer, we will insert the Doctors third Argument.

The fourth and last Argument (says the Doctor) against Astrology that I
shall urge, passing by innumerable others, is, that a main part of the Basis,
and bottom, on which Astrologers build the structure of their Art of
Prediction is but meet imagination: for there is no such thing as the tenth or
ninth Sphere: and therefore the Zodiac placed by Astrologers in them is but a
dreamed Fiction. Yea, and one of the quondam great Astrologers (M. P.) will
dare to say, that the twelve Signs, bounded (as they suppose) within the
dimensions of such a thing as a Zodiac; namely, the signs of Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, etc. that is, a Ram, a Bull, etc. (feigned to have power over the
twelve parts of Man's Body) are only twelve imaginary Signs; for in the
Heavens (says he) there is no such matter as a Ram, a Bull, etc. And how
(says he) can it stand with reason, that in a Firmament, feigned by Poets, and
Philosophers, a forged Sign (which indeed is nothing) should have any power and
operation in the Bodies of men. Again, the very order of Government of these
Signs in Man's body, is found and without show of reason: for according to
this Platform, when the Moon comes into the first Sign Aries, she rules in
the head; and when she comes into the second Sign Taurus, she rules in the
Neck; and so descends down from part to part, ruling two, in some three days,
etc. Where observe (says he) that the Moon is made to rule in the cold and
moist parts, when she is in the hot and dry Signs; whereas in reason, a more
consonant order were this, that when the Moon were in hot and dry Signs, as in
Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, she should rule in hot and dry parts of the body;
and when she is in cold and moist Signs, she should rule in the cold and moist
parts of the Body; and so still govern those parts which in temperature come
nearest to the Signs wherein the Moon is. Beside this, some learned Physicians
have upon experience confessed, that the observation of the Sign is nothing
material and that there is no danger in it, for gelding of Cattle, or letting
of blood. And the vanity of the old conceit and imagination of them that have
put much in the Signs, appears in the common practice of men, who commonly
upon Stevens day use to let blood, be the Sign where it will. The truth is
(says he) the Sign in its own nature is neither way available, being but a
fantasy, grounded upon supposed premises, and therefore ought to be rejected
as mere Vanity. Thus far he.

Now let me add some particulars suiting to what he has said to illustrate the
same; and so I shall not only confirm him, but also what I affirmed my self in
the beginning of this Argument.

First, touching those feigned Firmaments, or Heavens, called the ninth and
tenth Heavens; besides that the ancient famous Astronomers, Plato, Aristotle
Hipparchus, and many others, knew no such thing; sense also does evince that we
can be sure of no more but eight: For we see distinctly the seven Planets, Sun,
Moon, etc. and their several motions in twenty four hours, etc. And we can
perceive the eighth Heaven of the fixed stars (known by their twinkling) to
move in one motion, round the Earth in 24. hours; because we can see the heels
of the lesser Northern Bear; adjacent to the North Pole, to be downward toward
the Earth in the Evening, and to be upward in the Morning. But we have no sure
ground to conclude that there are more Heavens, either the Crystal Ninth, or
the first moving Tenth. The grand reason brought to prove them from the two
other motions of the eighth Heaven of fixed stars beside that from East to West
in twenty four hours, as that the eighth Heaven of fixed stars moves from West
to East, coming to be in the same posture as when they began that motion, by
the end of forty nine thousand years: and that the same eighth Heaven has
another motion from South to North, and thence to South again, which process
and recess is a finishing seven thousand years; and therefore that that motion
of the eighth Heaven, from East to West in 24. hours, must needs be violent, as
forced from some tenth Heaven, naturally so moving; and that from West to East
in forty nine thousand years, must be also violent, as forced from some ninth
Heaven, naturally so moving; and the last motion of the eighth Heaven, viz.
From South to North, and back again in seven thousand years to be the natural,
peculiar, innate motion of that eighth Heaven; seeing that (as they form the
Argument) one simple single moveable body can have but one natural motion; I
say; this Argument does not evince my reason in the least, to believe the
existence and being of the ninth and tenth Heaven: for God that by his Word at
the beginning said to the Earth, Stand thou still, and to the Sea, Move thou
continually, with several motions, as of flowing and reflowing, twice every
twenty four hours, and they obey his voice to this day; the same God commanding
the eighth Heaven to run from East to West every twenty four hours; and withal
to linger and slinck back every day a little from West to East (as suppose with
the Astronomer) as much as comes to one Degree, or sixty miles in an hundred
years (which is about three quarters of a mile in one year and half a quarter)
and also to roll forward from South to North, and back again from North to
South, so gradually till in seven hundred years it is as it was, cannot choose
but obey the voice of God; and so move without ceasing. And (to throw away
Traditions in Philosophy as well as in Divinity) it is a readier way and surer,
to say, God commanded the Heavens so to move at first Creation, and they obey;
then to say, Primus motor God moves the Angels, or Intelligences, they move a
tenth Heaven, and a tenth Heaven moves the other Heavens. And to the clause of
one natural body, we say, that there is hardly any natural motion, without some
violent, as the Philosophers calls violent: for if Fire ascends, no more of the
flame ascends in a pure natural motion, but that which ascends in the
Mathematical indivisible Line in the point of the Pyramid, pointing at the
Centre-point of the Earth, to its correspondent point in the Sphere of the
lowest Heaven. Indeed if the Pyramical form of the flame were turned upside
down, then all the flakes of flame might seem to take their natural order
proportionable from one Centre-point in the Earth, to their several
correspondent points in the Sphere of the lowest Heaven.

So of any heavy Body, Stone, or Bowl, etc. falling down from some high places
to the Earth, no more of it moves naturally, then the very middle of it tending
downward in a Mathematical strait Line to the Centre-point of the Earth; the
corners of such a stone, or the circumference of that Bowl, falling not with
the like natural motion, because there is but one universal Centre-point in the
middle of the Earth, to answer to all downward motions; which is the Physical
demonstrative reason why naturally the Earth is round, the heavy parts more
pressing to the general Centre-point, the lighter lesser.

So the Water in its motion in a River, it naturally tends downward, yet
desires not to be so low as the Center of the Earth: and the mean while it
tends progreffively forward; and in this progressive motion, no more is
precisely natural, but what proceeds in a strait Line: for the Water has no
mind of it self to go out of its Line; that being out of its way, and besides
its design. So that either we must say, one man may have many natural motions,
or we must no more feign more Heavens then eight, to move the rest, in their
several motions, then we dare feign more Elements then four, to manage the
several motions that are in each one of them.

Secondly, touching the imaginary Sphere the Zodiac, this must needs be an
infallible Conclusion, so far as the Heaven or Firmament of the Zodiac is
feigned, so far of necessity must the Zodiac supposed in that Heaven or
Firmament be a mere feigned thing. (We heard before, that most learned
Philosopher and Astronomer Keckerman lay it down for a sure Rule; that
Astronomers may make, and use Hypotheses, that is, Suppositions, but
Astrologers may not.) But the ninth or tenth Sphere or Heaven are feigned,
therefore the Zodiac imagined in them is also seigned. It Is worth the while to
hear Alsted (which is to our purpose) what he says concerning the Zodiac, the
Zodiac (says he) of the first Mover (that is the tenth Heaven) is imaginary,
of the eighth Sphere real. The imaginary is primarily and originally in the
Mover, or tenth Heaven, in the inferior Spheres it is secondarily conceited.
The Real changes its situation; the imaginary does not. The signs also of the
real Zodiac, are wonderful unequal, but in the imaginary equal. In Accounts
the imaginary Zodiac is more commodious; but not so in Predictions. Thus you
see how much fiction there is about the Zodiac; and more honor ascribed to
the feigned then to the real.

Thirdly, touching the twelve imaginary Signs; there is no such forms of
stars, as of themselves seem such. Compare Taurus and Aries; and Aries lying
under Balaena. Tradition and Globes tell us such things, but the stars of
themselves could never make us so imagine. See the Celestial Globe.

Fourthly, touching the disorderly placing of the hot dry Signs in parts that
are not hot and dry: Nore that Alsted a learned Philosopher, and was also an
Astrologer, (at least in opinion) affirms in his System, or Treatise of
Astrology, that the twelve Signs are divided into four Trigonos, that is
Ternions. or Three. In primo trigono sunt signaignea, videlicet, Aries, Leo,
and Sagittarius: In his dominantur calor and siccitas, quae dominantur cholerae
and sapori amaro: that is, In the first Ternion are the fiery Signs. Aries the
Ram, Leo the Lion, and Sagittarius the Archer. In these Signs are predominant
heat and dryness, which have dominion and rule over Choler, and bitterness: so
Alsted, Vranosc. Par. 4. Cap. 4. Now that these Signs are thus affigned to
have dominion; Aries on the head, and Leo on the heart, and Sagittarius on the
Reins and Loins, your Astrologers show you in your ordinary and common
Almanacks. But your Philosophers and Physicians will assure us upon strong
reason, that a man has the coldest Brain, and moistest Heart, and humid'st
Reins.

Fifthly, touching the imagined Signs, and their supposed dominion over the
parts of Man's Body, this would be taken into consideration, that the
Traditions about them is such a Fiction in the eyes of some Astrologers, that
some of them omit them in their Almanacks, others expressly deride them. So that
which goes under the name of Master Pond: Should I but dare to omit the Anatomy,
Which long enough has gulled my Country Friend:
He with contempt would straight refuse to buy
This Book; and it is no Almanac contend:
Ask him its use, he will say he cannot tell;
No more can I; yet since he love'st so well,
I le let it stand, because my Book shall sell.


And for my part, I have of purpose tried the experiment of letting Blood in
that part where the Sign has been (as the Almanacks prescribe) with good
success. Thus the Doctor, which Will. Ram. has in no measure answered,
neither in quantity nor quality, either to M. Perkins, or Alsted, nor to the
Doctor. Will Ram. says, Let there be no ninth or tenth Sphere. Then we ask
what becomes of the Basis of Astrology, seeing the Zodiac (supposed in them
originally unchangeably, and equally) is thereby taken away. ret says Will.
Ram. the said twelve Signs or Constellations are there, call them (says he)
what you will. But we have showed Will. Ram. that they are not there; there is
no such Configurations. And therefore the Effects of such Constellations as
such must needs be nonens, as the Effects of any stars for the most are
incognita, and Will. Ram. has not demonstrated to the contrary; but only
Verba dare. And played the Dictator not Confutor; or as if he had been rather
Jester on the Stage at Technogamia, then a Juridical Advocate at the diyorce of
Astrology.

W. R. his CHAP. V. Wherein the Doctors confutation of the objections that are
brought for Astrology is (he says) examined and refuted.
THere remains nothing more to be answered of Master Homes his discourse but
his confutations of the objections that are brought for Astrology, which indeed
is already refelled in what has been already said; having consideration to the
definition of Astrology, and the Tenants of Astrologers: but because I will not
give him occasion to carp or brag of my leaving him here, I shall go along with
him in every particular of his remaining cavils; that so the Reader may see on
what small grounds he builds up his tower of opposition against Astrology, and
what small reason he has to carp thereat.

First he says Melancthon stands not for Astrology; but you have heard
before how he also thus falsely abused S. Augustine and Galen; but admit
neither of all these were one jot for it, but positively against it; yet will
not this (if granted) make a whit against Astrology; since he will not deny but
these are men, and humanum est errare, man is subject to frailty and error,
and therefore is not Astrology absolutely condemned hereby; since already you
have heard it no wise condemned by the word of God, but the effects of the
Stars clearly thereby manifested; yet for the answer of this his delusive
quirk. I shall only send him to Melancthon to be better perused (which here to
clear would be too too tedious) and then he will not thus inconsiderately wrong
him, as the other two S. Augustine and Galen, the reason whereof was also a
negligent perusal of them.

Secondly, to gainsay (as he thinks) Astrology, he says, that some make a
great matter of the Star that was seen at the birth of Christ: But I answer,
that this appearance of this Star makes neither for nor against Astrology.

But to come to the objections Logical, which he says are brought in defense
of Astrology and his answers, the first is, that God made the Stars to be
signs, Genesis 1.14. therefore the knowledge of the signification of these signs
are lawful: his answer is, God made them to be signs of natural effects or
events, not of arbitrary and moral, that depend on man's will. Wherefore here
first the Reader may take notice that M. Homes does now (contrary to what he
has all this while denied) consesse the Stars to be signs of natural effects
and events, and whereas he denies them to be signs of arbitrary and moral
events depending on the will, he gains little of the Astrologer, who (as you
have already heard) acknowledges the same.

To handle here every particular objection and his answers hereon, would be too
tedious, and indeed but vain, and to little purpose, since he can say no more
then what has been already (if rightly understood) answered: for to insist
upon every vain quillet were an Herculean labor, and to render my self more
weak then the propounders or authors thereof; wherefore I conclude.

SURVEY. A full answer to this fifth Chapter will be to show you

The Doctors SECT. V. Confuting the Objections that are brought in the behalf
of Astrology.
I will not be so severe (unprovoked) as to take public cognizance of, and to
name to the world, the Authors Books, Predictions, or Practices that have
apologized for, and acted in Astrology; because of other good learning in them
(which I reverence); though in their Astrologicalls, I know they have
exceedingly erred. If any will be violently impertinent, Viis and modis, by all
means to lay low others persons or parts, thereby to advance their mistakes,
the Defendent then is bound to tell All the Truth, which can be made good by
substantial witnesses, and testimony. That which I have in my eye to do, is
only to give a light touch, and pointing with the finger upon some few things
that are most speciously pretended to be Patronages of Astrology.

And because some are more Oratorious, others more Logical. I shall suit my
language to theirs. And to the first I must say, it appears by what has been
said in the precedent Treatise, that The Heavens yet never spoke the Language
of Astrology, so as the most learned in the World (before named) could ever
understand. And to rhetoricate high in the behalf of Astronomy; or to kick down
low them that slight it, is wide from the business in hand touching Astrology,
whose vast difference from the other was before sufficiently, though briefly,
intimated: And though he should own it, that Pleyades, Arcturus, Orion, and
other Stars (mentioned in Scripture, and allowed therein to be lawfully
mentioned by us) have stamped in them by creation a power of Influences, whereby
accordingly they Operate on sublunary Bodies; men knowing in some measure those
influences, so that they lawfully Predict according to the known nature and
quality of those influences; yet will it not thence follow that there is any
such thing allowed as Judiciary Astrology, to predict and foretell what shall
befall men, and Cities, and Commonwealths, in relation to humane affairs,
arbitrary actings, and Spontaneous voluntary transactions that depend
immediately upon the movings of the will of man. All that would naturally
follow from those indefinite premises (if granted) would be only a particular
conclusion, that therefore in some things men may be able in a lawful way
probably to predict some kinds of events, as that whether there shall be, or
perhaps whether it will be an healthy or sickly time for men or beasts, or such
like natural effects of the natural influences of Stars. Which if men can
attain at times of the year to see distinctly in their just positions,
exaltations and conjunctions, etc. and have had experience of the operations of
their influences; they may perhaps sometimes blunder right, that so weather,
health, or sickness, etc. may follow as they conjectured. But all this, and if
we could name an hundred more natural effects, would not satisfy the
Astrologer, or his Clients; nor keep up the reputation of the one, or answer
the expectation of the other. They ordinarily come to the Astrologer with these
Queries? Such a time I was born, after what manner shall my life and death be?
Thither I intend to go, and so and so to do, what shall be the success? Such a
night I was robbed, what manner of person was the Thief, and where, or how may
I find him? Such a thing I lost at such a time, how may I get it again? I am
loved and do love several persons in a way of marriage which may I take as
luckie, which refuse as unluckie? with infinite the like Questions, and many
more stranger then these. To which if the Astrologer make no answer, the
reforters despise him. If he does not undertake to give a positive answer to
such interogatories, then I must ask him what Scripture, or reason does teach,
or allow such a kind of Astrology? The Heathen Roman Senate (without direction
from Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. whom they knew not, or acknowledged not) made laws
against Vaticinatores; that is, Those that would foretell things ( as Vlpian in
his seventh Book, De officio proconsulis, tells us) And if Gellius does think
that the common people understood by that name the Chaldaeans (A. Gell. lib. 2.
Noct. Art.) this does not conclude that the learned Legislators so understood
it. And if they did, the suspicion is yet unremoved, whether all Astrologicall
Predictours of humane events and arbitrary transactions are not of the same
bran with the Chaldean Foretellers? And therefore Moses and the Prophers, etc.
condemning Astrology, condemn all without limitation, or distinction: so that
we have no warrant to take man's word against Gods word; but to refuse their
distinction of lawful and unlawful Astrology. For all Astrology, that is
properly Astrology in the opinion of Astrologers (and not Astronomy, Physiology
or Meteorology etc.) that is, to predict the effects aforesaid, is unlawful,
superstitious, false, abominable, etc. And so are we to understand those
Epithites or aditionall titles of Astrology, in divine, and humane pious
Writers. For they do no more intimare a lawful Astrology then in the common
expression, Turpe vitium filthy or uncomely vice does intimate that any vice is
not filthy but comely. So that Astrology was not heretofore before the time of
Ptolomy and An. Pius, unlawful, only because then the Art was imperfect, and
its prognostication uncertain; but because for many other and greater reasons
(as we heard before) did God condemn it in his word the imperfection and
uncertainty also still essentially adhearing to it, as learned Astrologicall
Alsted, but of the other day, and others more assert; before mentioned
sufficiently. Melancthon, they say, teaches us, how necessary Astrology is.
Could I have found it by perusal of all his works, I should have thought so
too; but with the same labor sinding the contrary, I must rather believe what
I see, then what I hear. He speaks against Astrology in his Commentary on Genesis
c. 1. upon the words, Videre quod sit bonum, etc. it is in the beginning of his
Works (and therefore one would think he would not afterward so grossly
contradict himself: His words against Astrology in that place are, Primum hic
observabis, vanum esse Commentum Philosophorum, quod de ordine causarum. and de
fluxu syderum prodiderunt. Nam ante astra conduntur plantae, quas potissimum
nasci, et servari virtute syderum existimaverunt. That is, First thou shall
observe here that the Fiction which the Philosophers have set forth concerning
the order of causes and the Influence of Stars is Vain. For the Plants which
they have imagined to be created and nourished by the virtue of the Stars, were
created before the Stars: so Melancthon. And I much suspect that the original
pretenders of Melancthon for Astrology, mistook by a negligent view of his
words on the Epistle to the Colossians, c. 2, which are these, Medicina
comprehendit Physiologiam and Astronomiam. Sunt enim in mendendo, temporum
discrimina quaedam servanda. Est autem and alia Astronomiae utilitas, quod
oportet habere civilium negotiorum causa certam anni et mensium descriptionem,
etc, Necessaria est et altera philosophiae pars quae Morum Praecepta Tradit,
and quae Leges Regendarum Civium Peperit. In which words Melancthon speaks
something of the usefulness of Astronomy; of Physiology (or Physics; that is,
Natural Philosophy:) of Ethics; that is, Moral Philosophy, to teach men
external good manners; and of Politics; that is, touching the civil
government of cities, and Commonwealths: But not a word of the name or thing
of Astrology; and therefore I thought it not worth while to translate this last
place. It Is sufficient for us, that Melancthon does appear rather against
Astrology.

We have confessed before, that many strange things have, and may be done by the
Optics (the Art of seeing) and several other Arts; as the same may be granted
to Staticks (of Ponderations) etc, So that Ignoramus would think them to be
Juggling, or etc. We honor all true Art and Artifices, of which the Artist (at
least) can give from nature, justissimam rationem, a due account and cause. But
this does not countenance, in the least, the Astrology, and Astrologicall Feits
we speak of. A friend of Astrology, to patronage it, makes great use of that
place in Job, chap. 38. v. 31. which our English Translatours thus render,
Can thou refrain, or bind the sweet influence of the Pleiades, etc. And from
this one word Influences, draws forth great conclusions for Astrologicall
predictions. But first note, that in the Hebrew (the sole judge of the right
reading of the Text) there is no such word as Influences or Sweet, but only
(...) that is, The Pleasures, Delights, or Delicacies; (...) of Virgiliae, or
Pleiades, In the Syriack and Arabic, there is less; mentioning only the Face
of Pleiades. And in Hieroms Latin translation as little, namely, The shining
Stars Pleiades. In the Chaldee less yet, for it neither names Pleiades, nor
influence, nor any effect of any virtue upon the sublunary bodies, but mentions
only the motions of Stars, thus, Will thou bind Orion with Chains, and loose
the Cords that draw Arcturus? And to the same tune the Greek Translation of the
Septuagint, (...), etc. That is, Have thou composed the bond of Pleiades, and
have thou opened the fence, or enclosure of Orion. Secondly note, that whatever
intimation of influence any Astrologer can draw from this Text, it will prove
but a natural influence upon Plants, and natural bodies, to further their
natural effects, nothing tending to Predictions of voluntary actings, and
humane events of men, as men, as that same friend of Astrology has ingeniously
confessed enough to this purpose. Although (says he) All things are governed
by the influence of the Heavens, yet Many eminent things do Happen in the Air,
and in the Body of man, whose Original cause is from the virtue of the
Heavens. As sometimes the influence is helped forward through Diabolical and
wicked enchantments, so oftentimes God is pleased to hinder the influentiall
virtues of the Heavens at the prayers of the Faithful. It is sure that so much
credit is not to be given to such Signs as the vulgar and credulous Astrologer
does imagine; neither is there virtue and power altogether to be rejected.
Influences though they descend on man, etc. yet they do not Compel, through
any necessity: For the free mind of man is not subjected, and as it were,
enslaved to any Position of the Stars; For Sapiens dominabitur Astris; that
is, A wise man shall rule over the Stars. Thus far the great Friend of
Astrology, if not an Astrologer. In which, I much commend him for his ingenuous
and candid dealing. For according to this declaration, there can be no due,
true, and lawful prediction of humane things by the Stars: Though we grant
Meteorologicall effects; yet this inferrs nothing for rational events. But our
lover of Astrology before quoted, allows not in his gloss on Luke chap. 12.
verse. 54. a certainty of effects of Stars in Meteorologicals; How then shall
we in Arbitraries? Nor will the distinctions that some make, help up the credit
of judiciary, or divinatory predicting Astrology. They say there is a threefold
Prognostication, or Divination; namely, Superstitious, Supernatural, natural:
And Superstitious is either Heathenish, or Oraculous.

Not to spend time about the form of these distinctions, either to note the low
debasing, Scripturelesse, and unworthy phrases of Supernatural
Prognostication, or Divination, whereby to signify the wonderful Predictions
of the extraordinarily inspired Prophets; or to show that the terms of the
distinctions, Coincidere, are not distinct; Superstitious, and Supernatural
being both above nature. God so acting in the Supernatural, and Satan in the
superstitious, and Heathenish and Oraculous all one; those Oracles they mention
of Apollo etc. belonging to the Heathen. I say not to spend time about words; I
shall briefly speak to the thing; namely, That by the Arguments, the Scriptures
use and urge against Astrology in general, without the least distinguishing in
favor of any kind of Astrology, properly so called; it appears that all
Astrology is Superstitious, Heathenish, etc. To tell us of the effects of
Stars in Meteors, Elements, Plants, etc. is only to Physiology, or
Meteorology. To discourse further, as to say the effect of the Stars is a
voluntary action, by which the principal efficient God, is Helped, Assisted,
and Furthered, in producing the effect, as the Master Builder is helped by his
servants to build an House, is not only an unwarrantable, but a most sinful,
I had almost said, a blasphemous speech. That God that can do all things
immediately of himself (as we see in the Creation, and miraculous operations)
when he uses any of the Creatures in producing any effects, He Assisteth them,
not they Him. And we find not in the Scriptures that he used any Creatures to
predict Voluntary actions, but his Prophers.

Those that will defend Astrologicall predictions, by a distinction between Non
illicitium, and Licitum, that though Astrologicall predictions are not lawful;
yet they are not unlawful, do not consider that lawful and unlawful are
immediate contraries; so that whatsoever cannot be truly asserted to be
lawful, is unlawful. And as weak is their defense to presume to say that
Astrologicall predictions are no where in the Word of God forbidden; either
explicitly or implicitly: For not withstanding their superficial glosses
(not worth a particular answer) on two or three Scriptures that are against
them, whereby to abate their edge, and to save the head of Astrology from
wounding; it has been abundantly before demonstrated out of many Scriptures,
that Astrology, indefinitely, without exception is condemned by the Word of
God. To whiffle off the dint of any Scripture, expressly disliking Astrology (as
Isa. 47.13. etc.) with the distinction that their superstitious, or Heathenish
Astrology is forbidden, not lawful Astrology; has been already answered: That
all Astrology, properly so called, is condemned in the Word of God, by such and
the like Epithites, of superstitious, heathenish, etc. as all vice is condemned
by the names of filthy, uncomely, (etc.) vice. And those terms added to
Astrology, of superstitious, heathenish, etc. are of the very dint of the
Arguments in many places of Scripture, whereby the holy Ghost intends to render
all Astrology odious.

For the great matter that some would make of the mention of a Star ( Matthew.
2.2.) appearing at Christ's birth, etc. whereby to countenance Astrology; I
shall answer briefly (because the Press calls upon me to shut up.) Either we
must consider this Star singly, or conjunctively: If singly, then if this was
a real Star, it was either ordinary, or extraordinary: If ordinary, namely,
made and settled in its being in the first creation, and ever since common in
appearance, how should it of its self signify Christ's birth an effect, once
only to be, from the beginning to the end of the World? It is unpossible that
a common cause, or sign, of it self can be a sure demonstration of a new single
singular effect, never to be but once. If it was an extraordinary star, then
either so it being newly created; which inferrs that God did not create all
things in the beginning, no not all kinds of things; for the Stars, say the
Philosophers upon the ground of their different natures, do Differ specie.
differ in kind. If extraordinary only in appearance, now, and not before
appearing, how should it of it self teach any Astrologer the said event, who
mainly pretends experience? If it were a seeming star; that is, a Comet, or
Blazing star: First, that rather presageth death, then birth, by reason of the
noisome and filthy fumes and exhalations of which it is compounded, and being
on fire diffuseth them into the air in which the Sons of men are enwrapped.
Secondly, Then, this star belongs rather to Metereologie (a part of natural
Philosophy) then to Astrology. If we consider this Star conjunctively;
namely, together with prophetical explanations upon it (as the stars in Joel
2. And Matthew. 24.) then the consideration of this star was more Theological
then Astrologicall. And this is supposed by the Learned, both ancient and
modern, that the wise men of the East took into consideration the signification
of this star by the help of Scriptures, either immediately coming to their
view (being Eastern neighbors of the Jews) or mediately by the hands of them
that had their glosses (of such a thing to come) out of the Scriptures. It Is put
upon Chrysostom, that he affirms that in the East in a City called Seth, near
the Ocean there was a society of men, twelve in number, studients in Astrology;
who learning out of Balaams prophecy, Numb. 24.17. that such a star was to
appear, gave themselves from year to year to observe the heavens, and to wait
for the appearing of it: and for continuation of that observation throughout
many ages till it did appear, did at the death of any of the twelve, choose
another in his room; by which at last they saw this star. Calcidius likewise
a Platonic Philosopher flourishing in the time of Christ's birth, writing upon
Plato his Timeus, concerning diverse Stars and their wonderful effects, faith
thus, There is a more holy and divine history (meaning the Scriptures) which
reports that by the appearing of a certain extraordinary Star, not diseases
and death were foreshown, but the venerable descent of God for man's salvation;
which Star was observed by the Chaldaeans, who worshipped God, new born and
become man, and offered him gifts. So far Calcidius. And whereas in Hebrew,
that prophecy of Balaam runs thus. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and
a Plant or Branch shall rise out of Israel (according to which Isaiah and
Jeremiah Prophecy, Isay 11.1. Jer. 23.5. and 3.15.) the Greek of the Septuagint
(who wrote about 300. years before Christ) translates Star by (...) a Star, but
Plant or Branch (which our Translatours render Scepter (the Septuagint
translate by (...), Man; which the vulgar latin follows. So that the learned
Eastern people, by their knowledge of the Hebrew, and of so ancient a Greek
Translation, might compound a due sense out of these two, that a starr should
arise to signify the birth of a most eminent man to be born of the blood of
Jacob or Israel. Lastly, the Ancient Sibills (who wrote long before Christ;
Some as anciently as the Babilonian captivity; some mentioned by Virgil, who
flourished above forty years before the Birth of Christ, etc.) do in their
way, foretell of Christ, and sometimes in an Astrologicall Phrase, Jam redit
and virgo redeunt Saturnia regna:
Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.


These Sibylls were so well known in the Eastern world, that from them (how
ever they came by it) they might have some hints of this Sarr and it is pointing
at Christ. These things being so; it is plain, not the Starr of it self
Astrologically, but the Theological pre-expositions of that Starr did cause
men to understand, at the appearance thereof that Christ was to be born. It Is
well confessed by some, whom they cry up to be for their Astrologicall way, That
both Nature and Art may beat a stand in spiritual things, especially
concerning Christ, which as the Apostle witnesses are very mysterious, Ephesians.
3.4. 1 Timothy 3.16. The wisemen hoping well of the Jews, as Gods peculiar people,
go to Jerusalem, and consult with them. These wise men came to Christ by a
guidance of a Starr, which may justly blame the unwise, who ascribe their not
coming to Christ to fatal necessity, or the influences of Stars; as
Tertullian has it, Deonerant seipsos, and malae mentis impetus vel fato vel
astris imputant. As Austine has to one same purpose, Falso ds stellarum
influxu conqueruntur mortales, quod peccatum adeo vountarum; est quod si non
voluntarium non est peccatum; that is, mortal men falsely complain of the
influence of the stars; that sin is so voluntary, for if it be not
voluntary, it is not sin. Did we resist by grace our corruptions, we should
deceive the Astrologers, by ruling over the Stars. The highest God can, and
does often cross the course of Nature, and often produces that which could not
be foretold by the observation of the Stars. And therefore men should (...),
not to think beyond that we may wisely think, to be wise to sobriety. Certainly
to foretell contingences is the property of God himself.

Thus far for answer to the Orators for Astrology.

Next we will give a short reply to them that are more Logical.

Ob. God made the stars to be signs Genesis 1.14. therefore the knowledge of the
signification of those signs is lawful.

Answ. God made them to be signs of natural effects or events; not of
arbitrary and moral, that depend on man's will, on which the stars have no
power. Corpus non agit in animam. A body cannot act upon the spirit of a man,
no more then a material sword can wound an Angel. Again the stars are not
signs to us of all natural events, as to wit, not of natural contingences
(to us contingent) as the lighting of a Crow near us, or, etc. but of all
natural necessaries known by apparent common experience. As that of Solomon;
when they cause a North wind; it drives away rain, etc. And that of our Savior
Mat. 16.3. speaking according to the common experience men had. when the sky
is red in the Evening, ye say it will be fair weather. But when the sky is red
and lowering in the Morning, it will be foul weather. Further, The stars may be
signs in regard of their motions, belonging merely to pure Astronomy, as when
there will be an eclipse; though they should never be signs of any events in
regard of their influences or qualitative Virtues.

Obj. The Stars are causes of many things here below. But it cannot be
unlawful to observe Causes how they produce their effects, Scire est per
causas scire. All true knowledge is by the Causes. And therefore, Felix qui
poterit rerum cognoscere causas, He is happy that knows the Causes of Things.

Answ. 1. We said but now, the motions of the Stars cause Eclipses; sometimes
of the Moon by the interposition of the Earth exactly between it and the Sun;
sometimes of the Sun by the direct interposition of the Moon between us and the
Body of the Sun, which the Astronomer (though he never knew the least of the
inward influential qualities of any of the Stars) can predict. And therefore
all this does add nothing at all to countenance Astrology.

Secondly, we demand what Causes are the Stars? Not particular Causes of
particular Events, but general common Causes that work in common, and alike
upon all things. Now no man can divine of a particular Event by a general
Cause, unless he know the particular Causes subordinate and their particular
virtues. Some give this instance, that a man cannot, by setting many sorts of
Eggs under a Hen, foretell what will be hatched, by the mere sitting of the Hen
in common upon them all; unless also he know the particular qualities of those
Eggs; so from the stars, being common Causes no man can foretell Events, unless
he knew the kinds and qualities of Causes and Things subordinate to them.

Object. Experience shows that Astrologers sometimes hit right.

Answ. To this M. Perkins, and other pious learned men, and with appeal to many
others, and of those of as great Antiquity as the Times of the Apostles; gives
this Answer, and with great confidence; that in this there is a secret Magic
at least; if not an open Covenant with the Devil; he making supply what is
wanting in the virtue of stars, and Rules of Astrology. And say they, this is
the judgment of those that have known this Art. So far they. Consonant to
which we referr the Reader to what before was confessed by Master Bridges, S.
Astin and others, he makes mention of. Which is the more confirmed; because if
the Astrologers client comes tempting him and not confiding in him; that is, in
his skill, he can do nothing, but if he can admire the Artist, and rely upon
his skill, then he can answer his desires. And this is confessed by them that
have been great Astrologers but now repenting have left it, whom if need be, I
can name.

Obj. Moses and Daniel were greatly skild in this Art. For of Moses it is said,
Acts 7.22. That he was learned in all the Wisdom of the Fgyptians. And of
Daniel, cap. 1.17.20. That he had skill in all Learning and wisdom of the
Chaldeans.

Ans. If they had practiced it in their younger years, it does neither follow
nor appear in the Bible, that they continued to practice it. For we are sure at
man's estate they were precious Godly men. Secondly, It is said, they had skill,
not, that they practiced it. They might have skill, and to use it as S. Austin
Master Perkins, and Master Bridges etc. to abhor and testify againstche evil
of it.

Thirdly, It is plain that Moses was opposite to the Egyptian Magicians, etc.
and by his skill conquered and shamed them, and convinced them, that the finger
of God was in what Moses did. And of Daniel it is said, that he was in skill
ten times Better then all the Astrologers or Magicians that were in all
Nebuchadnezzars Realm, Dan, 1.20. Therefore his skill must needs be divine, and
above Astrology.

Obj. We see and feel that the Sun and Moon and other Stars have great powe on
the air, and so by it on the bodies of men, as appears even by this, that in
some weathers we are more cheerful, in some more Melancholy; in some more
healthy, in others more sickly.

Ans. All this is nothing at all to Astrologicall prediction of natural
contingents; much less of voluntary moralls. Nor can we tell so much in many
natural things, as to which Starr to attribute which effect seeing they all at
once cooperate: As a man in a juce, extracted mixtly out of several herbs
pounded together, and strained, cannot by all his senses distinguish the
virtues of these acuratly, much less foretell which (being medicinably
applied) shall operate most, and what peculiar effect it shall produce; least
of all if this compound juice must be mingled with some other liquors, as the
operative qualities of the Stars are mingled with the qualities of the
Elements; of them above, in their radiation before they reach to us; and of them
beneath by exhalation of them, and reflection of the beams of the Stars, which
is a second mixture, and so a further confounding of humane understanding how
to judge of them what they will effect.

Obj. Sol and Luna, post Deum omnium viventium vita sunt: Herm. Trism. The Sun
and the Moon, next under God are the life of all living creatures.

Ans. If they be the life of all living creatures, then no more of men then of
Beasts, or plants. What is this then to the acting of their understandings and
wills wherein they are distinguished from, and sublimated above all corporal
things, whose forms are (materiales) material, not spiritual. Food is the
cause of man's life, yet that has no influence upon the soul. The soul of man
acts pure, yea purest reason when the body is as dead by deep sleep, Therefore
all this objection makes nothing so Astrology.

Obj. (...). etc. (...) Phil. Jud. de Mund. Opif. Movings and Earthquakes
proceed from the concussions of the Heavens. etc. because the Stars are made
for Signse.

This objection out of Forged Philo (as learned Broughton calls him) is nothing
for the praise of Astrology. In Meteorology are handled Earthquakes. They are
passions of the Earth, not of men, the Earth has a fit of the Wind, and makes
it in part, to tumble for ease, till it belcheth it up again. If the attractive
Stars, that at lest, draw light things upward, are become depulsive to make
the Air descend; I wonder it is not so said in all the body of Philosophy? And
if any thing be ascribed to the Stars in the ascent of that Earthquake-ayre,
it is needless; for it would as surely ascend of its own levitating quality
(as soon as the Earth gives way) without the help of the Stars, as without
them, water descend.

If Stars be said mediately to cause Earthquakes (I know not how;) their Hosts
and Myriads, bespangled over the Heavens, surrounding the Earth, operate in
common, as well as constantly; and the Earthquakes are so seldom in time, and
so particular to petty places, in comparison of the Universe, that no just
reason can predict this event by them. to say, that because the Stars are
signs of some things; as of Day and Night, Heat and Cold, etc. which are
natural; therefore they are signs of all or most things, even of
Contingences, Arbitraries, and Moralities, and to a ground of prediction, of
such; is such a gross Non-sequitur, that no man that has and uses reason,
will, or can believe it.

Obj. (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.6. Demtcritus foretold many things, by
the observation of things above; and it was called Wisdom.

Answ. By what things above? For there are some Elements above, and in them
many ayrie, fieri, and watery Meteors as well as Stars. If by the Stars, then
what things did he foretell? If that in Clemens Alexandrinus, That Stars are
Instrumetts of Time: Or that of Thales Milesius, to foretell Eclipses of the
Sun, etc. or find out Vrsa minor, or the like stars, to direct the Mariner in
Navigation; these belong not to Astrology, but to Physiology, and Astronomy.
Nor do they conduce to Predictions of humane Actings. If he foretold any thing
(being a Heathen) which is not clearly previsible by Nature or Reason, his
(...), wisdom, was falsely so called. But to do him lawful right, as far as
we can know; He was (says the Story) an Astronomer, which produces nothing
for the honor of Astrology.

Object. Augustine says, Astrologia perscrutanda est ad cognoscendum
proprietates istorum syderum, ut hunc locum intelligere possimus, that is,
Astrology is to be searched into, to know the properties of those stars, that
we may be able to understand this place: therefore in the judgment of
Augustine, there is a lawful use of Astrology.

Answ. This place in Augustine can import no more but this, that some place of
Scripture, speaking of some stars; the knowledge of the qualities of those
stars would further the fuller understanding of that place of Scripture: but
what makes this to predicting Astrology, more then Meal, Leaven, etc. ( Matthew.
13.) or the precious Stones, a Jasper, and Sardine, and Emerald, ( Revel. 4.)
whose properties well understood, help more fully to know the meaning of those
Scriptures? Surely, Augustine never intended in that Expression if any such be
in his Works, to advance Astrology or Astronomy, or the Consideration of stars
and Constellations for understanding of the Scriptures, or any other good use:
for in his Works, Edit. Basil per Frob. Anno Domini 1569. he has these
Expressions, opposite to any such intent.

Astronomia parum aui nihil commodat Scripturae, Aug. Tom. 3. Col. 38. that is,
Astronomy little profits or lends to the Scripture.

Syderum cognitio parum utilis Scripturae, Aug. Tom. 3. cap. 38. that is, The
knowledge of the Stars, or Constellations is little profit to the Scripture.

Augustine in his tom. 1. cap. 761. tom. 8. cap. 197. speaks against,
Astrologos and eorum curiositates, Astrologers and their Curiosities.

In his 1. tom. cap. 90,100,102,126,418. He detests the vanity of Astrology.

In his 4. tom.cap. 742. He pronounces that, Astrologi veritat is inimici
Astrologers are Enemies of the Truth.

In his 5. tom.cap. 279, etc. he abundantly disputes of the uncertainty of
Astrology.

And in his 5. tom.cap. 291. Augustine has this terrible speech against
Astrologers; namely, Astrologorum responsa ex malis esse spiritibus; that is,
That the Answers of Astrologers are from or by evil Spirits.

And in his 8. tom.cap. 165. Augustine affirms, that Astrology is not
necessary to this life, Astrologia huic vitae non est necessaria.

Augustine in his 10. tom. cap. 525. shows the vanity of Astrologers.

And in his 8. tom.cap. 197. is his Invective against the new Astrologers.

Augustine in his fifth Book, De civitate Dei, Cap. 1. (to which some give this
Title, Contra Astrologorum ineptias, idest, Against the Fooleries of
Astrologers, Jo. Crisp. has these words, Illi vero qui positionem stellarum
quodammodo decernentium qualis quisque sit, and quid ei proveniat boni, quid ve
mali accidat, ex Dei voluntate suspendunt, si easdem stellas putant habere hanc
potestatem traditam sibi a summa illius potestate, etc. id est, As for those
that make these operations of the stars in good or bad, to depend upon God's
will, if they say, that they have this power given them from him, to use
according to their own wills, they do Heaven much wrong; in imagining that any
wicked Acts or Injuries are decreed in so glorious a Senate, and such as if any
earthly City had but instituted, the whole generation of man would have
conspired the subversion of it. And what part has God left him in this
disposing of humane affairs, if they be swayed by a necessity from the stars,
whereas he is the Lord of stars, and of men? If they do not say that the stars
are Causes of these wicked Acts, through a power that God has given them, bu
that they effect them by his express command, is this fit to be imagined for
true of God, that is unworthy to be held true of the stars? But if the stars be
said to portend this only, and not procure it, and that their Positions be but
signs, not Causes of such Effects (for so hold many learned men;) Truly the
Astrologians use not to say, Mars in such a House signifies this or that; no
but makech the child born an Homicide. But to grant them this error of speech
etc. how comes it to pass, that they could never show the reason of that
diversity of life, actions, state, profession, art honor, and such humane
accidents, that have befallen two Twins? Nor of such a great difference both in
the things aforesaid, and in their death, that in this case many strangers have
come nearer them in their course of life, then the one has done to the other,
etc. Upon which words at * Erasmus of himself, and out of Firmicus, says, Mars
is a star bloody, fiery, and violent: Being in the seventh House says
Firmicus, lib. 3.) in a Partile aspect with the Horoscope (that is in the West)
does presage; that is, makes men Murderers, wicked, and heinous.

Augustine in the same Book, Cap. 7. has to this purpose, Jam illud quis ferat
quod in eligendis diebus, novae quaedam suis actibus fata moliuntur? Non erat
videlicet ille ita natus, ut haberet admirabilem filium, sed it a potius ut
contemtibilem gigneret, and ideo vir doctus elegit horam qua misceretur uxori.
Fecit ergo fatum quod non habebat, sed ex ipsi^ fato cepit esse fatale, quod in
ejus nativitate non fuerat. O stultitiam singularem! Eligitur dies ut ducatur
uxor, credo propterea, quia potest in diem non bonum, nisi elegatur incurri and
infeliciter duci. Vbi est ergo quod nascenti jam sydera decreverunt? An potest
homo quod ei jam constitutum est, diei electione mutare, and quod ipse in
eligendo die constituerit non poterit ab alia potestate mutari? etc. that is,
But who can endure this Foolery of theirs, to invent a new destiny for every
action that a man undertaketh? That wise man aforesaid, it seems, was not born
to have an admirable Son, but rather a contemptible one; and therefore elected
he his hour wherein to beget a worthy one: so thus did he work himself a
destiny more then his stars portended, and made that a part of his Fate, which
was not signified in his Nativity. O singular fondness! A day must not be
chosen for Marriage, because otherwise one might light on an unlucky day, and
so make an ill Marriage. But where then is the destiny of your Nativity? Can a
man change what his fate has appointed, by choosing this day or that, and
cannot the Fate of that day which he chooses be altered by another Fate? Again,
if men alone of all the Creatures on Earth, be under the starry power, why do
they choose days to plant, and days to sow, and so forth; days to tame Cattle,
days to put to Males for increase of Oxen, or Horses, and such like? If the
election of those days be good, because the stars have dominion in all earthly
Bodies living, Creatures and Plants, according as the times do change; let them
but consider how many Creatures have original from one and the same instant,
and yet have such diverse ends, as he that but notes, will deaide those
Observations, as Childrens Toys. For what Sot will say, that all Herbs, Trees,
Beasts, Birds, Serpents, Worms, and Fishes, have each one a particular moment
of time to be brought forth in? Yet men do use for trying of the Mathematicians
skill, to bring them the figures of the Births of Beasts, which they have for
this end diligently obobserved at home; and him they hold the most skillfull
Mathematician that can say by the figure, this portendeth the Birth of a Beast,
and not of a Man, etc. Thus far Augustine, out of whom I might have quoted much
more; but they that list, may in his Works easily find it of themselves.

Thus you see evidently, even by this of the Doctor, that Will. Ramsey has
given no real Answer to him, where he seems to give an Answer, as 1. Touching
Melancton. 2. Touching Austin. 3. Touching the Doctors denial of the natural
Effects of the stars, etc. there Will. Ramsey tells us notorious untruths, as
has been most evidently demonstrated by the precedent Treatise. Of the same
brain are those passages of Will. Ramsey, touching the star that appeared at
Christ's Birth; and of his yielding that stars are not signs of arbitrary
Events, etc. For his Crew do mightily cry up that Book as the Friend of their
Astrology, wherein that star is handled. And William in this his Lux has
stood for arbitrary Effects of stars, and has by figures showed his practice
therein, as has been abundantly demonstrated. And therefore Will. Ram. does
plainly juggle with his Reader, and play Legerdemain (as they say) or Bo-peep
(as Children speak) For in the beginning of his Book he lays down a definition
of Astrology, by the natural Effects of Stars; with some Glosses to the same
effect in his Epistle to the Reader, (to which if he had adhered, there had
been no Controversy between us) but when he comes upon the Stage of Dispute in
his Book, he changes his Habit; until again he be quite stripped by his
Opponent; and then he runs to his definition again. And when he is ferretted,
that he cannot tell where to be, he puts Queries, that when he cannot fairly
win, he may foully beg the Question. But that will not be granted.

FINIS.

