A SPEECH MADE BEFORE THE LORDS IN THE UPPER HOUSE; BY FRANCIS ROUS Esquire,
March the 16th. 1640.

AGAINST Dr. COSSENS, Dr. MAYNWARING, and Dr. BEALE; Upon the Complaint of Mr.
PETER SMART.

AT LONDON, Printed for JOHN WRIGHT, Junior. MDCXLI.

A SPEECH MADE BEFORE THE LORDS IN THE Upper HOUSE; By Mr. FRANCIS ROUS
Esquire; March the 16th. 1640.
Against Dr. COSSENS. Dr. MAYNWARRING, and Dr. BEALE.
My LORDS,
I Am commanded by the House of Commons to present to your Lord-ships a
Declaration and Impeachment against Dr. COSSENS and others upon the Complaint
of Mr. PETER SMART: which Mr. SMART was a Proto-Martyr, or, first Confessor of
note in the late days of Persecution. The whole matter is a tree, whereof the
branches and fruit are manifest in the Articles of this Declaration; which
being read, I shall with your Lordships favor discover and lay open the root.

The Declaration was read, and then He proceeded thus:
My Lords:
I Am now to discover the Root of Master SMARTS Persecution.

Your Lordships have heard of a great Design to bring in Popery; you have
heard of Armies of Soldiers, and particularly of the Popish Irish Army, the
burden and Complaint of the Commons. But there is another Army not so much
spoken of, and that is an Army of Priests: for since Altars came in (so they
delight to be called,) it is a saying of Gregory the Great, that when
Antichrist comes, Praeparatus est excercitus Sacerdotum: there is an Army of
Priests ready to receive him; this is fulfilled in our time; for certainty this
Army of Priests does many ways advance the design and plot of Popery. A first
is by the subversion of our Laws, and Government: our Laws and Popery cannot
stand together; but either Popery must overthrow our Laws, or our Laws must
overthrow Popery: but to overthrow our Laws, they must overthrow Parliaments;
and to overthrow Parliaments, they must overthrow property; they must bring
the Subjects goods to be arbitrarily disposed, that so there may be no need of
Parliaments; this has been done by Dr. MAYNWARING (whom we find wanting yet
not in the seats, but in the Bar of the Lords House) and the like by Dr.
BEALE: and I think it was the Intention of the late Cannons.

A second way, by which this Army of Priests advances the Popish Design, is
the way of Treaty. This has been acted both by writings and conference;
Sancta Clara himself says, Doctissimi little quibuscunque egi; so it seems
they have had conferences together; And Sancta Clara on his part, labors to
bring the Articles of our Church to Popery; and some of our side strive to
meet him in that way: we have a testimony that the great Archpriest
himself has said; It were no hard matter to make a reconciliation, if a wise
man had the handling of it. But I verily believe that as the State of Papacy
stands, a far wiser man then he cannot reconcile Us, without the loss of our
Religion. For the Pope being fastened to his Errors, even by his Chair of
Inerrabilitie, he sits still unmoved, and so we cannot meet, except we come
wholly to him. A man standing in a Boat tied to a Rock, when he draws the
rope, does not draw the Rock to the Boat; but the Boat to the Rock. And Sancta
Clara does (in this somewhat honestly) confess it: for he says that he dealt
in this way of Treaty, not to draw the Church to the Protestants: but the
Protestants to the Church.

A third way is a way of violence, this violence they exercise partly by
Secular Arms, and partly by Priestly Arms, which they call Spiritual: for
Secular Arms, we have their own confession, that the late war was Bellum
Episcopale; and we have the Papists confession, that it was Bellum Papale: for
in their motives, they say, that the War concerns them not only as Subjects,
but as Catholics, for so they falsely call themselves: and if it be so, then
Bellum Episcopale, is also Bellum Papale: in the Episcopal War, the Papal
cause is advanced: For the Spiritual Arms, thus they come to execution.

When a great Man is coming, his Sumpters, his Furniture, his Provisions go
before: the Popes Furniture, Altars and Copes, Pictures and Images are come
before; (and if we believe Dr. COSSENS) the very substance of the Mass; a
certain sign that the Pope was not far off. Now these forerunners being
come, if any man resist them, Fire comes out of the Brambles and devoures the
Cedars of Lebanon: the Army of the Priests falls upon him with their Arms of
Suspension, Sequestration, Excommunication, Degradation, and Deprivation. And
by these Arms has Mr. SMART been oppressed and undone. He falls upon their
Superstitions and Innovations, and they fall upon him with their Arms, they
beat him down, yea they pull him up by the roots, taking away all his means
of maintenance and living; yet they leave him life to feel his miseries: Ita
foriunt, ut diu se sentiat mori; there is no cruelty to Priestly cruelty;
these are they that did put our very Savior to death: the Calling is Reverend,
but the Corruption of it most pernicious; Corruption optimi pessima: I know no
reason of this change, except it be that of the Apostle: Because when they
knew God, they did not worship him as GOD, but made a God of the World, placing
the excellency of Priesthood in Worldly pomp and Greatness and gave the
glory of the invisible GOD to Pictures, Images and Altars: therefore God gave
them up to vile affections, to be implacable, unmercifull, and without natural
affection. But whatsoever the cause is of their Corruption; certainly their
Arms have fallen heavy upon Mr. SMART, and Priestly cruelty has cast him
into a long misery, from which he could get no release by any Priestly mercy.

And now it is prayed, that as these Delinquents by the cruel oppressions of M.
SMART have advanced the Cause of Popery; so they may in such a degree of
justice be punished, that in them Priestly cruelty and the very cause of
Popery may appear to be punished and suppressed, and that Mr. SMART suffering
for the Cause of Protestancie may be so repaired, that in him pious Constancy,
and the very Cause of Protestancie may appear to be righted and repaired.

FINIS.

