MORBVS EPIDEMICVS: OR The Disease of the Latter Days: Discovered and laid
open in a SERMON Out of The II Ep. of Timothy chapter 4. v. 3, 4.

By JOHN RAMSEY, Minister of East-Rudham In the County of Norfolk.

We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed,

Jerem. 51.9. Livy of the Roman State, p. 3. Ad haec tempora, quibus nec vitia
nostra, nec remedia pati possumus, perventum est.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by Philip Briggs, at the
Dolphin in St. Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.LVI.

To his right worthy and Learned Friend, Mr. JAMES DUPORT, One of the Senior
Fellows, and Vice-Master of Trinity College in Cambridge.
SIR,
IT was the grave advice of St. Hierom to his friend Rusticus; Hierom. ad
Rustic. Ep. 39.
Ne ad scribendum cito prosilias, and levi ducaris insania. If I have seemingly
transgressed the Rule of the Ancient, and this Cito be objected and laid to my
charge, as an argument of overmuch lightness; I suppose, they that know me in
part, will readily become (though not my Advocates, yet) my Compurgators. And
that number of years with a surplusage, which exempted and discharged the
Levites under the Law from the burden of their Office; will be thought a
sufficient warrant, so far forth as concerns the Age of the Publisher, to
license the Sermon to the Press. As for the Sermon it self, the Subject matter
of it is spent in the Discovery of the Disease of the Latter Days: A disease
so much the more dangerous, by how much it is the more common and Epidemical.

It is observed of our blessed Savior, upon his first entrance into his
public Office, Matthew. 4.23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in
their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom; and healing all
manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the People. And I have
herein followed, after a sort, Christ's example, and in my first essay in this
kind, attempted the Cure of that which is (causally and virtually) all manner
of sickness, and all manner of disease among the People; and that is, The not
enduring Sound Doctrine. That the Remedy is accommodate to the Distemper of the
present Times, I suppose will not be denied. And I shall accompany and send it
into the world, with this hearty and pithy prayer, Faxit Deus ut sit aeque
commodum ac accommodum; God grant it may prove as profitable as it is truly
seasonable. If the succinct handling, and cursory dispatch of the several parts
be prejudged and censured as a fault: Let such consider, That he who adventures
upon a long Journey, and is to call in at several places, must not protract the
time, nor stay long in any. And as for my choice in the Dedication, I shall
make use of no other Apology then that known Rule in the Civil Law; Regulae
Juvis.
Mancipato Patre, mancipantur and Liberi. I may add, Etiam and Libri, and the
Truth is one and the same. The Father has been long since bound unto you with
the cords of a Man, with bands of Love, many real and liberal favors. And now
this sorry Sermon (...). Clem. Alex. Lib. 1. Stron.
as a Child of the same Parent, becomes bound unto you. But I must not exceed
the measure of an Epistle; and am therein cautioned by the Pen of a Heathen:
The Letters of Friends and Lovers must not be overlong, nor fill both Hands.

I have no more to say; But that next the glory of God, and the common Benefit
of his Church, the propriety and particular interest in this poor Piece, and
Paper present, is wholly yours together with the Author,

Your very affectionate and observant Friend JOHN RAMSEY.

2 Timothy 4.3, 4. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears.

And they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be turned after
Fables.


THe first words of the Text, The coherence of the Text.
which stand as a Porter or Portall, at the Door of Entrance, and lead us into
the inner Rooms, [For the time will come] imply and point out unto us; that the
Text is a Prophecy, which in the genuine acception and signification of the
word, is a Prediction or foretelling of things to come. For the Writings of
Paul to Timothy, though they pass under the name of Epistles, Letters of
direction and advice, sent from him as an Apostle of Christ, and a Messenger of
the Churches: yet in these Epistles of his, there are several interspersions
and sprinklings of Prophecy, three whereof are very observable and remarkable
above the rest.

The first Prophecy concerns that grand Apostasy and falling away from the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, by Popish idolatry and superstition, 1 Timothy
4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later Times some shall
depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, (...), to spirits of
error, (by an usual Hebraism) and Doctrines of Devils.

The second Prophecy respects the general Atheism and profaneness of men's
lives, 2 Timothy 3.1. This know also, that in the last days perilous Times shall
come. Heretical Doctrines of Devils, (as the Apostle styles them) are the
Product of the later Times. But the deplorable looseness and lewdness of men's
manners are the issue of the last days, and so nearer the end of the world,
than the former. This the Apostle makes good, by a particular enumeration of
sins and sinners, Verse. 3, 4, 5. For men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy. And then in the close he claps in with this signal character, Verse. 5.
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; as a cloak and
covering for all the rest.

The third and last Prophecy is in the Text, and notes out unto us an utter
aversness and abhorrence from sound Doctrine, which is the only means to
rectify men's judgments in point of Faith, and to correct and reform their
dissoluteness; and renders them more impatient of the Remedy than of the
Malady. And so it follows in the Text, [For the Time shall come.]

The Text then as it lies before you, holds forth and presents unto your view
the Disease of the later days, and for the more methodical and orderly
resolution of the words, we may take notice of a fivefold specialty: 1. The
nature of the Disease specified. The division of the Text.
They will [not endure sound Doctrine.] 2. The cause of the Disease, and that
is their Lusts, [After their own lusts.] 3. The signs or symptoms of the
Discase, and they are two: 1. The first is in the ear, [Having itching ears.]
2. The second is, the satisfying or scratching this itching ear with a
multiplied variety of Instructors, [They shall heap to themselves Teachers.]
4. The effect of the Disease; and that is double, (wherein as in every motion)
there are two Terms: 1. There is the Terminus a quo, [They shall turn away
their ears from the Truth.] 2. There is the Terminus ad quem, [And shall be
turned after Fables.]
5. The circumstance of the Time, when the Disease shall be in the Paroxysm, in
the full heat and height. And that we have in the first words of the Text,
[For the time shall come.]


They will not endure (...), The first part. The nature of the Disease.
sound Doctrine. A Metaphor or borrowed speech taken up from the natural Food
or Physic of the Body; and in a figurative and a spiritual sense, translated
and applied unto the Soul. For the Soul, as it stands in need, so it has its
proper Food and Physic, as well as the Body, and that is the Word of God.

The Word of God is the Food of the Soul, 1. The Word the Food of the Soul.
whereby it lives, as the Body, by the natural nourishment, Food for all sorts
of Christians. Milk for newborn Infants and Babes in Christ: Meat, strong Meat
to those that are of full age, Even those that by reason of use have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil. Heb. 5.13, 14.

And as the Word of God is the Food, 2. The Word the Physic of the Soul.
so is it likewise the Physic of the Soul. A Metaphor whereunto St. Paul
alludes, and whereat he frequently glances through these Epistles. If any man
consent not (...), To wholesome words, even to the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Timothy 6.3.

And the Apostle elsewhere commends it to his Scholar Timothy under the same
name and title, 2 Timothy 1. v. 13. (...), Hold fast the form of wholesome words.

This Physic of the Soul may be said to be wholesome words, or sound Doctrine,
in two respects: 1. First, formally, and in its own nature, as being healthful
in it self. 2. Secondly, causally, by way of Energie and operation, as healing
in the effect.


First, sound Doctrine is healthful in it self, 1. First, healthful in it own
nature.
Venenum aliquando pro remedio fuit. Senec. de Benef. lib. 2. c. 18. Medici
pedes and alas Cantharidis, cum ipsa sit mortifera, prodesse dicunt. Plutarch.
de audiend. Poetis.
and whereas the natural Physic is many times made up of rank and deadly
Poison, yet so corrected and tempered by Art, that the malignity and venom is
taken out; and proves a sovereign Antidote and Preservative. This spiritual
Physic has no Venom and Poison in it; but is altogether pure and simple, and
every way suitable to the Souls health.

Two Ingredients there are in the Word of God that make it thus healthful in
it self: A double Ingredient in the Word.


1. The one Truth. 2. The other Holiness.
The first Ingredient in the Word is Truth, 1. The first, Truth.
John 17. v. 17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. As being
an exact Idea, a lively Portraicture, the perfect Copy and Counterpart of the
mind and will of God. Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit,
Religio possidet. Joan. Picus Mirandula.
And as it is Truth in it self, so it makes an impression of Truth upon the
Soul; even as the Seal stamps it own form and figure upon the body of the Wax.
The Truth of Faith and Manners; Truth of Doctrine and Life, both these are the
effects of the Word of God.

A second Ingredient of sound Doctrine is Holiness, for as it teaches men to
believe aright, 2. The second Ingredient of the Word Holiness.
so it likewise instructs them to live well; To live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world. This is the proper (...). Clem. in Paedag. (...)
Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 1.
End of it, to make men better to spiritualize their natures, to sanctify
their affections, and to bring them unto happiness. If any man consent not to
wholesome words, and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.
v. 3. Those only are wholesome words, that are according to godliness. This is
the specifical form, that distinguishes them from all other. The Apostle
reduces and referres these wholesome words to two Heads, 2 Timothy 1. v. 13. Hold
fast the form of wholesome words, which thou have heard of me in Faith and
Love. Faith in Christ, and Love toward our Christian Brethren; These are the
very abstract and summary abridgment of sound Doctrine.

Secondly, 2. Healing in the effect.
sound Doctrine is healing in the effect: like unto the Tree of Life, which was
planted in the streets of the new Jerusalem, that bare twelve manner of fruits,
and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations. Revel. 22. v. 2.

The Word of God comes to have this healing effect, Two manner of ways.
two manner of ways: 1. By a formal contrariety to the Disease. 2. By a
particular Application to the Patient.


First, 1. First, by a formal contrariety to the Disease.
the Word heals by way of contrariety to the Disease. And herein lies the
difference betwixt Food and Physic.

Food is the conversion of the nourishment into the substance of the Body. And
in that respect, Nutrimur similibus, we are nourished by things of the same or
like nature. But Physic is the removing of obstructions, the disburthening of
superfluities, the purging out of malignant humors. And therefore Morbi
curantur contrariis, Diseases are best cured by the contraries. There is a
contrariety betwixt the Body and the Disease. And there is as great a
contrariety betwixt the Disease and the Physic, 1 Timothy 1. v. 9, 10. The Law is
not made for the righteous, but for the lawless, and for the disobedient, and
for the ungodly, and for sinners. And if there be any other thing that is
contrary to sound Doctrine, notorious and enormous sins, such as are there
rehearsed by the Apostle, are contrary to sound Doctrine. And sound Doctrine is
every way as contrary to gross and open sins. And it declares and manifests
this contrariety by a free and round admonition, in a severe and sharp reproof,
Titus 1. v. 13. Rebuke them sharply, (...), cuttingly, after the manner of
Chirurgum misericordem esse non oportet. Celsus.
Chirurgions, (as the word imports) that they may be sound in the Faith. Nec
deest censura quae increpet, nec medicina quae sanet. Cyprian.
Cutting Reproofs, and the paring men's consciences to the quick, are an
excellent means to make men sound in the Faith. There is no way to cure a
Gangrene but by cutting off the part affected, and by Quae ferro non curantur,
ignis curat. Regula Medicorum.
cauterising the mortified member. If this be not done speedily, the whole Body
must needs perish.

The words of the wise are as Goads and Nails fastened; Eccles. 12. v. 11. And
what is the use of Goads, but to provoke and prick forward the dull Ox? And
Nails must not only be fastened, but driven home to the Head. Even so the words
of the wise must Si cujus sermo non pungit sed oblectationem facit audientibus,
iste non est sermo sapientis, verba enim sapientum ut st muli. Hieronym. in
Eccles. cap. 12. Pungit, non penetrat. Seneca of Chrysip. Epist. 1. ad Lucil.
Pungere non palpare, as Hierom well expresses it: They must penetrate and
pierce deep, not only scarrifie or scratch the face of men's consciences. The
two Witnesses had a Fire that went out of their mouth, that devoured their
Enemies; Revel. 11. v. 6. And they tormented those that dwelt upon the Earth;
v. 10. And what was this tormenting Fire that went out of their mouths, but the
scorching and burning heat of their Ministry, which consumed their
corruptions, even as the Fire licks up the Stubble. The Ministers of Christ are
the Salt of the Earth; Matthew. 5. v. 13. so called by reason of their savoury
Doctrine. And Salt has an acrimony and sharpness in it, it corrodes and frets,
it sucks up the putrid moisture, and so prevents putrefaction: For howsoever
erroneous and false Doctrine has no savor nor sharpness in it; As it was said
of the Popish Liturgy, Missa non mordet, The Mass has no Teeth in it, it bites
not at all. Yet true and sound Doctrine bites where it fastens, like unto a
Quae per insuavitatem medentur, emolumento curationis offensam sui excusant,
and praesentem injuriam superventurae utilitatis gratia commendant. Tert. de
Poenit. c. 10.
Purging Potion, it stirs and troubles the humor, it causes a grumbling in the
conscience, it puts it to extreme smart and pain, and hereby it heals and cures.

Secondly, 2. By a particular application to the Patient.
the word heals by a particular application to the Patient. For this is a sure
Rule, Omne agens agit per contactum, Every agent works by way of contact, by a
real touch of that Body whereon it acts, either immediately in the substance,
or in the power and virtue of it. This is very observable in the practice of
Surgery and Physic, where the Plaster must be close applied and laid upon
the Sore; and the Potion must be inwardly received into the Body; otherwise it
no way conduces nor proves availsome unto health.

And so it is in the dispensation of the spiritual Physic, the preaching of
the Gospel, which consists of these two parts, and stands upon them, as the
several Legs, Explication and Application. And as it must be explained and
opened in the sense and meaning of the words, so it must be applied and brought
home to the conscience.

That Physic which cures at one time may kill at another. And hereof Aug. Ep.
5. ad Marcellinum.
St. Augustine affords us a notable Example, in that famous Physician
Vindicianus, who being sent for to a young man in a dangerous sickness,
recovered and restored him to his former health: but relapsing into his
sickness in his old age, and making use of the same Prescript, which had
formerly afforded him present help and remedy without the advice of his
Physician; Ideo male acceptus es, quia non ego jussi illi aetati, jam hoc non
se fuisse jussurum. Vindicianus answer to the young man.
it had like to have cost him his life. And so it is with the spiritual
Physic, which must be attempered to the present exigents and emergencies of
Time, Place, Person, and particularly applied to the state and condition of the
Hearers.

Thus have you heard in part, that the sound Doctrine here mentioned, is both
healthful and healing Physic; and the Disease of the later days is the
refusing and rejecting of it; and set forth unto us in these words, (...). They
will not endure it, they will in no case swallow or digest this (...). Hippoc.
Aphor. l. 2.
Purging Pill: like unto a wayward and froward Patient, or rather a Molestus
est Medicus furenti phrenetico, and pater indisciplinato filio, ille ligando,
ille caedendo, sed ambo diligendo. August. ad Bonif. Commit. Epist. 1.
phrenetick and distracted person, that casts away his Physic in the heat of
his indignation; and as for his Physician, he will not suffer him to abide in
the same Room, and in case he appears in his presence, he spares not to
bespatter him with uncivil and unsavory language, and in a fierce and furious
manner with heavy and downright blows, he falls foul upon his person.

This not enduring sound Doctrine hints out and intimates these two Particulars:

First, a disallowing and disapproving of it in their judgments, which they
censure, and condemn, as unsound and unprofitable.

The second is, a displicency and displeasure in the Affections, which makes
them angry and testy, pettish and peevish, and to vent their choleric passion,
as Ahab against Micaiah, 1 Kings 22.8. I hate him, for he does not prophecy
good concerning me, but evil: and yet Micaiah spoke no other thing than what
God put into his mouth; as he told the Messenger that was sent unto him with
this instruction, Behold, now the words of the Prophets declare good unto the
King with one mouth: Let thy word I pray thee, be like the word of one of them,
and speak that which is good. And Micaiah said, As the Lord lives, What the
Lord says unto me, that will I speak, Verse. 13, 14.

There is a goodness of things in themselves, and unto others. And Physic may
be said to be good in order to the natural state and constitution of the Body,
or the distemper and Disease. The Word of God, that good Word of God, as the
Apostle terms it, Heb. 6.5. is always good in it self, and good unto us, even
to a good and honest heart: Do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly? Micah 2.7. But it is not good to our corrupt humors, and unlawful
lusts. And herein it fares with sound Doctrine as it does with wholesome
nourishment, which seems unpleasant and unsavory to an Aguish palate; and yet
the fault is not in the meat, but in the mouth and taste of the party. And the
Rule of Aquinas is sound and good, Nihil verum putant, nisi quod suave est,
nihil credibile nisi quod potest incutere voluptatem, nemo rem veritate
ponderat, sed ornatu. Non credunt ergo divinis, quia fuco carent. Lactant. l.
5. c. 1. Aquinas summa Theolog.
Non est judicandum de rebus secundum opinionem impiorum, sicut nec de
saporibus secundum aestimationem aegrotorum, We are not to spend our judgments
according to the common opinion of the wicked, no more than we judge of savor
according to the diseases, fancy and frowardness of sick men.

The second general part of the Text is the cause of the Disease, (...), 2. The
second part. The cause of the Disease, After their own Lusts.
After their own lusts. Their Lusts, their own Lusts.

There are natural, and there are morbid or sickly desires in the Body; A
natural desire in every creature after their proper food and nourishment,
thereby to preserve their individual natures, and to prorogue and lengthen out
their being to the utmost point and period, to propagate and increase their
kind by natural generation, that being mortal in themselves, they may after a
sort prove immortal in their posterity. But besides the desires of nature,
there are morbid and sickly desires in the Body, which are sometimes found in
children that feed upon coals and dirt: and such are the depraved longings of
women with child, called Pica by Phyficians, from a Bird of that name: and
that because the inconstant and various desires of nature, so misguided by
vicious humors, are well resembled by the strange mixture of white and black
Feathers in that Bird.

Answerable to both these, there are both spiritual, and sinful, and sickly
desires in the Soul.

There are spiritual desires after divine and heavenly matters, Two sorts of
desires in the Soul: 1. Spiritual:
Those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

And there are sickly and sinful desires in the Soul, 3. Sinful, or Lusts.
for the matter, manner, measure, order, end, which are known by the name of
Lusts, and are usually taken in the worser part; and as Physicians often times
take the Crisis of the Crasis and temper of the Body from the Stomach and
Appetite of the party: even so may we judge of the state of men's Souls by their
desires and lusts. That is one part of St. Paul's description of those silly
women, led captive by Seducers, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6. And foreshewing the Disease of the later Days in the Text, alleges
this as the proper cause, Their lusts, their own Lusts, their private fancies
and humors, carried about with every wind of Doctrine, tossed to and fro; as
this or the other thing suits best with their disposition. And this (...), or
peculiar of theirs, is directly opposed to that catholic Doctrine that is
common to the whole Church, wherein there is Unus Deus, and una fides, one God,
one Faith, Beza in locum.
(as Beza well observes upon the place) and this one Faith, and their many
Lusts, are every way incompatible, and inconsistent, and cannot stand together.

And that you may the better conceive what these Lusts are, I shall branch them
out into these three Particulars: 1. Proud Ignorance. Three sorts of sinful
lusts.
2. Wanton Curiosity. 3. Sordid Covetousness.


The first cause why men will not endure sound Doctrine is the Lust of Proud
Ignorance, 1. The first Lust, Proud Ignorance.
If any man consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, He is proud, knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. (...), He is swollen big or
puffed up, as the word signifies, Grandis tumor contrarius est sanitati.
Quintil. Inst. Orat.
and tumors and swellings are contrary to health and soundness, and are no
less destructive to Soul, than Body: it is the property of Proud Ignorance to
puff up men's spirits, like unto empty Bladders, that are blown with the wind.
And whereas for the most part Knowledge puffs up, as the Apostle tells us, 1
Cor. 8.1. yet are there some that are puffed up out of Ignorance, in whom Pride
and Ignorance go hand in hand, as they are linked together in the Text, He is
proud, knowing nothing. This makes them presume that they stand in no need of
the public Ministry, the only outward and ordinary means of instruction:
That they know all that is knowable, and have more understanding than their
Teachers, as David affirms of himself. Nay more than so, this confident conceit
and overweening opinion of their gifts, transports some private men so far, as
to desert and quit their proper station and calling, and though neither of
sufficient arts and parts, no nor competent abilities for the Ministerial
Function, to invade and rush upon it. Even as empty Carts run faster than
laden Wains; and the lesser Pinks, and lighter Pinnaces sail swifter than the
taller Ships of the greatest bulk and burden. Like unto hasty Ahimaaz, they
will needs be running; Let me also run, (so he speaks unto Joab) though they
have no tidings ready, 2 Samuel 18.22. And they run by the way of the Plain, as
he did, Verse. 23. the shorter, but the worser way: and by that means they
overrun many a Cushi, men of greater worth, and every way more able than
themselves. Or like unto those Jewish Doctors, whom St. Paul justly taxes, 1 Timothy 1.7. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they affirm. Gellius, l. 1. c. 15.
(...), which in plain English is, They say, they know not what.

A second Lust is Wanton Curiosity, 2. The second Lust is Wanton Curiosity.
which causes men to slight plain and profitable matters, and to disdain, and
despise sound and saving Truths. Like unto the People of Israel of old, that
loathed their Manna, though it was the Bread of Heaven, and the Food of Angels,
yet away with this dry Manna, give them Flesh to eat. They must be fed with
some mysterious points of Religion, either enigmatical Prophecies out of the
Old Testament, or dark Riddles of the Revelation, as yet unrevealed; Christ's
personal Reign upon Earth; A fifth Monarchy, or somewhat of the like nature.
They must be amused and amazed with sublime and lofty speculations, strange and
uncouth Ad aeternam felicitatem nos vocat Deus non per difficilces quaestiones.
Hilarious. Curiositatem odit Deus, nec vult nos esse Curistas and Quaeristas.
Crucifigamus hauc pestem, Quare. Lutherus in Genesis c. 19.
Questions; being not only in love with, but even sick of them, (...), as St.
Paul phraseth it, 1 Timothy 6.4. A fond dotage, or rather a languishing sickness
of the Soul.

This is that makes so many Athenians in Religion, and to hanker after Non est
sciens hodie qui novitates non invenit. Alv. Pelag de Planctu Eccl. l. 2.
New Lights, and new Doctrines, after their example, who when St. Paul preached
unto them Jesus and the Resurrection, began to question him in this manner, May
we know what this new Doctrine whereof thou speak is, Acts 17.19. This was
their customary and common practice; for all the Athenians spent their time in
nothing else, but either to tell or hear some new thing, Verse. 21.

And were there nothing more in a Doctrine, but the mere novelty, this alone
were reason enough to misdoubt it, and to render it up unto suspicion: for that
known Rule of Tertullian holds sound, for the most part, Id verum and dominicum
quod prius, extraneum and falsum quod posterins. Haereses non tam falsitas
revincit quam novitas. Tertul. Praescript. adv. Haeret.
That is true which is most ancient, and that erroneous and false which is of
later date. And both Heretics and Heresies are not more strongly confuted and
confounded from their falsehood, than by Novelty.

The third and last cause why men will not endure sound Doctrine is the Lust of
Sordid Covetousness. 3. The third Lust, Sordid Covetousness.
There is not any sin more opposite to the profession and practice of Religion,
nor the reverend and respective hearing of the Word, than that of Covetousness.
It was the blemish and bane of Ezekiel's Hearers, and moved them to bejeer him,
and to laugh him to scorn, Ezekiel. 33.31. And they come unto thee, as the people
comes, and they sit before thee, as my people, and they hear thy words, but
they will not do them: for with their mouths they make jests, but their heart
goes after their Covetousness. Our blessed Savior himself escaped not the
flouts and scoffs of the Pharisees, and it was their Covetousness that was in
fault, Luke 16.14. And the Pharisees also (who were covetous) heard all these
things, and they derided him. How many are there, even among us, that do not
only quarrel the Persons and Doctrine of the Ministers, but except also
against the Calling of the Ministry? And would you know the true cause? Is it
not their means, and maintenance, that is as a scourge in their sides, and as
thorns in their eyes? Do they not complain of the payment of their Tithes, as a
heavy burden too heavy for them to bear? And do they not endeavor that
Ecclesiastical Livings should want a sufficient Livelihood, and so prove no
Livings at all? But rather like unto the Diets of sick men, (...), Demosth.
Phil.
(...), (as the Orator speaks of them) which neither afford a man life, nor yet
will give him leave to die. Therein after a sort justifying the virulent but
unjust crimination of our Romish Adversaries; That our Doctrine is Negative,
our Religion is Ablative. How far are these men from that heroical and
religious resolution of King David, who when Araunah offered him his
threshing-floor and his Oxen, as a free Gift, would in no case accept of it,
Nay, but I will surely buy it of thee at a price, neither will I offer a
Burntoffering to the Lord my God, of that which does cost me nothing, 2 Samuel
24.24. Whereas we on the other side, are every way unwilling to receive ought
of the hand of God, though never so unvaluable and prizeless a mercy, that
shall cost us any thing. Fain would men have (...), (as Nazianzen styles it) A
Gospel that is cost-free, without expense and charge. How far are men from
hearkening to the wise man's counsel, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy
substance. Who though they can be content to draw near to God with their mouth,
and to honor him with their lips, with the Jews of old, yet will they be very
hardly persuaded to honor him with their substance. Herein they plead
Prescription and Exemption, and crave that Privilege for their god Mammon, that
Naaman did for his bowing in the House of Rimmon, 2 Kings 5.18. In this thing
the Lord pardon thy servant, The Lord pardon thy servant in this thing.

The third general part of the Text is the Signs and Symptoms of the Disease,
3. The third part. The Signs and Symptoms of the Disease, two. 1. The first
Symptom, Having itching Ears.
and they are two.

The first Symptom is in the Ear, Having itching Ears. The Itch is a natural
infirmity and ailment in the Body, which is seemingly allayed and eased, with
the rubbing and scratching of it, but repays the short pleasure with a long and
lasting pain, and often times draws blood after it.

Such a spiritual weakness is the Itch of the Ear, which seeks to be scratched
and clawed with picked phrases, queint sentences, and strong lines, which have
not the property of Physic to cure the Distempers of the Soul, but serve in
stead of an Ointment to smooth the Skin, to supple the Joints, and to recreate
and refresh the Body. Been olet unguentum, been olet and pharmacum: hoc tantum
delectat, illud vero prodest. Plutarch.
There is this difference betwixt an Ointment and Physic, though both are well
sented, yet an Ointment delights only, whereas Physic brings profit with it.
Pruritus auditus non sanam cupit doctri^am, sed confricationem audi^us, sed
delectationom audiendo, Cajetan. in locum.
But the itching Ear preferres pleasure before profit, prizeth an Ointment
above Physic, and makes choice of such Physicians, which tickle the Ear,
though they never cure their wounds, Aegrotus non quaerit Medicum elegantem sed
sanantem. Seneca.
which no sick men will do besides. The palliated cure of any spiritual
Emperick or Mountebank are best accepted; who heal the hurt of their souls
slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, where there is no Peace, Jer. 6.14. And they
say to their Teachers, as the rebellious Jews of old to their Prophets, Isai
30.10. Prophecy not unto us right things, Speak smooth things, Prophecy
deceits.

It was the saying of one of our own, who was so far in love with it, that he
desired it might remain as a Memorial upon his Monument, Pruritus disputandi
Ecclesiae scabies. Sir Henry Wotton.
The Itch of Disputation is the Scab of the Church. And what he spoke of the
Itch of Disputation, is most true of the Itch of the Ear in the general; it is
the Scab of Religion, the Scab of the Church, a spiritual Leprosy, that
overspreads the whole man.

The second sign or Symptom of this Disease, 2. The second Symptom, They
shall heap to themselves Teachers.
is the scratching and clawing of the itching Ear, with a multiplied variety of
Instructors, (...), They shall heap to themselves Teachers. Ipsi sibi, (as Beza
renders it) that is, Scientes ac prudentes sibi accersere suae perniciei
instrumenta. Beza in locum.
They shall wittingly and willingly procure the Instruments of their own
destruction; (as he glosses upon the place.)

This Heap of Teachers may be conceived in a double reference: A Heap in a
double reference.


1. The quantity. 1. The multitude and number. 2. The quality. 2. The condition
and qualification of their Teachers.
First, 1. The multitude and number of them.
this Heap of Teachers may be referred to their multitude or number, when they
are multiplied unnecessarily, and without cause, which is against the Rule of
common Reason; who though they have never so able and painful a Pastor of
their own, and a company of orthodox and faithful Ministers round about them,
yet not satisfied and content herewith, they admire and run agadding after
strangers: like unto silly Doves without heart, as the Prophet speaks of
Ephraim, Hosea 7.11. That forsake their own Dove-cote, and build in the next
Barn or Steeple. And herein they bewray a spiritual kind of covetousness, and
say of their Heap of Teachers, as he in the Poet of his full Bags and Chests,

Verum, dulce est de magno tollere acervo.

O! it is a pleasant thing to take whole handfulls out of a great heap.

Secondly, 2. The qualification and condition of them.
this Heap of Teachers may relate to their qualification and condition, when
there is a multiplication of such as are insufficient and unworthy. And so
Magis coacervatio est, si fiant quatuor indigni quam centum boni, Aquin. in loc.
Aquinas expounds the place, Then may it more properly be said to be an Heap of
Teachers, if there be four bad, than an hundred good.

There are three marks and characters of this Heap of Teachers 1. Young and
youthful Teachers. Three characters of them
2. Ignorant and unlearned Teachers. 3. False and flattering Teachers.


The first character of these Teachers, 1. The first characters, Young and
youthful Teachers.
they are young and youthful: A Bishop must not be a Novice, that is St.
Paul's charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.6. (...), he says not a young man, but a
Novice. A Plant that is new-set in the Nursery of the University, or the Garden
of the Church, that has not taken any deep rooting, nor grown up to any great
height; and so cannot bring forth much fruit. There is no building with green
and unseasoned Timber. And to lay the burden of the Pastoral charge upon the
shoulders of a Novice, is all Greg. de cura Pastor. part. 3. c. 16.
one, says Gregory, as to raise the Roof of an House upon the walls, while
they are yet green and tender; this is to build unto ruin, and to downfall the
whole Frame; and yet these Novice Teachers are the men, whom they most respect
and reverence, and are every way as inordinate in their loves and likings of
green years and green Heads, as women with child in their longings after green
fruit. For albeit youth is not to be despised, as St. Paul advises Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth. And the reason is given by Ignatius,
Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes.
(...), Then is not youth to be disdained, when it is devoted and dedicated
unto God, and seasoned with sanctity and holiness; yet nevertheless youth has
not that ballast of knowledge and learning that Bos lassus fortius fig it pedem.
Hieron. senex ad Aug. Juvenem. Aug. Ep. 13.1.
solid gravity and experience of elder years. And young Elihu was not mistaken,
when he thus thought and taught, Job 32.7. I said, Days should speak, and
multitude of years should teach wisdom. There is as great a difference betwixt
Age and Youth, as betwixt old and new Wine; and though new Wine be the more
brisk and sparkling, yet the old has the deeper color, and the greater
strength. And that Age is to be preferred before Youth we may learn from the
Parable of old and new Wine, Luke 5.39. No man having drunk old Wine,
straightway desires new: for he says, (...), The old is better.

A second character of this Heap of Teachers, 2. The second character, Ignorant
and unlearned Teachers.
They are ignorant and unlearned. A strange kind of Mothers, who bring forth
and give suck too, before they conceive. They teach what they never learned,
and are the Masters of the unlearned, ere that they ever were the Scholars of
the learned, as Nimium multi imperitorum Magistri fiunt, pr isquam fuerint
Doctorum Discipuli. Hieron. Ep. ^.
St. Hierom complains of too too many in his Time. And to make choice of such
kind of Teachers is to employ a lame Messenger, to command him to run, and at
the same time to cut off his Legs. It is the wise man's comparison, Prove. 26.6.
He that sends by the hand of a Fool, cutteth off the Feet. This is to make
use of blind Guides; and if the blind lead the blind, they will both fall
into the Ditch. Si Sacerdos est, sciat legem Domini, si ignoret legem Domini,
ipse arguit se non esse Sacerdotem Domini. Hier. super Agg. c. 2.
How can they prove good Seers, that want their eyes? Or afford light unto
others that are darkness themselves? as if darkness should bring forth light;
Et nox nocti indicaret scientiam, and night unto night should utter knowledge.
And of such Teachers as these, that Prophecy of Micah is verified and made
good, Micah 3.6. Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, (or prove
sound and able Divines) The Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day
shall be dark over them.

The third and last character of this Heap of Teachers, They are false and
flattering, 3. The third character, False and flattering Teachers.
who daub with untempered mortar, and parget a rotten Post, or a ruinous wall,
with a fair crust and outside, as deceitful Builders: and sow Pillows under
men's arm-holes, that they may sleep and snort more securely, Ezekiel. 13.10. That
Et quoniam mel in Dei sacrificiis non offertur, nimia dulcedo art mutata est,
and quadam piperis austeritate condita, ap ud Deum nil tantum suave placet,
nisi quod babet in se aliquid mordacis veritatis. Hieronym. de legal. sacrific.
sacrifice with Honey in stead of Salt; and offer Offerunt coccum, sed non bis
tinctum; non duplicatum. Origin. in Exodus
Red, but not Scarlet; the Dye of their words go not deep enough, but cocker,
and cherish, and sooth, and smooth men up in their sins; such were the Teachers
in Micah's time, and ours, and like unto parallel lines, they both go together,
Micah 2.11. If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood dody, he shall even be
the Prophet of this People.

The fourth general part, 4. The fourth part, The effect of the Disease.
is the Effect of the Disease, and that is double; wherein (as in every motion)
there are two Terms.

1. There is the Terminus a quo, [They shall turn away their Ears from the
Truth.] 2. There is the Terminus ad quem, [And shall be turned after Fables.]
There are two things considerable in every sin, 1. An aversion from God, an
immutable and unchangeable good. 2. And a conversion to the creature, a
flitting and a fading vanity: both these are very observable, and inseparably
joined together in the effects of this sin. They shall turn away their Ears
from the Truth; There is an aversion and falling off from God; and shall be
turned after Fables, that is a conversion or falling on to the creature. For as
there is no vacuum or emptiness in nature, but it is always replenished and
filled with some kind of Body, even so there is no vacuity of sin in the Soul:
and no sooner has the mind taken the leave, and bid Adieu unto the Truth, but
it is forthwith entertained and taken up with fond Fables, dangerous Doctrines,
(...), damnable Heresies, or Heresies of damnation, as St. Peter styles them,
To the denying of the Lord that bought them, in his several natures, as God and
Man; yea to the denying of each person in the blessed Trinity: and hereof the
present Times afford us most sad and woeful experieuce, wherein men having once
shaken hands with fundamental and saving Truths, they are immediately
proselyted and perverted to gross errors of all sorts and sizes, they turn
Anabaptists, Familists, Quakers, Ranters, and what not, and so bring upon
themselves quick destruction. And as this follows by a spiritual kind of
necessity, there being no vacuum in sin, no more than in nature; so it chiefly
comes to pass and takes effect through the just judgment of God, receiving in
themselves (...), That recompense of their error that was meet, as St. Paul
speaks of the Gentiles, Romans 1.27. And because they received not the love of
the Truth, that they might be saved, (...), for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they might believe a Lie. As the same Apostle tells the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. They that will not believe this Truth, are
justly given over to believe (...), That great and prodigious Lie of
Antichristian Doctrine. And Quia nox faciunt bona quae cognoscunt, non
cognoscunt mala quae faciunt. August.
seeing they do not the good which they know, they are so seduced by the spirit
of ignorance and error, that they shall not know the evil that they do.

But if any demand and ask concerning the time, when their Disease shall be in
the Paroxysm, 5. The time of the Disease, the fifth part of the Text.
in the full heat and height, and propound the Disciples question touching the
destruction of Jerusalem, Matthew. 24.3. Tell us when shall these things be? St.
Paul shall answer the question out of the Text, For the time shall come. This
he spoke full sixteen hundred years ago, and what was then a Prophecy and a
Prediction of a thing to come, is now a History and a Relation of what is past.
And I may a little alter St. Paul's words, and turn his (...) into (...), The
time shall come, into The time is come, and apply and take up our Saviors
words to his Countrymen at Nazareth, Luke 4.21. This day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your ears. And it may be there are some Readers that will make
good St. Paul's Prophecy, and will not endure sound Doctrine, either Text or
Sermon. Like unto those of the Popish party, Joan. Manl. Collect.
whom the Friar justly reproved, and told him plainly of it, That the Truth he
preached was like Holy Water which every one desired and called for with a
great deal of earnestness; yet when the Sexton cast it on them, and sprinkled
them therewith, they would turn their backs upon it. And if there be any such,
let them make inquiry and narrow search into the cause of the Disease, and look
to their lusts. Let them see if there be not in them, a lust of proud
ignorance, or wanton curiosity, or sordid covetousness. Let them examine and
try it by the several signs and symptoms, The Itch of the Ear, and the heaping
to themselves Teachers, young and youthful Teachers, ignorant and unlearned
Teachers, false and flattering Teachers: and let them take heed and beware in
the last place of the lamentable effects of it, They shall turn away their Ears
from the Truth, and shall be turned after Fables.

But in case men will not endure sound Doctrine, The application.
must the Ministers of God prove mealy-mouthed, and be as men in whose mouths
there are no reproofs. Or shall they take up the Prophet Jeremy's resolution,
Jer. 20.9. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in
his Name. Nay rather, let them attend and observe Ezekiel's charge, Ezekiel. 2.7.
And thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear, for they are most rebellious. The Word of God must be
spoken, and sounded forth both from the Pulpit and the Press, whether men will
hear, Men's boni studii ac pii voti, etiamsi effectum non invenerit coepti
operis, habet tamen praemium voluntatis. Salvian. de Gubern. Dei Praefat.
or whether they will forbear; and so much the rather, when men stop their
ears, and turn their backs upon it. If the Iron be blunt, there must be put to
more strength, Eccles. 10.10. The more Gravissimus nodus in ligno non potest
expelli nisi gravissimo oppressorio. Ambrose.
knotty and cross-grained the Timber is, the more sharp and strong must the
Wedges be, and the forcible blows must be redoubled and repeated; and the more
thwart and opposite men declare themselves unto sound Doctrine, the Ministers
of God must be the more importunate and vehement in the pressing and urging of
it: that is the ground of the Apostles exhortation in the words before the
Text, and is noted out unto us in the Particle [For] the first word of the
Text. Preach the Word, Be instant in season, and out of season, Reprove,
Rebuke, Exhort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2. For the time
will come, that they will not endure sound Doctrine. And it is a strange kind
of [For;] as if the Apostle should argue in this manner, Seeing men stop their
ears like the deaf Adder, Cry aloud and spare not, and cause them to hear
whether they will or no: and being fallen into a spiritual Lethargy, a deep and
dead sleep, labor to awaken and to arowze them up: and since Mundus senescens
patitur Phantasias. Gerson. contra superstitiosos.
in this fancy-full Age of the World men are wholly given over to Dreams and
Dotages, employ and improve both power and parts to the utmost of your ability
to disabuse and undeceive them of their errors.

And give me leave to apply it to my Brethren of the Ministry, The conclusion.
and to speak it home to my self and others in the Apostles words, Preach the
Word, Be instant in season, out of season, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, with all
long-suffering and Doctrine. And the reason is here rendered in the words of the
Text, For the Time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but
after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be turned
after Fables.

FINIS.

