THE LAVVFULNES Of obeying the Present Government.

Proposed By one that loves all Presbyterian lovers of Truth and Peace, and is
of their Communion.

JOHN 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.

Printed at London for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1649.

The lawfulness of obeying the present Government.
A Declaration has been lately published, wherein the grounds are expressed of
settling the present Government, with which if any be not so far satisfied as to
think that settlement lawful, yet even to such is this Discourse directed,
which proposes Proofs, that though the change of a Government were believed
not to be lawful, yet it may lawfully be obeyed.

THe Apostle entreating of purpose upon the duty of submission and obedience to
Authority, lays down this precept; Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God; the powers that are, are ordained of God; and hereupon infers, Wherefore
ye must needs be subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. And that
he speaks not in this place merely of power or authority abstracted from
persons, Potestatis nomine, intelligo Magistratum, qui est cum potestate and
autoritate, maluit tamen Apostolus ipsam potestatem nominare quam hominem etc.
Rolloc. in locum. 1. Tim. 2.2.
but of persons clothed with that authority, appears in that he says; For,
rulers are not a terror to good works. So that he speaks of persons ruling,
as well as of the power by which they rule. And again, He is the Minister of
God, and they are Gods Ministers; and accordingly he directs Timothy, to pray
for a blessing upon those that are in authority. Now if the Powers, Rulers, and
those that were in authority in that time were ordained of God, and were to be
obeyed for conscience sake, let us consider how lawfully they came into that
power, rule, and authority. This Epistle most probably, if not certainly, was
written in the time of Claudius Caesar, or Nero, Acts 18.1, 2.
the former of which banished the Jews out of Rome, upon which occasion Aquila
and Priscilla came out to meet with Paul at Corinth: and by the sentence of the
latter, Paul having made his appeal to Caesar finished his course, and passed
unto a crown of righteousness. And now, behold the lawfulness by which these
two persons came to be invested in their power and authority. Timore caedis
exterritus prorepsit ad solarium proximum, interque praetenta foribus velase
abdidit; latentem, discurrens forte gregarius ^^iles animadversis pedibus, e
studio sciscitandi quisnam esset, agnovit, extractumque and praemetu ad genua
sibi accidentem, Imperatorem, salutavit. Hinc ad alios commilitones
fluctuanies, nec quio quam adhuc quam frementes perduxit. Ab his lecticae
impositus, and quia servi diffugerant, vicissim succollantibus, in castra
delatus est, tristis ac trepidus miserante obvia ^u^ba, quasi ad paenam
raperetur insons. Receptus intra vallum, inter excubias militum pernoctavit,
aliquanto minore spe quam fiducia. Nam Consule cum Senatu, and cohortibus
urbanis forum capitoliumque occuparunt, asseriuri comunem libertatem, accitusq,
and ipse per Tribunum plebis in curiam ad suadenda quae viderentur, vi se and
necessitate teneri respondit. Verum postero die Senatu segriore in exequendis
conatibus per raedium ac dissentionem diversa censentium, and multitudine quae
circumstabat, umum rectorem jam and nominatim exposcente, armator pro concione
jurare in nomen suum passus est, promisitque singulis quinadena H.S. primus
Casarum fidem militis, etiam praemio pigneratus. Sueton in Claudio. Agrippina
velut dolor victa, and solatia conquirens, tenere amplexu Britannicum veram
paterni oris effigiem appellare, etc. Antoniam quoque and Octaviam attinuit,
and cunctos aditus custodiis clauserat, crebroque vulgabat ire in melius
valetudinem principis, quo miles bona in spe ageret, tempusque prosperum ex
monitis Chaldaeorum attentaret. Tunc medio dici, tertio ante idus Octobr.
foribus palatii repent diductis, comitante Burrho, Nero egreditur ad cohortem,
quae more militia excubiis adest, ubi monente praefecto, festis vocibus
exceptus, inditur lecticae. Dubitavisse quosdam ferunt respectantes
rogitantesque ubi Britannicus esset? Mox nullo in diversum auctore, quae
offerrebantur secuti sunt. Illatusque castris Nero, and congruentia tempori
praefatus, promisso donativo ad exemplum paternae largitionis Imperator
consalutatur. Sententiam militum secura patrum consulta, nec dubitatum est apud
provincias. Tacit. Annal. Lib. 12.


Of Claudius Caesar the Story tells us this; After the death of Caius Caligula,
the Consuls and Senate of Rome entered into a consultation, how they might
restore the Commonwealth to her ancient freedom, which by the Caesar's had been
taken from them. So that the taking in of an Emperor, and consequently of
Claudius for Emperor, was directly against the wills and resolution of the
Consuls and Senate; yet these anciently for many hundred years had the chief
power of Government; But see the way of Claudius his coming to the Empire;
during the Interregnum, Claudius being frighted with the news of Caligula's
death, and fearing himself might be enquired for upon suspicion withdrew, and
hid himself behind the Hangings, or covering of a door; where a Soldier
seeing his feet, and desirous to know what he was drew him forth, and upon
knowledge of him saluted him Emperor, though even then for fear falling down
low before him. This one Soldier brought him forth to his fellow Soldiers,
who lifted him up as Emperor; and thus while the Senate was slow in executing
their purposes, and differences grew among them, Claudius, who was sent for by
the Senate to give in his council concerning the common freedom, undertook
the Empire. Thus in one Soldier at first, and then in more, was the foundation
of Claudius his Imperial power, against the will, consultations, and
endeavors of Consuls and Senate. And for Nero (his Successor) Britannicus, who
was nearer of kin to Claudius, being his Son, was kept in by the cunning of
Neroes mother, and by the same craft Nero being brought forth to the Soldiery,
was first saluted Emperor by them. This sentence of the Soldiers was followed
with the consent of the Senate, and then it was not scrupled in the Provinces;
so that the Soldiery was also the foundation of Neroes Empire. Thus we see
Rulers put by Soldiers into that power which is said by the Scripture to be
ordained of God; and even to these Rulers men must be subject for conscience.

But passing from the Roman state to our own; sure we are that in this Nation
many persons have been settled in supreme power and authority by mere force
without title of inheritance, or just conquest. And it has been observed by
some that accurately have looked into our story, that not any three immediately
succeeding each other, came to the Crown by true lineall succession and order
of blood. Neither is there any great difficulty in finding it, until we come
to Queen Mary, whose title being by an incestuous marriage, these observers
say that Queen Elizabeth should have reigned in her stead; However, we are
clearly told by story, that five Kings on a row (of which the Conquer was the
first) had no title at all by lineall descent and proximity of blood. The first
came in by force; The second and third had an elder Brother living when they
came to the Crown; The fourth reigned when his Predecessor had a Daughter, and
Heir living which was Mawd the Empress; The fifth being the Son of that
Empress, reigned while his Mother was alive, by whom his Title came. But
leaving these, and Edward the third who reigned in his Fathers life time, and
the three Henry's; fourth, fifth, and sixth, who reigned upon the Lancastrian
(that is a younger Brothers) Title, Let us more particularly consider Henry the
seventh; See Speed in H. 7. ^. 1. and Seq.
This Henry came in with an Army, and by mere power was made King in the Army,
and by the Army; so that in the very field where he got the Victory, the Crown
was set upon his head, and there he gave Knighthood to diverse; And upon this
foundation of military power, he got himself afterward to be solemnly
Crowned at Westminster. And soon after upon authority thus gotten, he called a
Parliament, and in that Parliament was the Crown entailed upon him and his
Heirs. Thus both his Crown and his Parliament were founded upon power; As for
any right Title, he could have none; for he came from a Bastard of John of
Gaunt, which though legitimated by Parliament for common Inheritances, yet
expressly was excluded from right to the Crown. And for his wives Title, that
came in after his Kingship, and his Parliament, which before had settled the
Crown upon him and his Heirs. And he was so far from exercising authority in
her right, that her name is not used in any Laws as Queen Mary's was, both
before and after her marriage with the Spanish King. Now this and the rest who
came in by mere power without Title of inheritance, being in their opinion who
are now unsatisfied, to be held unlawful, yet the maine body of this Nation
did obey them, whilst they ruled, yea does yield subjection to their Laws to
this very day. And the learned in the Laws do continually plead, judge,
justify, and condemn according to these Laws; So that herein the very voice
of the Nation with one consent seems to speak aloud; That those whose Title
is held unlawful, yet being possessed of authority may lawfully be obeyed.

And hereunto Divines and Casuists give their concurrence; among them one that
is resolute both for Monarchy and lineall Succession, thus expresses his
judgment, both for seeking of right and justice from an usurper (whom he
calls a Tyrant, in regard of an unjust Title, not in respect of Tyranicall
oppression) and for obeying his commands. Dicendum est, licite subditos ab eo
(qui tyrannus jure and titulo est) jus petere, quia quamvis jus and titulum non
habeat, respublica tamen tacit consentit in hoc ut civibus ipsi Tyranno,
Facto, non jure subditis, jus dicat, acsi esset competens judex and legitimus
superior. Item, si mandata tyranni sint aqua, and justa, parendum est. Azor.
Inst. Mor. Par. 2. Lib. 10. Cap 4. Non peccat subditus tyranni, qui dominium
and jurisdictionem alicujus ditienis usurpavit, petendo ab eo justitia
administrationem, etc. Siquidem dat operam ut qui peccat jurisdictionem
usurpando, non peccet etiam justitiae administrationem praetermittendo; Ex
Navarrie manual. cap. 14. ^. 41.

Si mandata principis, alioqui Tyranni, sint aequa et justa, parendum est.
Alsted, Theol. Cas. Cap. 17.


First, that Subjects may lawfully seek justice of him; And secondly, that if
his commands be lawful and just, they must be obeyed. And another well
esteemed in the Reformed Churches, is of the same judgment.

Paraeus says, Civilem and herilem expresso verbo sancit. Genesis 9.

Qui sanguinem hominis fuderit, ejus sa guis etiam fundetur ab homine. Non
utique a quovis; prohiburt enim, non occides: Sed a Magistratu divinitus
ordinato. Nec refert quibus modis vel artibus Nimrod, Jeroboam, aut alii regna
sibi paraverint. Nam aliud est potestas quae a Deo est; aliud acquisitio et
uius potestatis. Parae. in Romans 13.

Posestatis Himrodi initrium fuit quidum malum etc. Quum igitur quaeritur cui
parendum, non est spectandum qualis sic qui potestarem exercei, nec quo jure
vel injuria, quis potestatam in^serit, quave ratione came administres, sed
tantum si potestatem habeat. Si enim quis potestate po^et iam i^^^bilatum est
illum a deo cem potestatem accepisse, unde sine onmi exceptione illi te
permittat oportes, and pareas ex animo.


That it matters not by what means or craft Nimrod, Jerobeam, got Kingdoms to
themselves; For the power is one thing which is of God, and the getting and the
use of the power is another; And after: The beginning of Nimrods power was
indeed evil, as to the getting and usurping power, because abusing his
strength, force, and wealth, he violently subdued others, and compelled them to
obey; but not the power or force wherewith he seemed to be indeed by God, above
others; And another more plainly. When a question is made whom we should obey;
it must not be looked at what he is that exercises the power, or by what right
or wrong he has invaded the power, or in what manner he does dispense it, but
only if he have power. For if any man do excel in power, it is now out of
doubt, that he received that power of God; wherefore without all exception thou
must yield thy self up to him, and heartily obey him.

And indeed how can it be otherwise? for when a person or persons have gotten
Supreme power, and by the same excluded all other from authority, either that
authority which is thus taken by power must be obeyed, or else all authority
and government must fall to the ground; and so confusion (which is worse then
tituler Tyranny) be admitted into a Commonwealth; And (according to the
doctrine of King James) the King being for the Commonwealth, and not the
Commonwealth for the King, the end should be destroyed for the means, the
whole for a part. If a Masters mate had thrown the Master over Board, and by
power would suffer no other to guide the Ship but himself; if the Mariners
will not obey him commanding aright for the safe guiding of the Ship, the Ship
must needs perish and themselves with it. And whereas some speak of a time for
setlement, they indeed do rather speak for a time of unsetlement; for they will
have an unsetlement first, and a setlement after. And whereas like does produce
its like; yet they would have an unsetlement to beget a setlement. They would
have confusion, distraction, destruction to bring forth order and safety. But
the former Scriptures speak not of the future, but of the present time; not of
obeying those that shall be powers, and shall be in authority; but the powers
that are, and those that are in authority. Neither do the Casuists and Divines
speak of obedience to those that shall be settled but those that are in actual
possession of authority. Neither did our Ancestors in the former examples defer
obedience to the Kings that came in by power without Title; but gave it
presently, being presently vested and possessed of authority. Besides, let it
be considered whether that may not be called a setlement, how soon soever it
is when there is such a way settled that men may have Justice if they will, and
may enjoy that maine end of Magistracy, to live a peaceable life in godliness
and honesty.

And indeed when one is in possession by power, and another pretends a Title,
what can the maine body of a Nation, which consists of the Common People do in
this case? What Right had William surnamed the Conqueror? what Right (we
speak of a Right of equity) had his Sons William the second, and Henry the
first, while their elder brother lived, etc. Parliaments as Kingdoms, give
their voice with power; and he who has the force does commonly carry the
effect of Right. Speed in H. 4. The King ( H. 7.) made speed to London as to
the chief seat and Epitome of the English Monarchy etc. The Mayor of London
and his Fellowship received him in Violet at Hornesey Park; but his entrance
(which was at Shorditch) was honored with a very great troop of the Peers
and Nobles in his Train, etc. The whole House of Parliament concurring finally
in establishing by a solemn Act, the Crown upon him and his Heirs for ever.
Id. in H. 7.
They cannot judge of Titles; but thy see who does visibly and actually
exercise power and authority. Yea even Learned men, and States men have been
found ignorant of the former observations, of the not succeeding three in order
of blood since the Conquest; and then how should the Common people know it? Yet
further, even Peers, chief Cities, Parliaments, and all having to one in
every three, thus subjected themselves upon terms of power and not of right;
what can be expected but that what has been done, may or should be done
hereafter? especially when in this present age obedience is given to the Laws
and Commands of those Princes? But some say that there are Oaths that justify
disobedience to the present Government. Surely Oaths are sacred bonds and
reverent obligements, and where they do not themselves leave or make us free,
we are not to cut or break them in pieces; Yet concerning these there are
faults on both hands: On the one side the slighting of an Oath, (and such is
the comparing it with an Almanac) which is a light as well as an unproper
comparison; except it were such an Oath as was made only for a year; But we
find some part of the Vow and Covenant to speak of all the days of our
lives, which doubtless may lie on many of the takers for many years; True it
is that the obligation of some things may end, because they can no longer be
kept, as that of the Kings person; Regula juris. Im ssibilium nulla est
obligatio.
for to impossible things there is no obligation: but will any man that
understands, and savours Religion and Piety, say that the clauses which
concern Religion and Piety are expired? Did we promise to God in our several
places and callings, to extripate Profaneness, Heresy, and Blasphemy, and to
endeavor a reformed life in our selves and ours; only till our Enemies were
overcome, and then to make an end? What were this but to say unto God, If thou will deliver us, we will be bound to thee till we are delivered and no longer?
Would this invite God to deliver us from our enemies, or rather to keep our
Enemies still in strength against us? least we being delivered from our Enemies
should not serve him in righteousness and holiness all our lives. Surely this
is too like that course of carnal Israel, of whom it is written, Psalm. 78.34.
When he slew them, then they sought him, and they enquired early after God;
but their heart, was not right with him, neither were they stestfad in his
Covenant. Much more piously and faithfully a reverend and truly spiritual
Divine; A well grounded Covenant is a sure, Mr. Carill in his Sermon upon Nehe.
9.38. concerning the Covenant. October. 6. 1643.
a firm and an irrevocable Act. When you have such an All This (and such you
have) as is here concentred in the Text, to lay into, or for the foundation of
the Covenant; the superstruction (as aeternitati sacrum and) must stand for
ever.

But on the other side there are other faults; such are the urging of an Oath
or Covenant against enemies, and not against friends in one and the same
Action; and if not altogether so, yet a slight and diminishing charge of it
upon one, and a vehement and aggravating charge of it upon the other. Another
fault may be, a stiff insisting on one part, and a neglect, or at least
silence in another part; as likewise when by event two parts of it come to be
inconsistent, to choose and enforce the keeping of the lighter or less
necessary part, and to give way to the loss and not keeping of the greater.
There is another, in racking an Oath or Covenant, to make it speak that which
it meant not. And here it were good to consider, whether there be any clause in
any Oath or Covenant, which in a fair and common sense forbids obedience to
the commands of the present Government and Authority, much less when no other
can be had, and so the Commonwealth must go to ruin. Quando res illa, quam
quis juramento confirmavit, est nimis ard^a; aut quando quis qui j^^^vit, ex
muta^^^ virium vel fortuna, effectus est pa^um aptus ad id exequendum; aut
denique quando res juramento confirmata est jucanti, impedimenio, ne bo^^
publico consulat, tunc est legitima cause dispensanti in juramento. Sayr. lib.
5. c. 8. n. 12.
And whether it forbids obedience to the present Authority more then to Laws
that have been formerly enacted, by those which came into Authority merely by
power? Si id quod juramus, primo fuerit licitum, postea causis aliis
intervenientibus illicitum fiat, aut etiam impossible, tum nullo modo
conscientiam obligat. Alsted. Theol. Cas. cap. 15.
If it be said that in the Oath of Allegiance, Allegiance is sworn to the
King, his Heirs, and Successors, if His Heirs be not His Successors, how does
that Oath bind? either the word Successors must be superfluous, or else it
must bind to Successors as well as to Heirs; and if it binds not to a
Successor, that is not an Heir, how can it bind to an Heir that is not a
Successor? And if you will know the common and usual sense (which should be
the meaning of an Oath) of the word Successors, Jusjurandum in foro
conscientiae semper est interpretandum juxta mentem jurantis; at in foro
exteriori seu judiciali semper est judicandum secundum communem sensum, quem
ipsa verbae reddunt, and secundum communem hominum usum. Alsted. cap. 15. n. 13.
you need not so much ask of Lawyers and learned persons, as of men of
ordinary knowledge, and demand of them, Who was the Successor of William the
Conqueror, and see whether they will not say, William Rufus; and who succeeded
Richard the third, and whether they will not say Henry the seventh? and yet (as
it appears before) neither of them was Heir. So it seems in the ordinary
acception, the word Successor is taken for him that actually succeeds in
Government, and not for him that is actually excluded. And as in Language the
ordinary acception of a word is to be taken for the meaning, so that meaning is
to be understood as most proper to have been taken in an Oath.

Yet withal this Quaere may be added; While the Son is in the same posture in
which the Father was, how comes this Oath at this time to stand up and plead
for disobedience in regard of the Son, that was asleep and silent in regard of
the Father?

Thus have I gone toward peace (as I believe) in the way of truth; and as
far as it is truth, and no further, I desire it may be received. I also wish
that those who read and examine it, may do it (as I profess sincerely my
self to have endeavored) with a calm, clear, and peaceable spirit, without
prejudice or partiship. And I doubt not but to such upright seekers of Truth,
Truth will appear in a true shape; whereas partial and prejudiced minds
speak unto Truth what they would have her speak unto them, and do not hear
her what she says of her self.

FINIS.

