The Royal FUNERAL: OR, THE Mourning State and Solemnity OF THE FUNERAL OF
MARY, Queen of ENGLAND, etc.
Who was Intered at Westminster, on the Fifth of March, 1695.
To the Tune of, Hopes Farewell, etc.
Licensed and Entered according te Order.

HEre I write a sorrowful Ditty,
for all the Protestant Nation to read,
Which must needs be moved with Pity,
for every Heart has just reason to bleed;
Death's cruel Spleen, assaulted the Queen,
When she in the hight of her Glory was seen;
Septer and Ball, Crown, Throne and all,
She now has forsaken, behold her Funeral!
Lords, and likewise Ladies of Honor,
while Queen Mary she was lying in State,
In their Mourning they waited upon Her,
their Grief and Sorrow no Tongue can relate;
Death's cruel Dart, has pierced the Heart
Of our Royal Queen Mary, and forced her to part,
With Crown and Ball, Throne, Septer and all,
Let Protestant Subjects behold her Funeral!
On the Twentieth Eight of December
our most Religious Queen Mary she died,
At which time the Church a dear Member
did lose, for which we in Grief do abide;
The Courtly Train, do weep and complain,
For to see the last Per^od of her Royal Reign;
Septer and Ball Throne Crown and all,
Queen Mary has left, for behold her Funeral!
Mourn ye Sons and Daughters of Sion,
O mourn in Sable and sorrowful Tears,
Good Queen Mary whom we did rely on,
is snatched from us in the prime of her Years:
Many a Day in State she lay,
From whence they conveyed her to Lodgins of Clay:
Septer and Ball, Throne, Crown and all,
Queen Mary has left, for behold her Funeral!
Now that Sweet and Heavenly Creature
lies close confined in a Coffing of Lead;
Death's sharp Arrows severely did treat her,
without respect to a Queen's Crowned Head;
Both High and Low must suffer the Blow,
For Death in full power no Pity will show:
Septer and Ball, Throne Crown and all,
Queen Mary has left, for behold her Funeral!
This Good Queen her Mercies extended
to all her Subjects of every Degree,
So that when her Days they were Ended,
no Queen was ever so Lamented as She;
Both Rich and Poor, the Nation all over,
Did weep, but no Sorrow her Life could restore:
Septer and Ball, Throne Crown and all,
Queen Mary has left, for behold her Funeral!
Now the Abbey is shadowed with Mourning,
and with the darkest of Sable all round;
See how Things are changing and turning,
for there Queen Mary in Triumph was Crowned;
Now in the room of pleasant Perfume,
She lies close confined in a cold silent Tomb:
Septer and Ball, Throne, Crown and all,
Queen Mary has left, for behold her Funeral!
World thy chiefest Honors are flying,
there is nothing lasting amongst us we find;
Crowned Heads are subject to Dying,
they leave their Trophies of Honor behind;
Flourish they may, yet Time will decay,
And blast Earthly Glory, though never so gay:
Septer and Ball, Throne, Crown and all,
Queen Mary has left, for behold her Funeral!
London: Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street, without
Newgate.


