Astrologia accusata pariter and Condemnata. OR THE DIABOLICAL ART OF Judicial
Astrology, RECEIVING THE DEFINITIVE SENTENCE OF FINAL CONDEMNATION: BEING
Delivered in this following Discourse, where the said Art is briefly and
manifestly opened, justly arraigned, diligently examined, and experimentally
condemned by him, who was a Student in the same.

Omnis planta quam non plantavit Pater ille meus coelestis, eradicabitur.
Matthew. 15.13. By JOHN RAUNCE, Sometime a practitioner of Astrology, and
Student in the Magic Art.

LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes, for W. Learner, at the Blackmore in
Bishopsgate-streete, 1650.

The Preface to the Reader.
READER,
MY desire is in this short Treatise, to disclose a part of my mind unto thee,
concerning Judicial Astrology, and if it might be, to persuade thee, not to
spend thy short and precious time, in the study and practice of this abominable
Art; for I have been a Student in this very Art, against which I now write:
also I was not quiet, nor at peace in my mind, until such time as I had seen
all the secrets of the same. Now the time being come, in which I had attained
unto my hearts desire, then did I blindly rejoice in my condition, and thought
with my self, that I had now gotten the knowledge of that, which would for ever
make me wise: thus having attained unto my Hearts desire, and being in my
youthful Age, I here withheld no knowledge from my self, which might seem to
give my mind content: So I mounting from degree to degree, upon the slippery
scale of curiosity, at length I came to the height of uncertain principles;
which when I was thus high gone, yet here found no resting place, wherefore I
beholding that there was more then I yet understood, then did I here seek for
the knowledge of those things also, the knowledge of which things was not from
me withheld. Now I having gone to the ground of Astrology, I could then
dispute of the events of things, etc. Lo here I did vainly glory in my self,
as if that by the greatness of my Art, and the quickness of my ingenuity, made
a Conquest of Plutoes Dominion. But this vain conceit of mine, did not continue
long; for when I was in the prime of my practice, the Lord God from Heaven
confounded my wisdom, and destroyed all my Babylonian skill. Now my Reader, it
may be here thou do expect the story of my conversion from my diabolical
practices, but I shall say very little of that at this time; for all that I
shall declare of it at present, is only thus, viz. when I was in the prime of
my diabolical ways, one day I being in my study, very earnest in searching out
the cause of future events: at this very time, when I thought my self to be at
peace, and in a happy condition, then came the Lord God in a terrible voice
into my heart, and wheresoever I became for many days after, I continually
heard this most doleful sound in my mind, viz. After all such things only
wicked men seek. And as I heard this voice sounding in my heart, so also I had
my Conscience accusing me, that I was one of those wicked men, because I did
spend my precious time in searching out the cause of those things which no man
can attain unto, but by diabolical Learning. Wherefore my Reader, it is not
without cause, that I have taken upon me to declare the vileness of
Astrological Predictions. For if I am raised up by the Lord God, to be an
Instrument to gainsay and withstand the Art of Astrology, then assuredly I
shall be able, to stand before the faces of the Astrologers, to witness that
which here I have delivered. Moreover, I say unto all persons whatsoever,
before whom this Book of mine shall come, how that I have not gone rashly nor
inconsiderately to work, in that I have taken in hand to declare against that
wicked Art of Judicial Astrology: Also I say I would them to know, that I have
set my self down seriously to consider, what it would cost me at the highest
price, which if the worst come, I know what I have to do. And as for the scoffs
and jeeres of all my Antagonists, or any other whatsoever, I say their scoffing
and jeering is no more to me, then the dirt that does hang on my shoes; which
dirt at my pleasure, I can shake off, when and where I please. Now if any man
be unsatisfied in what I have here written, against the said Art of Judicial
Astrology, because I do deny the said Art to be lawful. Therefore I say unto
all such men, that if they can prove Astrology a lawful Art by sounder and
better Arguments grounded upon the Scripture and reason, then it is here, or
can elsewhere by me be denied, then am I willing to submit, and so for the
present farewell,

JOHN RAUNCE, Of the Borough of Chipping Wickham, in the County of Buckingham.
From my Study November 8. 1650,
The Prological Oration of the Author, to all Practitioners of Astrology, and
unto all other Persons whatsoever, that are lovers of the same.
BEhold you vain Astrologers
who gazing on the Sky,
Search out the motions of the Stars
for to Divine thereby;
Of the particular events
and ends of things which are,
Known by the name of contingents
which no Art can declare;
Whose Rules are only natural
and are contained within
The bounds of learning liberal,
which is without all sin.
Where will you then a resting place
for this vain Art out find,
That so it may not have disgrace
being numbered with the kind
Of wicked and ungodly Arts,
which are both vain and ill,
And does reside in rotten hearts
for to fulfill their will.
For all such men as do profess
and folks which seek this skill,
All such the Devil does possess
made Captives at his will?
When born their Child, then suddenly
the hour must be sought;
And so they think to know thereby
It Is fortune good or naught.
Or if on them does fall some loss,
contrary to their will,
Then from some Planet came that cross
who was not good but ill.
Also if God on them does lay
for sin some sore Disease,
Then presently they send away
to Ekrons God for ease.
Or if they fear their time is nigh,
Astrologers they send,
To know if then they needs must dye
and may not more amend.
Even as King Ahaziah, who
when on his bed did lie,
To Baal-zebub (said he) now go,
and ask when I shall dye.
And now then my own Countrymen,
my council see you take,
Consider what your Art is then,
and from your sin awake.
Let no man say I here dispute
contrary to my mind
As if I here were destitute,
and this way would it find.
For I my self have sometime been
a Student in this skill,
All secrets in it I have seen
to satisfy my will.
Now to the Lord be all the praise
who of his own free grace,
Has brought me from my wicked ways
and set me in this place;
That so I should a witness be
against these wicked Arts,
As here it is set forth by me
to the grief of your hearts.
JOHN RAUNCE.

A DISCOVRSE AGAINST Judicial Astrology.
CHAPTER I. Of Judicial Astrology, what it is, the original of it, who was the
Author thereof, by what Names or Titles the Professors of it are called, and
their Profession what it promises.
FOr as much as I have taken in hand, to set forth to the view of my
Countrymen, the nature of that Art which is known by the name of Judicial
Astrology, that now my Doctrine may be understood of all men; What Astrology
that is, which is by the Author called Judicial Astrology.
I think it convenient here to set forth in few words, what I mean by Judicial
Astrology, which is briefly thus defined, viz. by Judicial Astrology I
understand Astrological Predictions, in which the Astrologer does foretell the
particular events of things belonging to man. For as much as it is my desire,
that my Antagonists may know and understand my mind plainly: See my Declaration
against Astrology, Page 2. line 2. 3. 4.
therefore I declare that this aforesaid Art of Judicial Astrology, is a
secret diabolical Divination, as it is elsewhere by me divulged. Moreover, I do
affirm the said Art of Astrology, to be full of Idolatry and superstition, and
is contrary unto the Scripture, as I shall here manifest and prove to all
rational men, whom I desire well to consider this first, Note here
viz. That no Astrologer can or is able (according to the Rules of their said
Art) to predict or foretell the event or end of any particular thing belonging
unto man, but by their superstitious and Idolatrous observing and regarding of
time, that this regarding of time is (as I have said) superstition and
Idolatry, is evident from the words of the Scripture to be seen, Deuteronomy. 18.10.11.
in Deuteronomy. 18.10.11. verses. You may there find many unlawful things rehearsed
and condemned for abominable and wicked practices; amongst which unlawful
observations, there is also named this wicked Art of observing of time, in
these words; Let none be found among you that is a regarder of times: Note.
here is to be noted, how that all observing and regarding of time is here
forbidden and condemned, Eccles. 3. chap. from the 1. verse to the 8. verse.
which is not agreeable to the Scripture: now whereas Solomon says, there is
an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under Heaven. A time to be born,
and a time to die, etc. Solomon does not here say, that one time is better then
another to be born in; nor that one time is worse then another to die in; again
he says, there is a time to love, and a time to hate, a time of War, and a
time of peace. Yet he does not say, that Men and Women do either love or hate
each other, according to the several dispositions of the significators of their
Nativities. Neither does Solomon say that Wars and Peace proceed of, or from
the conjunction of the Planets: nor yet that one time is better to go to war
in then another, because of the positious of the Stars. Now we may see how
that Solomon says, and so with him all other wise men, that there is an
appointed time for every thing under the whole Heaven. The sayings of this wise
man Solomon, are agreeable to the mind and will of God revealed in the
Scripture; for the Scripture does evidently hold forth unto us, that there is a
time for all things to be accomplished and finished in; but in no one place of
the Scripture is it said, that one time is better then another, according to
the Stars, or the positions of the Heavens, for to do the aforesaid things:
wherefore we may clearly behold our Astrology what it is; for take from it
that which the word of God does forbid and condemn, and then it will be of no
worth to the Astrologers, because it will then appear to be a beggarly Art,
that has no resting or abiding place, in any part of good learning. But to
return to our matter again, I say, that Astrology is an unlawful Art, Of the
observing of time, the first thing why Astrology is unlawful. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 10.
11. 14.
and ought not to be practiced in a Christian Commonwealth.

First, because the thing without which Astrology, cannot be practiced, is by,
and in the Scripture plainly forbidden and condemned: now this thing is the
regarding of times, which you may see, is positively condemned in the 18.
Chapter of Deuteronomy. v. 10. Let none be found among you that is a regarder of
times. Now that the name Astrology is not here named I confess; but that the
practice of Astrology is here condemned, is evident from what I have, and
shall set forth against the said Art. In the next place I will declare to the
World (so far as I know) who was the first inventer of Astrology, that so
they, who are ignorant of this secret Art, The original of Astrology, who was
the Inventor of it.
may understand from whence it came, and who was the Author of it, and thereby
they may the better judge of its illegality, according to the judgments of many
very learned men: the invention of Astrology is attributed to the Devils;
wherefore I have for the witnessing of the said position, the Authority of that
learned man, G. Carleton, Bishop of Chichester, whose words are these, viz.
vide. Astrologomania, fol. 57. Tertul. Lib. de Idololatria. Origin. Hom. 13.
The first Invention of Astrology, is by many learntd men attributed to the
Devils. With whom agree the sayings of many ancient Writers, as Tertullian,
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Lactantius, with others who shall be mentioned in
their proper places: hereupon it is apparent from what these Authors have
written in their own works, that Astrology is by them condemned for a wicked
Art, whose original is from the Devils, and therefore is not fit to be suffered
in a Commonwealth, much less in and amongst those, who are Christians and
Professors of the Gospel; St. August. Lib. de Doc. Chr. Aug. Lib. de not.
Demon.
for as Augustine says, it is a great madness and folly to go about to tell by
the Stars, the manners, actions, and events of men; which says he, true
Christian piety expels and condemns. Also the same Author affirms, that
it is not lawful for any Christian to cast Nativities. These things which are
here alleged out of Augustine, (I think) are able to satisfy any rational man,
that Astrology is a wicked Art, because as he himself confesses in his book
of Confessions, Chamber. ex August.
that he was of that ungodly society of Astrologers, for his words are these,
viz. Now also I had renounced the false Predictions of Astrologers, whom
Christian and true piety expels and condemns: the Astrologers cannot say
(except they will lie) that this great Doctor, and ancient Father St. Augustine
writ against Astrology, through the weakness of his learning; nor can they say
that he condemned their Art, because he did not know it; but we find that he
speaks against the said Art, because he had experience of its unsoundness. In
the nexr place, I suppose it is convenient to say a little of the Names and
Titles of the professors of this said Art of Judicial Astrology, they are
called or known by there names, Names belonging unto the Astrologers, both in
English and Latin.
viz. Astrologers, Prognosticators, Almanack-makers, Figure-flingers, Wisemen,
Cunning-men, Wizards, Magicians, Starre-gazers; with many such strange names
they are called, and in latin, Chaldae, Astrologi, Mathematici, Planetarij,
Magi, Genethliaci, Babylonij, Divini, Fatidici, etc. this which is said already
of the Names of these Professors of the aforesaid Art, shall suffice for the
present; but to proceed, now I am to show what this abominable Profession
promises to perform: What the Art of Astrology, promises to perform.
wherefore you are to understand, that Astrology promises to foretell what
shall be the issue, event or end, of any thing belonging to man, which things
the Astrologers do say, are signified by the 12. houses of Heaven: these are
some of those things which the 12. houses are said (by the Astrologers) to
signify, viz. That the first house signifies the Life and Body of him that is
born, or does ask a question: the second his Riches, the third, The
significations of the twelve Houses.
Brethren and Sisters; the fourth, his Parents; the fifth, Children; the sixth,
sickness, the seventh, Marriage; the eighth, Death; the ninth, Religion and
God; the tenth, Rule and Dignities; the eleventh, Hope and trust; the twelfth,
private enemies: these, and such like things as these are, the Astrologers do
busy themselves about, to search out their Events; for so much as these things
aforesaid, are by the Astrologers feigned to belong to the 12, houses of
Heaven, and that they can by the motions and influences of the Stars, know
what shall be the event and end of these, or any such things: therefore I say
and affirm, that no man can by the Stars, know what shall be the issue or
event of these, or any such things: Also, that the Stars do not signify any
such things as these are: Likewise I deny, that your twelve houses can signify
any of these things, or any such as these are. Moreover I deny, that any man
is able by any lawful Learning, to attain to so much knowledge as to know
thereby, what shall be the issue, event; or end of these aforesaid things, or
of any other belonging to Man. Yet notwithstanding, what is here delivered,
viz. (that no man is able by any lawful Art, to attain to so much knowledge
therein, by good and lawful learning, as to know thereby what shall be the
particular events of things belonging to Man:) yet I say, I would not have any
man think, that it is my judgment, that the Astrologer does not sometimes by
his Art, predict or foretell the events of some things belonging to man. But
this is that which I say, viz. That no man can by any lawful Art, come to any
such knowledge of future events; but as for Astrologers, and such vain men as
they are; I confess, that they may by their knowledge and skill in filthy and
unclean Arts, (such as is Judicial Astrology, with Magic, and the like
abominable Arts) come to know somewhat of future events, 1 Samuel 28. chap. v.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
through the instigation of the Devil, by the permission of God; for did not
the Witch at Endor, with the help of the Devil, predict or foretell to King
Saul, what should be his end? which prediction proved true. Now who can prove
the going of Saul to ask Council of the Witch, or the practice of the Witch,
in foretelling by the Devil the ruin of Saul; 1 Samuel 31.6.
I say where is he that can prove it lawful, because the event answered to the
Prediction? And yet our Astrologers have no better Arguments to prove the
legality of their Art, of Astrology; but only because the event falls out,
to be according to the Prediction; for when any one questioneth with them about
the legality of their Art of Astrology,) then shall you have them, to prove
the lawfulness of their Art. Rehearse certain Historical Predictions which
proved true by the events of the things foretold, and so to say with Sir
Christopher Heydon, Sir Christ: Heydon in his Defense, page 195.
who says, that he for his own part does freely confess, that there is no one
thing that has made him so confident in the validity of this art, as that
which he has seen to fall out true. Now here you may behold that this great
Champion of our English Astrologers after that he had made a long and tedious
discourse for the defense of Astrology, at length thinking with himself that
all his former Arguments were too feeble to prove what he had undertaken, does
here in this place, lay down as his strongest Argument, (which as himself
says) made him so confident of the validity of Astrology, Mr. Lilly in his
Introduct. page 148.
and it is this, viz. The event falling out, according to the Prediction. Now
where is he, that by this Argument, is able to prove Astrology a lawful Art?
Almost such another Argument, but to the very same purpose is to be seen in the
works of Mr. Will: Lilly, who writing of the marks, moles or scarres, that the
Querent has, says that the verity thereof, has been one main argument of his
engaging in all the parts of Astrology so far. But if Mr. Lilly has no better
Arguments to prove the verity of Astrology by, assuredly he will not be able
to prove the legality of the Art, which he as yet professes.

CHAP. II. That Judicial Astrology is a vain and foolish Art, being full of
Idolatrous and superstitious Fables contrary to the Scripture, and the practice
thereof is a Diabolical Divination.
THe vanity and foolishness of Astrology, Astrology is a vain and foolish
art. Eccles. 8. Chap. 6. 7. verses.
may many ways be proved. But to begin, I will bring the sentences of that
wise man King Solomon, who says, that for to every purpose there is a time and
judgment, because the misery of man is great upon him; for he knows not that
which shall be: for who can tell him when it shall be? Now from this saying of
Solomon, it is very apparent, that none can know the future events of things
belonging to man; for he positively affirms, that no man knows that which
shall be, or who can tell when it shall be? The foolishness of Astrologers, and
the vanity of Astrology.
here you may see Astrologers to be unwise, and their Art of Astrology to be a
vain and foolish Art; for that which the wisest of men says cannot be known,
that do they take upon them for to foretell: Moreover, the vanity and
foolishness of Astrology does herein appear.

First, because it has no one place of the word of God to warrant its legality.

Secondly, because the Scripture is not only silent in the Commendations
thereof; but because it is full of plain sentences which declare openly the
foolishness and vanity of the said Art, in that the Scripture does deride at
the Practitioners thereof, and condemns the practice of it as unlawful, as it
is to be seen in Isaiah 47. chapter and the 13. and 14 verses. Isaiah 47. c. v.
13.14. Jer. 10. c. v. 2.
Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand
up, and save thee from these things which shall come upon thee. Behold, they
shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver
themselves from the power of the flame, etc. Again, the practice, and the
Practitioners thereof are condemned, Jer. 10. chap. 2. verse. Thus says the
Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of
Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them, etc.

Astrologers do superstitiously regard times, as by imagining one time to be
better then another, according to the Planet that is, Lord of the hour, as is
set forth hereafter, and this is condemned Deuteronomy. 18.10.
Thirdly, Astrology is a vain and foolish Art, because that the regarding of
time, without which, Astrology cannot be practiced, is by and in the Scripture
condemned for an abomination, as it does appear in the 18. of Deuteronomy. and the 14.
verse, which says thus. For these Nations which thou shall possess, hearkened
unto observers of times, and unto Diviners; but as for thee, the Lord thy God
has not suffered thee so to do. And as you may see in the 12. verse,
aforegoing in the same Chap. these words, viz. For all that do these things are
an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations, the Lord thy
God does drive them out from before thee. Wherefore my beloved Countrymen,
abandon these your Astrological follies, which if you do not do, I proclaim
from the Lord God, that destruction shall come upon you, which you shall not
foresee by all your art of Astrology, and when it is upon you, then shall you
behold your selves in misery, but you shall not be able to help your selves by
all your Babylonish skill; consider what I say. But from this I hasten to the
next thing, which is this, viz. That Astrology is full of Idolatrous and
superstitious fables, contrary to the Scripture: Astrology is full of
Idolatrous and superstitious Fables.
now to the end that this position may be made manifest: therefore in the first
place I will begin with your Houses of Heaven, and I say that those
significations, which you give of them, are superstitious Fables; but to the
end my Reader may understand what those significations are: therefore I do
insert them into this figure following, according as they are appropriated to
the twelve Houses by the Astrologians.

1 Life and Body of him that is born, or does ask the Question; this is the
Horoscope angle.

2 Goods, Traffic, Substance, Riches, Gain, Damage, Loss, Wealth or Poverty.

3 Kindred, Brethren, Sisters, Cousins, small Journeys, Faith and Religion,
Changes.

4 Fathers, Houses, Heritages, Lands, Tenements, hidden Treasures, end of any
thing belonging to Man.

5 Children, Gifts, Presents, Pleasures, Plays, Voluptuousness, Banqueting,
Bravery, Dancing.

6 Grief, Sickness, Infirmities, the Quality and Cause of it, Curable or not
Curable.

7 Wives, Marriage, Suits, Quarrels, Strife, known Enmity, Debate, Love
questions.

8 Death, Sadness, long Torments, envy the Quality of Death, Inheritance
apparent.

9 God, Religion, Wisdom, Faith, Science, Voyage, Ceremonies, Sects, Paradoxes,
Sacrifices, Dreams.

10 Honor, Dignities, Offices, Magistrates, Governers, Rulers, Estimation,
Profession, Action.

11 Friends, Companions, Hope, Confidence, Favor, Help, Succor, Praise,
Estimation.

12 Private Enemies, Witches, Captivity, Prisons, Torment, Lamentation,
Sadness, Hate.



There are many other significations belonging to these 12. Houses, which are
so many in number, that it would be over tedious for me to name them every one;
for they are so manifold, according to the judgment of Mr. Lilley in his
introduction page 50. where he says, that there is nothing appertaining to the
life of man in this World, which in one way or other has not relation to one
of the twelve Houses of Heaven, and as the 12. signs are appropriate to the
particular Members of Man's Body; Mr. Lilly his Intred. page 50.
so also do the 12. Houses represent not only the several parts of man, but his
actions, quality of life and living, and the curiosity and judgment of our
forefathers in Astrology, was such, as they have allotted to every house a
particular signification, and so distinguished humane accidents throughout the
whole 12. Houses, as he that understands the questions appertaining to each
House, shall not want sufficient grounds whereon to judge or give a rational
answer upon any contingent accident, That the signs cannot signify the
particular Members of Man's Body, neither can the Houses signify his actions,
life, or living.
and success thereof, thus far Mr. Lilly with his Forefathers the Astrologers:
And now here again I say, that whatsoever Mr. Lilly has said, or any of his
Forefathers affirmed of the aforesaid positions, is by me denied from these
considerations.

First, I say, for as much as there is not a corporal Heaven, representing the
form and nature of a humane body; therefore I do deny, that the several parts,
life and actions of a humane body, can be appropiated thereunto; for because
that thing which does represent another thing in body, must have the very
self-same form of the thing represented. So that if the several parts of Man's
Body be appropriated to the 12. houses and signs then must the houses and
signs represent the body of Man in form and shape; but how manifestly
erroneous this assertion is to all reason, is proved thus.

First I say, that the houses cannot represent the body of Man, because that
they are only imaginary circumstances in the circumference of the 9. Heaven.
Wherefore or as much as that the houses and signs have but only an imaginary
being in form and shape: therefore they cannot be appropriated to the
particular Members of Man's Body, because the Body of Man has a visible and
real Being in form and shape. which the 12. houses and signs have not, because
they are only imaginary things as I said before. Now seeing I have from
sufficient grounds, denied that the 12. houses and signs can be appropriated
unto the particular parts of Man's Body: In the next place I am to write of the
life and actions of man, for this is the position of the Astrologers, viz. The
quality of the life and actions of Man, cannot be known by the Houses, nor from
the signs of Heaven.
The 12. Houses represent not only the several parts of Man's Body; but his
actions, quality of his life and living: this Position is already before by me
denied, and I have given reasons for my so doing. But to the end, my Reader may
be the better able to judge between me and my Antagonists: Therefore I say,
that the quality of the life and actions of Man, cannot be known by the Houses,
nor from the Stars or signs of Heaven: which thing although I have spread
abroad sufficient Arguments for the proof of what I have delivered, yet
nevertheless, this I say again, that for as much as the 12. Signs, as also the
12. Houses of the Astrologers, are only imaginary things, seigned by the
Astrologians: therefore I deny, that the quality of the life and actions of
Man, can be known by the Houses, or from the 12. Signs of Heaven; because that
no conceived Idaea, which is as it were a substance, but is not a real
substance in being, can represent the humane nature of Man, which is a rea
substance, and has a visible being: wherefore seeing, the Houses and Signs
cannot truly and really represent the Body of Man, in substance, form, and
being: Therefore I say, that the quality of the life and actions of man cannot
be known by the Houses, nor yet from the Signs of Heaven; for that thing,
which does not truly and really in nature, represent the very substance, form,
and natural Being of the thing represented, cannot in any wise signify the
quality of the being; nor yet the nature of the actings of the thing
represented: from which Argument I infer this conclusion following which is
this: That for as much as the 12. Houses and Signs do not truly and really
represent the very substance, form, and natural being of Man: therefore I say,
that the quality of the life and actions of Man, cannot be known by, Mr.
Perkins against Witchcraft. page 620.
nor from the Houses and Signs of Heaven aforesaid.

Now then in this place, to insert something out of the works of that godly
Man, Mr. Perkins, I judge it very necessary for these two Reasons. First,
because he was a very godly man, and therefore all men ought the more readily
to believe that which he wrote to be truth. Secondly, because he was a Student
in the said Art of Judicial Astrology; and therefore he was the better able to
judge of the legality or illegality of the Art of Astrology. Now what he faith
of Astrology, you may see in his discourse of Witchcraft, page 620. where his
words are to this purpose, viz. That divination by the Stars, is commonly
called Judicial Astrology, of which we may read, Deuteronomy. 18.10.11. where the
Holy Ghost does of purpose reckon up all those kind of develish Arts, Deuteronomy.
18.10.11.
whereby men have dealings and society with Satan, either in divining or
practicing: amongst which this is the second.

The word there used may carry a double sense, for it signifies either him
that observes times: under which acception Astrology is comprehended, or him
that observes the Clouds; Megnonen.
and howsoever, the best learned Interpreters do dissent about the Notation of
it, yet all agree in this, that the profession of divining by the Stars, is
condemned: and that it is to be numbered among the rest expressed in the
prohibition, may further appear by other places of Scripture, as in Isaiah
47.13.14. where the Lord threatens the same judgments against the Diviners by
the Stars, Isaiah 47.13.14. Dan. 2.2.
that he does against Soothsayers, and Magicians. Again in Dan. 2.2.
Inchanters, Astrologers, and Sorcerers, are joined together, as being all sent
for about the same business, viz. To expound the Kings Dream.

Now if the Lord himself have allotted the same punishment to the Astrologer,
which he has to the Sooth-sayer and Magician, and account them all one; it is
manifest, that divining by the Stars, ought to be held as a superstitious kind
of Divination.

Thus Mr. Perkins has declared against the Art of Astrology, whereby it does
appear from that which has been delivered, that Astrology is contrary unto
the Scripture, and is also full of idolatrous and superstitious Fables; for it
does manifestly appear to be fabulous, and to abound with superstition and
Idolatry, in your Planetary days and hours; for thus say you Astrologers, viz.
Bacon. Ganivetus.
That Saturday is not a good day for work, because of the Planet Saturn; for
says Ganivetus, if any one comes to ask council in the hour of an evil
Planet, viz. Saturn or Mars, it is a suspicion rather to evil then to good.

Again says another, Haly. Abenragel.
the hours of Saturn and Mars ought to be abhorred in all things; for says he,
you were best to take heed that you take no great matter in hand, or begin any
long journey in the hours of the aforesaid Plan^^^ etc. But of this more
hereafter in this discourse. Yet nevertheless it is manifest, from what has
been declared, that the Art of Astrology is a Diabolical Divination. Psalm.
84.11. and 34.9.
For says the Prophet David, the Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing
will he uphold from them that walk uprightly.

From hence I gather that much, viz. That the knowledge of all good things is,
and has been by the Lord manifested unto his People, so that if the
foreknowledge of things by Astrology be a good thing, it has been by the
Lord revealed unto his People; but the Scripture does in no place justify
those that seek after the foreknowledge of things by the Stars: therefore I
say, that the seeking to know future events by the Stars, which is Astrology,
is not a good thing; because that whatsoever is a good thing, Isa. 47.10.11.
Jer. 10.2.
the Scripture does not condemn it, in deriding at the professors thereof.

But the Scripture does condemn Astrology in deriding at the Professors
thereof: therefore Astrology is not a good thing. Again, whatsoever is an evil
thing, the word of God does condemn it with those that practice it; but the
word of God does condemn the Practitioners of Astrology: therefore it does
condemn Astrology.

Now then, for as much as Astrologers do take upon them for to divine by their
Art of Astrology, of the particular events of things belonging to Man:
therefore I say, that the aforesaid Art of Judicial Astrology, is a Diabolical
Divination, because it is condemned by the Scripture, with the Professors
thereof for a wicked Art; for says the Prophet to the Law, and to the
Testimony, Isaiah 8.20.
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them.

From the very word of God, you may here then very evidently behold, that
Astrologers are workers in darkness, and their Art of Astrology is a work of
darkness: Ephesians. 5.11.
wherefore consider the words of the Apostle, who says thus: Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove them rather.

CHAP. III. In which is set forth, that one of the first and chiefest points in
Astrology; and without the said point, Astrologers can do nothing, is the
regarding of times, the which regarding of times, is superstition and Idolatry.
Regarding or observing of times, the great point in Astrology.
NOw in this place I will manifestly declare that which is one of the first and
chiefest points in Astrology, and the point is this, viz. The regarding or
observing of times.

Now I say, that without this point of regarding of times, the Astrologers can
do nothing in their Art of Astrology; for take from the Art of Astrology but
this one thing, viz. The regarding or observing of times; and then it will be
so poor an Art, that the Practitioners thereof, will be ashamed to own it; for
then it will do them no more service, neither shall the Astrologers get any
more pence by their Art, for telling of Fortunes, or resolving of horary
Questions, nor for their making of Elections; for take away Regarding of times,
and then no Astrologer can calculate your Nativity; for according to the Rules
of Astrology, the very exact time must be known, in which the Man or Woman is
born, before judgment be given by the Astrologer: so in like manner, it is in
questions, elections, Mr. John Booker.
and all other parts of Astrology, that this is according to the rules of
Astrology, it is very manifest from their own words; for that Astrologer Mr.
Booker, says plainly thus, viz.

Ask what you will, would you resolved be,
Observe your time, learn your Nativitie.
But to come more close unto the matter, I find that the Astrologers do regard
and observe times, to be either good or evil, to do such, or such a thing in,
because of the Stars and their positions, etc. for they have planetary days and
hours, according unto which Planets, that then rule and govern: Lupton. page
107. ex Haly. Abenragel.
The Astrologers do account the time to be either good or evil; for says one,
the hour of Mars is to be abhorred in all things, both in the beginning, and
when the thing is done.

And a little after he says thus, viz. And as I have said of Mars, so I say of
Saturn, for there is never a good of them both, meaning their hours.

Now this regarding of times, is Superstition and Idolatry, for these Reasons.

First, Genesis 1.31.
because God has not made any thing to be both good and evil; for says Moses,
God saw every thing that he had made; and behold, it was very good. So that
here you may see, after God had created all things, behold, he sees all things
to be very good: then from hence I gather thus much, that is, that the making
the Stars, and so times according to the Stars, and their positions to be
evil, for such or such a purpose; I say that this making of times evil or
unfortunate according to Stars, and their several positions, is not of, from,
nor by the appointment of God,

The Reason is, because the word of God says the contrary; for says the
Scripture, God saw all that he had made, and behold it was very good. So then
from this you may see according to the Scripture, the hours of Saturn and Mars,
to be as good for to do any thing in them, as in the hours of Jupiter or Venus.
Also the Moon may be in any of her Mansions, and yet you may not fear to do any
lawful thing, although the Astrologer shall tell you, that you have taken an
unfortunate election, to do your operation, by reason of the position of the
Heavens. As also because of the Moon, who is in one of her Mansions: which
position of the Moon in the said Mansion, does signify the destruction of the
thing you have begun, or that it shall be marred by this or that means, before
you can perform the work, etc. I say, that none that fear the true God, ought
to regard these or any such like heathenish superstitions of the Astrologers,
because that these things aforesaid are not of Gods own institution; but are of
man's invention, that these things are not of Gods institution: it does
evidently appear from and by the Scripture; for whatsoever is of Gods
institution, the Scripture does bear witness of the same: but the Scripture
does bear witness that God made all things good, Genesis 1.31.
therefore all things are good, by and from Gods institution.

Again, whatsoever is by, and in the Scripture condemned, the same is not of
Gods institution; but the regarding and observing of times, Levit. 19.26. 2
Kings 21.6. Deuteronomy. 18.10.11.
is by and in the Scripture condemned: therefore the regarding and observing of
times, is not of Gods institution.

The Arguments above written, do wholly depend upon the Scripture, as you may
see; for the first Argument whose scope is to prove, that all things are good,
by and from Gods institution, is evidently seen to agree with the Scripture,
and is therefore confirmed by the Scripture, as you may see Genesis 1.31. in these
words, And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.
Now the Scripture says plainly, that God made every thing good; so then we may
now manifestly know, that God made all the Stars of Heaven good also according
to his word, he made all years, months, weeks, days, and hours to be good,
then that fantastical opinion of making a difference of days and hours, to
begin a work in or upon, is in very truth, an Idolatrous and superstitious
Dotage and fiction of the brains of the Astrologers.

Also the other Argument, in which is declared, viz. That the regarding and
observing of times, is not of Gods institution, is proved thus, because it is
condemned by and in the Scripture; for you find that Manasseh, that great
Idolater, is in the Scripture reproved for his observing of times, among other
his Idolatrous practices; for says the Scripture thus of him, viz. 2 Kings
21.6. Deuteronomy. 18.10.
And he made his Son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used
Enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits, and Wizards, etc. 2 Kings 21.6.
Again in Deuteronomy. 18.10. it is said, viz. Let none be found among you, that uses
Divination, or is an observer of times, or an Inchanter, or a Witch, etc. Also
in Levit. 19.26. it is said, Ye shall not use Enchantment, nor observe times.
From these places of Scripture, it is plainly to be seen, That the regarding or
observing of times is forbidden to be used, and the use of it is condemnen for
Idolatry.

Now then from hence it is apparent, that Astrologers are very Idolaters,
because that they regard times, the which regarding of times is in the
Scripture condemned: In the very like manner it is very apparent to all
rational men, that Judicial Astrology is a secret Diabolical Divination. I say
secret, because it is so close, and a subtle delusion of the Devil, whereby
Satan does delude almost all men at his pleasure, and makes men which believe
in this vain delusion, viz. Astrology, to think that the Stars of Heaven are
the causes of those strange alterations here upon earth, in the Bodies of Men
and Women, according as the Astrologers say the 12. Houses of the Heaven do
signify. Now what those significations are, is elsewhere by me set forth in a
Figure, See Chap. 2. of this Discourse.
and there you may find many of those things belonging to man, which the
Astrologers do appropriate unto the 12. Houses; and withal the Astrologers do
say, that these 12. Houses do give signification of the particular events of
the said things, and also of many others which are not there by me mentioned.
But once again I give all men to know, how that I do here again deny, that any
Man can know the issue, event, or end of any of the things a fore by me, set
down in the second Chapter of this Discourse, in the Figure of the Astrologers
12. Houses. I say that no man can by any lawful learning, attain to so much
knowledge therein, as thereby to know the events of the aforesaid things; but
that somewhat may be known of the particular events of those things, by
unlawful and filthy Arts, I do not deny; 1 Samuel 28. c. 7. v. c. 31. v. 6.
for we find, that the Witch at Endor did predict and foretell to King Saul,
that which afterward fell out to be as the Witch had said. What cause now then
have our Astrologert to brag so much of their Predictions, because the event is
as they foretold, I say they have no just cause to rejoice so much as they do,
seeing a wicked Witch is able to do as much. Again, their art is such, that
they are not able to prove lawful according to the Scripture; and therefore it
does appear to be nothing better, then an art of learned Witchcraft:
Daemonologiae Lib. 1. cap. 3.
according to which position, is the saying of the late King James, whose
judgment is this, viz. as there are two sorts of folks that may be enticed to
this a^^, to wit, Learned or un-learned: so are there two means, which are the
first stirrers up, and feeders of their curiosity, thereby to make them to give
themselves over to the same: which two means I call the Devils School, and the
Devils Rudiments.

The Learned have their curiosity wakened up, and fed by that which I call his
School.

Judicial Astrology is the Devils School, for Learned men to learn orcery in.
This is the art of Judicial Astrology; for diverse men having attained to a
great perfection in learning, and yet remain without the spirit of
Regeneration, and the fruits thereof, finding all natural things common, as
well to the Country Clown as unto them; hereupon they assay to purchase unto
themselves a greater name, by not only knowing the course of the Heavens,
Stars, and Planets; but likewise to climb to the knowledge of things to come
thereby, which at the first face appearing lawful unto them, in respect the
ground thereof seems to proceed of natural causes only: they are so allured
thereby, that finding their practice to prove true in sundry things, they study
to the cause thereof.

And so mounting from degree, to degree, upon the slipperie and uncertain scale
of curiosity; they are at last intised, that where lawful Arts and Sciences
fails, to satisfy their restless minds, even to stick to that black and
unlawful Science of Magic. Where finding at the first, that such diverse forms
of Circles, and Conjurations, rightly joined thereunto, will raise such diverse
forms of spirits, to resolve them their doubts: and attributing the doing, to
the power inseparably tied, or inherent in the Circles, and many words of GOD,
confusedly wrapped, they blindly glory in themselves, as if they had by their
quickness of ingeny, made a Conquest of Plutoes Dominion, and were become
Emperors of the kingdom of Hell: where, in the mean time, (miserable wretches)
they are become in very deed, bondslaves to their mortal enemy, viz: the
devil, and their knowledge for all that, they presume thereof, is nothing
increased, except in knowing evil, and the horrors of hell for the punishment
thereof, as Adam was, for eating of the forbidden Tree. I will here end with
that saying of Saint Augustine, who says, August. de doc. Christ. lib. 2. cap.
23.
that the running to these Wisemen is, Genus quoddam fornicationis, A
spiritual kind of fornication. For all such as run after this Art, or seek to
those which practice the same, I say they go from God; and run after the Devil
a whoring.

CHAP. IIII. The Positions and Arguments, which the Astrologers use, and bring
for to warrant the legality of their Art of Astrology, examined, condemned,
and overthrown; Also their Objections opened, controverted, and Answered
according to Reason.
HEre I am to Dispute, of the Positions and Arguments which the Astrologers
make use of, to warrant their Art of Astrology by: but if the said Positions
and Arguments are warily considered, it will appear, that they have nothing in
them, to prove the lawfulness of Astrologicall Predictions. Of which Positions
this is the greatest and strongest, and the said Position is this, Sir Christo:
Heydon.
viz: That the Stars are natural causes of such effects, as Astrologers
foretell. From this Position the Astrologers frame many Arguments, to prove
Astrology a lawful Art: for upon this very one Position, does rest and depend
that great Discourse of Sir Christopher Heydon, which he made in the Defense of
Astrology. So that if I can but remove this Prop, you shall see Sir
Christopher's Defense of Astrology drop down to the ground, and so with it,
all our English Astrologers, and their Art of Judicial Astrology: for our
Astrologers, if a man questioneth the lawfulness of Astrology with them, they
are then at stand what to say; and have not any other way to resolve him that
makes a doubt of the said Arts legality: But to send him to Sir Christopher
Heydons Defense of Astrology; and thus these idle Drones, which are not able
to prove the legalitie of that Art which they daily practice: are glad with all
their hearts to run, and hide themselves under Sir Christopher's protection, as
in a Mouse-hole; for fear they should be catched in their own Arguments for it.
Come out of your selves, you idle Drones, and prove your Art of Astrology a
good, true, and lawful Art, if you can. For if you are not able to prove the
legalitie of Astrology by sound and substantial Arguments, then for shame
give off your practicing of such an Art, which you cannot prove lawful and
honest: and think not with your selves, that seeing we are not able to prove
Astrology a lawful and honest Art yet we have on our side Sir Christopher
Heydon, and Doctor Gell; and they shall prove it for us. I give you to
understand, I will not be so satisfied; for I say unto you Astrologers, that if
Sir Christopher Heydon, and Dr: Gell, and all the Friends Astrology has, I
say, if I were before their faces all at once, yet then, even then I would
deny, Astrology to be a lawful Art. But now to return again, to the
aforesaid Position of the Astrologers, which is this, viz: That the Stars are
natural causes of such effects, as Astrologers foretell. First I will examine
this Position, and then shall we see, whether those events which the
Astrologers foretell, are caused by the Stars, or not. Wherefore in the first
place we are to know, what those Effects are which the Astrologers say are
caused by the Stars. Now the effects, which the Astrologers do affirm are
caused by the Stars, are these, viz: The particular events of those things,
belonging to man, which things are by the Astrologers appropriate to the twelve
houses of Heaven. As for the things whose effects, Mr. Lilly his Intro: pa. 50.
the Astrologers say are caused by the Stars, I have mentioned many of them in
the second Chapter of this Discourse, and therefore I refer you thither; for
there you have them inserted into a Figure, according as they are by the
Astrologers, appropriate to the twelve Houses. Now in this place I am to treat,
of the Effects of the aforesaid things; that is to say, whether, A question.
The Answer.
or not, the effects of those things are caused by the Stars. To this I answer
Negatively, and say, that the Stars are not the causes, of the Effects of those
things belonging to man; as for example, I will instance in these particulars
following, viz: Gauricus warned Henry the second King of France, Heydons
Defense of Astrology. p. 194. Page 81.
not to run at Tilt in the one and fourtieth year of his age, for that the
Stars did then threaten a wound in his Head. Paulus tertius, warned his Son
long before, of the very day of his death. Mr. Christian an Astrologer of
Prague, Rants zovi^ fol. 97.
admonished Ladislaus Jagello King of Poland (by a Priest,) that he should
beware of eminent Death, because that many Planets were conjoined this year,
and there happens an Eclipse likewise of the Moon under the earth;
notwithstanding the premonition he dyed that year, 1434. Anno aetatis 49. Also
Picus, being foretold by three Astrologers, that he should not live above
thirty three years, confirmed the prediction. Now that these aforesaid events,
were foretold by the said men, (viz: Astrologers) I confess; But that those
men could fore see those events by the Stars, or that the Stars were Natural
causes of those events, both these things I do deny, for these Reasons. First
then I say, that the Stars were not natural causes of those aforesaid Events;
Because there is a dependence and coherence between the cause and the Effect,
in Natural things; but in these things there is none. For every Effect and
Accident, does show it is Cause. So that Natural and Elementary effects and
accidents, show forth Natural and Elementary Causes. Also Metaphysicall or
supernatural Effects and Accidents, show forth Metaphysicall or supernatural
causes. Herein the Astrologers are beside the matter, and are deceived in their
principles; for they take Metaphysicall or supernatural effects and accidents,
to be effected by Natural and Elementary causes. Now why the Astrologers are
here deceived is this; viz: because they do behold and see, many Alterations,
changes, events and accidents, effected in man's body; Hereupon they do believe
that the said Alterations, changes, events and accidents, are effected by and
from Natural and Elementary causes: because the body of man, upon whom the
said things are effected, is a natural and elementary substance. Wherefore I
say, that there are many things, which the Astrologers affirm to be effected by
and from Natural causes; the which Position I do deny, and say, that those
things are not effected by nor from Natural and Elementary causes: But I say
that those things are Metaphysicall, and supernatural Effects, and Accidents;
and are effected and accomplished, in Natural and Elementary bodies, by a
Metaphysicall and supernatural Cause: as I will hereafter in these following
examples declare. For whereas the Astrologers do impute the Flood, Albumazar,
ca. 3. de Max. conjunc.

Marcilius Ficinus in his Treatise of the Star that led the Wisemen. Spine us
in Catastro. Mundi.


which was in the days of Noah, to a certain great Conjunction of the Planets:
so in like manner they say of the Birth of Moses. Also the coming of Christ,
and the preaching of the Gospel, the promulgation and publication of the Law,
the sedition of the people, their troubles, persecutions, banishments,
bloodshed, deaths, wars, these, and many other such like things as these are,
the Astrologers say are fore-shewed by the Stars. Now all these things are
supernatural effects, that is to say, they are such things whose cause is not
Natural, but above Nature. So then, for as much as the cause of these things,
is a Metaphysicall Agent, therefore I deny, that the Effects of the aforesaid
things can be caused by a Physical constellation.

But now I am come to the second thing which is this, viz: That no man can by
the Stars foresee such Effects as is aforesaid. Now that no man can by the
Stars foresee such events, it is very manifest, for if all the Star-gazers in
the world, if they were agazing all together at once on the Stars, they are not
able to foresee those events in the Stars, which events they do not cause. That
the Stars are not the causes of those events, it is the saying of some of your
own Authors; For, says Spineus, that as well the great Conjunctions, Spineus.
as Mo^kstars, Comets, Eclipses, and the like, ought not to be called the
causes of future events, here then you may see, that there is so great
contradiction, between the sayings of the Astrologers and their practices; that
all Rational men may behold, the Art of Astrology to be a foolish lying Art:
and that the Astrologers do profess such an Art, whose Rules they are ignorant
of. For sometimes you shall have them say with Spineus, that the Stars are not
the causes of Future events, but do they always say thus? No, for if we look
upon their Astrologicall Predictions, then shall we hear them say the very
contrary. For whereas they said at one time, that the great Conjunctions of the
Planets, etc. are not the causes of future events. At another time you shall
have them say, that the very same Conjunctions do produce great Effects. As for
example, I will instance in the said Spineus who is cited before, Spineus in
Catastrophe Mundi.
whose words are thus in one place of his book, viz. That as well the great
Conjunctions, as Mock-stars, Comets, Eclipses, and the like, ought not to be
called the causes of Future Events. But this very man, Spineus writing of a
Future Catastrophe to come upon the world, in the same book says thus,
speaking of the said Catastrophe, subversion, or end of the world, viz: that
the principal causes are the great, mean, and lesser Conjunctions of the
superior Planets, the other principal causes are Mock-stars; changing of the
Absis of the Planets, Eclipses, and the like: so likewise the Genitures of
Kings, Geniturae validae regna mutant: Segment. 7. Aph. 166.
Strong Genitures do change Kingdoms. Causes Adjutant, are Revolutions, the
progressions of the greater Orb, of great Conjunctions; before Noah's Flood,
the Birth of Christ, Mahomet, and the like; which things being rightly
considered, may not only enable us to foretell the end of the world, but
perhaps the time also: and a little after the same Author says again, viz:
Spineus in Catastrophe.
That seeing therefore the great Conjunctions of the weightier Planets, are wont
to produce great effects, as the changes of Monarchies and Kingdoms, the coming
of Prophets, etc. by them also shall the dead be changed, and all things shall
be renewed; and again he says, viz: for like as the Causes are, so shall the
effects be; for good Conjunctions are wont to bestow goodness, and good
Magistrates; but evil Conjunctions produce the contrary. Thus Spineus who is
so much applauded by many Astrologers, does one while say one thing, and
another while he says the very contrary to what he said before, as it is to be
seen from his own books: for one while he says that the principal causes of
that Catastrophe, are the great, mean, and lesser Conjunctions of the superior
Planets, etc. and not long after he says, viz: that as well the great
conjunctions of the Planets, as Mock-stars, Comets, Eclipses, etc. ought not to
be called the causes of future events, what shall I say, of such an Art as is
Astrology? and of such Artists, as are Astrologers? As for the Art of
Astrology, it is as I have elsewhere said, viz: a foolish and lying Art. But
as for the Artists of this Art of Astrology, they are Astrologers: of them I
say thus much, that for as much as some of them would needs be taken for to be
Prophets: I deny that these Astrologers are any of Gods Prophets; But that they
are the Devils Prophets I grant: for if in their Astrologicall predictions, of
the particular events of things belonging to Man; they at any time do predict
or foretell such an event, which at the time limited by the Astrologer, does
come to pass accordingly: yet I say, that the said particular event could not
before seen by the Astrologer in it is cause, without the help of a Spirit. That
this Position is according to your Art, Centiloqui Ptol. Aph. 1.
I prove by your own Authors, for your great Master in Astrology, Ptolomie
says, Soli autem numine afflati praedicunt particularia: that is, none but
those inspired with a Demon foretell particulars: Marcilius Eicinus in li. 3.
here also I will bring another great Artist, who speaking of Astrologicall
Predictions, says thus of them, viz: That such predictions stand not by
Learning, but by some instinct. Wherefore it is apparent from what these two
great Astrologers have said, that he who does foretell, the particular events
of things in Astrologicall predictions, does not foretell those events, from
the Positians and Qualities of the Stars: But by being inspired with a Demon,
or by having familiarity with some Spirit.

Again here I bring another great Astrologicall Author, Cor: Agrippa, who
says, Agrippade occulta Philosophia, lib. 3. Astrologomania.
that Magic and Astrology cannot be separated: for, says Agrippa, there is
such affinity and agreement, between these two Arts, viz: Astrology and
Magic; That as Magic cannot be performed without Astrology; so Astrology
cannot have it is end and perfection without Magic. So then the differences is
not much, whether we call these predictions Magical, or Astrologicall
predictions. Now here it is objected, viz: Objection. Solution.
that the Astrologer may stay himself in his Figure, and proceed no further. To
this I answer: That for as much as the Knowledge of a particular event, cannot
be known without the help of a Spirit; therefore I say, that the difference is
not great, in whatsoever degree he proceeds, so he proceeds at all with the
devil in his illusions. So that if he come to the knowledge of a particular
event, whether it be by conference, or by some other means, then he does
proceed with the devil in his illusions, for we are herein certified, that this
thing cannot be done by any lawful Art and Learning, but by the help of a
Spirit; take that help which way you will, it is diabolical. For that
judicial Astrology either has been, or may be altogether separated from
Magic; this the Astrolegers can never prove: if they can, then let us see them
do it.

But it is again objected by the Astrologers as follows, viz: The great
Objection of Astrologers.
That those events which the Astrologers do Predict, and foretell; many of
those events do fall out to be, as the Astrologer foretold: therefore the Art
of Astrology is useful and profitable in the life of man. To this I answer
thus: That to come to the knowledge of any thing by unlawful means, Answer.
Vide Epist. de T. Vicars. Deuteronomy. 13.1.
does not make the practice warrantable. For suppose that their predictions
fall out to be as they foretold, yet this makes the Astrologer never a whit the
more to be believed, nor his Art to be ever a jot the more lawful: as it is
plain in the 13. Chap. of Deuteronomy. verse 1. If there arise amongst you a Prophet,
or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder. And the sign or
wonder come to pass, yet shall thou not hearken unto him, for the Lord your
God proves you, etc. Again the devil in Samuels shape, 1 Samuel 28.11.
being conjured up by the Witch, did foretell unto Saul those things which were
true, and as the devil had predicted, the prediction proved true by the event,
which fell out to be as the devil had said: as you may see, for said the
devil, 1 Samuel 28.19. unto Saul, 1 Samuel 28.19. Chap. 31.6.
And to morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me, and the Lord shall give the
host of Israel into the hands of the Philistines. 1 Samuel 31.6.
Which thing was according to the devils prediction, for in the 1 Samuel 31.6.
you shall find these words, viz: So Saul died, and his three sons, and his
armor-bearer, and all his men that same day together. Moreover we find in the
Acts of the Apostles, that the Pythoniss there did give a true testimony of the
Apostles of Jesus Christ: thus we may see that the devil tells truth
sometimes, and yet he is still the father of lies. Now here you may plainly
see, that the devils can foretell what shall be the events of some things; so
then it being so, that God is sometimes pleased, to permit unto the devils, the
foreknowledge of some things, and that the said devils do many times declare
the future events of things as is aforesaid. Therefore I say, for this cause we
are not to think it a strange thing, in that we sometimes see the Astrologers
foretell, that which afterward does come to pass, and when the thing is come
to pass, we are not then to give ever the more credit to the Astrologer; nor
yet to think Astrology to be any whit the law fuller; because the event
falls out to be, as the Astrologer had before predicted. For, if because the
event falls out to be true, or shall come to pass according to the
prediction, I say if any shall believe Astrology to be a lawful Art, from
this ground ( viz: Because those things foretold by the Astrologers, many times
fall out to be true, and so come to pass as they predicted) again I say if they
have no better arguments to prove the legallity of Astrology then this of the
event answering to the prediction. Here then I say to all rational men, viz:
Note.
that Magic, Conjuration, Witchcraft, and all such abominable, wicked and
unclean Arts may by the aforesaid argument, be proved to be as lawful as is
the Art of Judicial Astrology. 1 Samuel 28.19. 1 Samuel 31.6.
As for example, I will instance in the death of King Saul with his sons, and
the destruction of his great Army, for we find that the witch at Endor having
conjured up the devil for to resolve the King of his doubts, the said devil
being raised up by the Witches art, answers unto the King after this manner,
viz. 1 Samuel 28.19
To morrow shall thou and thy Sons be with me, the Lord shall deliver also
the Host of Israel into the hand of the Philistims, etc.

Now that this Prediction fell out to be true, 1 Samuel 31.6.
according to the Devils predicting of the same, none can deny; for says the
Scripture, so Saul dyed, and his three Sons, and his Armor-bearer, and all
his men that same day together.

So then from hence you may see the aforesaid argument, cannot prove the
legality of the art of Astrology any more, then it can prove the lawfulness of
the Witch and her art, in raising up the Devil at Endor: wherefore we may
evidently understand from hence as follows, viz. What the greatest and
strongest arguments are, which the Astrologers can, or are able to bring to
prove the legality of Astrology from and by: I say that Magic Conjuration and
Witchcraft, may from and by the said argument, be proved and warranted, as
lawful and as honest as Judicial Astrology; Exodus 22.18. Mic. 5.12.
but how lawful and honest Witchcraft is, I leave unto all men for to judge
from these places of Scripture; for it is said in Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not
suffer a Witch to live, again it is said by the Lord God in Mica, 5.12. and I
will cut off Witch-crafts out of thine hand, and thou shall have no more
Soothsayers.

But to return again to my purpose, I have declared a little before, that the
greatest and strongest arguments that are set forth by the Astrologers, for to
prove the legality of Astrology by, is this, viz. The event falling out to be
according to the Prediction. Now that this is the best, The greatest argument
the Astrologers have to prove the legality of their art.
and strongest of all the arguments, which the Astrologers can bring and
produce, to warrant the legality of their said art of Judicial Astrology by.

I say it is evidently to be seen, that this is their greatest and strongest
argument, as it does plainly appear by their own words and confessions, written
by themselves in their own Books, as you shall see I will here again manifestly
prove, although the same is elsewhere by me done.

Sir Christopher Heydon in his defense of Astrology, fol, 195.
But to begin, I think it is my best way, to set their Champion in the first
place, because if any man questioneth with our Astrologers, about the
lawfulness of their Art, they in all the haste and speed as may possible be
done, send him unto their Champion Sir Christopher Heydon's Defense of
Astrology, where he may have a full resolution of all his questions and doubts
which he has ag inst Astrology.

But now seeing we are in a Dispute about the Arguments that the Astrologers do
commonly bring, to prove their art of Astrology a lawful art: now then seeing
Sir Christopher is the chiefest of our Astrologers, and unto him they send all
that gainsay their art; therefore let us hear what he can say for Astrology.

Heydon. 195.
Now what he says, made him believe Astrology to be a lawful art, is only,
because he had seen the event fall out true according to the Prediction; as it
does plainly appear by his own words, which are as follows in the 195 page of
his Discourse, where he says thus, viz.

I, for my part (says he) do freely confess, that there is no one thing that
has made me so confident in the validity of this art, as that which I have
seen to fall out true.

Thus the great Artist of Astrology, in few words, has told us, what his
strongest argument is, whereby he can prove Astrology a lawful and a mighty
powerful art: now if this be a sufficient warrant, to make a man confident in
the validity of an art, 1 Samuel 31.
because he sees the Predictions fall out true; then may these Astrologers be
as confident, in the validity of Witchcraft, as they can be of the legality of
Astrology by their own argument; for because the greatest and strongest
argument, which all of them use to plead the validity of Astrology by, is this,
Because they see their predictions fall out true.

Again, to this I answer, as I said before, That this argument does prove
Astrology no more to be a lawful art, then it does prove Witchcraft to be
lawful; for all that which was foretold unto Saul by Witchcraft fell out true:
Therefore Witchcraft is as lawful as Astrology, by the best argument of the
Astrologers.

Now that this is the best and strongest argument, which the Astrologers have
to warrant the legality of Astrology by, this, I say, I will prove by their own
words and confessions, as I said before; and I will fetch out him first into the
light, unto whom they all run to hide themselves in the dark.

He it is, whom I cited a little before, Heydon. fol. 195.
Sir Christopher Heydon in his Defense of Astrology, says thus, viz. I, for my
part (says he) do freely confess, that there is no one thing that has made
me so confident in the validity of this Art, as that which I have (...) fall
out true.

Now you having here understood what Sir Christopher Heydon's great argument
for Astrology is, Mr. Lilly. page 148. of his Intr.
in the next place you shall hear what Mr. William Lilly has declared to be
his great argument, for the verity or truth of Astrology; his words are thus,
speaking of the marks, moles, or scars of the querent, (says he) I have many
times admired at the verity hereof, and it has been one main argument of my
engaging so far in all the parts of Astrology, for very rarely you shall find
these rules fail.

Thus Mr. Lilly, with his feeble argument for the verity of Astrology, which
argument of his, can prove Astrology to be no better then Witchcraft.

But I have another of our English Star-masters, Mr. Booker in his Bloody
Almanac.
Mr. Booker, who writing of the conjunction of Saturn and Mars, says thus, viz.

I am herein (says he) much encouraged by those labors of my friend Mr.
Lilly, not only printed in these times, but made more memorable in the
success, I have observed, has followed his Astrological Predictions; a few of
which I will repeat, that the misguided infancy against Astrology, may not be
destitute of sufficient testimony in his only Writings of the verity of that
Art; by which art, at this time, I write the ensuing Discourse. Thus Mr. Booker.

Wherefore, my Reader, consider what these aforesaid Astrologers have said for
the verity of their art of Astrology, and thou shall see that their best and
strongest arguments that they can produce to warrant the legality and verity of
A rologie by.

I say, thou Reader may see, that by their own arguments the legality and
verity of Astrology is proved no more; then the legality and verity of
Witchcraft, by their own aforesaid argument of the event falling out,
according to the Prediction. But seeing I have sufficiently declared against
this argument, in showing the insufficiency of the same to prove Astrology any
better then Witchcraft: therefore I here leave it, and so proceed on to the
next position of the Astrologers, wherein they do affirm, that the World is
governed by Stars and Angels. Now their said position is this, viz. that from
the beginning of the World there were 7. Spirits appointed as Rulers to the 7.
Planets, and every one of these Spirits rules the World 354. years, and 4.
months in order. Tritemius. Avenazre.
Now then for as much as I am here to write of the Astrologers Planetary Angels
or Spirits, therefore I will evidently set forth to the view of all men, what
the said Angels or Spirits are, that so all rational men may understand and
see, how the Astrologers would delude others, as they themselves are deluded,
for that they believe a lie, in their affirming Gods governing of the World by
planetary Angels, which said planetary Angels are very Devils. Wherefore I say
again, and again, I will affirm it as follows, viz. That the Astrologers 7.
planetary Angels, are no other Angels or Spirits, then those 7. chief Angels or
Spirits, which are the only Agents for the Magicians and Conjurers in their
several operations of conjuration, that this is truth, I am able to prove by
the writings of some of your Authors, and others. Also I can bear witness to
the same, from my own experience; Mr. Lilly. Tritemim. Avenazre,
for you Astrologers say, that the names of your Planetary Angels are these,
viz. 1 Cassiel, 2. Zachariel. 3. Samael. 4. Michael. 5. Anael. 6. Raphael, 7.
Gabriel. Thus they are also called by the Magicians, and Conjurers, as you see
here set forth by the Astrologers; for the Magi^ians know them by these names,
viz. 1. Cassiel. Heptameron Petri de Albano.
2. Zachariel. 3. Samael. 4. Michael. 5. Anael. 6. Raphael. 7. Gabriel. Aga^n,
these 7. Angels are thus by the Astrologers appropriate unto the 7. Planets,
viz. unto Saturn, Cassiel, unto Jupiter, Zachariel, unto Mars, Samael, unto the
Sun, Michael, unto Venus, Anael, unto Mercury, Raphael, unto the Moon,
Gabriel: and as you see they are appropriate unto the 7. Planets by the
Astrologers, even so in the very same manner, they are appropriate unto the ^.
Planets, by the Magicians. Also in like manner as the Astrologers do divide the
days of the week amongst the 7. Planets, and so from hence they call the 7.
days of the week after the names of the Planets, by appropriating the days of
the week unto the Planets as follows, viz. unto the Planet Saturn, they give
Saturday, unto Jupiter Thursday, unto Mars Tuesday, unto the Sun Sunday, unto
Venus Friday, unto Mercury Wednesday, unto the Moon Monday: even so do the
Magicians. Moreover, the Astrologers do divide the day into 12. equal parts,
whether the day be long or short: these parts they call planetary hours, these
planetary hours the Astrologers appropriate unto the 7. Planets for them to
rule in: from hence it is, that they are called planetary hours. After this
manner do the Magicians and Conjurers also, and as you here see, how Astrology
and Magic do begin together, even so do they end together; for there is such a
strong tie between these 2. arts, that they cannot be separated one from the
other, without a renting of them both in pieces. But now here to return again
to my former matter where I laid down this position, viz. That the 7. Planetary
Angels of the Astrologers, are 7. Devils, etc. Mr. Booker in his this years
Almanac. 1651.
Now whereas Mr. Booker says, who dare or can deny Gods Government of the
World by Angels and Stars: and whereas Dr. G^ll has made a Sermon of Gods
Government of the World by Stars and Angels, who in the same Sermon says thus
in the 2. page of his said Sermon, viz And therefore before the times of
restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. which are at hand, appear before the many
oppressed divine truths be set free: Dr. Gells Sermon, p. 2.
the truths in nature, which together with those other, have been long time
decryed and trodden underfoot, must be revealed and publicly made known. Such
is Gods Government of the World by Stars and Angels. Thus Dr. Gell in the said
Sermon, does in diverse places speak of Gods Government of the World by Stars
and Angels; and so he being deluded with a superstitious and heathenish
opinion, of the Astrologers and Magicians, striveth and labors with all the
might and power he has to delude others, as he and his Auditory are deluded,
in that they be of a heathenish opinion concerning the Stars, and also have a
good conceit of the Devils, as if God did govern the World by them. Dr. Gells
Ser. page 23.

Mr Booker in his Almanac. 1651.


Now seeing Dr. Gell, and Mr. Booker say, who can deny, or who dare deny, Gods
Government of the World by Stars and Angels? therefore I say, and hereby I give
them to know, and so with them all other of the same society to understand,
that I dare and can deny their said position, in which they do affirm the Rule
and Government of the World by Stars and Angels; the which I do deny as
follows, viz. That for as much as the Astrologers do affirm, that the World
is governed by secundarian Intelligences, which said secundarian Intelligences,
are Stars, Planets, Constellations and Spirits. Therefore I do deny the
aforesaid assertion of the Astrologers, for these reasons following, viz. That
whatsoever is immediately governed by the providence of God only, the same is
not governed by secundarian Intelligences; but the whole life of Man is
governed immediately by the providence of God only: therefore I deny that Man's
life is governed by the secundarian Intelligences, which are Stars and Angels:
Now that the life of Man is governed by the providence of God only, I prove it
thus, Job. 38.41. Psalm. 147.9.
That he who provideth for the Raven his food, the same it is who only
governs the whole life of Man; but says the Scripture, The Lord God, he
gives to the Beast his Food, and to the young Ravens which cry: therefore it
is the living God that governs the whole course of the life of Man, and not
only man; but also the whole course of the World likewise; for, behold the
Fowls of the Air, Mat. 6.26.
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into Barns; yet your
heavenly Father feeds them. Again, Mat. 10.29.30.
are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing? and one of them shall not fall on
the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered; so that a Sparrow cannot fall, nor a hair of my head perish, without
the good will and pleasure of my heavenly Father.

Wherefore we may see plainly, that God, the living God, does govern all the
World by his only wisdom and providence: So that we see here is no place for
the secundarian Intelligences of the Astrologians; whereupon it is evidently to
be seen, that their secundarian Intelligences, are only pernicious and
superstitious Fables, whereby the Astrologers are deluded by the Devil, in that
they Idolize the Stars, and are deceived in their Planetary Angels, who they
think are the good Angels of God; but the Astrologers and all other that think
those 7. Angels which the Astrologers call Planetary Angels, are good Angels. I
say if any man say that the said Angels are good, I say that all such men are
deluded; for whosoever says that evil is good, the same is deluded; but
Astrologers do call evil good, in that they affirm the Planetary Angels to be
good Angels, the which said Angels, are Devils, as I said before; for because
that no man can by Conjurations cause the good Angels to appear in a visible
form at his will and pleasure; But some man can cause the Planetary Angels to
appear in a visible form at his will and pleasure, by Conjuration: therefore
the Planetary Angels are not good Angels.

Moreover I say, that these 7. Planetary Angels of the Astrologers, are the
chief agents for Conjurors.

Reader, to the end that thou in this place may have seen how that the said
Planetary Angels of the Astrologers, are as I have aforesaid told thee, viz.
Seven Devils which are also the Magicians chief agents in all Magical
operations.

I say, I did purpose with my self at the first, when I begun this work against
Astrology, to have showed how Astrology is the foundation of Magic: as also
I thought to have set forth how these Planetary Angels are the chief agents for
the Magicians, in their several operations of Conjuration.

Likewise, I could here have set forth unto thy view, their Figures, Circles,
and many such things not fitting to be mentioned.

Also I could have showed unto thee, how these 7. Planetary Angels are to be
called upon by the Magician. To speak briefly of the matter, I could have here
shown unto thee, the whole body of Magic, the which if I had done, when thou
had seen it, The difference between Magic and Astrology, in the practice.
thou would have told me that Magic is as lawful as Astrology; for the
difference that is between Magic and Astrology, is only in the practice; for
whereas the Astrologer does work by his Houses, and from the positions of the
Stars in them, he does from thence with his superstitious regarding of times,
conjecture of the events of things: but the Magician does work after this
manner, for the Magician having by Conjuration, called upon the Astrologers
Planetary Angels, and many other. The said Angels do appear in many forms, but
at the length, they appearing only which should, and in their proper forms,
they will say unto the Magician, Pete quid vis. etc. which the Magician having
made known, then the said Spirits will resolve him of his doubts, and if the
Magician has any thing for the said Angels to perform and do, then will they
(if God permit) accomplish the same according to the desire of the Magician.

Here I could have declared more of the mystery of this wicked art; but why I
will say no more of the same at this time, this is my reason, because if I
should here unfold and lay open the Rules of this art, men of corrupt hearts
who are now ignorant of that wicked art, when they saw the Rules of the same
made manifest, although they are as unclean, and as wicked as the very Devil:
yet I say, those men would take the Rules of the said art, and join them
together again, and so I should contrary to my own desire, help to build up
that which I am appointed to destroy: wherefore it is sufficient, that I have
declared the illegality of the aforesaid arts. But one word more, and then I
have done, whereas I said a little before, viz. That the Astrologer does work
by his Houses, and from the positions of the Star in them, he does from thence
with his superstitious regarding of times, conjecture of the events of things;
that is to say, viz. that whereas the Magician does in his practice work, and
understand plainly from the Planetary Angels, by conferring with them, I say
the Magician is herein fully resolved, by this way of conference, what shall be
the event of any thing he desires to know, (if the Devils know it; But for as
much as Astrologers do not work in this way of conference with the Planetary
Angels: therefore the Astrologers have another way whereby they work: now in
the way the Astrologers go, they know things but only by conjecture; and the
reason why they cannot determine positively in things, as can the Magicians, is
this, because the Magicians have the help of the Devils, by having conference
with them. Now the Devil makes out himself unto the Astrologer in a dark
hidden way, that the Astrologer cannot see him, although he work continually by
him. Now then the way by which the Devil and the Astrologer do work together,
is briefly thus, viz. That the Astrologers superstitious regarding of times,
and their erecting of a figure, with their observing the position of the Stars
in their said figure; to this end, that so they might know the events of
particular things: I say that this regarding of time, and erecting of a figure,
with the observing of the Stars therein, to the end aforesaid: I say it is
nothing else but vain Ceremonies, whereby the Planetary Angels do come to
understand and know, what it is the Astrologer would foretell, or what the thing
is, of which the Astrologer would predict and foretell the event thereof. So
then the Astrologers Figure being erected, he does from thence conjecture what
shall be the event of the thing, for which the figure was erected. Now the
Astrologer having thus delivered his Oracle, from thence forth the Planetary
Angels do all that they are able (God permitting them) to bring to pass that
which the Astrologer did foretell: Now why the Devil does all this, it is to
this end, that so he may uphold and maintain his Kingdom of darkness.

Thus Reader, I will here make an end, and if thou have any thing to say
against me, because I have denied Astrology to be a lawful Art, thou know
where I have my abiding place.

FINIS.

