HONOR ADVANCED: OR, A brief account of the long keeping, and late leaving of
the Close at Liechfield, Being a full Relation of all the Passages worthy
observation during the whole time of the Siege; As also of the honorable
terms upon which it was resigned.

Together with The Names of those valiant Commanders who have done this service
both for Church and State; Some of them unexperienced in War, yet all
courageous for the Truth.

By Captain John Randolph, A Commander, and eye-witnesser in the said Close.

1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor.

Printed for Tho: Underhill. 1643.

Gods goodness and severity: MANIFESTED IN The strange preservation of the
Garrison in Liechfield Close; and after a long Siege, honorably surrendered to
Prince Rupert and his Forces.
Faithfully Related by Jo: Randolph, one of the Captains in the said Close.
I Need not tell the world what (to their cost) they know, That Soldiers by
action, and Printers by promulgation, are the two great English Factors. I am
content to lay by my Sword, and handle the Pen at this time, not to encroach
upon another employment, but that such as will, may know the truth of the
passages concerning Liechfield Close, of which I was an eyewitness.

The Close of Liechfield has a strong wall and buildings incompassing the
Cathedral Church, which all together make a very defensible Fort; This was
gained from the Earl of Chesterfield, and diverse other Commanders and
Soldiers (by the forces raised by the Lord Brook after his death) under the
Conduct of Sir John Gell, then Commander in Chief, who afterward by advise of
the Committee of the County, placed a Garrison in it, consisting of about two
hundred soldiers, besides Captains: This Garrison Prince Rupert (having drawn
his forces into Staffordshire) summoned by a Trumpeter (the soldiers usual
Herald) on April the sixth, to yield up the Close unto him, conditioning that
the Captains and Soldiers should be entertained to serve his Majesty in their
respective places, or else march away; we returned a direct denial, and told
him we resolved to fight it out: Hereupon, on Saturday, April the eighth, he
advanced into Liechfield, the Inhabitants petitioning him so to do, his forces
then were about four thousand: Sunday, the ninth of April, they well observed
us, intrenching themselves, and in the night planted their Ordnance on the East
side of the Close, fitting their instruments, which on Monday, April the tenth,
they played with in earnest, shooting about one hundred and fifty bullets
roundly, most of which weighed nineteen pound, and not all in vain, for they
pierced our walls very frequentlie, which we repaired with stones and earth
without any prejudice to our selves, this design not answering their
expectations, they removed their Ordnance thence, and planted them on the South
side, in a garden of Sir Richard Dyets, This proved to them labor in vain,
and then because we had leisure, we bravely mounted three or four leather
Buckets upon wheels like a Morter-piece, which they let fly at furiously, and
so spent the rest of that day, in playing while we danced, some of them that
while having laid the great Pond dry, that lay between their Ordnance and us,
in the night following endeavored with Fagots to make a Bridge over the mud,
and did half perform it before we could discern it, after which we played
them a sit with our muskets, to their loss, which yet did not deter them, for
that design (as much conducing to their advantage) they prosecuted diverse
nights, though we laid the man for the most part with the Faggot; and how ever
they had a stock sufficient, and might spare men yet was the service too hot,
dead men and Fagots did not join hansomely together, nevertheless the day
following they shot from the Garden or backeside where they had pitched, by
reason whereof they fired a house in the Town which they intended not, whereby
eight or ten other houses were consumed, and that while we made way through the
flames with our Bullets to meet our Adversaries, and there many of them fell.
Upon Saturday, April 15. they planted their great Ordnance at the South Gate
near the Mill, which is within a few yards of the Close, and thence shot about
sixty times, thereby battering all the Wall over the Percullis, intending to
make their entry there on Sunday morning, and therefore during the smoke of
the shot, attempted to scale the Walls, which the Sentinel espying discharged,
as did other of our soldiers upon his Alarm, who were exceeding ready and
diligent, notwithstanding their continual service day and night, for the space
of sixteen days and nights, for so long the Siege continued, and so that Plot
(as the rest) miscarried: In this assault we lost one man, and they (as we
conceive) about sixty, yet so indefatigable were they, that they caused the
Colliers which they called to their assistance to under-mine us, which we once
or twice prevented by countermining and smoking them out: Another Mine they
had secreatly made from the Angel under one of our Towers, which we suspected
not; this being fully prepared, Prince Rupert did again; viz. on Thursday
morning, April 20. sound a Parley, and tendered us the former Conditions, which
we again refusing, they presently blew up our Tower, and there made a terrible
wide breach, and entered it presently with much eagerness and security as we
conceived, for many of their chief Commanders appeared first in it; about 40.
of our Musketeers endeavored to make good the breach, the rest of our
soldiers being employed on the Walls, which they were also now endeavoring to
scale; these forty seeing little execution done by their shot, being lead on
by that truly valiant Soldier, Leiutenant Mydhope did fall upon their
Adversaries (being between two or three hundred) pell mell, and with their
Butt ends of their Muskets, their Swords, and Holbeards, did most bravely
repel them, slew many, among which was Colonel Usher, Captain Corbet (say
some Sir John Corbets Son) and many other Officers, to the number of about 60.
and wounded near upon 100. others amongst which were the Lord Digbie who is
snot into the knee, Colonel Wagstaff, Mortally wounded, Colonel Garret hurt,
took Prisoners diverse great Commanders, among which was Capt. Leg, and
Prince Ruperts Chaplain, one Askin a Scottish man, unto whom a Surgeon was
sent, Prince Rupert having before requested it, after this, while some of our
soldiers made good the breach, we went presently to clear the Close of those
that rushed in, being about 150. who apprehending all their own, as in
probability they well might, fell on Plundering; diverse of these we took
Prisoners, others of them escaped down the Ladders that were reared for their
coming over unto us, a fair escape by Ladders.

We lost in this dreadful commotion not above eight men, two were blown up
with the Tower, and some four or six wounded, and in all the siege before not
above three or four men; when we had breathed a little, a Council of War was
called, and perceiving our danger, how destitute of all relief from men, and
which was worst of all, how very near spent our Match and Powder were, not
enough to make good another assault, we resolved on these Articles to present
to Prince Rupert.

1. To leave the Close, and to march out with our Bag and Baggage, and all our
soldiers armed, and Colors flying. 2. To have eleven Carts provided for us.
3. That all the prisoners that any of the Kings forces had taken in
Staffordshire, since my Lord Brooks arrival there, should be released.
Unto which we added, that if Prince Rupert refused these terms, we would put
all our prisoners we then had to the Sword, and die our selves upon the walls.

Upon the receipt of the Articles, Col. Hastings came in to treat with us, and
in a very short time consented to them, whereupon we marched forth orderly the
next morning, being Friday, with our Colors displayed, being about 80.
Musketeers, and as many Horsemen with their Horses and Arms, besides the
Commanders, and so passed through Prince Rupert his Army, which was set guard
wise about a mile in length, none of his Soldiers offering any abuse to us,
and so we came safe to Coventry, some on Friday night, others on Saturday
morning, and however we have cause to be humble, yet blessed be God, who has
not delivered us over unto death, but by us cut of many hundreds of our enemies.

That both our Commanders and Common soldiers who kept Liechfield Close may
have their due commendations, this may not be omitted, namely, their great
faithfulness as well as courage, for although Prince Rupert and Hastings used
all means [as by commending them for their valor, proffering them preferment
and good pay, etc.] to cause them to desert the Parliament, and serve under
them, yet they refused, although they had never received penny pay in all that
service.

The names of the Commanders in the Close.
Capt. Edw. Leigh. Sergeant Major Russell. Capt. Greives. Capt. Henry Stone.
Capt. Edward Foley. Capt. John Randolph. Capt. Spearing. Capt. Richard Smith.
Capt. Holmes.
The Names of some Commanders in Prince Ruperts Army.
Prince Rupert. Earl of Northampton. Lord Digby. Lord Capell. Col. Hastings,
Stanhop, Wagstaffe, Usher, Garret, Harding, etc.

