Ruperts Sumpter, AND Private Cabinet rifled.

AND A DISCOVERY OF A Pack of his JEWELS.

By way of DIALOGUE Between, Mercurius Britaunicus and Mercurius Aulicus.

York



London* Printed by (...)

Britanicus. WHither so fast Aulicus


Aulicus, I beshrew you for following me so close Master Britanicus, you have
tired me out of a Lordship, a living, a Clerkeship, a Knighthood, or something
of note, that I should have had for my good service had not you been, and broke
the heart of me, and the neck of my designs.


Brit. What news from Rupert, Aulicus? he has lately had a great fight I hear.


Aul. Yea, marry, Brit that does a little revive me, for he has raised the
Siege at York, taken General Lesley, beaten the two other Generals, wounded
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and totally routed them, and this is true I will take my
oath of it, for I have the Kings hand for it, and he has Prince Ruperts hand
for it, and so have all the Ambassadors in England, and he that brought the
news first was made a Knight for his labor.


Brit. In this manner you get all your victories, and your Deplorations and
Proclamations, and thus you make all your Protestations in print, well so we
get them, we will give you leave to have the Kings hand for them. But what is
the reason you travel in your shirt, Aulicus? are you so hot?


Aul. To tell you the truth I was even now with a holy Priest in his house,
that was troubled with an Ague, and he put off his Wastcote and ran away, and
I ran so fast after him that I was quite out of breath, and so extreme hot,
that I was forced to put off my doublet to cool my self.


Brit. But I could tell you a better story of Rupert, he was once a pretty
young man, and this Kingdom did love him well, and gave him his maintenance,
but the Emperor got him, and gave him good quarter, and popery and the young
man came over, and lit into ill company at Oxford, amongst Priests and
Prelates, Jesuits and Bishops, and bad Courtiers, and there he has lived with
his good Uncle, spoiling and robbing, and killing and plundering, and hopes to
be King himself shortly, if his Majesty look not to him, for he does all he
can to get the love of the Cavaliers, a dangerous design. Now, what a horrible
thing will this be, to set up such a bloody Prince, but the reason is this,
The Papists and grand Malignants fear, that the Scots and we together shall
get our King, and have him good again, and then they are undone. But I dare say
no more, I must be secret, only this. And it is thought if he cannot be King,
he intends at least to undo the Kingdom, that his Majesty and himself shall
be both alike, the King no better then his Nephew. Is not this a malicious
Prince think you?


Aul. You dishonor that noble Prince, whose resolution is so valiant, that all
the Roundheads in the Kingdom shall be stain, rather then his highness will let
his Uncle be advised by the Lords and Commons at Westminster.


Brit. For prince Ruperts highness, we hear of his highness, and were it not
for the Parliament he would shortly be too high for his Majesty* Is it not a
shame for the English Nobility to let him alone in his design, that would
grow higher then the King himself, if not higher by the head, yet by the
Crown. Are these the good Subjects that set up a wanton young Prince, to court
his Majesty's Armies to himself, to fight for the King so long, till nothing
but his Throne be a seat commensurate to his person?


Aul. Can you blame the Prince, for doing what he does when he sees his uncle
cannot subdue the Kingdom by force of Arms? why should not he massacre the
Rebels that abuse so good a King, that has done and suffered more, then all
his predecessors since the conquest?


Brit. We acknowledge it with sad hearts and hands, he has done more then any
of his predecessors, what do you mean Aulicus, to go about to vindicate
Rupert, who has set the King against his grand Council more then ever his
predecessors have done, proclaimed his Parliament Traitors, suffered them to be
called pretended houses more then ever his predecessors has not Rupert
protected delinquents ^g^i^ Law and Justice? set up a standard for Papists and
Foreigners, tolerated Priests end Jesuits in his camp, betrayed the
Kingdom of Ireland to the mercy of bloody Rebels by not drawing the English
Forces thence. Aulicus this is your meaning, you say true Rupert has fomented
her Majesty to continue this war, to divide the King from his people: to pawn
his jewels, and to provide him arms and ammunition to destroy the Kingdom,
and to bring his Majesty into these straights whilst himself does kill fire
and plunder, and spill whole Rivers of blood, till the Thames and the Severne,
and Trent and Humber, and Owse, flow down in crimson streams? That the Bishops
may have way to bring in Popery and Libertinisme, the Priests preach
Arminianisme, evil Councillors bring in Tyranny, and a civil war eats up the
bowels of the Kingdom. And Iermine and Digby, Bristol, Cottington, Rateliff,
Davis, Dupper, Goring, and Nicholas, may be the only Council to advise with
the King against the Parliament, more then ever was known before, and suffer
thee Aulicus to rail, jeare, blaspheme, abuse miscall the Parliament without
contradiction, and therefore I will follow thee and never leave till all thy
villainy be discovered, and I hope to see an end of thee and thy baseness both
together.


Aul. You are very hot upon it Britnnicus, but for all your curses and
imprications I hope to see all the remnant at Westminster that sit voting
whilst the Kingdom is involved in blood, and all the Roundheads and Citizens
on your side one day to be cut off, man, woman and child, for refusing thus to
obey your King.


Brit. I pray thee tell me Aulicus, where does the rem^ant remain, almost 300
sit at Westminster, and at Oxford but a matter of a hundred withal the
Strangeways; and all the Joseph's, and the James, unless you reckon those in
the Duchess of Buckinghams closet; and whether is it not better to sit voting
at Westminster, then to sit doting in a bean field, as Rupert did under the
blosumes when he was vouted lately at York, who has been all this while not
only involving but dissolving the Kingdom, dis-parliamenting that great
Council. It is true the Kingdom is in blood, but who opened the veins of the
Protestants, and let out the blood of our brethren of Scotland, and made the
streams of Tine run crimson, It is true, our Parliament fits and votes, and
Rupert involves it in blood, and our Parliament is the only pole and center the
Kingdom rests on, their residence and combining fixes the State and Nation and
keeps it from confusion. This is that which he would slay: for he knows the
being of a Parliament, the essence of such a Senate shows vigor and strength,
and activity in all the parts, and all the powers, and engines, and
machinations of the Enemy is to disarme, to murder, to massacre, to
unprivilegde this Parliament.


Aul. The Prince is wise and valiant, and those that are about him are so
tender of his honor, that they will not leave his Highness, whilst they have
one drop of blood in their bodies, is this great work that they are about to
subdue, and utterly root out you and all the faction, that will not throw their
necks under the feet of his Highness, in obedience to King Charles.


Brit. Indeed you may call Rupert his Highness, for he hopes to be higher
then his Majesty, if all be true I hear from thence, Rupert is fitting his
head for a Crown, and has a Montero: which he means to make use of under it;
if his head be not too little for it: as it must needs be indeed. But what
shall that Kingdom do where he gets the Crown? for he will presently send it
after the Jewels. But before the Crown be set upon his head, I would first
have his head at a reasonable distance from the wilder part of his body.


Aul. You would have him beheaded then, would you, truly that were a thousand
pities, for if he were gone, I think we should never have such a Champion
again to follow the business home; he subdues all where he comes, and
spares neither man, woman, nor child. The last Sunday I was m^ditating of his
Majesty's Coronation, and then you would no think how it troubled me to
consider of the Treasons, and Covenants, and close Committees, and looking in
my Calender, I found the noble Prince Rupert recorded the very next day after
his Majesty's Coronation in M. N^worths Almanac, this was a providence?


Brit. This is a malignant Oxford papisticall trick, to put Rupert so close to
the Coronation, how dare you thus go about to inaugurate the wild Prince, I
warrant thou would be the first that would worship him if he should come to
the Crown, and he bad fair for it, before his routing at York, the soulderie
began to admire him, and he rid in state upon the trappings of his success,
and one said, It is pity your Highness is but a Commander of horse you are
worthy to command a Kingdom, an other whispers him, that the peoples eyes are
upon him, and the yongman rid far higher in his saddle then he does now:
Would it not have been a pretty feat to have seen him conquer an inheritance
for himself in the name of his Majesty: but God be blessed, he is now cut
short* and we hope shortly to see the hot spirited yongster see all his hopes
quite frustrate.


Aul. Oh if you had seen how he was beloved in Lancashire; you would not
offer to speak so, when he was there with his Army before the fight? he did
much increase it, with the Catholics of those parts: he set on the Commission
of Array with success, and the Earl of Derbies Dependants resorted to him,
and Colonel Goring has been so active since his liberty; that he never
took rest since his lodging in the Tower: and with a great Army the Prince
marched like the swift clouds, to raise the siege at York.


Brit. God be thanked, that Cloud did much obscure the North, but it is now
dissipated, and God has given his servants, a glorious victory over the
Enemies of their Religion and liberty. The plundering Prince with his Irish
Rebels papists, and other desperate Russians were totally routed, and defeated,
3000 of them being ^^aine on the place, and 1500 taken with 3 piece of
Ord^ance, 10000 Arms with all their Ammunition, bag and baggage, 100 and odd
Colors. And whilst our soldiers were in the heat of execution, Prince Rupert
was much beholding to the gallantrie of his Horse who in the conclusion
surpassed all the rest of his followers in swiftness.


Aul. Indeed the Prince was sent to relieve York, but he hindered them, and
fought with the Roundheads against the Council and advice of the Commanders.


Brit. It pleased God it should be so, that so by this means he might be
routed; but it has so displeased the Earl of Newcastle, that has left his
Commission behind him, and it is brought up to the Parliament, but he is fled
after his plunder, and so I warrant you will Rupert after him shortly.


Aul. No such matter, The Prince has rallied his m^n again, and recruted
himself, and is four or 5000 ^^rong again; and hopes to recrute his honor
too. The papists have not quite taken off their hopes from him; it is hoped he
will do well enough with his horse to rang up and down till the popish Irish
good subjects come over to join with him for the defense of the Protestant
Religion, and the liberty of the Subject.


Brit. We believe the Irish are preparing to come, because we hear Rupert ^s
to meet the^, but sure it was not the Pidlers, but our Cannons at the Leaguer,
that made him dance in the Bean field, till he was so fain to lie down and
sing -- the lamentation of a total routing.


Aul. You will talk of great matters: as you did of the taking of York,
Newcastle, Oxford: but you see we keep them still, and were very near the
taking of Hull, which we hoped would have been delivered up to us.


Brit. Indeed Aulicus this is that which has done us (...) mischief. You have
had them amongst us ^ho h^^^ acted for you: We found in Ruperts Sumpter such
(...) have discovered all your tricks, and we see now how you come to cheat
us of Towns and Castles formerly, and how you come by all your intelligence of
our proceedings. There we found C. R. which certified how vvilling and ready
Sir John Hotham was to deliver up Hull to the Marquess of Newcastle. There
we found a discovery of the Lord Rochfords intelligence given to the Kings
forces, for which the King had signed his Pardon. You may well presume upon
Victories, and go on in your plots and contrivements against us: when you can
have intelligence from a Peer out of our own house of Lords. But now we
shall look to you hereafter, and labor to prevent the same as well as we can.


FINIS.
Published according to Order.


