A LETTER SENT To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons, Of the late Fight at Colchester, AND, How the Suburbs of the
said Town were fired by The Lord Goring, Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas, and the
rest of the Enemy.

PRinted by the Command of the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 17. 1648.

To the Honorable, WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House OF
COMMONS.
SIR,
IN my last I intimated to you, That we hoped to gain the Gate House, the works
about it, and church; all which the Enemy had fortified very strongly, and it
pleased God this afternoon about Five of the clock to deliver all these places
into our hands, the manner was thus; We discharged four pieces of Canon
altogether, which much amazed the Enemy in the works, and then discharged four
more; and immediately our Musketeers fell on and stormed the Gate House with
Ladders, and threw in hand-Granado's: The Enemy opposed very stoutly for a
while, and threw down several of the Ladders, but at last gave back; some held
out their Handkerchiefs, others fired very fiercely: yet notwithstanding, our
men gained the work, and part of the Gate House, and throwing in a
hand-Granado, where there was some of the Enemy stood to their Arms, it happened
to light amongst their Magazine, consisting of about four Barrels of powder,
and blew up about forty of their men: It pleased God that we had but one man
hurt with that blow. All this evening our men have been digging, and pulling
out the dead bodies of the Enemy, finding here and there a Leg and an Arm by it
self. There were in the whole number, as some of the prisoners who had quarter
confessed Sevenscore, and we had about Threescore prisoners, not any could escape
(we getting between them and home) so the rest were put to the Sword, and
destroyed as aforesaid.

I send you herewith some poisoned Bullets, that you may see how they still
persist in their venomous disposition, to shoot such things as may be sure to
rancour and poison the flesh.

The Enemy was so enraged at this loss (having totally by this means shut
themselves up within the walls, and not having any part of the Suburbs) that
they set the Suburbs round the Town on fire, and at this present there is the
sadest spectacle to be seen, that has fallen out in this Age, there being now
burning in a great Flame, houses above a mile in length, and with that
violence, that it is a wonder to behold it: By this we conceive that they are
desperately bent, and will not only destroy the Suburbs, but even burn the
Town also before they yield.

I hope in the Lord he will enable us very shortly to gain this place, and to
make such Destroyers of the Nation, Examples to posterity.

Leaguer before Colchester, July 15. 12 at night. J. R.

FINIS.

