5 Iulii, 11 at night.

A LETTER From the Leaguer before Colchester, Sent to the Honorable Committee
at DERBY-House, OF The great Fight between his Excellency The Lord FAIRFAX, AND
The Forces in Colchester.

ORdered by the said Committee, That this Letter be forthwith Printed and
Published.

GUALTHER FROST Secr'

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 7. 1648.

At the LEAGUER before Colchester, July 5. Eleven at night.
SIR,
THe Enemy sallyed forth at East-bridge about eight in the morning, with One
thousand Foot and Three hundred Horse, and fell on our guard very suddenly, and
surprised some of them being contrymen, the rest retreated to the main
guard: Colonel Whaley perceiving what advantage the Enemy had got, presently
advanced with his horse and got between them and home, whilst the Tower
Regiment advanced toward the Front, and routed both Horse and Foot together,
and took about One hundred prisoners, the most of them miserably wounded, the
Soldiers giving them a payment for their poisoned Bullets: About Twenty of the
Enemy was slain on the place, most Gentlemen, their good apparel and white
skins speak no less: Lieutenant Colonel Weston, eldest Son to Sir Richard
Weston, and two Captains more were taken prisoners, they confess they were One
thousand Foot, besides Horse; and some of the prisoners say, a Colonel was
slain on the place, where their Foot fell; the Retreat was so hasty, that our
two Drakes which they surprised at East-bridge, they left behind, so that we
gained them, the house and Turnpike, where we formerly were: Lieut: Colonel
Shambroke was shot in the body, the Bullet since taken out, and we find it
poisoned, boiled in Copprice; our Soldiers hope to be revenged of them the next
engagement for this poisoned Bullet: Captain Moody who commanded a Troop of
Suffolk horse, was taken prisoner, engaging the Enemy very boldly in person;
one Soldier had his Leg shot off with a great Bullet, and some wounded. The
Enemy was this day so sufficiently beaten, that unless hunger, which breaks
stone walls, enforce them to play their last game, they will no more appear.

Your servant, J. R.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Colonel or person of quality slain, had Rings on his finger, which the
Soldiers cut off before he was dead; many of them had two shirts on, which
would make one believe they intended an escape. One Wood a Commander of Horse,
lately a Supermerary Reformado, was slain on their side.

FINIS.

