A Most Grave, and Modest Confutation of the Errors of the Sect, commonly
Called BROWNISTS, OR: SEPERATISTS.

Agreed upon long since by the joint consent of sundry, godly, and Learned
Ministers of this Kingdom, then standing out and suffering in the cause of
inconformity; and now published in a time of need, for the good of Gods Church,
and the better settling of men's unstable minds in the truth against, the
subtle insinuations, and plausible pretenses of that pernicious evil.

Published by W. Rathband, Minister of the GOSPEL.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, and George Badger, and are to be sold at
the Bible, on Fleet-Bridge, and in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1644.

The Publisher to the READER.
CHristian Reader, touching this ensuing treatise, be pleased to understand
that it was compiled, (so as now thou have it, without any adition, or
alteration) many years since by sundry Reverend and Godly Ministers of this
Kingdom, who in their times stood out and suffered in the cause of
Inconformitie to the Ceremonies, and labored the Reformation of things then,
and still in part remaining amiss in our Church: therein both for opinion, and
practice, endeavoring to keep close to the Rules of Scripture, and what in
them lay to eschew all errors and exorbitances, both of separation on the right
hand, and of superstition on the left.

Who the men were by name, is neither now necessary to be published, nor, in
respect of them all, certainly known. But what sort of men they were that made
it, and of what piety, charity, modesty, and ability for this controversy
they were, the treatise it self by its own light will sufficiently discover
to the unpartiall, and unprejudicate Reader.

It is now presented to public view (after so long deteinment) the rather
because;

First, The Press is now more free and open (then in former times) to books of
this nature, which do so oppose the Schism of the Brownists, as not at all to
allow of the tyranny and corruptions of the Bishops.

Secondly, It seems now more needful then formerly, through the late
lamentable increase of opinions and practices of separation, and the dangerous
rents already made, and likely to be made thereby, even to the utter ruin of
this Church, if by the mercy of our God, and the wisdom of our King, and
Parliament, some timely, and effectual remedy be not provided.

Thirdly, Hereby (good Reader) thou may see that the opinions, and practices
of those that way addicted, now so much extolled, wondered at, and greedily
embraced by many, under the notion of new truths, and a new and further light
(as if some new created Star bad now appeared to the world, never seen before)
are indeed no other, for substance, but the old errors and dotages of Barrow,
and Greenwood, long since by them published, and by the godly, sober, and
judicious in those times opposed, and exploded. Save that now, like rustie
weapons, they are newly furbished, and being but the same mettalls, and
materials, are only cast into a new mould, with addition of some things more,
of the same sort, then they expressly held; mitigation of others, by them more
sharply and rigorously delivered; and interlasing of others, more pleasing and
plausible to make the rest relish and vent the better.

Fourthly, Hereby also thou may perceive, and take up the true judgment of
the true ancient and present Non-conformists of this Kingdom, in these points,
as from their own mouth, and pen. Whereof (by the help of God) thou may make
these, and the like uses.

First, Thou may clear them in thy thoughts from the misrepresentations, and
imputations both of the Episcopal, and Schismatic party. Both of which
would make the world believe that the Non-conformists have laid the foundation
of Brownisme, by their principles of Inconformity, and that if this be
lawful, the other must needs be necessary: The former sort thus suggesting,
to lay the greater hatred upon them and the cause of Reformation, which they
promoted; The latter sort to procure the greater credit to their own
irregular, and unwarrantable courses thereby. (And would to God that some other
brethren (though of a far better sort, and such as have long groaned under
their Conformity, had not been, or yet were not too credulous to such
unlikely, and unreasonable suggestions against their brethren.)

2. Thou may see that the cause of separation may be confuted without
relinquishing in one part, the grounds of Inconformitie, or leaning at all unto
Episcopacie. As the cause of Inconformitie, may be fully maintained without
fetching weapons from or betaking our selves unto the Camp of Separation,
which thing I could wish with all my heart, bad been well observed by some
(otherwise godly and judicious brethren) in these days, who no sooner begin to
distaste and cast off, their old burden of superstitious conformity, (of late
augmented, and made utterly unprofitable by sundry other innovations) but
withal they begin to dislike all set forms of prayer especially, in our
Lyturgie, as unlawful, to question their own present standing in the
ministry as Antichristian, and to abstain from our worship, especially our
Sacraments, as Idolatrous, with other like unreasonable opinions, and
practices. As if it were not possible for men to leap out of the Surplice,
unless also they leapt out of the Church, and as if there were no middle
between separation from the Church and true worship thereof, and subscription
unto or practice or approbation of all the corruptions in the same. An error,
in some sort, formerly excusable when oppression (as Solomon says, Eccles.
7.7.) and persecution made even wise men themselves mad, and sometimes in
have, between fear, grief and anger, in avoiding one extreme, to fall upon
another. But now, since that by the miraculous mercy of God) the stings of
those great Bees, are pulled out, and their horns sawed off, whereby they have
so long afflicted, and willingly destroyed this poor Church, I say now, me
thinks wise men should look before they leap, and so warily eschew one
error as that they do not unwarily run into another, perhaps a worse.

Lastly thou may be somewhat stayed, from hasty adhering, or inclining to
their courses of separation, not only by the Treatise it self, but also by
the consideration of the Treatisers. For though no man's person whatsoever can
be a sufficient bottom whereon to settle any opinion or practice in Religion,
but the Word of God, and right reason alone, yet is not these men's example, or
testimony to be altogether slighted, especially in this controversy, wherein
we are sometimes almost deaffed with the praises of some of the seperators
eminent learning, piety, sincerity, zeal, etc. In which case I hope it need
not be offensive to any, perhaps it may be profitable to some (according to
the Apostles example in a case not altogether unlike, 2 Cor. 11.22. to oppose
these men's learning, piety, sincerity, zeal, etc. against the others; Who as
in all other things they were examples of holiness, so in this, that they have
ever, not only for borne but steadfastly opposed to their great reproach,
damage, and danger many ways, the corruptions in our Church Government,
worship and Leiturgie, and have been lights and leaders to these latter times
therein, yet always in a peaceable and regular way, as not on the one side to
subject themselves to suspicious inventions, so on the other, not sinfully to
separate from the Communion and true worship of Churches; accounting it more
agreeable to all rules of piety, charity, and Christian prudence to tolerate
for the time, what they could not mend, rather than to rent and tear all in
pieces, to an utter ruin.

To conclude, though perhaps some few particulars in this treatise may seem
more questionable, yet for the maine I doubt not but the Authors have held
close to the truth, both in their own positions, and in opposing their
adversaries. By which therefore (good Reader) thou may reap much benefit,
for thy better settling in these unsettled times, if thou be capable thereof,
and if the Lord shall please to add his blessing thereunto. Which he shall
never cease to pray for, who is, (all that he is) truly thine in Him,

W R.

THE PREFACE of the AUTHORS of the Treatise, ensuing to the READER.
THE holy Apostle Saint Paul writing unto the Galathians these words, Brethren,
If any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, you which are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted: both shows the danger of falling, whereunto they are
subject, who stand in the Church of God, and prescribes the duty of
recovering those that are fallen unto such as are spiritual, That is to say,
as are furnished with gifts thereunto, with the manner how all that ought to be
performed: two necessary points in our judgments to be considered, and much
tending to the preservation of the good and happy estate of the Church of God:
for how comes it to pass, that Satan so far prevails against it; but for
that weak men consider not the danger of falling, until they be down, and
almost past recovering; those that are fallen, either not at all, or not until
they be well near without remedy. It is therefore one especial part of holy
wisdom, for men who think they stand, to take heed lest they fall, and
therefore to seek to kneow the depth of Satan's policies and subtilties, and
then the effectual means for the preventing of them, Into which if they
carefully enquire they shall find, that though he seek to draw even those
that have shined as stars in the Church, from heaven unto the earth; yet that
he much more earnestly labors to make them wandering stars, forsaking the
place wherein they seemed to be fixed, to give shine and direction to others,
that is, though he labors and endeavors to bring men from their first
love and zeal, unto a lukewarmnesse, or key coldness in the Church, yet he
rather desires to lead them into a fiery spirit, and indiscreet zeal from
the Church and society of Saints, which no doubt he does, as for many other
causes; so for these two. 1. That he might by their departure, who have seemed
zealous and godly professors, shake the faith of others, and cause them to
doubt, that they are not in the true Church; where they may find directions
toward the kingdom of heaven: and at last to fly from it, as from Babylon.
And 2. that he might deprive those men themselves of the happy means of the
recovery which they might have had easily applied, had they been in the
Church, and remained in the fellowship thereof: Hence it is, that in the Church
of God, those who breaking the holy bands of love and faith, have like unkind
children forsaken her their natural mother, and often pleaded with her as a
strumpet, which never was done in more convenient manner then of late, by
certain of our brethren, who having been brought forth of the womb, and
brought up in the bosom of the Church of England, have not only renounced, as
a stepmother: but condemned her, as one of the daughters, yea the eldest
daughter of the very whore of Babylon, railing on her, as if she living in
continual spiritual fornications, brought forth sons and daughters, not
unto Christ; but unto Antichrist his adversary: By which their faults and
fallings, as they have deprived themselves of those gracious blessings which
they did long, and might have still enjoyed amongst us to their souls health,
and made the means of their recovery more hard and difficult; so have they
troubled and disquieted many remaining in the body of our Church, and of strong
men in the truth, brought them to be children again in understanding, easy to
be carried about with every blast of diverse and strange doctrines, how
contrary soever to the truth according unto godliness, either taught or
received by them. The case thus standing, we take it to be our duties, being
members and Ministers of this Church, having by Gods grace received some,
though a small measure of gifts fit thereunto, as to maintain the credit of
the Church, wherein we live. And to justify the practice of our ministry
therein, so far forth as truth will permit; so chiefly to seek, and
endeavor both the recoverie of those that are strayed from the sheepfold of
Christ amongst us, and also the stay of those that are ready to run after
them, together with the better grounding, and confirming of them who remain in
the flock, with comfort under their shepherds, which duty we have endeavored
to perform heretofore by public preaching, and private conferences as
occasions has been offered, and now have bestowed our labors in writing this
treatise following, to the same end wherein after we have proved by certain
reasons, that our Assemblies, are the true Church of God, we take upon us to
show.

First, The four chiefest exceptions, they take against our Church for
warranting Schism, and separation from us are vain and frivelous.

Secondly, That the maine grounds they stand upon for the erecting their new
Church, are weak and slender.

Thirdly, that the best arguments that they use for condemning us, and
justifying themselves, are loose and unsufficient: which points as we have
gathered out of their printed books and written papers (where they were before
scattered) and brought into one form and body, so have we more plainly, and
nakedly, both proposed, and dealt in, passing by all impertinent, and offensive
matters; And their flouting declamations, petitions, exclamations, and bitter
reviling speeches against our Churches, Ministers, and people, all their
reproachful slanderous profane scornings, fearful blasphemies against the
Word preached, and Sacraments administered, prayers, and holy exercises of
Religion, used in our Assemblies, wherewith their writings, and printings swell
to some bigness, as Bladders puffed up with wind. All these (though we have
given the Reader some taste of their spirit in them) yet have we not in our
Treatise stood upon them, for that we judge them not worthy the answer.

This work of ours, we commend, first unto our brethren departed from us,
desiring them to read it, without partiality, self love, prejudice or other
sinister affections, and with meekness, indifferency, and love of the Truth,
desire to be informed, and readiness to be reformed, where they err and go
astray: It may be that God will give a blessing to it, nay sure we are, that
he is faithful that has promised, to give unto those that ask, to open to
those that knock, and to cause them to find that seek, the truth in sincerity
of their hearts, especially if to the reading thereof, they adjoyne: First, a
review of the books which have been written by the Ringleaders of their
separations. Secondly, a view of the persons of whom their Assemblies consist.
And Thirdly, a consideration of the estate wherein their Church now stands.
In the review of the books which have been written, we exhort them with single
hearts, to examine the spirits where with the authors of them were led in their
writing, and they shall find it not to be the good spirit of God, which
fills men's hearts with meekness, humility compassion, softness,
holiness, and other sanctified affections, but that evil spirit of Satan,
which under color of zeal of Gods glory, hatred of sin, desire of serving
God in sincerity, thrusts men whom it has deceived into pride, self love,
rashness, unnatural affections, uncharitable surmises, and most unchristian
judgment of their brethren.

Secondly, to weigh wisely what end they proposed to themselves in their
writings, which will evidently appear to be not so much the clearing of
themselves, from the crime of Schism, as the drawing of others to join with
them, and the defacing of our Church, which they compare with the most
Idolatrous, and heathenish Nations, that ever were, yea with Sodom and Babylon
it self, and the disgracing the Ministers thereof, especially those whom
heretofore they have most reverenced, whom they sort with most wretched
Miscreants, Judas, Cain, Balaam, and many other, upon whom the spirit of God
has set a fearful brand of eternal condemnation.

Thirdly, to try carefully the allegations of Scripture, wherewith they have
fully painted the Margents, and with the multitude, whereof they have
astonished the simple, or credulous Readers, persuading them, that their cause
stands upon the same ground of Gods holy Word, and they shall plainly
perceive, that the places by them alleged, do for the most part prove that,
which we deny not: And if they be brought to confirm the matter in
controversy, they are either unconscionably, or ignorantly wrested against, or
besides the meaning of the Holy Ghost. A second thing which we entreat them to
do is, to view the persons of whom their Assemblies consist, and let them tell
us how many of them there be, whom they have brought from gross ignorance,
unto true knowledge, from infidelity, to holy Faith, from profanesse of life,
to a conscionable walking with God; if there be scarce any amongst them, which
have not bin of some note in our Churches, for holy and sincere profession; and
if they had no good thing in them, which they have not received by the
ministry of those men, and in the bosom of those Churches, which now they
condemn, and fly from, why then take they the Seal of our ministry, and
Church, and set it unto their blanke? Thirdly we exhort all of them to a survey
of their estate, wherein they stand, which is (if that be true, which by some
of their own has been reported) full of disorder and confusion; And indeed how
can it otherwise be, whereas they teach that every member of their Church may,
and ought to stand up against their Ministers and Elders, to gainesay them in
delivering of doctrine, and withstand the other in execution of discipline; If
he be persuaded, the one erreth from the truth, and the other fails in
justice, is not this to make every member an eye, an ear, an head? And must
not men be of Angelical perfection to preserve unity, where such large
liberty is granted unto them?

A second sort to whom we commend this labor of ours, be our brethren also who
by the writings, doings, and sufferings of these deceived men, are in danger
likewise to be deceived, being brought to halt between two opinions. These
also we pray to read it with an holy purpose, to be fully resolved, and settled
in the truth. We hope their labor shall not be in vain, if they will accept
from us these few advertisments.

First, That they make not the example of any man seem he never so godly,
religious, and zealous, but the Word of God only, the rule of their belief,
and life; Paul himself must be followed no further, when the holy precepts of
the Word, and the examples of the godly join together, we have the one to teach
us, the other to incite us to do our duties.

Secondly, That they carry an humble and lowly conceit of themselves, and their
gifts.

That they remember, 1 Cor. 8.2. Galath. 6.3.
that if any man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought
to know; And that if any man seem to himself, that he is somewhat, when he is
nothing, he deceaveth himself in his imaginations.

That to this purpose, they occupy themselves in consideration of their own
wants, and sins, which cleave so fast unto them, rather than in the marking
the blemishes, and noteing the faults that are in others, following the
counsel of the Apostle. Galath. 6.4.
Let every one prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself only, and not in another.

Thirdly, that they have a reverend opinion of those men by whose ministry
they have been begotten unto God, or nourished in the truth, by whose labors
they have been instructed, confirmed and comforted, in whose mouths the Word
of God has been unto them, as a two edged sword, entering through them unto
the deviding a sunder the soul and spirit, the joints and the marrow, that
they suffer not a sinful thought to enter into their heads, of their unlawful
vocations, who have their hearts and souls, as Seals of their ministry, and
may say to them as Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 9.1^.
are ye not my work in the Lord, if I be not an Apostle unto others, yet
doubtless I am unto you, for you are the Seal of mine Apostleship in the
Lord; whereof they should therefore be the more careful, for that it has bin
an ancient and ordinary policy of Satan, that he might cause men to refuse
the word brought unto them in the mouths of the Prophets, Apostles and other
men of God, yea of Christ Himself to persuade them that they had no warrant of
their vocarions, and calling from God.

Fourthly, That if notwithstanding, all that is said for their instruction, and
reformation in this behalf, they keep a liking of that draught of a Church,
which our deceived Brethren have framed and commended in their writings, and
desire to join themselves unto their society.

They yet remember it is a part of wisdom, to stay the full establishing of
their Church, and practice of the Ordinances thereof, for a time that they may
see what blessings of God be upon it, for the ratifying and approving of their
doings: for if it be of God, it will stand as an house founded upon a a sure
Rock, if it be of men, it will come to naught.

A third sort to whom we commend this work of ours are our stronger brethren
which continue with comfort in the society of their Church, them we entreat
that if they find any confirmation or strengthening unto their consciences by
the pursuing hereof, any increase of knowledge and ability to maintain the
truth of our Church, Sacraments and word, to defend the lawfulness of our
ministry, and practice of Gods external worship amongst us.

That first they praise God whose gift it is, that any thing is spoken, or
written for their edification, instruction and consolation, and then bestow the
same as occasion shall be offered, to the reclaiming of those that are straied,
and holding them that are ready to wander.

We lastly commend this simple travel of ours to the Church of God, whereof
we are unworthy Ministers, beseeching her to accept our poor endeavors, the
rather, for that we are not ignorant that the labors which we have taken in
this cause, will be diversely judged of, according to the manner and affection
of those men to whom this work shall come.

Some, as namely, our deceived Brethren against whom we deal, will hold it
damnable and execrable, as being bestowed against the Church of Christ, against
the Saints and children of God, against the holy Truth taught in the Testament
of Christ; yea, and that contrary to the light of our own consciences, and
knowledge of our own hearts.

To the first part of this their charge and accusation, we answer; That whether
they or we be the true Church of God: whether they or we have the Truth
taught in the Testament of Christ, is the matter in controversy betwixt us. If
we be the Church of God and have the Truth of Christ, as we hope shall appear
by this Treatise, then have they written and spoken against the Church of God,
and that in most shameful and fearful manner. If they be the true Church of
God, and have his Truth (which we assure our selves they shall be never able to
prove) then have we spent our labors against the Church of God: But have we
done it wittingly and willingly against the light of our hearts; This is indeed
the second part of their charge: but who made them the searchers of our hearts,
and judges of our consciences, that they should accuse us, to Im other and
quench the light of Truth, which has shined into our souls, especially when
they hear our protestations to the contrary, where is that Charity that
thinks none evil, which hops all things; we say therefore unto the second
part of their accusation with the Apostle, We say the Truth in Christ, our
consciences bearing us witnesses in the holy Ghost, that we can say nothing
against the Truth; but for the Truth, wittingly and willingly. And in the
Testamonie thereof we pray God that our tongues may cleave to the roof of our
mouths when we endeavor to speak, and that our pens may stick to the ends
of our fingers, when we attempt to write any thing against the Church,
Children, or Truth of God.

Some others, Fathers, and Brethren, Ministers, and Members with us of this
Church, finding by our manner of writeing of what judgemeut we are, will hold
our pains requisite and necessary, to stay the course of these waters which
we have given passage unto, and to make up the breaches we have opened, by
speaking against the government established in this Church, the Ceremonies used
therein; and other our unadvised dealings in the execution of our Ministry.

To these men we say first, that as we have been, and are persuaded of the
Truth of these things which we have delivered, touching the defects and wants,
the blemishes and deformities of this Church. So have we in the sincerity and
uprightness of our hearts, dealt for the redress and Reformation thereof:
Wherein, though we know nothing by our selves before men, more then Truth will
permit, if they should have taken occasion by our doctrine (which we persuade
our selves to be the doctrine of the Truth) to make this Schism; Yet were this
no reason to reprove us, unless those men which have set down true positions
be to be blamed, as Authors of the false Collections and Conclusions which are
inferred and gathered thereupon.

Secondly we answer, That our deceived Brethren do no less condemn those
Churches of God, as the Synagogues of Satan, where the doctrine which we have
taught touching the government of the Church, and matters of Ceremonies is
maintained, and where all things which we hold offensive in our Church are
abolished, then they do the Church of England, insomuch that they have written
of the Church of Geneva (which is holden to be the best pattern of a Reformed
Church) that it became a miserable president and pernicious example even unto
all Europe: whereby it is evident that they have been brought unto this Scisme
by some other inducements then the dealing of those men in-the execution of
their Ministry, who are charged to be the occasions, if not the Authors
thereof.

Thirdly, there is such difference and plain contradiction between them and
us in judgment, yea in the matter of discipline and Church government, besides
many other material points of doctrine, as we marvel any men should esteem
us causes of their defections from this Church, much more that any man should
write, That between the Brownists and others (he means them and us) there is
no controversy as touching the framing of a Church by the word of God.

A third sort of our loving Brethren, approving our care of Gods Church, and
desire to reclaim poor deceived souls, will yet happily esteem our labor
altogether needless and superfluous, as spent and bestowed both against a
cause that has so little show of truth and semblance of probability; nay so
evident appearance of falsehood and vanity, as it is rather to be despised then
confuted, and also upon men, whose zeal and rashness so far prevails over
sound judgment, and discretion, that we shall rather sharpen and increase
their humor, (by thinking them worthy answering) to a further contradiction,
then either inform their understanding by sound reason, or alter their
affection by efficacy of any persuasion.

These Brethren we desire to give us leave to dissent from them, who judge far
otherwise of this cause, we handle and hope much better of the persons against
whom we deal: for the cause it self we say, that though it did appear, as it
is indeed full of falsehood and and vanity unto these that have the gift to
discern between those things that differ, and withal to temper their
affections (which is the reason it prevails not with any such to their
seduction) yet unto men of weak judgments and strong affections, or of more
heat then knowledge, it seems far otherwise, who are not in our judgments to
be contemned and suffered to be so headlongly carried in so violent a course,
but rather with compassion to be reclaimed, and with meekness to be restored
by such as are spiritual; If it please the Lord to give a blessing to their
labor so spent and employed.

Secondly, seeing this Heresy of theirs does not only seek to untile the
House of God built amongst us, nor to break down the walls only, but even to
overthrow the whole fram thereof, taking away the Pillars whereon it stands,
the preaching of the Word and administration of the Sacraments: Yea digging up
the very foundation thereof, and taking Christ from us whom (as they say) we
preach not, but deny in all his offices, were the false-hood and blasphemy
thereof never so apparent, yet were not the labor needless, and superfluous,
that is spent in confuting thereof.

Thirdly, Seeing this cause has been thought to be of such weight and regard,
that it has brought the High Court of Parliament to make a sharp Law for the
preventing of the mischiefs thereof, shall it be thought a matter unnecessary
and fruitless for Ministers to deal withal, especially where Laws politic
can but draw the outward man to conformity which is but Hypocrisy unless the
Law of God be annexed thereunto for the converting of the soul, and bringing
the inward man, to do that inwardly, and sincerely which outwardly it
performs.

Lastly, We have the examples of diverse Learned and godly brethren to warrant
our doings, and to persuade us of the necessity of this labor, who either by
commandment from authority, or of their own motions by occasions offered unto
them, have dealt not only by disputation and conference, but also by writing
and printing for the suppression of this Schism and reclaiming these men. For
the persons against whom we write, though we hold them all to be in a
dangerous estate (we are loath to say in a damnable estate) as long as they
continue in this Schism, and have cause to fear that Satan's subtilties
abusing the gifts that are in them, and drawing them to pride, and conceit of
themselves has hardened some of them so in their Schism, that they will
hardly be reclaimed, yet hope we, that as many of them have been brought back
again to the Church, who straied away with them, so the rest may in time be
brought to a sight of their own error by good means effectual thereunto,
such as God has sanctified to that end, and promised to accompany with the
gracious assistance of his holy spirit: This labor therefore of ours, we trust
shall not be in vain, but have that work in them for their recovery by the
blessing of God.

If God vouchsafe us not this favor to be happy instruments of their good, yet
doubt we not, but he that is witness unto our Consciences, how we long after
their salvation, yea even from our hearts roots; will be our strength, and our
judgment and work shall be with him; though they be not gathered. But if it
be remembered that our labors have been bestowed, Esaias 49.4, 5.
not only to raise them that are fallen already; but also to stay them that
stagger, and strengthen them that stand upright: though it should be utterly
unprofitable unto the former sort; yet being likely to prevail with others, to
their benefit, it cannot but be acceptable unto God, and comfortable unto our
selves, and so neither superfluous nor unnecessary.

This now only remains (Christian reader) that before we commend this
treatise to Gods blessing, we advertise thee of two things needful for thee to
know: First, whereas to many rash and hot spirited men it may seem, that we
have dealt in this cause too remisly, so that we have justified the
corruptions of our Church, as has been objected against others heretofore; We
answer, that our dealing may well indeed seem too remiss, whilst the reader
shall compare it with over bitter, untrue, yea, and slanderous biting and
invectives of our Brethren: but being compared with it self, and with our
Church, as in it self it stands, we hope it will appear (sure we are that
our knowledge) we have not justified the least thing therein worthy to be
condemned.

Secondly, whereas the work is somewhat long, and therefore somewhat wearisome
to the Reader: Know that we desired to be much more brief therein then we
are, both for that, not the reading so much as the writing of it out by them,
that after the reading of it may desire it, must needs be tedious; as also; for
that fewer words and reasons might have as well satisfied the learned sort: but
whereas our desire is to satisfy the simple, as having more need; by framing
diverse answers unto the arguments and proofs which we confute, and to make
them plain to their capacity and understanding, we could not use more
brevitie without more obscurity. And thus we commend thee to God, and to his
blessing upon the reading hereof, that it may be a means to teach thee to
discern the things that differ, and to keep thee from thy being overmuch
just, lest thou become too wicked. Amen.

A Collection of the chief Heads, of this book.
I. Certain exceptions they take, and faults they find withus; viz. With our,
I. Church in general and the whole frame of Our Assemblies which they affirm to
be false and Antichristian, because; 1. They were not rightly gathered, page
8. 2. They communicate together in an outward worship of God that is polluted
with the writings and inventions of men, page 12. 3. They want the true
discipline of Christ, page 17. 4. They submit themselves to false, and
Antichristian discipline, page. 19. 5. They obstinately continue in the
aforesaid wants and corruptions, having been convinced, page 21.
II. Ministers whom they affirm to be false and Antichristian. 1. The Office
whereunto we are called, is not that which Christ has ordained, but that which
Antichrist calls his Priests unto. page 28. 2. Their entrance is not
according to Christ's Ordinance, but also Antichristian. p. 34. 3. Their
administration and exercise of their office, is not according to Christ's
Ordinance, but Antichristian forms of prayer. p. 39. 4. Their maintenance is
Jewish, and Antichristian, viz. by tithes, etc. page 42.
III. People and the private members of our Assemblies, whom they say to be
such as no true Church, can consist of. 1. Because they are not a separated
people from the world. page 50. 2. They are not Saints faithful. page 51. 3.
They tolerate the openly prophan p. 52
Two certain conclusions, which they infer upon the foresaid exceptions viz.
1. Therefore the Assemblies we separate from are such, as the Scriptures do
warrant us to separate from. page 57. 2. Therefore the Assemblies we join
unto, are such as the Scriptures do warrant us to join unto. p. 62.


THE Church of Engl. is a true Church OF CHRIST.
I. EXCEPTION.
THe first Exception is against the whole body of our Assemblies and our Church
in General, which they term Babylonish Synagogues and a whorish Idolatrous
Church, Henry Barrow in his discovery of the false Church, Page 24.

ANSWER.
THat the Church of England is a true Church of Christ, Our Congregations are
true Churches For, Arg. 1. We have and ^oyne together in the use of the
preaching of the Gospel and administ ration of the Sacraments.
and such an one, as from which whosoever wittingly and willingly separateth
himself, cutteth himself from Christ, we doubt not but the indifferent
Reader may be persuaded by these reasons following.

First, We enjoy and join together in the use of those outward means which
God in his Word has ordained for the gathering of a visible Church: for proof
whereof we allege, that the means which we use and enjoy, have been
effectual to the unfeigned conversion of many, as may appear, both by the
other fruits of faith, and by the Martyrdom which sundry have endured that
were Members of our Church, and had no other means of conversion then such as
we have: Yea even those men, who judge so hardly of us now are able to witness
with us in this case. That if their be any true faith and sanctification in
them (though it be much increased, as they think, since they left us) yet it
was begun and bred in our Assemblies.

Secondly, If these places of holy Scripture, Marth. 28.20. Ephesians. s. 4.11, 14.
be well examined, it will be found that the means, which Christ ordained for
the gathering of a visible Church, are the very same which we enjoy, even the
preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments. That which Henry
Barrow says against us, in this point page 160. of his discovery (viz.) that
there is not any one thing amongst us either in order, or administration
according to Christ's Testament, shall be hereafter disproved, when we shall
come to justify our Ministry of the Word and Sacraments against their
arguments or Objection whatsoever.

Now that this is an infallible and good argument of a true Church, appears:
Which is an in fallible note of a true Church.
because; First, There cannot any people be named, that, having these means,
may yet by the word be evicted not to have been the true Church. The Papists
indeed brag of these means, but without cause, for the doctrine of faith is
not preached amongst them, but oppugned, and consequently they cannot have the
true Sacraments which are Seals of righteousness, Romans 3.12. and 9, 4.
which is by faith. Secondly, the Scripture every where speaks of the
preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, as of privileges
peculiar to the Church of God. psalm. 147.19.20.


So while the Jenes only were the Church, these privileges were restrained to
them, Matthew. 10 56.
and never made common to the Gentiles till the partition wall being broken
down, Acts 11.19. and 23.
they also were incorporated to the Church of God.

So the Prophet says, Arg. 2.
that this should be the reason, why the Gentiles were moved to join
themselves unto the true Church, because there and no where else the Ministry
of the Word was to be found.

Secondly, Our whole Church makes profession of the true faith: The confession
of our Church, together with the Apology thereof, and those Articles of
Religion which were agreed upon in the Convocation House, in the Year of the
Lord 1562. (whereunto every Minister of the Land is bound by Law to subscribe,
so far forth as they concern the confession of faith, and the doctrine of
the Sacraments) do prove this evidently; for how shall we better judge of the
faith which our Church professes, than by such evidence. Many Papists and
Atheists, are in our Land. we grant, and many ignorant and wicked men besides,
who make not so clear and so holy profession of the true faith, as they
should: but that our Church accounts any one to be her Child, or member, who
either denies Christ, or professes any other way to salvation, then faith
which works by love, or who does not profess this faith an some measure, we
confidently deny. Now this reason also has force sufficient to prove us the
true Church; for as true faith in Christ is that which gives the life and
being to such as are effectually called, and so become Members of the
Invisible, and Elect Church; so the profession of true says, is that which
gives life and being to a visible Church: Upon this profession we find many
that have been incorporated into the visible Church, and admitted to the
privileges thereof, even by the Apostles themselves: Act: 8.37, 38. and
16.31.32. and 12.
Yea and Simon Magus, though he had neither faith, nor the spirit of God, yet
because he made profession of faith, was judged a member of the visible Church,
and baptized. So the Church of Pergamus, Act. 8 13. Revel. 2.12, 15.
though it did toletate gross corruptions in it; it kept the faith of Christ,
and denied not his faith, and was still called the Church of God.

The description of a Church, which they give in the page 67. See our further
answer to this in the defense we make for our people against the second Article
of their third exception.
of their collection of Letters and conferences (viz.) That it is a company of
faithful people that truly worship Christ, and readily obey him; is utterly
untrue, it it be understood (as needs it must) of the visible Church; for it
every one that the Church may account a visible member, be truly faithful, how
is our Savior to be understood, when he compares the Church or Ministry to
a draw-net, which being east into the Sea, gathers as well that which must be
cast away, as good Fish: Matthew. 13.47, 48.
And to a field, where the Devil does as busily sow tares, as the Son of Man
does good Wheat? Matthew. 13.37 39.
or how shall that difference stand, which the Scripture makes betwixt the
Lords judgment, and the judgment of men, if men may not account any members of
the Church by their outward appearance, and profession; 1 Samuel 1617. Acts 13.28.
unless they know them to have true faith? which thing the Lords eye is only
able to discern.

Thirdly, We hold, and teach, and maintain, against all Heretics, Arg. 3.
and adversaries, every part and Article of Gods holy truth, which is
fundamental, and such, as without the knowledge, and believing whereof, there
is no salvation. Our confessions, Catechismes. Articles of Religion, published,
and approved of our Church, may persuade all indifferent men of this: Yet was
not Henry Barrow ashamed to write in the 10th. page of his discovery.

That all the Lares of God, both of the first, and second Table are here
broken, and forsaken, both of the Ecclesiastical, and Civil estate, and of
every particular person in both, all things being innovated in both, according
to the Iusts and pleasures of men, the Law, and Word of God being quite
rejected and cast aside.

And in the 212. page of their refutation of Master Gifford, They have these
words; We hold that you have poisoned all the fountains of sincere doctrine,
and perverted the whole Testament, and turned away the practice thereof by your
damnable false expositions: Yea, that you teach not one point sincerely. And in
the 162. page of this discovery. They are made socontrary one to another, as it
is an impossible thing, to find two of them in one mind; yea, or any one of
them constant in that he affirms, they know not the Doctrine even of the
beginning of Christ. Add hereto Henry Barrowes words, 12 and 23. pages of
their collections of Letters, and conference. We will not give any answer to
these speeches, but only desire the Christian Reader to consider, whether ever
Gods Spirit taught any to write so slanderously; not only against a whole
Nation, (the conversion whereof they pretend to seek) but against the blessed
Truth of God; And how unlikely it is that they should be in the right way,
whose chief leaders were guided by such a spirit: That they should be the
Lords building, whose first founders and Master builders, had either so small
skill, or so bad a Conscience: Do we not hold all the same books of Canonical
Scriptures which they themselves do? Do we not reject out of the Canon all
which themselves account Apochryphall? Have they any translation of holy
Scripture besides ours? Do they themselves believe, or teach otherwise in the
Articles of the holy Trinity, of justification, of predestination then we do?
Has every member of their Assemblies recovered that spirit of truth, whereby
they are led into all truth; as Henry Barrow, page 107. of his discovery
affirms? And is there not any one amongst us that has not quite rejected the
whole Word of God? Not any one that knows the doctrine even of the beginning
of Christ? We know no better way to convince them in this, then by appealing
unto their Consciences, which we are sure will take our parts against them.

Now this reason also is strong to prove us a true Church, for although the
bare letter of the Scripture may be found amongst the Jews and Papists, and
other Heretics. Which none ran do but the true Church.
Yet was there never any people, that held and maintained the true sense of the
Scripture, in all points fundamental, but only the Church of God, whereunto
only this title belongs to be the pillar and ground of truth: 1 Tun. 3.15.
A people may be a true Church though they hnow not nor hold every truth
contained in the Scriptures.
wherein we desire the Reader to consider that a people may be the true
Church, though they know not, nor hold not every truth contained in the holy
Scriptures, but contrarily hold many errors repugnant to the Scriptures. Yet
has Henry Barrow affirmed in the 167. page of his discovery: That to the
people of God, and every one of them, God has given his holy sanctifying
spirit, to open unto them, and lead them unto all truth, Whereby it is most
evident, that he would have none to be accounted the people and Church of God,
who either know not, or practice not every truth contained in the holy
Scriptures. In which opinion, see, I pray you how gross and dangerous errors
are contained.

First, That to every inseriour member in the Church, there is as much reveiled
as to the Pastors, and chief members, whereas the Apostle affirms, Romans
12.3. Ephesians 4 16. eol. 2.19.
that the Holy Ghost is given to every member of the body of Christ, not
equally, but proportionably, as the place, which it occupies in the body does
require.

Secondly, That the promise mentioned, John 16.13. Should be made to every
member of the Church: which in the last words of the verse appears plainly
to be particular to the Apostles.

Thirdly, That the Church cannot err: and so neither were the Corinthians
rightly called the Church of God, when they judged corruptly of fornication,
and of the Resurrection; Neither they of Pergamus when the Doctrine of Balaam
was maintained among them; Neither were Paul, and the rest of the Apostles,
true Members of the Church, who (though in the exercises of their Apostolical
function, they could not err) yet knew but in part and in many things were
subject to error. 1 Cor. 13 9.


Another strange opinion is amongst them maintained in the 156,157. of the
discovery (viz.) That every truth contained in the Scripture is fundamental:
For (although we affirm not (as he thereslandereth us) That some part of
Scripture is more holy, more authentical, or more true then other. Note.
Yet doubt we not to say, that some parts are of more use, and more necessary
for men to know then, othersome. Else, why does the Holy Ghost often give
special commendation to some parts, more than to other; 1 Timothy 4.11. Titus 3.8.
Make 4.3^.
why does he (as it were make Proclamation, and solemn oyesses before some,
and not before other? Why does he use a special art in some parts, rather
than in other? And although we do not hold (as they falsely charge us in the
forenamed page of their discovery) That some parts of holy Scripture are of
small moment, superficial, needless, and of no necessity: such as may be
altered and violated without any prejudice, or danger at all to the soul, and
much less that a man that has obstinately continued in the transgression of
some parts, and openly taught the same unto others, may be undoubtedly saved,
though he die without Repentance: but on the contrary we believe, and teach
that there is no part of holy Scripture, which every Christian is not
necessarily bound to seek, and desire the knowledge of, so far forth as in
him lies: yet dare we not call every truth fundamental, that is, such as if
it be not obeyed and known, the whole Religion, and faith of the Church must
needs fall to the ground. For we do make no question, but that the thief that
was crucified, and the Eunuch even then when he was baptized by Philip, were in
the state of salvation, though they could not choose but be ignorant of many
truths in Religion.

The only fundamental truth in Religion, is this, That Jesus Christ the Son
of God, who took our nature of the Virgin Mary, is our only and all-sufficient
Savior. For first, they that receive this truth are the people of God, and in
the state of salvation, they that receive it not, cannot possibly be saved.
Mat. 16.17 104.2. Col. 3.17. John 20.31. Ephos. 2.20.
Secondly, There is no other point of Christian Religion necessary, otherwise
then as it tends necess rily to the bringing us unto, or confirming us in the
assurance of this one truth Heb. 13.8. 1 Cor. 2.2. Ephesians. s. 2.19, 22.
and therefore when the Apostle says that the Church is built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, his meaning is not to call every thing
contained in their writings, the foundation of the Church. But that this
foundation we have spoken of, is there to be found, and has witnesses from
thence, and that all the writings, and doctrines of the Apostles and Prophets
do bend unto, stay and rest upon this one truth, as the walls in the building,
upon the chief corner stone.

Lastly, Arg. 4. All reformed Churches give the Testimony to us.
All the known Churches in the world acknowledge our Church for their Sister,
and give unto us the right hand of fellow-ship. This Henry Barrow, and John
Greene-wood deny in their 14. page of their refutation; but they name not any
one Church that makes question of us, whether we were the true Church or no:
never yet was there any reformed Church made that question. They are well
acquainted with our Church, by the report of them that have traveled from
bence and sundry other ways, with our doctrine and Lyturgie, our wants and
corruptions every one. Neither do they only forbear to show their dislike to
us, or are content to preserve society with us, which happily through humane
infirmity, they might do upon sinister respects (though they approved not of
us in judgment, but they do also hold and teach, that what people soever has
so much as we, is the true Church, though the wants and corruptions are as
great as ours are.

Now when we allege for our selves the testimonies of the Churches, Which
strongly argues that we are the true Church.
we do not thereby (as these men fondly conclude in the 14. page of their
refutation) make the word of men, the foundation of our Church; Nor do we use
these as our only and chief defense; whereby we seek to approve our selves
either unto the Lord, or to the Consciences of his people; but such an argument
we take this to be, as in his due place, has much force in it; and as God
Himself has sanctified for a principal help in deciding of controversies in
this kind, the Apostles use to allege it as a matter of comfort to them whom
they write unto, that the Churches of Christ salute them Romans 16.16. 1 Pet. 5
13.
that they were famous and had the good report of the Churches Romans 16.19. 2
Cor. 8 18, 19, 23.24. Galah. 1.2.
Saint Paul though he received not his calling either from men, or by men (c)
nor was any whit inferior to the chief Apostles 2 Cor. 12.11.
yet does he allege for the credit of his ministry, that the chiefest
Apostles approved him, and gave to him the right hand of fellowship; Gal. 2.9.
Yea, Gal. 2.2.
he sought also their approbation, and feared, that without it, he should have
run in vain. And which is yet more, he seeks to win commendation and
credit, even to those which he by his Apostolical authority, might have
established by the example and judgment of other churches: If those Churches,
which were planted by the Apostles themseltes, might take comfort in the good
opinion that other Churches had of them: May not we much more? If the Ministry
of Paul, and orders he prescribed to the Church, received further credit by the
approbation of the Churches: Then their approbations give some credit to the
ministry and orders of the Church now.

The doctrine and word of God (though to speak properly it received authority
only from it self, and the Spirit of God) yet has it ever been the rather
received by men, for the testimony the Church has given unto it. So our
Savior Christ says, That Wisdom is justified of her Children, Matthew. 11.19.
John 5.34.
and although he affirms, that he received not the record of men; Yet in
respect of the salvation and good it men, he judges it necessary, John 1.7, 8,
and 5, 33, 34.
that John Baptist should give Testimony unto him. Now if this one thing
furthered the damnation of the unbelieving Jews, that they would not hear nor
receive Christ, though testimony were given of him by one whom they knew to be
sent of God: shall not this further the condemnation of these men, that they
refuse to hear, and receive us, though we be commended unto them by the
testimony of so many Churches of God? Some cases there be wherein we are
commanded to seek for the judgment of the Churches, and to account it the
judgment of God, else why did the Church at Antioch in a question that could
not be debated at home, seek to the Church at Jerusalem, for help especially,
seeing they had two such excellent men with them as Paul and Barnabas, whose
judgments they might safely have trusted unto: Acts 15.2.
says our Savior, that whatsoever they bind on earth, shall be bound also in
heaven, Matthew. 18 18.
and says he not also to Churches of other Nations? Shall he be accounted as
an heathen, or a Publican, that will not regard the judgment and censure of the
particular Congregation, whereof he is a member Matthew 18.17.
and shall they not be much more accounted so, that despise the judgment of all
the Churches? Must the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets,
amongst whom we live 1 Cor. 14.32.
and must not both people and Prophets be subject to all the Prophets and
Churches in the world? The ability to try and discern the spirits and
doctrines of such teachers as arise in the Church is such a gift as the true
Church never wanted 1 Ioh. 4.1. Revel. 2.2.
neither could it be the pillar and ground of truth 1 Timothy 3.15.
if it should be ignorant of a truth, so necessary to the salvation of men as
this is, (viz.) What people is accounted to be the true Church of God: if God
has given his Church power to judge and pronounce a particular man, that he is
in the state of salvation, and that so infallibly, that he has promised to
ratify in heaven, the judgment which the Church shall in this case give upon
earth Matthew. 18 18.
may it not be said that he has much more made the Church able to discern
and pronounce of a Congregation or people, that is a true visible Church, which
is a matter of no such difficulty as the other? So that to conclude, though
those men make so light of the judgment and testimony of other Churches, 1 Cor.
14 36.
as if the Word of God had come out from them only, or, as if themselves were
able to judge of us better than all the godly learned besides; Yet do we take
much comfort and assurance from hence, that we are the true Church of God. Now
it remains that we answer such reasons, as are objected against our Church
bythem.

Objections answered.
THe first thing that they object against our Church, Object. I. The objection
against the whole body of our Church, is that it was not rightly gathered.
and our parish assemblies, is this: That it was not rightly gathered by such
means as God in his Word has ordained and sanctified for the gathering of his
Church. For says Henry Barrow, in the 10th page of his discovery. All the
people were in one day, with the blast of Queen Elizabeth's Trumpet, of
ignorant persons, and gross Idolaters made faithful Christians, and true
Prophets. And in the third page of that Epistle to the Reader, which they have
presixed to their refutation of Master Gifford, they have these words. Where
such profane multitudes were immediately changed from public Idolaters and on
an instant received, or rather compelled to be members of this Church, in some
parish or other, without any due calling to the says, by the preaching of the
Gospel going before, or orderly joining together in the faith, there being no
voluntary, or particular confession of thein own faith and duties, made nor
required of any, who can say, that those Churches were ever rightly gathered,
or built according to the Rule of CHRIST'S Testament?

ANSWER, I.
To all that they thus object against our first gathering this answer, we give.

First, That we might be counted a true Church, though it could not appear
that we were at the first rightly gathered, for even as the Disciples might be
well assured of Christ's bodily presence, when they saw and felt him, though
they could not perceive which way, or how he could possibly come in, so may we
esteem them a true Church, of whose present profession and faith, we are well
assured though we cannot see by what means they were first gathered; Else we
may still doubt, whether Melchisedech and the families of Job, were true
Churches and members of the Church, because how they were first gathered, and
made a Church, or of whom, we know not; and yet we are now certainly persuaded
that they are a Church. Nay, we find good warrant in the word to the
contrary, for we read of many, (who having by that they heard, and saw)
perceived evidently, that a people were the Church of God, did join themselves
willingly unto them, without enquiring how they were gathered or converted, as
Abraham to Melchisedech, Rahab to Israel, the Eunuch to Philip, the Jailer to
Paul and Silas.

Secondly, We might be rightly gathered to the society, Secondly, We might
be gathered to an outward profession, and to the society of the visible Church
by some other means, then by preaching of the Word Confutation of Mr. Gifford
page 152. and in the collection of slanderous Articles, page 44, 45.
and fellowship of the visible Church, by other means then by the preaching of
the Gospel: for proof whereof, we allege their own judgment and opinion,
(which howsoever it be, yet has force enough to stop their mouths) namely,
that men may be won to the true faith of Christ, not extraordinarily, but even
ordinarily, also by other means than the public and ministerial preaching
of the Word. For if several Members may be converted without this means, may
not they much rather without it be gathered together, and made an assembly?

Secondly, Admit there were no other means, whereby a man could be soundly
converted, but only preaching: Yet it is evident, that by some other means,
men may be lawfully brought to an outward profession, and so made a visible
Church. Many in the days of Christ were prepared to hear and believe, and did
also follow him, and profess themselves his Disciples, that no man could,
without sin, have denied them to be members of the visible Church, who yet
were not all drawn by his word. But some by his Miracles, John 2.23, 24.
some by the report they heard of him John 4.39.
some by desire John 6.24, 26.
they had to be fed by him. Some Kings became nursing Fathers, and Queens
nursing Mothers to the Church, their Laws have been means to bring men to
outward society of the Church. And the practice of Josiah proves, that men
may be compelled by the Magistrate, to serve the Lord. Chron. 34.32, 33.
Now as many heareing of the fame of John Baptist, and of Christ came unto
them, and so were converted by their preaching: Thirdly, Our Churches were
first converted, and gathered by teaching of the Word.
so many that for fear of the Law, were first brought to the Church and
outward profession of the truth have been and are effectually converted by the
ministry of the Word.

Thirdly, Our Church was gathered by the preaching of the Word. For, the first
conversion of the faithful of our Land, was by the preaching of the Gospel,
as is manifested by the testimonies of the best approved Histories; Since that
time, many have been from age to age, called by the same means, as by the
ministry of Master Wickliffe, and such like, for proof whereof this may
serve that in most of the Kings days there have been some, which have endured
Martyrdom for the truth. These secret ones did gather others secretly, so long
as persecution continued, and showed themselves openly, when liberty was
granted; In the days of King Edward, great numbers were by preaching, so
effectually called, that in Queen Mary's Reign, many simple men and women,
were able to maintain the truth, against the learned Papists, and to seal
it with their blood. Besides them, there were many secret Congregations in many
parts of the Land, all the days of Queen Marie, which gladly received, and
openly professed the Gospel offered unto them, by public authority, at her
Majesty's entrance to the Crown. If it be said, that they ceased to be the
true Churches of Christ because they joined themselves, and became one body,
with such as were newly come from Idolatry, (and that not of conscience, but
for fear only:) we answer; that they rather, that were fallen from the
Gospel in Queen Mary's days, were moved by Queen Elizabeth's Proclamation,
to join themselves unto them, that had stood faithful all that while: Neither
is it truly said of them, that in one day, by the blast of Her Majesty's
Trumpet, at the beginning of her Reign, all sorts of men were drawn to a
profession of the Gospel, without any further means used, for before any were
compelled to the profession of the Gospel; which was not till Midsomer, after
her Majesty came to the Crown, there were not only many Commissioners sent
unto all the parts of the Land, that they might deface all the monuments of
Idolatry, but sundry Preachers also, which in the days of Queen Mary, had
received approbation, and exercised their ministry in some of the best
reformed Churches beyond the Seas, did by their doctrine both keep them, whom
they found converted) in the profession of the truth, and called many others,
of which number we may reckon, Master Knox, Leave, Gilbie, Sampson, Whitingham,
Goodman; and sundry others. And there were daily added to the Church, by no
other means, then by the ministry of the Word preached. So that if this were
a good reason against other particular members, or whole families, yet it
cannot justify a separation from all, seeing we have many that by the
preaching of the word of God, were converted and gathered.

Fourthly, This being proved that there was a true Church in the Land before
Her Majesty's Reign, Fourthly though the means used for the gathering our
Church had not been sufficient for the first calling a people to the faith,
yet were the sufficient for the recalling of the people that had fallen from
the faith which formerly they had professed.
the question must not be whether the means she used, were the right means
for the calling, and converting a people to the faith, but whether she took a
lawful course for recalling, and reuniting of Her Subjects unto those true
professors whose fellowship they had forsaken; this was the course which
Jehosaphat took, 2 Chro. 17.8.
who (to gather the Church which was divided) sent preachers into sundry parts
of his Kingdom, and appointed Noble men to accompany and assist them by
countenancing their ministry, and compelling the people to hear them.

This course also did Josiah take, who having abolished Idolatry compelled all
his subjects to the service of the true God; 2 Chr. 34.33. 2 Chro. 14 4. 2
Chro. 15.13.
Thus did Asa use his authority, in commanding Judah to seek the Lord, and to
do according to the Law, and Commandment, and threatening them with death,
that should resuse: So did Hezekiah by his Proclamation bring diverse of Israel
to Jerusalem, who were before separated from the Church of God. Chro. 30, 12.


Fifthly, Whereas they say, that at the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, the
people should have been required with solemn oath and covenant to renounce
Idolatry, and to profess faith, and true obedience to the Gospel, after the
example of Asas reformation; We answer.

First, If it had been absolutely necessary to the being of a Church that
there should be such a solemn covenant by oath, to renounce Idolatry; this
course should be taken in that reformation which Ichosaphat and Josiah made, as
well as that which Asa made.

Secondly, even where this oath was taken, it was Gods true Church before the
time of that oath and covenant made by Asa, we read it was made and taken in
the 15. year of his Reign, when yet his subjects were the true Church long
before.

Secondly, There be diverse congregations in our Land, which in the beginning
of her Majesty's days, and since, have publicly professed their repentance,
for their former Idolatry, and promised to embrace and obey the truth, as it is
profently established; as in Coventry, North-hampton, and some other places.
Yea, we doubt not to affirm, that the whole Land; in the Parliament, holden in
the first year of her Majesty's Reign, did enter into a solemn covenant with
the Lord, for the renouncing of Popery and reciaving the Gospel.

OBJECT. II.
The second thing they object against the whole body of our Assemblies is this:
Object. The second Objection against the whole body of our Church is, that it
uses a worship of God which is polluted with the writings of men, as, read,
stinted prayers. Answ.
That they communicate together in a false and Idolatrous worship of God, which
is polluted with the writings of men, (viz.) With read stinted prayers,
Homilies, Catechismes, and such like; which in the 24. page of their
refutation, they call the smoke of the bottomless pit.

To this Objection we give this answer. First, That it is evident by the Word,
that the Church has used, and might use lawfully in Gods worship, and prayer,
a stinted form of words: for we find a form of blessing the people prescribed
to the Priests, Numb. 6.23, 24
a form of confession to be used at the bringing of the first fruits to the
Temple prescribed to the people, Deuteronomy. 26.13, 15.
A psalm appointed for the Priests, and Levites, to use every Morning. Psalm
22.1.
Another to be used every Sabbath day: Psalm 92.
So in the thanksgiving used at the bringing home of the Arc, unto the place
prepared for it by David, the Church tied themselves to the very words of 105.
and 96. Psalms; 1 Chro. 16.8, 36.
and as one Evangelist reports, that our Savior appointed that prayer which
he gave to His Disciples to be a pattern to frame all other prayers by. Matthew.
6 9. Luke 11.2. Object.
So the other Evangelist reports, that he had them when they prayed, say, Our
Father, etc. Which he would never have done, if it had not been lawful for us
in making those petitions to God, to use those very words which are there
prescribed.

Now to that, they object against this, that we never read, the Apostles did
use this prescript form of words in prayer.

We answer, Answ.
That it is absurd negatively to prove from examples of men, against that which
God in His Word so expressly, either commanded, or permitted; for we may as well
reason thus: That we do not read that the Apostles, or the Church in their
time, did baptize Infants. Ergo, They were not then baptized: or thus, We do
not read, that the Apostles did pray, either before, or after they preached,
Ergo, They did not: Or thus, Saint Paul did not marry, nor take maintenance
from the Corinthians, Ergo he might not lawfully have done it. The most
Psalms, that David made, as they were committed to the Church Musicians; That
in singing them, were tied to the very words that David set down; so they were
not sung as Meditations and doctrines for the instruction of the Church, but as
prayers unto God. This is evident not only by the manifold petitions and
thankesgivings unto God, that are to be found in them, but by this especially,
that they are said to be sung unto the Lord.

And as by that which has been said, it may appear that set and prescript
forms are lawful in those prayers and thanksgivings that are used upon
ordinary occasions; Secondly, A stinted and set form of words is lawful, even
to the extraordinary prayers.
So it is also evident, that they may be lawfully used even in those prayers,
and thanksgivings, that (being taken up) on extraordinary occasions, do
require an extraordinary, and special fervency of the spirit, for which we
have the example of our Savior Christ Himself, Mat. 26.42, 44.
who used the very same words three times severally b even in that prayer,
which he made with all holy excess of fervent affection.

And this may lawfully be done, not only in those forms which we frame and
devise our selves, Thirdly, It is lawful to tie our selves (in prayer) even to
that form of words which have been devised and used by others. 2 Chro. 6.41,
42. Psalm. 132.8.10. 2 Chronicles. 5.13. Psalm. 136.1. Psalm 136.1. 2 Chronicles. 20.21.
2 Chronicles. 29.30. 4. A prescript form of words bath been some times commanded
to be used in extraordinary occasions. Hosca 14.3^ Joel 2.13.
but in them also which we find to have bin used by the good servants of God
in former times, upon the like occasions to those that befall us now So Solomon
uses, in the Dedication of the Temple, that very Psalm which David vowed to
use at the bringing of the Arc to his house; and in the bringing of the
Tabernacle and holy Vessels into the House of God, he uses the same words of
another Psalm. So Jehosaphat uses the same words of the same Psalm, in that
excellent thankesgiving which he makes to God. Hezekiah caused thanks to be
given, in the same words unto God, as David, and Asaph had used before. Yea,
this manner of praying, and praising in set and prescript forms of words, even
upon extraordinary occasions, we find directly commanded fundry times. So the
Prophets expressly set forth what words should be used among the people.

And which is yet more, we find a set, and prescript form of words to be used
in extraordinary occasions, appointed long before that those occasions fell
out. So we read of a form of thanksgiving, Fourthly, it has sometimes been
prescribed long before the occasions fell out. Esa 12.3, 4. 1 King. 8.47.
Daniel 9.5. Ier. 33.11. Ezra 3.11.
appointed to be used by the Church at Christ's coming, and Solomon,
prescribes a form of confession, to be used by the Church in captivity, which
form Daniel in the name of the Church used. So Jeremy appoints the 136.
Psalm to be used by the people, for a form of thanksgiving, after their
return from captivity, which was also used accordingly by then: whereupon
this will follow, that unless they can take exception, to the matter of our
prayers (which shall afterward be considered of) they may not blame us for the
stinted and prescript form of prayers we use, and that if we want fervencie of
spirit, in our prayers, That also which they object against our Catechismes is
of no force, for first, it is lawful to collect out of the word, and to teach
in order the principles of Religion.
the fault is to be imputed to the corruption of our own hearts, and not to
the prescript forms we use.

Concerning the Catechismes used in our Church, we answer; first, It is evident
by the Scripture, that the Church has for the instruction of the people, not
only taught, and deliverd the holy Scriptures themselves, and tied themselves
in their teaching, to the very words, and frame thereof) but has also ever
had, and used to teach abridgments, sums of their principles of Religion,
collected out of the Scriptures, and this we think will be evident to such as
in the fear of God and desire to know the truth, shall well weigh and consider
these places. Romans 2, 20. and 6, 17. 2 Timothy 1.13. Heb. 5.12.13, 14, and 6, 1,
2, Secondly, it is also lawful to require of the hearers an account which is
also thus taught.


And as the Scripture proves this warrantable, so reason it self, and common
experience teaches, that it is a great help in all knowledge, to have short
sums of that we would learn, in our view, and prospect represented to us,
and to have that in order taught, that we would be instructed in. So is the
Saylor helped by his Card, the Traveller by his Map, and the most cunning
workman, by his pattern he draws before be begins his work. Luke
2.46.47. Mat. 13.36, 51 Mark. 9.28.30, 31.
So he that teaches children, begins with the Letters; and he that
builds an house, with the foundation.

Secondly, Thirdly the hearer may lawfully give account of the doctrine in the
self same words wherein it was taught. Fourth'y he may lawfully have copies of
these principles in writing or print. That which they object against our forms
(viz) that we conceive them not our selves, but they are devised and imposed by
others, is also of no moment, for it is lawful to use these forms not only
that are in the word, but such as men have devised, Ref. page 204.
It is also evident, that in teaching these principles (as well as in the other
kind of instructions) Christ and his Holy Apostles have been wont to require
of their hearers, that they should resound, and give account of the principles
of Religion, thus taught in order, as appears by the notation of the Greek
word, (...), which is used in all these places, Luke 14. Acts 18.25. 1 Cor.
14.19. Galath 6.6. as also by the practice of the Jewish Church, which our
Savior by his presence approved and by his own practifie also, and which,
(following his example) some of the Apostles did.

Thirdly, If Ministers may (as we have proved) in regard of the particular
state of their people, collect such abridgments, and require the people to
resound them; then it cannot be unlawful, for the people to resound the
doctrine in the self same words, wherein it was taught.

Fourthly, This being so, it cannot but be lawful, and profitable for the
people to have the Catechismes, and sums delivered them in writing, or in
print, that they may the better read, and learn them.

Seeing we may have forms, both of prayers and Catechismes, we see not how
this can condemn the forms which we use, viz. That in compiling, and
collecting them, the invention, and such other gifts of men are used, seeing
there is a liberty left to the Church to do many things, that tend only to
the setting forth of Gods Ordinances, (as themselves confess) and in the
preaching of the Word, and in those prayers which they call conceived praiesr,
the wit, memory, judgment, and such other humane gifts, are lawfully, and
necessarily used, especially considering that the peoples understanding, and
memory, may be the better helped, by that they are well acquainted with them
by the other.

If (we may use lawfully (as we see we may) even such forms as were collected
by men, Secondly, It is lawful for Ministers to use such forms as have been
devised by men of better gifts then themselves.
and that these forms do not any way stain or prejudice the fevencie of the
spirit, then doubt we not, but these forms that have been set down by men of
better gifts, may as lawfully be used of them, who thoroughly conceive the
meaning, and truth of them, as those which the Minister devises himself.

If forms thus devised by men be found to be lawful and profitable, what
sin can it be, for the Governors of the Church, to command that such forms
be used; Thirdly, It is lawful to use such good forms as are imposed by
authority.
or for us that are persuaded of the lawfulness of them being imposed, unless
they will say, that therefore it is unlawful for us to hear the word, receive
the Sacraments, believe the Trinity, and all other Articles of the faith;
because we are commanded by the Magistrates so to do: whereas indeed we ought
the rather to do good things that are agreeable unto the Word, when we know
them to be also commanded by the Christian Magistrate.

Though we are persuaded by the former reason, Yet we do grant that in some
cases conceived prayers, are more fit then other.
to think that stinted forms, are so far from being simply unlawful, as in
that, in the ordinary and general occasions of the whole Church, they are many
times, more fit, then those, that are called conceived prayers. Yet it is well
known that our Law allows, and our preachers, also do use prayers
conceived, which we in some cases, do judge more fit to stir up, and
express the groans, and sighs of the spirit, then those prayers do wherein
we tie our selves to prescript words.

But why do we seek to justify our prescript Lyturgie, before these men,
who speak as scornefully, and profanely of our conceived prayers, as they can
possibly do of those which we read? For when Henry Barrow had derided and
flouted those that use only read prayers; he breaks out into these
speeches, in the 37. page of his discovery, that other smooth hypocrites: yet
as gross Idolaters, use this, (viz.) the Lords prayer, as a clause, or supply,
to their long, and prolix prayers conceived before, whereby it should seem,
that their hatred to us, (rather then to our corruptions) is so great, as that,
whatsoever we do will displease them.

Concerning Homilies, this answer we give; The reasons they bring against us
for Homilies is of no force.
That though we think it is not simply unlawful, to read in our Assemblies
such Homilies, as are for the matter sound and good: yet in regard of the
dangerous inconveniences, that may come, by using them by so many Ministers and
Congregations in the Land, do utterly dislike all public use of them: as that
we wonder that these men are not ashamed to use this as a reason of their
separation from the whole Church.

But what if all this were granted, that the use of our stinted prayers, If to
have a Drescript form of Lyturgie were Idolatrous yet might we be the true
Church for all that.
Catechismes, and Homilies were Idolatrous, which yet we have proved to be
otherwise; will it from thence follow, that we are not that true Church? Is
this a greater corruption in the worship of God, then the retaining of hie
places, against which there is so express a commandment, Deuteronomy. 12.2. 1 King
11.8, 9 1 King. 15.14. 2 King. 15.4. 2 King. 18.4, 2 King. 13.6.
or then the burning Incense to the Brazen Serpent? b and yet it is evident,
that the one of these was retained in the days of Asa and Azariah Kings of
Judah, and the other, even till Hezekiahs Reign: in which time
notwithstanding, it is manifest there was a true Church in Judah.

The testimony of Scripture, which they quote in the page 68. of the collection
of Letters and Conferences: and in the 144. page of their resutations against
our prescript Lyturgie, are such as either tend generally to the condemning of
Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 5.8, 9. 1 Chro. 28.10. Revel. 22, 19. Prove. 30.5, 6. Deuteronomy.
4.32. Revel. 22.18, 19 Matthew. 15.9. Col. 2.20, 23.
or such as forbid us to add any thing to the Word of God.

To the first sort, we answer; that they have not yet proved our Lyturgie
Idolatry. Secondly, if they had, yet cannot they by these testimonies
conclude, that therefore they that use it are not the true Church.

To the other sort of Testimonies, this we say; that we add not our Lyturgie
unto the Word of God, nor make it of equal authority with it: neither do we
use it to the same ends, and purposes, that we do the Scripture.

Secondly, We do wonder, with what judgment, or Conscience, they can blame us
for adding to the word by our Lyturgie, who will at no hand allow us to use, as
prayers, any of the forms that are set down in the Scripture.

The reasons also against all forms of Lyturgie, The reasons against all
forms of Lyturgie are weak and set down in the 43. page of the collection of
slanderous Articles.
are fond and weak, though they seem to collect them from the Scriptures, for
we have above proved, that God may be worshipped spiritually, and fervently,
even in that prayer, wherein a set and prescript form of words are used.

Secondly, That this is no good reason, the Apostles are not read, to have used
any set form of prayer themselves; or to have prescribed any to the Churches,
Ergo, they did not use, or prescribe any, or Ergo, the Church might not.

Thirdly, John 4.23. Romans 8.26. 1 John 2.17. 1 Cor. 3.11, 12
We see not why they may not as strongly reason, the spirit helps our
infirmities, and we have received that anointing, and therefore we need not,
nor may not use any outward helps, for our consolation and instruction, or for
the subduing of our corruptions; as this, the spirit helps our infirmities,
etc. and we have received that anointing, Ergo, we need not, nor may not use
any prescript forms of words, as helps in our prayers.

OBJECT. III.
The third thing they object against the whole body of the Church, Object. The
third Objection against the whole body of our Church, is, that we want Christ's
Discipline.
is this: That we want that discipline, and order, which Christ in his
Testament has appointed for the government of the Church: for neither have we
(say they) the power to bind or to loose; nor those officers by whom the
censures of Christ should be exercised; Yea says, Henry Barrow, in the 160.
page of his discovery; You have not any one thing, order, or administration,
according to his Testament. And in the 188. page, such places of Scripture as
make express mention of Christ's discipline, as Romans 12. 1 Cor. 15. and 12. 2
Cor. 2 Ephesians. 4. 2 These. 3. and 1 Timothy 5.1. are not says he, suffered so much,
as to be read in the Church; much less to be sincerely expounded: from these
premises, see what a conclusion, he in the 27. page of his discovery,
infers, without the power (says he) and practice of the diligent watch of
every Member: but especially of the Elders, the Word of God is made an Idol,
the Sacraments sacrilege unto us, and all things we do, odious and abominable
unto the Lord.

To this third Objection, this answer we give. Answ. The first part of Christ's
Discipline which is most subst intiall we have 1. For the works and duties
which he would have performed in the government of his Church, are all one in
our assemblies. Discipline not exercised rightly.


First, whereas the discipline of Christ, consists in two things, (viz.) what
works and duties, Christ would have performed, for the ordering and government
of his Church, and by what persons and Officers he would have these duties
exercised: We affirm, that for as much as all these works, (viz.) preaching
of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, the censures of admonition,
suspension, excommunication, and provision for the necessity of the poor, are
in many of our Assemblies performed, and by Law ought to be in all, that there
ore we cannot justly be said to be without the discipline of Christ, but
rather that we having the discipline of Christ, which is most substantial, do
want the other, and so exercile it not rightly, that is to say, not by those
Officers, which Christ ^ath appointed.

Secondly, It is well known, that the chief works and discipline; Secondly,
The chief works of Christ's Discipline are exercised with us even by those
Officers that he appointed.
namely the preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, and
consequently, the principiall part of that power, to bind and loose, which
Christ gave to his Church, is not only exercised in many o^ our Assemblies;
but exercised also, by those very Officers which Christ has appointed for us:
the Laws of our land do authorize the Minister to stay from the Lords Table,
all such as are uncatechised, and out of charity, or any otherwise public
offenders, (as appears in the Rubric before the Communion, and in that which
is after confirmation) And from whence else comes the trouble of many of our
Ministers, but from the exercising of this authority, even from the suspending
of the ungodly from the Sacrament, and stinging their consciences by the
preaching of the word?

Thirdly, Thirdly, though the ^^^p^ine were not exercised at all with us, it
could not therefore follow that we have it not. Fourthly, Though even through
ignorance or fearfulness, we were kept from it, yet might we have right and
authority to use it.
Though none of our Assemblies did use this power, it follows not from
therce, that we have it not: No more than it does follow, that the rich churl
has no money, because he uses none, and that a man therefore has no
authority, because he does not exercise any.

Fourthly, Admit we were not able (through want of knowledge and courage) to
use this power. Yet follows it not, that therefore we want the right, and
authority to use it: For if those Churches which the Prophet reproves, Ezekiel.
22.26.
for putting no difference between the holy and profane or that which the
Apostle blames, for not putting the incestuous person from among them: had
they wanted authority, to use this power, how could they justly have been
reproved, for neglecting the exercising thereof?

Lastly, Though it were granted, that we wanted both the exercise of the
Churches censures, and some of those Officers, which our Savior has appointed
to exercise them by: Yet might we be a true visible Church notwithstanding:
there was a true Church in Judah, all the days of Asa, b 1 Cor 5.1, 2.
and Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 15.9.10. and 17, 5, 9
yet was not the discipline reformed there, till the latter days of
Iehosaphats Reign. 2 Chro. 19, 8 11. Ezekiel 22.26.
That also was a true Church, even then when the Apostles found this fault with
them, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2.
the Congregation at Samariah is called a Church before the discipline was
established there. And even in Jerusalem there was a famous visible Church of
Christ long before sundry parts of the discipline (for want whereof they
condemn us) were established there, yea it is evident, that by the Apostles
themselves diverse Churches were gathered, some good space of time, g Acts
13.43. 14 11, 21, 23. Tit, 5.5.
before the discipline was settled, or exercised, Acts 8.12.19 31. Acts 2.41, 42.
by all which is manifest; that how necessary soever those parts of the
discipline (which we want) be to the beauty, and well being, or preservation
of the Church. Yet are they not necessary to the being thereof, but that a true
Church may be without them. And as we may well call him a man, that wants not
only sundry parts of his body, as an Arm, or a Leg. or Eye, but is also
distempered much even in the Brain, and Liver, and heart, and the rest of the
vi^all parts; so may we rightly call that a Church, which not only wants
sundry of those Officers which Christ has ordained, but has also even in the
ministry of the word, and the profession of the true faith (which are as it
were the brain and heart of a true Church) much maimednesse and distemper.

The places of Scripture which they allege to disprove this which we have
said, are unskilfully applied; In the collection of Letters and conferences,
page 69. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Romans 12.8.
for the one of them mentio eth no other ordinary officers out Pastors, and
Teachers, which our Church professes, the other though it proves there should
be other Officers besides them there named; yet does it not affirm, that
without them there can be no true Church.

OBJECT. IIII.
The fourth thing which they object against the whole body of our Assemblies is
this: Object. The fourth Objection against the whole body of our Assemblies is,
that we stand under the Popish Church government w^^ reason also is
insufficient to warrant their separation.
That we stand under (us they say) a false and Antichristian government, for
that we are directed by; and subject to Canons, Courts, and authority of the
Bishops which they do not content themselves in the 68.69. page of their
collection of Letters, and conferences to call Popish, and Antichristian, and
Egyptian, and Babylonish Tokes, but in regard thereof they say our Assemblies
Cast our Satan by the power of Satan.

To this fourth objection we make this answer:

First, Seeing it has been already showed that the discipline which our
Church exercises, is in substance the same with that which Christ instituted,
they cannot with any color of truth say, that all our Church government is
Popish, and Antichristian, but only that it is popishly and corruptly
administered. Answ. 1. The substance of our discipline is Christ, and not
Antichrists 2 These 10.11. 2 Timothy 4.1.3. 1 John 2.22. 1 John 4 3. John 7. Revel.
13.5, 16.


Secondly, Though it were confessed, that in the callings, and authority of
the Bishops, there be diverse things Antichristian; Yet see we not how our
Bishops could truly be called Antichrists, or Antichristians; because, first
the word when it describes Antichrist, and teaches us how to know him, uses
to mark him out by his false doctrine. Neither can we find in holy Scripture,
any such accounted an Antichrist or Antichristian, who holding the truth of
doctrine, and professing all the fundamental Articles of the faith, does
swerve either in judgment or practice from that rule which Christ has given
for the discipline of his Church. Now it is evident, that our Bishops both do,
and by the Laws of our Land ought to hold and teach all doctrines and truths
that are fundamental: Yea some of them have learnedly, and soundly maintained
the truth against Heretics; that have gai^^aid it, some have not only by
their doctrine and ministry converted many to the truth, but have suffered
persecution also for the Gospel, and though Henry Barrow in the eleventh page
of his discovery call them Pseudo-Martyrs, and runaway professors, yet can
he not prove that they all since their accepting their rooms, renounced, and
are fallen from that truth which they then suffered for.

Secondly, Their Hierarchy, and other their corruptions that are charged upon
the calling of our Bishops, were rather to be esteemed as the stairs, and way
to Antichristianitie, then Antichristianitie it self, which is evident by
this, that they were in the Church before the Pope (who is the Antichrist, and
the chief head-linke of all Antichristianitie) was revealed.

Thirdly, The Antichristian Bishops hold their pre-eminence, as from GODS Law,
which is unchangeable; Whereas our Bishops since her Majesty's Reign until
this day (for the most part) held their superiority by no other right, then by
the positive Law, which is variable; Yea it appears, both by the institution
of the Courts of deligates, and by the continuance thereof to this day, that
they do and ought by Law to hold their jurisdiction, not as from God, but as
from he Prince.

Thirdly, Thirdly, if they were, yet might we be the true Church.
Admit that both our Bishops, and the government by them exercised were
Antichristian, yet might we that stand in that sort, as we do, be subject
unto them that are the true Church of Christ; it is evident, that to speak
properly, the Yoke of Antichrist is only inward and spiritual where the faith
and Conscience are enjoined upon pain of damnation to receive other Laws and
worship, then that which God in his word prescribes, and even to this Yoke,
the true Church has been often subject, or else the Church of the Jews even
in the days of Christ was no true Church that held themselves bound in
conscience to observe sundry traditions of the Elders: In a more large sense
those Prelates are called Antichristian, that join civil jurisdiction, with
Ecclesiastical, or usurp more than they ought in external government, or
tyrannously abuse the power committed to their hands; and this Antichristian
Yoke also, the true Church has borne many a time: in the days of the
Macchabees, there was a true Church among the Jews, yet did the Priests
exercise civil jurisdiction.

There was a true Church, Ier^ 5.31. and 20.1.
both in Jeremies, and Ezekiels days, which yet did bear this Antichristian
Yoke: the authority which our Bishops are said to usurp over the Ministers,
Ezekiel. 34.4. Which had not-needed if the Church could have suppressed, or
withstood them.
and Church, is not worse than that, which Di^trephes usurped; for besides that
he sought for an Antichristian pre-eminence, it is evident that the Church was
unable to resist him, and therefore the Apostle purposed himself to come and
rebuke him. Their own terms they use in this, [ viz. Egyptian, and Babylonish
Yoke,] shall teach them thus much; for seeing that the Ieues remained still the
Church of God, even in that bondage that they stood under in Egypt, and
Babylon; why may not we also remain God Church still, notwithstanding the
Yoke which we bear, being nothing so heavy as that was?

OBJECT. V.
The last thing they object against the whole body of our Assemblies, The fifth
Objection against the whole body of our Church is that we obstinately continue
in the aforesaid wants and corruptions though we have bin duly convinced. 1.
Objection is false and insufficient to warrant their separation for some of our
assemblies have mourned for that which is amiss and by all due means sought
reformation. Secondly, some maintain corruptions and oppugn the discipline
because they are not yet in their consciences persuaded of the things. Tit.
3.11.
is this: That we ob^tinately continue in the aforesaid wants, and
corruptions, though we have been convinced concerning this point, they have
these words, in the 23. page of their refutation; We hold withal that no true
Church, or Christian will maintain any sin, or error, when it is evidently
showed and convinced to them by the Word of God; much less persecute such as
reprove and admonish them, as you do. In the 164. page they charge us with
wilful obstinacy, open rejecting, and resisting the truth, etc.

To this reason, we also give this answer.

That neither do our Assemblies continue in the aforesaid wants and
corruptions, neither if they did, should they therefore cease to be a true
Church; for,

First, It is evident, that many Ministers and Congreations, have both by
prayer unto God, and all means (that have been in their powers to use)
testified unto men their earnest desire to have these corruptions removed, and
the true discipline established.

Secondly, The most of them that maintain the evils that are amongst us, and
repugne the reformation which the rest have sought, cannot be justly charged
with wilful obstinacy, or committing those things wherein their own
consciences do condemn them; for, seeing they profess, and pretend that they
are not yet in their judgment persuaded of these things, and the whole
conversation of many of them: is, such as gives us just cause to believe them,
who dare be so presumptuous as to judge thus of their hearts, and consciences,
though he were sure they have wanted no means whereby they might have been
convinced.

Considering that it is one thing, to have had the means of convincing another
thing to be convinced: the former whereof may be performed to us by men, the
other by the Lord only; and that a people, in whom some right means of
convincing have not been effectual, may as well be the true Church of God, as
they that have received and profited by all right means, that have been used
for their instruction, and reformation of life.

Thirdly, We have not yet had the right means used to convince us in sundry of
those matters, Thirdly, We have not had so much as the right means used to
convince us in these things which are in controversy between them and us.
that are in controversy between us and them; for proof whereof, we refer
our selves to the answer, which we will hereafter make unto their articles in
their conclusion.

Fourthly, Though not only the right means had been used to convict us, but
they had also so far prevailed with us, that in judgment we saw the truth
(which they say is not practiced amongst us) and in heart did affect it; yet
would this sufficiently clear us from the crime of wilful obstinacy, that
we have not power without the consent and permission of Christian Magistrates
(under whom we live, by whose means we enjoy so many great benefits, Fourthly,
Although we were all thoroughly convinced, yet have we not power and warrant
from God to redress public disorders, and erect the discipline without the
consent of the Christian Magistrates.
and whom if we should thus far provoke (we should evidently hazard the
loss of those things wherein the very life and being of a visible Church
consists,) either to remove the corruptions that remain amongst us, or to
establish those Church orders which we want; for although we doubt not but the
whole truth of Christ's doctrine, may be lawfully taught (though all the
Magistrates in the world gainsay it) and practiced also so far forth by
every Christian, as the bounds of his particular calling permits, and that it
is the Magistrates principal honor, in the sight of God, and man, to yield
and submit himself to the instructions, reproves, and censures of the Church,
so far forth, as they are agreeable to the Word of God, who is Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings: Yet cannot we not see good reason to persuade us, that the
Church ought, or may either pull down, corrupt Church government, or erect the
right discipline, not only without, but contrary to the likeing of Christian
Magistrates.

Thus much we find in the Word of God. Godly Princes


First, That in those public reformations of the Church, which the word
commends, the Christian and godly Princes were ever the principal actors.

Secondly, That for the want of public Reformation, the Magistrate is every
where blamed, and no where the Church, for ought we can find: often are the
Priests, and people blamed for erecting and practicing Idolatry, but never for
that they plucked it not down, when their Princes had set them up: Neither can
we find whether ever the Church under a Christian Magistrate, was by any
Prophet, either commanded to deal (otherwise then by persuasion) in public
Reformation, when the Magistrate neglected it; or reproved for the contrary.

To that which they were wont to say; then the Apostles were much to blame, who
in erecting the Church government, never waited for, nor sought the Magistrates
leave, and good likeing? We answer, that though without the Magistrates leave
they did it. Yet not contrary to his liking, or when he opposed his authority
directly, and inhibited it, the never erected the discipline, when there was so
direct an opposition made against it by the civil Magistantes.

Secondly, If it could be proved that the Apostles did so then, yet would it
not follow, that we also may do so now; for neither was the Heathen Magistrate
altogether so much to be respected by the Church as the Christian Magistrate
is; neither have our Ministers, and people, now so full and absolute a power,
to pull down, and set up orders in the Church, as the Apostles (those wise
Master builders) had.

Lastly, though this were all proved, Fisthly, though we did voluntarily
continue in those known wants and corruptions having power to redress them:
yet might we be the true Church notwithstanding.
that our Assemblies are thoroughly convinced in these points, and that we
having power to reform that which is amiss, do yet voluntarily continue in
those wants, and corruptions, yet might we be the true Churches of Christ,
notwithstanding; for as true faith in Christ, not moral obedience, is that
which gives life, and being to every true member of the Church, so the
profession of true faith in Christ, rather than obedience, is that which gives
the life, and being to a visible Assembly.

So we read that many upon their profession of faith were baptized and
incorporated into the Church. Acts 8.12, 13 and 16, 31, 32.
So that which made the Romuns a true Church in the judgment of Paul, was, that
their faith was published throughout the world. Romans 1.8.
And generally, that which made the Gentiles (to whom he preached) a true
Church, was that they gave obedience of faith, neither do we see what
difference they will make betwixt the covenant of works, and the covenant of
grace, Romans 1.5.
if they hold obedience to the Commandments of God, necessary to the life and
first being of a true Christian Church.

And as a wife cease not to be a wife, though in many things she cease to be
wilfully disobedient to her husband, unless she sin, either by desertion, or
whoredom, and be divorced. So neither the Church cease to be the Church, and
Spouse of Christ, till she be both sufficiently convinced of Atheism, or
Idolatry, and be divorced also, the Lord taking from her His Word, and
Sacraments, and all other his spiritual Jewels, and Ornaments; In the third
Chapter of Jeremy, both Israel, and Judah, were charged with Idolatry, and yet
must we needs confess, that they still continued the true Church of God,
unless we will say, there was at that time, no true visible Church in the
world, which was most absurd to affirm. So the Corinthians being in the first
Epistle, convinced of the sin of Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.14.
and other sins, 2 Cor. 6.14. and 12, 21, 13, 2
the Church remaining in them, as appears in the second Epistle, 2 Cor. 1.1.
did yet continue to be the true Church of God, notwithstanding, and so are
called in the same Epistle; That which Henry Barrow in the 94. page of their
refutation excuses this Church by, (viz.) that it was orderly gathered, and
established, may as well be alleged for our Assemblies, as for the Church of
Cor. as, we hope, may appear by that which has been above said in our Answer
to the first Objection they make against the whole body of our Church; He that
was once a brother, though he persist in his sins, he has been convinced
of, not by one brother only, but by two or three, yea though he commit some
presumptuous sins, cease not to be a brother notwithstanding; Matthew.
18.15, 16.
how much less, shall a Church cease to be a true Church, Psalm 19.
because it has been convinced of some gross corruptions, by one, or some few?

The high places were continued in Israel, and Iudab, and that under the Reign
of sundry good Kings; notwithstanding the reproof of many Prophets. Yet were
they of Israel, and Judah, accounted the Church still; neither did the Prophets
cease, to communicate with them. 2 Kings 1.3. and 15.3.
Neither would those that remained in Babylon after the Proclamation of Cyrus
(which was also the Commandment of God) 2 Chro. 36.22 Ezra. 2.2.
to return, thrust out of the account of the Church, as appears by the
communion of them, with the Church of Jerusalem, and the books of Ezra, and
Nehemiah, notwithstanding, partly in fear of the danger, partly in a love of
the commodity, which they settled themselves in, during the captivity, they
did not build the Temple in person, but only sent money for the building.

Lastly, the Apostle sets down a Rule, which is directly contrary to this
fourth Article of their first exception in these words; Let us therefore as
many as are perfect, be thus mind d, and if in any thing, ye be otherwise mind
d, Philip. 3.15.
God shall reveal the same unto you; Nevertheless, Whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, that we may mind the same thing,
whereby it appears, that with those who hold the foundation, we both may,
and ought to hold and join our selves in the things, wherein we are agreed,
notwithstanding our differences in those things that are not fundamental. By
all which it is manifest how false, and dangerous a doctrine, that is, which
Henry Barrow in the 28. page of his discovery affirms, that presumptuous
sin, with obstinacy joined thereunto, breaks the covenant with God; if he
had said, it gives the Lord just cause to cast us off, and to make void that
covenant whereby he had bound himself unto us, we would have consented. But
that the everlasting covenant of God, is utterly broken by a presumptuous sin
committed with obstinacy, if we should grant, we should condemn the
generation of the just, and darken much the glory of Gods Mercy, who is
constant in love toward those, whom he has received into covenant, even
though they be many times unconstant and unfaithful unto him.

And even as an Husband, or wife, cease not presently to be an Husband, or
wife, when they have committed adultery, till by just divorce they be
separated, so it is in this case as we have above said.

We have a true Ministry IN ENGLAND.
II. EXCEPTION.
THe second general exception is against the Ministry of our Church, which
they affirm to be false, and Antichristian. Concerning which, they have these
words, in the page 146. and 147. of their refutation, we have perused all this
rabble of the ministry, of the Church of England, and have not found any one
of them right, or almost, in any point, according to the right Rules of Christ's
Testament, they are all strangers there, they belong us to Christ's body. His
Church neither are they (...) is members to the Head. And in the 147. page of
the same back, they ^^ they say, that our Minister is such as can have (...)
God, alleging moreover, that the ways if the (...) Church, (...) are the
ways of death, and have no promise of salves and in the 147. page, they have
these words; Out of the smoke of the Bottomless pit all their Ministers come,
when that fallen st^rre, An christ ha^ the Key thereof given him; to his
Kingdom the false Church, they have always belonged, always served him in
his sever (...) shapes, they have bin always k^it to him, as members to the
head; from him, and not from Christ, we all see with our bodily eyes, that the
Church of England has received them. And in the 158. page of the same book,
they conclude thus. The keeping of these offices, cannot now belong unto, or
serve in Christ's Kingdom: His Church neither, be knit unto Christ as the Head.
But as the Holy Chost witnesses of them, they have a King over them, the
Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name is in Hebrew, Abaddon; and in Greek,
Appollion as in all languages, and places, they discover.

ANSWER.
THat we have a true Ministry in this Land, But it appears that our
Ministry is holy and lawful, because the true Church has received and
approved our doctrine. John 10.3, 5. Ephesians. 4.11, 12 2 John 4.6. 2. Many have
bin effectually called by our Ministry. And this reason taken from the force
of our Ministry, and has force to prove the lawfulness of it.
it may evidently appear by these reasons.

A true Church (such as we have proved ours to be in our answer, to their first
exception) could neither have received our doctrine at the first, nor proved it
so long, nor have been continued, nourished, and built up by it: had not we
been the true faithful Ministers of Christ.

Secondly, It is evident, that many have been brought (by our Ministry) to
saving knowledge, faith, and reformation of life. For proof whereof, we
appeal, first, to their own consciences, out of which we desire them to
answer us, as in the presence of Almighty God.

Secondly, By the manifest differences, that may be noted betwixt those that
have been taught by a learned Ministry, and those that have bad none; who
yet should be in judgment, and affection, as good or better than the other,
if the Ministry, under which the other lived, were not true and lawful.

That this reason taken from the fruit of our labors, is sufficient to prove
we are the true Ministers of God; As appears in this.

1. That the Lord in his most holy Word, makes this the most proper note of
such ministry, as is according to his own heart. Ier. 3.15 and 23, 31. John
10.25.


Secondly, In that the ministry is often justified, and proved to be of God, by
this reason; So that our Savior Christ proves Himself, to be the true
Messiah, by doing the works of the Messiah; Ephesians 4 11, 12 Romans 10.14, 15.
so may we prove our selves true Ministers, by doing the works of God, His
Ministers.

To that which they object against this reason, 2 Cor. 9.1, 2. Romans 13.17, 18.
1 These 1.1, 9. Mat. 12.5, 6. John 5.36. Notwithstanding that it is objected of
other means.
(viz.) that thereby the Popish Church and Ministry may be justified, as well
as ours, seeing that many have been converted by private conference, and
reading, and by domestical preaching, and exhortations, without a public
Church alling?

We answer, that though the Lord has been often wont, heretofore, and is able
still to convert souls by private means, and such as are extraordinary. Yet
cannot it be proved, that any have been converted usually, or that public
Congregations have been gathered, and builded up by any private
interpretations, and application of the Scriptures, but by such only as has
been use by a lawful ministry. And whereas Henry Barrow excepteth further, p.
152. and 153 and of his refutation, that this argues only true doctrine, and
not a true Ministry; we answer,

First, That thereby he justifies our doctrine, which elsewhere, he generally
condemns.

Secondly, That he affirms only, that true doctrine without a true
ministry, does ordinarily convert men: but proves it not, nor indeed was
able to prove it: as shall hereafter appear, in the answer we make to the
second Article of their consequence.

But our Ministers have no promise of blessing in their teaching (say they) and
therefore, neither may they lawfully teach, nor the people hear them?

To this we answer, First, Ezech. 3.2, 7.
That Gods Ministers have lawfully taught when they have not only wanted the
promise, that their labor should do that people good, whom they did teach,
but received assurance of the contrary.

Secondly, That the people have lawfully heard, Jonah 3.4, ^.
and hearkened to teachers, that have come unto them, when they (as being
utterly ignorant and unaconainted with Gods promises) had no assurance to their
consciences, that God had promised a blessing to their hearing;

Objection first.
THe first thing they object against our Ministers, Their first objection
against our ministers is, that the office whereunto our Ministers were called
is Antichristian, which is false and slanderous: for the office and duties
whereunto we are called, are the very same which the word prescribes, not
those that popish Priests are called unto.
Is, that the Office whereunto our ministry is called, is not that which
Christ has Ordained, but that which Antichrist calls his Priests unto:
Concerning these points, these are their words, in the 158. page of their
refutation: They have served in, and belonged unto Antichrist, even the Popes
Kingd me and Throne, the false Church, with all the abominable Jdolatrie
therein?

ANSWER. I.
To which their Objection, we give this answer.

The preaching of the whole truth of Gods Word, and nothing but it; the
administration of the Sacraments, and of public prayer, as they are all the
parts of the Ministers Office prescribed in the word, so are they all appointed
to our Ministers by the Law.

And for so much, as there is no Priesthood in the Popish Church, that is not
ordained to offer that Idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass, or that was ever
called unto, and necessarily enjoined those duties of ministry that are
required of us. We see not with what truth our brethren can say that our
Office is the same, which Antichrist calls his Priests unto.

And if our Office be the same which Antichrist has ordained, how falls it
out, that the Papists give a new ordination, to such as having had that which
our Church gives, do in Apostacy shrink unto them.

And if it be objected, Though some popish Priests are allowed to exercise the
Ministry without any new Ordination.
that our Church admits such as were ordained by Antichrist without any new
ordination, whereby appears, that our office and theirs is all one? we answer.

First, That though they have no other ordination, yet in more essential parts
of their outward calling unto the Ministry, there are so many differences to
be observed, in the practice of our Church, that no indifferent man can think,
we judge the calling, that any man has had in popery, to be sufficient for
exercise of their Ministry in our Church.

Secondly, The receaving of some into the Ministry, that have bin popish
Priests, without new ordination, as we take it to be a grievous corruption, and
such as we will by no means seek to justify, so we think it cannot by any
show of good reason, be alleged to prove that the calling which all our
Ministers have, is the very same which the Popish Priests exercise; but only
to show either the outward calling, which some of our Ministers exercise is,
the very same with that of the popish Priests, or (at the most) that some
chief Governors in the Church do in their judgment, hold that there is no
new Ordination, The first reason against our office is, that we all receive
one. Antichristian Deaconship, which has not force to condemn our office,
seeing under the n^me of Priest and Deacon, many receive at one time, the full
power of ministry. Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8. (...). Ephesians. 3.7. Col. 1.7, 23.
1 Timothy 4.6. (...). Acts 1.17, 25, and 6.4. and 12.25. and 20, 24. Romans 12.13,
1. Cor. 12.5. Thirdly, Although he that is called to be a Deacon be restrained
from some work that belongs to a Minister, yet is he not called to do ought
that is unlawful.
to be required in such a case, both which if we should grant, yet had they
granted nothing at all in the question, that is betwixt us.

The first reason whereby they would prove that office, whereunto our Ministers
are called, is not that which Christ has ordained, but that whereunto
Antichrist has called his Priests is, That we are called unto such a
Deaconship as is not according unto Christ's Testament, but Popish and
Antichristian? Whereunto we answer.

1. That if the Deaconship and Priesthood (as they term it) be taken by us
both at once, as usually they are, then we are enabled to do whatsoever a
Minister of the Gospel may do of himself, without the assistance of the
Eldership, and so the error that is committed rests in the form and
ceremony only, not in the matter it self.

Secondly, though it were indeed to be wished, that every office in the Church
were called by the proper name which the Scripture gives it; Yet if the Church
give a wrong name to a right and lawful office, the office is not therefore to
be refused, much less, is the power to preach the word, and to administer the
one of the Sacraments, therefore to be refused, because it is given by the
name of the Deacons Office, considering that although in the strict, and most
proper sense, the Scripture calls them Deacons, to whom, the Office of caring
for the poor is committed; yet sometimes also all that labor in the word are
comprehended under this name, and the ministry of the word, is called a
Deaconship.

Thirdly, If it be objected, that our Deaconship, is neither approved nor
mentioned in the Scripture, because it restrains us from dealing with the one
Sacrament, and so separateth those things, which God has coupled?

We answer, That this can be no reason against our Ministers, because when
they are made Deacons, they are not called to do any thing that is unlawful,
but only cut short for a time and restrained from some thing, which they may or
ought to do, much less can it be alleged against all our Ministers,
because many of us (as it is above said) were made both Deacons, and Priests,
(as they speak fondly) in one day, and so took the full power and authority
of ministry without any such separation, or many as is here objected. The
second reason against our office (viz) this we be called by such names as are
popish, is fond and insufficient. For the name Priest though not simply
unlawful, yet in our Churches judged unfit to be given unto the Ministers of
the Gospel. Bishop Horn against Fe^kman, fol. 95. and fol. 111. Thirdly, If
all were called by popish names, yet might we be true Ministers.


Their second reason, against our office and function is; That ^ee are not
known by the right names that in the Word an given to the Ministers of Christ,
but by such names as have been devised and given by the Papists as Priest,
Pri-son, Vicar and Curate, etc.

To which we answer, first, Concerning the name Priest, although we think,
that at the first, it was well enough applied to the Preachers of the Word
because it was derived from the Greek Word, (...), that signifies an Elder.
Yet because it is used now by the profane, as a term of scorn, and has a
long time, both by Papists, and others, been by common custom abused, and
appropriated to such as do sacrifice, therefore not only the most of our poople
refuse to call us by that name but even some, who have been chief Governors
of our Church, have judged it unfit to be given unto the Ministers of the
Gospel.

Secondly, It is well known, not only that many of our Ministers are usually
called by such names, as the Scripture gives but also that the Law of the Land
(in the book of conlecration) gives us the name of Pastors, Teachers and
Rectors.

Thirdly, Though the names objected against us, have been used by the Papists,
and therefore are very unfit to be given to the Ministers of the Gospel. Yet
see we not, that either by their original, or use, they have any such
contagion in them, as should poy son and infect all the offices, and duties
whereunto they are applied.

Fourthly, Fourthly, Especially seeing they are imposed upon us, and we delight
not in them. Genesis 41.45. ^^or. 1.7, 8.
Though there names were of themselve, of Antichristian original and use. Yet
if they be imposed upon any such as take no pleasure in them, we see not how
they can any wait (...) pollute them and their offices, then Joseph, and
Daniel, were polluted by (...) and Idolatrous names that were given them, or
than private Christians, are made the worse by the odious terms of Precisians,
Purity (...), is Martinists, or then our brethren themselves, are by the names
of Brownists, and Barrowists; which they so usually are called by, and so much
dislike.

Fifthly, Fifthly Our Doctrines may be good though we were all called by, and
did delight in those names. Matthew. 23.2. Their third reason that we are called
to read stinted and imposed prayers.
if neither the Law, nor the people, did give us any other names then such as
are popish, and we also did glory in them our selves. Yet makes this nothing to
the condemnation of our office, and doctrine, seeing, that though the name of
Pharisie were not of divine institution, Yet Christ Himself gives
approbation, to the office of preaching, which they exercised.

Their third reason against our office and function, is. That we are called to
read stinted prayers, that are devised, and imposed by men: Concerning which,
they say, page 62. of their discovery, to the Book of common prayers, all the
Priests of the Land are swonn to use it in manner and form prescribed, and in
the book ^s in (...) the whole form and substance of their ministr^^^^e, and
in (...) 3.) (...) book of common prayer is the very ground work of their
faith (...) and Ministry, and in place (...) them, of the Word of God. And in
the 64 page, the Word of God may not be taught, but when th^^ book has first
^een^read, and has had the pre-eminence.

To all which was give this answer; Is also insufficient for a prescript form
of prayer is lawful. Secondly, even though it be imposed.
First that a see and prescript form of prayer, may lawfully be used, as we
have proved already in our answer to their second objection against out Church.

Secondly, If to have a prescript form of prayer is lawful in it self, we
see not how this should make it unlawful, that it is prescribed by the Church,
authorized by the Christian Magistrate, for which we also refer our selves to
that answer, we have already given to then second Objection against our Church.

Thirdly, though that by statute, the Ministers be commanded to read prayer,
Yet do we deny that is enjoined, as any e^^entiall part of our office, seeing
that in the f^^^ie of ordination, appointed by Law, there is no such thing
(...) of us, (...) are there only charged with the preaching of the Word,
prayer, and (...) of the Sacraments, and discipline of Christ. And that statute
which ratifieth the Communion book, respects of the substance of our Office,
but order only and uniformiti^^ Neither does any Law of our Land deny him, to
be a true and lawfully Minister, which preaches the word aright though he
never read prayers according to that book. Whereof the practice of our Church
is a sufficient proof, wherein there are many Ministers allowed, that never
meddled with that book, and many both Schoolmasters and others, by the
Bishops are permitted to read it publicly, though they be not in the account
of Ministers; And which is more, private men may ((...) Statute) reable it in
their private houses: Their fourth reason (viz.) that we are called to read
ungodly prayers is also insufficient, for 1. We have Ministers that read none
of those prayers that for matter or form can be proved ungodly.
All which proves evidently the reading of the Book of Common Prayer, is not
taken to be of the substance of our ministry, nor absolutely necessary, to the
being of a Minister in our Church. And therefore we cannot but wonder to read
those accusations (which are so notoriously known to be false and slanderons)
in their writings who pretend such love to sincerity, and are so sharp
censurers, even of the secret faults of other men.

Their fourth reason against the office we exercise, is, That we are called to
read ungodly prayers? whereunto we answer.

First, It is most clear that many Ministers in our Church, use not to read
any of those prayers, which you account, for the matter ungodly, and that
therefore this can be no good reason, against all our Ministers.

Secondly, Secondly, none are in the ordination called and enjoined to read
such. 2 Kings 16.11.
If all did use to read them; Yet are they not in their Ordination called to
read them (as has been above proved) so that if they read them, the fault
is in them, and not in the office they exercise.

Thirdly, If they were enjoined to read ungodly prayers, and did accordingly
read them, this cannot make their Ministry void, or Antichristian, for then
Vriah should have been no Priest, for that he made an Alter at Jerusalem, like
that in all points, which was at Damascus: whereas it is evident, that he
continued the Priest of the Lord still: Notwithstanding that great fault which
was beyond all comparison greater than this, that is in question.

Their fifth reason against our office is, That we are called to read, Homilies,
and Injuctions, and whereunto we answer.

First, That neither do the most of our Ministers read Homilies; Neither does
any law of the Land require, that Preachers should read them.

Secondly, If Law did enjoyne them to all, and all did read them; yet are they
not enjoined in our ordination, nor accounted by Law as substantial parts of
our office, neither is their any doubt made in our Land (no not by them that
do press the precise observation of Law in this point) whether he be a
lawful Minister, who does not read, either Homilies, or Injunctions.

Their sixth reason against our office is, That we are called to marry, bury,
and Church women. To which also we answer.

First, That it is no part of our office (whereunto in ordination we are
called) to do these things.

Secondly, as the Ministers use to bless the Marriages, that are made in our
Land, so make we no doubt, but that it is lawful and fit (as a matter not of
substance, but of good order) that they should not do it, for as it is
necessary that this ordinance of God should be sanctified, by the Word, and
prayer, so it cannot be inconvenient, that the Word and prayer, whereby it is
sanctified, should be administered by him, who in a special sort is appointed
of God to be the steward, and disposer of all his mysteries, and to whom in his
ministerial actions, greater promises are made than to any other man: though
he do the very same thing. And seeing that in these days it preventeth many
dangerous inconveniences, to have marriages blessed in the public congregations,
who can be thought so fit to speak in the congregation, and to be the month,
either of the Lord to the people, or of the people unto God, as is the Minister?

That which Henry Barrow objecteth in the 123. page of his discovery; That he
ever took Marriage for an Ordinance, and an action of the second table, and
sees not why we may not as well set up the tables, of the money changers, or
bring in any other civil matters or chaffaire, as this into our Church; is
easily answered; for though marriages be a civil action, yet is not the
blessing of it, by the word, and prayer civil: And as the Magistrates may have
a hand in those actions, that are Ecclesiastical and belonging to the first
Table, (even by Henry Barrowes own confession, in the 85. page of the same
book) so may the Minister have a hand in those actions that are civil, and
belonging to the second Table. And though Marriages receive life and being,
from the contract that is made by mutual consent of parties, and Parents
privately (which is the cause why we do thereupon according to the Scriptures,
account them man and wife, before they have lain together) yet does this add
much to the seemlinesse and beauty of that holy ordinance, when it is thus
made known, and rightly ratified in the congregation.

Concerning Courching of women, we answer: That many of our Ministers do upon
a just dislike of the form prescribed in the book, and upon fear of
nurishing the great superstition (that the people for the most part have put in
that custom) forbear to use any particular, and personal form of
thankesgiving, at that time and occasion: And yet we see not how it should
simply, be unlawful, (though very unconvenient) to use some form of
thankesgiving, at that time even with special mention of that occasion, or how
our ministry should be made void, and Antichristian by doing so besides that,
the book it self tieth no Minister to the form preseribed, but leaves it to
his discretion to use it, or any other, as that case or occasion requires.

Concerning burialls, we answer.

First, That many of our Ministers are known to refuse the form of burial
prescribed in the book.

Secondly, That a Christian Minister may (for the honor and seemlinesse of
Christian burial) accompany, as a Christian, with the rest of the Neighbors,
the body of Christians departed unto the grave.

Thirdly, if the minister use some few words of comfort and exhortation at that
time; Yea even in that form, that the book prescribes, though it may prove
inconvenient, and offensive; Yet is there no such impiety in that action, that
should make his ministry void, or Antichristian.

Their seventh reason against our office is, That we are called to use
Antichristian Geremonies? whereunto we make this answer. That the Ceremonies
wherein opinion of Holiness is, or has been put, many of our Ministers have
cast off, so that this reason makes nothing to justify separation from all
our Church Assemblies.

Secondly, Many that use sundry of these Ceremonies do it, because either they
judge them things indifferent and such, as whereunto the Law of Christian
charity, b Romans 7.15. 2 Chronicles. 20 33. 1 King. 2.5.3. Though we all used the
most unlawful Ceremonies that are in our Church; Yet might we be true
Ministers. Galath. 4 9. 2 Kings 14.4. Fourthly, Specially seeing we are not
bound by office to use them. Their second Objection against our ministry is,
that the entrance in to our Office is Antichristian; which insufficient to
warrant their separation, for First, the people are not bound to enquire or see
how their Ministers entered Secondly, Our entrance may be lawful though it be
not in all points agreeable to the rules of Christ's Testament. ^esu^a. p. 127.
and the tender regard to the weakness of the people does (as they think)
bind them, following therein, the direction of the Word, or else they
tolerate them as burdens, which it lies not in them to remove, being laid
upon them by the determination of the Magistrate, and custom of the Church:
And seeing that they do in judgment, and affection, unfainedly dislike that
which either through humane infirmity, or in Christian wisdom, and to prevent
more dangerous inconveniences) they are enforced to bear with We see not, why
they may not be accounted the true Ministers of Christ, notwithstanding they
use these inconyenient Ceremonies, as well as Paul might be judged to be a good
Christian, though he sometimes did that evil, which he hated and Iehos^phat a
good King, though he endured the high places to continue in Judah all the time
of his government, because he was not able to abolish them. And David though
he suffered Ioab to live many days, after he had committed most unnatural
murder because he was notable without manifest danger to his state to cut him
off.

Thirdly, the use of the most unlawful ceremonies that are amongst us, is not
of force to make our Ministry void, and Antichristian, or our Church for the
Galathians were still a true Church, though they had received even those
impotent, and beggarly rudiments, which they had once cast off, much more we,
which cannot be said to have resumed them, as being never yet freed from the
bondage of them, so was there still a true Church in Judah when the hill
alters, and high places were continued there, which yet was a greater
corruption in the worship of God, then the ceremonies whereof question is made,
can possibly be accounted.

Fourthly, It is no part of our office whereunto we are in ordination called,
to use any ceremonies as has been showed before.

The second thing they object against our Ministry is, That the manner of our
entrance into the aforesaid office and calling is Antichristian, and not
according to Gods Ordinance?

Whereunto we answer: First, that the people may lawfully accept us to be
true Ministers, whom the Church so esteems, though they cannot see how we
first entered. And that by no commandment or example in the Word, they are
bound to enquire there-into. For further proof whereof, we refer out selves
unto the answer which we have made to their first Objection, against the whole
body of our Church.

Secondly, Though none of those Rules which Christ his Testament has set down
for the calling, and ordaining of our Ministry, can be wanting without a
blemish, and maime to the calling: And consequently they should all of them be
carefully sought for, both by Minister and people, yet may some of them be
wanting, without loss of the life, and being of the calling: Neither is that
true which they affirm; That whatsoever Minister has not a true, and right
calling, in all points, though the office whereunto he be called, be a true
office, is no true Minister, but an usurper, an intruder, a thief, and a
murderer. For first, whatsoever is of the being, and substance of the calling
to the ministry, has been common to all true and lawful Ministers, that
ever were in the Church, as well as the substance of the Sacraments, and
discipline, and whole Religion, has ever been one, and the same, in all
places, and at all times; whereas it is clear, that some of the rules
prescribed for the outward calling in the New Testament, have not bin always
in use, and practice throughout Gods Church, no not in such ministries as the
Word has given testimony to; for proof whereof may be alleged the calling,
that those Levites, and Preachers exercised, whereof there is mention made, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 9. For as in diverse other parts of Gods service, the omitting,
and swerving from sundry of Gods holy Ordinances prescribed in the word, makes
not the action it self void and unlawful (as is evident by that one example,
2 Chro. 30.26, 17, 18, 19) so the want and swerving from some rules prescribed,
for the outward calling of the Ministers, cannot be of force sufficient to make
their calling void, and unlawful.

Thirdly, Thirdly, Our entrance might be lawful though in some points it were
according to some Cannons of Antichrist. Their first reason whereby they
condemn our entrance, (viz.) that we were not elect by the people, not
approved by the Eldership, is of no force.
Though our entrance were according to some of Antichrists Canons, yet would
not that prove that our ministry is Antichristian; for further proof
whereof, we refer our selves to that answer we have made to the fourth
Objection against the whole body of our Church.

Their first reason against our entrance is; That we are not chosen, by that
people, over whom we are set, or approved by an Eldership?

Whereunto we give this answer. First, that their be sundry of our Ministers in
our Church, that have been in times past chosen by a faithful people, and
ordained by a true Eldership, to the work of the ministry, at Antwerp.
Geneva, Midlebarough, Flushing; Stoade, Gernsey

Against who if this be objected. That they were not thus called, to any of our
Parish Assemblies? We desire to know by what warrant they can ^^ee accounted
to be (...) Ministers now, that have given no just cause of deprivation, since
the time they were so sufficiently called to the ministry.

Secondly, the most of such Preachers, as have stood for the cause of
Reformation have the very same outward election, Secondly, many of the same
election and ordination in substance which the word requires
and ordination in substance which the word prescribes; for first, their are
be ore their entrance, sufficient means used to know and find what gifts are
in them by disputations and other exercises in divinity.

Secondly, their gifts are approved by the judgment of sundry learned men of
the Colleges, and places wherein, and whereabout they have been trained up

Thirdly, the faithful that are in those Congregations, where they are placed
do either desire them, or gladly receive them, or at the least by not taking
exception to them, do even by their silence, consent to their entrance, or by
submitting themselves willingly to their godly directions in all things, and
profitting in knowledge and Reformation of life by their labors, do
manifestly approve of them, and set a seal unto their ministry, whereof this
may serve for an evident proof, that many Assemblies have both made an earnest
fuite for sundry Ministers before their first coming to them; And when they
have been molested afterward.

And seeing the right that Patrons now have, was given them at first by the
peoples free consent (though ignorantly, and unlawfully as we are persuaded)
we see not why the choice that the Patron makes, may not be accounted the
choice of the people, as well as the acts done by the Knights, and Burgesses of
the Parliament, are deemed the acts of the whole commons, by whom they were
deputed; It is evident that by the Law mentioned, Numb. 30.8. that the silence
of the husband, or parent that testified not his dislike to the vow which he
understood was made by his wife, or child, made the said vow of as much force,
as if his consent had been requited and given, so it is judged in this case of
the peoples silence, in accepting of their Ministers.

Thirdly, the Law it self requires that we should have the same election and
ordination in substance which the Word of God prescribes, for by the Law;
First, none should be made Minister, but at the same time also be should be
appointed to some certain charge.

Secondly, That when any Ministers are to be made, there should be knowledge
given thereof, and that in so public place and manner, that even the people,
over whom any Minister is to be set, may know it, and be admitted, to take any
just exception, they can either to his doctrine, or life.

Thirdly, There may be some entrance into the Ministry in substance
sufficient, where the people at first have not made election, nor their consent
been required at all: as in case where the people have not knowledge of their
right, or having known it have not been suffered to use it: But yet have
afterward yielded themselves subject thereunto, as also in the case aforesaid,
Numbers 30.8, for further proof whereof, we refer our selves to the answer we
have given, unto that which they object in general against our entrance.

Fourthly, Concerning ordination by Eldership, this we answer in particular:
First, that unless the eldership be held so essential a thing, that there can
be no true Church without it (which we are well assured of that our brethren
themselves, and all that have any knowledge will deny) ordination by the
eldership cannot be absolutely necessary, albeit in the settled government of a
Church, we hold it of the essence of the calling of a Minister, that we have
the substance of the ordination appointed in the Word.

Fifthly, That as in times past; so now also there may be in some places such an
estate of the Church, as wherein no manner of ordination and investing of
Ministers, has been, or could be used in the giving of an entrance into the
Ministry: And though where it may be conveniently had, we hold it fit that
the weakness of the peoples judgment in their choice of their Minister,
should be supported by the discreet knowledge of the Ministers and Elders that
are about them; Yet where it cannot be conveniently had (as in places where the
Gospel is newly planted, and far removed from other Churches already
established) there that (amongst other considerations) the course of the Gospel
should not be stayed, till ordination be fetched from far countries; the Lord
himself oftentimes supplieth the places of the Ministers and Elders, and
lays on his hands: such evidence of gifts and graces proper for the Ministry,
as not only the Church does willingly acknowledge; but the enemies also will
they nill they, are in their consciences convinced to be divine and excellent.

And seeing it is evident that neither the Prophets under the law, nor many
worthy Ministers that God has raised up since the time of the Gospel, had ever
before their entrance into the Ministry, their gifts solemnly approved or been
ordained.

Our Brethren must needs grant that this kind of ordination is not simply or
absolutely necessary to the being of a Minister.

To which also this may be added, that our Savior in giving notice whereby the
true Pastor should be discerned from the false, names only these, viz. that he
enter himself, and lead the people in and out by that door.

Secondly, that the people of God agree with him and consent to his Ministry.

Thirdly, that the Porter (the holy Ghost) open the hearts of the hearers to
him and his doctrine (a) which 3. notes doubtless our Savior would not have
rested in, if there could have been no true Minister without the ordination
which our Brethren speak of, and urge that as a matter of absolute necessity:
Their second reason (viz.) that we reccive our Ordinatio^ from Antichristian
Bishops, ialso insufficient for, first, Our Bishops cannot truly be called
Antichristian.
So that to conclude this point, we say that the ordinary course of entering
into the Ministry is not kept; but a great imperfection and want is to be
acknowledged where this election and ordination is not used; Yet is not the
want such, as takes away the very life, and being of a true ministry.

Their second reason against our entrance is; That our ordination is received
from Antichristian Prelates, and such as being persecutors of the godly, cannot
be well accounted brethren, or members of the Church, much less can they give
a calling to a Minister of the Church? whereunto we answer.

First, Secondly, seeing our Bishops are such as can judge of the sufficiency
of gifts, and are also Ministers It cannot be unlawful for him that is to be
a Ministers to receive approbation and authority from them.
That the Bishops of England cannot truly be called Antichristian Prelates, for
proof whereof, we refer our selves unto that answer we have given unto
their fourth Objection, against the whole body of our Church.

Secondly. seeing it cannot be denied, that the Bishops are able to judge of
such gifts as are required for the sufficiency of Ministers; yea that many of
them have been such Ministers themselves, as to whose labors, the Lord has
set to his Seal, and who have also suffered persecution for the truth; we are
persuaded, that (though it were not necessary, yet) it cannot be unlawful, for
him that enters into the ministry to be approved, and authorized even by them.

And if our ordination be in this behalf faulty, how will out Brethren
justify the calling of their own Ministers, Thirdly, the gifts and power to
ordain which God has committed to his Church, we may lawfully seek the
benefit of it, even at worse mensch n^s then our Bishops are if we cannot
otherwise come by it.
that have received ordination ever from the people, who neither by
commandment, not example, can be found to have any such authority, nor are in
any degree to capable of it, as the Bishops.

Thirdly, the ordination we seek for, from the Bishops, is not theirs but
committed, to the Church by Christ Himself: And seeing we have already
proved, that there was in England a true Church even then when this authority
was first given by Parliament, to the Bishops, and that the true Church (which
without a ministry, cannot possibly be continued) is never without power to
ordain Ministers: We may lawfully reverence, and seek for the benefit of
this power, and pri^^ledge, which God has given to his Church, though it were
conveied unto us by men, less capable of this authority, then our Bishops
are. And he that thinks Christ's ordination, the better for the man, that
bestows it, iucurreth (as we think) the danger of the curse, Fourthly. We
may lawfully seek the Bishops approbation, because from his hands only we can
receive the civil Magistrates allowance to exercise our Ministry.
denounced against him, that puts his trust in man, and makes flesh his
arm, and nith dra^eth his heart from the Lord. Ier. 17.5.

Fifthly, If our Bishops were not at all capable of this power to give
Ecclesiastical Ordination, yet seeing the Christian Magistrates approbation,
is not to be refused by him that exercises a ministry in the Church, and
that cannot be had in our Church, but by the hands of the Bishops we think
that he who is fitted of God to the ministry, and has also testimony of his
fitness from such godly learned Brethren as have made trial of his gifts, and
can judge of them, may lawfully accept and seek for this kind of approbation,
if all other conditions be equal.

Sixthly, Admit the Bishops from whom we receive our ordination, 6. Though the
Ordination received from the Bishops were as corrupt as baptismal received from
popish Priests, Ye may he be a lawful Minister that has no other Ordination
then from the Bishops Their third Objection agaiust our Ministry is, that our
administration and exercise of that office whereunto we are thus called, is
also Antichristian.
were indeed Antichristian, or Heretics (as we judge them not to be) yet why
should we be bound to seek for any other ordination, more than another
baptism, then that which we have received from Popish Priests in the time of
ignorance; And seeing that Barrow and Groenwood, in the 54. page of their
refutation, do not only account many to be true Christians, that never had
other outward Baptism, then that which they had from Popish Priests, but
plainly affirm, that such neither need, nor ought to be baptized again; we
wonder why they dare not account us true Ministers, because of this ordination
received from the Bishops.

Shall ordination be thought more necessary to the being of a Minister, than
baptism is to the being of a Christian; or shall an error in ordination, have
more force to prove one no Minister, than an error in Baptism has to prove
one no Christian; or are our Bishops worse than the Popish. Priests, or the
corruption in the form of our ordination, greater than those that are used in
popish Baptism.

The third thing they object against our Ministry, Is, that the admistration,
and exercise of our function, is not agreeable to the Word, but Antichristian
because (say they) as at our entrance, we swear Cannonicall Obedience to the
Bishops; Fifthly, Which is insufficient to warrant their separation, for it is
not utterly unlawful for us to yield some kind of obedience to, Bishops.
so do we perform it in our whole administration, by going to their Courts,
by standing, and falling at their commandment?

Whereunto we answer.

First, that so long as the Christian Magistrate requires we should yield
obedience to the Bishops (and that with this limitation, (viz.) only in things
lawful and honest) we think it not unlawful for us to give obedience to
them, in those things they do by civil authority, though neither themselves,
nor the Magistrate might well require us to do, for even our Savior Himself
yielded obedience to Caesar, in such a thing wherein Caesar could not lawfully
exact obedience of him; as for the excommunication and suspentions, Mat. 17.24,
27
and such other censures as are merely Ecclesiastical? We answer. As the true
Church of God, which from the Lord Jesus has received these keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, did though unadvisedly, and unlawfully deliver them over
into the hands of the Bishops: And the Bishops being Preachers of the Word,
though they should not have this power wholly committed unto them, yet are they
capable of it. We see not how it should be utterly unlawful to reverence and
yield to the censures of Christ's Church, being exercised, and administered even
by them, unless we will say, that the Church presently loses her right and
power, to censure Offenders, when she commits it unto any such men, as unto
whom of right, either not at all, or not of right, only it belongs.

Secondly, Secondly, Not bind our selves thereto by oath, so far as we do.
Now as we may lawfully yield some obedience to the Bishops in these things,
so we may lawfully bind our selves by oath to do it: if our oaths be
required or us by the Christian Magistrates anthoririe, especially seeing we
do by oath bind our selves, to obey in regard of the civil authority, which
is committed to them, by the Christian Magistrate.

Thirdly, For our going to their Courts, this we answer. That seeing we do
testify in our callings, our dislike to the vile, and odious corruptions of
their Courts; And do also utterly refuse to yield obedience to any o^ their
unlawful decrees, we cannot justly be condemned for appearing intheir Courts,
or any other place whereunto we are by His Majesty's authority summoned. And
whereas the persons before whom we appear are judged usually corrupt, and
enemies to that Reformation which we desire, and some of them also, such as
(being no ministers themselves) do by all means seek the disgrace of our
calling, and the utter discoutagement of such Christians, as in whom they
perceive any sparks of true zeal) we account this our appeating at their
Courts, not only for an abridgment of our liberty, but also for such a
burden, as we have just cause to groan under, and to pray, that God would in
His good time, move His Majesty's heart, to eat us of it. And yet as the
Apostle being free was content, for the Churches sake, not only to become
bound, in serving it with the labor of his hands, but also, by subjecting
himselse to those Ceremonies, which in Christ were abolished, so may, and ought
we for the Churches sake, to bear this burden, rather than to forsake, or
refuse the ministry, when the Lord has called, and fitted us unto it.

For our yielding to the suspentions, and deprivations, we answer. That so
long as the Bishops suspend, and deprive according to the Law of the Land, we
account of the action herein, Fourthly, To cease from the execution of our
ministry when they suspend or deprive us.
as of the act of the Church, which we may and ought to reverence, and yield
unto, if they do otherwise, we have liberty given us by the Law, to appeal
from them, if it be said, that the Church is not to be obeyed when it
suspends, and deprives us, for such causes as we in our Consciences know to be
insufficient? We answer. That it lies in them to depose, that may ordain; and
they may shut, that may open. And that as he may with a good conscience,
execute a ministry, by the ordination, and calling of the Church, who is
privy to himself of some unfitness (if the Church will press him to it) so
may he who is privy to himself, of no fault that deserves deprivation, cease
from the execution of his ministry, when he is pressed thereunto by the
Church. And if a guiltless person put out of his charge by the Churches
authority, may yet continue in it, what proceedings can there be against
guilty persons, who in their own conceit, are always guiltless, or will at
least pretend so to be; Seeing they also will be ready always to object
against the Churches judgment, that they are called of God, and may not
therefore give over the execution of their ministry at the will of man.

And yet admitting it were merely unlawful, Fourthly, If this obedience we
yield to them were utterly unlawful yet may we be true Ministers of Christ
notwithstanding.
upon any respect to yield any new obedience at all, to the censures of the
Bishops; yet how will it follow, that this our unlawful yielding, has force
sufficient to make us (ipso fasto) no true Ministers, unless you will say,
that the High Priests, who were in Christ's time, that took and left their
offices, at the will of tyrants, and heathen Princes, Were therefore not to be
accounted Priests, for further answer, hereunto we refer the Reader, to that
which we have above said to the fourth thing which they object against the
whole body of our Assemblies; And to that also which we have already answered
unto the fourth reason, which they bring against our office.

The speech of the Apostls, The speech of the Apostles. Acts 4.19, 20, 15. most
unskilfully alleged against us. 1 Timothy 6.2.
which they are wont to object against us in this case, may easily appear how
unskilfully, it is alleged to them that will consider these three differences
between their case and ours.

First, they that inhibited the Apostles, were known, and professed enemies to
the Gospel.

Secondly, the Apostles were charged not to teach in the name of Christ, nor to
publish any part of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which commandment might more
hardly be yielded unto, then this of our Bishops, who though they cannot
endure them, which teach that part of the truth that concerns the good
government, and reformation of the Church, yet are they not only content that
the Gospel should be preached, but are also preachers of it themselves.

Thirdly, The Apostles received not their calling, and authority from men
Galath. 2.1.
nor by the hands of men, but immediately from God Himself, and therefore also
might not be restrained, or deposed by men; whereas we, though we exercise a
function, whereof God is the Author, and we are also called of God to it, yet
are we called and ordained by the hand, and ministry of men, and may
therefore by men, be also deposed and restrained from the exercise of our
ministry.

The fourth Objection against our ministry is, There fourth Objection against
our Ministry is that our maintenance is not according to Christ's directions,
but Jewish and Antichristian, which is not of force to condemn our ministry,
Because we may be the true Ministers of Christ although we receave maintenance
from all sorts of men.
That we are not maintained a cording to the direction Christ bath given in his
Testament, but our maintenance is lewish, and Antichristian: That this is a
principal matter objected against our ministry, appears in the fourth page
of their Collection of letters, and conferences, and sundry other parts of
their writings,

And least they should seem to say it only, they bring sundry reasons, to
prove that our maintenance is such, as no Minister of Christ, can accept, or
live by, for say ye, our Ministers receive maintenance from all sorts of men
in their parish without difference. This is alleged in their collection of
liberties and page 18. and called in the 145. page of the refutation. An
execrable sacrilege, and covetous making merchandise of the holy things of
God, a letting out of our selves to hire to the prophan, for filthy Lucre. To
this first reason they bring against our mintenance, this answer we give.

First, That the Christian Magistrate is bound to use his authority for the
furtherance of the subjects in all things that concern godliness, and honestic,
and so see that the moral Law be kept by them, whereas therefore the
Christian Magistrate (in conscience of his duty) has provided by the Law,
that all his Subjects should (of the increase God gives them) contribute
somewhat toward the maintenance of their Minister; we may truly be said to
receave our maintenance, rather from the Magistrate then from the people.

Secondly, the Magistrate may lawfully appoint so much of the Subjects goods
(as by Law is given to the Ministers maintenance) to be employed to this or
any other good use, as is evident by that, which the Apostle says, Romans 13.7.

Thirdly, the Magistrate may without any show of wrong compel the subjects to
pay this part of their goods, which they give to their Minister, because in
Parliament it was voluntarily bestowed, even by the people themselves: whose
free act that is, to be accounted, which is enacted and done in Parliament.

Fourthly, It is evident by the Word, that the offerings which heathens
voluntarily brought, and gave to the building, and beautifiing of the Temple
were accepted of, as appears in the stories. Ezra. 1.4, 6


Fifthly, Seeing the Apostle calls it our own bread, Mehem 2.8. 2 These. 3.12.
we get by our honest labors, Ephesians. 4.28
and our Savior says in this case, that the labourer is worthy of his hire,
Luke 10.7
we may with comfort, and good conscience, take maintenance of the wicked that
live in our parishes, for whose sake, both publicly and privately, we take
pains, and to whom the benefit of our labor is offered; seeing that the
Apostle avoucheth 1 Cor. 9.11.
that such as sow spiritual things amongst people (though God bless not their
feed) may lawfully, and honestly, reap their carnal things.

Sixthly, As for the testimony of the holy Scriptures, which our brethren
allege in this point, we give this answer unto them. To the place, Levit.
22.25. we answer.

First, that the meaning is, that a stranger being a Proselite, might no more
lawfully offer any of these unclean, and imperfect sacrifices spoken of in the
verses going before, then a Jew might.

Secondly, If the unbelieving stranger were meant here, yet is there nothing
spoken here of the maintenance, which should come to the Priests, for the
intent of the Law, in this place is to show what manner of sacrifices should
be offered to the Lord, and not what maintenance Priests should have, which is
evident, both for that the sacrifice is here called, the bread of their God,
and also for that elsewhere the Priests might receave maintenance, which might
have blemish, as in the first fruits, and first borne. To that place, Pro.
15.8. and all such like, we answer.

First, that thought the action their spoken of (for the substance thereof) be
good and lawful; yet as it comes from them whose hearts are not purged by
faith, it is indeed abominable in Gods sight, as all other the actions of the
wicked are.

Secondly, That they abuse this place, for it is there meant of the spiritual
services of God, and not of corporal maintenance, and lastly, if it were to be
understood of the maintenance of the Minister, yet should not the Minister
sin, in taking it, because they sin in giving it; Because by the Law, it
was provided, that all Jews clean, or unclean, good or bad should pay tithes
without exception. To the place Phil 4 18. We answer.

First, That he speaks not there of maintenance due to the ministry, but of
the contribution, made to the afflicted Saints, and to himself in particular,
that had a principal portion, in the sufferings of the Saints.

Secondly, if they urge that the maintenance of the Minister is also an odor
that smells sweet, and a sacrifice acceptable to God, which nothing that
proceeds from the wicked can be: we refer our selves herein to the answer
we have made to the Prove. 15.8. cited by them to the same purpose.

Their second reason against our maintenance is, Secondly, although onr
main'enance be fixed and certain.
That it is fixed and certain. This is alleged in the 61. page of their
Discovery, and in sundry other parts of their writings, Concerning which we
answer.

First, that this can be no good reason against all our Ministers, seeing that
we have some preach ordinarily and painfully, who yet either live wholly of
themselves, or take nothing of the people, but that which they give voluntarily.

Secondly, if it be a great fault to live upon a set stipend, yet seems it
strange unto us, that they should account it so great to make a nullitie of our
Ministry.

Thirdly, we can see no reason why it should be thought either unlawful or
unconvenient to set stipends to be given unto, and received by the Minister:
for first, under Moses law, Deuteronomy. 14.22 Numb. 35.2.9. Josh. 21.18. etc. 2 Chronicles. 6.64.
a certain and set course was prescribed for the Ministers maintenance, and
the people appointed what they should give. Now if it be said of the manner of
the Leviticall maintenance, that it was Ceremonial, yet would we fain know
what Ceremony or shadow there can be in the certainty thereof: Shall we say
that together with the Ceremony it self, all the equity also and moral
reason is abrogated.

Secondly, as Ezekiel describing the pattern of the new Sanctuary that should
be under the Gospel, alludeth unto a certain and set maintenance that should
be given to the ministry: Ezr. 45.1.5
so there be fundry Phraises and Comparisons in the new Testament used by
Christ and the Apostles, from which the same may be very probably gathered to
be lawful and fit, as when the Ministers maintenance is compared to the wages
and hire of a servant, Luke 10.17 2 Timothy 5.18.
and when it is compared to the soldiers pay, 1 Cor. 9.7.
which both things are certain and set.

Thirdly, it stands with sound reason that the Ministers maintenance should
be certain: For first, seeing it is already proved that a sufficient
maintenance must necessarily be given to the Minister of the people, how can it
be unlawful, either for the people by their own promise, or for the
Magistrate by law to bind them unto that which they should voluntarily do of
themselves? Secondly, by this kind of maintenance, sundry of the peoples
infirmities (as their grudging to give ought when it is in their power to give
or not to give, their base estimation likewise of the Minister, and looking for
civil duty at his hand, and many other such like) are best prevented: Yea, we
deny that ever any Church was so well informed, wherein the most part of the
people had not need to have such infirmities restrained in them, by the wisdom
and authority of the Christian Magistrate.

Touching the places of Scripture 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. 1 Timothy 6.8. Jude 11.13.
in this point alleged, by them we give this answer. First, that they
condemn only the covetousness of men, and not the set maintenance of
Ministers, which may be received without covetousness. Secondly, if they will
enforce these places against set payments to the Minister, they may as well
enforce them against all set payments to the Prince, to the servant, to the
labourer, or any other. Thirdly if not, then seeing the Apostles rule Tim. 5.8.
does concern even the Ministers as well as others, why should it be thought
covetousness in him to provide a certain and set maintenance for himself and
his family, more then the same care is in any other Christian?

To the place Mat. 10. we say that the Commandment which our Savior Christ
gave there to his disciples was temporary, and concerned that especial voyage
only wherein (for their encouragement to the Ministry) our Savior assures
them, that they should not need to fear the want of maintenance; for he would
supply that extraordinarily as it were, by his especial providence, in
inclining the hearts of men to maintain them: And that this is so, may appear
by these reasons. Verse 7.8.
First, if it be a perpetual rule we may thence gather, 1. that the Minister
ought now to have no abiding place, neither two coats, two pair of shoes,
nor a staff; neither that they may possess any thing of their own.

Secondly, they then received their gifts of preaching and working of miracles
freely without cost, and therefore were bound from covenanting for stipend, to
dispense those gifts, receaving no more then for their present necessity of
food and raiment, which cannot be so said of those, whose bringing up in
learning is costly, and whose study is painful.

Thirdly, by the commandment which our Savior Christ gives Luke 22.35 36. 1
Cor. 96, 7. Matthew. 20.
for provision for themselves; And that which Paul challenges, it is evident,
that the restraint given, Mat. 10. was but temporary, yea ad mit it might be
proved from hence, that no set maintenance were given to the Ministers during
the Apostles time (which cannot be) yet follows not that there should be
none: Now seeing that the Church was then without those nourishing fathers
which the Lord promised by the Prophet, Esaias 49 23, ^^
without whose authority we see not how that order for forced maintenance
could be taken. Neither doubt we to acknowledge even this for a special fruit
of that blessing promised to come to the Church by Christian Magistrates,
whereas they said, that whatsoever is given to the maintenance of Gods Service,
should be free, and voluntary, and allege for that, these places, Exodus
15.2. 2 Cor. 8.12. 2 Cor. 9.5, 7. we answer. That the bond of the peoples
promise, and Magistrates Law is no hinderance, to the freedom and voluntarines,
seeing the service, and obedience of David was free and voluntary;
Notwithstanding the vow and oath he bound himself with. Psalm. 119.106. N^bem.
10.38.
So was that also which is mentioned in Nehemiah, for if Covenanting, should
take away the voluntarinesse of the act, then should it not be lawful to
covenant with servants and laborers or any other; Yea the Lord our God does
bind Himself by Covenant, to give that reward to the faith, and obedience of
his servants, which yet he gives most freely and voluntarily.

The third reason they allege against our maintenance, Thirdly. Although we
be maintained by Tithes.
Is this; That we are maintained by Jewish tithes, and concerning which, they
have these words, In the 60. page of their discovery; It is evident, who are
thus maintained by those Jewish Tithes, and offerings, are not the ministers of
Christ, and a little after, these Priests, and people still retain the
Leviticall decimations, in the same form, to the same ends. And page 16. I
could never see any difference between the Jews and them, save that the
Swine-heards, tythe-Pigges and Geese, etc.

To all which, we thus answer: First, It is evident, that the tithes are not
held amongst us, by virtue of the Leviticall Law, but only by the positive Law
of our Land, for proof whereof, these reasons following may be sufficient.

First, If this kind of maintenance were given to the Minister, for conscience
and obedience to that Law; why should not the first fruits also, offerings and
diverse other things, which by a plain commandment, were due to the
Leviticall Priesthood be given us as well as tithes?

Secondly, The manner of tything (which in diverse parts of our Land is
diversely used, and which through custom also, is many ways altered) proves
that paying of tithes amongst us, is not according to the Leviticall Law, nor
in religeous obedience thereunto.

Thirdly, The Law (by consent of the states in the Parliament) having alenated,
the tithes in many places, from the Minister, unto the Prince, and other men;
does thereby declare, that it appoints not the paying of the tithes, by
virtue of the Law of God.

Fourthly, Sundry of our Ministers are (and that even in the judgment of our
whole Church) lawfully by other means maintained, then by tithes, which is
also a plain demonstration, that both the Leuiticall Law is not held to be in
force with us; and if it were, we might yet have some true Ministers in our
Land notwithstanding.

Secondly, As the Prince (without any show of Jewish superstition) may require
of the Ministers first fruits, and tenths, and of all the rest of the subjects
fifteenes, and subsidies for the maintenance of the wars, and other civil
purposes, so doubt we not, but he may as well especially by act of Parliament
(which is also the act of the people) require tenths of his people to the
maintenance of the ministry, of which (as we have said before) he is bound
to have a more special care, and regard then of the maintenance of the wars,
or any other civil estate.

Their fourth reason against our maintenance is, Fourthly, Although we be
maintained by offerings and mortuary.
That it arises from popish offerings and mortuaries: Concerning which, we
answer, as follows.

First, Their be sundry of our Ministers that receive none at all, against
whose Congregations, and Ministers, this reason cannot hold, and many even of
them to whom the Law allows offerings, have refused them that were accustomed
to be given at the Churchings, and burialls, and such other, as the receiving
whereof, they see would be likely to nourish superstition in the people.

Secondly, If all did receive and live by offerings, we see not what pollution
can come to their ministry thereby, for why may not that creature of God,
which was first given to profane, and superstitious uses, be now lawfully
translated to the maintenance of Gods service, seeing that even under the Law,
translation was lawful, when (for a Ceremony, to shadow what detestation the
people of God should bear to the manners of the heathen, and how they should
be separated from them:) Many things were made unclean to the Jews, that are
not so to us; So also the Iron, and Brass, Silver, and Gold of Jericho, a
Joshua 6.24.
was put into the treasure of Gods house, as appears in the story of Joshuab:
And David dedicated unto the Lord, the brass, and silver, and gold, of all the
Nations, that he subdued; as may also appear by Samuel. 2 Samuel 8.11.
Now if those goods that were not only put a part to an Idolatrous use, by a
civil institution, but also actually abused to Idolatry, might yet lawfully
bereceaved for the maintenance of the true service of God, how much more may
the money we receave for offerings, etc. be lawfully taken and enjoyed by us,
seeing whatsoever original the money, and institution had, yet was it never
applied to any Idolatrous use.

Thirdly, If those offerings were polluted things, yet are they too accidental
to overthrow the very being, and nature of our ministry.

Our People may beaccounted Members of a true visible CHURCH.
III. EXCEPTION.
THeir third general exception, is against our people, and the private Members
of our Assemblies, Whom they affirm to be such, as no true Church of God can
consist of.

ANSWER.
THe reasons amongst us to account of people, Our people (say they) are such as
cannot be members of a true Church. But we have good reasons to account our
people holy and true Members of the visible Church.
for the members of the true Church are these.

First, We know many in whom (we think) we do discern infallible notes, of
an unfeigned conversion.

Secondly, That all that are (by many of our Ministers) admitted to the
Sacrament, and other the privileges of the Church are such as can give account
(in some true measure) of their faith, and do not only generally profess
obedience; but when they are convinced of any particular sin, they are also
willing to profess parricular sorrow and purpose of amendment.

Thirdly, many of those who are wicked and ignorant, we cannot see just cause
to account them wilfully ignorant, nor obstinately rebellious, and therefore we
may lawfully esteem them brethren, 2 Th^s 3, 14, ^^
notwithstanding their ignorance, and sin, and this we think the Apostles own
words will warrant us to do.

Fourthly, our people in general profess the true faith, and obedience of
Christ, which makes them members of the ^^ole Church, as we have already
proved, and if an being dealt with according to the rule that Christ
prescribes, shall be found wilful and obstinate in his ignorance and sin,
(...). 18.15, 17
then as he cease to profess the true faith, and obedience of Christ: So may
we by the Laws of our Land, cease to account him a member of our Church.

The first thing they object against our people is this, Their first reason
against our people, is that th^^r can no separation, be discerned amongst them
but the consist of all ^o^^s. Which reason ^s f^lse and insufficient.
That the ignorant and pr^phane multi^u le, as they are confusedly, by our
Baptism ma^^e member^ of our Church, and admitted to all other th privileges
thereof, so is there no separation (say they) to be observed amongst them in
their ordinary conversation: concerning which matter these are their own words in
the ninth page of their discovery: All the profane and wicked of the Land,
Atheists, Papists, Anabaptists, Heretics of all sorts, gluttons, riotous,
blasphemous, etc. and who not, that dwells in this land, or is within the
Kings-dominions, all without exception, are received into, and nourished in the
bosom of this Church, with the Word and Sacraments: none are here refused,
none are here kept out? Whereunto we answer.

First, (...) ^2. ^1, ^2 53. (...) 14.4, and 17, 4, 5.
That even by the preaching of the Word, that separation which the Scripture so
much commends, is wrought and evidently to be discovered amongst the people
of our Land, and very many of our people there be, that do carefully shun
the private familiarity of all notorious offenders.

Secondly, As all our Ministers may by Law, so many of them do keep from the
Lords Table every ignorant person, and notorious offend or.

Thirdly, Many of our Ministers do refuse to receive such into the Church by
Baptism, whose Parents will not make a confession, of true faith and obedience
to Christ. Neither does public authority of Law enforce us to receive any
man's Child, against whom it may be manifestly proved, that he professes not
the true faith.

Fourthly, children may lawfully be admitted to baptism, though both their
Parents be profane, if those who are in the stead of Parents to them, do
require baptism for them, and give their promise to the Church for their
religious education, seeing they may be lawfully accounted within Gods
covenant, if any of their ancesters, in any Generations were faithful. Exodus
20.5. Their second Objection against our people is that none of them be
accounted holy faithful, because they obey not Christ nor practice his
ordinances. Which is also false and insufficient, for first themselves know
many of our people to be such as have religiously reformed their own persons
and families, and carefully sought the reformation of the Church.


The second thing they object against our people is, That the best of them are
without true faith, because they live not in obedience of Christ, set up among
them, nor practice his Ordinances? Whereunto we answer.

First, It is a most rash and presumptuous judgment to deny them amongst us
to be a faithful people, of whom these our brethren themselves do know that
they have by the hearing of the Word, been brought to such a faith, as bath
been effectual in the Reformation of their lives, because (partly for that
they knew it not, and partly for that they are hindered by authority) they
practice not the whole discipline of Christ; And this rash judgment which they
give of our people, is so much the more blameworthy, because they cannot be
ignorant, with what care our people have sought by all good, and dutiful
means the Reformation of the Church: And how much they have be wailed and
mourned for the want thereof, for which matter also, we refer the Reader to
the answer, we have above given to their fourth and fifth objections against
the whole body of our Assemblies.

Secondly, Our people deserve not to be blamed, for that they erect not the
discipline; for,

First, They esteem both our Prince to be a most lawful and a Christian
Magistrate, and our Ministers to be true Ministers of Christ, by whose means,
seeing they have received from God, and do still enjoy, not those blessings
only, that belong to the comfort of this life, but the means of eternal
happiness, and the effectual assurance of it also; they are justly afraid,
that by enterprising a public Reformation, not only without, but contrary to
the direction, and liking of them, who by Gods Word ought to have, if not the
only, yet the principal hand, in that work, they should highly offend God.

2. They cannot find any warrant in holy Scripture for them that are private
Members of the Church, to erect the discipline, no not though the Magistrate
and Ministers, who should deal in this work were altogether profane and
ungodlie, in deviding the Land of Canaan, which was a type of Heaven, and of
the Church under the Gospel, and in all the Church causes, that were dealt in
under the government of Joshua, which was a type of, Christ's government, neither
private persons, nor the whole multitude, had the managing of matters, Josh.
19.51. and 21, 1. and 22, 14
but the people did all by the Elders, and chief Fathers, a which also was
commanded: Numb. 34.16.28.
So in public Church causes under the Gospel, the Lord has ordained certain
special men chosen out from among the people, by their consent to rule and
govern the rest. 1 Timothy 5.17. and 4.14


And where God has sanctified and separated a special sort of men to any
office, or the administration thereunto belonging, there has he restrained
all others that are not of the same sort, from doing the actions properly
belonging to that office, as may well appear by comparing these places of holy
Scripture together. Numbr. 4.15. with the first, Chron 13.7, 10 Number. 4.20. with
1 Samuel 6.19. Number. 16.40. and 3.10. Heb. 5.4. with 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 19. Acts
14.23.


Therefore also we see the faithful, at Listra, ^conium, and Antiochiah, l ad
no Elders, till the Apostles by their consent, ordained them: No more had they
at Creta till Ti^us, was sent to that purpose.

To the places of holy Scripture, which they allege for this their second
Objection against our people? we answer.

First, That some of them, Ier. 31.34. Ezech. 44.8, 9. Cant. 4.7. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Acts 15.9.
concern the invisible Church, and therefore are ignorantly applied to the
description of them that are members of the Church visible.

As if no measure of faith, and holiness, were to be allowed by men in the
judging of the members of the Church visible, but that only which the Lord
Himself allows of in juding of the elect Members of the visible Church:
Whereas it is evident, that to the making of the Members of the visible Church,
an outward obedience and profession of faith is sufficient, though there be no
inward grace, nor truth in the heart.

Secondly, That some of them require indeed, that every Christian should seek
the Kingdom of God, and the place where God is worshipped, according to his
Word, submit themselves to the Yoke of Christ, and to obey him in all his
Ordinances: but that the people without either the Magistrate, or Ministers
help, or consent, should reform the Church, and erect the discipline, they are
so far from commanding, that if they be well compared, with that we have
above said, they will be found to command the contrary.

The third thing they object against our people, Is, That though some of them
had once been faithful, yet by tollerating in their Assemblies, the open
profane, by wanting power to cast them out, and communicateing with them in
their worship of God, they are now become not ue Church of Christ? Whereunto we
answer.

First, that the godly which are in our Assemblies, do not at all tolerate the
wicked profane, but do as much (as in them lies) show their dislike to them,
mourning also for their profaneness, and for the want of Christian discipline,
whereby they might be separated: Yea the very Laws of our Church (as has
been above said) do separate from our Assemblies the open profane.

Secondly, admit they did not at all shut out the prophanie (either because
they know not their right, or for that they are hindered and restrained to do
it, or that they sin in not using their right in this case) or if it were
granted that the people, even the private members of the assemblies had full
authority given them by Christ, without the Ministers or Magistrates consent
to cast out and excommunicate the open profane (the contrary whereof has been
before sufficiently proved) yet might they as lawfully for want of power, or
for such inconveniences tolerate the prophanie amongst them, and so forbear
the execution of their authority in this case, as either David did spare Joab,
2 Samuel 3 39. 2. Kings 14 5.
or Amaziah those rebels that slew his father because they were not strong
enough do justice upon them.

Thirdly, the communicating in Gods service with these open sinners, Thirdly,
they may be true members of the Church, though they do communicate in Gods,
worship with the open profane, as may appear by the example of the godly that
lived under the law.
whom the godly in some of our assemblies are enforced to communicate with, or
to want the benefit of Gods public worship is not sufficient, either to make
him profane, or pollute unto them the holy things of God; for proof whereof we
allege, First, the examples of the godly that lived under the Ceremonial
law. The Prophets either served not God at all in the Temple, or else they
joined in Gods service with many that were notoriously stained with gross
sins: for who are they whose sins the Prophets so mightily cry out upon,
Esaias 1.10. Jer. 5.1.9. and 7 8.11. Ezekiel. 16.4^.52. and 22, 25.26.
but such as were admitted to the public worship of God.

If the Babylonians and the Caldeans should violently have included themselves
into the Church assemblies of Gods people in the time of their captivity;
should the godly Jews by such presence of the wicked which they wanted power
to hinder, either have been persuaded to cease from public worship of God, or
have been poluted by it. Was Annah and Simeon, or the blessed Virgin and Joseph
polluted by communicating Luke 2.22.27.36.
with the Jews in their time, when not only the people, but also the Priests
with whom they communicated, were both in doctrine and life so much corrupted:
Or did this stain all that Justice for which Zacharias is so commended for
that he kept his course, and so served in the Temple even in that corrupt age.
But what need further examples be brought for the practice of the godly that
lived under the law, seeing it is evident that our Savior himself was by
Circumcision made a member of that corrupt church of Jury, Luke 2.21.22.
and presented in that temple when he was an infant, and when he came to
years of discretion he communicated with them in the public service of God;
for he went with his Parents to the Passover, Luke 2.41.
he went to the feast of the Tabernacles, John 7 10.
his cnstome was to frequent the Synagogues on the Sabbath day, even before he
entered into the Ministry, Luke 4 16.
yea he commands the people so far to hearken unto, and to sollow the
directions of those wicke^ Scribes and Pharisees, as they kept themselves
within t e chair of Moses, and taught his doctrine M^. 23, 1, 2, ^.
: But this reason taken from the examples of the godly that lived under the
law, Henry Barrow in the 39. and 40 pages of his Discovery seeks to shift off
after this manner, viz That nothing then d^filed the godly, if the Priest and
People with whom they communicated were not Legally and Ceremonially polluted:
for the Priests and Ecclesiastical State then were not to med i will with the
faults of manners, nor to separat^^ any from the Congregations for moral
sins: but it is now under the Gospel far other wise where all things are
become new and spiritual, and where all manner of known sins obst nately
held and maintained, have as great force to defile men in the judgment of the
Church, and to deserve separation as legal pollutions, leprosies, running
issues and other diseases had then.

To which his reply we answer that moral transgressions did defile men, and
make them worthy to be separated from Gods public worship then, as well as
they do now; for it is evident by the law that they who had morally offended,
were kept from the Congregation till they had professed their repentance, and
till atonement had been made for them.

For to what purpose can we imagine that public confession bringing a sin
offering, ^evit 4 13.14.22 27, and 5.1^. (...) 6.27. N^^n 15.22.25
and seeking of atonement to be made by the Priest should be enjoined him that
had committed a moral transgression, if without the doing of these things, he
might be still partaker of the public worship, and if these things do not
import a restraint from the public worship, them will it follow, that the
moral transgressour was left free from all censure and Ecclesiastical
punishment, notwithstanding this his open and manifest contempt of Gods
ordinances: for there is no other censure appointed in the whole law for the
punishment of this contempt, and consequently the whole worship of God did lie
open to most notorious profanation and confusion,

Secondly, the man that did morally offend is as well called unclean by the
holy Ghost, as he that had transgressed the Ceremonial law, and the very same
word (Tame) that is put for Ceremonial uncleanness in one place, Le^^. 5.2.3.
is put for moral uncleanness in another, (...) ^8 23.24.29.
and consequently where it it is said in the book of Chronicles, that by
Jehoiadab his appointment, 2 C^^^n. 23.29.
porters were set by the gates of the house of the Lord, that none that was
unclean in any thing should enter in, it may and ought to be understood of the
restraining of them that were morally, as well as those that were Ceremonially
unclean.

Thirdly, the Priest was commanded to deal with him, that in some things
sinned of ignorance against the Morrall Law, even in the same sort as he was to
deal with him that was legallie polluted through ignorance. L^vit 5 1. Levit.
6. ^^7.


Fourthlie, He that was privy to himself of Moral transgression, was bound
in Conscience to abstain from the facrifices and Sacraments though he were not
ceremonially polluted: Esaias 1.10, 14. (...) 7 9.11. (...) 5 23, 24.
And were not the Church Governors, then bound to separate such, when they
also, and the Congregation were made privy to such transgressions?

But why spend we so many words in confuting this most absurd assertion, seeing
themselves in the 89. and 90. pages of their refutation, affirm, and l^bour to
prove, by many testimonies, that under the Law many were to be separated from
the Congregation for moral transgressio^s.

A second reason to prove that the godly are not polluted, Secondly, Of the
godly that lived under the Gospel.
by communicating in the true worship of God, with known and open sinners, may
be taken from the example of the godly that have lived in the Churches under
the Gospel.

The godly that were in the Church of Cor. remained Saints, and faithful
still, 1 Cor. 1.2.
though they had communicated in Gods worship, with the incestuous person, with
such as accounted fornication no sin, as came profanely to the Sacrament, as
denied the Resurrection.

The faithful in Pergamus receive no pollution, from them that lived amongst
them, and joined with them in Gods worship, and yet maintanied the doctrine of
Balaam, and of the Nicolaitames, nor they of Thyatira from Jes^bell, who was
tolerated amongst them to teach and deceive, and cause many to commit
fornication amongst them, Revel. 2.14, 15. Revel. 2.20,
and to eat meat sacrificed to Idols.

And (to let pass all other examples) we would gladly know this of our
brethren themselves, whether if it should so fall out in their Assemblies (as
it may in the most perfect Church, that is upon the earth) that some one wicked
man should remain uncast out, either through the ignorance, or partiallity, or
fear of the Church governors, they should for that one man's sake, deprive
themselves of all the comfort they find in their meetings; if they would not,
why give they not the like liberty to the godly amongst us, who have, and do
still look for as much comfort in our Assemblies, as they do in theirs: If
they would then who is so blind, as not to see that their Congregation is a
very Babell, and place full of miserable confusion, or so mad, as either to
jovne himself unto it, or being joined, to remain in it, any longer? If they
allege that the former examples are all unfitly applied unto our people, for
that they were all true Churches, whereunto the godly above named, did join
themselves, and therefore were not easily to be forsaken, and the worship
wherein they communicated with the wicked, was the true worship of God (whereas
neither our Assemblies are true Churches, nor our worship the true worship of
God,) or they continued not in this their fault, with that obstinancie, that we
and our people do?

We answer, That they beg that, which is in question between us, for neither
do our people doubt whether it be the true Church, and worship of God, wherein
they communicate, nor do they see how they have been convinced of sin in
this action. And we have already proved at large, both that our Church, is a
true Church, and our worship the true worship of God, and that we cannot
justly be charged with obstinate continuance, in those wants and corruptions,
that are now amongst us.

To the places of Scripture which they bring against our people in this point
in the 68. page of their Collection of Letters, and conferences? We answer,
that they are all most unskilfullie applied, for although some Levit. 20.24.
John 15.16.
of them do prove, that Gods people should be separated from the rest of the
world: Some Esaias 65 11. Ezech. 16.25.
of them that they may not offer sacrifice unto a multitude of Gods, nor join
with Idolators, neither in the false worship of God, nor in voluntary leagues,
and familiarity; 2 Cor. 6.14 17
other some that the Minister must deal sincerely, in the delivery of Gods
Message to his people, not mixing any vile opinion, or assertion of his own,
with the precious Word of God, nor applying the Word to their humors and
likeing, but cause them rather to frame, and apply themselves unto it, I^r.
15.19.
yet do no one of these prove either, that the communicating in the true
worship of God, with some that are profane, is of force, to cut off a people
from the Church, and covenant of God; or that the godly should rather abstain
from the exercise of Gods true worship, than use them in the company of some
others that are ungodly.

Or that it is the sin of the people, that such are not separated from
amongst them; And surely we cannot but wonder that our brethren do thus deal
with the sacred Word of God; they use to fill the Margents of their books with
such store of places of Scripture, that the simple might think that they have
even a cloud of witnesses against us; when themselves could not but know, that
the Scripture is by them dragged as it were by violence, to bear witness in a
matter, for which they have not one word to speak.

The Conclusion.
FRom these three Exceptions that have been above answered, they infer this
conclusion, that therefore they may lawfully, and ought to separate themselves
from us in such sort, as they do. In this conclusion, there are two Articles,
whereunto we will answer severally.

The first Article in their conclusion is this: The Assemblies which we go
from, are such, as the Word of God does warrant us to go from?

Whereunto we answer; That we may much more strongly conclude upon that which
we have above written, that because we have a true Church, consisting of a
lawful ministry, and a faithful people, therefore they cannot separate
themselves from us, but they must needs incur the most shameful and odious
reproach of manifest Schism.

The places of holy Scripture which they allege to warrant their separation
by; we affirm to be of no force, to conclude that which they are brought for,
which shall more plainly appear when they are considered of a part, and
sorted so, as the variety of their nature requires.

The first sort of their testimonies concern only that private, 1 Cor. 5.9, 13
Ephe. 5.7, 10, 11 2 These. 3.6, 14.15.
and voluntary familiarity, which Christ has forbidden to have with the
wicked that live in the Church, this shall appear to be the true meaning of
the Apostle, even of that place of 1 Cor. 5. which in the 218. page of their
refutation, and in sundry other places of their writings, they urge so, as it
may seem they judge it to be of more force, for this purpose, then all the
rest.

First the word (...), used by the Apostle, both in this place and the 2 These.
3. does with a double composition with two such prepositions, note a most
familiar acquaintance and conversation.

Secondly, It cannot be showed in all the Scripture, where this phrase to
(eat) being barely and generally set down, without any adition is taken for
the eating of the Sacrament.

Thirdly, If the Apostle had meant a separation in the Church Assemblies, he
would have commanded the Church rather to cut off, and to put from them, these
wicked men then to separate themselves from the wicked.

Fourthly, It appears by the tenth and eleventh verses, being compared
together, that the Apostle wrote the second time to clear his meaning in that
which he had wrote before; And therefore in this place be requires no more
separation from brethren, that are fornicators, and then the Corinthians did
think he had (in a former letter) from such fornicators were out of the Church;
Now the Corinthians could never imagine, that when the Apostle forbad them to
eat with Heathens and Infidels that were fornicators, and his meaning should
be to forbid them the communicating with such in the service of God: for they
never had accustomed to communicate so; And therefore the separation he
requires, must needs be meant only of private, and voluntary familiarity. If
they object that the Apostle in requiring separation from the wicked in private
conversation, does much more forbid all society with them in the worship of
God, seeing that thereby we join our selves much nearer together then by any
civil fellowship (as they affirm in the 218. page of their refutation) We
answer, that the reason follows not; for, First, It is in a private man's
power to keep from his first Table any wicked man, in whose hand, yet it lies
not to shut any from the Lords Table.

Secondly, Each Christian as he is bound, by the commandment of God to the
exercises of Religion, especially in such as are public, so is he to forbear
the private farmiliaritie of the wicked.

Thirdly, Even as a Christian may eat privately with a wicked man, or with an
excommunicate person, in some cases, when his company cannot be eschewed, as
being in an Army, or Prison, or ship upon the Sea, amongst a company of
vile wicked men, being by the Prince, or any other that has power enforced
either to do so, or utterly to want all food, so much more is it lawful for a
Christian to eat with the wicked man at the Lords Table, wherein he is
enforced either to do so, or utterly to want all the great benefits and
comfort that God offers him in the Sacrament.

The second sort of their Testimonies, Matthew. 7.15. Romans 16.17. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Titus 2.6.
whereby they labor to warrant their separation, concern only the avoiding
and taking heed of false Prophets, blind guides, hypocritical, and profane
deceivers, and therefore they can with no peace to their consciences, ground
their separation upon them, till they have sufficiently proved, that not some
of our Ministers, but all are not only faulty in their practice, but teach
also unsound, and corrupt doctrine, which they will never be able to prove.

The third sort of their Testimonies, 2 Cor. 6.14.18 ^evel. 18.4
do indeed partly concern that separation, which Christians should make from
Idolatours in the service of God, yet do they no ways serve, to justify this
their separation from us unless they could prove (which they are not able to
do) that those Assemblies which these Scriptures command a separation from,
were in the profession of truth equal to us, or that the corruptions which are
amongst us, are equal unto such as were in those Assemblies. Besides these
test imonies, they seek by two reasons, to prove the necessity of their
separation from us, whereof the first is taken from the burt that may come to
the true Christian by communicating with the wicked; The other from the hurt he
may do to the wicked, with whom he does communicate.

Concerning the first, they have these words; in the 97. page of their
refutation. A little Leaven, leaveneth the whole lump, so one openly unworthy
received to the Lords Supper, makes all the Communicants guilty. And in the
34. page of their discovery; The known, and suffered sin of any one member
is contagious to all such as communicate in Prayers, and Sacraments, with such
an obstinate offender, and makes them as guilty in Gods sight, as he himself
is? Whereunto we answer.

First, That we have already proved by many examples (in the answer we have
above given unto the last thing they object against the people, and private
members of our Church) that the godly receive no contagion from the wicked,
with whom they are enforced to communicate in the true worship of God.

Secondly, That their assertion may by reason, appear evidently to be most
absurd, for if the presence of the wicked should of its own nature make the
action of the Sacrament, and prayer void, and of none effect to the faithful,
that communicate with him, then should we never without great doubting, and
wavering communicate in those holy exercises in such a Congregation, where all
that we join with, are not well known unto us, for fear their should be in
the company, some open offenders whom our selves know not of. If our knowledge,
and privity to his sin, be the thing that maks his presence contagious to us,
especially when we hay admonished him, Ezec. 18.20.
and by all means testified our dislike to his sin, so far as in us lies.
Then how is the Prophet to be understood, when he says; the wickedness of
the wicked shall be upon his own head, but admit this was granted that the
presence of the wicked in prayer, and Sacrament, did infect the godly, how will
they excuse their refusal to hear the Word preached in our Assemblies, seeing
it is so clear by the Apostles speech, Cor. 14.24, 25.
that the preaching of the Word, might be of force, to do them good, though
some that joined with them in the hearing of it were Infidels.

To their second reason, wherein they pretend a charitable regard of us, who by
their joining with us in Gods worship, may be hardened in the likeing of our
corruptions, and by their separation, may happily be brought to Repentance.

We answer, that the godly man who has reproved the open offender, shunned his
private familiarity, and has gone so far in testilying his dislike to his
sin, as the bounds of his calling will permit, is no way accessory to his
sin, nor has any fellowship with the unsruitfull works of darkness, Ephesians.
5.11.
and if that any wicked man will imagine, that the godly do not much dislike
him, because they will not for his sake, shun the public worship of God; it is
an offense taken and not given, and therefore such as wherewith the conscience
of a godly man need not to be troubled.

Thus have we answered, that which they pretend for the warrant, and necessity
of their separation from our Assemblies. And now least any should be justly
offended by thinking that in this apology, we make for our Church, we do any
way plead for Baal. or seek to daube up the breaches of our Church with
untempered mortar, and so run our selves into the danger or that curse, which
the Lord denounces against them, that call darkness light, and speak good of
evil.

We therefore freely confess, that there are (indeed) in our Church great
corruptions, and that is the great sin of our Ministers, that they do not
with so much zeal, and courage reveal and show their distike of them, and of
our people, that they mourn not, nor seek by all homble and earnest means to
God, and the Magistrate for Reformation of them, as they ought to do. And yet
(though many in this Land, do both know, and mourn, and make known also in
their callings their great dislike unto those corruptions that are amongst us,
as much as any of these brethren with truth can do, we dare considently
affirm, that the corruptions of our Church, are not such, as for which an.
Christian may make separation from us, and that we are hereby induced to
avouch, because we find that in the Old, and New Testament, as has been
above said, as many, and as heinous corruptions to have been in such
Assemblies, as from which no separation was ever taught or practiced.

Secondly, Though we did grant that (upon warrant of some places, that they
bring) there might lawfully (upon due regard of some circumstances) a
separation be made even from our Assemblies, yet do we affirm, that for as
much as they have failed in sundry of those circumstances, that therefore their
separation, is utterly unjustifiable, for whereas they could not with any just
warrant to their consciences, separate themselves from us, till they bad found
us obstinate in our corruptions, and temptuous scorners of all good means used
for reforming us, (as is evident by the example of such separations as are
commended in the Word) Acts 13.45.46. and 19.8, 9.
we affirm that they have departed from us before they could (with any
charity or good conscience) be so persuaded of us. And this we doubt not to
prove to their own consciences, and to all that know them well, by these
reasons following.

First, they separated themselves from us before that either by writing or any
competent means, they had soundly convicted us, or manifested unto our
judgment the dangerous errors we held, wherein they have manifestly
transgressed the rule of the word: Act. 19.3.9. 2 Timothy 4.2. T^^. 1.10, 11. and
3.10.
we grant indeed the truth and necessity of the government of Christ
prescribed in the word, which has been sufficiently manifested to the Church,
and that our Church has been sufficiently convinced of many gross
corruptions; but that for the want of some parts of discipline, our Church
should be no Church, or that for the corruptions amongst us, our Ministers
should be no true Ministers, or our people no faithful people (which are the
very fundamental principles of their Schism, and almost the very matter of
difference betwixt them and us.) In these points we deny that either to this
day they have sufficiently convinced us, or that before the first time of their
separation) they had in any measure used means to convince us.

Secondly, after they had convicted us in Judgment, they should have (by
brotherly admonition and exhortation, sought to persuade us unto the love and
practice of the truth revealed, and to the hatred and forsaking of the
manifested corruptions 2 These. 3.14.15. Tit. 3.10. Heb. 10.15.
which is evident they did not before their separation.

Thirdly, the Scripture forbids the Church to eject a private member, till
in all patience and long suffering, his repentance has been waited for, and
the fruit of the aforesaid means expected 2 These. 3.14.15. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25 and
2 Timothy 4.2.
which evidently reproves their hasty and sudden departure from us, either
before, or suddenly after they had used the means abovesaid, especially seeing
that in all reason more long-sufferance should be used by such private members
as they were toward a whole Church, than by a whole Church toward private
members.

Fourthly, whereas they should have used all the means abovesaid in meekness,
humility and love, mourning also for the hardness of our hearts, whereby the
means became frustrate unto us. Ephesians. 4.15. 2 Timothy 2.25. Tit. 3.2. Heb.
10.24.25.
It is evident that their zeal in dealing against us, has been like the rash
and undiscreet zeal spoken of, and reproved in the sons of Zebedeus. Mar. 3.5.
Luke 9.55.
And has favored altogether of uncharitableness and not of love: for as all
they that once have declined to that Schism, are found to be exceedingly proud
and disdainful to wards all that are contrary minded; yea even such as (before
they were infected with that leaven) were patterns of all love, modesty and
humility unto others; so will they not acknowledge nor reverence any of the
most excellent graces that God has given unto any of his servants amongst us,
nor so much respect them, as the very Papists will do; no they profess
greater detestation and despite to the most godly and most sincere men amongst
us, then they do to such as are most notorious in profannesse, and malice to
the truth. To which purpose also we desire that the spirit whereby Henry
Barrow was directed in writing his last books may be well examined.

Fifthly, whereas by the equity of the rule which our Savior himself gives,
and according to the practice of the Apostolic Church, we should have had our
corruptions made known to some other Reformed Churches, and by them we should
have been convinced and admonished before these our brethren could rightly
judge us as heathens and publicanes, we affirm that they (as if the Word of
God had come out from them, or had come unto them only) have by their
disorderly separation, not only despised and robbed us of our right; but all
other christian Churches in the world besides.

Sixthly, they have not so much as protested the cause of their separation from
us to the particular Congregations, whereof before their departure they were
accounted by others, and did also acknowledge themselves to be members.

Seaventhly, those of them which once exercised the places of the Ministry
amongst us, and received for the same the reward due which they call Balaams
wages, have not before, or since their departure, made actual restitution of
that which was (if their opinions be true) most unjustly received, nor yet
showed themselves willing so to do, to their ability which norwithhstanding
by the law of God they are most strictly bound to do.

The scond Article in their conclusion is this, That the Assemblies which they
go and join themselves unto, are such as the Word of God commands them to
go unto: whereunto we give this answer. That if they had followed the
direction of Gods Word when they had left us for our coruptions and wants as
they charge us with, they should have joined themselves to some other Reformed
Churches which are pure from our corruptions, and amongst whom the discipline
of Christ is rightly established: as we find the faithful Levites and people
did in the days of Iiroboam and every wise hearted Christian, will hold it to
be a reason of great force against them that they have made separation, not
from us only; but from all other Reformed Churches in the world: For there by
they appear to have been of this judgment, that till they arose, there was
not a true co^stituted visible Church in the whole world known unto them: unto
which they might have joined themselves.

Secondly, the Assemblies which they erected, and joined themselves unto, if
they be looked into with a Christian and indifferent eye, shall well appear to
be much more deformed than many of those are, which they have for saken, for
proof whereof, we desire the Readers, to weigh well with the weights of the
Sanctuary, and to try by the touchstone of the Word certain points of
doctrine, which they have both brewed, and broached to the world in their
printed Books. Then secondly their practice and dispositions. All their
Paradoxes, and absurd opinions, we will not set down, but in some few, we will
give the Readers a taste of the rest.

In the 138. page of their discovery they affirm, That such an Idolatrous
shape cleaves to every stone of our Material Charches, as by no means can be
severed from them, while there is a stone left standing upon a stone, so that
neither they can be used to the worship of God, nor we have any use of them,
seeing that they are execrable, and devoted to destruction. In the 167. page of
the same book they teach: That to every Christian God has given his boly
sanctifying spirit, to open unto them, and to l^ade them in to all truth. Much
like unto this, is that which they wright in the 161. page of their refutation:
That it is an execrable position, to say that the Church, and every member
thereof is in some spiritual bondage to sin.

Touching the Magistrates authority, besides that by the whole tenor of their
writings, it appears, that they hold the people may take in hand the public
Reformation of the Church, and erect the whole discipline not only without, but
contrary to the Christian Magistrates liking and consent; they do also
directly affirm, page 218 and 219. of their discovery: That God has in the
holy Scripture made most perfect, and necessary Laws, both for the Church, and
Commonwealth, and that he requires of the King, and Magistrase, to see their
Laws executed, and not to make new.

Neither do they judge ever a whit more dutifully of the Churches of God, for
of them they use to speak, as if their had been no true Church in the world,
till they sprung up. Nor were at this time any right constituted Church
Assembly in the world, but their own: for in the Epistie to the Reader which
they prefixed before their discovery and in the first page thereof, they have
these words. The whole land (I say not the whole World) has lain so long, and
is so deep set in the def^ction, etc. And in the second page: Although the
truth has long layn hid, and buried, and be now impugned of all men. But why
should we wonder that they judge so erroniously of men, seeing the sacred
Worship of God, they hold, that it may receive pollution from men that deal in
it, for in the 30. page of their discovery, They teach that the open sin of
the Minister, defiles the Sacrament, and Prayer, administ^ed by them. Yea in
the 34. page they go somewhat further, and say: That the known, and suffered
sin of any one member, is coniagious to all such as communicate with him, in
that estate, and make th them all as guilty in Gods sight, as he himself is.

Touching the Articles of our faith, which by all the godly, in all ages have
been called the Apostles creed; Thus they speak, in the 76. page of their
discovery: Their forged patchry, commonly called the Apostls Creed. The
Article of Christ's descending into Hell what sense soever it be taken in, they
call in the 48. page of their refutation; That Blasphemous Article of our
Faith. Besides these gross absurdities they hold against other points of
wholesome doctrine, let the Reader guess at the judgment they have in the
manner of Church government (wherein they would appear to be better seen,
then all the godly learned in the world besides) by these few things. which we
will offer to his consideration. First, whereas they have in their writings,
disclaimed the discipline which we desire, and other reformed Churches have
received, they have never yet clearly set down, what discipline it is which
themselves stand so much for. In the 27. page of their discovery, when they
have scoffed at the discipline we seek, they offer words to this effect. That
without the power, and practice of the diligent watch of every member, but
chiefly of the Rulers, and Elders, the Word of God is made as Idol, the
Sacrament sacrilege unto us, and all things we do, odious and abominable to
the Lord: Whereby it appears, they are of opinion, that there can be no true
Religion there, where either, there is no Eldership established, or where the
Elders fail in the execution of their office, or where any one private member
of the Church shall fail in doing the Office of a Watchman, and censurer to
the rest, much like to this, is that which they write in the 37. page of their
refutation, Has the greater Minister in the Church, any more power to retain,
and loose the sin of the least member, then the same member, has to bind,
or loose his sin. In the 119. page of their discovery, speaking of the
Church government. which has been sought for amongst us, and received by
other reformed Churches, they have these words. The thing it self they
corrupt, in that they add new devises of their own, as their Pastoral
suspensi (...) from their Sacraments, their set continued Sy^eds, their select
classes of Ministers, their settled supreme Council, whereby they have well
expressed what they mean, in the 29. and 249. pages of their refutation when
they affirm, that the Church has no power, to make any Loves of indifferent
things. And page 193. of their discovery; That the people, without any
Minister, may give ordination, and full calling into the ministry.

Secondly, As their judgment is erroneous, so is the practice of their
discipline in their Assemblies most disorderly; For, first none can gather
Churches from Infidelity, nor may go about it, but only such as are appointed
to it, by our Savior Christ, and he has appointed none for that work but
Ministers, which also themselves in the fourth page of the preface, prefixed to
the refutation, do confess, we would gladly know by what ministry, their
Assemblies were first gathered; by what presbytery were the Ministers, that
first gathered their Assemblies examined, and ordained with imposition of
hands: Secondly, when the first were gathered, what foundation had they to
ground their faith, and doctrine upon (especially in these point of
controversy) when they neither had any other translation of the Scripture then
that which they received from us, whom they judged no better than Heretics,
and Infidels, nor any one among them, who by the knowledge in the tongues, was
able to examine our translation, by the original Scriptures.

Thirdly, How great a disorder it is, that in their Assemblies, private persons
are allowed to interpret the Scriptures publicly; and that they hold faith may
even ordinarily be wrought by privatemen. Where God has separated, and
sanctified a special sort of men, to any office, and the administration
thereunto belonging; there he has restrained others, that are not of that
sort, from, ordinary doing of the actions properly belonging unto that office,
as may appear by many Testimonies, and examples; Now it is evidant that in the
Old, and in the New Testament, the Lord did separate the Priests, and Levites,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelifts, Pastors, and Teachers, to the public
Administration of the Word, and Prayer of the Sacrifices, and Sacraments of the
Church, how then shall any other presumo to meddle there with?

The Priests and Levites, who had ever by inheritance, some right to all the
services of the Tabernacle might not lawfully exercise the meanest service,
till they were specially called, and consecrated thereunto, Exodus 28. and 29.
Levit. 8.34.
how much less then, might any other deal in the public service of God
without a public calling thereunto? We are not ignorant that they are wont to
allege many testimonies of Scripture, to warrant this disorder by, but alas
they do it very ignorantly; For many of them whose examples they cite, were
by special calling separated to the Office of preaching.

The seventie Disciples are said to have been sent by CHRIST, Luke 10.
Paul and Barnabas, when they preached at Antioch, of Pisidia, Acts 13.
were not only lawful Ministers, but (for ought that can appear by this
place to the contrary) they were so reputed also by the Ruler of the Synagogue,
to whom their public, and famous preaching in so many Assemblies before, with
the approbation of the Jews, could not be unknown; The faithful men that
the Apostles writes of to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.2.
who should teach others also, were such only, as should be both instructed by
Timothy, and receive authority from him to do it. Of some other mentioned in
their quotations, it is very probable, that they were not private men, but had
a special calling to the Office of preaching. The Disciples, that being
scattered through persecutions went about preaching, may very well be thought
to have been Ministers, rather than private men, unless we shall imagine
there were no Ministers in Iernfalem before the Church was scattered, but the
Apostles only, and Philip who is also called an Evangelist, is the only man of
name amongst all these scattered Disciples, that preached; The Prophets
mentioned in the 1 Cor. 14. is very likely, were either such as whose
extraordinary gifts did suficientlie prove to the Church, that they were
extraordinari^e stirred up, and called of God, or else such as being separated
to the work of the ministry, were by that exercise of their gifts to be
fitted to the full execution of that office, as those children of the Prophets
were, for the like purpose trained up in these Schools of the Prophets
mentioned in the Old Testament.

And as they cannot conclude out of these places, that those Prophets were
mere private men, so shall they not f^^tle the name of a Prophet given in any
place of holy Scripture to a mere private man.

The preaching mentioned, Luke 8.39. the expounding of the way of God, Acts 18
26. the exhorting spoken of, 1 These. 5.11. was not Eccle^iasticall, or Church
preaching but only private, and do mesticall instruction.

Some other places which they allege, Phil. 2.15, 16 Peter 3.12.
concern neither public preaching, nor private instruction, but only the
constant profession of the truth, and holy conversation which God requires of
every Christian.

Thirdly the gross disorders that are to be found in their Assembly we have
mentioned, to which the strange cho^se of their Ministers may be added: For by
what Testimonic of holy Scripture can they warrant the admitting or choosing in
to the ministry, such a one, as within some six, or eight weeks before was
tramplanted from so Antichristian a Church and ministry as they reckon ours
to be. As not only Master Francis Johnson, but sundry other of their
Ministers have been. Sure we are that herein they have done directly contrary
to the rule of the holy Apostle, and for smaller faults then this they are
ready to say against us in the 127. page of their refutation, That he that has
not a true and right calling unto his Office, is no true Minister; but an
Usurper, an Intruder, a Thief, a Murderer, etc. But what shall we need to
reckon up any more of the disorders that may be noted in their Church
government, seeing it is not possible but that those Assemblies should be full
of confusion and disorder, where no Church censure can pass without the
consent of every private man, and wherein every member is made equal in power
and authority with the Ministers and Elders of the Church. These things being
so, what is there to be seen amongst them, whereby so many simple Christians
are deceived and moved to forsake us, and join to them? Save only that show
of sincerity and zeal, and holy conversation wherein they are thought to go
far beyond any of us.

Concerning which we say, that although the coversation of many of our people
and Ministers also be very scandalous, and the lives of the best of us, far
short of that perfection we daily strive unto: Yet it shall well appear to him
that will rightly consider these few lines following, That the power of true
godliness is much more wanting amongst them then it is with us, whom they have
forsaken; for it we may judge of the scholars by their teachers and of the
miserable seduced multitude by their chief Leaders, and if men do not use to
speak, much less to write: but from the abundance of their hearts, then have
they as small cause certainly to bost of their holiness, and to say they are not
as other men, nor as we are, whom they have forsaken, as the Pharisee in the
Gospel said: Luke 18 9.11.14.
This we dare boldly say, that there was never any man of note in our Church,
that in his writings has bewrayed so irreligeous and unsanctified a spirit, as
their chief Leaders have done: For proof whereof we desire the Christian
Reader to consider first the shameful lies which wittingly, and against the
light of their own hearts, they have published, and whereby they have in a
manner borne false witness against us. In the ninth page of their Discovery
they say, That all the Atheists, Papists, and Anabaptists, and Heretics of
all sorts, Whores, Thieves, Witches, Conjurers, and who not, that dwells in
this Island, or is within the Queens dominions, are received and nourished
within the bosom of this Church, with the Word and Sacraments; none are
refused, none kept out. In the 60. page of their Discovery they say, These
Priests and people retain the Leviticall Decimations in the same form, to the
same end. In the 63. and 64. pages they affirm, That the service book is the
very ground work of our Faith, Church, and Ministry, from whence we fetch all
our directions for all things, That we are sworn to, and by this book. That
the Word of God may not be taught, but where this bath been read. In the 28.
page, They say we all adore the words of Salutation which the Angel Gabriel
used to the Virgin Mary, That we worship either the Purification, or the person
of our Lady: So they maliciously say we torme the blessed Virgin) And that we
power out unto her our drink Offerings, and burn incense to the Queen of
heaven; Whereas, through diverse pages they charge us with keeping Fasts and
Feasts to honor of Saints. In the 100. page they say, Their Priest Baptiseth
the child, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
and of the holy Cross. In the 148. page, They say, it is utterly denied in the
Church of England, that the Magistrate should be Excommunicated. In the 183.
page, They say, that it is impossible to find two of ou^ Ministers in one
mind and judgment, yea, in any two Churches of the Land, to have the same
doctrine taught. In the 188. page they say, That no one place of Scripture
which makes express mention of the government of Christ, As Romans 12.1. Cor.
12. and 15. and is suffered to be so much as read in our Churches. In the 175.
page they say, These new Glasses take upon them to make Ministirs.

A second note whereby we may try the spirits of their chief Leaders, is their
spiteful railing, wherein they are so rich and plentiful, as we know not how
to find amongst all the rabble of profane and ungodly men, any one that goes
beyond them in it, our Ministers they call Balamites, Cananites, Babylonish
Divines, Egyptian Enckanters, limbs of the Devil, as bitter enemies as
Turkish Ianizaries, marked soldiers of the Beast, such as know not the
Doctrines of the beginning of Christ, such as were nusled even from the mothers
breast in profane Heathenisme, vain. Philosophy, ungodly Arts, trained up in
Idolatry, Superstition, and most filthy Abomination, Perjurie, Blasphemy,
etc.

These men by precisenes and outward show of Holiness, Hypocrisy, Vainglory
and Covetousness, resemble, or rather exceed the Pharisees. And the 38. page
of their Discovery, Such a Priest as this is a Blasing star, a Paragon of a
Country, one of the new found Martin Saints, and such People are Puritans, or
Martinists, Preficians, etc.

And in the 193. page, they name the Ministers of Geneva and their Churches
Classes, (I dare not say the secret Classes in England) do make Ministers for
us in England. And these Ministers when they are come over, are received and
esteemed as Angels in hell, and shine as bright stars in this smokie Egyptian
furnaces. And in the 12. page of their Collection of Letters, speaking of two
very worthy Preachers, they have these words. I suppose more corrupt Teachers
then these cannot be found is any age, they teaching nothing almost truly,
much less sincereli^.

To this we may refer the unreverent and malicious speech, against the most
godly learned, that have lived in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, as in
the 23. page of their Discovery, they call us the crooked Disciples of Master
Calvin. And in the 18. page Master Calvin has no doubt unsufferably perverted
and wrested these and other places of Scripture, and drawn very foul and
corrupt doctrines thence, touching the state and order of a planted Church, and
more dangerous and damnable conclusions from the same. And in the 33. page.
This and such like d^testable stuff has Master Calvin in his ignorance,
partly to confute the Anabaptists, partly to defend his own rash and disorderly
proceedings of Geueva, whereby this their Church became a just reproach to all
men, yea, that which is worse, and more to be lamented, it became a miserable
precident and pernicious example to all Europe.

The last note which we will observe for the trial of their spirit, is their
scurrilous and ruffanlike profanesse, wherein they seem to us to have expelled
all that in a show of zeal and sincerity, have written or dealt in the holy
things of God. In the 52. page of their Discovery, speaking of Ordination they
have these words. He solemnly sits in his chair, and lays his Symoniacall
hands upon him, delivers the Bible into his hands, breaths upon him, and
gives, or rather sells him his unh^^y Ghost, as he shall know by the price
of his box. In the 73. page having spoken against red stinted prayers, and
being come to speak against the prayers which godly Preachers do conceive,
according to the present occasions of the Church. Thus they scoff at them;
Other more smooth H^pocrites, yet as gross Idolaters, use the Lords Prayer as
a close or supply (forsooth) to their long Prelix Prayers conceived before. In
the 86. page of their refutation. He most sacrilegiously sells them his
pretended Sacrament for their second shot or offering. In the 97. and 98. page
of their Discovery, speaking of our public Fasts; thus they write. Here the
learned Priests and Preachers lay their heads together, choose out three or
sour, from among them to preach: some of them must play Sin, another the
Judgments of God, the third Repentance, the fourth, the Gospel, the people are
solemnly bidden from all quarters to this Stage Play: who as the first
invention of it flocked in thick and threefold to behold this novelty: He that
plays Sin amongst some other faults, will reprove such as do not diligently
enough countenance the preaching Priests (I should say) frequent not their
Sermons; for the want of the Dise pline, all that mourn in the chine, and sigh
in secres for it, (though neither Priest nor people know what it means, yet)
they must now fast and then the fault is not in them, but in God Almighty,
that they have it not. If you come now to the second Table, they are severe
men, they will make Conscience to tremble, If there be ever an Usurer, or a
Drunkard, or an Whoremaster, they will so back-bite him, that he will not love
a Sermon a good while again. These men must bear with them, if in the Pulpit,
when they are ravished with the zeal of the Lord, they have now and then a
gird at them, to ease their s^o makes, especially now for fashion sake.

And in the 99. page when the P. P. have ended, then are the people dismissed
(where I trow for that night, is no talk either by the way as they go home,
or at their supper. but how excellently such a man, and such a man did.) The
Priest themselves that took this pains, are bestowed at some good hosts, or
some good Dan^es Houses where at night they recompense their fasting and
mourning with good cheer, and case; And in the 180. page. They had a presoript
place, like a Tubbe, called their Pulpit, and the Preacher for the most part
disputes to the Houre-Glasse, which being run his Sermpcin action must be at an
end. And a little after, here would not be fergotten, the sweet Palmodicall
harmony of the Vultures, Crows, Gleades, Owls, Geefe, of the Leopards,
Bears, Wolves, Dogs, Foxes, Swine, Goats: All these with one accord,
Sympathy, and Harmony, sing some pleasant ballad, or else unto David's Melodious
Harp some Psalm in time, to stir up the spirits of their worthy Priest, or
Preacher, who being thus wrupt and ravished with this Harmony, goes to his
Gear in form above said, where his mouth distills, and his lips drop down
old Parables, etc. And in the 191. p. Master Parson takes to him his Pastoral
staff, or wooden dagger of superstition, where with he keeps such a
flourishing as the fly can have no rest, yea by your leave if any poor man in
the parish offends him, he may peradventure go without his Bread and Wine for
that day: and in the 192. page, speaking of the Bishops, and dumb Ministers:
Indeed their Cake is Dough, it this gear, this sweeping new Reformation come
in; In the 128. page, speaking of Churching of women they have these words, she
having offered her accustomed offering, to him for his labor; God speed her
well, she is a woman on foot again. And in the 244. page of their refutation,
they call our prescript prayers; The smoke of the bottomless pit.

But what need we any further evidence or demonstration of their spirit; Sure
we are that by this which is already set down, it will well appear to the
wise and Christian Reader, that Gods Spirit never taught men to write as those
men (who are known to have been the chief perswaders and seducers of these
our deceaved brethren) have done.

To conclude, if we did grant that the Assemblies which these men have
gathered and joined themselves unto, were not equal only, but much better
reformed then ours, yet by joining to them with disclayming, and condemning
utterlie all other reformed Churches in the world, we see not why they may not
thereby be said to divide Christ; As well as they of Corinth, should have done
if they joined unto, and fellowed Paul, so as withal they forsaked, and
despised Apollos, or Cephas.

FINIS.

