A more Full and Exact RELATION (Being the Third LETTER To the Honorable
William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons) Of the
several TREATIES between Sir Tho. Fairfax and Sir Ralph Hopton, and of his
coming into the PARLIAMENT.

Together with the coming in of the Gentry of that County to Sir Thomas, and
the taking of Saint Mawes, the principle Fort of Pendennis Castle.

Which Letter was read in the House of Commons.

17. Martii. 1645. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Letter be forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printed to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. March 18. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
THis is the third I sent unto you since the Treaty with the Lord Hopton; the
time may seem somewhat long since it began; yet if you will consider the many
particulars that are to be insisted upon concerning the Disbanding of an Army
(though it be sooner Disbanded then Raised) you will not think the time too
long that has been spent about the same: It is now finished, Subscribed by
both Generals, and Hostages given: They consist of many particulars, and are
very long; and therefore I will not presume to touch upon any of them, lest I
do mistake, but leave you to the Articles at large when they come up; only
this (in general) the Field-force in the West of England is to be dissolved: To
morrow at eight of the clock, the first Brigade of English (of Horse) are to be
at a Rendezvous, and there every Officer to receive his Pass, first giving his
engagement never to bear Arms against the Parliament (the like engagement has
not been given on any Articles) and every common Trooper to be dismounted, to
deliver up his Horse and Arms, and to receive the promised reward of twenty
shillings to bear their charges home (it being too little for many of them (my
Countrymen) that have near Five hundred English miles home) It is not to be
credited how much this Army is become in their esteem, during this Cessation;
and what sorrowful expressions many of them do make; that they have been thus
deluded concerning our carriage; the most ingenuous of them affirming, the
ways of the Court at Oxford have never been rightly represented unto them.
Officers and Soldiers unanimously desire employment for Ireland, being willing
to take the Sacrament-Oath, or to give what other Obligation shall be thought
fit, That as they will never bear Arms in England against the Parliament, so
will they not when they are employed in Ireland by the Parliament, desist from
pursuing their Commands against the Irish Rebels, upon anp invitations of the
Kings: They affirming, They have sufficiently smarted for being enticed
formerly by him. This I only offer to your consideration, to make what use of
it shall be thought convenient; and if it shall be thought fit to employ them
into Ireland, it is requisite some of the Committee of the Army for Irish
affairs, or other chief Officer be sent down with all possible speed that may
be to Salisbury, where these may be met marching to their several homes, and
will be ready to hearken to any Proposition of Employment that way: Likewise
some of the Horses may be allowed to go upon that Service, if it be desired,
which is thought better to be granted (upon a second consideration) then at the
Disbanding to permit them, to let them and their Horses Quarter in a body upon
the Country, and give those disturbances that the other Horse of this kind
have done near Basing. I think you may have a thousand Officers, Soldiers, and
Reformadoes by the first of April, will be at any Rendezvous upon the
Seacoasts to be mounted and transported for Ireland. It is now a fit time to
take the same into consideration, which is the only cause of my presumption to
mention it unto you, if the wisdom of the Parliament shall think fit to employ
them again.

Every hour more Gentlemen of quality do come in: And this day Colonel
Trevanian come from Peurin, and some of his Officers came to Truro with their
Colors flying, and their men armed, even from the Lord Hoptons Head-quarter.
This has wrought such operation upon the Governor at St. Mawes (the principal
Fort that commands the Haven at Falmouth, having a greater command thereof,
then the Castle and Fort of Pendennis) that he has sent to the General to be
received into favor, and will deliver up the Castle, Fort, Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition: and accordingly there is Forces sent away this night to take
possession thereof.

Thus you see how God does work for us, and for the good and welfare of this
Land; and let nothing in this great business done in this Country in so short
a time, where so little hopes of success was expected, be attributed unto man,
but solely unto God who orders affairs thus so much for the public good.

Arundel the Governor of Pendennis, sent to tempt the Governor at St. Mawes
to come in the Castle of Pendennis, he refused the same, and as aforesaid
craved the aid of this Army. There are two great brass pieces of Ordnance in
the Fort, of about Four thousand weight a piece. For the Castle of Pendennis, I
make no doubt as soon as this Army is totally Disbanded (which though it begin
to morrow, will take too or three days before it be ended) make what speed we
can; we shall find them tractable; if not, we shall settle this County in such
a posture of Security against that place, as will compel them in a short time
to hearken to worse Propositions then they now might have had, if they persist
in a refusal of the Summons intended to be sent them. Sir John Arundel, (who
sent formerly) Sir John Meux, Sir Henry Hastings, and many other Commanders and
Gentlemen of quality, have all accepted of Passes and Protections; and
(unaminously) Officers and Soldiers do all agree, and would be engaged by Oath
to oppose French, or Irish (though of the Kings sending in) to their utmost:
And that which has wrought upon many of their spirits, and (especially of the
whole County of Cornwall) was, the Letter sent from Glamorgan (His Majesty's
principal Agent with the Irish Rebels) signifying to the Prince an intention,
to send over Irish (being a Duplicate of that Packet which we took at Padstow.)
Thus has God turned that to the Kings, and the bloody Irish Rebels
disadvantage, which he and they had thought to have made their means of
continuing the War in England: And I hope God will so order it, That those men
they expected here to fight for them, will be as valiant, and as zealous as any
against them. To morrow as soon as the first Brigade is disbanded, there goes
Forces toward Pendennis; and as there is occasion to give you an account of
that, or any other business, you shall not fail to receive the same. I thought
good to send this Messenger Post with this, lest my former Letters did
miscarry, or mis-reports should arise by the long continuance of this Treaty,
desiring you to consider him for the greatness of the Journey: None should
have been more willing to have undertaken it then my self, but that the
business of the Atmy is now greater then ever it has been, since I had the
honor and happiness to serve therein.

This day some of the Princes servants who are come to the Headquarters, say
That the Prince is landed at Ceely, that they left him there, that his
condition is mean: Provisions must be sent from hence, or he, and that poor
Family with him cannot long subsist. They curse Hyde and Culpepper, and desire
they might have no other Executioner then themselves, for the Treason committed
by them in carrying away the Prince, and to be so deceitful in doing the same,
as to publish a Declaration in the Princes Name, the day before he went, That
there was no such intention, and that none about him should presume to speak a
word to that purpose, and yet the next day on a sudden shipped him, and carried
him to Sea: He was three days at Sea before he got to Ceely, the wind being
cross, and forced him to sail at a distance.

There is such care taken in the Army by the General and Lieutenant General,
that I am confident, not one man that came off upon this Treaty, shall be
plundered to the value of two pence: So much our Soldiers have forgotten
former injuries, and inclinable (I may say it) and (beyond expectation) to
requite good for evil.

It is late, and I have much business more to do this night, in order to the
business to morrow, and therefore must abruptly break of, and remain,

Truro, March 13. 12 at Night. 1645. Your most humble and faithful Servant, J.
R.

THis Bearer was through the greatest part of H(...) Army, and see their Horse;
some good, some bad, about four thousand in all: Our men have gotten already
choice Horses, by exchange, and buying at low rates* and by that means we shall
have most of the Officers Horses; for they want money as well as the Soldiers.

FINIS.

