PRINCE ROBERTS DECLARATION. TO The KINGS most Excellent Majesty, October 11.
1642. DECLARING His Resolution to leave the Kings Army here in England, and
with all expedition to go for Holland, having seriously considered of the
present differences betwixt His Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament. ALSO
The proceedings of the Lord Willoughby of Parham, and Sir William Balfoure, who
have joined their Forces with his Excellency. With the Proceedings of both
Armies near Shrewsbury, from the 8. of October to the 13.

LONDON, Printed for Th. Tompson. October 13. 1642.

PRINCE ROBERTS Declaration to the KINGS most excellent Majesty, October. 11.
1642.
Declaring his Resolution to leave His Majesty's Army here in England, and with
all expedition to go into Helland, having seriously considered of the present
differences between His Majesty and His two Houses of Parliament. Also the
proceedings of both Armies near Shrewsbury from the 8. of October to the 13.

UPon the 11. day of this month Prince Robert began to declare his Resolution
to the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the rest of the Nobles that are now
attending upon his royal Person, which was to this effect: That he had
information by Letters from Holland, that his royal much discontented and
troubled in mind for his residence (...) very desirous that, he should take
his leave of his royal Uncle, the King of England, and to come to the Hague in
Holland, whereby she might impart her mind unto him: he being willing to
fulfill his Mothers desires, and sorry for his first coming over, declared his
resolution to His Majesty, that he was now resolved to leave England, desiring
His Majesty not to be displeased thereat; and that according to the utmost of
his power, he would endeavor to send over such able Commanders as should
finish what he had begun.

His Excellency the Earl of Esser having left a strong garrison at Worcester
and all other places which he thought might prove prejudicial to his Army, if
that the malignant Party should take them into their possession, and having
secvred these places, he, advanced with his whole Army toward Shrowsbury,
where the Kings Majesty has set down his resolution to meet which his
Excellency and his whole Army: but the weather being somewhat vehement, insomuch
as his Excellency could not march with his whole army fast enough toward
Shrewsbury, therefore he sent Colonel Hollis, Colonel Hampden, and diverse
other Officers with three thousand horse and Foot before, by reason of the
information which he had newly received, that some of the Parliaments Forces
that lay near unto the said town of Shrewsbury were in great distress,
because the Kings Army were almost gathered to a head, and lay within five
miles of the said town, and therefore expected they should suddenly have a
battle with them, and not being able to encounter with them, because the
Cavaliers did far exceed them in number, therefore forth with they dispatched
Letters to the Lord General, desiring speedy aid from his Excellency, and
according to their desires, he sent the aforenamed Eosses, which no sooner
arrived there, but immediately they had a battle with the Cavaliers, being in
number about seven thousand Horse and Foer, which were under the command of the
Earl of Lindsey, and the Earl of Westmerland, and our Forces were not above
four thousand at the most: having joined themselves in battle with the enemy,
continuing for the space of three hours, the enemy retreated with the loss of
fifty men, and twenty three on our side.

From Bridgnorth there is information by diverse letters that the Lord
Willoughby of Parham has joined his Forces with his Excellency the Earl of
Essex, and are in their march toward Shrewsbury, and by the way they found
great opposition at Bridgnorth (which is a town about twelve miles distant
from Shrewbury) by Prince Robert and diverse olders of the malignant Party,
whereupon there soon increased many dangers, and the inveterate malice of the
Cavaliers there burst out, and began to give out many scoffing speeches against
our soldiers, but they not brooking of such scandalous words, desired leave of
their Officers to discharge against them; but at the first they seemed somewhat
unwilling, and would not condescend thereunto, until they understood the
pleasure of the Lord General; but after some consultation thereof, they sell
to it pell mell, and in the space of five hours seventy of the Cavaliers were
slain, and diverse taken prisoners, with very little loss on our party:
whereupon the enemy sounded a parley, and at the said parley it was concluded
on, that a set day should be appointed for the meeting of both Armies.

There are 340. soldiers come out of Herefordshire to his Excellency for the
service of the King and Parliament, and that the city of Hereford had sent to
his Excellency, signifying their good affection to the Parliament, and their
desire to have that city secured against the Cavaliers, which they much feared
would come, there being a malignant party in the city, those that were
well-affection, durst not show their forwardness so much as they would,
whereupon his Excellency sent one thousand foot, and four troops of horse to
disarme the malignants, and to settle that City in a good posture of defense,
and likewise ordered that a sufficient garrison should be left there for the
safety and peace of those parts.

Sir William Balfoure is gone to join his Forces with the L. General, and the
Scots Commanders that proffered their service to the Parliament, are gone to his
Excellency and entered into their placed

FINIS.

