A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE RIGHT HONORABLE House of LORDS, In the Abbey
Church at Westminster, Wednesday the 25. day of June, 1645. Being the day
appointed for solemn and public Humiliation.

By SAMUEL RUTHERFURD Professor of Divinity at St. Andrews.

Esaias 8. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house
of Jacob, and I will look for him.

London Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

Die Iovis 26. Iunii, 1645.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr.
Rutherfurd who preached yesterday before the Lords in Parliament, in the Abbey
Church Westminster, is hereby thanked for the great pains he took in his said
Sermon; And is desired to print and publish the same, which is to be printed
only by authority under his own hand.

To the Gentleman Usher or his Deputy to be delivered to the said Mr.
Rutherfurd.
John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

I appoint Andrew Crook to print this Sermon.

Samuel Rutherfurd.

Errata.
PAge 17. line 27. for stope read slops, p. 18. li. 4. for it read at, p. 23.
l. ult, for feels, r. flees, p. 28. l. 19. for Emphesis r. Emphasis, p. 29.
l. 30. for end, r. send, p. 48. l. 15. for Chap. 4. r. Chap 24. p. 50. l. 20.
for same r. son, p. 54. l. 9. for 22 r. 42. p. 55. l. 1. for it, r. unbeleefe.

To the godly and ingenuous READER.
AS the Text of the book of divine providence (worthy Reader) is the Church
and Spouse of Jesus Christ, for every line, word, and letter thereof has a
necessary relation to that body whereof Christ Jesus is head, so the draughts
and passages of providence toward all creatures, yea to devils and the haters
of Zion, seem to be but Annotations in the Margin of this great volume. There
be many wonders and depths in the book, and the Lord does even before our eyes
in this old age of the world create new things and miracles in Britain. 1. It
is most congruous to divine wisdom to time fitly the laughing and the weeping
of the children of men; the triumphing of the wicked, and their prosperity;
The Sackcloth and tears of the prisoners of hope seem dark and mysterious
Chapters of the book, especially because we trade by the senses, and color
of things, for we see not how God has set his enemies in slippery places, and
that the throne that mystical Babylon sits on, is made of Crystal glass,
and the pillars thereof nothing but Saffes of ever-guilded earth, the Sons of
God would not exchange their tears with the joy of the wicked. O that we had
grace to read to a full period, and with the sense of a godhead, every section
of the treatisc of providence; we do half both the word and the works of
God, wrong reading of God in his ways does spoil the true sense and scope of
God in his acting. The light of faith makes legible to us, that The vision at
the end shall speak, and not lie, and that light is sown to the righteous;
then the harvest must be hoped for, and we err not a little, if we comment
any otherwise on the short triumphing of the wicked, Job. 20. 5, 6.
and the joy of the hypocrite for a moment, even when his excellency mounteth
up to heaven, and his head reaches unto the clouds; then that his golden
heaven is not only lined with silken troubles, and woes, but also that he
goes down to the grave, and the Chambers of hell, in a moment. 2. This
seems dark to us, that all the heirs of one inheritance do not mind and
speak the same thing; yet in the Apostolic Church there has been some
discord, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Phil. 1. 2. Romans 15. 5. Gal. 5. 10. more love, less
pride of opinion and judgment, must either be in these kingdoms, or then we
are to fear that God must work us to an union, by the sword of the common
enemy, we might have union at an easier rate. 3. It is a mystery, but it is
also from the Lord who is wonderful in counsel, that truth must be trailed
through floods of blood. 4. That a Church is green and flowring and smelling
out beauty, glory and life, in the flaming fire, that the cruelty, policy,
wisdom, counsels of nations round about Britain, and so many bloody men
within our bowels in the three kingdoms, 2 Cor. 6. 9.
do kill us, and behold we live, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
troubleand us, we are not distressed, perplex us, and we despair not,
persecute us, and we are not forsaken, cast us down, and we are not
destroyed. What a living death? what a breathing and triumphing grave is this?
what a shining darkness? what a rejoicing sorrow is here? 5. We wonder that
our wars are not at an end? But Gods thoughts are not like our thoughts, when
God has by the sword taken away his Jewels and his precious ones out of these
Kingdoms, it is rather like the continued burning of the house, then any
apparent end of our miseries. 6. Yet after the Lord has made the glory of
Jacob thin, and the fatness of his flesh to wax lean, are we not in
silence and hope to believe that a remnant must be saved? Esaias 17. 6.
and that yet gleaning Grapes shall be left in the kingdoms, as the shaking
of an Olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four
or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, says the Lord God of
Israel? Lord, hasten his work, and ripen us by humiliation and turning to him
who has smitten us, for the day that the Lord is bringing forth out of the
womb of his decree of peace, Esaias 30. 26.
when the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Snnne, and the light
of the Sun shall be seven fold as the light of seven days; Farewell.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honorable the House of LORDS at their
Monthly Fast, June 25. 1645. in the Abbey Church at Westminster.
Luke 8. 22. Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship
with his Disciples, and he said unto them, let us go over into the other side
of the Lake, and they lanced forth.

23. But as they sailed, he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of wind on
the lake, and they were filled with water, and were in jeopardie.

24. And they came to him and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish:
then he arose and rebuked the wind, and the raging of the water, and they
ceased, and there was a calm.

25. And he said unto them, where is your faith? and they being afraid
wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is this? for he commands
even the winds and the water, and they obey him.


Mark 4. 38. And he was in the hinder part of the ship asleep on a pillow,
and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish?

39. And he arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be
still: and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.

40. And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have
no faith?


Matthew. 8. 26. And he says unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little
faith? then he arose and rebuked the winds and the Sea, and there was a great
calm.


THere is so much of G^d, and of omnipotency in these words (which I desire by
Gods assistance and your patience to go through shortly, at least in such
heads of doctrine as may be most suitable to the present condition of the
Church) as may prove that God being sought by prayer is a present help in
trouble.

The words contain six particulars.

1. There is here Christ's Sea journey with the convoy; secondly, time; thirdly,
and place. Christ and his members have not a way of only dry land to heaven,
there is much Sea-way before Christ and his followers, ere they come to shore.

2. We have in the Text, the condition of the ship and the Sailors and
passengers that are carried in the vessel with Christ, Six parts of the Text.
in six particulars, expressing the greatness of the danger by reason of a
mighty storm. The words opened.
First, there is a behold (...), set before it; first to hold forth the
greatness of the storm, Matthew. 8. 24. And behold, there arose a great
tempest. Secondly, to note that creatures as winds and storms are daring and
bold against Christ, and his Church, God permitting them; we imagine when
Christ goes to Sea, he must have fair weather, and a calm Sea, for how dare
the winds blow upon the fair face of him who created Sea and winds? But Christ
sailing must have a mighty gale, if the Prince of the air Satan can in his
own sphere and parish command the winds. The second circumstance, Mark says
a great storm (...) came down; it is contrary to nature that winds descend,
they rather ascend; this says it was not an ordinary wind, but thirdly, a
whirlewind, Mark (...), such a wind, as Aristotle says, is most dangerous, by
rolling in a circle with violence, so as it does in Italy and other parts
swallow up towns. Matthew says it was (...) a great tempest, a Sea-quake,
that had as great force and strength as an Earthquake, that can remove Castles
and Towers out of their places. Fourthly, from the effect, the greatness of it
is amplified, the ship was filled with water; Chemnitius observes as the
waterpots, John 2. are filled with water to the brim: for it is the same word.
Fifthly, they were in such fear, that the Disciples being some of them
Fishermen, and so experienced with Sea storms, cry that they perish, and are
gone; when the Shipmasters art fails him, and the grayhaired Seamen go to
their prayers, the passengers have cause to be afraid. But sixthly, that is not
much, there is a good Seaman in the Ship, the great Lord Admiral not of the
Seas only, but also of the winds, is here; Lord Admiralls on earth cannot make
winds and fair weather, all shall be well, the Creator of Sea and winds is
here; yea but he is so here, as if he were not here to them, he is fast
asleep; God save us from a Sea-storme, when Christ is either far away from
us, or sleeping.

3. What course take the Disciples in their danger? first, they awake Christ
with their prayer; secondly, they double their words, Luke says, (...),
master, m^ster, tutor, such as are heads of Colleges, or take care of
Orphans, are so called. Christ tutors storms, and winds, and Church and
Court, and all: Matthew says (...), Lord, which signifies Christ's dominion:
Mark (...), Master, for (if he can, and what can he not?) he will help his
Disciples, so they put an argument of help home upon Christ from his office.
Thirdly, they complain, Carest thou not for us? What a master art thou, who
sleep when we are in danger to be drowned? so dream we Christ cares not
for us, if he deliver not presently. Fourthly, they lay the danger before him,
we perish.

4. We have Christ's present helping of them, Matthew keeps the natural
method; Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? he first rebukes the
Disciples unbeleefe, before he rebuke the Sea and winds. Secondly, he spoke
angry words to the Sea and winds, or laid a strict charge on the Sea and winds,
as the word is, Luke 3. 12. Luke 9. 21. or it is to rebuke with threatening and
authority, 2 Timothy 4. 2. not because Sea and winds can stir without special
commission from God, as the Poets fancied that their Aeolus could boast and
chide the winds and cast them in fetters, but this is to express the absolute
and invincible dominion of Christ over Sea and winds, they being his Apparitors
and Pursevants, so that thirdly, Christ (as Mark says) uttered angry words of
authority and commanded the Sea, (...) be quiet, peace, and be still, (...)
be muzled, it is borrowed from wild beasts or dogs that are muzled up that
they cannot devour, so is the word, 1 Cor. 9. 9. Thou shall not muzle the Ox
that treads out the corn; it is a hard trope, and holds forth to us the Sea
as a devouring beast, that would swallow up ships; so Matthew. 22. 34. Jesus
stopped the mouths of the Sadduces.

5. The effect of Christ's rebuking is here set down, there was without more
ado a great calm; when Christ glowmeth upon the Sea it dare but smile and be
still.

6. The fruit of the miracle is here, the Seamen, not the Disciples were
stricken with wonder and astonishment.

Now it came to pass on a certain day. Part I.


Touching the three particulars in the first part, a word first of the place,
this was not properly a Sea, but a lake, not Lacus Gadarenus, of which Strabo
says beasts could not go through it, without the loss of hair and hoofes,
the waters being so pestilent, but it was the lake of Genesareth, through which
Christ and his Disciples sailed to the Gadarens, called by a Hebraisme the Sea
of Tiberias.

Secondly Christ's convoy in this Sea-journey were his Disciples. Seldom was
Christ his alone, only when he went to a mountain to pray, as Ioh. 6. 15. and
in the garden when his Disciples would not watch with him one hour. But
ordinarily his Disciples, and others were witnesses of his doctrine and
miracles. First, because the Disciples were to be eyewitnesses of him, to
preach by sense as well as by faith, 1 John 1. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 18. And this voice
which came from heaven we heard (says Peter) when we were with him in the
holy mount. Preachers are to converse much with Christ, and why*
Sense of Christ's sweetness in Preachers is not so good as faith, but it is
more excellent then hearesay; there is a sense of faith in such as have been
in the Mount with Christ; I believed, therefore I spoke, 2 Cor. 4. 13. Sense of
Christ is an excellent Preacher of Christ, Now believe we (say the Samaritans,
Ioh. 4. 42.) not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves;
every faithful pastor is not only a messenger to speak tidings, but a
witness who saw and heard the visions of God. Secondly, Crosse-bearing is not
easily learned, Christ had the perfect art of it, Heb. 5. 8. the Disciples must
see how straight Christ's shoulders are in walking under the Cross; to learn
to do is no difficill thing, in comparison of learning to suffer. Thirdly, we
know our own weakness best in conversing with Christ. Christ's beauty and
fairness casts a shade and a light on our blackness; we are all fair
enough while we see Christ's fairness, Esaias 6. 5. Fourthly, the more you
converse with Christ, the more you partake of heaven; to be with your self is
to be in ill company, to be with the world rubbeth rust on you, to be with
Christ leaves a smell of heaven, and a die and color of another world on you
that you shall never rub off; to touch perfume and sweet ointments leaves a
witness behind it; none can preach nor suffer, but such as have been with
Christ to see and hear; you may be called to a bloody death for Christ. I
pray you ask when was you last with Christ, and how often was you with him, or
was you ever with him?

Thirdly, (...).
the time of his sailing, Mark says, in that same day when the evening was
come, chap. 4. 35. that is, in the day that he preached the parables, you have
Matthew. 13. it is like he went to Sea in the evening, when he had preached all
the day. Luke says indefinitely on a certain day; Luc. (...).
how ever there is no waste of words, here two Evangelists, as their manner is,
do write a Diurnall of Christ's life and actions, How carefully Christ
husbanded time.
they chronicle Christ's time carefully. Whence see we how well Christ
husbanded his time upon earth, Act. 10. 38. he went about doing good: So in his
message to Herod, Luke 13. 32, 33. Go tell Herod, Behold, I cast out devils,
and do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.
First, he spent whole nights in prayer to God, Luke 6. 12. wrought miracles in
the night, at the fourth watch, Matthew. 14. 25. yea now while he is sleeping
he is making way for a miracle. Secondly, Early in the morning he taught in
the Temple, John 8. 2. and while he was eating he losed not time, but
preached in time of dinner. Luke 7. 38, 39. Luke 10. 39, 40. and made it his
meat and drink, when he should have eaten, to gain souls, Ioh. 4. 34.
Thirdly, he began early, being twelve years of age, to dispute with the
Doctors in the Temple, and died preaching and praying on the Cross, Luke 23.
43. 44. 46.

Then first, such are rebuked, as know not well their time, Ier. 8. 7. Yea the
Storke of the heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of her coming, but my people know not
the judgment of the Lord. Who is wise to know when God is watering the Land
with blood? How both kingdoms fail in improving of opportunities of mercy.
to know that the year 1645. is that year of vengeance that has been in the
Lords heart against England and Scotland? This must be a part of prophecy,
which the people knows not while God reveal it, Ezekiel. 7. 12. The time is
come, the day draws near, verse. 2. Also thou son of man, thus says the
Lord God, unto the Lord of Israel, an end, the end is come upon the four
corners of the Land.

Secondly, it were a right timing of actions if the honorable Parliament would
begin not at the establishing of their own Liberties, Laws, houses, but at
the building of the house of God; the Lord has given opportunity for many
years of a sitting Parliament, and there is not yet a face of a Church in the
Land, and scarcely is there one stone laid in the house of the Lord; men say,
it is not yet time to build the house of the Lord.

Thirdly, we have not known in this our day of the Gospel, these things that
belong to our peace: had Tyrus and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah seen the days of
the Son of man, which England and Scotland have seen, they should have
repented long ago; and had we improved the gracious opportunities of mercy,
our peace had been as a River, and our righteousness as the waves of the Sea;
but now we are like broken men, unable so much as to cast up our accounts, far
less to pay the rent of the Vineyard, when our Vine is as the Vine of Sodom,
and our Grapes are Grapes of Gall; there is much underhand dealing against the
cause and covenant of God; we did swear the extirpation of Prelacie, Popery
and Schism, now we preach, profess and print that liberty is to be given
for consciences of men, and how can this be denied to Papists and Prelates?
not only every City, but every family almost has a new Religion, the former
unreprented will worship in the breasts of men, against the power of godliness,
vanity in apparel, whoring, extortion, unjustice to widows and Orphans whose
husbands and parents were killed in the wars, drunkenness, excess, lying
and cousening, unjust and false slanders and calumnies, trusting in the arm of
men and multitudes, halting between God and Baal, postponing of Christ's
matters to the end of the day, as if Religion and the house of God were of
less concernment to us then liberties and civil Laws, and as if both
kingdoms miraculously defended by the right arm of God, against merciless
and blood-thirsty Babylon, were not more obliged to the Lord of Hosts, who has
saved us, then that we should now be debtors to our own carnal ends,
divisions, rentings, emulations, sides and factions; Ephraim against Manasseh,
and Manasseh against Ephraim, though the children of one father: all these and
many other sins tesifie to our faces that the time of the Gospel has not
been fruitfully improved by the two kingdoms.

Fourthly, A general fail of all in the care less improvement of time.
all of us generally fail in the bad husbanding of time, we are a dying ere
we know for what end we live; imagine a master send his servant to a great
City with a written paper containing businesses of great concernment, having
allotted to him the space of ten sandglasses to dispatch them all, should he
for the space of the first nine hours fall a drinking with his drunken
companions, and go up and down to behold all the novelties of the City, he
should break trust; Alas! is not this world like a great Exchange? our Paper
contains the business of a great kingdom up above, the honor and glory of
our Lord, our redemption through Christ, a treaty for everlasting peace; the
time of infancy and childhood slippeth over, and we know not the end of our
creation; youth-head and man's age like a proud meadow, green, fair,
delightful to day, and to morrow hay, casts blossoms and flowers, and with
one little stride skippeth over our span-length of time, and we go through
the Exchange to buy frothy honor, rotten pleasure, and when the last hour is
come, we scarce read our masters paper, we barter one nothing-creature with
another; alas! it is but a poor reckoning that a natural man can make, who
can say no more at his death, but I have eaten, drunken, sleeped, waked,
dreamed and sinned, for the space of sixty or seventie years, and that is
all. Time like a long swift sliding River runs through the City from the
creation, when God first set the horologe a going, to the day of Christ's second
coming, this River slideth through our fingers, we eat, drink, sleep,
sport, laugh, buy, sell, speak, breathe, die in a moment, every gasp of air
is a flux of our minutes time sliding into eternity; within a few generations
there shall be a Parliament of other faces, a new generation of other men in
the Cities, Houses, Assemblies we are now in, and we a company of
night-visions shall fly away, and our places shall know us no more: and though
this should not be, the world is not eternal, being a great body made up of
corruptible pieces, of little dying creatures, standing upon nothing, if God
take the legs from them; at length God shall remove the passes of the watch,
and time shall be no more, the wheels of time shall be at a stand. What
poor thoughts shall we have of this poor fading ball of clay the earth, when
the worms shall creep in through face and cheeks, and eat our tongue, and
seize upon Liver and heart? or imagine that our spirits once entered within the
line of eternity could but stay up beside the Moon, and look down and
behold us children sweating and running for our beloved shadows of Lands,
Fields, Flocks, Castles, Towers, Crowns, Scepters, Gold, Money, he should
wonder that reason is so bleare-eyed as to hunt dreams and toys. Judge
righteously, give fair justice to Christ, do good while it is to day,
consider the afternoon of a declining Sun, within few hours we are plunged
in the bosom and womb of eternity, and cannot return back again. Lord
teach us to number our days.

23. But as they sailed be fell a sleep, Part II.
and there came down a storm of wind, Matthew. 8. 24. a great tempest. I keep
the order laid down before; this is not an ordinary storm. But is not the
most skilled Seaman in heaven and earth here? dare the wind blow so proudly on
his face, who is white and ruddy, and the chief amongst ten thousand worlds?
do not the Seas know their Creator? and dare they wet his face, who made the
Sea and the dry Land? Yet from the greatness of this storm (as was cleared
before from the Text) we observe that Christ his Ship, his Church, and
passengers have in their sailing more then ordinary storms. Lamen. 1. 12. Is
it nothing to all you that pass by? (alas! Christ in his sufferings has too
many passers by) Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,
Christ and his Ship have more then ordinary storms.
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger! Chap.
2. 13. the Prophet cannot find a comparison to equal the Churches sorrow. Thy
breach is great like the Sea, who can beale thee? The Sea is a vast body, and a
great Sea of troubles was like to drown the Church, Chap. 1. 9. Jerusalem came
down wonderfully (...) is admirably, (...)
the word is from a root which signifies to be separated, and hidden as
things above sense or reason, as Genesis 18. 14. Is there any thing hid, or too
hard or admirable to the Lord, which he cannot do? there is some great and
admirable thing in the Sword of the Lord, upon the three kingdoms above all
that Irish Rebels, or bloodly malignants can do; the curse and vengeance in
afflictions from men comes from a higher hand then men, men kill with the
Sword, but they cannot stamp upon killing with the Sword judgment and
vengeance, this only God does. Lam. 2. 2. The Lord has swallowed up all the
inhabitants of Jacob, and has not pitied. 4. He has bent his bow like an
enemy; O terrible, any enemy but God, is tolerable; the Lord stood with his
right hand as an adversary, and slew all that was pleasant to the eye, (the
sucking children are pleasant to the eye) in the Tabernacle of the daughter of
Zion be poured out his fury like fire, v. 20. Behold, O Lord, and consider to
whom thou have done this: shall the women eat their fruit and children of a
span long? shall the Priests and the Prophets be slain in the Sanctuary?
Psalm. 44. 19. Thou have sore broken us, or bruised us, as in the place of
Dragons, and covered us (as with a veil or covering, or garment, Psalm. 32. 1.)
with the shadow of death. Death is a cold, sad and fearful garment cast over
the Church, and that when she is bruised to dust and powder: how sore and
heavy a storm was upon poor Job? Chap. 16. 13. His archers compass me round
about, (Gods terrors shot not at the rovers, that God should miss the mark)
he cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare, he pours out my Gall
upon the ground. 14. He breaks me with breach upon breach, and runs on
me as a Giant. What is safe in the living man, when the reins, that are as
inward as the man's heart, are cloven asunder? and when Gall and Liver are taken
out of the living man, and powered upon the earth? See how the Lord deals with
his own people, Hos. 13. 8. I will meet them as a Bear bereaved of her
Whelps, and will rent the cawle of their heart. It cannot be an ordinary
pain, when the web of fate that compasses about the heart, is torn
asunder. There is a sad and a black book presented unto Ezekiel, Chap. 3. 10.
a roll of a book written within and without (page and margin) lamentation, and
mourning and woe, how does the afflicted Church complain, Psalm. 102. 3? My
days are consumed as smoke (when yesterdayes sad life is burnt to ashes, what
is it?) and my bones are burnt as an bearth, 4. My heart is smitten and
withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread. 5. By reason of the
voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin. These and the like borrowed
expressions, hold forth that the storm of afflictions was terrible and loud,
as if it would cleave Mountains and Rocks, and there must be such a pressure
of pain here, as if you would take a living man's bones, and make fuel for
fire, and use them as we do Faggots; and not that only, but they endured as
much heat of fire as the hearth-stone that is daily under the extremity of the
fire: so the Apostle speaks of himself, 1 Cor. 4. 8. For I think God has
set forth us, (...), the last Apostl^s, as it were appointed to death, for we
are made a spectacle to the world, and to men and Angels. The Apostles in
regard of their great sufferings, were so exposed to violent death, as in the
Roman Plays, Bulls, Dogs, Lions, were set forth to fight one another to death;
they were made worlds wonders, and gazing-stacks to heaven and earth, to men
and Angels for their great sufferings. Behold how strong the tempest was, that
invaded that bark, that carried the witnesses of Jesus to heaven, Heb. 11. 35.
they were tortured, stoned, sawen asunder, tempted, slain with the Sword.

The reason of the Lords so dealing is. Reason why the afflictions of the
people of God are so extreme.
1. God declares himself more impatient of sin in his own children, then
in the wicked; I mean of Gods impatience Evangelick, in regard that it is a
sin of higher ingratitude to sin against the Gospel. 2. Illumination. 3.
And the mercy of regeneration, then to sin against the Law, and common
favors and gifts; though Gods legal impatience in regard of revenging justice
be far more against the sins of the wicked, then against the sins of
believers, Evangelick and legal anger in God.
it being an act of vengeance which God cannot exercise toward believers; and
if Antinomians would acknowledge an Evangelick displeasure and anger of God
against the sins of believers, as the Scripture does, 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22. 1
Cor. 11. 30, 31. 2 Samuel 11. 27. they should not so stumble at the Gospel as
they do; I say, God is more displeased with the sins of his own children,
then with the sins of the wicked; even as the husbandman is more offended
that Thristles and Thorns grow in his Garden, then in his out-field, Esaias 1. 2.
Hear O heaven, hearken O earth; why? it is more then an ordinary defection
that moves the Lord to this. I have nourished and brought up children, and
they rebel against me. God takes it also harder, that violence and unjustice
should be in Parliaments and Assemblies, then in Prelates Courts and High
Commissions. The Lord expects nothing else but sour grapes from his enemies.
2. The hell of the godly, and the heart of their hell should ordinarily be
heavier then the borders and margin of the hell of the wicked: the sufferings
of the Saints in this life is their whole hell: wicked men have here a heaven,
and but fore-tastings of hell, which I grant, in regard they want the presence
and comforts of God in this life, and also that their curses are in themselves
heavier then the afflictions of the godly, but not so in their apprehension. 3.
Gods deep counsels work under-board; providence is a great mystery: why
these three kingdoms having a good cause, and contending for Christ, yet
should be put to a more bloody condition, and have more of floods of blood for
a while, then bloody men who defend a cursed cause, is wondered at by us, as
ignorance is the cause of admiration; he that never saw husbandry, thinks
sowing, losing and casting away of good Corn; the end, cujus gratia, which
seasoneth Gods works with wisdom and grace, is unseene: honey is sweet, but
tasting only discerns it; neither eye can see it, nor ear can hear it; our
senses cannot reach the reason of his Counsel, who will have the godly plagued
every morning.

If it be so, Use. 1.
that the godly, the green tree suffer such a fire, it must be more then fire
that is abiding the enemies; O enemies of the Gospel, O Malignants and haters
of the Lord and his Saints, have you Castles and strong holds to run to in
the day of wrath? or are your Castles judgement-proofe? Cannot death and hell
scale your walls? and though you shut your doors, climb in at your windows?
are your bulworkes and walls salvation? Wrath untolerable to the ungodly.
have you strength to bide the proof and shot of the vengeance of the Lord,
and the vengeance of his Temple? has not the second death long and sharp
tuskes? will you endure the siege and batteries of everlasting wrath? vengeance
will have nothing under your precious souls; take your pleasure, kill and
destroy the mountain of the Lord, the feast is good, ever, till the reckoning
come: Job 28. 8. Can you drink a Sea of vengeance? and floods of gall and
wormwood? there is a Sword before the throne forbished that will lap and
swallow up blood and never be quenched: wrath, wrath creeps on the sinners
in Zion by theft, without a cry or noise of feet, you hear not the rattling of
your suns wheels, when it is setting, and the night falls on you; the day
of wrath is secret and uncertain, you sleep and you see not hell at your
heels; what will you do, when you shall make your prayers to the hills, to
cover you quick?

This serves to condemn our softness, Use 2.
who love a wanton, and a smooth providence, We love a soft and a chosen
providence of our own carving.
and Golden and silken sailing to be carried away quickly to land without wind
or storm, we desire to go to Paradise through no other way but Paradise, and
a way strowed with Roses; nay but we must endure hardness, and resolve the
way cannot be changed to flatter our softness, it is as God has carved it
out, there be not two ways to heaven; one way strowed with blood, and
brimstone, and deaths, to Christ, and another to us white, fair, easy; heaven
was not so feazable to Christ, but it was to him sweating; if Christ had taken
the fair way and a street to heaven like Paradise, and left the rough way to
us, we had the more reason to complain. But it should silence us that Christ
says; you have no harder usage then the Captain of your salvation had, Joh.
15. 18. when we see we must suffer, we would be at a chosen Cross, and
afflictions carved by our own wit, or flowred and perfumed with Diamonds and
Rubies; so our heart says any judgment but war, and any war but civil
war; the hatred of the world is not much, but hatred from our brethren, the
sons of our Mother, O that is hard! yet it is not to be expected but the
flesh will war in the Saints against both the Spirit and the flesh in other
Saints; no less then the flesh warreth against the Spirit in one and the same
Saint, we are to kiss and adore providence, we can no more change the foul
and dirtie way to fair heaven, then we can remove heaven it self out of its
place; God has drawn and molded the topographie to heaven, and set all our
Guests before; he is a bad Soldier who follows such a Captain of salvation
as Christ, weeping and murmuring.

But what does this ship lead us to? certain it is, that it holds forth to
us the condition of the Church of God, tossed with wind and wave, and the world
it self, the earth is a Sea of glass before the Throne, Revel. 4. 6. and that
mingled with fire, Eight particulars considerable in the ship in which Christ
and his Church is carried.
Revel. 15. 2. Of which a word, 1. of the ship, 2. of the Element it sayleth
in, 3. of the Pilot, 4. of the Anchor and appurtenances, 5. of the wares, 6. of
the passengers carried in the ship, 7. of the winds and storms, 8. of the Port
and Haven. The ship is, of its nature, a tumbling and a moving creature, and by
its constitution and nature ordained for motion. The Church triumphing is
landed, and above motion, but the militant Church is a rolling and a tumbling
thing; and that first, The Church a moveable thing as a ship.
in a natural; secondly, in a civil; thirdly, in a spiritual relation. As
the Church consists of men in a natural consideration, all are but changes
and mere motions; for man's condition in the wood of creatures, he is borne
amongst is moveable, he himself is a proud inch of short-living clay. God
has given wheels to time, so that it plays upon generations, Eccles. 1. 4.
One generation passes away and another comes, verse. 5. The sun also
rises, and the sun goes down; the Moon looks not on us, two days, with
one face; elements, winds, floods, seas, time, as years, days, hours, living
creatures, trees, herbs, flowers, summer, harvest, spring, heavens, stars
are all tottering and reeling; and if the earth and the works that are
therein, must be burnt with fire, 2 Pet. 3. 12. all must be on their journey
toward change and corruption; the best of them for elegancy of matter not
excepted. The heavens shall wax old as a garment, Psalm. 102. 26. 2 The Church
in a civil relation is a rolling thing, and that first, as it is in
Commonwealths and States. Kingdoms and Monarchies are up and down, green,
flowrishing, and withering in their cadency like May flowers. God does roll
Kings and Kingdoms like Bowls in an Alley; pride, tyranny, unjustice puts
a Byas on the Bowl that it tumbleth over the mount, and God with a put of his
foot turns the Bowl out of its place; the glory and absoluteness of men is
a weight that cannot bear it self. Secondly, man the best of the creatures is
a vain thing, Psalm. 39. Every man at his best state is altogether vanity*
(...)
if the Hebrew express it better (as I humbly conceive it does) it runs thus,
ver. 6. surely, all men are all vanity, even standing on their feet, or every
man is every vanity, though he stand on his tiptoes, or stand straight up, as
a Champion or an army of Soldiers that stand fast and keep their ground, for
so the word (...) signifies as the learned observe, vanity is a light, a
moving and rolling thing, like a Cart wheel or a feather in the air. Thirdly,
the Church for one good day of ease has ten, twenty troublesome days of
war, persecution, divisions, heresies, plots. Read the History of the
Judges, and of the persecuting, yea and Christian Emperors, and you shall see
the ups and downs of the Church, they had ease, yea and court and favor with
godly Emperors, but a very short time. Thirdly, in their spiritual relation,
the Church is a moving thing: in that, 1. change is a part of sufferings, and
suffering and the Cross is the patrimony of the Church; whereas David says of
the wicked, Psalm. 55. 19. Because they have not changes, therefore they fear
not God; Meab is not moved from vessel to vessel, Great change of the
spiritual condition of the Church, and of particular Saints.
and has not gone to captivity, therefore his taste remained in him, and his
sent is not changed, Jer. 48. 11. Secondly, the Song of Solomon shows the
inward and spiritual ups and downs, and changes of the Church; as sometime
Chap. 2. it is full noonday with the Church; she being taken into the
banqueting house, and Verse. 4. his banner over her was love; and she is in
great Court, Verse. 16. My well beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among
the Lillies, 17. till the day break, and the shadows flee away; but there is
a change of Court, and a great revolution, Chap. 3. 1. By night, on my bed I
sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not. Again,
Chap. 4. there is a revolution, Christ breaks out in a high commendation and
praise of his Church, Chap. 4: Verse. 16. there is a prayer of hers in sense of
love and heat of faith for an union; Let my beloved come into his garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits; here the ship has fair weather, and sails fair
before the wind, for Christ answers, Chapter 5. 1. I am come unto my garden, my
sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh, with my spice, I have eaten my
honey-combe with my honey, I have drunken my wine with my milk, eat O
friends, yea drink abundantly, O beloved; this is a joyful feast between
Christ and his Church. But this world lasts not always; she falls asleep
and holds Christ at the door, and there is mighty storm that tosseth the
ship, and a sad discourting of her; for it is far otherwise, Verse. 6. I
sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but he gave me no
answer. Grace, as it is in God, is God gracious, and is most stable and
unchangeable, but it is various, as it is received in us, who are made of
changes, and a difference there must be between a communion of grace and a
communion of glory, and 2. between this life and that life; as for the former,
glory is grace in everlasting action, and therefore there is no desertions in
heaven, no hiding of Gods face, no cloud, no night, no change, nothing but a
sun in its full strength; always day without night, a full Sunshine without
a cloud or a shadow. Grace in us is a habit, and not always in action, and our
stabilitie here (as touching the other) is Heb. 13. Verse. 14. that we have no
continuing City here, but we seek one to come, this is a tottering life.

Secondly, The Ship sayleth in a Sea of glass, mingled with fire.
the ship sayleth in an element called a Sea of glass, all things here are
frail, slippery, brickle like glass, it cannot bear the ship above, no more
then a board of glass can sustain the weight of an huge ship, but it should
break in a thousand pieces; certainly the Church subsisteth by no worldly
strength, Christ sayleth with his own wind, then it it is a Sea of glass
mingled with fire, Rev. 15. 2. There be cumbustions, wars, tumults, motions,
and mighty winds in this Sea, that that may be fulfilled which Christ says
to the passengers, John 16. 33. in the world you shall have tribulation.

Thirdly, all the safety of the ship is in a good pilot, now Christ who can
sail with every wind, and brings many broken ships to land, he sits at
the helm and sets the halfdrowned ship-broken passengers on dry land to
sing on the shore, Revel. 7. 14. These are they (the ship broken men who
swimmed to land on Plankes and broken boards) that have come out of great
tribulation (out of the Sea of glass mingled with (...)) and have washed their
robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. The Ship is sailing in
Britain now in a Sea of blood, Christ must bring her safe to land.

Fourthly, Hope the Anchor of the Church.
there be three excellent virtues of the anchor of hope, Heb. 6. 19, 20.
first, which hope we have as an anchor of the soul (...), out of danger and
sure. Secondly, it is tothed in good ground, it is up within the veil in
heaven; he must shake heaven, who loses the Anchor. Thirdly, Christ the
forerunner, who leapt first ashoare, and as the first begotten of the dead,
first hanselled heaven with our fresh, has the far end of the Anchor in his
hand. Christ strengthens the Tackling and the cords of the ship; the Church a
ventruous Pinnage, that through the strength of Christ ventures thorough, 2
Cor. 6. 5. Stripes, imprisonments, tumults, labors, watchings, fastings, by
honor and dishonor, through evil report and good report, and landeth safe,
John 14. 3. I will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am,
there you may be also.

Fifthly, The wares of the ship.
the precious pearl of the Gospel is carried in this ship, yea Christ who
holds the seven stars, and walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks,
is in the ship. Be not afraid (said the Emperor to the waterman) thou
carriest Caesar: So here Christ says to the shipmen, Be not afraid, you carry
the King of Kings in this poor Bark of the Church; indeed there be more
precious wares in the ship, then if she carried from India millions of Navies
of Gold, and shipfulls of Diamonds and Rubies.

Sixthly, Seven sorts of passengers in the ship.
there be many passengers of diverse qualities, of which I speak with reference
to the times; as first, some green professors believed (as children do) it
was but a play to be engaged for the good cause. But when the King left his
Parliament and made war with his good Subjects of both kingdoms, they then
became to be Sea-ficke, and to vomit out their protestations and covenant; men
should seriously put down in paper aforehand what it will cost them, if they
indent with Christ to follow him, Luke 14. 28. Secondly, some engaged to the
cause and embarked upon life and death did cast themselves in the Sea, thinking
to swim to the nearest shore, they stole away from Christ, and cast Cause,
Gospel, Laws and Liberties over board to save themselves, but he that will
save his life, shall lose it. Thirdly, some still remain in the ship, but as
Judas did with Christ, waiting an opportunity either to play a game for
Malignants, or to foster divisions between the kingdoms, and divisions in the
Church, to raise a mutiny amongst the passengers of Christ, that the one half
may throw the other over board in the Sea. Fourthly, Some are like Jonab, down
in the sides of the ship sleeping; these are indifferent passers by, Lament. 1.
12. they will neither sweat at the Pumpe, nor lay one finger on a rope, nor move
an Oar, but (say they in their heart) Christ is a good enough Seaman, if he
will not guide his own ship to shore, let him see to it. Fifthly, some
passengers are merchant men; their Sea voyage in the ship is to gain, to buy
and sell Religion, and live on the winning, these that would draw in to
themselves gain from the public now, would crucify Christ for his coat.
Sixthly, some trusting in multitude and strength think by hard rowing and
sweating at the Oars to bring the ship to land; but a horse is a vain help.
Seventhly, sincere professors are willing to stay, and take fair or foul
weather with Christ, to sink or swim with the Gospel, and not only to
stay, but to row and pray. We cannot but see winds and storms, loud and
mighty tossing the poor ship in Britain; Pirates and robbers have made stops
in the ship by plots, much underwater is come in. Eighthly, though the winds be
strong and the Sea tempestuous, yet the port is sure, for this is the promise
of the Lord who sits at the helm, Esaias 54. 11. O thou afflicted and tossed
with tempests, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy
foundations with Saphires. Christ can sail with contrary winds, yea the
harbor is near; Behold I come quickly, (says the Lord); in the greatest
storm that ever was, the Church can see the shore and dry land, Mic. 7. 9.
and faith in war sees peace, and in shipwreck is assured of the land, and in
saddest times, when God is farthest off, the children of God feel the smell of
the flowers of the higher garden Romans 5. 3. We rejoice, or we leap for
joy, in tribulation.

[And he was fast asleep.] We are here to consider farther of the condition
that they were it; Why Christ took on our nature and infirmities.
it is a storm, but Christ sleeps. First, a word of Christ's sleeping.
Secondly, of his sleeping at this time. If we compare the Text with it self
we shall find, he was sleeping, who can neither slumber nor sleep, and that
he is waking while he is sleeping, for he who is the mighty God, the Prince
of peace, and rebuked the Sea and the winds, and there was a calm, does not
sleep. How then? can God sleep? he that is in one person God-man can sleep.
First, because in this rare piece of our redemption, Christ-God took all our
infirmities on him, except sin, as he took our nature, so he took our
condition and place, to express the depth of the love of God to mankind; the
lower and the baser our glorious redeemer was, it has the greater impression
of love. Christ, God and man, and why.
Love, love answers all our questions of wonder. O way of life, why wast thou
wearied? O bread of life, why wast thou hungry? O well of life, why wast thou
thirsty? Have thou not made all the fountains and all the Vines in Judea, and
in all the earth? O ancient of days, why becamest thou young, and a weeping
infant? blessed Jesus would become a workhouse of sufferings and infirmities
for us; and love, free love answers all these questions; for us, for us
sinners he came thus low. Secondly, here is a wonder, if there be a wonder in
the world, Christ God and man in one person is more then a miracle. The mighty
God giving infinite subsistence to a finite nature, Isa. 9. 6. Thirdly, here is
an able and sufficient Savior furnished to us, one who is more then a man;
why? there was not only need of infinite worth and merit to the person, but of
infinite strength under the sufferings; man as man is but a creature, and all
the Angels in heaven and a world of worlds of new created Angels could not
endure the infinite wrath of God, and therefore God must be in this play,
unless all had been marred. Qu. But the Godhead could not suffer nor be a
passive subject of suffering, God therefore though be had not made one person
with the manhead, might have added actively strength to a man to endure and
suffer all that Christ suffered. Answ. It is true, the Godhead was no formal
passive subject of either infirmities or sufferings in Christ, and God might
have added to one who is only man possibly strength to suffer the terrors of
the second death without despairing: but then it could not be said, that in
that case these sufferings should have been the sufferings and blood of God,
and so of infinite worth and merit. But here all strength, and which is more,
all worth and merit of suffering came from the Godhead, The influence of the
Godhead in Christ's sufferings was active, not passive.
which may be illustrate from two comparisons. First, suppose there were a
fair rose in the southest part of the earth, nearest the Sun, growing in
great beauty, but in danger to be burnt up with the extreme heat of the
Sun, yet if we should imagine there were at the root of this same rose a
cold refreshing Fountain and Spring of water, sending up an oily and lively
soap of life to the rose, so that how much the parching heat of the Sun
consumed and wasted of the life and greenenesse of the Rose, the fountain
eternally furnished as much of new vigor and life to it, we may think if the
fountain were eternal so to act upon the Rose, the Rose must be eternally
green and never wither: So the flower of Issai, Jesus Christ the fair Rose of
Sharon, that Lilly of the field never planted with hands, that blessed man who
was a son without a father, though the parching Sun of the infinite wrath
of God, for our sins did burn him, and look upon him to consume him, as he
complained, Psalm. 22. 15. My strength is dried up like a Potsheard. 17. I may
tell all my bones; yet the blessed Godhead, in a personal union, was like an
oily fountain at his root, that contributed the active influence of life,
courage, vigor and strength, so as this rose could not but grow in death, and
the excellency of his person makes the sufferings of infinite worth. And even
as the Scarlet and purple Curtains in the Tabernacle cast a glaunce and luster
on the golden Mercy-seate, when the Arc was within the Tabernacle: so the
purple wounds and blood of Jesus Christ and all his infirmities received an
excellent sweet luster, worth and beauty from the glorious and more then
golden Godhead of our true and living Arc the Son of God. It may also be
thus cleared, the Iron wedges of Noah's Arc separated from the Arc, and cast
into the waters should sink to the bottom, but being fastened in the Arc they
fleet above the water: the manhead separated from the Godhead should sink
under the wrath that Christ did sustain, but being wedged and united to the
Godhead, in a personal union, could not but ride out against all the storms:
O blessed be our sure Ark. Now though suffering could not touch the Godhead
passively, yet could the Godhead actively contribute to the strengthening of the
Manhood for suffering.

Hence we are to conceive if Christ the Redeemer, Use 1.
Christ personal, was a Standard Bearer that could not faint under all his
sufferings and infirmities, Christ mystical is more then men, I mean the
Church of Christ must have also strength against all the persecutions of men;
there is a bone in the head of the Church, that is, strength in Christ that
cannot be broken, malignants shall fight against Mount Zion, but shall not
prevail, there was never any victory that the seed of the Serpent or Satan
could obtain against Christ, but the bruising of his heel, that is a poor
victory, a wound in the heel, or a bleeding heel is far from the heart;
Malignants are but drawing blood of Christ's heel, in these bloody wars. But
they do but thresh the waters, Christ has endured more then the wrath of the
King of Britain, and believe it, he shall be victorious and shall prevail.

If Christ be such a wonderful one that is God no less then man, Use 2.
it is neither piety nor good policy to take any thing from him that is his
due; if Caesar had stepped in and usurped a headship over the Assembly convened
in the name of Christ, It were sacrilege in the Roman Empire and Senate to
give out decrees to the Churches as the Apostles and Elders did, Acts 15.
Act. 15. and had said it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us the Roman
Emperor and Senate of Rome, to injoyne such Laws to the Churches of Christ;
and should put the name of the Emperors and Parliaments decrees on these which
are called the decrees of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, as they are
called, Act. 16. 4. I conceive the Apostles would have called it a wronging of
Christ the King of the Church, in his prerogative Royal, and an abridging of
the freedom of his Court; nor was it ever in our heart to teach that the
Christian Magistrate is with blind obedience to execute the decrees of the
Church; for this poor argument, if it have any nerves, as it would cast upon
us the doctrine of Papists and Jesuits to make the ways of Christ odious, it
has as great strength against the preaching of the Gospel; for if Paul or any
faithful Pastor preach to the Magistrates of Berea that Christ, whom the Jews
crucified, is the only Redeemer and Savior of the world, and that therefore
they are as nurse-fathers to give liberty to the Servants of God, to preach
this doctrine, and to hinder any to persecute such as shall preach this
doctrine, yet by their civil authority, and ex officio, they are not for
that, with blind obedience to receive it, and not to search the Scriptures to
try whether that which is preached be agreeable to the Scriptures, nor to take
it upon the bare authority of the Preacher, but they are to search the
Scriptures, and obliged to believe the preached Gospel. But not as Magistrates
either to preach themselves, or to judge authoritatively by virtue of their
office, whether the Preachers doctrine be the Gospel of Christ, or no: so if a
Synod, by the holy Ghost, and the light of Scriptures determine any thing for
discipline or censure, the Magistrate as he may as a Christian try the word
preached, so may he the same way try the decrees and determinations of the
Church, and not take them upon blind trust, and accordingly punish the
contraveners as a magistrate, and as he is the Minister of God that bears
his sword; but yet he can no more as a Magistrate, and by his office prescribe
such ecclesiastic Laws, (as we have Acts 15. v. 28, Act. 16. 4.) unto the
Churches of God, or as a Magistrate and by his office judge them unlawful, and
forbid them, then he can preach the word, or say, it seemed good to the holy
Ghost, and to me who bears the Sword, to command that the Churches observe
such and such Laws. But we shall hardly believe that the honorable Houses
will take on them supreme authority above the Assemblies and courts of the
Lord Jesus, or that they will give occasion to all the Protestant Churches in
the world who prays for them, to write against their proceedings.

[ And he was fast asleepe] What? should Christ sleep now, as Lonab did, when
God seems to be angry with all in the ship? Innocence can sleep sound
amidst the greatest calamities.
Nay but Christ holds forth to us by his sleeping, that innocence and a good
conscience can sleep securely amidst the greatest calamities and storms, and
not be afraid. This is made good by these grounds of Scripture; as first, God
has a chamber and a pavilion to save his own people in, so are they spoken to
Esaias 26. 20. Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about
thee, hide thy self for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.
Secondly, God not only saves his own from trouble, but also from the fear
of trouble, Psalm. 3. 5. I laid me down and slept. 6. I will not be afraid of
ten thousand of the people, that have set themselves against me round about,
Psalm. 23. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil. Thirdly, there is yet a higher degree to which a good
conscience can ascend, for Eliphaz says, Job 5. 22. At destruction and famine
thou shall laugh, faith is so above death, that it makes a holy sporting at
death, 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory? It is much to look death on the face and to laugh; believe and
triumph. It is true, the Godly are fittest to be soldiers, and faith has
more true courage for the war then thousands of men, yet are not means to
be despised. God will not have us to work miracles on the warrant of our own
private spirit, though God work miracles himself; David says, Psalm. 141. 7.
that the Lord covered his head in the day of battle; yet he puts on a
helmet on his head himself in the day of battle, and was a man of war. 2 Samuel* 17. 10. There is reason why the Saints are secure in God, in the greatest
calamity, because peace with God makes peace with bullets, and swords and
spears, and these go well together, Psalm. 149. 6. Let the high praises of God
be in their mouth, and a two edged sword in their hand: and faith knows
nothing of base fear; when there are storms without, to the believer, there
is fair weather within, faith is a grace above time, as there is neither rain
nor winds above the second region of the air, therefore the Camp should be
purged of Achans. Secondly, unbeleefe has a wide apprehension, and is full of
jealosies and fears, and believes every bush to be an armed man, Prove. 28.
1. The wicked feels when none pursues, but the righteous (...) is confident
as a Lion, or as a young Lion, courage and animositie is vigorous and green in
the young Lion, for when the believer has closed a covenant with death, not
such a one as is Esaias 28. 15. but such a covenant as takes in Christ as a
party with the believer, in which he is in Covenant with the wild beasts of
the field, Hos. 2. 18. and with the stones of the fields, then is he secure,
for if death be the Saints servant, 1 Cor. 3. 22. why but we should have
Law-suretie in Christ, with our servant, that death shall not hurt us? 1 Cor.
15. 55. and if the grave be our bed of rest, why should not the sick man be
at peace with his own Couch, and with his own post that conveyeth him over
the water to heaven? the believers death is a sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 6. 51. 1 Cor.
4. 14. then it must be a sweet and sound sleep, as is the sleep of the godly,
whereas such as sleep wrapped in such a winding sheet as the sins of their
youth, Job 20. 11. cannot have a sound sleep, but as an ill conscience
prophecyeth vengeance, as we see in Hamans wife, Esth. 8. 13. and in Cain,
Genesis 4. 14. so the bones of a reprobate in the grave must in a manner prophecy
hell and wrath to him.

[Hee was fast asleepe] Christ-man did but sleep, How God is said to sleep.
for otherwise, Psalm. 121. 4. Behold he that keeps Israel shall neither
slumber nor sleep. Yet in our trouble God is said to sleep, not that spirits,
far less the Creator of spirits, does sleep, only he seems to sleep.
i. when we dream that God lets things go at six and seven, and when he
seems to cock the wheels of his providence, and works not for us, his
arm seems to sleep, Esaias 51. 9. Awake, awake, put on strength O arm of the
Lord, awake as in the ancient days, in the generations of old; now the
sleeping of his arm is the sleeping of his power, and he says, Verse. 5. My
righteousness is near, my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge
the people; his arm is his power to judge between his Church and his enemies,
Psalm. 44. 23. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? Psalm. 7. 6. Awake O Lord, for
the judgment that thou have commanded.

But why should Christ sleep when his cause requires he should wake?

Ans. Beside that this was a proof of his humane nature united personally with
his Godhead, that a sleeping man was God who could command the Sea, and the
winds, it was expedient that this storm should rise when Christ was sleeping,
for it might seem to arise against his will, if he had been waking: or
rather God of purpose will have extreme dangers to come on his Church, and he
will seem to sleep and to be far off, to waken up our sleeping faith.
Hence the doctrine is, God will have his Church and cause within a hairs
breadth of losing, except he arise and help.
God will have his Church and cause to be brought within a hair breadth of
losing, except the Lord arise and be only be a present help in trouble.
Consider that Christ-man (if we lay aside the decree of God) was capable of
drowning, stoning or any death as well as crucifying, and in this ship was
carried Christ the hope of heaven, and all the ends of the earth, and the
eleven Disciples were in the same danger, they had a word of promise that they
should be his witnesses to carry the Chariot of the Gospel to all the world,
and to subdue the nations to Christ by the preaching of the word, and were to
be brought before Kings and rulers for a testimony to all nations, and to be
scourged, killed, persecuted of all men for Christ's sake; here be both a
promise, and prophecies, and all seems to be losed as fallen in the bottom
of the Sea; Christ and Apostles and the ship are within less then two or three
fingers breadth of death. The Church was at a low ebb in Egypt, the male
children must be drowned in the River, the life of the aged is toyled and
worn out of them. Omnipotency with nine heavy plagues cannot get the people of
God freed out of the hands of a Tyrant. God must step in with immediate
omnipotence in the tenth plague to pull out his people with a stretched out
arm. Moses his word of deliverance and Gods decree of bringing out the people
is upon the extreme bank and margin of perishing: Israel has an host of
cruel enemies behind them, and the raging Sea before them, and mountains on
every side, here be many deaths in a circle round about the Church, this is
like to God sleeping and the wheels of providence at a stand, there is no
place for help from a creature except immediate omnipotency break a gap in the
circle, and divide the red Sea; the Church of God is a field of dry and dead
bones, so as it is said, Ezekiel. 37. 2. Behold the bones were (...) very or
exceeding dry, and they say, Verse. 11. our hope is losed, and we are cut off;
yet we know God made his own word good, Verse. 12. Behold O my people, I will
open your graves, and bring you to the land of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord
shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants. But when shall
that be? (...)
Omnipotency is good at a dead lift; when he sees their strength is gone,
Heb. that their hand is gone, and there is none shut up and left, when the
Saints have neither hands nor feet, the Lord arises: for Christ can sail with
half wind, and play about and fetch a compass, yea he can sail against tide
and wind, and with no wind, he never sincks his bark, nor breaks his helm,
nor loses a passenger, nor misseth his harbor, so how hopeless was the
condition of the Church, when loving Jesus Christ is couched under a cold stone
in the grave? the only hope of David's throane, he who was to restore the
kingdom to Israel is gone; and what shall the people of God now do? utter
desolation is so near that God is put to it, and the poor Churches coal so
cold, that they are at Lord either now or never, either within three days
restore the head of the Church or never. Then the Lord, Act. 5. 31. exalted
buried Christ, with his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior to give
repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.

1. Reason. Why God saves not while the Church be between the sinking and the
swimming.
Omnipotency can walk in the extreme and out most margin and most pendulous
bank hanging over hell, and not fall; Christ can drive his Chariot over
mountains and rocks and not break one pin or wedge of it, poor nothing to
omnipotency is as good as Spear and Shield.

2. Reas. This declares the depth of the wisdom of Gods unsearchable
dispensation, he suffers malignants to ride over his people, that he may
perfume the work of hell in the enemies, who are, as it were, skullions to
purge the vessels of mercy and to humble them, and may instampe their Acts
with supernatural events of faith and patience; malignants plow the Church,
and sow blood in the three kingdoms, the father of Christ the good husband man
comes in to break the clods and the fallow ground, and reap the crop of the
quiet fruits of righteousness; and it is depth of wisdom to consider how God
makes use of men's sinful engagements having chainzed men to his cause, and
carries his own holy and clean work of reformation through many foul hands
and durtie intentions: so when men thwart and cross Gods will of precept, they
serve Gods will of providence; a passenger walks on the hatches of the ship
toward the west, Sea, and tide and wind do carry both him, his motion and
ship to the east, the wisdom of God the Pilot of his Church overpowereth men's
intentions which are set on gain, honor, factions, their own by-ends, ease
and pleasure.

It is not unlike that when this work now under the Lords wheels in Britain
is come to a height of extreme desolation, that we are at this, Lord, either
now or never, and the Sea is come in at the broad side of the ship, that the
Lord will deliver by some immediate way; and we see feavours come to a height,
and then decrease and cool: and when does the Sea turn to an ebbing? not
while it flow to the utmost score of the coast, and then be fullest; seldom
does ever the Lord deliver his Church while their hope be gone, and what if it
be so here, that Parliaments, Assemblies, armies of and in both kingdoms,
navies, shippings, treaties, victories can do no more? and then the Lord
arise, and by some immediate omnipotency we never dreamed of, calm our Sea,
and bring his own ship to land. First, you never saw creatures do any great
work, but something was left to omnipotency and to God only to be done.
Moses led the people out of Egypt, but he could not divide the red Sea, and
that was their way. Secondly, in Gods greatest works immediate providence has
had hand. The victory over Midian had more of Gods immediate work, then of
Gideons Sword in it: this truly to me is one continued miracle that these
1600. years, God has carried his ship and kept the passengers alive, when
persecuting Emperors, when bloody Babylon, when Heretics, Kings the horns of
the beast that rose out of the Sea, fire, faggots, sword, torments have torn
the sails of Christ's Ship, broken the Mast, drowned the passengers, yet we
live. Joseph is blessed, but when he is separated from his brethren, then
blessings come upon the head of Joseph.

He was fast asleep.

This is the saddest circumstance in their suffering. What is death and the
drowning of them all, so they have Christ with them? The presence of God in
trouble how comfortable.
But Oh! Christ to their sense is as good as absent; for he is fast alseepe;
and as they complain, he cares not for them; Christ walking and working for
a soul in the saddest affliction of the world is a blessed visitation. To be
in heaven, if Christ sleep and be not with you, is a hell, and to be in hell
and want his presence, is two hells; to be sick, and the only Physician
Christ will not come at me, is two hells. Gods watching presence, first,
brings the courage of faith: To be in the midst of devils, the believer
having God with him walks without fear; even cold death that king of
terrors walking with him at his right side, he has a passe-port that will
take him safe through the grave, as these places prove, Psalm. 16. 8, 9, 10.
Psalm. 23. 4. Psalm. 46. 2. 3. Mic. 7. 8. Secondly, God is not present with his
own in trouble as the picture of a friend, who has much love in his heart
while he stands at your bed side seeing you go to a great hell through a
little hell of sickness and pain, and cannot take off you one grain weight
of sorrow and pain. But God is in a far other manner present, Psalm. 91. 15.
I will be with him in trouble, but this is not all, I will deliver him, Esaias
43. 2. when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through
the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt; nor is Christ in trouble like our Summer-friends who
in a great drough dry up.

But may not God be with his own, though they be both burnt and drowned? then
this is no consequent at all, fear not that the fire shall burn thee, or the
waters shall drown thee, for I am with thee; yea it is most strong, this
presence of God with his own in trouble makes God and them so one, by Gods
union of love, (for Gods love to us is infinitely more active to save us, then
either our faith and love to him) that the fire that burns Jacob must also
seize upon God, according to that, Zach. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches
the apple of his eye. Thirdly, when Christ waketh and sleeps not in heavy
afflictions, his love is so in action, even while he strikes, that the rod
falls out of his hand, that he 1. gives them not so hot a fire, as silver,
and 2. he acts love and mercy on them in their saddest time of suffering,
and marieth them at their lowest condition; both which are excellently
expressed, Esaias 48. 10. Behold, I have refined thee, but not as silver, I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. Fourthly, we may add another
benefit of the presence of God in afflictions, that the very breath of Christ
is sweet, though he should not deliver for the present, yet the smoke of hell
and the pain of the furnace is so perfumed and over-gilded with the breathings
of the love of Christ, that the pain of the furnace is allayed; this is
witnessed by the Martyrs singing at the stake; If in these bloody sufferings
we want Gods presence, how miserable are we? and therefore this is one of the
proper marks of the children of God, if we can miss Gods comfortable
presence in this fiery trial that is now in the three kingdoms: So Lament. 1.
16. for these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, yea
but these sufferings are but the material object of weeping, there is a higher
cause of weeping then that, and set down in the Hebrew as a cause with an
(...) because the comforter that should bring back my soul is far away:
(...)
Christ esteemed this the salt of his sufferings; My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? there is a great Emphesis in (...) and therefore the word is
doubled: as if he would say, any forsaking of friends is nothing, but Gods
forsaking is sad: and Heman, Psalm. 88. 6. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit,
in darkness, in the depths. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, thou afflictest
me with all thy waves; but this is the heaviest of all, 14. Lord why castest
thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? positive wrath is not so
heavy as the mere negative absence of God. Mary her want of the man Christ is
sad, but she wants him under an higher reduplication, John 20. 13. The Angels
say unto Mary Magdalen, Woman why weepest thou? she answers with a because,
(...), Because they have taken away my Lord; Sword and pestilence, yea the
civil sword are heavy plagues on a land, but this is heavier, God has left
us, O terrible! the Lord is not with us.

Luke 8. 24. Part III.
And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish. The
unity and harmony of Christ's Disciples in their trouble.


The third part of the text contains the course they take in their trouble.
It is good that in their trouble they agree in these four. First, that there
is a great danger, even present drowning. Secondly, they look spiritually on
it in this, that the face of death is so much the more awefull that Christ
their deliverer sleeps. Thirdly, they agree in judgment that Christ only
can help them. Fourthly, they agree in practice, all join in prayer to awake
Christ, and by faith to awake him, and set him on work to help and save them.
It is excellent when one heart and one mind is amongst all the passengers of
Christ's ship, especially in a troublesome Sea storm. Genesis 13. Abraham and Lots
herdmen strive. But it is so much the worse that it is said, Verse. 7. and the
Canaanite and the Perizite dwelt then in the land, they had common enemies,
Reasons for Christian unity.
and therefore striving was unseasonable; holy Joseph (when his brethren was in
great distress, falling out was unseasonable) therefore says to them, Genesis
45. 24. See that ye fall not out by the way: Alas! we are in great trouble,
and yet we fall out by the way: it was a sad time with the Disciples near to
the time when the shepherd was smitten and they scattered sheep, when Christ
said, John 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
love one another.

Do but hear how Paul is most copious in arguments for this in one Verse,
Philip. 2. 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 2. Fulfill
my joy, that ye may be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, and of one mind Psalm. 133. 1. to be of one mind in love, is the
fulfilling of the joy of the Saints; biting and devouring is a hole, a gap, a
great blanke to the joy of the holy Ghost; love neighboureth with the sweet
consolations of Christ, it is the birth, a fruit, an Apple growing on the
spirit of Jesus, Gal. 5. 22. in the womb and bowels of love lodges bowels of
tender mercies; pardoned sinners cannot so hate pardoned sinners as to jeere
them out of the hearts of the Saints, and end them to the lake of Brimstone.
Ps. 133. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity. Many things are good, as works of divine justice, and destroying
the enemies of God, yet they are not pleasant; and many things are pleasant
that are not good, as the pleasures of sin for a season must be pleasant;
but because unlawful, they are not good; but unity amongst brethren is both
good and pleasant; now because striving and bitter divisions in this land and
Church are so sad, and a lovely and peaceable union so necessary, give me leave
to press this a little; the motion of a loving union were desirable.

First, because our Father the Lord appeared to Elias, not in the thunder, but
in the calm voice. Love is not only from God, but 1 John 4. 8. God is love,
and that in all the four causes of love: See how much of God is in any, as
much of love and meekness is in them; love is the breathings of heaven, love
is the air and element we live in, in the highest new Jerusalem, 1 Cor. 13.
8. 13. The redeemeds breath smells of love, and love has the smell of another
world; it is a flower of Christ's planting, the blessings and prayers of the
good husbandman Christ's Father came on the flower, Psalm. 133. 3. The dew of God
lies all the night upon the leaves of the flower, it is always green. The
Church is a house that is builded up in love, that raises the wall up to
heaven, Ephesians. 4. 16.

Secondly, Christ our redeemer, whose we are, being bought with a price, is a
mass of love, he has a heart very hospital to lodge all our infirmities;
when he saw his people, as touching the condition of their soul, like sheep
without a shepherd, (...), he was bowelled with compassion toward them: Esaias
40. when the Prophet speaks of his power and his ruling arm, he also
prophecyeth of his meekness and bowels of compassion to weak ones; there be
three sorts of persons in the Church that he shall handle tenderly. 1. The
simple but gracious, and for these, Verse. 11. he shall feed his fl^cke like a
shepherd; he has the heart of a shepherd who tendereth and cares for the
flock. 2. There be young ones, babes in Christ, and of these it is said, he
shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, two
excellent sweet expressions, he shall not throw his club at the Lambs, nor be
froward and cruel to them, but in lieu of a club, he shall gather them with
his arm. 3. And as for the young and weak that have not legs, he shall
carry these in his bosom; the bosom of Christ is a seat of love and
tenderness of bowels. 4. There be some in the Church that want not their
infirmities and sins, and have legs, and a little strength, yet the
tenderness of the bowels of compassion must yield them, some Christian
condescension and accommodation, and they must not be forced and driven
roughly, Christ's Spirit is a spirit of accommodation, Sir I Will make you in
despite of your teeth, is not for these, and therefore it is said, he shall
gently lead those that are with young, so Esaias 42. 2. Jesus Christ shall not
cry nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets, Christ has
not the art of railing, shouting and thundering against the meek of the flock.
Yea Christ rides and triumphs in meekness, Zach. 9. 9. his horse he rides
on, is meekness, Psalm. 45. 4. it is spoken to him, Ride prosperously upon
truth and meekness, and Psalm. 147. 6. This Lord lifeth up the meek, and Psalm.
76. 9. be will save all the meek of the earth: Christ's heart is King Solomon's
Chariot, the pillars of it is, (Cant. 3. 10.) Silver, the bottom thereof Gold,
the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem. And Christ chooses to dwell in a heart paved with love
and meekness.

Thirdly, the Spirit of the Lord is a Dove, the spirit of grace is a gaul-lesse
and gentle spirit. Grace, grace is the innocentest thing of the world, there is
no wild fire of sinful wrath in grace. Bitterness, railing, jeering,
persecution with the tongue, outcries against Assemblies, Presbyteries, are not
the tools of the spirit of grace; yea calumnies, salt writings on either side
are not from that spirit of Christ which has a hand to wipe tears off the
faces of the mourners in Zion; To all raylings, all bitter mockings against
Presbyteries and Assemblies, we say, we are desirous not to be driven off
the road way to heaven, but to go on, Through honor and dishonor by evil
report and good report, as deceivers, and yet true. One inch of a good
conscience is rather to be chosen, then a thousand yards of windy credit.
Meek Jesus Christ and his Apostles used not such a style of language, nor is
such Grammar from heaven, nor smells it of the holy Ghosts pen.

Fourthly, if we be the children of one father, it might breed strange
thoughts in our minds, when the sons of one father Independents and
Presbyterians (spare me, necessity, not love of factions forces me to these
terms) shall sing one song up before the throne, to him that lives and
reigns for ever, that we cannot gather heat and warmness of love in one
arc, and in one Church here in the earth, pens and tongues salted and steeped
in the gall of bitterness are not the fruits of the Spirit. Shall we kill and
devour one another all the day, and lodge together in one heaven at night, and
can we say one to another in heaven, have thou sound me, O mine enemy? shall
there be any factions, any sides, either religious, of Presbyterian and
independent in heaven, or national of England and Scotland (which yet differ
not essentially (I am sure) but only in the poor accidents of North and
South) and yet on earth we must be at daggers, at rentings, divisions; are
there two Christ's, because two nations?

Fifthly, truth is never victorious by persecution; now the Scripture speaks
of a persecution with the tongue, Jer. 18. 18. Come (say they) let us smite
Jeremiah with the tongue. Job thus complayneth of his friends who never put
violent hands in him, Chap. 19. 22. Why do you persecute me as God, and are
not satisfied with my flesh? then tongue persecution is an eating of the flesh.

Sixthly, the Gospel which we profess is a Gospel of peace, we preach war
between the flesh and the spirit, and war between the woman's Seed and the
Serpent. But oh! should we preach war between the Saints? we have choyser
golden chains to tie us together, Ephesians. 4. 4. There is one body, and one
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. 5. One Lord, one
faith, one Baptism. 6. One God, and Father of all. Have we need of Prelates
and a high Commission Court, and pursevants sent out to hunt us for praying
together, that they may reconcile us and unite us together, as we were all one
within these few years?

Seventhly, the more grace and mercy we have from God our Father, and from our
Lord Jesus, the more peace amongst our selves, and the more grace the more
compassion toward the weakness of Brethren. Christ is an uniting and a
congregating Savior, his blood and his spirit sows and needleth together the
hearts of the lamb and the Leopard, of the Calfe and of the young Lion, Esaias
11. 6.

Eighthly, the Saints of the most High are styled the meek of the earth, Esaias
11. 4. there be no meek creatures on earth but the regenerate. Bulls and Lions
fight together, Lions and Woolves pursue Lambs. But we have not heard of
war between Lambs and Lambs; Why should we strive, for we are brethren?
how unseemly that one redeemed one should hate, persecute and chase another
redeemed one, even into the gates of heaven?

Ninthly, are we not debtors one to another? and the sum we owe is love. O
what a spirit of accommodation was in that chosen vessel Paul! who said, 1 Cor.
9. 22. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save same.
This is Paul's charge, Gal. 6. 1, 2. who will have love to put in joint an
overtaken sinner, in the spirit of meekness, and so it is, love does not only
bear it self, but also the burdens of our brethren* and so fulfilleth the Law
of Christ; love planted by Christ is the Law of Christ, and why do we by
ruptures and divisions labor to frustrate the end of Christ's prayer, which is,
John 17. 2. I pray (says Christ) that they may all be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee? if we be one in uno tertio, in the heart of Christ,
and of Christ's Father, why but we should be one amongst our selves? yea love
is burnt in tender feeling and compassion with the very smoke of a brothers
house that is on fire, 1 Cor. 13. 15. Love is not easily provoked; it is a
pardoning grace, and has strong shoulders to bear the madness and
infirmities of a fellow heir of heaven. Love thinks not evil, love must
abound in love and charitable thoughts toward others, as every element
abounds in its own sphere, it thinks not that the Saints do hunt for a
dominion over Saints. 6. Love rejoices not in iniquity. Cursed be that love
that exulteth when malignants prevail, and rejoices not when the cause of the
Lord and his people are victorious. Love rejoices in the truth; then love is
wounded and sick when heresies and sects prevail; and sigheth to see Altars
multiplied, and that many false Christ's and false teachers arise. We cannot
deny but God has put his seal to the ministry of the servants of Christ that
went from this to New England, and in the wisdom of God they saw and do see,
that liberty of conscience is no remedy, but physic worse then the disease;
against false religions; It is now off my way to dispute. But I know certainly
a negative argument from the practice of Christ and the Apostles, because they
stirred not up heathen Magistrates and Wolves, not fathers, to punish false
teachers, is not good divinity to infer liberty of conscience; for in their
practice they stirred not up the sword of the Magistrate against extortions and
rapines in publicans, nor against the persecuting and killing of the Lord of
Glory, nor against sedition, incests, tyranny over the Apostles and Christians,
bribing and unjustice used against Paul by Felix and others who were subject to
higher Magistrates, and many other scandalous sins against the second table;
any might infer liberty of conversation in matters of the second table, no
less then liberty of conscience in matters of the first table, if this
argument hold good. But the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles gives to the
Magistrate the Sword against evil doers, Romans 13. 4. but teachers of false
doctrine though in the matter of ceremonies, are evil doers, Phil. 3. 2. and
they pervert souls, Act. 15. and kill souls, and subvert whole houses, and
make their followers twofold more the Children of hell, then they themselves,
Matthew. 23. 15. nor did we ever dream that the bloody sword was a mean of
conversion of souls, the Gospel is so the only power of God to salvation, but
that hinders not but the Magistrate is to restrain by a coercive power the
man that teaches that Jesus Christ is not true God consubstantiall with the
Father, because the Sword ought to curb the spreading of false doctrine, it
follows not that it is a mean of propagating true doctrine. But of this more
possibly in another place. Nor do I intend the bloody sword should be drawn
against every different opinion holden by the truly godly, though in the
government of the Church all see not with the same light.

Luke 8. 24. Master, master, we perish.

Mark 3. 38. Master carest thou not that we perish?

It is too ordinary for us, Doct.
because of the greatness of the stroke, and no present deliverance to put
unkindnesse upon Christ, We put unkindnesse on Christ, because we are not
presently delivered, and the reasons thereof.
as here they complain that Christ is careless of them, because he sleeps
and they perish; few of the Saints have ever been in extremity of heavy
afflictions, but they have uttered hard thoughts of Christ, Psalm. 77. as the
Prophet in name of the Church, when he was troubled and his sore ran in the
night, Verse. 7. says, will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable
no more? 8. Is his mercy clean gone? (...)
is his word or oracle rotten? 9. Has he forgotten to be gracious? has he
in anger shut up his tender mercies? It is a strange word, Verse. 7. will he
be favorable no more? will he never put forth in action one act of good will
again? for the word (...) is (...); it were a prodigious thing as the Prophet
calls it, his infirmity, Verse. 10. that all acts of reconciliation toward
the elect should dry up. (...)
Jeremiah when he cried out in his great trouble, Chap. 15. Verse. 10. Woe is
me, my mother, (...)
that thou have borne me a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole
earth; (...)
complayneth Verse. 18. Will thou be altogether to me as a lier? Et non addet
(been) velle ultra.
as waters that are unfaithful? that is, I hoped thou should have helped
me, as the thirsty traveller trusts in a dry pit, seeing it afar off, and
believing it to be a refreshing fountain, but thou have beguiled me and my
hope; to this you may add the cursing of the day that he was borne in, Chap.
20. David, Psalm. 31. when Verse. 12. he was forgotten as a dead man, and laid
aside by all the world, as an useless, and a broken vessel, complains,
Verse. 22. For I said in mine have, I am cut off from before thine eyes; and we
know the sufferings of Job, who beside his other agues utters these words,
Chap. 13. Verse. 14. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine
enemy? The Reasons are:

First, extreme afflictions, as Physic, stir up both the good and the bad
humors, they make legible both the good and the ill in the man, and which of
them is the predominant; when the fire boileth extremely, if there be a scum
in the liquor, it is that which is first seen, yea and it is not only the
virtue and strength of the fire, but also of the gold that the dross goes to
its own place, if it were all gold there should be no separation at all; the
Disciples here put a false Character upon Christ, that he has neither love to
them, nor care of them, they double the word, Master, master, and that is a
check, being added to the other, carest thou not for us? it says 1. that he
is worse then other masters, better serve any master then Christ, a master will
care for his servants, so he can help them, no earthly master will sleep,
when he knows his servants are drowning. 2. They object his sluggishnesse,
carest thou not for us? he bath neither love nor respect to us, though we
have forsaken all and followed him.

Secondly, apprehension puts a bastard glowme upon Christ, and causes us to
take a false measure of Christ; Fancy has strong operations, especially when
it comes in the room and place of faith. What could they imagine now but
that the Sea will drown Christ? he had said to them, he must be delivered
to the hands of sinners and be crucified, or then, he could walk upon the
Sea and escape death, and would let them go to the mercy of the raging Seas,
and perish in the waters? now this was a belying of the promises of God; Christ
had both decreed and said that they behooved to be his witnesses, and to carry
his name to the Gentiles, and carry the chariot of the Gospel thorough all the
world, and be delivered up to Synagogues and councels, and be beaten and
scourged, and hated of all men for his names sake, now all these are dreams,
they must be drowned in the waters, through no other cause but the negligence
and cold affection that their master Christ bears to them, though they had
preferred him and his service to all the world. We are beasts under great
temptations, and fantasy is all the wit that leads beasts, so the Prophet
says of himself, Psalm. 72. 22. so foolish was I and ignorant, I was a beast
before thee; and why a beast? he had said in his heart, Verse. 11. how does God
know? that was a strong dream: he that teaches man knowledge, shall be not
know? Psalm. 94. 10. and Verse. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain,
(...) is an empty thing, and our word smoke or reeke seems to come from it,
then said the Prophets imagination, it is as empty a thing as smoke to serve
God.

Thirdly, sense is strong as fancy, drowning and death was come over board, and
therefore they complain of a changed and sleeping Christ; now old and gray
haired judgments move us not, as the drowning of the old world, the
destruction of Sodom with fire and brimstone, these are gone many hundredth
years, therefore they affect not us, and the day of judgment is far off,
and where is the promise of his coming? say the scoffers, 2 Pet. 3. and so did
the people, Ezekiel. 12. 27. Son of man behold they of the house of Israel say,
The vision that he sees is for many days to come, and he prophecieth of
times that are afar off. But when death is at thy right side, and sits
upon the ball of thy cheek, that acts and works on us. When the Sword is
two hundredth miles from us, we take no care of it; but if the enemy were
coming in at the ports of the City, and we saw them burning houses, and
killing husbands and children, and heard the crying of women and children; we
should then be on the other extremity, and cry, Christ is changed and cares
not for us; keep good and heavenly thoughts of Christ in the saddest times,
Psalm. 22. 2. O my God I cry by day and thou hear not, in the night season I
am not silent; What then? does he fall a chiding with God? does he say, Oh,
God is changed, he cares not for us? no: yea the contrary he says, Verse. 3.
But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. 4. Our fathers
trusted in thee and were delivered; say in the mouth of hell, I will believe,
as Job 13. 15. Though the Lord should kill me, I will trust in him; faith
lives and breaths in the grave, in the throat of hell. How sweet is it to
hear, There is the grave of a buried believer; these be the ashes of a dead
man, that went into the grave in faith and hope as Christ did, Psalm. 16. 10.
Beware of false imaginations of God in time of trouble. Fancy can spin out and
forge a God weak of memory, who has forgotten his promises, Esaias 49. 14, 15.
we cast behind us the promises in the day of trouble; yea which is fearful,
often when we conceive we are praying, we are but chiding with God, and not
far from blaspheming; grace in the day of trouble lays silence on the
thoughts, we have need of an high Priest to wash our sacrifices, and when we
have prayed, there is so much sin in our prayers that Christ must pray them
over again, as it were, for he makes prayers and requests for us, Heb. 8. 25.

They awoke him saying, Master, master.

Prayer awaketh a seeming sleeping God, and puts him to it, we cannot take a
better course in trouble then to run to Christ by prayer, Psalm. 130. 1. Out
of the deeps have I cried unto thee, Psalm. 18. 6. In my distress I called upon
the Lord: that is a sweet story, Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried unto the
Lord, and the Lord heard and saved him out of all his troubles. ^
David used this weapon of prayer against his own son Absalom, Psalm. 3.
Faith is not partial, prayer is not selfie, David prayed and prophesied his
sons destruction. 7. Arise O Lord, save me; and he answers himself, Thou
have broken the teeth of the ungodly: A praying Army must be a victorious Army.
If this storm had not risen they should not have prayed: alas! we put Christ
often in the reere; or we keep Christ to a reserve or a recrute; when we have
tried Physicians for twelve years, and spent all, then we come to Christ,
when we can do no better. There is much deceit in bed-prayers, for the
principium motus, the first spring is extrinsecall, it comes from the rod on
us; it is true, natural consciences deaded and benumbed with rubbing do
gather warm blood, and are stirred up to devotion and fasting, and praying in
the spirit, and the spirit of prayer may be wakened by judgment, Judgments
of themselves are the occasion, rather then the cause of praying.
but judgment is not the cause of praying in the godly, but the occasion. He
that raises up a sleeping man is not the cause of his motion and walking, the
cause was in him, when he was fast asleep, his life and the Locomotive power
is the cause of walking, and this is not put in the sleeping man by him who
raises him: when the hypocrite and ungodly man fasteth and prays, the hand
of an angry God is both occasion and cause of his praying; we would try what
moves us to fasting and praying.

First, Some signs that sin, not afflictions put us to fasting and praying.
whether sin or afflictions, this is a good sign, if we can pray with as
great intention of spirit to be delivered from the dominion of sin, as for
the pardon of the guilt; we may be afraid that God hear us when we pray for
deliverance from the dominion of Idol-sinnes, experience teaches this. But we
are never afraid to be heard, but afraid with the fear of unbeleefe, for the
most part, that we be not heard, when we pray for pardon and deliverance
from the guilt of sin; the reason is, men may hate the guilt of sin, and
yet love the sin.

Secondly, if affliction put us to a humiliation for sin, as sin and the
depth of grief for sin puts us to condemn our selves without flattery
and lying, the contrary of which is when in trouble we give God good words,
and have within us lying hearts and think not so, as the people, Psalm. 78. 34.
who sought God when he slew them, Verse. 36. Nevertheless they did flatter him
with their mouth, and they lied to him with their tongues. 37. for their heart
was not right within them; men do then flatter themselves, when they flatter
God.

Thirdly, when we are more anxious in our fasting for Zion, and the taking of
the Ark of God, then for our selves, our Laws, goods, houses, lives and
liberties; when David made the 25. Psalm the troubles of his heart were
enlarged, but this was one of his great suits when he had cause to mind
himself, 22. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

Fourthly, when the circumcised heart is humbled, and the people shall not
faint and expire through want of faith, by which the just lives. 2. When they
shall not so murmr and wrestle against the rod as a wild Bull taken and
lying in a net, which having lost strength and feet, and being overcome, yet
kicketh against the hunter. 3. When they shall not be surfeited with
affliction, so as to loathe and despise the rod, as the tender stomach loatheth
physic, because they are full and surfeited with the fury of the Lord. These
three are excellently expressed, Esaias 51. 20. Thy sons have fainted, they lie
at the head of all the streets (for in the meetings of ways the wild bull is
catched in the net) as a wild bull in a net; they are full of the fury of the
Lord, and the rebuke of thy God: it is a bad token to faint; 2. to wrestle, 3.
to be so drunk with Gods judgments and rebukes, as against reason, to cry
out against God and his Prophets in trouble, as these who are drunken and
afflicted, but not with wine, Verse. 21. but with the rod and rebukes; and cry,
it was better with us in Egypt, under the Prelates, and their brick and clay
and toyling, under ceremonies, Official Courts, tyranny of conscience, and now
we are wast^d and destroyed and killed; and 4. when the people shall as it
were, with pleasure and good will (for so the word Levit. 26. 41. (...)
signifies) accept of the punishment of their iniquity, a kindly and willing
satisfaction of heart in the rod of God in so far, as it calmeth and
pacifieth (in a manner) Evangelick justice, so that the Lord is eased and
comforted toward his people, when he has punished them, and they are eased and
comforted in the declaration of the glory of his justice, and with good will
do justify God in his afflicting them, as Lament. 3. 41, 42. Micah. 7. 9.
Esa. 39. 8. this willing accepting of the rod, (I say) is a speaking sign that
the rod of God is sanctified.

Mark 4. 39. Then he arose, and as Matthew. 8. 26. he says to them, Why are
ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Matthew keeps the most natural order;
for Christ first rebuked the Disciples unbeleefe, before he rebuked the Sea
and the winds, we have reason so to conceive of Christ's method, for he
requires faith before he work miracles, at least often he does so, though
he confirm and strengthen that faith by miracles. How the rod of God must
work us to humiliation, ere we be delivered.
It is fit that Christ rebuke us ere he deliver us from drowning. He first
rebukes the noble man and all his nation for unbeleefe, and then heals his
son, John 4. 48, 49, 50. He first chideth Martha out of her unbeleefe, and
then raises her brother Lazarus from death, John 11. 40. 43, 44. and Matthew.
17. 17. He rebukes the father of the lunaticke child, and the faithlesnesse
of the perverse generation, before he cast out the devil; it is fit we be
both convinced and humbled, before he turn away his angry hand. First, the
cross is a mystery to us and a dumb teacher, we understand not the language
and the grammar of the rod, the man of wisdom knows it, Mic. 6. 9. Vengeance
is written on the wall before Belshazzer; but it is in unknown language, he
does not understand it. Secondly, green and raw deliverances are plagues of
God, not mercies; the plague is nine times removed, but Pharaohs heart is
neither softened nor humbled, the scum abides in the bloody City, as the Lord
complayneth, Ezekiel. 24. 6. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Woe to the bloody
City, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out; the
Prophet in Chaldea heard that Jerusalem had been boiled with the sword of the
Lord, but the scumme of their Idolatry and blood remained in them; whilst the
wicked of these kingdoms, malignants, bloody Irish, rotten hearted men, such
backsliders and perjured Apostates, as are in Scotland, delivered to Satan and
excommunicated, while these taste of the Gall and wormwood of the wrath of God
in this war, the hand of God cannot be removed, and therefore that must be
taken notice of, Jer. 6. 29. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of
the fire, the founder melts in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away; O
that our Lord would boil out on the fire the scumme of both kingdoms. The
whoredoms of Popish Egypt, and the ceremonies, the inventions of men are not
mourned for by the pastors of the Lord, sure, I am, not by most of the
Ministers in Scotland: What can we say for our confidence in our Armies, our
multitude, Parliaments, Navies, our extortion, oppression, unjustice,
hollow-heartednesse in the cause of God, our lying, cousening, budding and
bribing, our breach of our Covenant, denying of justice to the oppressed, to
the widow, strangers, and Orphans, to the poor and needy, the abominable and
daring opinions of God, his Son Christ, his Church, his Sacraments and free
grace and sanctification and holiness in this land? Thirdly, judgments on a
land or a person are the cup of the Lords fury: now often it is the grounds and
thick of the cup, which is the substance and virtue of the cup, and must work
the cure. And possibly to sip at the brim will not do it, it is a judgment
that some get not leave to heat in the furnace, but are dipped in in the
flood, and are never at leisure to commune with their own heart, nor has the
Lord time to allure them in the wilderness, Hos. 2. 14. as Ephraim was in the
Oven as a Cake unturned: poor Germany has not been slenderly dipped in, and
presently out again, they have now been in the floods, and under the water
these 26. years, these kingdoms are yet green, not ripened, for the mercy of
deliverance, ourscumme remains in us; divisions amongst us say, it is not yet
time for our triumph, The fields are not while already to harvest; when all
godliness is to dispute out new ways to heaven, and not seek after the power
of godliness; it is good we see the far end of the judgment, and that we
be heart-humbled and tamed, and made weaned children, that we put our mouth
in the dust, and sit alone on the ground, and keep silence, and be filled
with reproach, and bear the yoke, Lament. 3. 28, 29, 30. and resolve to bear
the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned, Mic. 7. 9. and it is good
we be threshed while we be so broken as we may remember, and be confounded,
and never open our mouth any more, because of our shame, when the Lord is
pacified toward us, for all that we have done, Ezekiel. 16. 63.

Mark 4. 40. Why are you so fearful? Luke 8. 25. Where is your faith?

The ground of their doubting and unbeleefe is excessive and immoderate fear,
not simply fear, therefore Mark says, (...), why are you so fearful? he
says not; why fear you? hence the Text will lead us to inquire in the bad
properties of this fear; which that we may do, a little of the affections in
general; 2. of this bad fear condemned by our Lord in these following
propositions.

1 Proposition. Grace does not extirpate, but regulate fear and other
affections.
Grace removes not affections; Christ condemns not their fear, but only
their fearfulness (...) so high bended. Grace makes not men Stoics, nor does
it root out Nature: Nature of it self, as it comes out of the workhouse of
the Creator, is an innocent thing. Whatever decrees the high former, and Potter
have concerning all things, in the exercise of his absolute, but most pure and
holy Sovereignty over lame Vessels, yet all that he made is good; he is the
author of no sinfulness in the Creature. But he does not extirpate the
nature, and harmless being of natural affections: A Surgeon takes not
away life and sense, but only rottenness and corrupt humors, that are enemies
to life and sense. Grace embroidereth sinlesse nature, but does not turn it
out at doors: Give your lust to Christ who makes all things new; and he
shall restore it again to you in renewed love: Put your fainting in his hand,
and he will make it holy fear: Christ's furnace melts but out the refuse and
dross of our affections. What fire was in Peter a Fisher is but made holy
zeal in Peter the Apostle; no man is the worse that he come through the new
Physicians hands; he makes brass Gold: I should wish no better, but that
Christ would barter an old heart with a new; for Christ has skill to over-gold
nature with Grace. Grace turned not Job in a lump of iron, that he could not
weep or sorrow; for it was not destructive of Grace which he says, Job 16.
16. My face is foul with weeping: The Man Christ that chosen flower, and the
rarest pearl of sinlesse nature both wept, Job. 11. 35. Luke 19. 42. and was
feared, Luke 22. 44. Heb. 5. 7.

2 Propos. Grace but removes the scumme, and exorbitances of our affections:
As first, Grace is a regular thing, and moves as the Stars do, in a motion,
contrary to the motion of the whole World; it moves not as nature does, to
seek its own being and life, but with subordination to God. Be angry, but
sin not, holds in all; Fear, but sin not; Love the Creature, but sin
not; Trust holy men, but sin not; Sorrow at calamities, but sin not. Grace
is a straight line that measures both it self, and all crooked lines. And
therefore the Grace of God, the Gospel is a teaching guide, Tit. 2. 11. The
grace of God, 12. teaches us to deny ungodliness.

Secondly, grace is an excellent skreene between the soul and the burning heat
of affections, it is a strong bank to keep off over-swelling tides of lusts
in the soul; when affections start up without leave of the grace of God, then
a man according to Gods heart David will but utterly destroy Nabal and all he
has, the Disciples, because they cannot have a nights lodiging, will do no
less then burn Cities and Towns, and have Samaria destroyed as Sodom, as if
Christ were come in the world to raise fire and sword against men, women and
sucking infants, but when affections look toward the creatures, the grace of
God sets them on to move on leasurely and upon slow wheels, and loppeth off
from our affections all the wanton and luxuriant branches, that is a sweet
fruit of the grace of God, 1 Cor. 7. 29. But this I say, Brethren, the time is
short, it remains that both they that have wives, be as though they had
none. 30. And they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoice
as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not;
and mortification laugheth at mirth and laughter, as Solomon in his repenting
days does, Eccles. 2. 2. I said of laughter, it is mad, and of mirth, what
does it?

3. Proposition. There be diverse diseases in the fear of the Disciples; as
first, their fear is more then enough, they speak as if the Sea could drown
Christ and them both, The faults of the Disciples fear.
ere the man Christ awake. Hence their precipitations, Master, master, and
their complaint, carest thou not for us? our affections in great dangers run
with the head foremost, not only before the light of faith, but before that
reason command them to rise; according to the measure of unmortified lusts so
is the swelling of our affections; grace keeping them within banks, else they
are as some great Seas that have great tides. Secondly, there is much unbeleefe
in this fear; and therefore as Matthew relates the story, Christ said to them,
why are ye fearful O ye of little faith? and as Mark says, 4. 40. How is
it that you have no faith? and Luke says, where is your faith? that is, they
had little or no great strength of faith, with this fear, it being mixed with
much doubting; hence as Christ denies not simply that they had no faith, so
he condemns their unbeleefe, unbeleefe does not a little dull our
apprehension, so that death and afflictions look on us with a more ugly and
awsome countenance, the more of the sun be covered in an eclipse, the
greater is the darkness: unbeleefe is a dark black webbecast over our eyes,
that we see not what omnipotency can do, and how it secondeth the
faithfulness of God, to make good his own promises, our corrupt affections
arising in their strength are great enemies to righteous judging. Hence
thirdly, this fear does make them to misfather their affliction, they lay the
blame of their danger on Christ's sleeping, and his forgetfulness and
carelessness of them, as their complaint shows: Carest thou nor for us? we
perish, and thou sleep; in this, if in any thing, it is true; happy is he
who knows the causes of things, we are often smitten of God in the dark. To
apply these to our selves. It is much to know the causes of this present war
in the rwo kingdoms, some say it is because liberty is not given to every man
to live in what Religion he pleases, but this is a sin that every man do, It
were good to inquire the causes of the judgment.
What seems good in his own eyes, because there is not a judge to put any to
shame, Judge. 18. Chap. 19. 1, 2. the contrary then cannot be the cause of the
so great judgment. Others say rebellion against the King is the cause, but
rather the not timous rising to help the Lord, and his oppressed people
against the mighty is the cause. The defection of both kingdoms to altar
worship, imagerie, idolatry, Popish and Arminian Doctrine, the articles of
Perth Assembly followed and practiced in our own kingdom without repentance,
the ignorance of God, people perishing for want of knowledge, both under
prelacy, and now the not building of the house of God in this land, the
backsliding of many after the Covenant of God is sworn, are the true causes,
and it is to be feared that if Presbyteriall government be erected in this
land (as we hope it shall) if this be not taken heed to, it shall continue a
judgment on the Land, and it is this, many both preachers and professors shall
conform to the Government (as they would do to either the prelaticall, or
congregationall way as many time-servers do) and shall hate and persecute the
power of godliness under the pretense of Sectaries, Brownists, Separatists,
independents, and the like, and retaining an Antichristian and rotten heart
shall do what in them lies, under that color to vex, oppress and banish many
godly men out of the land. But this is to be considered, if it were not
needful there were a Fast through both kingdoms to deal with God to find out
the true causes of our fastings, and these heavy judgments in which in the
three kingdoms many hundredth thousands are killed. I doubt if under any Prince
or Emperor there be a history can parallel the blood shed within these few
years; Job when God visited him desired to know wherefore God contended with
him: it is a sad thing to lie drowned under unknown and fatherless plagues,
we being ignorant of the causes of Gods judgment; so we suffer blind crosses
like the Ox that bears the yoke and knows nothing of the art of husbandry,
or the horse killed in the battle, and yet is ignorant of State-affaires, and
of the causes of war, and of disorders in Laws, Liberties, Religion in State
and Church, we are like one smitten in the dark night by a spirit or a ghost,
but he sees not who strikes. Oh it were good we would inquire, as the
Prophet does, Esa. 42. 24. who gave Jacob for a spoil; and Israel to robbery?
and wherefore is all this come on us? why does the Lord contend with us? O make
us know our iniquities.

Often the rod makes a lying report of God, Use 2.
and accuses Christ in our desertions. O! Christ is unkind, he is changed,
he has forsaken me; we can sooner spy a fault in Christ under desertion then
in our selves, and we often reason from that which is no cause for the cause.
Christ seems changed to us, and unmercifull and sleepey and careless. First,
when the judgment is extreme and we apprehend it as a fruit of the anger
and vengeance of God. The causes of misapprehending of Christ.
Apprehension gives life to afflictions and casts in many ounce weights of
wrath in our cup, which was never there, because our conscience gives in
against us lying libells and unjust complaints, such as this, ( thou art not in
Christ) nor a convert, nor a pardoned and justified sinner;) and we first
retort the lying libell upon Christ* O! Christ has forgotten to be merciful,
we see Christ in the false glass, in our extreme suffering, our sin and
apprehension joining together. Secondly, Christ may sleep and hide himself in
a great trial, and when he is gone, and grace has no actual influence on
our souls, then we languish and die; the passes of the Clock being laid by,
there is no motion at all, and the wheels gather rust. Should we suppose that
the Creator of nature did suspend his influence, all natural operations should
cease, there should be no motion in the Sun, it should neither rise nor go
down, the rain should not fall, the wind should not blow, living things could
not move, Beasts could not walk, Fowels could not fly, Fishes could not
swim, Roses, Flowers, and Herbs could not grow, etc. because he causes all
these to be, and his immediate influence adds oil to all wheels, and
rowleth and moves them, else they could not stir; so Christ in the sphere
of grace being the first mover, if his influence stand still, all our wheels
as wanting oil and motion gather rust and stand still; Paul cannot call Jesus
Lord, the Spouse runs not, for the bridegroom will not draw, Can. 1. David
dies and withers a hundredth deaths; for God hides his face. Hezekiah
faints, for God glowmeth, Haman is down amongst the dead, in the grave,
Christ his life works not, so here in trouble Christ stands behind the
mount, and the poor Disciples faint and die, and dream, and are all afraid in
a storm, because God seems to sleep, as if God were dead: Oxthodoxe and
sound apprhensions of Christ in us are not habits, but acts, and are in us as
lightnings are in the air, when nature actually cooperateth, or as fire is in
the flint, not but when it is beaten out with force. Thirdly, distempers and
fevers on faith take away the taste and the honey out of Christ, the father is
not a father to the child in a fit of an ague.

Thirdly, when extreme danger is near and the Army foiled, and the enemy
entering in at the ports, our courage is as far to seek as ever was the
courage of the Apostles. Oh then we are gone, this is our death, the cause is
now losed, Christ is buried, he cannot rise again, Esaias 7. 2. It was told the
house of David, saying, Syria is confederat with Ephraim, and his heart was
moved, as the trees of the field: the word (...) is to be moved from place to
place, and is ascribed to Cain the vagabond, Genesis 4. 12. we fear the creature
too much, because he can kill the body, and we fear the Lord of heaven and
earth to little, though he have dominion over both soul and body, remember
what a forgetting of God it is to fear the creature in Gods cause, Esaias 51.
12. I, even I am he that comfort you, who art thou that shall be afraid of
a man that shall die, and of the Son of man that shall be made as grass? is
it so great a sin to fear man? ay, the next words bear no less. 13. and
forgettest the Lord thy maker that stretched out the heaven, and laid the
foundation of the earth; an unbeleeving people has a fear of their own,
which the people of God are not to follow, Esaias 8. 12. Fear ye not the fear
of this people, neither be afraid. 13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts, let him
be your fear.

Matthew. 8. 26. Then he says unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little
faith? Luke 8. 25. where is your fatth?

That which Christ first seeks, and first misseth in any is their faith.
Where is your faith? by comparing the Evangelists together a little faith is
faith, and it is no faith, that is, not so great a faith as is required in a
great storm. Hence these conclusions concerning a little faith.

1. Conclus. What is a small or weak faith.
A little faith in regard of the nature of faith is faith; as Christ, Matthew. 8.
says not, they have no faith; but he childeth them for their little faith; as
the least of fire is fire, as well as a fire of all the timber and fuel of
the earth is fire, and the fourth part of a drop of dew is water, no less then
the whole element of water is water; the least measure of saving faith is
saving faith; and there be other three acts of free grace that are of the same
nature. As first, Gods free love of election to glory can neither be half nor
divided; the meanest of the elect is no less a chosen Senator enrolled in the
book of life then Abraham, or great Moses. Secondly, all the Saints are
equally ransomed and equally married on Christ, there was no greater ransom of
Christ's blood given for Job, David, the Apostles then for thee, O thou the
least of Saints. Thirdly, all are equally saved and crowned Kings; of the
degrees of grace and glory, I do not now speak.

2. Conclus. Faith and fainting may consist together at one and the same time,
as night and day are one in the twylight, so the poor man said, Faith and
fainting may consist together in one
Mark 9. 24. I believe, that is faith, Lord help my unbeleefe, that is
fainting; and David, Psalm. 31. 22. I I said in my have, I am cut off from
before mine eyes; here is much fainting. Nevertheless thou heardest the voice
of my supplication; here must be much faith, when his prayers has been
heard: So Jonah Chap. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, this was base
fainting; yet I will look toward thy holy Temple, this is faith, and Jeremiah,
chapter 20. 7. O Lord thou have deceived me, and I was deceived, thou art stronger
then I, and have prevailed, I am in derision daily, and every one mocketh me.
He fainted not a little, when he spoke so of God to God; but Verse. 11. he
gets up the mount again; But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible
one, therefore my persecutors shall stumble, they shall not prevail. A
wrestling faith opposing doubtings and faintings is an argument of a vigorous
life of Christ, and weakness here is an argument of strength and deadness
does argue life, and fainting believing; we have a bad opinion of our own
state when there is no cause, and the reason is, that it is a reflect act to
know our own acts of faith; Reasons why we know our grace so hardly.
and first, reflect acts are more rare and difficill, because more spiritual
then direct acts. Secondly, the light of saving grace must concur in all our
reflect acts, but it seems to me to be easier, because more natural to
reflect upon our doubting and unbeleefe, then upon our believing, especially
where there is any tenderness of conscience, as a sleeping man knows not
that he is in health, nor can he have any sense of his health while he
sleeps, and yet a sleeping man may know and feel the pain of sickness, and
of an aching bone, and thereby be wakened to feel it more sensibly, though I
know there be a necessity of the influence of saving grace, either to know
our fainting, or our faith in a spiritual manner, yet there be degrees of
grace here.

3 Conclus. Those who have a great faith in habit, many have a little faith in
act, and the Disciples who had forsaken all and followed Christ, must have a
great measure of faith of fiduciall adherence; it is a great faith to renounce
all our bosome-lovers for Christ: Though 2. their faith of light, or in regard
of knowledge was weak; they not knowing Christ's death and resurrection, which
are principal Articles of faith, Matthew. 16. 21, 22, 23. Joh. 20 9. Yet in this
present act their faith was weak. The grounds of a weak faith in regard of
the act, and some special exigents of a prevailing temptation: are first,
because faith is one thing, The grounds of a faith weak in action.
and the use of faith another thing: The habit of faith is not the complete
and only cause of believing. 1. Because then the regenerate from the first
moment of their regeneration to their dying day, should always believe, which
is repugnant to Scripture and all experience; for the habit of faith, and the
seed of God always remains in them, even when they sin, they lose not that,
Joh. 3. 9. 1 Ioh. 2. 27, 28, 29. Ioh. 4. 14. Ier. 32. 40, 41. Esaias 59. 21. 2.
We are not Lords, having by free will a dominion over the habit of faith, to
stir it up into acts when we please; for then, these that have the habit
need not to pray for the actual influence of the grace of God, to work in
them to will and to do, against many Scriptures, as Cant. 1. 4. Psalm. 25. 5.
Psalm. 86. 11. Psalm. 119. 18, 36, 37. 66. 68. 80. 3. Our free will, at its best,
is but Graces armor-bearer, and servant. Grace whether habitual or actual,
is Gods Prerogative Royal, and one of the supreme and absolute flowers of his
Crown. And therefore we are Masters of our own sins; we can be willingly
wicked, and fall when we will, we are not masters of our own rising again;
we can faint when we will, but we believe when Christ will, and when his
saving grace breathes on us, and neither sooner nor later, neither more
strongly, nor more remissely, then the free grace of God, inableth us: for if
we could believe ere grace blow on us; First, we could prevene grace, and
then should we carry it all before us; and it should be after this, not
prevening grace, but prevening nature, prevening free will. Secondly, if the
intention of the degrees of actual believing were in our power, Paul did not
well to ascribe his laboring more abundantly to the grace of God, and not to
himself, 1 Cor. 15. 10. But I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me. Faith and sense compared together.
Simile.
Secondly, our faith is often led by the sense of appearance and second causes,
and that is a very bad rule. Faith and sense may thus be compared: Faith is
like the just horologe or watch which shows to us justly the hours at
midnight, when there be neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars to give notice what time
of night it is; so rotten boylie Job, chap. 19. 25, 26. when he had not so
much as Starlight of appearance to lead him, but death and rotten boyles,
could in faith point the hour, and say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and
that I shall see him for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my reins be consumed within me: But sense is not like the night
horologe, but like the Sun-diall, that cannot point the hours in the night,
nay, nor yet in daylight if the same be under cloud, sense must have
daylight, and a shining Sun; and can do nothing for Christ upon trust: and
this is a great unthankfulness in our sense; for it is faith and not sense
that lays hold on relations, and such a relation as is between husband and
wife, so the Lord speaks, Esa. 54. 4. Fear not, that is, believe; upon what
ground? Upon the ground of marriage-faith. Ver. 5. for thy maker is thy
husband. so is faith expressed by a marriage word, We are freed from the Law,
Romans 7. 4. (...) that ye should be for another husband, that ye should be
married on another lover.

4 Conclus. Sometimes we believe on Christ as moral agents, and then we may
both know Christ and our own state, if the light of the Spirit concur to make
the promises visible to our spiritual senses: not only as true, but also as
good and sweet, for we see colors, and apprehend them both as colors, and as
pleasant and delectable: so a man may see a great heap of Gold which belongs
to another man, he sees it as of such a color, and as it offers it self to
the eye; but because it is not his own, nor has he any hope it can be his
own; he sees it possibly with grief: but if it were offered and given to
him, he should then see it as good and acceptable: now the grounds of a weak
faith, is a weak evidence of our interest in Christ; small and weak evidence
produces weak acts of believing: it is true there is sometime little evidence
of knowledge, where there is strong adherence, and strong faith, as many
unlettered Martyrs of no great knowledge in the Scriptures, have dyed with
great adherence and strength of faith: but there is a twofold evidence, one
literal, another spiritual, it is unpossible there can be a strong faith,
but there must be a strong spiritual evidence proportionable thereunto to
convey it, for faith walks not without eyes, and therefore the weakness of
spiritual evidence of our interest in Christ (as here the Apostles see not but
Christ has forgotten them, and cares not that they perish) must produce a
weak faith. Again faith comes not only from discourse, and the moral
persuasion of the holy Ghost making use of sanctified reason, Faith from
instinct of grace sometime rather then from light of discourse.
but also sometime from a mere spiritual instinct, as where there is no
discourse, especially when we first believe, and have nothing but a mere
command, and knows not whether the promise and the Savior belongs to us or
not, even as the infant that can make no use of discourse relieth and trusts
to the mother or nurse for milk, by mere instinct, having neither promise nor
experience for it, and the young Chickens confide in the covering of the Hens
wings, and the Lambs for food from the damme merely by natural instinct: so
when we are newborn again, the first act of fiduciall adherence seems to
be from the new nature and instinct of grace, as the child in a sudden
danger without discourse or promise that his father will help him, runs to
his father, and the Conies in danger to their holes of the rock, and so a weak
instinct of grace may produce weak acts, and by the way the promise may be
forgotten and out of mind, and the assurance that Christ loved me before the
world was, none at all, and a believer yet may rely and confide in Christ
through instinct, and know no ground, as through some secret sympathy of nature
one may love another and they know not the reason, and proportionally may trust
in another also, for love produces some confidence, so some are kind and their
heart warmed with Christ; and they do not well know Christ, as the Disciples
going to Emmaus have hearts burning with the love of God, but they knew not it
was Christ who was there, the third man conferring with them.

5. Conclus. The special cause of all sins of infirmity.
The chief cause, as of all sins of infirmity, so of a weak and infirm
faith, is not so much from want of will as want of power, and rather from want
of grace and a larger measure of the spirit of faith, then from malice and
wickedness. I deny not but the corruption of a wicked nature has influence in
sins of infirmity, and in a weak faith, as it has in all sins (as some
of the mothers seed must always be in the child;) but I speak comparatively,
and in regard of that which is the nature of sin; therefore sins of
infirmity and a weak faith, though they be not venial sins, as Papists
vainly teach, yet they be sins of a lower size; for there be less
activenesse and more passivenesse in these sins, and so less will and more
renitency and reluctance then in reigning sins, and all sins of infirmity
have but the half of the will, sometime nothing but a virtuall consent, as in
the first motions of concupiscence and some sinful errors and bad opinions
contrary to the truth which the children of God have, and the renewed part does
protest on the contrary against the flesh and side with Christ; and if the will
join in sins of infirmity, it is but the one half of the will trayling the
other half after it, like the motion of a worm in which the former part
having more life and vigor draws after it the hinder part. But I come to
prove the nature of a weak^ or little faith, and of other sins of infirmity:
Paul, Romans 7. 14. says of him self, I am carnal sold under sin, he uses
the passive Verb (...), that which is put to the market to be made away for
money, were it man or woman, is a patient, But Ahab had another mark, Elias
said to him, 1 King. 20. ^0. (...) thou have sold thy self to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, he that is sold is not sui juris, not
his own man, the flesh in that act prevails over him, the renewed will
saying the contrary. The acting of ^d unbeleefe in a Saint is like a business
in a court hardly (...) hotly debated, and the matter is carried by one voice
only, or as in weighing of things in a balance one scruple may cast the
seal, and where there is but one grain of saving grace, the work may be
swayed by it, if the flesh act by prevalency, it goes wrong, but in the wicked,
where there is no prevalency of saving grace, nor any such principle, the sin
is not a sin of infirmity. Christ has not one voice in the court, if reason
speak against some crying sins, that is something of God the Creator, but
nothing of Christ, it is not from a saving principle, or the right end the
honor of God, and so it is not a voice in the court for Christ, but for nature
and carnal ends. Paul has another word, Romans 7. 23. I find another Law in my
mind, (...), leading me captive to the Law of sin; the word signifies one
taken with the point of a Spear, or Sword, or with a bloody weapon, so is the
word, From (...), cuspis, mucio, and (...), captivus, or (...), cuspis hastae.
Luke 21. 24. They shall fall by the edge of the Sword, (...), and shall be
led captive unto all nations, Romans 16. 17. Salute Andronicus and Junia my
kinsmen, (...) and fellow prisoners. Now in a taken captive there be two
things expressing the nature of infirmities, and so of a weak faith in the
Saints. First, ere the captive be taken in war he resists, and sheddeth
blood, and therefore by paction they promise him quarters. Secondly, it is
major vis, a greater power that does it, so it is against his will that he is
taken, and only for want of strength and power to fight he is taken; so he
that falls of infirmity or sins of weakness, if he had more strength of
grace, he would not yield, and therefore he resists and accepts not of
quarters from the flesh without stroke of Sword, and the spirit does not
consent to the ill he does, as it is, Romans 7. 15. For that which I do, I
allow not, for what I would, that I do not: but what I hate that I do: So the
believer is like a sick man walking up a mount, his will and desire is quicker
in climbing up to be at the top of the mount, then his legs are. The last
practical indictment of conscience that leads on in these sins of
infirmity is broken, shaken, divided, it is not a kindly consent the captive
gives to obey his keepers, and therefore there is complaynings under these
sins, as Paul does, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Hence the poor man is so gravelled with a
body of sin, that his confined desires take strength from the strong walls of
the prison, that he would gladly be in heaven, where he shall sin no more,
as the Bird would wish the Cage of clay broken that it might flee up and sing;
Esaias uses another word, (...)
Chapter 22. Christ shall not break a Reed that grows in a lake, or an Oate Reed
that is already bruised, the word is halfe-breaking, as Genesis 25. 22. The Twinns
struggle or shalter one another in the womb, but they killed not one another;
and the smoking flax is a dying out candle in the socket, except more oil be
added to it, it is gone, the word (...) signifies the dim eyes of old men,
Genesis 27. 4. Job 17. 7. so the weak believer and the fainting faith may from
this easily be known.

Then if Christ miss faith in a professor; Use 1.
first, labor to believe, especially in a storm; now the Sea rages, the
storm is tempestuous, God has not as yet awaked in the three Kingdoms for
our deliverance, believe, faith cannot strike sail to hell or death, Romans 8.
37. faith can make a passage between hell and heaven; for out of the belly of
Hell Jonah cried; this should put our enemies to flight, it did so of old, Heb.
11. 34. and grace is not weak, and old, and gray haired now; there are bones
and strength in faith now to subdue malignants, as of old; these that seek for
crooked ways of an unjust peace without truth, do not trust God in these
storms; we are in public calamities so far from faith that we think God
has forgotten us, as the people in their calamity said, Ezekiel. 33. 10. If our
transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how
should we then live? we look to the waters that flows over the soul and
cannot see the bottom, and our hope sinketh, but faith would outface all our
storms, and carry ship-broken men to laud. It was unbeleefe rather then Sea
and winds that was like to drown the Church, for it puts weakness and
sleepiness upon Christ, and robs him of the glory of his truth. Glory is the
prime flower of the Crown and Royal Prerogative of Christ, and it changes
Christ in a sleeping man, there must be then more high treason here against
the Royal honor of Christ then in all sins, it is from unbeleefe that that
complaint is made, Jer. 14. 8. Why should thou be as a stranger in the
land, and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night? 9. Why
should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? the
Church had as good said, why should you be turned in no God, for he that
cannot save is no God; so unbeleefe usurpeth the Crown and dethroaneth God.

Secondly, Use 2.
so long as we are not humbled for sin, and turn not from our evil ways,
Christ justly misseth faith in us, and says, he can see no faith in the land,
and God will change his dispensation toward his Church, and do what he has
not done before, if he deliver us, ere we turn to him. But God cannot take
his vessel out of the fire till he have purged away the tin and the dross:
Will he cast the rod in the fire till he have done his work in mount Zion?
God principally aymeth that this shall be the end of his fire in Zion, and his
furnace in Jerusalem, which he says, Ezekiel. 7. 16. But they that escape of
them shall escape, or, shall be saved, and they shall be upon the mountains
as Doves in the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his iniquity:
could we return, and build the house of the Lord, our enemies in the three
kingdoms should fall and our peace should be as a river, and our
righteousness as the waves of the Sea, Esaias 48. 18. we may have peace without
turning to God, but it should not be peace like a mighty river, but like a
dried up brook, but so scarce that it should dry up as the dew.

Thirdly, Use 3.
challenge not Christ of unkindnesse through unbeleefe in sad times, faith
thinks no evil of Christ; blame thy self and thy unbeleefe, if Christ hide
his face; faith has eyes to see Christ in the night as in daylight, faiths
eyes pierce through Christ's mark, and the veil or cloud that covers his face,
there is mercy and love in the bottom of afflictions.

Fourthly, Use 4.
weak ones are neither to under-value Christ in themselves, nor should others
under-value them; faith makes not heart-separation from faith, the
estrangement of affection from any in whom there is any thing of Christ is from
the flesh, contrary to faith,

Mark 4. 39. And he arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto the Sea, Peace,
peace, be still.

The Sea is not capable of rebukes such as are given to reasonable creatures,
How God really rebukes the creature.
but there is a rebuking of omnipotency, that is not verbal but real; (...) is
with words hardly to rebuke; in conjugation kal cum (...) it is to destroy,
Mal. 2. 3. Behold I will destroy your seed, Esaias 54. 9. I have sworn I will
not be angry with thee, neither rebuke thee. 2. It is to hinder the enemies in
their ill courses, Zach. 3. 2. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, Mal. 3. 11. I
will rebuke the devourer for your sake, Psalm. 68. 30. Lord rebuke the company
of the Spearemen: and when it is applied to creatures void of reason, it is by
omnipotency to hinder them to hurt us, and to stay their actions, Psalm. 106. 9.
He rebuked the red Sea also, Luke 4. 39. Jesus rebuked the seaver; it holds
forth the acts of omnipotency in Christ, such as is his act of creating of an
immediate fair sweet calm out of a contrary, out of a boisterous and stormy
Sea. God has some pieces in which is stamped so much of a legible and evident
omnipotency, as the work fathereth it self upon God only without a teacher,
Gods omnipotency in creating and ruling the earth and Sea.
so Job 26. 7. he stretches out the North over the empty place, and hangs
the earth upon nothing; the earth is the weightiest of any visible creature God
has made, it needs some solid resting place; but the omnipotency of the
Creator does hang it upon nothing, except only the air round about it, now
the air being so weak, so yielding an Element, it were unpossible that the
heavy and ponderous earth should have been seated on the empty and fluid air
to rest in it these five thousand years, except omnipotency had done it, for
the air of it self is very nothing to hold up the globe of the earth, Job 38.
5. Who has laid the measures of the earth, if thou know? or who has
stretched the line upon it? 6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened?
or who laid the corner stone thereof? there be three great questions here,
that few can answer but God. First, to take the compass of the circumference
of the globe of the earth exactly, and to lay a measuring line over the
Diameter and the whole body of it, is a great work. Secondly, to know how to
fasten the corner stone of the world. Thirdly, and how the whole weight is
sustained, is more then we can tell, and it is no less wonder, Psalm. 104. 2.
who stretches out the heaven as a curtain. What a power must it be, to
spread over all nations of the earth, the elements and creatures in Sea and
land, such a large white molten web of Crystal glass, that has been
spread over our head, from the east end of the world to the west, and north and
south, and there is not an hole in the web, these five thousand years. (2)
The Sea is a fluid huge great body, where can there be a bottle to contain
it? 2. When it swells and rages with mighty winds, how is it kept from
drowning the world? God does remedy these two. 1. Job 38. 8. Who shut up the
Sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?
Verse. 11. The Lord said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed. God has put an Iron door upon the Sea, and
put it under an Act and Law of omnipotency, that it shall not devour and
overwhelme the earth, Jer. 5. 22. he has placed the sand for the bound of the
Sea, by a perpetual decree. For the second, when, Psalm. 107. 27. the Sea is
all in fire, and the passengers in a mighty storm reele to and fro, and
stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end, 29. he makes the
storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Esaias 50. 2. Behold, at my
rebuke, I dry up the Sea. Psalm. 65. 7. he stilleth the noise of the Seas. (3.)
The Seas, as all the rest of the creatures, are by the first sin of man,
broken out of the covenant of peace, between us and them in the state of
innocence, and war is denounced between us and them, the fire should burn
us, the water has Law to drown us, the air to suffocate us, the earth a
Commission to swallow us up quick, if Christ had not made a cessation of arms,
and if the Gospel were not a concluded treaty of peace, and if the Lord
should not rebuke the fury of the creature, (for some sparks of Gods wrath yet
resideth in the creature) they have yet an inclination to revenge the quarrel
of the treason that we committed against their King, and we do receive the
creatures as fugitive soldiers from Gods Camp of justice, and do employ them
in war against God, as the Glutton and Drunkard imployeth meat and drink
against God, the vain persons their vain apparel, their patched faces, bare
breasts and shoulders, as an exchange to sell the body to lust; if the Lord
should not rebuke our servants the creatures, water, fire, sword and the like,
they would destroy us.

If we look spiritually now upon Gods dealing to these kingdoms, Use
the sword has a charge from God to come against these lands, Ezekiel. 21. 14.
Therefore, Son of man, prophecy and smite thine hands together, and let the
Sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the slain, it is the sword of
the great men that are slain, This sword in Britain not the sword of men,
but of the Lord.
which enters into their privy Chambers: when God gives the sword a
commission to destroy, it cannot rest, Jeremiah Chap. 47. Verse. 6. O thou sword
of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy
scabbard, rest and be still. 7. How can it be quiet seeing the Lord has given
it a charge against. Askelon and the Sea shore? there has be appointed it: it
is then a commanded and a sent sword that now rages in these kingdoms. 2. Not
only is the Sword and the pestilence sent of God by special commission, Jer.
24. 10. but it is his sword, it is not the sword of Papists and malignants, but
the sword of the Lord, Jer. 47. 6. The Lord says, Ezekiel. 14. 21. that the
Sword, famine, noisome beasts and pestilence are his four sore judgments: we
may go thorough these soldiers, we have the Lords passe-port, Esaias 43. 2.
for the sword is our Fathers sword. The Seas we are in, are our Fathers Seas,
and so cannot drown us. 3. Omnipotency takes this as peculiar to himself,
he only can create peace, Psalm. 46. 9. He makes wars to cease from the
ends of the earth, Esaias 45. 6. I am the Lord, and there is none else. 7. I
form the light and create darkness, I make peace and create evil: then by
what title he is God and Creator by the same, It is proper only to
omnipotency to make peace.
he makes peace, Psalm. 65. 7. He stilleth the noise of the Seas, the noise of
their waves and the tumult of people; these be two troublesome creatures, the
raging Sea, and the people up in wars; The will of furious men is an unruly
and wild thing, there is a strong tide and mighty and lofty winds stirring in
men's hearts, when they are in a fever and heat of war; it is Omnipotencies
proper work to calm the winds, and put the wheels to a stand, that peace may
be in our borders. 4. He has promised as he is Creator deliverance, Esaias
65. 18. But be you glad, and rejoice for ever, in that which I create, for
behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, it is the word
used Genesis 1. 1. when it is said, God created the heaven and the earth, 5. He
has said he will rebuke Kings for his Churches sake, Psalm. 105. 14. and Esaias
50. 9. of Christ's enemies. They all shall wax old as a garment, the moth shall
eat them up, Esaias 49. 26. And I will feed them that oppress thee with their
own flesh, and they shall he drunken with their own blood, as with sweet
wine; Are we then to doubt but the Lord will arise and rebuke these winds?
Christ is in the ship called the Church of God, therefore the tacklings shall
not be loosed, but the mast shall be strengthened and the sails spread out,
though there break up a leake in the ship: and there was a loud noise of
lofty storms in this poor ship, such as fining, confining, imprisoning,
banishing, silencing of the Pastors of Jesus Christ, cutting off ears, ripping
of noses; yet Christ arose and rebuked these winds: and though there were cries
of reconciliation with Rome, strong tides and winds of false doctrine, of
altar-worship, imagery, vain Idols to represent the Father and the Son
Christ, massing, a new real sacrifice, the body of Popery taught in
Universities, preached in Pulpits, printed in books, Christ arose and rebuked
these winds; and when the three kingdoms have been swimming in blood, to hold
up arbitrary power in the State, and the Tyranny of Antichristian prelates in
the Church, the Lord of Hoasts has also rebuked these winds, and will calm
the Sea. There be also great storms of sad and lamentable divisions, and
rents, alter against alter, so as the one half of the passengers are like to
cast the other over board in the Sea, these are more dangerous and
judgement-like winds, Oh that we could awake the Lord, that he may arise and
rebuke the Sea and the winds! There has been, and still is a cry of many
provocations in both kingdoms, so that the Lord cannot have rest in heaven,
for the sins of the land that are come up before him. The breach of the
Covenant of God, all sort of sins against both Tables, no knowledge of God in
the land, no mercy, no truth, but by swearing, lying, killing and stealing and
committing adultery we break out, and blood touches blood; yet the Lord Jesus
is a Savior not only of persons, but also a national redeemer, he
sprinkleth many nations, Esaias 52. 15. with his blood, he sprinkles clean water
upon nations the house of Israel, and cleanses them from all their filthiness
and idols, for his names sake, Ezekiel. 36. 22. 25. it is the omnipotency of free
grace that Christ arise and rebuke these winds and Seas also.

Mark 4. 39. And there was a great calm. Part V.


There be^ two Characters of God in this miracle; Two Characters of God in this
miracle: 1 That it is done in an instant, and irresistibly. 2 That it is great.
One in the manner of the doing, anger goes not away from either a man, or the
Sea in an instant; when the air is calmed, and the wind removed, yet in the
bowels of the Sea, there remains a wind, and so a raging and working in the
Sea. But here without delay, there is a calm. Secondly, in the miracle there
is a Character of God, there was a great calm.

In the former we see God works irresistibly, and with efficacy. For when
he saves, we must be saved: When God says that which Isaac said, I have
blessed him; the other must follow, And he shall be blessed. Some Creatures
work necessarily without any dominion over their actions; the Sun must cast
out heat, the fire cannot but burn, the Sea cannot but flow; Things necessary
to the Creature, to the Creator have a may not be: Things contingent to the
Creature, may have a must be to the Creator.
but because God has truly an absolute Prerogative Royal, he has a Negative
voice in all the actions of the world, and what is to the creature necessary,
and a must be, to the Lord it is free, though not contingent, and it has a
may be to God, and not a must be, except he will: To the creature the sea
must ebb and flow, the Sun must give light, the fire must consume, the Lion
must devour the prey; but in all these to God, there is a must not be, except
he add his affirmative voice; and therefore God commands the Sea neither to
ebb nor flow, but to stand up as two stiff walls of glass, he covers the
Sun with a web of darkness at the crucifying of the Lord of glory; he
discharges the fire to burn the three children, and the Lion to eat Daniel,
and all these must be, because God has said they shall be. Again, as God
puts his may not be upon things necessary to the creature; so he puts a
law of necessity upon all the contingent actions of the creature: an arrow shot
at a venture may kill Achab, and not kill Achab, but some other man near by;
yet there is here to the Lord no contingency, no such thing as maybee, and may
not be. But the arrow of the Lords vengeance must be so timed, so placed, as
it has no motion against any but Achab only, and against no part of him, but
between the joints of his harness, that he may fall and die, according to
the word of the Lord.

The way and manner that Christ has a calm Sea, Use.
we have a calm Sea, and the way that Christ comes to land, and at that
very time, It is enough that our sea be calm, when Christ's is calm
the Disciples come to land; our stomachs rise much, we say, What is God
doing? is there not a necessity in regard of divine justice, that vengeance
fall upon Malignants, Papists, Prelates in these Kingdoms, and bloody Irish
cutthroats and murderers? But we would consider these two. First, these
sixteen hundredth years, Christ has been under wrongs, and vengeance to the
full, has not reached his enemies, as yet, for 1. the enemies of Christ are
not fully subdued; 2. and many of them rotten in the dust, are not in their
bodies tormented as yet; Christ suffers injuries, and you cannot, you will
not have patience to endure the cruelty of bloody men. Secondly, Christ as we
see here, devideth fair weather and foul weather with his Disciples, it is
enough to us, that if we be laid low, we are low with Christ* it is time
enough that we have fair weather and come safe to shore to dry our garments
at that Sun that shines to the glorified in heaven, when Christ comes to
shore; let us weep when Christ weepeth, and be buried when Christ is buried;
when Christ rejoices and rises again, we cannot lie rotting in the grave.

[A great Calm,] Matthew 8. 26. so calls it (...). This is the other
Character of God in this miracle, that it is a great calm. Greatness is
printed on all the works of God.
There is nothing in God, not any judgment or work of God but greatness is
printed on it; for the effect smells of the cause, Job 36. 26. God is great,
Christ is great, as the Churches danger in this Sea-voyage is great, so is the
calm great; great buildings have great foundations, great ships great sails,
great Sea-ebbings have great flowings, 2 Cor. 1. 10. God delivered us from so
great a death, some death is but an infant death and weak, there is another
death called by Bildad, Job. 18. 13. The first borne of death. The Lord shows
his people ( Psalm. 71. 20.) great and sore troubles, and gives them tears to
drink in great measure, Psalm. 80. 5. and the people is in great distress,
Nehem. 9. 37. and for that the Lord does great things for them, Psalm. 126. 2.
and works a great salvation for his people, 1 Samuel 14. 45. and gives great
deliverances to David, Psalm. 18. 80. and to David's seed, the Israel of God.
Secondly, there is greatness written upon all the works of God, Psalm. 92. 5.
O Lord how great are thy works? Psalm. 111. Verse. 2. The works of the Lord are
great, sought out of all those that have pleasure therein. Thirdly, there is
greatness written on his judgments against his enemies, for Zach. 7. 12.
there is a great wrath from the Lord of hosts on those that pull away the
shoulders, and makes their heart as an Adamant stone; he fights against the
rebellious, Ier. 21. 5. in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath; and the
great day of his wrath shall come upon his enemies, so that they shall not be
able to stand. Fourthly, and there is a great reward for the righteous, Psalm.
19. 11. a great reward in heaven for them, Matthew. 5. Verse. 12. A far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Then great vengeance is appointed for the enemies of God, Use 1.
Ezekiel. 25. 17. and great desolation on Pharaoh the great Dragon that lies in
the midst of his Rivers, Ezekiel. 29. 3. and when these kingdoms have committed
great whoredoms, what wonder that great judgments be on us, and many more
hundredth thousands be slain in the three kingdoms then histories can in our
ages parallel but if Babylon be a great whore, great must be her fall, all
the Kings of the earth, and her Merchants shall wonder, and weep and wail at
her desolation. Our King says, he will repeal Laws made against Papists in
England; But it is a work above his strength to hold up the cursed throane of
the beast, which God has said he will crush; if all the Kings of the earth
should make their bones pillars to hold up that throne, there is such a weight
of vengeance lying on that throne, that their bones shall be bruised in powder.

Reformation is a work of God also, Use 2.
Zach. 13. 23. and then it is a great work, and though there be great
mountains in the way, God does rebuke and remove such mountains, Zach. 4. 7.
faint not then, be strong in the Lord.

No marvel we are to sell all and buy Christ that pearl of great price, Use
3.
Matthew. 13. 46. for none has so near a relation to God as he; we seek
great things, seek great Christ.

Luke 8. 25. Part VI.
And they being afraid wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is
this? for he commands even the winds and waters, and they obey him.

This is all the fruit we read this miracle produced in the Seamen, they fall
a wondering, being astonished to see a man command Sea and winds. First, the
miracles of Christ and all the works of God are so far inferior to his
word, that they can teach us nothing of the Trinity, We see little of God in
his ways.
nor of two natures in the one person and of our mediator Jesus Christ.
Secondly, O how little of God do we see, especially being void of his own
light? even Job says, though God be at our elbow, we know not it is he,
Chap. 23. 8. Behold I go forward, and he is not there, and backward, but I
cannot perceive him. But is this because God was neither behind Job, nor before
him? no, God goes round about us, every man may as it were, put forth his
hand, and grope the Almighty, Act. 17. 27. therefore Job adds Verse. 9. ( he
is) on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him, he hides
himself on the right hand that I cannot see him; we cannot trace the
footsteps of his unsearchable ways, alas we but sport our selves to behold
the superfice, the outside, and as it were, the brim of divine providence men
or Angels cannot dive to the bottom of the ways of our Lord; Esaias 55. he
says himself, Verse. 9. for as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are
my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts. Thirdly,
we come but that near Christ, that we go at the farthest three or four
steps to him; some are convinced and wonder, they say this must be God, as
Luke 4. 22. when Christ preaches as Christ, and like himself, they all bear
him witness and wonder at the gracious words that proceed out of his mouth;
yet they are not a step nearer to him, they despise him, and say, Is not this
Joseph's son? Some know a Prophet has been amongst them, Ezekiel. 3. 5. but
they are Scorpions and briars and thorns, and will not hear. Secondly, some
ate enlightened and believe for an hour, Matthew. 13. 21. a faith that lives for
an hour is a sickly, dying faith. Thirdly, some are a step nearer, they have
joy in Christ, Matthew. 13. 20. and the word of the Prophet is, Ezekiel. 33. 32. to
them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well
on an Instrument; the Gospel is sweet to many, but they come not nearer, they
will not hear, nor obey. Fourthly, some taste of the good Word of God, and of
the powers, (...), the manifold powers of the life to come, Heb. 6. 5. yet come
never nearer to Christ, but fall off, as if they were afraid to be converted,
they go not a fifth step farther on to give themselves up wholly to Jesus
Christ.

It is not the Seamens way only; Use 1.
but 1. Malignants, and Prelates and Papists see God in this work, God most
visible in that he now does in Britain, but Malignants will not see him.
they wonder, and yet they resist, Esaias 26. 11. Lord thy hand is exalted, they
see not, they shall see and be ashamed for their envy at the people: in this
work that the Lord is working in the three kingdoms, there be sundry notes
of divinity and footsteps of God, and Malignants do but wonder; as 1. when
Prelates and Malignants were on the top of their wheels, God, from despised and
contemned beginnings, raised the work to a great height; 2. our adversaries
were agents, and would not rest, but did cooperate to their own destruction:
They would move the King to change Religion in Scotland against all Laws. 2.
They would stir him up to raise Armies by Sea and Land against Scotland. 3.
They moved the King to break the articles of peace, and the word of a Prince to
his Subjects, after an accommodation, and set him on bloody wars again. 4.
After his Army was defeated and a Parliament granted in England they moved him
first to come and yield to all that is just and right in a Parliament of
Scotland, but against their mind, with no purpose to keep their faith, and
then to raise Tragical and bloody wars in England, and in all these they
were coagents and workers with a judicial and secret providence, to their own
destruction. 3. They have been searching to find out, that our intentions were
not to establish Religion in power and purity, and to be freed of the bondage
of arbitrary and tyrannical domination over Church and State, but to change
monarchy, and set up another government; this they could never yet find. 4.
They see God against them, prophanitie and wickedness on their side, and with
them Papists, Idolaters, Irish murderers, the cruellest of men, the scumme and
refuse of the Churchmen, yet they will not see God in this. 5. They find and
see their treachery, popery, tyranny discovered by many plots come to light, by
letters under the Kings hand, their intentions to bring in a foreign nation,
ere popery and arbitrary government be not established; and that all Treaties
have been intended, not for a just peace, but for this end that a peace being
once patched and sowed up, all things shall return to their ancient Channels,
as the King speaks in his instructions to his Commissioners at Vxbridge, yet
they will not see God in all these passages of his deep providence.

If natural men wonder at the power and excellency of Christ, Use 2.
in that he with a word commands Sea and winds, The Lord Jesus a wonder to all.
and they obey him; should not Christ be to us a worlds wonder? should he not
be to us altogether lovely? were it possible to lay in the counter-scale of
the balance to Christ a world of Angels, put in yet millions of worlds of
Angels, add to them a world of Solomon's with tripled wisdom, put in all the
delights of the sons of men, put in yet the flower and Rose of ten thousand
possible worlds perfections, they should be under-weight to him, the balance
should never down. Oh! we glory in good armies, we rejoice in victories and
success, in a good Parliliament, in godly Commanders, in a good reformation,
all is excellent to us, that has any luster or glimpse of created goodness,
but why do we not rather wonder, admire and extol excellent Jesus Christ?
who sets him on high above the skies? who lifts up his throne and his glory?
Consider but what is said of him, Col. 1. 15. Who is the image of the invisible
God, the first borne of every creature, Verse. 16. For by him were all things
created, etc. 17. And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.
18. And he is the head of the body the Church, who is the beginning, the first
borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence; see
what wonders are there in Christ, as first, he is Gods equal, every way as
high as God, being the substantial Image of God, begotten of the Father, and
without all beginning. Secondly, as man the eldest of the creation of God, and
as God the Creator of the new world. Thirdly, no less the Creator of all then
the Father; we have a head who can make and unmake all the glorious Angels in
heaven, the royallest of the house of heaven, these principalities and powers,
these little Gods, the eldest and supreme Courtiers, the higher house of the
Peers of heaven, are but pieces of dependent shadows that fell from the
fingers of our highest King, when he framed this great all, and the rich
Palace-Royall of this greatest body of heaven and earth and all the furniture
within the bosom of the great world. Fourthly, the Lord Jesus has all the
created world so in the hollow of his hand, as a man that holds a bowl of
glass in his hand in the air, should he take his arm from under it, it
should fall to the earth and break in a hundred pieces, and do no more good,
if Christ in whom all things consist (some say) as the notes of an excellent
music in a song, draw in his arms of conserving providence, the world should
go all out of tune, and the Globe of Crystal glass should fall to a thousand
mere nothings; and as a man between his fingers may crush an Egg, so has
Christ the huge created Lump of the whole creation in his hand, if he but
thrust his two fingers together with a little crush, all the world is dissolved
like a broken Egg. Fifthly, he is the head of the Church, and such a head as
is deaths eldest son and heir, he lay in deaths womb, and as the doubly
blessed firstborn, had the key of death with him in the inner side, and
opened the womb and took away the ports and gates of death on his back, that
now all the younger brethren might come out at the same passage also; yea he
came a bridegroom from heaven to suite in marriage a bride his Church, was
sick, and died of love for a Princes daughter his lovely Church, and rose the
third day from death, and married her. Sixthly, he has so the absolute
pre-eminence in all things that the highest of the Angels are but his vassals
and servants, and is now in such incomparable eminency of Glory, above all
creatures, that when the beloved-disciple John who came that near to him in
the days of his flesh, that he leaned on his bosom, saw him in his glory,
he fell down at his feet dead, Revel. 1. 17. yea there was more of heaven in
Christ then his eyes of flesh could behold.

FINIS.

