An EXACT and TRUE RELATION OF The great and mighty Engagement between the
English and Duch Fleets, upon the Coast of Holland; and the advancing of 24 of
the chief Lords and Noblemen of the United Provinces, to the several Cou^ts of
Admiralty, The setting up of the Standard of the Netherlands: The Resolution of
their Lord Admiral De Wit, and his joining with the French Fleet. The
chaining up of the Dutch Harbors, the planting of the Ordnance against the
English; and ^ll Officers and Soldiers to die without mercy, that shall
dissert their colors. With the bearing up of the Lord General Monk, and 100
gallant Men of War against them; their Resolution to fight it out to the last
man. The engaging of them near the Texel. the number sunk and taken; and the
full particulars of the loss on both sides with a List of the names of the
Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, Masters, and others Officers taken prisoners.

Advertised by Letters from the Navy, Sept. 3. 1653. and published by special
Order.



LONDON: Printed for G. H. MDCLIII.

An exact and true RELATION OF The great and mighty Engagement between the
English and Dutch Fleets upon the coast of Holland. Being the copy of a Letter
sent from the Navy, touching the same.
Endeared Brother,
IF after so many eminent discoveries of the will and purpose of God, touching
the establishment of our Commonwealth, any man should be so much averse as to
continue opposite to the present rule and steering of those Conservators who
now sit at the helm, let them remember, how God uses to dispose of his
incorrigible and implacable enemies. But I perceive, one main impediment that
keeps men from quitting their old and ancient principles (a sparkling Diamond,
in the precious Fundamentals of our English Law; but foul and ignoble to kindle
new coals within our dying and decaying embers; for I must ingeniously
confess, they are not yet well sifted,) is, the fear of being counted a
Turn-coat: Yet know that if God once declare, as it were from Heaven against
thy ways, thy principle or thy party, then it is no dishonor, but ingenuity,
and thy duty to Turn: For he has said in this case, If a man do not turn, he
will whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has prepared
or him the instruments of death and destruction. And it was a loud declaration
from Heaven at our first engagement, when it pleased God to decide the
controversy, upon these our Neptune Dominions, for many weeks, in the space of
7 hours: And again, let us but remember, how eminently he has appeared since
in the second and third engagements, at which time we are credibly insormed,
that Trump and his Council of Officers had such a sharp appetite, that nothing
would satisfy their insatiable stomachs, but the Isle of Wight for a
Breakfast, Dover for a Dinner, and our whole Fleet to make shipwreck of for a
Supper; thus did they gorge themselves with spoil, but at the last gave up the
account with a final decision, almost, of the whole controversy; for
Providence seems, as it were with his own finger, to point out to all the world
his resolutions for England, against a proud, imperious, and most insulting
Hogen Mogen, that is, the high and mighty Rebel of the Netherlands; and by the
several links comprised within his incomparable and golden chain of mercies,
has vouchsafed unto us sundry silver prizes, although I must ingeniously
acknowledge, sometimes we have purchased them at a high rate: for truly, we
have a very stout enemy to deal withal, and that all Europe (by woeful
experience) has found; but really the burden seems not very heavy unto us;
for upon the 13 of this instant, being commanded to the coast of Holland, we
all mutually aboard our nimble Amity, resolved as one man to adventure all that
was near and dear unto us, in the defense and preservation of the honor and
just propriety of our Native Country, against all Usurpers, Violaters, and
Infringers of the ancient privileges thereof.

In obedience to command we set sail, with 5 men of war more to range the
Holland coast, which we did, and the 14 of the same, we arrived near the said
Hollands coast, where one of our Frig^ts that was in company, put forth the
Dutch colors, upon the boltsprit, and likewise upon the Poop, and had Dutch
vains at his Topmast heads then came two Pilot boats of, with 11 Pilots in
them, and so they were all taken prisoners, and to make it short we all stood
too and again for three days space, where we took amongst us five Busses with
Herrings, then began a storm and we lost one another, and after the storm had
continued six days, we met with a Hollander come from new Netherland, 14 pieces
mounted, 750 hoghosts of leaf Tobacco, and 800 Beaver skins, with some other
rich furs, we called to him to strike, he would not, we came along his side,
and fired four guns into her, and at that bout shot his tiller in two pieces,
it was so much wind that we could not bear our lower guns out, but at the last
he steering away something large, we made a little shift to get 5 guns out
below, and so boarded him, but was forced of again by reason of the sea it was
so great, and they told us they would not yield in that weather, and we
answered we would sink them, and so we did within one half hours time, for we
ranged along his side twice, and trebble loaded our guns, with round and bar,
and shot him under water, the men we saved to the number of 21, whereof one
died when he came aboard, she lay with her top sail yards in the water, above 4
hours, which made us imagine that the Tobacco in the Cask was not wet through,
that made her swim so long, we lost 4 men, and four more deadly wounded, the
Captain and Pylot were both hurt, the one on the thigh, the other on the leg,
but now in the mending hand, we shot all her rigging to pieces before we sunk
her, and she tore us to some purpose, as had almost at any time yet, we
likewise took one Busse, and we took what things was in her, and the men out of
her to the number of 13, and so let her go adrift by reason of the bad weather,
there is 12 sail more taken, and 3 sunk going into the Texel, they were 40 sail
in all, some from the Streights, and some from France, and likewise from the
West Indies, the ship that we took was one of them, and had lost her Fleet,
this day we are all of us setting sail from Albrough Bay, for the coast of
Holland to the number of 22, the rest of our Fleet is there already under the
command of Captain Lawson. Van de Wit is ready to come out, but with what
number I cannot certainly tell you, for the men that we took in the Buss, would
not certify us of no more then 36 or 40 sail, our boat is going ashore with
the wounded men, and I have no time to write any thing more; only I thought it
not amiss to represent you with a List of the names of the Dutch Officers that
were taken prisoners in the late fight, and sent to England in the ship Samuel,
and commanded by Capt. William Swyer, viz.

Captain Cornelius Everson Cap. Arion Banker Cap. Martins Scahar Cap. Cornelius
Taman Cap. Nich. Cloys Johnson Cap. Garbrand Scater Cap. And. Fortune Cap. John
Hais Lieut. Derrick Clonter Lieut. Hendrick Johnson Koning Lieut. Helebtan
Debuck Lieut. James Sequeste Ensign John Virmuden Ensi. Francis Vandermore John
Alberton, master Batholomew Roulosson, m. Feter Williamson, m. Garbrant
Cornelius, m. Peter Stute, m. Hilbrack Arion, m. Peter Lawson, m. Peter
Mardinson, m. Segabert Martine, Surgeon. Bernard Alberson Camp, S. Garrat
Hendrickson Plugh, S. Hendrick Jacobson, S. John Juling, S. William Dunker,
masters mate Simond Johnson Haline, ma. Duick Abraham's, m.m. sters mate Lewis
Desonte, m.m. Rame Peterson, m.m. James Johnson, m.m. Martin Joorson, m.m.
Cloyse Andros, gunner Laurence Lawerson, g. Daniel Hendrickson, g. Cornelius
Bomes, Boatswain Hendrick Cornelius, Boatswain Cornelius Jacobson, Boatswain
David Otter, Boats. Michael Dammart, Carpenter. Jacob Polson, Carpenter. John
Ringes, Carpenter. Barnet Johnson, Carpenter.
Postscript.
Upon the close of this letter, the wind blowing, and having a fair gale, we
struck off to the Dutch coast, where our General Monk sailing within a league
of the Texel bar, with 100 sail, caused the Pendants and Streamers to be hung
forth, and there rode with the rest of our Fleet till Thursday in the evening,
at which time the seas growing rough, we were forced to ride at Anchor two
leagues off; but upon our near approach the next morning, the Governor of the
Texel caused the Harbor to be chained up, and the Ordnance planted; the like
was done at the Brill, Goree, and other places, and great is the allarum
throughout all the Cinque Ports, with this sudden change and revolution; for
indeed, their design was to be out, before we could be ready to strike sail,
and being prevented, the only way to make it more facile, was for 24 of their
chief Lords, to go to every Court of Admiralty, and to hasten out the shipping,
whereof eight stately new ships, we hear are ready to lanch torch into the Deep
with the rest, and De Wit is to carry the Flag alias the Standard of the
Netherlands, who it is said is resolved to fight us upon the 10 of this instant
September, with one hundred and twenty men of War, and 27 Fireships; besides
seventeen sail of French that are joined with them: so that we expect a sudden
engagement, and desire the prayers of all the people of God, for his poor
creatures amongst the rest, in the day of battle, who subscribes himself,

Your most affectionate brother, J. R.
Aboard the Amity, Aug. 30. 1653.
FINIS.

