AN ITINERARY Containing A VOYAGE, Made through ITALY, In the year 1646, and
1647.

Illustrated with diverse figures of Antiquities.

Never before Published.

By Jo: RAYMOND, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

Roma Venetia

Plebeae sane sunt istae animae quae suis affixae terris bona resident (...)
divinior est quae c^^^um Imitatur et gaudet metu.

Il MERCURIO ITALICO Communicating A Voyage Made through Italy in the years
1646 and 1647 by I. R. Gent.

Ne Plus Mome Vltra

J. Cross Sculpt.



London Printed for Hum: Moseley and are to be sold at (...) shop at ye Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1648

TO MY READERS Howsoever Qualified.
Gentlemen,
DEdicatory leaves to a Book, like a Curtain before a picture, only beget some
higher expectation of the Piece; A weather beaten Traveller needs no such
Vmbrilla as a Patron to shroud under. Though this Book was not writ to be
Printed, yet the worst (infallibly) are printed to be read. My intention was to
confine this wanderer to my Closet and no farther; till the advice of some
familiar, and command of Superior Friends pressed me to exchange a single
Manuscript for more Numerous Prints. I can challenge no other inducement then
that I expose some Novelties which I question not but this age will digest.
For the cutts I have hither transported, interpret me not so much desirous to
grace the Page, as to preserve Antiquity. My choice consisting of those things
I never before saw published. I Speak plurally through my whole Transcursion,
because that particle (we) implies asseveration, or in Reference to Gentlemen
my fellow Travelers, who can affirm what I relate. Some (though strange yet
no Contradiction) have seen this Book before the Author pend it; to those my
sentence is referd: such as look into foreign parts through the spectacles of
Imagination only, have no Patent either to Justify or condemn me, to these
therefore may I appear a Romance, to the others a Real story.

J. R.

TO THE Most Illustrious PRINCE CHARLES, Prince of Great BRITAIN,
Duke of Cornwall and Aubigny, Earl of Chester, etc.
May it please Your Highness,
It Is humbly conceived the duty of all the youth of ENGLAND to dedicate
themselves and their endeavors to your HIGHNESS: not only in regard of your
Native but Acquired Greatness, which draws the eyes of all Good Men upon Your
HIGHNESS Person and Actions. This Sir makes me humbly beg leave to lay my
first fruits at Your HIGHNESS feet, which (without farther Presumption) is the
utmost Ambition of

Your Highness most humble and most faithfully devoted JOHN RAYMOND.

A LETTER from a most ingenious Friend, to whom the Author sent His Mercurio
Italico.
SIR,
I Return your Papers by that hand which brought them: I have run swiftly
over your Itinerary, but am not so impudent to pronounce my thoughts on it;
unless I had more time or a steaddier Brain; for after my riding three days
poast I am fitter for sleep then Epistles. The thing most observable of all
your Travells is your self, who are able to graspe so much of the World, when
it is not twice ten years since you came into it. I conceive it flows from
your good nature, thus to set marks on your several Stages, that the Prints
are visible to your friends and Country: 'Twas usefully done, since now so many
of us are doomed to wander, not like Cain for drawing blood, but for asking
Peace. Did others follow your example, this unhabitable-VVorld would have more
Manners and less News. Many Itineraries I have seen in Latin, few in
English, and those so partial, that Countries are described (as Committees do
Gentlemen) not as they are, but as they would have them. It Is a Noble
Meditation how Greece and Italy (two great Champions) look over the Water,
Daring and threatening and watching each other; 'twas once so 'twixt France and
England. Such as have seen them will say how exactly you show us Rome, Venice,
Florence, Naples, Milan, Genua, Bolonia, Padua, and those other Glories beyond
the Alps: to me this great limb of the World (Italy you know is a leg) not
your foot but your hand has gone over as a brief, elegant, smart Anatomist.
But I am sorry you mention Virgils Tomb, for now people will think he is
mortal; sure his own Pile (built three stories high, of Eclogues, Georgicks,
and Aeneads) will last as long as the round World. In this Journey others went
before you, so as you are forced almost upon gleanings, yet here (as in the
Field) gleanings put together are the best of the Corn. Now you are come
home, you will have stranger sights then any abroad; you will see Great Britain a
Floating Island, and the most virtuous Monarch under Heaven cast into a small
Isle as on some plank in a great Shipwreck. You Will find London (like the Spleen
in the Body) has rendered other Parts poor and languid; so as now England is
but one great Town; this London all sides do court and hate, and she is so
much cocknay to think it will continue, having kicked at all, and made no
friend. Sir, when you behold a Kingdom without a King, a Church without
Clergy, a University without Scholars, you will grant we have a thorough
Reformation. But two hours since I saw a better sight then Italy affords; it is
His Highness the Prince of Wales, who for Soul and Body is sure the most
hopeful Prince in the Christian World; whose coming hither this afternoon
brings a flood of business (as well as joy) on all the English in this Town,
especially on such as come for Dispatches; and that is the very reason why now
you must excuse,

Sir, Amiens Iul: 11. Stilo novo 1648. Your most affectionate humble Servant.
J. BERKENHEAD.

On his Friends Mercurio Italico.
Go with your Hellish Heliconish spells,
Raise puffpast, kneade unleav'ned sillables,
Expatiate on a page in Tiptoe sense
To pacify the wits concupisence
Make Cupid dance o'th Ropes; O! this is sport
Will drill the Tenements of the -- -- --
Planetick N^ntio tell him that peepes here
Tyber and Thames concorporate this year.
Minnums, leave Padling in your feeble Gear.
Mark how the lusty Gray Beards hugg each other
Their Elementall sobbs the consort smother.
These to their Native Beds Retreat; But see
Antiquity swadled in a Novelty.
Yet no Booth Progeny to be Gazed on Guest,
Nor Loud ones with the Mandeville posest;
Rare, not miraculous Blusterers that can
Preach up the Book but chatechise the Man.
What though Vesuuius
Hells Centinell that Champion stout,
Spit wildfire, Blow the Days Taper out?
Or those insulting the Alps
Gogmagogs rehearse
But pimples in the Corpulent Universe;
All Is safe: Begin thy Voyage Reader, try;
Delay will Annalize a Diary.
Travells go twice abroad, both merit Praise;
First they drive days to years, then years to days.
J. N.

An Introduction to ITALY.
IT is preeminence enough methinkes for Italy that she did then sway the
Allcoercive Scepter on Earth, when our Redeemer assumed the flesh. To her we
owe our Civility; she purchased it by conquests in the Levant; Propogated it by
Victories in the North, till dispairing of a Farther Plantation the Picts wall
was her Vltima Thule; perhaps least that people should have stumbled at the
Innovation.

To be Retrograde on this subject were to rob History of her birthright, to
insist on my own ocular observation but venial usury.

There are three evitable dangers that divert some from this Voyage; the first
is the heates of the Climate; A second, that horrible (in Report) Inquisition;
the last, Hazard of those merciless Out Laws Banditas.

The first may be allayd by Moderation, the second prevented by discretion;
the last avoided by the defense of those states you pass through.

This Duke of florence quite extirpated that savage Race out of his Dominions
by raising a competent number; that personated Robbers and joynd in league with
the real ones till they fouud opportunity to dispatch them.

As there is connivance at the Luterani (for so they term us) so it is rashness
to proclaim ones opinion, weakness to disclose it: This may gain the Odium
of the Better, this the injuries of the Vulgar.

A novice of late so soon as he was come to Florence, said, Methinks this
place is somewhat popishly affected.

Another with more pardonable ignorance when his Host asked him whether he was
walking in the Afternoon, replied, to Mass.

One of my Cotemporaries discoursing with a Friar, in a Compleme^t protested he
did reverence Clergy men for that he was the son of a Priest in England:
which the Monk could not conster but either an Irony to his Order, or Infamous
to the Gentleman's own descent.

The most cautious tongue is incident to these Errors; yet that nation is not
so scrupulous as to take notice of a strangers words or actions unless openly
scandalous; for as Heretico is a name utterly detestable, so Tramontano by the
Multitude is held contemptible, which low reputation begets a happy privacy to
the Reserved Forreigner.

That sort of People which Travelers have most agitation with as Vetturino's
Hosts and the like, are very peremptory and cross, which if you menace they
will repair with double insolence; knowing that if in the contest their
Stilletto should do mischief, the next Church may be their Asylum, where no
Law or violence can attempt them.

The safest way is Dissimulation, and to win better Accommodation amongst
them disparage not, rather commend the worst.

Their Osterias or Innes stand usually alone, remote from any Village, so that
Passengers must be content with what those Tabernae can afford, and he that
seems to dislike their feeble A weak Broth of Herbs
Minestra perhaps shall have nothing but an Good words.
Allegramente for amends.

This Inference I lay hold on to speak more amply of the Italian.

Whilst Rome wore the Imperial Diadem of the subdued World, it might have been
a disputable Criticisme, whither Rome stood in Italy; or Italy in Rome, That
voice of fame which attributed all to the Roman; derogated from the Renown of
the Italian: Now, since Rome did resign the Crown to the Miter; Italy allows
her no Supremacy, but Ecclesiastical; and in the general voge it is the most
proper phrase to say such a man is an Italian, though a Native of Rome.

However, in the Survey of this present Generation I find a residue of the old
Genius still surviving.

That Roman Generosity yet runs in the blood of their Noble Families, which
(I have heard) can draw their Pedigree from the great Masters of the World; as
that of the Savelli from Scipio Africanus.

Neither does the height of their spirits argue less.

The Neopolitan is so elevated with his imaginary Revennewes that in his
deepest poverty he will speak thousands rather then betray his wants.

One will sit gravely before his door picking his teeth, and condemn the
Capon he eat last; when a morsel of Bread would pass down merrily.

Another I have seen begging in this method: first he looks about to see
whether the Coast be clear, before he will utter one suppliant word; then he
approaches in a more submisse strain, yet if any one chance to cast an eye
that way; he retreates to familiarity; Pressing the justness of his Demands
till he obtaines the alms; which if but a penny or so, he casts it
contemptibly in the Donours face, but soon after peaceably searches for the
money, and when it is found prays for the Benefactour.

This is consonant with the Spaniard, so is the Genuesian as lofty as his
buildings, so proud in his Garb, that at our first nights Supper in Genua,
some Fidlars came to welcome us with their Music, but with so grave and
stately a Preamble, that we all withdrew from our seats to salute the men,
imagining them no less then Magistrates.

The Plebeians or Commonalty of Italy savor much of the Goths and Vandalls;
yet even these are frequently distinguished with the worthy Appellations of
Julio, Flaminio, Fabio, etc.

In the Campagna di Roma I once espyde a Labourer tilling the ground near some
decayed Monuments; whereupon I made toward the fellow and asked him what those
Ruins were; He answered me, he knew nothing; but he had often heard his
Grandfather tell a Story of one Signor Romolo, that fought there. A twinkling
Tradition and implies much.

They have a Recreation certainly derived from their Ancestors, viz: La Mora,
anciently micare Digitis, at the first it appears but childishly ridiculous;
after better acquaintance, a kind of Conjuration; It Is of force to bind the
Fancy; yet the most illiterate are best at the Game.

And no wonder since this Air has from all Ages checherisht the strongest
Atlase's for Invention and Art.

What Brain but Italian could contrive Engines to raise so vast a Moles as the
Vatican Obelisque.

Observe what machivillian unheard of Weapons they devise to surprise an enemy
unawares.

At Venice I saw a pocket Church Book with a Pistol hid in the binding, which
turning to such a Page, discharges. A plot (I conceive) to entrap him you hate,
whilst yon are at your devotions together, when there is least suspicion.

Another as rare, is a Pocket stone-Bow, which held under a Cloak shoots
needles with violence to pierce a man's body, yet leaves a wound scarce
discernable.

A third is a walking staff in appearance; at the top is a Spring which graspt
hard, at the other end will jet forth a Rapier with force enough to kill at a
yards distance.

A fourth is a Gunne to be charged with wind, which for six paces will not
fail of execution with a small or no report.

To these I may add their curious (yet Illegal) tricks in poison, some
mortal by smelling to, others that given now, shall have no operation till
many months after.

Some will attempt to poison Rivers if they can but find the Source or
Fountain; and in Milan there stands a Pillar called Colonna Infame, raised where
a Magicians house was pulled down, who for a time poysond the whole City.

I omit not their excellency in Statuary, Limming, Architecture, Gardning,
Scenes, Music, in which all Europe gives them the precedence.

In what perfection they have these faculties you may conclude from these
Instances.

Upon a Sepulcher in S. Peter's at Rome, in a Combent posture lie the feminine
Statues of Old age, and of Youth; In the latter the Sculpturer has so exceeded
Nature, for Limbs, Features and Comeliness, that it is said a Spaniard at his
Beads left his Devotions to expiate his sense on that Niobe-like Lady, and for
that reason a veil of black Marble now covers Youths nakedness; whilst her
neighbor old Age wants a Smock.

For limming, one Mattia Casale of Sienna (though no eminent Artist) drew the
Picture of a Prince so exactly, and with that vivacity, that in the Princes
eyes, he placed his own Effigies perfectly discernable as in the Original.

Sir Henry Wotton a friend to Ingenuity, and a great admirer of it in the
Italian, had transported out of Italy a Piece of two Dogs combating for a bone,
done with that life; that a third more living Curre entering into the Room,
very eagerly assaulted the Colors, which wanted nothing but motion, to resist
him.

For their Architecture I refer you to their Cities; A Flandrian Ambassador
leaving Florence, told the Great Duke his City deserved to be seen never but
on Holy Days.

For their Gardens, I dare considently avow all Christendom affords none so
voluptuous, as those within the Walls and Territory of Rome; and at Bagnaia (as
I remember) there is a Walk for a hundred paces archt with Fountains, so that
a man may pass dry under the Element of water; A trick might raise a Question
in the Schools.

Their Scenes, (or as they term them Operas) are Regalios, they have not yet
fully communicated to us, their other Arts we daily borrow.

A year since in a Representation at Venice, Phaeton in his Chariot drawn by
four Natural well pamperd Steeds, were all hurld over the Theater in an
Artificial cloud.

In this they but imitate Nature, mark how they subdue her.

At the Marriage of the Duke of Florence there was brought on the Stage a
Balletta, or dance of Horses; whilst an Ape playde the air on a Gittarre; A
Florentin said a third Miracle was intended, Viz: a Consort of Parachitos
voices, but the Scholars had not got their lesson perfect against the day
appointed for the Nuptials.

They are so addicted to Music, especially that of the Voice, (which
indisputably is the best,) that great Persons keep their Castrati, viz.
Eunuch's whose throats and complexions scandalize their breeches.

Neither is the Rout less propense to that though with lesser skill and art; A
Porter.
There Is no Fachin or Cobbler but can finger some Instrument; so that when the
heats of the Day are tired out to a cool Evening; the Streets resound with
confused, yet pleasant Notes.

Their Carnavall is the fitest Season to vent any humors; He Is most extold
that can act the Mimick best: So many men, so many Crochets; some abusive,
others for Mirth.

A Sanesian perhaps to satyrize on the French Vanity, got on a Suit a la Mode
with all things correspondent; but for his trimming, where we place Gold
Buttons (as down the Breeches. Round the knees, along the skirts etc.) he wore
little Hobby Horse Bells, and on his Crest stood a Cocks comb Triumphant; Thus
whilst he footed it gingerly through the streets, the spectators voushsaft him
no other Title then Monsieur.

From these passages I have here cited the Reader may collect of what temper
this people is, by these following what that of the Country.

Southern climates (Philosophically) refine the brain; those that have adorned
Italy with their singular endowments, owe perhaps as much to their Country, as
she to them.

Yet most certainly had Romulus his Successors aspird no farther then the Mud
wall he left them; had those Legions of Worthies never been borne there, we
should never have had such an esteem of this Cisalpine clod; the fertility of
which I attribute not to the Soil, but Site.

The Earth yealdes these five Harvests successively; First, in June, that of
Silk; in July, of diverse fruits; in August, that of Corn, which they
afterward sow with Millio, Rice, Turkey Wheat, or the like grain, and within
two months have another croppe.

In September that of their wines.

In October, that of Oil.

Most of those places celebrated by the old Poets for the rich gifts of Bacchus
are degenerated from their pristine worth, yet in lieu of those, others are so
enobled, that in a Moderate computation they have no less then twenty distinct
Species of Liquor to please the Gusto; the most dilicious, (and but the Ethnic
Ambrosia in a Christian Phrase) they call Lachrymae Christi.

They have few trees but what we have seen in these parts.

The Hesperian Apple, or Orange Tree is of a most ravishing beauty perpetually
Verdant, bearing an Hortyard of Blossoms, green and ripe Fruit altogether.

Amongst their Medicinal Plants scarce known amongst us but in Apothicaries
shoppes; I took notice of one Odoriferous Herb called Basilico, which has
this innate power, that if laid under a stone in some moist place, in two days
it produces a Scorpion, this I can assert by experience, and to countenance
this story, there fell out a strange accident in my stay at Siena. A Gentleman
was so pleased with the smell of this Basilico, that he had some dried and
beaten into powder, which he snuft up, imagining it of the same force with
Tobacco to clear the head, but he bought the experience at the price of his
life, for he dyed distracted; His skull being afterward opened by the
Chyrurgion, a nest of Scorpions were found feeding on his Brain.

For their creatures they have many not known to this Island, but for
curiosity. About Rome they plow the land with Buffolos; near Sienna they hunt
the wild Boar, with the Rowbuck, the Wolf, the Porcupine, and the Tasso Cane
or Mountain Dog.

They have many Reptilias, of strange natures.

The Cimici are most Troublesome bed fellows; but Fleas in Folio, yet so
dainty, as they will choose their flesh; my Chamberfellowes face has looked
big as Boreas with them in one night, when they have not so much as touched my
skin, or disturbd my sleep. They are very offensive to his nostrills that
destroys them.

The Cantherides are green flies by day, and in the night pass about the
fields (a pleasing spectacle) like flying Glowormes with fire in their Tails.

A Rimarra is a Philanthropall creature in form like a Lyzzard, in bigness
much exceeding it. A Countryman told me nature had so provided that the
property of that beast was thus; If a Peasent lay to repose himself in the
shade, The Rimarra will vigilantly attend him, if a Serpent approach (with
which she is at enmity) she tickles the Countryman in the ear; summoning him
to stand on his guard.

No less strange though true is the report of the Tarantula which some say is
a Fly; but at the opening of a door in the Vatican their skipt out a creature
not much unlike an Eft, only with longer claws, at which some Italians then
in our company cried out Vna Tarantula Tarantula The venom of the Tarantula is
of such operation as he that is stung while the fit continues falls a
caparing; and nothing can allay it but Music. I saw a Capuchian at Siena who
was perfectly well in his senses all the year till precisely the day came
about whereon he received a Bite of a Tarantula, then on a sudden he would
skip like a Madman.

Were these occurrences as Pleasing to my Reader as to my self, I should build
gates for my Cities to run out of: This roughly hewed Portaile resembles the
Alps which past, behold Rome the Holy. Page 67 Venice the Rich. page 187
Naples the Gentle. p. 138 Florence the fair. p 28 Genua the Superbe. p. 10
Milan the Great. p. 238 Bolonia the Fat. p. 168 Padua the Learned. p. 205
Verona the Ancient. p. 226


AN ITENIRARY CONTAINING A breife Narration of a Voyage made through Italy, in
the year 1646. and 1647.
THere are but two ordinary passages out of France into Italy, the one over the
Alps, the other by the Mediterranean Sea, those commonly which go by the
first, return by the second, and so contrary. We (November being quite expired
ere we left France) for our own convenience preferred a boat before a horse,
I mean the Sea voyage, before the Land. Wherefore being come to Antibe the
utmost City of France, we found favor of the Governor (it being a Frontiere
and place of strength) in giving us a Bill of health, without which it is very
difficult to enter into any of the Italian States or Cities, and having over
night procured a Filoaco to carry us all our way to Genua if so be we met
with no Boat of return betwixt thence and Monaco; the next morning we
departed, and about nine in the forenoone came before Nice in Savoy, situated
on the Sea side, but has no Port, the buildings are after the Italian, and it
is commanded by a strong Castle that stands on a hill. Finding no convenience
of imbarquing better here we sailed on, but at the point of Land that turns
toward Morgues, there arose a contrary wind, which forced us to retire into
the next harbor, to wit Villa Franca (aunciently called Portus Herculis) where
by permissio^ of the Governor of the Citadell we lay that night. This place
likewise belongs to the Duke of Savoy. The next day going out of the Haven we
met with a Genova Filouco, and having agreed for our passage in that, quitted
our former, yet no sooner were we in the boat but a Tempest drove us again
into the harbor; so that we lost that day entirely. The day following we had
both fair weather, and a calm Sea, which encouraged our watermen to adventure
out; about 2. miles from Villa Franca we dis- a great vessel making toward
us, which our Boatmen seemed to fear taking it, for a Turkish man of War, but
we were afterward informed to the contrary. A little further we struck into
the Port of Monaco, and after an hour or two stay there, the wind growing
contrary, our Boatmen wished us to tarry longer least we should be exposed to a
greater inconvenience, which we the more willingly condiscended too, in
regard, it is so remarkable a place as no stranger can well pass without
especial observation thereof; for I must confess I know no so small a
principality of the like consideration, either for strength or riches; The
Prince of the family of the Grimaldi of Genua, is in his state sovereign, and
coins money, but has still some greater King for his Protector, of late years
he left the Spanish party, and gave himself with this his chief Town, to
the King of France's tuition, so that at our arrive there, there was a strict
garrison of French; the Marquis of Corbon being then Governor to whom we had
address from his Brother in Law at Antibe, used us very civilly, and sent a
soldier with us; to show us all the rarityes that are there to be seen.

Monaco (whether I may properly call it a Town or Castle I know not) is
situated on the top of a rockey Promontory of incredible hard access, Monaco.
environed with strong walls, within which are some streets very neately
representing the face of a City, in the midst is a spacious court fit for to
exercise military discipline in, at the end is the Princes Palace, which though
Beautiful on the outside yet contains greater wealth within, chiefly in his
Gardrobe, where the variety of Tapistries the great quantity of plate, with the
vastness of vessels, as Fountains, Tables, and such like of pure silver,
striks amazement into him that sees it, besides this rich furniture, there are
two Cabinets or Galeries of rare curiosities which excepting the Duke of
Florences, may be equaled with most of that nature in Italy: amongst other
singularities I was much taken with the statue of an Indian of Porphyre, and
other material, as likewise a gemmery compiled of several precious stones
with these letters; Otium Francisci Bembi; The Prince was then in enlarging
this Palace, and beautifying it with Marbles and waterworks. Having with great
satisfaction seen all the particularities of this place, we returned down to
our Inn, and it growing toward night, some few hours before our departure a
hard accident befell us, which was the loss of our Bill of health, wherefore
though it was dark and the watch was set, yet we sent up a letter by a string
to the Governor, who very courteously returned us a Ticket of larger extent
then our former. At midnight we departed from Monaco past eight miles farther
by Menton, a village belonging to the same Prince, and about break of day we
came before Vintimiglia the first city (toward France) of the Republique of
Genua, from hence we were in view of the mountains of Corsica and four miles
farther we past by Saint Remes, where the shore (which is called by the name of
the rive of Genua) is all covered with Orange, Citron, and Date Trees. Past the
rest of that day without seeing any thing remarkable, unless Porto Mauritio,
where heretofore there was a very good Port which the Genuesians ruined,
fearing it should bring prejudice to their own. Toward night we struck in at
Oneille, a city which seems to interrupt the Genois dominions, and belongs to
the Duke of Savoy. After we had supt we took boat and sailed all night by
many Towns, viz. Diano, Araisse, where they fish for Coral, Albengue, Luan, a
city of the Prince of Oria a Genois, Final a place of strength and the only
garrison the King of Spain has in these coasts; the Port though small yet
serves much in the conveyance of men and ammunition toward Milan. This place
commonly pillageth strangers, they taking all for Frenchmen; but (praised be
God) we past quietly, and toward break of day came before Savona; The most
ancient and greatest city of the Genevoisat after Genua it self. Behind this
city, the Apennines that cleave Italy in sunder begin to take their rise. From
hence to Genua is 35. Italian miles; all which way one goes more and more into
the pleasantness of Italy, the whole board being filled with Country Seats and
Villages, which for beauty surpass many cities I have seen elsewhere. Amongst
those San Pietro d' Arania (whither the richer Genuesians retire themselves in
the summer, and indeed may be called another Genua for the gallantry of the
buildings) is the best; but three miles distant from Genua, the Metropolis of
that most flourishing Republic, which contains so stately Palaces, that from
all the rest of Italy, it has gotten the name of Genua the superbe.

It Is situated at the foot of very high mountains, Genua.
which though sterile, yet want nothing that Art can enrich them with; In
gardens, waterworkes, and the like. That which exceeds all the rest, is the
Prince of Orias Palace, reaching from the bottom of the shore, to the top of
the mountains, divided into three gardens. In the first whereof the Terrasses
or Porches one above another bore up with marble Pillars, is very magnificent,
as likewise the Fountain of the Eagles, and the Family of Neptune: at the one
side that famous Cage of ironworke, which is of so vast an extent that it
encloseth a wood of Cypress and other trees. The other two are filled with
Grottes, Orange trees; and other variety of delights: At the upper part of all
stands the statue of Jupiter tonant. Within the Palace the Gardrobe full of
rarietyes; the Tapestries and precious Furuiture declare greatly the richness
of that Prince.

Next to this is the house of Hieronimo del Negro, where the excellent
Pictures, the fall of waters, the Fountain, the Piscina, the Grove and other
delightful departments, are well worth seeing. On all sides of the City is an
infinity of such places of pleasure, especially round about the Port, which is
of a large circuit, resembling much the form of a Theater enclosed with fair
buildings. It Is defended by a solid Bulwark (which they call Il Mole) that lies
about 2 hundred paces into the Sea, raised at a very great expense: Opposite to
that a rocky Promontory casts it self forth, at the head whereof stands a very
lofty Pharos, bearing a lantern of more then an ordinary bigness, to guide
Ships in the night: Within the Haven is a place where the Gallyes lay, every
one in a particular Classis. As for the City it self, it is enough to say the
Genuesians live in a Kingly luxury, and I believe it is the best built and
compacted City, not only of Italy, but also of Europe. The houses generally
are very high, the streets for the most part (its only fault) are somewhat
narow, so that no Coaches are here admitted, which though an inconvenience, yet
preserves the ways more clean and neater. I except here that spacious, long,
even, and indeed Mistress of streets the Strada Nova, which I am confident may
be justly preferred before any in Christendom, so proud in Architecture, so rich
in Marbles are the Palaces it is filled with. The fairest one belongs to the Duke
of Oria. Amongst the public Edifices, the Exchange or Merchants Hall. the
Dukes Palace with the Armory for 30 thousand men deserved our walking to.
Neither are the Genuesians less splendid, in adorning their Consecrated
places; witness the mighty quantity of polish't Marble, wherewith all the
Churches are filled, especially San Lorenzo the Dome, and Santo Ambrosio
belonging to the Jesuits. But that which surpasses all, and is of most
admiration, is the Chapel of the Anunciade, begun to be built not many
years since at the expense of one Family, (whose Palace joins to it) yet is
of so incredible richness for the red and white Marble Pillars, and other
ornaments, that one would imagine the revenues of a whole City could not be
enough to raise so glorious a Work as that will be when it is finished. Finally,
the Genuesians to defend this their brave City, have encompast it with Walls no
less commendable for beauty and strength, then prodigious for their large
extent. The people of this Commonwealth are habited all alike, somewhat
tending toward the Spanish Mode; and are of a very austere and superbe humor,
hardly vouchsafing to look so low as a stranger, wherefore having with much
satisfaction seen their Flourishing Estate, we left them. We set out from
Genua in a Filouca about Sunsetting, and having sayld all that night, about
noone the next day we struck into Porto Venere, and after dinner crossed the
Golfe of Aspecia, (which is defended with many strong Fortifications) to
Lerizi. This Bourg being the mid way from Genua to Ligourne (such is the
villainy of the watermen in these parts) if they get their passengers, chiefly
strangers hither, they will so delay their departure, pretending the
inconveniences of the weather, that by lying still at so great an expense, they
may be forced to give them their pay, and to hire horses for the rest of the
way by Land. Which trick we were forced to suffer patiently, after a day and
halfes attendance for our boat. Hence we took Post, and having past through
the Olive woods, over the hills that lay nearest the shore, we came into a
low plain Country, which continued so to Ligorne. First we past the River
Magre, then went by Sarazana, a good City, and last of the dominion of Genua,
after that we came into the Principality of Massa, wherein we past by Lavenza
and Carrara, where out of the hills they dig great store of Marble, and then
through Massa it self, where the Prince resides in Estate Sovereign.

The Town is very pleasant, standing in a Territory fruitful in Orange trees
and other fruits. Hence we came suddenly into Tuscany, but quickly left it,
falling into a woody Country, belonging to the State of Lucas, and so to
Viregio, under the same power, standing at the mouth of a small river, which
runs from Lucques. Here we were forced to lie, and the next morning some two
mile farther we past the river that parts the Republique of Lucques from
Toscany, and so in the morning arrived at Pisa. Pisa.


Which City was heretofore a great free state of it self, but at the rising of
the family of the Medicis on which line the Dukes of Etruria successively
run, this with many other noble cities, was reduced to the great Dukes
subjection. From whom it has received many Embellisments. It Is situated in a
Marshy land, so that the unholesomnesse of the air renders it scarce of the
native people, much more of strangers which seldom tarry any longer then to
see the rarities of the place. Amongst which I prefer that worthy piece of
art the Falling Tower which travelers boast of, (and not undeservedly) as one
of the most mervellous things they see in the voyage of Italy. It Is covered
round with galleries and 7. rows one above another of Marble Pillars, so that
it is hard to be imagined by what engines so great a structure should be
supported, it being built so declining to one side, that all men which regard
it, at the first expect its fall. Hard by is the Dome or Cathedral Church of
Pisa; where threescore Pillars testify as well its Antiquity, as the Gates of
Brass its rarity. Joining to this is the Campo Santo, or Cimetiere firm'd in
with a wall of Marble, and much resembles a Cloister; in the midst is the
Church yard from whence the place has its denomination, that implies the holy
Field; because half the ground was brought from Jerusalem, and it has a
particular propriety, that all bodies which are buried there, are consumed
within the space of 40. hours. Here are likewise reserved many Ancient Urnes,
which, with the story of the Old and New Testament painted of old work, make
the place very venerable. Hard by is the Baptistary, or San Giovanni; wherein,
the Font, and pulpit leaning on four Lions, will for the preciousnesse of the
stone, yield to no other in Italy. Leaving the Area where these things stand
together, a little more into the town is the Chapel and Palace, of the
Knights of the Order of St. Stephen, the Frontespiece of the Chapel is of
Marble neatly pollish't. The inside is adorned with the truest Ensigns of
Valor; I mean Trophies taken from the common enemies of Christianity, the
Turks. Before their Palace is the statue of the great Duke Cosmus, with a
Fountain. This Dignity of Knighthood is much like to that of Malta, both to
maintain Christ's cause against the Mahometans, yet these may marry, the others
I conceive may not: These wear a red Cross for their badge in this fashion.
From hence we walked to the Physicians garden, which is more for use then
delight; although there be good walks, and waterworks that well washed us, yet
for the most it is covered with simples, outlandish Plants and the like. Joining
to it is a gallery very commodious for Medecinall things, it abounding with all
curiosities of Nature, as foreign creatures, Stones, Mineralls, and whatsoever
strange the farthest Indies produce. In general, this City stands so
opportunely, as few like for the receiving of all foreign Wares. In the midst
thereof runs the river Arno, from thence to its Embuschment navigable for
very great Vessels, so that here is a place where the Duke builds his Galleys:
On one side of the river, is a fair street called Longarno, where is the great
Dukes Palace, and before it the statue of Ferdinand the third; On the other
side is the Exchange, little, but of Marble, then which nothing more common in
Italy. In a word, it is praise enough, to say it is the third City under the great
Duke, who I think has the fairest of what Prince soever. Having taken a
satisfactory view hereof, we went on our way to Ligourne, whither there is an
hourly convenience of a Coach to transport Merchandise from Ligorne to Pisa,
the Duke has made an artificial Channel, of 15. miles long, which bares
small boats like to Venetian Gondoloes. The Escluse of which Channel we saw
at our setting forth out of Pisa, covered for 250. paces. The most part of the
way to Ligorne is through Fennes, till one enters into the great Dukes Forest,
which continues to the town. Ligorne.


Ligorne the only maritimate place of importance, under the Great Duke, is
situated in a plain, at the board of the Mediterranean Sea, it is but little,
yet the great concurse of Merchants which flow thither from all Nations,
chiefly from my one, make it more spoken of than many Cities, of a larger
extent. It Is an innumerable sum of money the Duke receives yearly from this
small Port: wherefore his Predecessors with him have omitted nothing to make it
strong, witness the royal Bastions, and mote wherewith it is fenct; The great
Port where the Ships lay at Anchor, is defended by the Mole, and about has
many fanalls. The Darcina, where the Galleys (then but six in number) lay as
quiet as in a Chamber, is most exquisitely well contrived: Before stands that
best of modern Statues, the Duke Ferdinand in Marble, and the Colosses of
four slaves under him, in brass in diverse Postures, so lively represented,
that if the Statuary could have framed a voice as well as those bodies, he
might have conquered nature. Besides this piece, there are no more curiosities
in this town, yet many conveniences. The streets are generally large, the
houses low, but uniforme, unless some which have been put out of order by an
Earthquake, to which this place is often Subject. The great place is very
beautiful, and fit for the assemblies of Merchants. On the houses round about
and in the fairest streets, are pictured all the battles, and victories of the
great Dukes galleys, obtained over the Turks, which a slave did to gain his
redemption. The Jews which are here in great number, have the fairest
Synagogue I ever yet saw, wherein on a saturday their Sabbath, we saw the
manner of their divine (if so I may call it) service. Their privileges here
are more then ordinary, they wearing no mark of distinction as in other
Towns, so that here the wealthier and richer sort are of that Sect. The Greeks
likewise have a Congregation, and Church here. In a word, Ligorne is compacted
of foreigners, yet the unwholsomenesse of the air banisheth a great part from
thence, which I by dangerous experience found true; for the day before I was to
depart for Florence, (having all the while I stayed at Ligorne found a strange
alteration of the air, different both from that of England and France.) I was
ill disposed to sickness, however, not so much but that I adventured on my
journey, which though with much difficulty I perfected. The first night we lay
at Pisa, which way we had formerly past. The next morning we took Coach, (a
very unpleasant passage over hilly way) and past first by S. Roman, a Convent
of the Observantins standing on high, from whence is a pleasant prospect down
the valley, from thence we came to Empoly, a neat little town where we lay,
and the next day toward noone arrived at Florence.

Which for its singular excellencies, Florence.
amongst all other Cities of Italy, is called (...) the Fair. Florence the
Capital of Toscany, and seat of the great Duke, is situated at the bottom of
very high hills, environed on all sides with the same, excepting toward the
West side, before which lies a plain Country, vulgo Pianura di Fiorenza. This
City is divided in two by the river Arno, over which are built four Bridges of
stone, upon one of the two chief is the Goldsmiths street; upon the other of
very stately structure stand the four quarters of the year in marble;
Opposite to this before the Trinity, stands a vast Column, with a statue of
Justice in Porphyre at the top, which, Cosmus the first great Duke raised as a
Trophee in that place, because the news there came to his ear of the taking
of Siena. Hard by, is the Palazzo de Strozzi, no less to be admired for the
immensity of its fabric, then for its rude and unusual Architecture. From
hence toward the right hand is the Merchants Vault, supported with fair
Pillars, and before it a brazen Boar jetting forth water; Keeping right on,
one comes into the great Place, in the midst thereof is the great Duke Cosmus,
a horseback in brass, with this inscription under.

Cosmo Medici Magno, Etruriae Duci Primo, Pio, Felici, Invicto, Justo,
Clementi, Sacrae Militiae, Pacisque in Etruria Authori, Patri and Principi
Optimo, Ferdinandus, F. Mag. Dux: Mag. Dux. III. erexit: An. M. DLXXXXIV. on
each side of the Basis.

Profligatis hostibus in deditionem acceptis Senensibus: Plenis liberis Sen:
Fl. suffragiis Dux. Patriae renuntiatur. Behind.

Ob Zelam Religionis praecipuumque Justitiae studium.

Betwixt this horse and the Palazzo vecchio, is a Fountain, which all Italy
cannot show the like besides, round about the Laver is the family of Neptune in
brass, with his Colosse of Marble in the midst, bore up by four horses; The
whole not possible to be equald, much less excelled by human art.

In this same Piazza, is a Porch archt and adorned with some statues, amongst
which that of Judith, in brass with that of the Rape of the Sabines, three
Persons in several Postures cut all out of one stone are most remarkable.

Just against it is the Palazzo Vecchio, at the entrance stands two Colosses,
the one of David, the other of Hercules trampling on Cacus, the first of
Michael Angelo, which in my judgment comes short of the other, though he the
more famous statuary. Within is a Court set about with Pillars of Corinthian
work; Above is a very spacious Hall with diverse Statues, and amongst them
those of two Popes, Leo the tenth, and Clement the seventh, of the family of
the Medicis; the apertenants of this lodging are very great, and costly, but it
being not so frequented as if the Court were kept there, every thing loses
its luster.

Wherefore having speedily dispatched the sight hereof; that which requires a
week to observe well, is at hand: I mean that richest of Treasures, the great
Dukes Gallery. In the lower story sit the Courts of Justice, with an arcade to
walk in on each side. Above are the shops of diverse Artisans which work
continually for the great Duke. In the uppermost part is contained as many
wonders as things, Some to be admired for their preciousnesse and art, others
for their rarity and Antiquity. On each side of the Gallerie are ranged
Statues, to the number of fourscore and odd, of which for Antiquity I
prefer the Idol brought from the temple of Apollo, at Delphis, with this
verse on the Pedistall.

Vt potui huc veni Delphis and fratre relicto. As likewise that of Scipio
Africanus, holding up his Gown under his arm, according to Ciceros words.
Nobis quidem olim annus erat unus ad cohibendum brachium toga constitutus, and
ut exercitatione ludoque campestri, tunicati uteremur. After these I may reckon
the two triumphant Pillars; from whence they were taken I know not; but their
work speaks them Roman. Over the statues hang the Pictures, some Prototypes of
the most famous men of the modern times, on the one side Scholars, on the
other soldiers.

At the right hand of this gallerie are several stanzas full of curiosities,
into which whosoever enters is astonished at the quantity of wealth; confused
with the variety of things worth observation.

In the first Room we went into, stands the Tabernacle, or altar destinated
for S. Laurence Chapel, no part thereof of common Marble; but totally
compacted with Jewels and Precious stones; The value inestimable.

In the next Chamber is a Table with Flowers, and Birds in their natural
colors of Precious stones, with a Cabinet prized at two hundred thousand
Crowns, coverd with Agaths, Emerauds, Anamathists, etc. Within is the passion
of our Savior with the twelve Apostles all in Amber.

In the third is a Cabinet with Calcidon Pillars, filled (as they told us) with
ancient medailles of Gold; round about this Room is an infinite number of
Natural and artificial curiosities, as the Nalle turned half into Gold by
Alchymy, The Emperors head on a Turqu'oise bigger then a Walnut, with
thousands more. Next is the Armory, wherein are the habits, and diverse sorts
of arms of several ages, and People; amonst those, the King of China's habit,
Hannibals Headpiece of Corinthian metal, Charlemain's Sword; and an argument
of the Italian Jealousy, an Invention to lock up female frailty. Here likewise
is a Magnet which bears up fourscore pound weight of Iron.

In the last Cabinet we saw the curious Turnity of Ivory, a Pillar of Oriental
Alablaster, etc. and from thence we went into the Gardrobe, where are twelve
great Cubbards of silver Plate, a service all of pure Massy Gold; A saddle
which the Emperor gave in a present to the great Duke, all Embroidered with
Pearls and Diamonds; These, with many other Particularities of this gallerie,
(which might be a Theme copious enough to write a Volume on,) declaring the
wealth of this Prince equal with any Kings in Christendom.

From the said gallery is a Corrider; or private passage to the Palazzo de
Pithi, on the other side of the river; where the Duke keeps his Court; The
Front of this edifice is very majestique toward the Basis of Dorick work, in
the midst of Ionick, in the uppermost story of Corinthian. In the Court is a
Grotte with statues and a fountain over it, yet that which is most wonderful
is the Loadstone of a most prodigious greatness.

Neither are the gardens to be omitted, which for their largeness have the
face of a Forest, for their variety of a Paradise. Here Cypres groves, there
Walks with statues, here a Sea of Fountains, there Swans, Austriches, and
other recreative Creatures.

Being now on this side of the Arno, I will take notice of all I saw there
before I return to the other. And first there stands a Pillar, bearing on it
the statue of Peter Martyr, in the same place where he was beheaded. Next on
the wall of S. Nicholas Church, above a man's reach are these veses, signifying
an inundation of the River.

Fluctibus undisonis similis pelagique procellis.
Huc tumidis praeceps, irruit Arnus Aquis,
Prostravitque suae spumanti gurgite Florae.
Opida, Agros, Pontes, Mae^ia, Templa, Viros.
M DL. Id sept.
Going now back into the fuller body of the City, on the other side of the
River; on the banck there is a Marble, which I found of no great consequence,
yet set by a Venetian Ambassador as a Monument to a horse there buried, which
had done him good service in the siege of the City.

The Epitaph runs thus.

Non ingratus Herus (sonipes
Memorande) sepulchrum
Hoc, tibi pro meritis, haec monumenta dedit.
Least I should dwell too long amongst these earthly delights, wherewith
Florence is filled, I will go and meditate in the Churches; and first in the
Dome, which I conceive either for the exquisiteness of the work, or worth of
so vast a Bulk of Red, Black, and white Marble, to be the fairest Cathedral
without, that ever man laid eyes on. Its better part is the Cupola, so high
that the brass Globe at the top, is capable of holding sixteen persons.

No less wonderful is the Steeple, which without exempt, will yield to no
other in the world, composed of the same stone and materials with the Church,
but with more art and ornaments.

Before the Dome is the Temple of Mars; built in an Octogon; now called S. John,
or the Baptistary. The four gates of Brass, which Ortelius prefers before
any else in the world, the broken Pillars of Porphyre, the pavement, the old
Grecian Pieces at the top, are things to be noted.

From hence we went to see that mirror of Art, and wonder of this present
age, Saint Laurents Chapel, which is so glorious, that whosoever enters, will
even imagine himself in some place above terrestrial. It Is wholly overlaid
with fine Pollisht stones, neither is any color upon Earth, but it is there in
stones naturally, all which I have been since told by diverse, (an argument of
the great riches included in the Bowels of Italy) are dugg up within the great
Dukes dominions. Round about this Chapel are all the scutions of the towns
under the great Duke, in their proper Colors of stone. Above are Niches for
the statues of the great Dukes. Beside them their Urnes. The intent of this
whole sumptious Fabric, being that it should successively serve for the
Sepulcher of the great Dukes.

Saint Laurents Church and Convent join to this, where the Library filled with
Books, all in Manuscripts is not contemptible.

Not far from hence is Santa Maria Novella; in the Court are two Marble
Pyramids that stand on brass Turtoises. Hard by is S. Mary's Church belonging
to the Jacobins, where on the North wall is the Tomb of Picus Mirandola, an
eminent scholar, with this Epitaph.

Joannes jacet hic Mirandola, caetera morunt.
Et Tagus e Ganges forsan and Antipodes.
In the same Church is Politianus his Tomb subscribed thus.

Politianus in hoc tumulo jacet Angelus, unum
Qui caput, and linguas, (res nova) tres habuit.
From hence I went to the Anunciade, and saw in the way the Fountain of the
Centaure. The Anunciade is a place of great devotion, to a Madonna drawn by
the hand of Saint Luke. In the Piazza before is the statue of the Duke
Ferdinand the first; on horseback in brass, made by the same hand, with the
former above mentioned, so that there is little difference betwixt them. Hard
by are kept the Lions, and other wild beasts; and a little farther the Menage
or Stables of the great Duke stord with Barbary and other excellent horses, and
as I remember, I never saw better horse then at Florence. On the wall of the
Cavalrizza is this Inscription.

Franciscus Medices, Magnus Etruscor Dux 11. Quod Nobilissimorum Adolescentium,
qui equestri splendore se ornari cupiunt. Imprimisque Joannis fratris commodo
fiere^ hunc in Equo se exercendi Locum extrui jussit, Rustico Picardino Equorum
Magistro. M DLXXXVI.

Next to these though much distance, Santa Croce deserves seeing. Before it is
a fair spacious Court, in which (it being Carnavall time while we were at
Florence) we saw the play at Calce, with Cavalcades, shows, and other
assemblies of the Nobility.

Within the Church is the tomb of that famous Statuary, Picturer, and
Architecture, Michael Angelo, made by his own hand; Over his Urne stand those
three arts, he was so renowned for with their instruments broken, bewailing
the loss of their Patron underneath this Inscription.

Michaeli Angelo Bonerotio Evetusta Simonioru^ familia. Sculptori, Pictori,
Architecto. Fama Omnibus notissimo.

Leonardus Patruo amantiss: and de se optime meritro, Translatis Roma ejus
ossibus, atque in hoc templo Major suorum Sepulchro conditis, cohortante
Serenissimo Med: Magno Hetruriae Duce. P. 6. An. Sal: M DLXX. Vixit. ann.
LXXXVIII. M. XI. D. XV.

To conclude my description of Florence, the houses are high built, the streets
paved with great stones, even and long, many Fountains, and other public
ornaments, declaring the magnificence of the great Dukes. For eight mile round
about the City there seems another Florence, so full are the fields speckled
with Country seats. Neither are those delights to private men alone, but there
are likewise public walks, witness that of Pines two mile long: that of
Cypresses leading to Poggio Imperiale, and many more.

Two miles up into the Northern Mountains lies the old Fesuli, often spoke of
amongst the ancient Writers, but now a poor Village, not having so much as the
remnants of Antiquity.

In fine, there is no Province in Italy more furnished with delightful, and
well peopled Cities; then that of the great Duke, whose Ancestors having
united the States of three Commonwealths together, to wit, Of Pisa, Florence,
and Siena, does now entirely possess all Toscany; the nobler part of Italy.
The wife of this present Great Duke, Ferdinand the second of that name, comes
from the Duke of Vrbin, of the family of Rovori.

The Revenues of this Prince of Toscany exceeed yearly ten hundred thousand
Crowns, which will amount to a hundred thousand pound English, his ordinary
guard is of Cavalry, and Infantry, with Germans very well equipag'd.

The Florentins have commonly notable head pieces, so that from hence spring
notable Politicians, and Statesmen Machevil was of them, and it is said that
three Ambassadors from several Kings, meeting accidentally on the way, proved
in the conclusion to be all Florentins.

So soon as we had filled our selves with the sight of those many
singularities, that are in and about Florence, we set forward for Siena.

Going out of Florence, at the Porta Romana, one leaves Poggio Imperiale a
Villa of the great Dukes, which I had omitted above. At the entrance of the
walks of Cypres, that leads to it are the statues of the Tybre and Arno; those
of the famous old and new Poets, Virgil, Ovid, Petrarche, and Dante. The house
swarms with rarities, chiefly with excellent Pictures, amongst them all the
line of Austria, this great Dukes mother, who built this house, being sister to
the Emperor.

After we had past by that, we lay that night at a little Bourg called Santo
Cassiano. The next morning we rode through a Village Barbarino, from whence
the mighty stirring family of the Cardinals took their original. We dined
at Poggio Bonci, a place noted for the perfumd Tobacco composed there; which
the Italians through custom take in powder, as profusely, as we in England do
in the pipe. From hence in the afternoon we arrived at Siena.

Siena formerly a free State of it self, now subject to the Duke of Florence,
stands aloft covering the back of a hill; so that in the hottest time of the
year, this City is still refresht by cool gailes of wind; The air is very
wholesome, much agreeing with the constitution of strangers, the Inhabitants
very courteous, a great deal suiting to the humors of foreigners, and besides
the purity of the Italian Language, is here professed, and spoken; these and the
like conveniences make it much frequented by Travelers, and indeed moved us to
settle our selves there, for some Months.

Here we stayed not to see the rarities of the Place, which are not many in
number; but to get some knowledge and practice in the Vulgar Tongue, however
Siena deserves a better description then my pen can afford it; for neatness
and gentility, yielding to no other in Italy.

At the entrance of the Porta Camulia, or di Fiorenza, only the higher
buildings are in view; but out of the Porta Romans, the City seems to raise it
self with a great deal of Majesty; chiefly because of the many Towers it
has, which during the time of its Liberty, were raised in honor of such and
such men as had done any worthy service for the Commonwealth, amongst these
Towers which stand yet as signs of its formerly possessed Freedom; that of
Mangio surpasses for height, which though its foundations be in the Bottom of
the Piazza, yet outtops all the City besides, It serves now for the
Clock-house; From above is a fair prospect even to the confines of Toscany,
below at the foot of this hidious Structure, is a Chapel of Marble, where on
set days Mass is said to the People in public.

To this joins the Senate house, built by the Goths, as some conceive by the
manner of the Architecture. At one end thereof stands a Pillar, bearing Romulus
and Remus sucking the Wolf, in brass, which are the Arms of Siena, an
infallible argument of its Antiquity, and certainly dirived from the Romans, of
whom this City was a Colony. There are frequently more of the like pillars
about the Town upon one more decayed, then the rest is ingraved- Memores
Huberum, old, very old Latin.

As for the Piazza, which lies in the heart of the City, I cannot fancy a more
pleasing or commodious Place; it is of a large Compass, resembling (whether
naturally so, or artificially made so I know not) the fashion of a Cockle
shell, in the midst is a Marble Fountain of curious work, wherein out of the
Wolves mouths comes water. This place is paved with the same material as all
the streets of the City are, to wit, Brick; so that here and indeed throughout
all Siena, in the fowlest weather one may walk as clean as within doors. The
houses are for the most part Brick, built alla Moderna, the chiefest is that of
the Pope, and the Arch bishops, who is of the family of the Picolominys.

In the Strada larga lives the Prince Matthias, the Duke of Florence's Brother,
a man very courteous to strangers.

Close by his Palace is the Dome, or Cathedral Church of Sienna, which though
in comparison of others in Italy is but small, yet for the great travel and
expense which it must needs have cost, it is inferior to none, it is both without
and within of Black and white Marble; The Facade is admirable, garnisht with
statues; About the inside are the heads of all the Popes; The Pulpet is an
unparalelld piece, beset with figures of Marble. But that singularity which
this Temple boasts of above all others, is the pavement, whereon many parts of
the sacred history are so lively represented in several colors of Marble, as
no pensill can come near it, though many Masters take pattern from those
stones. Going up to the high Altar, at the left hand is the Library, painted by
Raphel d' Vrbino; On the same side is a Chapel, wherein is kept the arm of
S. John Baptist, which (as an Inscription there manifests) was given to a
Pope by the King of Peloponesus.

Opposite to the Dome is the Hospital, whither all Pilgrimmes in their passage
to to Rome, may come and take two or three meals gratis. In the Chapel lies
the body of their founder B. Susorius, as yet uncorrupted though nine hundred
years since he dyed.

Going down the Hill, from the Hospital, one comes to the Ponte Brande, which
is a reservitoire of Fish, not so much for the public use, as delight, or
pastime.

Hard by is the House where Santa Catharina of Siena lived, which, though a
place of special devotion, yet not so frequented as the Madonna di Provenzana.
From hence going up the hill, by the Dominicans one sees the Fortification, the
only defense of the City, and there by the Cavalrizza, whither in the summer
all the Gentry retire a Spasso.

The walls of Siena are of an exceeding compass, yet but slight, coverd with
Caper trees; that fruit growing best in that Soil, to wit, Mortar.

The Country about Sienna, principally toward the Maremmas or Marshes, is
filld with all sorts of great Chase, so that wild Boar, and other venison in
its season is sold in the Butchers shops, as commonly as other flesh.

In a word, I found Sienna the most commodious place a stranger could pick out
to live retiredly, and make his time beneficial. Where after two months stay,
having made some little progress in the language, the time of Easter
occasionly urging, together with good company, and the holy week, we set on for
Rome.

About ten miles from Siena one goes over a Bridge, whereupon is the Prince
Matthias his arms with this Inscription.

Viator securus incede.
Vt expedita tibi ad Vrbem per Hertruriam pateret via, triplicem, fluvium
Assum, Vmbronem, Vrcium, triplici poute subegit Matthias Seress: Hetruriae
princeps, Publicae securitatis vindex, invictus heroes, nec ipsam aquarum
licentiam errare patitur sine jugo.

Afterward we past through Buon Convento, where the Emperor Henry the seventh
died by poison, given him in the Eucharist. Dined at Tornieri, In the
afternoon past a fair Bridge, leaving at the right Mont Alcino, (auciently
Mons Ilicinus) noted for the Muscatello, it produces, past through San
Querico; Lay at the next Post.

The next day about twelve miles from Santo Querico we past by Radicofany; the
last Fortification of the great Dukes Dominions situated on a steep rocky
mountain, beneath it is the Bourg: and a little lower one of the greatest
Hosteries or Innes in the way to Rome.

That very high Mountain which the vallie parts from that of Radicofany, now
called Montamiata, was Tuniatus mentiond by Cato and Antonius. From Radicofany
we went to Centino, dined there in the confines of Toscany.

In the afternoon went over a fair bridge of Brick, built by Gregory the
thirteenth; Upon it a Marble speaks thus.

Omnia dic laeto eveniant and Fausta Viator
Gregorio, tutum qui tibi reddit iter.
Here begins the Stato della Chiesa, or Patrimony of Saint Peter: A mile
farther is Aquapendente, of which all the memorial I could gather (we only
passing through it) is a very ingenuous direction under the sign of the
Post House, it runs thus.

L'insegna della Posta, e posta a posta
In questa posta, fin che habbia a sua Posta.
Ogn' un cavallo a Vetturi in posta.
From hence the way continues very even, till one comes to a rude and stony
descent; down into a valley, from the top of which is a most pleasant
prospect, on the Lake of Bolsena, thirty miles in circuit; in the midst thereof
are two little Islands; In the one is a Convent of Capuchins, where those of the
family of the Farnese are interd, the other not inhabited unless by Fishermen.
At the side of the Lake stands Bolsena, on the ruins of the ancient Vulsinium,
famous in the Romans time. Some monuments of its former glory, yet stand
chiefly in the Court of Santa Christiana's Church, as an Ancient Urne, having
Lions heads, Cornucopias, Satyrs, Furies, pieces of such art as now the world
cannot imitate, besides this, there is a heathnish altar of Ophit stone,
frequent pieces of Diaspre Pillars; from hence we may gather that the
Volsinienses, were once splendid though now buried in their dust.

Distant from Bolsena seven miles is Monte Fiascone, in which way one passes
through a grove, wherein the ancients celebrated many Sacrifices to Juno.

Monte Fiascone was formerly the head of the Falisci, a renowned people in old
writers.

It Is now spoken of for the delicious Wine, of which there is a common story,
that a German Bishop having heard much commendations of the wine of that place,
sent his servant beforehand to try for the best at all the tavernes in the
Town, giving him in charge, that where he found the best he should write over
the door Est, Est; which he did, and having tasted, the Master approved his
choice, but in fine, he so filld his body with wine, that he left no room for
his Soul; for he suddenly dyed, and was buried in Faviono's Church, his
servant bewailing his loss; caused this witty Epitaph to be put upon his Tomb
stone.

Propter Est Est, Dominus meus mortuus. Est. Leaving Monte Fiascone, one goes
down into a plain, wherein about two mile from Viterbo, on the right hand is
a Sulphurous Fountain, the water perpetually boiling. At the entrance into
Viterbo is this Verse.

Vrbs Antiqua potens armis ac Vbere glebae. In the Palace is this.

Osiridis victoriam in Gigantes Litteris Historiographicis, in hoc antiquissimo
Marmore Inscriptam, ex Herculis olim uunc Divi Laurentii Templo translatam, ad
conservan: Vetustiss: Patriae monumenta, atque decora hic locandam statuit.
SPQV. Sum Osiris Rex.
Qui ab Italis in
Gigantes exercitus
Veni, Vidi, and Vici.
Sum Osiris Rex. Sum Osiris Rex. Jupiter universo in terrarum orb.
Qui terrarum pacato Italiam december annos incolni, docens quorum inventor fui.

The public Fountains at Viterbo are very Remarkable.

Without Viterbo are two ways for Rome, the old which the Pope in the last
difference with the Duke of Parma, charged none should pass; the new by
Capranica; we desirous to see the famous Palace of Capraroules, belonging to
the aforesaid Duke of the family of the Farnese, took the old way, which
though less usual, yet gives more satisfaction by the sight of that
magnificent Fabric.

It Is built in a Heptagon, or seven corners, before it is a Kingly Court,
within, the Staire Case, In the Garden the Cataracts of water, are very
admirable: But that for which this place is most spoken of, is the Sellar, which
besides the amplenesse thereof, is as well stord with wine of all sorts, the
Duke allowing to all strangers that come to see his house, two, or three
glasses of fresh liquor.

Hence, though late at night, we departed, and struck again into the Via
nuova, at Monterose where we lay; From Monterose to Rome, are twenty Italian
miles, all which Country the Veientes anciently possessed, a people that much
hindered the growth of the Roman Empire, of which take Florus. Hoc tunc
Veientes fuere: nunc fuisse quis meminit? quae reliquiae? quodve vestigium?
laborat annalium fides ut Veios fuisse credamus. So that if in Florus his time,
the memory of the Veientes was so extirpated, what signs or remnants of them
can we expect in this age.

Six mile beyond Monterose, upon the Via Cassia, stands Baccano, and hard by,
the Lake for bigness not much exceeding a Pond; yet noted for that memorable
slaughter of the three hundred Fabii, which the Veientes hereabouts cut off in
one day. There being but one child left at home, who afterward restord his
family, often serviceable to the Commonwealth.

After Baccano, there is a passage through a wood (Maesia anciently) where
heretofore a passenger could hardly escape robbing, but of late years the trees
being cut down it is free from danger. At the end thereof from the hill, one may
discern that Mistress of the World Rome.

Which before I enter, Rome.
I cannot but premeditate on Saint Hieromes three wishes, which were, to have
seen our Savior in the flesh, to have heard Saint Paul preach, and to have
seen Rome in its glory; which last, if ranged amongst the two former by so
learned a Father, it must needs be one of the happiest sights mortal eye could
attain to.

I must confess the fame of Rome, which has spread it self even to the most
remote parts of the earth; together with the small intelligence I had in those
histories, that declare the greatness of that universal Monarchy, made my
Idea of Rome to exceed that of all the world besides; yet again when I
conceived, how all humane things are by succession of time subject to change;
how at the fall of the Roman Empire this City was pillaged by the Barbarous,
how through the insatiable fury of Nero, the fire devoured it, I imagind some
lower fancy of Rome.

But in the conclusion, having had a full ocular view thereof, I found that it
flourishes beyond all expectation, this New even emulous to exceed the old,
the remnants of the old adding to the splendor of the new, both speaking it --
Roma triumphati Caput Orbis.

It Is so ample a Theme, that I grow almost confounded in going about to
describe it, and indeed no man will take that task upon him, that has seen
the diversity of Books, and Impressions there are only of the things of Note
at Rome.

One Volume of the Antiquities; Another of the Palaces; a third of the
Churches, a fourth of the Gardens; a fifth of the Statues; a sixth of the
Fountains; a seventh of the Villas; In a word, the Press is burdened with
nothing more then discriptions of Rome.

Wherefore I will briefly pass over what I saw, leaving the narration of each
particular, To the Itinerario d' Italia; and the Roma Antica, and the Roma
Moderna.

About four miles from Rome, in the way that leads to Porta Del Popolo is
Nero's Tomb, which because of the honor I owe not to the person the Tyrant,
but to the Antiquity I will here put down having never seen it in Print.

Neros Tomb

DMS KARISSIMA



This Sepulcher is of solid Marble, on it are engraven Dragons, Fame, etc. The
Inscription is hardly legible, only I could pick out Karissima with a K.

Within a mile and a half of Rome, we past the Tybre on the Mole, anciently
Pons Milvins, where (besides the many noble exploits performed there by
heathens.) Constantine the first Christian Emperor saw miraculously the sign
of the Cross, with the Motto, In hoc signo vinces. After we were gone over
that Bridge, we came upon a very broad paved way, The Via Flaminia, which
Flaminius in his Consulship continued sixty miles, from Rome to Ariminum.

At the entrance into Rome, at Porta del Popolo, is a lofty Pyramid coverd with
Egyptian Hyeroglyfiques, which was heretofore dedicated to the Sun, and stood
in the Circus Maximus, but was thence transferred, and placd here by Sintus, V.
as the inscriptions underneath manifest Vid. Romans Antic. page 355.
.

He that would see Rome may do it in a fortnight, walking about from Morning
to Evening, he that would make it his study to understand it, can hardly
perfect it in less then a year. A man may spend many Months at Rome, and yet
have something of Note to see every day.

The first day we walked to the Villa of Prince Ludovisio, which stands on the
same Soil, where that renowned one of Salust anciently stood, as one may
collect from the broken Guglia, one and twenty paces in length, which was
raised in his Hippodromus.

The principal rarities in this Kingly place, are the tired gladiator, Marc
Aurelius, his head of Brass that stood in the Capitol; The Oracles head of
Porphyre with the mouth open, whereby the Priests spoke, those for old; Among
the new, the man Petrified which the Emperor sent to the Pope. A Bedstead
built all of precious stones, to the value of 80000. Crowns. A bed (as a
worthy Knight then in our Company said) fit to get none but an Alexander the
great upon. In the garden are two ancient Tombs, and sixteen round Vessels of
stone, wherein the ancient Romans were wont to keep their Oil.

The same day in returning to our Lodging, we saw many Antiquities, Passing by
Alta Se mita, or Mons Quirinalis by the four Fountains, which Lepidus
brought, we came by Monte de Cavallo, which takes its denomination from the two
Colosses of Alexander, menaging his horse Bucephalus, made in emulation by the
two famous Sculptures, Phidias and Praxiteles. The horse at the left hand of
Alexander has under it Opus Phidiae, that on the right, Opus Praxitelis.
Constantin the great had these transported out of Greece, and placed in his
baths which were adjoining, as the Vid. Romans Mod page 280.
inscriptians underneath witness.

Afterward we past by the relics of Antoninus his Basilica, and saw Vid.
Romans Antic. pa. 343 and 346.
his and Trajans triumphant Pillar, the two most wonderful pieces of Rome. The
first which M. Aurelius Antoninus dedicated to his father Antonius Pius, is
175. foot in height, and now consecrated to Saint Paul, whose statue of Brass
gilded it bears on the top, that of Trajan which (as the vast letters on the
Pedistall lately discoverd declare) was raised in honor of him by the Senate,
after his death, returning from the Dacian wars, is a hundred twenty eight
foot high from the Basis whereon it stands.

On both these two Ensigns of the Roman glory, are in Mezzo levato, all the
adventures and battles of those two worthy Heroes. The last of these Saint
Peter now patroniseth, whose statue of Brass is upon the Head.

On Palm Sunday we walked to Monte Cavallo, a most sumptuous Palace of his S.
to see the distribution of Palms, and Olive branches to the Cardinals, with
other Ceremonies of that day.

From thence we made a circuit through a part of old Rome, and saw first the
Colosseo, or Vid. Romans Antic. p. 353.
Amphitheatre which Martial prefers before the seven wonders of the world, with

Omnis Caesareo cedat labor Amphitheatro. This stupenduous Fabric, which that
Poet through flattery attributes to Domitian, was began by Vespasian, and
finished by Titus his son. A great part stands entire to this day, the rest
(which I much merveile at) was demolisht for to build two eminent Palaces,
that of the Farnesi and the Cancellario.

On one side of it is a ruin of the Vid. Rom* An. i^. page 1^9.
Meta Sudans, from whence sprang water, wherewith the Spectatours ref^esht
themselves.

Hard by is the Vid. Rom Antic. page 173.
Arche Triumphall of Constantin the great, raised in honor of him for his
victory over Maxentius the Tyrant, at Pons Milvius, as the inscription on both
sides declares. In the Passage through on the one side is engraven Liberatori
Vrbis, on the other Fundatori Quietis. From this the via Appia began.

Opposite to this, is the Vid. Rom Antic. page 171.
Arch of Titus Vespasian, erected to him for his prise of Jerusalem; In the
work of this Arche is observd him riding in triumph, drawn in a Chariot by
four horses; on the contrary side, the Golden Candlestick, The tables of the
Law, the Arca Faederis, and many other Spoils taken out of the temple of
Solomon.

Having gazed a little on these Marbles, which speak Roman History more
palpably then any Author, we returned homewards by Saint John Latran, saw the
Vid. Romans Antic. pa. 350.
Obelisque, which with that before mentioned of the Madonna del populo, stood
in the Circus Maximus, this is held to be the biggest of one stone (to wit,
Ophit vulgarly granito, of which sort all the Pyramids here are) that ever came
into Rome, there being a great ship made purposely for the Carriage.

It was transported by Constantin from Alexandria to Constantinople, by his
son Constantius, from thence to Rome. In Egypt it servd for a Monument to the
King Ramusis, from which particulars one may gather that it has above two
thousand years, and yet by the preservation of Sixtus V. who placed it here,
it stands yet entire with Egyptian Characters upon it.

The Church of Saint John Latran, Vid. Romans Mod. page 442.
so called from a Palace of the Laterani, which stood there upon the Mons
Caelius, is the Mother of all Churches, not for the Fabric but Antiquity; it was
founded by Constantin; it would be too long a Subject to speak of all the
particulars, I will only name the chief, leaving the rest to the Prints in
Italy.

At one end of the Porch, is the statue of Henry the fourth of France, who gave
large revenues to the Church. At the high Altar the Pillars of Brass are very
glorious. Amongst the many sacred curiosities reserved here; first the Tomb of
Helen, Mother to Constantin the Great, four pillars bearing a stone, which
show the measure of our Saviors height, the table whereon the Soldiers cast
Lots. Two Pillars of the veil of the Temple wrent, The Pillar whereon the Cock
crew, etc.

Without S. John Lat: On the one side is a little Rotunda, coverd with Lead,
wherein is the Font, or Baptistarie of Constantin, with the fairest Pillars of
Porphyre in Rome. On the other is the Vid. Romans Mod page 45
Scala Santa, containing 28. stairs, that stood in Pilats house at Jerusalem,
whereon our Savior went and returned whilst he was in his Agony, sweating blood.

The Scala Sancta.

Above is the Sancta Sanctorum, and over it this verse.

Non est in toto sanctior Orb locus.



It Is credited that Helene sent them to Rome, with many other things of the
holy Land.

The Popes Palace of Saint John Latran, although not inhabited, yet is no
less majestic then the others, wherein his S. keeps his Court.

Having seen all the things of note, within and about Saint John Lat: we took
in our way homeward Vid. Romans Mod. page 486.
Saint Mary Maggior one of the seven Churches; and for beauty the second in
Rome; The two emulous Chappells of Paulus quintus, and Sixtus V. for the
variety and preciousnesse of the stone, imitating the famous San Lorenzo of
Florence.

Before the great Door of this Church is a high Vid. Romans Mod. page 491.
Column, taken out of the Temple of Peace, it was set up and dedicated to the
Virgin (whose statue is on the top) by Paulus V wherefore it stands
perpendicularly on four brass Coquatrises, the arms of the Borghesi, out of
which family came Paulus quintus. On the other side of Santa Maria Maggiore is
a Pyramid not so large as the others translated thither from the Mausoleum of
Augustus.

In the afternoon we saw little, only took a slight view of the Campo
Vaccino, filled with Antiquities; another day in the morning, we went to the
Vatican; In the way is Pons Elius, now Del Castello Santo Angelo, so called from
the Castle of S. Angelo by it, which was anciently Vid. Romans Antic. page 215
Moles Adriani. 'Twas built by Adrian the Emperor, as a Sepulcher for him and
his Successors; and in regard it stands yet so firm and entire, it is
reductiuto the form of a Vid. Romans Mod. page 3.
Fortress, wherein are kept the three millions of Gold, which money may be
employed on no use, unless to defend the State Apostolic, in point of arms.

From hence looking into the Tyber, * Vid. Rom Antic. page 190.
one may discern some ruins of the (a) triumphant Bridge, yet so little are
the remnants thereof, that it is hard to judge it to have been so glorious as it
was, however, it is said the Jews offered his S. fiftteen thousand Crowns, that
they might turn the course of the Tybre for some Months, and have all they
could find about this Bridge, In which I believe the Jews would not have been
loosers, it being the custom of the ancient Romans, when they past over the
Tybre in triumph, to fling in a part of their spoils taken from their enemies,
yet his S. would not assent thereunto, least the turning of the river might
prove prejudicial to the City.

From the Castello Santo Angelo is a Corridor that goes unto the Vatican, the
Popes winter Palace, to which joins Saint Peter's.

Before these two prime structures of new Rome; is a wide Court, in the midst
whereof is an Esguile or Vid. Romans Antic page 349.
Pyramid bore upon four Lions of Brass, which heretofore stood in Nero's
Cirque, and was Dedicated to Julius Caesar, whose ashes were conserved at the
top, where now the Cross triumphs. This Pyramid bears no Hierogly fixes as
the others, but is more firm and to sight newer.

In the some Court is a Fountain, from whence flows a stream of water, and
indeed throughout all Rome no street wants a public Fountain; wherefore,
because they are so common I omit them.

Vid. Rom Mod page 6.
Saint Peter's Church, as Erasmus said of that at Canterbury, -- Tanta sese
Majestate in coelum erigit, ut etiam procul in tuentibus, Religionem incutiat.
In a word, it is the most perfect model of decent Magnificence in the world,
there being an answerable Uniformity both within and without. The Frontis piece
is glorious with the Colosses of Christ, and the twelve Apostles, the Porch it
self is ample enough to be a Temple; Entering into the Church one admires the
work of the top, which is all of squares, Levati as they call it, after the
same manner with the Pantheon. In the Cupola is represented the Celestial
Hierarchy in pieces of Mosaic, so well that to all Beholders they seem
painted; In the Center of the Church stands the great Vid. Romans Mod. page 10.
Altar, the most singular piece both for the material and art that ever humane
hand produced, it is all of solid Brass, taken from the covering of the Rotunda,
and afterward melted into so stupenduous Pillars, each one whereof weighes
five and twenty thousand pounds, besides other diversity of Overages, the whole
so unpareld a work, that it is fit to stand in no Cathedral, unless S. Peter's.

* The Vatican Palace is such a Sea of lodgings, that it is said three Kings may
at the same time have room enough for themselves and followers.

In these large buildings are containd so many worthy Rarities, as the whole
world affords not the like; witness first that most famous Library of
Christendom; The Vatican, wherein several stanzas, or Centuries are most choice
Books, as well Manuscripts as Prints. At the entranee into the Bibliotheque,
are the two ancient statues of Hippolitus and Aristides; round about upon the
walls, are pictured the general Counsels.

Amongst other rare Manuscripts, which are to be seen here, as Virgils,
Terence, and many Roman Authors, written with their own hands, there are
likewise (though of later Date) King Harry the eights Letters to Anne of
Bulloyne, some in French, some in English; those beginning commonly with My
Darling, or a lascivious expression, together with his Book against Luther,
which procurd him the Title of Defender of the Faith, and at the end these two
verses written with his own hand.

Anglorum Rex Henricus Leo Decime mittit
Hoc opus, and Fidei testem and amicitiae.
In the Opposite Stanza is the Palsgraves Library, taken at Auspurg, and sent
afterward as a present to his S. Here also is kept the true draught of
Mahomets cheast. On the wall are picturd the machins, and inventions used in
raising the Pyramid before Saint Peter's with these verses.

Saxa agit Amphion Thebana ut Maenia condat
Sixtus and inmensae ponera Molis agit.
Many other singularities are there in this Library, from whence passing
through the Conclave, we went down into the armory, which standing underneath,
does as it were support the Library, wherefore the Motto over the Door is
Vrbanus VIII. Litteris arma, Armis litteras.

The Sword must uphold the pen, the pen the Sword. There are arms, and all
accomplishments for five and thirty thousand Men, Horse and foot.

Next to these, passing through a long gallerie, where the Maps of the
Provinces of old and new Italy are printed at large, we came into Belvedere so
called, because from thence one has most parr of Rome in view; There are five
gardens, some in Terrace, others low, in that of Belvedere, stands that vast
Pine Apple of Metal, which stood on the top of Moles Adriani, with two
Peacocks of the same material which stood on Scipio's Tomb; The other gardens
are filled with groves of Orange trees, and admirable Fountains, amongst which
the artificial Ship is most dilectable. In the last garden in Niches, shut up
are the best and most ancient statues of Rome, as that of Vid. Romans Mod. page
20.
Laocoon and his two sons, all of one Marble; The Cleopatra, the Niobe, the
Romulus and Remus sucking the Wolf; The Nilus, The Tybre, all famous pieces;
the first to wit, Loacoon was found in the seven halls of Titus.

In the Vatican hall (the walls of which are of Marble) is pictured the
Massacre of France, under one side Coligni and Sociorum caedes, on the other
Rex Coligni necem probat. In the Vatican Chapel we saw the judgment designd
by Michael Angelo, a piece which cannot be valued for its excellency.

After we had seen all the appartements of this vast house, returning homeward,
we stepped into Santa Maria de Cavalli Scossi, where there is the stone on which
Abraham offered Isaac, and another whereon our Savior was circumcised, with
this which ad libitum credas.

Hic lapis est in quem Natum templo obtulit olim
More Hebraeorum Virgo Maria suum.
In the next Church the Pillars are reserved in wodden cases, which Saint Peter
and Saint Paul were tide too, and whip't.

In the afternoon we walked to the Emperor Justinians gardens, and going out
by Porto del Popolo, just against the Pyramid upon the wall, I espide this
sentence, which intimates the inundation of the Tybre above the height of a man.

Notas Quirite hic Imprime hic Tybris fui. The gardens of Justinian are not so
full of delights, as thronged with Antiquities, which are for the most part
Urnes of stone, amongst which is Minu^ius Felix his; Here is besides the
Emperor Justinians Colosse, and the seventh of the termini or lapides that
stood on the Via Appia, the first is in the Capitol and none else to be found.
There is a Volume out in print only about this garden

From thence we went to the Villa Borghese Which without exempt may for all
excellencies be preferred before any other about Rome or in Italy; Before we
came into the Park, we past through a little house, where the artificial
rain: with the diversity of waterworks, by putting on several heads, on the
same fountain is very ingenuous. The gardens and Park want nothing which
should make a man conceive himself in Paradise. Groves of Laurells, Pines,
Cypresses, ^ame Hairs, Deares, Peacocks, Swans, Feasants, and all recreations
the world can afford. In the gardens the four Sphinxes of ancient stone are to
be noted. The outside of the house is adornd with four Frontispieces of
ancient Sculptures, in Basso Relievo, amongst which, Curtius falling into the
Vorago, Europa beard away on a Bull, Leda sucked by a Swan are most exquisite;
Within the house the Hall beset with Pillars of Porphyre, and other precious
stone, Seneca bleeding to death of Jet; The great Diana that Pompey worshipped of
Oriental Marble, The Gladiatour menacing the heavens, The Hermophrodite on the
bed, and for new pieces the Daphny and David.

Another day, in the morning we looked, into the Palazzo Borghese, hard by our
lodgeing, which is one of the greatest, and most royal about Rome; In the
Court the Rows of Marble Pillars and the Arcades, are very magnificent, Here
about where this Palace stands, was the Campus Martius.

From thence we went to the Palazzo Farnese, but in the way we took a full
view of the Rotunda, or Vid. Romans Antic. page 248.
Pantheon, the most absolute entire Antiquity in all Rome, which was built by
Marc. Agrippa, and dedicated to all the Gods, and is now to the Virgin and all
the Saints.

There was an Ascent into the Pantheon in the ancient times, but now one goes
down into it, (from whence I collect how the ruins of old Rome lay buried in
the earth; besides, if there be any digging for to lay the foundations of a
house in Rome, they still find pieces of statues, heads of Pillars, and the
like) yet for height it wants nothing of its first, and indeed to this day it
seems rather the work of Giants, then common men. So vast are the thirteen
Columns in the Porch, so stupenduous the Moles within, representing the world
with its orbicular form.

In the Porch is an ancient Sculpture of the primitive Christians, with this
Inscripon, which because it is not in the Prints I will not omit.

Auspiciis Eminentiss: Principis Julii Mazarini Romani, S. R. E. Cardinalis
hanc arcam Marmoream Veteris ac Novi Testamenti figuris caelatam tanquam
nascentis Ecclesiae adversus Iconomicos Testimonium.

Franciscus Gualdus Arimin: Eques Sancti Stephani tenebris in lucem.

Anno MDCXIVI.

Huc transferri ac veluti Trophaeum erigi curavit.

From the Pantheon we went directly to the Palazzo Farnese, which glorious
fabric was raised out of the ruins of the Amphitheatre; for the commendations
of the Architecture, it is enough to say Michael Angelo had a chief part
therein. Before it are two of the fairest Fountains about Rome.

In the Court the Hercules, and the Flora, are very noted Statues. But that
which surpasses all Statues, not only here, but in all Rome (and if in Rome
surely in all the world) is the Vid. Romans Mod page 205.
Tauro Farnese; A Bull with a dog and five persons, every one bigger then the
Natural cut to wonder out of one stone, the work of Apollonius and Tauriscus
of Rhodes, from whence it was conducted and placed in Antoninus his bathes,
where it was dug up a hundred years since, as Entire as if made but vesterday;
and now stands in this palace astonishing all that behold it.

In the afternoon we went to the Antiquities of the Vid. Romans Mod. page 402.
Capitol; At the foot of the stairs, are two Lions of Ancient stone, which stood
before the Rotunda, at the head, the statues of Castor and Pollux holding their
horses; The Trophies of Marius, The Primus Lapis, with a Ball of Brass on the
top; In the midst of the place is the Marcus Aurelius on horseback, of Brass,
and underneath the Marforius, which because of the Posture, Combente, as those
of rivers use to be, it is supposed was made for the Rhene; Under the stairs of
the Senate house, is a Fountain with the statue of Rome in red of Porphyre,
having on the sides the Tigris, and the Tybre.

At the right hand, as one comes on the Capital hill is the Conservatorio, so
called because most of the precious Antiquities are kept there; Vid.
As one goes in, Romans An^ic. page 69
are the statues of Julius and Augustus Caesar, the * Columna Rostrata with an
Inscription of very old Latin; not grammatical with ours, scarce the same
Dialect.

C. Duilius exemet leciones. Macistratos. Castreis exfocient: Pugnandod. Cepet
enque Navebos. marid. Consol Primos ornavet. Navebos Classeis Paenicus sumas
Cartaciniensis. Dictatored. Altod. Socieis Triresmos, Naveis, Captom. numei.
Navaled. Praedad Poplo.

In the Court is the hand and head of Commodus, his Colosse in Brass, The foot
and head of the Colosse of Apollo, of a most stupenduous vastness. A Pila,
with the ravishing of the Sabins in Relievo, with Severus, and Mamea upon it.
In the little Court going up the stairs are four admirable pieces of Basso
Relievo of Aurelius his triumph.

At the top of the stairs the old Statue of Marius, a Table of Brass with the
old Laws, in a gallerie hard by are the names of the Old and New Consuls.

The names of the Consuls when I was at Rome were these.

Primo Januarii: MDCXLVII.

Petrus Prignanus. Julius Gironus. Vincentius Baccellia. Coss. Benedictus
Masseius.
Within the Hall, and other Rooms of the Capitol, are most worthy statues,
both new and old, for New those of several Popes, for old those of Cicero;
Virgil; The Hercules of Metal, with the Lupus Fulmine tactus, and a hundred
more things worth observation.

Upon this same Mons Capitolinus, is a Church called Ara Celi, which stands on
the same ground where the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus stood.

The next day in the morning we went to the Palazzo Barberino, which I cannot
say to be inferior or superior to the others of Rome, for indeed the
Palaces of Rome are so excellent, that they will admit of no comparison
amongst themselves, for in what one comes short of another in one particular,
it outgoes it in some thing else.

The Palazzo Barberino is always to be reckond amongst the chief, whither
for the Structure, or for the Rarities.

In the Court lies a broken Pyramid. In the Galleries are admirable statues,
and amongst them the old, old Egyptian Idol Osiris, of a black strange stone,
the form of it because I never saw it printed, I will not omit.

OSIRIS In Aed. Card. Barb.



Osiris implies the figure of an Ox, yet blind Antiquity attributed any
strange shape to that Liety.

From this palace we went up to the Via Pia, The first thing of note we saw,
was a Round Chapel, one of the Torrions of Vid. Romans An^ic, page 309.
Dioclesians Bathes which are hard by, with vast Columns and Fragments of
Marble.

After that we stepped into Santa Maria della Vittoria, where the Ensigns hang
which were taken in Germany, to wit, the Cross Keys and the Miter, with the
motto Exterpentur. Against this Church stands the famous Fountain of the great
Moses striking the Rock, out of which gusheth water; The two Lions on each
side were brought from before the Rotunda. The Popes granaryes are hard by.

From thence we went to the Villa Montalto on the Viminal, saw the Water
works, the Citron trees in great number, with thousand rarities. In returning,
we saw the Church from whence the Arrians were expeld, together with the Villa
Aldobrandina.

In the afternoon we walked amongst the Antiquities, and saw the Rupis
Tarpeia, the Temple of Vid. Romans Antic. pa. 168.
Janus Quadrifrons, a solid square of Marble, with four gates which
represented the four quarters of the year, or four parts of the world. About
it are many Nichi, wherein stood the statues of the Months, as some suppose.
The place where this Temple is, was anciently called Velabrum, or Forum Boarium,
as the Arco Boario there standing by Saint Georges Church testifies.

Hard by on the mount Palatin are the ruins of the Vid. Romans An^ic. page 86.
and 88.
Palazzo Maggiore, or seat of the Caesar's.

The Valley betwixt this hill and the Aventin, was the Vid. Romans Mod. page 326.
Circus Maximus.

At the foot of the Aventin are Antoninus his Bathes. And on all sides
fragments of Antiquity, which show that the Romans built to last unto eternity.

The sixth day in the morning we went to Saint Peter's, where we saw his S.
carried about in Pomp, with his triple Crown, his breaking of the Toarch,
with other Ceremonies of the excommunication, and his washing of the Pilgrims
feet, to humble himself.

In the afternoon, we walked amongst some Antiquities, first passing along the
Tyber, we saw the Vid. Romans Antic. page 202.
Insula Tiburtina, which was made of the wheat of Tarquinius his granaries,
that was cast into the River after his banishment out from Rome; Secondly, the
Vid. Romans Antic. page 207.
Bridge whereon Horatius Cocles fought, when he commanded his men to cut down a
piece, and to leave him to his enemies.

A little farther, by the Via Ostiensis is the Pratum, where they used their
Olympic games; and in the same Meadow is the Mons Testaceus so called, because
the Romans which in their Temples and Sacrifices used earthen vessels much,
were wont to carry all their broken Pots to this place, which in time grew to
such a heap, that at this day there is a high hill of Potshares, from whence
we had a full view of all the seven hills of Rome, to wit, the Capitoline, The
Pallatin, The Aventine, The Celius, The Esquiline, The Viminall, The Quirinall.

Against Testaceus in the walls of Rome, just by the Gate that leads to Ostia,
is a huge Pyramid of Marble, Vid. Romans Antic. page 225.
Cestius one of the rich Epulons Tomb.

On good Friday we went to S. Peter's, wherein his Sanctities Chapel we saw
most admirable Representations. And there we found opportunity to go into the
Vaults, under Saint Peter's, where we saw diverse Sepulchers of the primitive
Christians, that of Pope Adrian the fourth, an English man, of Porphyre. The
Chapel where the bodies of Saint Peter and S. Paul were interd.

In the afternoon, we went to the Campo Vaccino, but in the way stands Saint
Paul's House, where according to the Acts, Act. 28. 30.
Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, etc.

The Vid. Romans Mod. page 428.
Campo Vaccino was heretofore the Forum Romanum, filled with the best buildings
about Rome, of which great remnants are yet standing. Going down into it from
the Capitol, in the wall toward the foundations of the new Capitol is some
part of the old, of mighty great stones. On the left is the Prison anciently
Tertullianum, now San Pietro in Carcere, because he was there imprisond.

At the foot of the Capitol is the Vid. Romans Antic. page 165.
Arc triumphal, of Septimius Severus supposed to be the first that was erected
in Rome, amongst the work upon this Arche is be seen the fashion of the Roman
Aries.

The three Pillars which stand buried half way in the ground behind the
Capitol, are of the Temple of Jupiter stator.

The seven the Temple of Concord.

The third in the midst of Campo Vaccino, The Temple of Jupiter tonant.

Hard by there is the Vorago, whereinto Curtius threw himself, and a good way
toward the Villa Farnese, the place where Remus and Romulus were found by
Faustulus.

At the other end of the Campo Vaccino, is the Vid. Romans Antic. pa. 239.
Temple of Peace, where Vespasian conserved that precious Treasury he brought
away from Jerusalem.

On the Palatin the Temple of Isis.

One morning we went to S. John Latran, where we saw the solemnity of a Moore,
and two Jews baptized in Constantins Baptistary.

From thence we went to the Villa Matthei, in the way runs Claudus his
Aquiducts, and hard by is the Temple of Fannus, a very entire Antiquity, now
Saint Stefano Rotundo.

In the Villa Matthei there is an ancient Pila, a Pyramid, the Colosse of
Alexander, things as pleasing to the judicious, as the other delights of the
gardens to the ignorant.

The same day about the Evening, we went to the Greeks Church where we saw the
Ceremonies of the Eastern Churches, and heard their Service all in Greek. On
Easter day we went to Saint Peter's, to see the manner of his S. receiving the
Eucharist: The rest of that day we reposed to fit our selves for the voyage of
Naples, so that now after so satisfactory a sight of this Mistress of the world
Rome, we bid her adieu for a time, leaving what we now omitted till our Return.

The voyage from Rome to Naples, though it be the most dangerous passage in
Italy, because the ways are so thronged with Banditos, yet in the upshot it
proves no less requisite to minds inquisitive in the Roman Antiquities; no
less delightful to men that would see the Wonders of Nature, then any other
in Europe.

There is all the way so many fragments of the Roman glory, that it is hard to
judge whither Rome and Naples were once joynd together, or whither Pozzuolo was
the Suburb of Rome.

From whence we set forth out of Port. Lat: anciently Asinaria; a mile out of
the City there are on all sides pieces of Antiquity. On the right hand we left
the Aquiducts of of Ancus Martius, and Claudius, with the new of Sixtus Quintus
not so stately as the old, on which the Aqua Felice runs sixteen miles. A
little farther on the right upon the Via Appia, is the Vid. Rom Antic. pa. 228.
Sepulcher of Metella Crassus his wife, now Capo di buove from the Oxes heads
of Marble upon it, with many more ancient Tombs.

Hard by is the Cirque of Caracalla, where lies the Pyramid that the old Earl
of Arundell would have bought, but in regard of the vastness, could find no
possibility of conveying it to the Tyber, it is said the present Pope after his
Nephews Palace in Piazza di Navona is finished, will erect it there in Circus
Agonalis.

These and diverse more Antiquities we had in view, round about us, till we
came unto Frescati.

Where having dined, we walked up to old Tusculum, to see Ciceros house, where
he composed that immortal testimony of Morality and learning, his Tusculans
Qnestions. it is situated on the top of a hill two mile above Frescati; so that
some give the Etemology (...) from (...) vexare, because it is troublesome to go
up to.

Tullies house stands, that continually it is refresht with gales of wind, and
has on all sides a most pleasant Prospect, even to the Mediterranean Sea, it
shows it self thus in its ruins.

Jullies Jusculan House

In the ruin under the letter. A. was of late years found a treasure.

B. Tullies house whereof. 10. Vaults are yet very firm.

C. The place where his Piscina or Fish-ponde was.



The territory of Frescati, as it was the ancient delight of the Romans, so it
is as yet coverd with Gardens and Villas, about ten Cardinals having their
Country seats there. A place of such ravishing delights, as fitter's for the
Gods to inhabit then men. Such is the Quantity of trees, which keep perpetually
green, the murmuring of Fountains and the like.

Amongst the the Villa's, the chief, and which wonderfully declares the
ingenuity of the Italians, is the Aldobrandina, which for divises in water is
the first within or without Rome, I think I may say in the world. Quite through
the garden, falls a Cataract, or deluge of water, toward the Embushment of
which, stand two Serpentin Pillars of Mosaic, from the tops of which, the
water creeps down; Below in the Court is that admirable Fountain, in which is
represented Atlas throwing up water, which forces artificial Thunder, and a
perfect Rainbow; Whilst the Elements seem here to be at difference; A Satyr
blows a horn louder then I ever heard a man; And Pan in the Interim, plays
two diverse tunes upon the Organes: Things that strike astonishment to all the
Spectators, which whosoever they be, must look to go away wet to the skin,
as we did, and from thence went into a place called the terrestiall Paradise, and
not undeservedly; for as the other inventions are moved by water, so these go
by wind. At the end of it is fashiond a hill, Parnassus whereon set the nine
Muses with several wind Instruments that sound by art. Underneath this hill
are Organs, which played diverse tunes so distinctly, that we conceived some
Master was playing on them, but looking we saw they went of themselves, the
cause of all this we afterward saw; In the midst of the room, there being a
Hole out of which wind issues, so violently, that for half a quarter of an
hour it bears up a Ball.

Leaving Frescati, that afternoon we past by Diana's Lake, and the wood famous
for the fiction of Acteon. From thence we had a woody and mountanous way unto
Veletri, where we lay, Veletri heretofore belongd to the Volsci, and the
ancestors of Augustus came from thence.

The best things to be seen in it now is the statue of Pope Urban the eight, in
^rasse, and the public fountains.

The next morning having past down the hill, whereon Veletri stands, we came
into a plain Country, and dined at Sermoneta, fifteen miles from Veletri.

In the afternoon, about three miles from Sermoneta, we past by a Tower, built
on the top of a Rock, to defend the Country from Robbery, as they say, though I
believe more to take money for passage, through the Gate below.

Five Italian miles farther, near to the Casa Nuova, and casa Biancha at the
foot of the hills, at the left are the Tres Tabernae, or three Tavernes, where
the Brethren met Saint Paul, in his voyage to Rome; according to the Acts. They
show themselves in this form now, and are indifferent entire, they being built
as the other Fabrics of the Romans, of great stones and Bricks in Square.

Tres Tabernae mentioned Act: 28th



Just before the Tres Tabernae are the Pomptine Fennes, and above, on a hill
stands Setia, which Martial says -- Pendulam Pomptinos spectare campos.

That night we lay at Piperno, at the Post house on the other side of the
Hill; but before we there arrived, we saw the Quarters of many Banditas hanged
on the high way side, an argument of the great hazard one undergoes in this
journey, if not a competent number together. Piperno heretofore Privernum was a
City of the Volsci, noted only for the Birth of Virgills Camilla, who came
from thence.

The next morning leaving Piperno, we past by a Convent, with a fair ancient
Church called Fossa Nova, where Thomas Aquinas died, which Place was the Appii
Forum. Likewise mentioned by Saint Luke, in his description of Saint Paul's
voyage to Rome.

About four miles farther, at a high Tower we enterd upon the Via Appia, that
Queen of ways, which Appius in his Consulship* lead from Rome to Capua, and
which Trajan afterward extended to Brundusium.

This street if I may so call it (the ruins of houses, Tombs, and the like on
both sides of it, testifying the former beauty thereof) is compacted of such
solid stones, that after so long a succession of time, neither the continual
passage of foot or horse, nor the injury of weather, has yet consumed any
part of it, unless that which past through the Pomptine Fennes which the water
has overflowde, the rest is very entire and firm, chiefly from this Tower to
Terracina, where we dind.

Terracina was formerly Anxur, as Livie has it, Anxur fuit quae nunc
Terracinae sunt Vrbs prona in paludes, it stands on the Cercean Promontory,
according to that of Virgill -- Circaeumque jugum queis
Jupiter Anxuris oris-Praesidet.


Upon which Servius in his Comentarie gives the dirivation of Anxur, quasi
(...) sine novacula, because that Jupiter imberbis was there worshipped; a part
of which Temple yet stands in the walls of the Dome, as the vast Marbles and
pieces of Pillars witness; Before it are some old inscriptions, with a Pillar
to Theodorick for having dried the Fennes, and renewed the way; over the old
Inscriptions are these new. Inclyta Gothorum Regis monumenta vetusta
Anxurei hoc oculis exposuere Loco.


The Old. Imp. Caesar Divi Nervae Fili us Nerva Trajanus Aug: Germanicus
Dacicus Pontif: Max: Trib: Pot: XVIIII. Imp. VI. Cos. V. PP. XVIII. Silices sua
Pecunia stravit.

TIT VPIO Aug:
Optato Pontiano Procuratori ET Prefect: Classis TI Julius TI Fab -- Optatus
II. VIR.


From Terraccina to Fondi, are ten miles, which way lying in the Confines of
the State of Rome, and the Kingdom of Naples, is the most dangerous part of
all the voyage. From Terracina we first past by the Emperor Galbas Villa; of
which take Suetonius. Ser. Galba Imperator M. Valerio Messalla, Cn. Lentulo
Coss. natus est IX. Kal. Januarii in villa Colli supposita prope Tarracinam
sinistrorsum Fundos petentibus.

Two mile farther we came to a wall with a Gate, which is the entrance into
the Kingdom of Naples, where on a Marble Table I read thus.

Hospes hic sunt Fines regni Neopolitani, si amicus advenis pacate omnia
invenies, and malis moribus pulsis, bonas leges.

From thence keeping right on the Via Appia, plain and even, we saw many
pieces of Antiquity, amongst which was an ancient Tomb, very entire, but
whose, it is not certain.

In this pleasant passage we came at length to Fundi, where we lay that night.

Fundi, though spoild of all signs of its Antiquity, yet still keeps its old
name, as Cicer: Atic.

-- Fundis accepi tuasitt eras caenans. It Is situated in a low plain, and as
the Poet says Collibus hinc atque inde Lacu simul aequore cinctum
Citria cui florent hortis e littore Myrti.


The Territoire about is very fruitful of Orange trees, so much that we went
into an Orchard, and for twenty Citrons and about thirty Oranges, we gave the
Owner a Julio, (that comes to an English sixpence) which very well contented
him, and I believe if we had stood to agree upon the price, we might have had
as many more for that money.

Over a gate on the left hand at Fundi, is this old Inscription.

EnVmmis Fronius LF DECTIEN C. Lucius, M. F. M. Runtius, L. F. Mess. Aed:
Portas, Turreis, Murum. Ex SC. Faciund: Coerunt Eisdemque probarunt.

Near to Fondi we saw the Mons Caecubus noted amongst the ancients for the good
Wine it bore, as Martial says.

-- Caecuba Fundanis generosa coquuntur ahenis. The next morning insisting yet
on the Via Appia; which though mountanous in that part, yet has on both sides
Myrtles, Bays, Locusts, Pomegrannets, and such like Verts, that grow wild in
the Hedges, we came at length to an ancient Torret, built half of solid
Marble; which after little examination we found to be Ciceros Tomb, his
Villa Formiana famous for his Slaughter, being there; Tullie^s Sepulcher is now
in this figure. As in the page following.

Jullies tomb at his Vida Formiana



This Tomb stands in an Olive garden, and at that instant when we rode by, a
labourer working there, dug up two old Coins, which some of our Company
bought. From hence we were in view of Cajeta; Of which Virgil says, Tu qoque
littoribus nostris Aeneia Nutrix
Aeternam moriens famam Cajeta dedisti.


The City lies in a Peninsula, very strong, and hard to come to by Land, but
over a narrow Isthmus.

The mountain cleft in sunder by an Earthquake (which commonly happen in the
Kingdom of Naples) is very hidious. The Inhabitants bear a great reverence to
this place, for that they believe it happened at the same time when our Savior
was in his Passion.

In the Church hard by the Trinitate, amongst other things to be seen, there is
the Corpse of the Duke of Bourbon in a wodden Chest, who was killed in attempting
to surprise Rome; His Epitaph is thus in Spanish.

Francia me dio la luze
Espanna m' esfuerzo y ventura,
Roma mi dio la muerte
Gaeta la Sepoltura.
France gave me breath,
Spain strength to Arms did call,
Rome gave me Death;
Gajeta Burial.
In the great Church at Gaieta is a huge Crater or Bowl, now put to the use of
a Font, which was dug up out of the ruins of Formia. The work so good that
the Sculptor was not ashamed to put his name to it; for thereon is this.

(...) (...), (...).
At Gajeta twill quit the pains of climing up the Promontory, to see the
Mausoleum of L. Munatius Plancus, one of Ciceros Pupills, a most entire
Antiquity; over the door may plainly be read.

L Munatius L. P. L. F. L. Pron. Plancus. Cos. Cens. Imp Iter. VII. Vir. Epul.
Triump. ex Raptis. Aedem. Saturni fecit de Manubiis. Agros. Div. Sit. in
Italia. Beneventi. In. Gallia Colonias deduxit. Lugdunum and Rauricam.

From this a Chronologer may collect, it is of near one thousand six hundred
years standing.

The Country from Mola to Gajeta, contains more Orange trees then any I know,
except Naples it self.

A little farther, about a mile from Mola, Formiae anciently, a Marble on the
Via Appia speaks thus

Plautius Theodo Pil: Apella Magister Augustalis Plautiae A. L. Rufae
ConLibert. Concubin. Piae Plautiae Aug* L. Faustae Libert.

That day we dind at Mola, where there is to be seen Ciceros Grote, in which
he wrote many of his familiar Epistles.

In the afternoon eight miles from Mola, we came unto Garigliano, where the
famous City Minturna stood, as a very entire Aquiduct, an Amphitheatre, with
many other ruins testify.

Having past here the river Liris, that terminated old Latium we came into the
Meadows of Minturna, where Marius hid himself in his flight from Sylla; at the
end of those fields runs along, Mons Massicus, so renowned for the wines it
produced, it is now called Garo, and from thence the river Liris, Garigliano,
adjoining are the ruins of Senuessa, as Martial -- Et Senuessanis venerunt
Massica Praelis.

That night we lay in Ager Falernus, at a Village called S. Agatha, at the
bottom of Sessa, formerly Aurunca.

The Ager Falernus is all that space of ground, which lies betwixt the Mons
Massicus, and the River Vulturnus, so that because of their affinity, Vinum
Massicum and Falernum was used promiscuously by the Ancients.

The next morning, we past by Torre di Francolesse, where Hanniball being
besieged by Fabius Maximus, escapt through that famous stratageme of making his
enemies drunk.

Two mile farther, we came in view of that happy Plain of Campania, now
Terru di Lavoro, which most Authors, as well Modern, as old, extol for the
most fruitful plat of earth, that is in the Universe. In a word, it was the
Subject of Virgils Georgicks.

In which having rode five miles, we came to dinner at New Capua, which though
so called in regard of the other, yet has some remnants of Antiquity. In the
Cloister of a Church, are some Ancient Tombs.

In the midst of the City, at the entrance as I suppose of the Jesuits
College, is this old Inscription.

Julio Auroxonti Leonidae. V. C. Quaestori Praet. Curatori Capuensium Ob multa
praeclara in cives patriamque Honori Licentiae suae merita Institutori Novorum
ac Renovatori Operum Publicorum. Ab origin Patrono omni laud dignissimo Regio
Competi.

The old Capua, the delight of Hanniball, and Paragon with Rome, and Carthage
is two mile off out of the way, on the left where the ruins of Columns,
Theaters, Temples, Porches show its former Magnificence. From Capua to Naples,
the way is even, spacious, and like a garden, it is indeed Campania. The
fertility of which is such, that if the owner have not as much Wine out of one
Vine, as will load five Mules, he thinks his labor ill spent, an incredible,
though true argument of the fruitfullnesse, of this Country. In the midway
stands Anversa, and eight miles farther Naples.

This Metropolis of that Kingdom, Naples.
which takes its denomination from thence, is a Maritimate on the Mediterranean
shore.

It Is ancient, though Neapolis, and was first called Parthenope. At this present
it is reckond the third City in Italy, and so great are the delights which nature
has allowed to this place, that it is still frequented by men of high condition,
and great personages, so that it has taken the Epethite, Naples the Gentle.

The streets of Naples are generally well paved of freestone, especially that
of Toledo, very large and even. Which indeed is necessary, here in regard of
the multitude of Coaches that pass to and fro. The Houses are very uniforme,
built flat, at the top to walk on, a notable convenience in these hot parts.

Another like accommodation which this City has, against the heats is the
Mole, which is like an Artificial street casting it self into the Sea, hither
all the Gentry at the evening retire to take the Fresco.

At the end of the Mole is the Fanal, and underneath a fountain, with the
statues of the old Dieties of Parthenope.

From thence one has in view the mountanous Island Capreas, the delight of
Tyberius.

Amongst the Palaces of Naplee, the Vice Kings then Duca d' Arcos is the
fairest. There are three Castles, S. Elmo above, Castle nuovo, Castello del Ovo
below. The Churches are generally the best I ever came into, filled with Marbles,
chiefly the Carthusians, the Jesuits, the Bishops Chapel.

The only Antiquity within the City, is at the Theatins Church, which was a
Temple of Castor and Pollux, the Frontispiece, or Porch of ancient Pillars,
with a Greek Inscription over it (which Language this City spoke when it was
called Parthenope) as likewise the remnants of their two Statues yet standing;
The Inscription is this.

(...).

It beiug May while we staide at Naples, We saw the famous Miracle of the blood
of Santo Gennaro, carried in procession.

Naples is extremely populous, and consequently vicious, he that desires to
live a retired, or indeed chaste life must not set up there; as the gardens are
filled with Oranges, so the houses want not for Lemmon.

Jusque datum Sceleri, says the Poet.

There were at my being there thirty thousand Courtesans Registered, that paid
taxes for their pleasure.

The things within Naples, are not to be omitted, yet those about give far
more satisfaction; and truly if a traveller Hyperbolise in any part of his
voyage of Italy, the most fit Theme he can take, are the Wonders a little
distant from Naples; and first the Tractus Puteolanus scatens hominum ac
naturae miraculis.

Parting for Pozzuoloes, on the left a Suburb by the Sea side leads to the
Margouline, where in the Church called Santa Maria Del Parto, is the Sepulcher of
Sincerus Sannazarius, with many figures of Marble excellently cut, and this
Epitaph.

Actius.
Sincerus.
D. O. M.
Da Sacro cineri Flores, Hic ille Maroni,
Sincerus Musa Proximus ut tumulo.
Vix: Ann. LXXI. Obiit MD XXX.
A Countreyman of ours in honor to that worthy Poet, has left this paper of
verses beside his Tomb.

Sonulus hendeca-Syllabicus Rithmicus.
Valum Nobile par brevi Camoena
Longum mensus iter; Fleam necesse
Quorum fertur oves? ita iste flesse.
Vt narint lachrimis and uda Avena
Seu pisces, lepida sed ille vena
Tam pisces cecinit probe atque press
Se tanquam placidos ut ipse adesse
Cura praestiteriut oves arena
Partum Virginis unus art rara
In sanctos rotulos modosque cultos
Alter quem memorant Sybillae ad ar^
Annos Vaticinatus ante multos
Quid mirum est igitur jacere clara
Ambos Virginis Vrbe Consepultos.
Ad Aras
P. Virgilii Maronis, etc.
Act: Sin: Poetarum Princip:
Hugo Hollandus Nobilis Cambo Britannus.
Flevit Fixitque
Autore vero egregio and amico Alexandro
Hebruno Nobili Anglo Britanno.
1626. Mart. 5.

Returning back a little, we came to the entrance of the famous Grotte, over
which on the left hand, stands Virgils Tomb upon a high rock, so that it is
scarce to be seen by those that pass below, The Guides commonly showing a
false; wherefore some few days after we walked up into it.

Over the Door of the Garden you pass through to it, is this Inscription on a
Marble.

Maronis Vrnam.
Cum Adjacente Monticulo, extensaque ad Cryptam planitie. Modiorum trium cum
dimidio circiter Vrbano VIII. annuente, etc.

Renovanda Mem. Praesentis Concessionis singulis XXVIII annis in actis Cur
Archiepiscopalis.

Having read this we went into the Tomb, now of this Form and situation. As
in the page following.

A. Virgills Tomb* B. The entrance into the Grotte C. a little chapel taken
for Virgills Tomb, but falsely.



This Tomb of the Prince of Poets is built in a Rotunda, or Cupola, about five
paces long, within, the walls are of Brick, in square after the Roman way, the
outside is of Massive stone, all coverd now with Bushes, amongst which three or
four Bay trees, (an immortal Emblem of the Prince of Poets there interd)
shoot forth about the height of a man, round it lie scatterd ruins, that
testify its former beauty, In the rock just opposite to the entrance, where
his known Epitaph of Mantua me genuit was, that being decayed, is placed a
Marble, stone with these verses.

STAI^SI Cencovius. 15 89
Qui Cineres? Tumuli haec vestigia, conditur olim
Ille hoc, qui cecinit pascua, rura, Duces,
Can: Rec: MDLIIII.
What dust lies here? this Heap protects his Hearse.
Who whilome warbled Fields, Farms, Fights in Verse.
The Crypta Neapolitana a perfect sign of the Roman Magnificence is the rockie
Mountain Pausylippus, cut through, very high, spacious* and well paved, so
that for the space of a mile, two Coaches may go on Front under earth* in the
midst is a Madonna, with a Lamp perpetually burning, the words at the
Encounter are Alla Marina, Alla Montagne.

At the going out of the Grotte, we struck toward the right, and arrived at
the Grotta del Cane, which has some innate property, to kill every living
thing that enters, if not speedily cast into the lake Agnano, 15. paces
distant. We saw the experiment, (as for the most part it is shown) in a Dog,
which seemed to loose his vital force by degrees, but afterward being thrown
into the Lake, revived.

Hard by are the Stowes of San Gennaro reasonable hot, with the odor of
Sulphur.

Hence turning to the left, we came to Capuchins, and saw the stone whereon San
Gen naro was beheaded, with Nasita a Mountain in the Sea, and a little toward
the right hand, is the Sulphatara, or hill of Brimstone, on which no grass or
herb grows, but it is all white with ashes, it still casting out of several
holes a continual smoke, with Flame, making the very earth to boil.

The ground is hollow underneath, and makes a hidious noise if struck upon
with a Hammer, or the like. These hills were called by the ancient Leucogei;
Campus Phlegraeus, and Forum Vulcani, whose Kingdom (if in any part of the
world) is here about, the Fire breaking out even in the high ways. Here they
compose Medicinal Pots of Brimstone.

Advancing forward, into the Suburbs of Pozzuoles, we saw an Amphitheatre, and
Ciceros house, called Academia.

Afterward being come to the Port, we took a barque, to pass over the bay,
which is round about, filled with remnants of those Romans magnificence, that
lived there.

The first place we saw after we were set to Land, was the Mercato del
Sabbato formerly a a Cirque; and the burial place of the ancient Romans.

From thence we past through the Elisian Fields (as they call them) a plain
spot of Earth, between the Mount Misenus, and the Augustins Convent of twenty
Acres, and came to the ancient Misenus, so called from the Trumpeter of Aeneas
there interd, the old Poets called it A erius, because of the many Sotteran Caves
in it; of which many are yet to be seen.

The chief is the Piscina Mirabili; before which is the Mare Mortuum. This
Piscina called mirabili, because of the wonderful art it is built with, was a
reserver of fresh water for the Navy, which, (because this stands so near the
Sea) was brought sixty mile. It has eleven Pillars in the length, four in
breadth, about four and forty in all. The material it is plaisterd with, in
the inside is as durable as stone, yet no man knows of what it is composed,
some conceive it to be of the whites of Eggs, and dust of Marble mingled
together.

From hence leaving Lucullus his house at the left, we went down into the
Cento Camerelle, or Neros hundred Chambers, where he kept his Prisoners, a
most hidious place.

Below that toward the Seaside is the Temple of Hercules, the place where
Agrippina, Neros Mother was killed, the Pescheries of Hortensius, Tacitus his
sons house, with many other ancient fragments which we saw though with much
pains.

From thence we took boat for Baia, where the Castle built by Charles the
fifth of France is strong, going thither we could discern the foundations of
Cimeria, and old Baia underneath the Sea, with the Via Consularis overwhelmed
by the water, and on the shore nothing but ruins.

Hereabouts Caron was feigned to pass with his Boat. Here we set again to
Land, and saw the Temple of Venus, the Sepulcher of Agrippina, with diverse
figures, and her Palace of the same work. The Temple of Diana at the left,
the Bathes of Trullius; The houses of Marius Pompey, Nero standing aloft.

Hereabout the Sea water is naturally hot: Hard by we went into Ciceros Bathes,
as gallant and entire an Antiquity as any in the Tract of Pozzuolo; These
waters were so sovereign, not many years since over most diseases, that over
every Bath was written for what cures it was good, of which Inscriptions some
letters yet stand, but the Physicians of Palermo (as they tell the story)
finding those waters prejudicial to their custom, went with instruments
expressly, and demolisht those writings (so that for the present they are
unusefull) the said Physicians, being all cast away in their return.

From these Bathes we went up to the Stowes of Tritola extremely hot, even to
Suffocacation, yet contrary to the Grottadel Cane, that choking below, and
harmless above, these cool and refreshing below, but almost stifeling above.

From thence we took horse, and past by the Lacus Lucrinus, the greater part
whereof is now coverd with the Monte Nuovo, which mountain (as their tradition
is) was raised in one night, a mile high, from the ashes which came out of
Sulfatara, and so coverd the Lucrin Lake. Tommaso Fonnare an old man of
Pozzuolo, that dyed three years since remembered of that mountains being made
in one night a hundred years ago.

After that we rode to the Lake Avernus, where abouts was the Poets Acheron or
descent into hell, at one side of the Lake is the Temple of Apollo; at the
other, the Sybilla Cumanas Grotte. It Is very spacious, at the end is a
Magnificent ascent where the Oracle stood, with the way that lead to Cuma, Her
bath yet stands, and her Chambers painted in Mosaic work, yet all under
ground, as indeed most of the aforesaid Antiquities (excepting the Temples) are.

In returning to Pozzuolo, we saw the Mount Gaurus, from whence came the best
Falernum, now called Barbaro, it being altogether sterile. In Puteoli there are
some Antiquities, as the Temple of Neptune, etc. In the Port are the vast
ruins of Caligulas Bridge, which past three mile cross the Sea, from
Pozzuoles to Baia.

After dinner we went back to Naples, In the way we saw the Lions,
Austriches, and other wild beasts and fowls, that a certain Prince keeps.

Having reposed a day after this troublesome, yet satisfactory voyage of
Pozzuoles, the next morning we set out of the quite contrary part of Naples,
to see that Miracle of Nature, the Brother of Aetna, Vesuvius, so famous for
its last eruption.

On the way, almost at the foot of the mountain, (a Marble frame which are
usual on the high ways, in the Kingdom of Naples) relates this.

Posteri Posteri
Vestra res agitur
Dies facem profert Dici nudius perendino Advortite.
Vicies ab satu solis ni fabulatur historia
Arsit Vesevus
Immani semper clade haesitantantium.
Ne posthaec incertos occupet.
Vterum gerit Mons hic moneo.
Bitumine, alumine, Ferro, Sulphur, Auro,
Argento, Nitro, Aquarum
Fontibus gravem.
Seryus, Ocyus ignescet, pelagoque influente pariet.
Sedante parturit.
Concutitur, concutitque solum,
Fumigat, coruscat, Fla^migerat, Quatit aerem.
Horrendum immugit, boat, tonat
Arsit finibus accolas
Emica dum licet.
Jam jam inititur mixtum igne lacum evomit
Praecipiti ruit ille lapsu
Seramque fugam praevertit
Si praeripit actum est periisti.
Ann: Sal. M DCXXX. XVI. Jan
Philippo IV. Rego.
Tum tu si sap is audi clamantem Lapidem
Sperne Larem, sperne Sarcinulas, mora nulla fuge.
Antonio Suares Vice Praefecto viarum.
The Vesuvius shows it self thus from Naples.

The Mountain Vesuvius



Upon this Hill, or (changing a Letter) Hell is a goodly Country for the space
of four mile on all sides, which formerly produced the excellent Graeco, made
barren, being coverd with a matter like Seacole Sinders. Going up higher it is
hidious to behold the deep cracks in the Earth, through which the streams of
Sulphur past, all about lies scatterd the several materials it cast forth;
Some like metal, other like Pitch, Brimstone and the like, with such vast
stones, as (I speak the least) four porters would not able to carry one of
them

Being come so near the top, as we could with our horses, we were forced to
alight, and to crawle up the steeper part, which is all coverd with a reddish
substance, that sounds like earthen vessels, some conceive it to be Pumie
stone burnt, after this we got up though weary to the top; where the Vorago is
so terrifying a spectacle, that if I would paint Hell, this would be the best
Pattern; It is a hole about three mile in compass, and about half as much in
depth, in the midst is a new hill that still vomits thick smoke, which the fire
within has raised within few years, it daily increases, and when it is grown
to a fuller Bulk caveat Neapolis.

Pliny the Naturalist too Inquisitive after the cause of this intestine fire
changed lives with Death on this Mountain.

In returning, as we were tired in getting up, so we went easily down, though
almost up to the knees in ashes.

This Mountain was the Vltima Meta of our voyage to Naples, wherefore having
with much content seen these wonderful things of Antiquity, Nature, and
Curiosity; after some few days we parted from Naples to Rome, treading the
same path we had before trac't, At our going out of the Kingdom, they made us
pay five times, for our Vallees, although they could find no prohibited goods;
At our entrance they let us pass quietly, without paying a farthing.

All the way to Rome I saw nothing observable, but what I had before spoken of,
only I would not omit the great quantity of Bufferos (Beasts which furnish the
Soldiery with their skins) that we met in the Country.

The day after our return to Rome, we walked to San Sebastiano, where a
mercenary Friar let us down into the Roma Sotterranea, or Rome under ground,
those hallowed Cavernes where the Church in her Infancy shelterd her self from
persecution; there is a most immense Folio out on this Subject. It Is now indeed
a City for the Dead, where in every street are pild gradually one above
another, the Corpse of Martyrs, to which some Monuments are added with no other
Epitaphs then this, Pro Christo.

This place is as stupendous for the rarity as venerable for the Antiquity:
The natives of Rome know not how far these Vaults continue under the Earth;
yet some miles they say are already discoverd, with so many Maeanders, that he
who adventures to enter without an experienced Guide may (as some French men
did) go into his grave living, yet increase the Bill of Mortality.

From thence we went into the Transtevere, saw first Montorio, formerly the
Janiculum, and the Chapel where (ut aiunt) Saint Peter was crucifified. In
the Church lies buried the Count Tiron Oneille of Ireland, who coming to Rome
in devotion dyed, very poor, yet for his good service in the Catholic Cause,
has a Tombestone with this Inscription.

D. O. M.
Roderico Principi Odonallio Comiti Tironalliae in Hibernia, Qui pro Religione
Catholica Gravissimis defunctus periculis. In Sago pariter and in Toga,
Constantissimus Cultor, and defensor Apostolicae Romanae Fidei, etc.

From thence we went down into many rich Churches, where the Primitive
Christians were martyrd; In one to wit, Santa Maria Transteverana is the
Fountain of Oil that arose, at our Saviors birth; Some stones that were tide
at the Martyrs feet when they were drowned, with other manner of Torments that
they were put to; In the same Church are very rare pillars of Porphyre, and
other stone taken from Aurelians baths. Thus every day produced a new sight to
us, but I would not pass by our Voyage to Tivoli, which was as follows.

Setting forth out of Rome, at Porta di San Lorenzo five miles from the City,
we saw a Bridge over the Teverone, built by Mamea, the Mother of Severus; A
little forwarder the Sepulcher of Valerius Volusi, and ancient Tombs without
number; On farther there is a place called Fide nates, and a Sulphurious River, A
Bridge called Ponte Lucano, and an ancient Tower garnisht with Inscriptions, that
stands for the Sepulcher of Plautius.

When we were come to Tivoli, we went to see those wonderful Eliziums, which
the Cardinal d' Este at most Royal expense has there in possession; the
sight whereof in my Opinion, may at this present draw as many to see Tivoli, as
Rome with all her Merveiles.

This shall be my pattern for a Country seat; All Regale, and therefore I Will
not omit any Particular.

First it is evident, the Hill was made even, and upon that Piazza this Palace
was erected; which is built of square stone, and all things answerable to a
Kingly Grandezza.

At the right hand are those Gardens which they call the secret, in which there
are sixteen huge Lavers of Marble, that cast forth Chrystalline water, in the
midst of these stands a Janus Quadrifrons higher then those, which makes four
more fountains that resemble Looking Glasses.

At the left there is a sumptuous Place for all manner of Exercises, or
Tournaments. The Facciata or Front has between the Windows many ancient
Statues, and so the first Porch with most ample steps in the ascent to the
Palace.

Before this, there is a most glorious Fountain, with the Statue of Leda; And
four vast and most delicious gardens in view.

Passing down the steps which have Piles of Water on both sides, amongst the
Groves there is these Fountains of Tethys, Esculapius, Arethusa, Pandora,
Pomona, and Flora. Afterward there is the stately Pegasus in Pamossa. The two
Colosses of the Sybilla Tyburtina, and Melicerta. The Cupids pouring water out
of their Flaskes are most ingenious, next there are some Urnes, upon which
stand ten Nymphs, and in the midst the Caves of the Sybilla, Tiburtina, and
Diana, Goddess of the Woods. Both aadornd with fountains, statues, Roots of
Coral, Mother of Pearl, and paved with Mosaic work.

On the other side of the Garden sets Rome triumphant, in the midst of her most
Memorable Fabrics, as the Pantheon, Capitol, Cirques, Theaters,
Amphitheatres, Obelisques, Mausoleos, Archs Triumphall, Pyramids, Aquiducts,
Porticos, Thermas, and the like. Neither is the River Tyber wanting; for out of
the Wolf and Twins gusheth a Rivolet, proportionable to that Representative
City.

In the next garden there is the Vccellario, where amonst the Branches of Trees,
Artificial Birds move their Wings and sing sweetly; on a sudden an Owl
appears, and they change their Melody into a chattering admiration.

Not far from thence is the Fountain of Dragons, which vomit forth the water
with a most horrid Noise.

The Grotte of Nature where the Organs play most harmoniously by the motion of
Water. In the garden that follows are diverse Lakelike conservatories of Fish,
with Swans, here the Mete Sudanti, the Ocean with Neptune in his Chariot on
Sea Horse are most stupenduous. In the last the Triton and thousand exotic
Plants are to be seen.

Tired with these Masterpieces of Art, we went to that Natural Cascata, or
Cataract at Tivoli, which is made by the precipitious fall of the River Anien
from the Mountains, it rusheth down with that Fury, that there is still a
thick mist over it, and by the Reflection of the Sun arises a perfect Rainbow.

Pliny mentions this River to have that Innate Quality to Petrifie the ground
it passes through, or any thing that lies long in it. The Sulphurious stream
I above mentioned flows from this.

Near to this is an old Temple, some say of Hercules, others adjudge it to the
Sibylla Tyburtina, or Albunea, and the more propable, for Tivoli was anciently
Tybur. Horace and many of the Roman Magnates had their Villas here, of which
they show their Ruins, as likewise the Sybilles Cave.

Returning for Rome, one may discern Preneste, and a little out of the way, on
the left stands a huge moles of Antiquity, the Villa Hadriana, the heap rather
of a City then a House, it is reported he had there the most eminent buildings
of the World taken from the Originalls, but

-- Jam seges est, ubi Troja fuit.
I have been long in the Transaction of these things, in and about Rome, and
now end somewhat abruptly, the diversity of things, makes my memory
treacherous, I can only say

Roma Capo e Compendio del Mondo
A cui non e cosa simile ne seconda.
Rome of the world Compendium and Head
Admits no like, nor can be seconded.
The heats growing on at Rome, we left it to set up our station for the Summer
at Sienna, and having already seen Caprarola, we went with the Procacccio, so
that passing to Viterbo by the Strada Nuova, we saw some remnants of the Via
Cassia, with Soutry where Orlando Furioso was borne, and the ruins of
Gharlemaines Palace.

At the great Inn at Radicofany, we met the Marquis de Fontenay, the French
Ambassador in his voyage to Rome.

A week after our arrive at Sienna, was an Opera represented on the new Theater
of Prince Matthias, with several changes of Scenes, as a Garden, Sea,
Palace, and other Machines, at which the Italians are spoke to be excellent.

All the time of our stay at Sienna, I filled my books more with observations of
the Language, then of the people, City, or Country: Only the diversity of
fruits which are every day brought to Market; and sold at a low rate, argues
much the fertility of Italy, as well as the great quantity of silk it
produces, and therefore deservedly called Bombycina; In June was the silk
Harvest, If I may so call it, and there was such abundance, that in England I
never saw so much Woole, as I did here Silk.

The ninth of July the Sanesians solemnizd a feast, but sore against their
wills, for Cosmus the Duke of Florence's taking Sienna.

In August on the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin, was a Race of
Barbaries, which ran without Riders from one gate of the City to the Princes
Palace, for a Pallium of Cloth of Gold.

The same Month we went to the Jews Synagogue, and saw the Circumcising of a
Child. Which the sacred Page describes.

September the seventh we set from Siena, to begin our return toward France,
our first days journey reached to Florence, where tarrying one day, the next
we parted with the Procaccio for Venice, paying seven Crowns a man.

Six miles up the Apennin we past by Pratolin, a famous seat of Pleasance
belonging to the great Duke; and about as many miles farther we dind at Il
Ponte, before which lies a most delicious Valley, environd with very high
mountains.

After dinner, about two miles farther, we past through Scarperia, from whence
we mounted more and more up the Apennins, The way in some places but straight,
and on the right hand is a very steep Precipes down to the plain below. All
that afternoon we rode up and down hills, which are as much fruitful, as
barren, and at night we lodgd at Fiorenzuolo, a Fortress which stands in the
midst of the Mountains, at the confiues of the great Dukes Territoire.

The next morning departing, long before break of day, (as the Procaccios in
Italy usually do) we perfectly discernd the flame of Pietra Mala, a Mountain
at the highest part of the Appinines, which perpetually burns.

All that forenoone we had a tedious passage through the Chestnut woods, till
we came unto Pianora, where having dind, by a sudden descent passing a
Torrent diverse times, we s^nk into the fertile and pleasant plain of Bolonia,
and so to the City it self, where we prevaild with our Conductor, to stay the
rest of that day, and half the following, that we might take a more full view
of this famous City of Bolonia, the second in the Stato della Chiesa.

It is situated at the foot of the Appenins, Bolonia
the neighboring Country producing so great abundance of things necessary to
humane life, that it has got the name Bolonia the Fat.

For strength it is not much considerable, there being but a single wall
without Bulwarks, Ramparts or the like, It Is a fiter habitation for the Muses,
then for Mars, the fame of that University which flourishes there, making this
Motto common, BOLONIA DOCET.

Amongst the things I took notice of at Bolonia, the first is the general
uniformity in the buildings, there running before all the houses, a very
stately Cloister, with Arches all of the same structure, so that a large street
appears one building, which manner though it differ from the ordinary Italian
way, yet is no less admirable

Amongst other fair edefices of this City, the Popes Palace very spacious, is
chief, over the Gate is the statue of a Pope in metal.

Before this Palace is the Piazza, as remakable as most in Italy: In the midst
stands a very sumptuous Fountain, where the Brazen Neptune made by John of
Bolonia, a famous Sculpturer is very considerable, at one end of this Place is
the Dome, not yet finished.

The great Schools are said to be as stately as most in Europe. And likewise
the Hospitalls are worth seeing The Convents at Bolonia are generally very
glorious, especially S. Dominick, and out of the Town S. Michael in Bosco.

In brief, the Bolonians agree with the other Italians, in having their houses
built decently, and in their Courts, still have some Verts set, as Orange
trees, Cypresses, or the like, which much pleases the eye of a stranger, as he
passes the streets.

In the heart of the City, stands the Tower of the Asinelli: (called so from a
Family that rai'sd it) some making Bolonia to represent the form of a ship,
set this for the maine Mast. It is grown somewhat to decay through time, and
the stairs are very rotten, however, we adventurd to go up to the top, and
from thence we had a full view of the Town below, with the streets lying in a
straight line, as likewise a fair Prospect on the plains of Lombardy.

On one side of this Tower, is another called Garisenda, which seems to fall
much after the manner of the Campanile, at Pisa, some impute it to the
Architecture, others say it was of the same height with that of the Asinelli;
but the Citizens fearing it would fall, pulled down the upper part, and left
the rest standing crooked, as at the present it does.

This is the sum of what I saw in Bolonia, yet berore I went from thence, I
took a taste of those famous Saltsages, that are composed at Bolonia, the
which are transported thence, not only into other places of Italy, but also
into diverse parts of Europe, as a rare and costly dish, which adds and
maintains her Epithet Bolonia La Grassa.

Leaving Bolonia for our more free entrance into the State of Venice, we took
a Bill of Health.

The first day we past the Canall, that goes to Ferrara, having our boat
drawn by a Horse, in which way we went through about nine Sustegne, Machines
not much unlike our Sluses, to keep up and let down the water for the turning
of all sorts of Milles, and the passage of Boats.

Toward Evening we past by Bentivoglio, a Castle that gave denomination to
the learned Cardinal of that name.

Some two hours later, we came to Mal Albergo, an infamous Inn, both in name
and in deed, where having poorly supt, we imbarqu't in another less Boat,
and having past all night through the fennes, The next morning we arrived at
Ferrara. Ferrara.


Ferrara heretofore a Duchy by it self, yet now subject to the Apostolic
See, is more considerable for strength, then beauty, however it is in Italy,
and therefore (secundum nos) no mean City.

Its situation is on a plat, so that by it runs two Channels, the one
toward Bolonia, the other toward the Po, it is fortified with very fair
Ramparts, upon most of which are planted Allies of trees.

Within the Town are some fair buildings, as the Palazzo del Diamante,
belonging to the Duke of Modena, the Castle where, in the Court are pictured
the Dukes of Ferrara, and it is said that at the last, there was no Room left
for another

Before the Palace are two small Statues of a Marquis, and Duke of Ferrara;
many other things are observable, as the Epitaph of the famous Poet Ariostus,
and of many other famous men buried there, which my short stay would not admit
me to collect.

Our Inn was the Angelo (a too sumptuous edifice to have been made a Tavern)
where having dind, we went by boat down the Channel, and about three mile
beyond Ferrara came into the Po, which is the greatest and farthest navigable
river in Italy, for breadth and length much above Tyber it self; the ancients
called it Padus, the Poets Erydanus, on the Banks whereof they feignd that, Io
transformd into a heifer was want to feed.

About evening we came on the confines of the Venetian territoire, and supt at
Corbua, a place three miles distant from that most ancient, yet now dejected
City Adria, which formerly gave the name of Mare Adriaticum, to the Sea now
called the Golfe of Venice.

Three miles farther, we changd our Bark for a bigger Vessel, to carry us
to Venice, and having now past thirty miles on the Po, we came suddenly by an
artificial cut into the River Adice (Athesis in Latin) that passes by Verona;
and the next morning, about the opening of the day, we enterd into the Golfe,
passing by Chioza, a City in an Island on the left, Palestina on the right,
with other Islands that lay ranged in a row to Venice it self, where, we
arrived the twelfth of September; and being come to the Port, we (as the
custom and order is) were not permitted to set foot on shore, on pain of
death, till we had a ticket of license.

Venetia, Venice.
is a word never heard of in the Romans days, the original of this name being
not above thirteen Centuries of years since, yet Historians generally report,
that at the decay of the Roman Empire, when the invasion of the Hunns and other
Barbarous Nations overspread Italy; Some provident Fishermen began to build
Cottages in those scatterd Islands, and in process of time, others for their
better security retired thither: From this poor, and low beginning (imitating
her elder sister) is she grown to that height, that all deservedly call her
Venice the rich.

This very mirror of State and Policy, as she was borne about the death of
old Rome, so she seems to be hereditarily Possessour of that which maintaind
Rome in her sovereign glory; The magnificent Genius of the People, the Gravity
of the Senate, the solidity of her laws, very much consonant with those of
Rome.

Hence Venice has this propriety above all other States; that she is a Virgin,
(a commodity rarely found within her self) and more, from her first Infancy,
Christian: having never yet fell from her principles, either in Government, or
Religion; but still valiantly defending her Liberty against the insulting
Mahomet.

Besides the wise and Judicious Potentates, that strengthen this Commonwealth,
Nature has fortified her with a strange and unusual situation

-- Media insuperabilis unda.
Environd with her embracing Neptune; to whom, (as the Ceremony of throwing a
ring into the Sea implies) she marries her self with yearly nuptials.

Hereupon our English Martial admiring the situation of the Magnificent
Venetians City, says to them

Quid mirum est vestram consistere Legibus Vrbem
Legibus exleges cum teneaatis aquas.
No wonder if by Laws your City stands,
Since outlaw waves are chained to your Commands.
If some casual necessity did not constrain men to build Venice, I could
never conceive how so stately Palaces, how so compacted a City should stand in
the midst of the Sea.

The particularities whereof are these. I may begin with the Piazza San Marco,
the Center whither an infinite number of Persons, from diverse parts of the
world in diverse habits; still tend: The Platform thereof somewhat resembles a
Carpenters square, the uniformity in the buildings, and other embellishments,
speaking it the fairest in Italy, I think I may say in Christendom.

At the end just before the Chiesa San Marco, are three Standards with
Pedestalls of Brass, very exquisite work.

At the right side from these, is the Clock-house, adorned with the signs of
Heaven, with the Sun and Moons monthly entrance to them, and two Statues of
Brass that strike.

Saint Marks Church is not so admirable for vastenesse, as for the rareness of
the design, and precious materials it is composed of.

The whole facade, or Frontispiece, is beset with Pillars, of Serpentine and
Porphyre, toward the top stand four horse of Brass, most worthy Trophies,
taken (as some say) by a Stratageme, out of Constantinople. And first stood in
an Arch-Triumphall at Rome. Amongst the imagiry work on this Church, there
stands a woman stroking a Dog; The Venetian Annals mention the story, of a
Senators Daughter, who (her Father altogether, depriving her of society with
men) had a prodigious Birth by that over familiar Play-fellow.

For the inward part of this Temple, It is a little obscure within, yet most
richly wenescoted with Marbles, and the whole top coverd with lively pieces in
Mosaic work: An Art lost or unknown in these parts, and highly valued there.

Near that Church gate, that looks into the Sea, is a little Chapel, and
therein is an ill hewd image of the Lady, made (as their Tradition goes) out of
the same rock, which Moses struck when the water miraculously gushed forth;
And to make good this story, they show three little holes out of which the
Fountain came forth. Some probability there may be of this, an old and now
scarce legible Greek Inscription, on the same stone begins thus --

(...).

And underneath these Latin words,

Aqua quae prius ex petra miraculose fluxit oratione Prophetae Moysis, producta
est, nunc autem haec Michaelis studio labitur, quem servas Christ and Conjugem
Irenem.

The construction is dubious the lines verbatim, as there I found them.

In this same Church is kept with great reverence, the body of the Cities
Protector Saint Mark, whose winged Lion with the Motto, Pax tibi Marce
Evangelista meus, is the Banner and Arms of this Commonwealth, In honor of
this Saint, here is likewise conservd a most inestimable treasure.

To this Cathedral Church joins the Dukes Palace wholly of Marble, with a
Kingly Arcade of three and thirty Pillars, under which, it is a most comely sight
to see the Venetians in their long Gowns, daily consulting of State affairs.

Just against the great Gate, at the top of the steps, stand two Colosses, the
one of Mars, the other of Neptune, works of famous Sansovinus. Opposite to
these stairs is a Facade of Statues, both ancient and modern.

Above is a most royal Corridor; wherein are diverse Tribunalls, or Courts of
Justice, and higher are most gallant ascents into the Senate house, and other
sumptuous Halls.

Below in the Court, in going out, I observd the mouths of two Wells in
Brass, of very singular art.

On the other side of the place is the Zecca, where they coin money, and the
Procuratorio; on the top of this structure stand five and twenty Statues.

On the seventeenth of September, whilst we were at Venice, there was a new
made Procurator, (the second man in the Republic) enterd into his office, at
which solemnity we saw the Senators in their robes of Scarlet, Damask, three
hundred most grave, proper persons, every one speaking himself no less then
an Ambassador in his deportment.

The following morning, the Secretary of the State, of the Family of the
Tommasini, for appearing a favorite to some Banditas, was privately strangled,
and his body afterward hung up in the place of execution, which place brings
me again into my description, it being Between the two Pillars that stand
toward the Canale della Giudeca. These two Colomnes were brought out of
Greece, on the one stands the Statue of Sanct. Theodorus, with the Crocodile,
on the other Saint Marks Lion of Brass.

This is the sum of what is to be noted within, and about the Piazza San
Marco, yet before I leave it, it is worth the pains to get up Saint Marks
steeple, which stands by it self, eighty feet distant from the Church.

From thence one may discern how the City lies compacted of many little
Islands, separated by Channells, joined by Bridges, the number whereof, if well
reckoned up, comes to four hundred and fifty, and the greater part of stone.
The fairest and most remarkable is the Bridge of Rialto, which, though but of
one Arch, yet for the height, length, and breadth, has no where a parell.

Upon it stand twelve shops, at each side coverd all alike with lead, and
behind magnificent Balustrades. This Bridge passes over the Canal Grande,
along which are the most stately houses in all Venice.

It is a most satisfactory sight to behold the Corso in this Channel, every
Feast toward the Evening, to see the Venetian Ladies habited like Nymphs, and
the Gondola's like so many Daulphines running a race. These Gondolas are Boats,
which because of the little use of walking a foot there, are still carrying
some passenger one way or another. Every noble Venetian keeps one of these
Seacoaches for his family, and others there are to be hired by any man for
money very genteel and commodious.

Hence one may easily conjecture how populate Venice is; for the number of
Gondolas is 40000. so that in case of necessity; the Boatmen would make a
considerable army, for every Gondola has a Rower, and the better sort too. And
now I am on the water, before I set foot to land, I may visit some of the
neigbouring Islands, and first Murano a mile distant from Venice.

Here continually (excepting in August and September) are Fornaces to make
Glasses, which for the variety of the work, and the Crystal substance,
exceed all others in the world, and are transported to all parts: out of which
merchandise Venice draws infinite sums of money.

In returning we stepped into the Arsenall, The Magazine and storehouse of
War, Mars his warehouse. In this place the Republic has all ammunition for
Sea and Land, all instruments of offense and Defense, all preparations for
shipping so ready, that it is said they can raise a Gally in four and twenty
hours, and though the late approach of their common enemy the Turk, has much
impoverisht this Arsenal, yet the daily labors of Artisans that work there,
still restore it.

The next day we went to the Greek Church, where at their service in their
own tongue, there was a great Congregation, who used more Ceremonies, but
less superstition then the Church of Rome, which calls the Greeks Schismatics
only, because they differ not much in exteriours from them; but will not
acknowledge the Pope to be head of the Church.

Neither have the Oriental Christians alone this Liberty at Venice, but
Loyalas Sons being exild thence, the Inquisition reaches not so far as
strangers, which made us Heretics (as they call us) think we were come out
of the Land of Bondage, to a more secure Country.

The day following we made a Gondola carry us over to San Georgeo, an Island
with a most beautiful Monastery; The Chapel is paved (as generally they are
in Venice) with a reddish Marble, About the Coire are very rare Statues, and in
the Cloister, sits Venice Triumphant.

From thence we went to San Giovanni e Paulo, more in devotion to the living
Ladies, then to the dead Image there worshipped.

This Place is much frequented by the Venetian walking May Poles, I mean the
women, which gives me occasion to speak of the common habits or fashions of
Venice.

The Citizens rich and poor follow all the same Mode, viz: A long black gown
with wide sleeves, and a kind of skirt to throw over one shoulder, the collar
always open, and a Black Cap edged with Fringe of Wool.

The Ladies have found out a devise very different from all other Europaeian
Dresses. They wear their own, or a counterfeit Hair below the shoulders,
trimmed with gemmes, and Flowers their Coats half too long for their bodies,
being mounted on their Chippeens, (which are as high as a man's leg) they walk
between two handmaids, majestickly deliberating of every step they take.

This fashion was invented, and appropriated to the noble Venetians wives, to
be constant to distinguish them from the Courtesans, who go coverd in a veil
of white Taffety. These fashions, because they are not so variable as ours, I
have here inserted.

Before the Church I last mentioned, San Giovannie Paulo is a Cavalier, or
horseman in Brass, with these words.

Bartholomeo Coleono Bergomensi ob militare Imperium optime gestum S C. Joanni
Mauro, and Marino Venereo Curatoribus An: Sal: Mcccclxxxxv.

This is the chief of what I observed in three weeks residence at Venice. As
concerning the trade, or traffic of this City, she is without Doubt, Mistress
of all others; it is she that makes rise or fall the Exchange at her pleasure.

And this I imagine proceeds from the great and innumerable company of Jews,
that are harbourd here, and that enjoy the Privilege of a Synagogue for every
Nation; so that in their Guetta they have nine diverse ones, yet wear they a
Badge of distinction, viz: a Scarlet hat. The shops at Venice are most richly
furnished with Eastern Merchandise, as Sattins, Damasks, Clothes of Gold, with
a world of costly Drugs, which word intimates I must hasten to the Medicinal
Padua.

From Venice to Padua, because of the convenient passage by water, is one easy
days journey.

About five miles from Venice we came to Liza Fusina, where the continent or
firm Land begins, here one finds commodity of going either by Land or Boat,
we took the latter; a most delightful Spasso on the river Brenta, which
runs in so direct a line, that one may see its course four miles behind or
before one, on both sides is a garden-like country, and a multitude of
Villa's, or Country houses, with Gardens of Orange trees, and other greens
after the Italian way. At the close of the evening we arrived at Padua.

Patavium was founded, Padua.
long before Romulus sucked the Wolf, It Is reported that Antenor flying with
some force into these parts, after the destruction of Troy began this name and
city; to confirm this, they yet show this Noble Heroes Tomb, with this Epitaph
in old Characters.

Inclitus Antenor Pat: etc.

The words are these.

C Inclytus Antenor Patriam Vox Nisa Quietem,
Transtulit huc Henetum Dardanidumque Fugas,
Expulit Euganeos, Patavinam condidit Vrbem;
Quem tegit hic humili marcaesa Domus.
The Monument whereon these verses are engraven stands by S. Lorenzos Church,
in this figure. As in the page following.

Antenors Tomb (...)



Not far from this Marble Chest, are some remnants of the walls that Antenor
laid; For the city is divided into the old, and the new, the old has round
about it the river, both are encompast with strong Bullwarkes, upon which are
planted rows of trees, very pleasant to walk amongst, though they quite
hinder the view of the city a far off.

Neither indeed (I must confess) does Padua abound with stately houses, like
the other chief Cities of Italy, yet those renowned disciples of Aesculapius
that are nourisht there, make it to be said both at home and abroad, Padua the
Learned.

It stands in a most delicious and fertile Plain, which produces so great
abundance of things necessary to humane life; that the vulgar Proverb goes
Bolonia la grassa ma Padoua la passa.

By reason of this plenty of provisions, and the daily practice in Physic, and
the other liberal Arts this city is no less frequented by strangers, then
Athens anciently was.

And indeed those who have been students at Padua, have reason to commend the
place, for by the Senate of Venice's constitution (under whom Padua is) every
Nation, English, Dutch, etc. has a Consul, enjoyes many Privileges, and by
their matriculation may lay in provisions, without paying any excise or
taxation.

This liberty is very prevalent to draw Foreigners thither, yet the ill
Government of the Scholars there much disswades others from likeing the place.

It is strange to find Minerva so joynd with Mars, to see students in so
warlike a posture, for the common mode of the Scholars is to go armed with a
pair of Pistolls, and a Stilletto by his side, this they say proceeds from
some old and inbred dissentions between the Vicentines and Brescians, which two
parties so fill the town with slaughter, that no man can walk the streets
late at night for fear of their Chi-va li? and which is a more manifest sign
of their Barbarismes on the Pillars of the Porch, or Arches that run before
the houses of this city, one may discern where Bullet have past; nay, so
trivial is homicide amongst them that if at any time they want a body for the
Anatomy Lecture, they make it a small business to kill a poor fachin, or porter
to put his body to that use.

Notwithstanding these gross abuses, yet Padua is a very worthy University. It
was Vacation time when we were there, however we stepped into the Schools.

Over the Gate is the Lion San Marco, and this Inscription.

Sic ingredere ut teipso quotidie doctior, sic egredere ut indies Patriae
Christianaeque Reipublicae utilior evad^s. Ita Demum Gymnasium a se feliciter
Ornatum existimabit.

MDC.

Within is a square Court, the building two stories of Pillars, one over
another, and round about in every corner are the Arms of all such as have been
Consulls in that University; Some in colors only, others in colors and
stone, with the country, name, and year; all which is made at the expense of
the Venetian, to make famous this nursery of learning.

Above is the Anotomick Theater a very neat, and singular invention; commodious
both for the Professor, and his Spectatours.

Not far from the Physic Schools is the Palagio della Ragione, or Hall of
Justice, which considered as an upper Room is the fairest and most spacious in
Christendom. Some impose more on the excellency of this Fabric, then can be
discernd by a common eye, alleging it is placed to the four parts of the
heaven, so that in the Equinoctial the beams of the Sun rising, entering at
the East windows strike those at the West, and in the Solstice, the rays that
come in at the South, touch the opposite window, in a word, there is no part
without some Astronomicall secret. The pictures represent the influence of
higher bodies on these below. It is coverd with lead, round about goes a
stately Corridor of Marble.

Over every door, is some Remembrance of those men who for their Birth have
celebrated Padua. Amongst these is that immortal Treasure of History and
Eloquence, Livie. In whose never fading memory there is, (at one end of this
hall) a monument erected, and this old inscription added thereunto.

VE
TLIVIVS
LIVIAE. TF
QVARTAEl
HALYS
CONCORDIALIS
SIBI ET SVIS
OMNIBVS.
T. Livius 4o Imperii Tib* Caesaris ano vita excessit aetatis vero suae LXXVI.

There is likewise a Poetical Elegy, but I pass by this new monument, with
all the appertenances of the same, to come to Livies old Tomb, which is there
extant in this form. As in the page following.

OSSA T LIVII PATAIVNI VNIVS OIVM MORTALIVM IVDICIO DISINI CVIVS PROPE INVICTO
CALAMO INVICTI P. R. RES GESTAO CONSCRIBERENTVR



To this Westminster Hall at Padua, joins the Podestas Palace.

The Podesta is he who represents the Senate; and executes their power; In most
of the cities under the State of Venice there is one. There is likewise a
Capitan Grande. He looks after the military affairs, the other the Political.

Many houses in Padua are worth seeing, as the Captains lodging in the Piazza.

At the Palazzo di Foscari all Arena, are some Vestigia of a Theater.

In the Garden of Mantua are diverse singularities; Amongst others a huge
Colosse of Hercules, with these words.

Hercules Buphiloponus Bestiarius, Qui tristitiam Orbis depuli^ omnem Peramplo
hoc signo Mantuae cura reflorescat.

One day walking to some of those places, I espied a good fair Chapel put to
no better use then a Barn, asking the reason, it was told me it had been a
Jesuits Church; an argument that those Religious Statesmen are not welcome
where the Venetians sway the sword; neither indeed have the Loyalists one
College in the Venetian Cities.

As for the Churches of Padua, that of Saint Anthony deserves the first place.
Before the door is a Man and Horse of Brass, within is a most precious Altar,
under which lies the body of S. Anthony, about is his life and miracles in
figures of Marble, cut by the most famous Masters of those times, or (I think)
that ever were, or will be.

Hard by this Church is Il prato della Valle a Meadow, at the end whereof stands
that most wealthy and Kingly Convent of S. Justine, the best and stateliest I
can remember I sawin Italy. The Chapel is an incomparable piece.

In the Cloisters an Antiquary might spend a years study; for amongst the
Legend stories designed on the walls, they have inserted hundreds of old
Inscriptions, with the Draughts of old stones, and pieces of Urnes, all which
were dug up out of the ground, when the Foundations of this Convent were first
laid

A little farther is the Physic Garden, filled with simples, but the Euganean
Hills furnish Padua more abundantly with medecinall Herbs.

These hills are in view from Padua, and have been always famous for the
Medecinall Bathes, that proceed from them.

Having spent a week in Padua, the Gentlemen we left at Venice, came thither
(viz: Sir J. G. a Northern Baronet, and my Lord B. his eldest Son) with whom
we joynd company to go thorough Lombardy, and so over the Alps into France.

From Padua we hird a Coach to Verona; In our first days journey we had
nothing to observe but the Fertility and pleasantness of the Country, neither
could I imagine my self any where but in Lombardy.

Had not the People, Language, Manners, seemd Italian, I might have thought my
self to have been out of Italy; so great an alteration is there in the
Landscape betwixt this, and the other side of the Appenines.

The meliority of either I dispute not, they being equally good, yet contrary,
that mountanous, this flat. The latter is called Lombardy, and under that name is
comprehended the whole plain betwixt the Alps, and the Appenines.

It was almost Vintage time when we past through this Paradise, and it made my
journey much easier, to see the trees rangd in order so far as one can see,
to look on the Vines embracing the Elmes, with such an incredible quantity of
grapes, that they are coverd more with Purple, then green.

Et Tellus Bacchi pondere pressa gemens. Besides this we lodgd every night in
some memorable City, where we sound good accommodation, and something
observable.

The first day some hours before it grew dark, we were in Vicenza.

Vicenza, Vicenza.
in Latin Vicentia, was according to Livie built by the Galli Senones in the
Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, since that time it has without doubt sufferd
many changes.

It is now under the Venetians, and stands in the Marquisate of Treves. It is
neither fortified, nor capable of Fortification, it being situated at the
bottom of a hill that commands the Town, however the fidelity of the
Inhabitants keep it in safety.

The Vicentins delight to go abroad in the world, to see foreign customs
(an humor seldom found in other Italians) so that at their return home they
live splendidly, go richly appareld, keep many followers; for which cause this
city is reputed very full of Gentry, and those rich, the common title to a
Gentleman here being Signor Conte, as much as my Lord.

Neither are they less noble in their Buildings then in their Garb; for by
the art of Palladius, the late Reviver of the Roman Architecture a Vicentin,
this city is beautified with stately Palaces public, and private.

The Hall of Justice is admirable, both for the Ancient and modern structure,
the Tower lofty, the Piazza most capacious of Tournaments, and other assemblyes
of the Gentry, Who are much given to shows and Pastimes; and to this purpose
they have erected a Theater, the figure whereof I conceive to be like those of
the ancienr Romans, though the materials differ, Palladius was the Inventor,
as this Inscription over the stage, testifies.

Virtuti ac Genio.
Olympior: Academia
Theatrum hoc a Fundamentis erexit.
Paladio Archit:
Anno 1584.
It will hold five thousand persons, the Scene is very well contrived with
Statues, and Corinthian Order, the Prospective represents a Kingly City.

Diverse like places of recreation there are, within and about the City,
amongst which is the Campo Marzo made in imitation of that, anciently at Rome,
for to exercise the youth in Chevalry, thither the Ladies and Gallentry of the
City resort, in the summer Evenings to take the Air.

The Arch or entrance into this Field will stand as a perpetual monument of
Palladius that built it.

Just opposite is the Garden of Connt Valmarana, wherein the close Walk of
Citron and Orange trees, together with the Labyrinthe are things very
commendable.

Going forth at the gate di Monte, one sees another Arch of Palladius, with a
most high pair of stairs to the top of the Madonna Del Monte.

Half a mile farther by the river side (which river was in Latin called Meduacus
Minor) is the Rotonda of Conte Mario Capra so called from the Cupola at the top,
or likeness it has with the Pantheon at Rome, though in my opinion it more
resembles the Temple of Janus Quadrifrons, for it has four faces and four
Gates.

Palladius made this his Masterpiece; for it is so contrived, that it contains
Geometrically a Round, a Cross, and a Square.

The Master of this house uses all strangers very civilly. His Sellars are the
best, and the best furnished I met with, neither is he sparing of his Wines to
Travelers; As we were returning from this house to our Inn, we met with him
and his followers attending him, one of them who spoke French said, his Master
desired to see us at his house to morrow, but our short stay would not permit
us to accept of that kind invitation, I infer this passage to show the generous
Minds of the Vicentines.

The next morning we left Vicenza very early, dind at Osteria Nuova the
midway: And about four in the afternoon we came unto Verona.

It Is the vulgar Criticisme on this Name, Verona.
that if it be syllabizd, it comprehends the first letters of the three head
Cities of Italy Ve-Venetia. Ro-Roma. Na -- Napoli. Others leave the verbal
dirivation, and more strictly interpret it, that whatsoever is containd in
those three Cities may be found in Verona.

Her wealth may be compared to that of Venice; Her Monuments of Antiquity
equal even those of Rome, neither is the delightful situation inferior to
that of Naples.

Thus much I must needs say, were I to see Italy again, I should make my
Station at Verona, for I know no place more agreeable or commodious for a
stranger.

The City stands one part on the side, the other at the foot of a hill, behind
which is a continuation of huge Mountains.

Before one side of the City lies a rich Plat Country; Before the other a
stony Champion, or Downs, wherein C. Marius gave a total overthrow to the
Cimbrians.

The River Athesis divides the City in the midst. Thus nature has adornd Her,
neither has art been wanting to glorify her, and this one may collect from
the mighty remnants of Roman Magnificence, that yet stand within her walls. I
may say with Martial,

-- Vnum pro cunctis fama loquatur Opus. Of the Amphitheatre at Verona, the
most perfect that is to be seen this day in Christendom, the figure whereof I
have here set down. As in the page following.

The Amphitheatre at Verona Arena



This noble work was spoild of all its ornaments by the Barbarous that sacked
Italy, yet one may easily judge, how betwixt the Arches and the Columns there
were statues.

In the circuit of this Moles are three Porches, one within another, made for
the Spectatours to go in, and out without disturbance to any one In the midst
is the Arena, where the Combatants fought in an ovale form, four and thirty
perches long, large two and twenty, environed with two and forty seats, which
lie gradatim, one above another, still extending to the top.

In these Cirques the vastness of Marble stones is incredible, so big that
one cannot conceive how they were transported thither.

This work was perfected by L. V. Flaminius Cousul Anno Vrb: Cond. 53.

Many other signs of Venerable Antiquity are there in Verona, as
Arches-Triumphalls, ruins of Temples, Aquiducts, Urnes and the like. There Is
one Arch Triumphall dedicated to Marius for his victory over the Cimbrians.

And although this City be not now of so great a compass as Historians
report, it was in the height of the Roman Empire, yet the Venetians have with
great expense joynd new Bulwarks and walls unto the old, and it is fencd with
three Castles, which make it as well impregnably strong, as delightful.

The buildings of this City are answerable to the Italian.

The fairest is the Council house, upon the roof whereof stand exposed to the
open air the Statues of Cornelius Nepos, Emilius Marcus, old Poets. Pliny the
Natural Historiographe, Vetruvius the Architecture, all which men graced their
native Verona by their singular Virtues.

Besides these, the Learned Scaliger was of Verona, for whose sake and his
Family i Signori della Scala, there is (in the heart of the city, before the
Inn we lay at Il Cavaletto) a stately Tomb of Marble, encompast with Iron
work, in the fashion of a Ladder, which that name implies.

These things we saw before it grew dark at Verona, which we left the next
morning, having renewed our bargain with the same Coach that brought us
thither, to carry us to Milan.

At our going out of the Town, I saw a Porphire Tomb in a Church yard, it was
told me that a King of the Goths lay buried there. Looking into the River
Athesis, I espied a Bridge of old Roman work, and some Engines which convey
water out of the river in to the city by Pipes.

When we parted from Verona, and indeed through all the Venetian State, our
Matriculations we had from Padua did us much service, for by that means none
of the Guard, would dare to hinder us as they usually do strangers.

Two miles beyond Verona we past over the Downs, memorable for the Battles
of Marius. About noone we came to Cavalli Caschieri, an Inn two miles short
of Peschiera, which is a most strong Fort of the Venetians, standing at the
Embushment of the Lago di Garda into that of Mantua.

The greater part of the afternoon, we past by the side of the Lake, which by
the Ancients ws called Benaca. From Peschiera it extends it self toward the
North five and thirty miles. It Is very rough and tempestuous, as Virgil says,

Fluctibus and fremitu assurgens Benaca marino.
Which I believe proceeds from its enclosure, between mountains which stop up
the wind, yet being fenct so with Alps which keep of the Northern blasts,
and warmd by the reflection of the Sun, those hills produce great store of
Olive, Citron, and Orange trees.

The Lake abounds with fish, especially with Troutes, equal to them of the
Lake of Geneva, which we tasted of that night at supper at Lunato.

In the midst of the Lago di Garda, is an Island wherein stands Sermonea.

The next day we had very bad Coach way, yet at dinner time we were at
Brescia, where because of bad weather we tarried that day.

Brescia, Brescia.
(by the Romans Brixia) may be called the Venetians Magazine, here is a
perpetual appearance of War though they live in peace, every shop is stord
with Arms; In a word* the chief traffic of this place are Swords, Muskets,
and other military Engines, from whence it is vulgarly called Brescia the Armed.

It has a plain on all sides, excepting toward the Castle which stands on
Hill; behind which are very high Mountains; By reason of this vicinity to the
Hills the City is beautified with many Fountains, a commodity which few of the
Cities in Lombardy have.

In some of the streets there runs Porches, whereby one may walk dry in
rainy weather. The Torre della Pallada is of rare Tuscan structure, the Piazza
is but little, yet the Town house may be reckoned amongst the fairest of Italy

The Dome was a repairing when I was there. In that is kept a sky color
Cross, which they hold to be the same which appeard to Constantin.

There is little observable, (only some Churches) at Brescia; which we left
the next morning, and dind at Vrsa Vecchio; after dinner we past by Vrsi Novi,
a strong Garrison in the Venetian Frontiers that way.

A little farther, having past the river Oglio, we went by Soncino, the first
place where we saw the Arms of Spain over the Gates, a sign we were come
into the State of Milan, but we soon were out of it again, for that night we
lay at Crema, which is under the Signory of Venice: It stands in a plain very
well fortified with Ramparts and a Mote. The Dome, the Tower, the Place, and
the Podestas Palace are worth seeing.

The next morning four miles beyond Crema we enterd into the State of Milan,
and past by Lodi, a great City on the side of the River Ada, this City is
famous, for the cheeses made there which are not much different from the
Parmisano, Lodi was called by the Romans Laus Pompeia.

From Lodi we went to dinner at Marignano ten miles from Milan; All which way
the Country is more Gardenlike then in any part of Lombardy, the high ways
are as straight as one can imagine, on both sides run Channells of water, on
both sides trees planted, and in the fields there is Corn, Wine, Fruits, and
Meadows altogether, till we came to the very gates of Milan. Milan.


Milan for the mighty circuit of her walls, the great number of Churches, is
before any other City in Italy said to be the Great.

The Metropolis of either France, or England, either Paris or London, go much
beyond it for bigness, yet they must be looked on as Heads of Kingdoms, this
as the Capital of a Duchy or Province, besides their chiefest greatness is
in their Suburbs, Milan has none at all, but lies within a stately wall of ten
miles compassc.

It Is placed in a wide plain, and has about it green Hills, delightful
Meadows, Navigable Rivers, and enjoys a wholesome Air, the territory does so
well furnish it with all necessary provisions, that it is worth a days journey
only to see the Market of Milan.

Neither does it want Trade to support it in a flourishing condition, for it is
so throngd with Artisans of all sorts, that the vulgar Proverb goes

Chi volesse Rassettare Italia rouinarebbe Milano.
For the Antiquity of this place Mediolanum its ancient appellation speaks it
old, and some pieces of Roman edefices, yet standing there confirm the same.

Before San Lorenzo's Church stand sixteen Marble Pillars, a a remnant of the
Temple of Hercules, at one end of them is this Inscription put in.

Imp: Caesari. L. Aurelio vero Aug: Arminiaco Medico Parthico Max: Trib: Pot:
VII IMP: IIII Cos. III PP Divi Antonini Pii Divi Hadriani Nepoti: Divi Trajani
Parthici ProNepoti Divi Nervae.

Abnepoti

Since Milan shook off Paganism to embrace the faith of Christ, that glorious
Pillar of the Church, Saint Ambrose was her Bishop. To whom there is a Church
dedicated vulgo Sanct' Ambrogio.

Under the high Altar supported by four Porphyre Pillars, is interred the body
of Saint Ambrose; it is believed that Saint Ambrose stood at the gates of this
Church, when he excommunicated Theodosius the Emperor, and would not suffer
him to enter therein.

Hard by is a poor Chapel in a blind corner, with a Well, where Saint
Ambrose baptized Saint Augustine, and began the Te Deum, as the Inscription on
the wall witnesses.

Hic Beatus Ambrosius baptisat Augustinum, Deodatum and Alippum, Hic Beatus
Ambrosius incipit Te Deum laudamus.

Augustinus sequitur Te Dominum Confitemur.
This place is so mean, and so little regarded, that it is very probably true;
for it is incredible how the name of Carolus Baromaeus a Council of Trent Saint,
highly cried up at Milan, has extinguished the memory of that learned Father.

In S. Eustorgios Church is to be seen the Sepulcher wherein lay the bodies of
the three Magi; the bodies were transported to Colen in Germany, but there
remaies the Tomb in this form.

SEPVLCHRVM TRIVM MAGORVM



Most of the Churches in Milan deserve the eye of the curions, yet all may be
included in the Dome or Cathedral, for the Fabric; the most like ours of any
I saw in Italy; yet for the materials more costly.

It Is all of white Marble, and about it, are five hundred Statues of the same.
The Addition that is now in building is very glorious, especially for the huge
Pillars of Granito, a sort of Marble very common at Milan. About the body of
the Church, are set up pictures of the miracles wrought by Saint Charles
Barromee. And in a Chapel under Ground is devoutly worshipped the body of that
new founded Saint, with a Treasure of rich presents.

As these divine buildings are glorious, so the private men's houses of Milan
are not inferior to those of other Cities in Italy; The streets are of a more
then common breadth, and there are very many gardens within the walls.

The fairest Palace in Milan (I may say in Italy) is the great Hospital, a
square of Columns and Porches six hundred Rods about; fitter to be the Court
of some Kings then to keep Alms men in; yet no use can it be put to better
then to feed the Hungry and cloth the naked.

Next to this I reckon the Castle accounted by all Engineers the fairest, the
strongest Fortification or Citadell in Europe. They are very cautelous in
letting strangers to see it, to cast an eye on the outworkes is a crime,
wherefore I omit any farther description.

Four days past while we were visiting these things, I have set down at
Milan. After this repose, we began to bethink our selves of the laborious
task we had to undertake, to get over the neighboring mountains the Alps.

Milan is the rise for two passages, either by mount Goodard, or Sampion, the
first is through Switzerland, tedious and long; the other is through Valesia
more delightsome, and short.

We meeting opportunely with a guide who had been conversant in the way by
Sampion, made our agreement with him, that he should bear all our charges,
for horse, Diet, and lodging, till we came to Geneva, we paying him eight
pistolls a man.

The passage over the Alps.
Our first days journey to Sesto at the foot of the Alps was by Coach, we
dind in the midway Alla Castellanza; Three miles short of Sesto, it is very
remarkable to see how on a sudden the Alps break off the flat Country, like
a wall to part Italy from her neighbors France and Germany.

Thereabouts we had in full view the Mount San Bernardo Il grande, the highest
Terrasse in Europe. And we could perfectly discern it about four English
miles to out top the Clouds.

That night we lay at Sesto. The next morning before break of day, we took
boat to pass over the Lago Maggiore (in Latin Verbanus Lacus) so called not
that it is the biggest amongst the Alps; but because the River Ticinus passes
through it into the Po, so that all Merchandise is thereby transported out of
Helvetia, Six mile beyond Seflo, we past by Arona a strong town in the Duchy
of Milan, three years since besieged by the French; it stands on the side of
the Lake, and against it is Angiera.

All that morning we had a pleasant passage going Terr' a Terra, till about
three in the afternoon we came to Marguzzo a poor village at the end of the
Lake.

Here began the difficulty of our voyage, we could see nothing but a Series of
Rocks, heapt to the skies upon one another, yet to get over we are constraind.

From Marguzzo we had horses to Duomo, that forenoone was not so tedious as
we expected it would have been, for we rode rather through then over the
Mountains in a very fruitful though narrow valley.

Having dind at Duomo we changd horse, and so the way required; being mounted
we presently got two miles higher where we met with extreme hazardous way,
and deep Precipices to boot. (Believe me Hanniball had a most hard task to
lead an army over the Alps -- Difficilis est ad Astra Via.)

Our horses though tract up in those paths, seemd to tell their steps and pick
out their footing; however in this slow pace we got safe to Vedra six mile
beyond Duomo, the last village in Duchy of Milan.

The next morning about three mile farther, we enterd into the Paese de'
Valesi; a most barbarous disconsolate place, a Habitation for Wolves and Bears.

Our terminus Visus was most hideous Mountains, coverd with snow, on all sides
terrible Precipices, monstrous Rocks, passages over narrow Bridges, Cataracts
of water, tumbling down with such noise that we could not hear one another
speak.

This strange and unusual Landscape continued not above five hours, but
presently we met with a new People, a new Phisiognomy, a new genius, a new
Dress, a new Language. Yet the first words we heard, we even understood Com
Heyn Gots name, and Got tanke heir.

These Monticoli are in all things consonant with the Switzers stout, lusty
fellows, yet very dull and ignorant.

They wear long Breeches, and rough Bands, their tongue is a broken Dutch.
That which they are most commendable for is their Honesty, a man may travel
over all their Country with Gold in his hand. Their women speak more of the
Male then their own, the female sex.

Having with much pains, yet delight, because of the variety, crowded through
some of the Alps, we came to dinner at Sampion, at the top of the Mountain,
to which that Village gives the denomination.

This mount Sampion was by the Latins called Mons Sempronius

After dinner we had the hardest part of our journey to pass over, and then
we were worst of all provided; the poverty of the place could not afford us
either Saddles or bridles to our Jades, yet necessity drives and away we must.

We were now at the very top of the Alps; nothing to be seen but snow, which
has laid there beyond the memory of man, and as some say ever since the flood.

There are Poles set up to direct the way to passengers, yet in the very path
our horses went so deep that few or none of us escaped without a fall.

In some parts of the year, as December, January and February this mountain
is impassable, The best time is in September, October or November.

After we had past over the snow which was but for four mile or thereabouts,
we were forced to alight, to crawle down the steeper part of the Mountain;
When our Guide desird us to horse again, it happened one unruly Jade broke loose
and ran away. It Was my ill Fortune to be set upon a Mule, an untamable
headstrong beast, which seeing the other Horse, a great way before, ran
headlong up and down, and carried the Rider over such terrible places that all
the company gave me for lost: When the horse and my Mule stayed of themselves
my fellow Travelers, overtooke me, so that evening we reached to Briga, at
the bottom of the Sampion which was the end of our Alpine voyage.

Hereabouts the Rivers, the Rhene and the Rhosne, have their fountains but
neither are Navigable.

The rest of our way to the Lake of Geneva, was amongst Alps but not over any.
There running along a rich valley between two huge Mountains.

From Briga we lay the next night at Sion (Sedunnm in Latin) being from Briga
six Switzer mile, thirty Italian.

Sion is the head City of Valesia, the Bishop has both the Spiritual and
Temporal Jurisdiction. From Sion we lay at Martigni. The next morning we
past by Saint Mauritz, a little farther we went through a gate that divides
the Vallois from the Duchy of Savoy: we dind at Montei, and in the afternoon
we came to Boveretta, and there hired a Boat, to pass by the Lake unto
Geneua.

The Lake of Geneva, heretofore Lacus Lemanus is held to be the biggest in
Christendom, on one side it has the Switzers and France, on the other the
Savoyarde, and at that end where it loses it self in the Rhodanus stands the
City that christens it Geneva, where we arrivd the sixteenth of October: the
eighth day from the time we sat out of Milan.

Geneva Geneva.
(ancienty head of the Allobroges) would be but an obscure Town were not Fame
her friend. Yet is she placed in such a corner of the World, that she seems to
lie Geografically in the Center between Germany, France, and Italy.

For this reason it is supposed Master Calvin began to preach up his Reformation,
in this City before any other, not through any splendor in the place, but that
some might come from all parts to follow his Doctrine.

And now by Gods protection I am in no Roman, though Catholic state, no
Inquisition to lay hold of my words, or writings; I may set down that which a
Marble Table has in letters of Gold, on the Towne-houseat Geneva Thus.

Post tenebras Lux.
Quum Anno 1535. profligata Romana Antichristi tyrannide, abrogatisque ejus
superstitionibus, Sacrosancta Christi Religio Hic in suam puritatem, Ecclesia
in meliorem ordinem, singulari Dei beneficio Reposita, and simul pulsis
fugatisque hostibus Vrbs ipsa in suam Libertatem non sine insigni Miraculo
restituta fuerit. Senatus Populusque Genevensis Monumentum hoc perpetuae
memoriae causa fieri atque hoc loco erigi curavit: Quo suam erga Deum
gratitudinem ad Posteros Testatam fecerit.

Before their eyes were opened by Master Calvin's Sermons, The Motto of the
Genevists was Post Tenebras spero Lucem, since it is alterd to Post Tenebras
Lux.

God will confound great things by small, else it is miraculous how those seeds
of the Gospel, which were first sowed in this Town, should spread it self
into many parts of the world Maugre Rome and her adherents.

This advantage Geneva has by its situation, the better sort speak or
understand any of these three Languages, French, Dutch, Italian, so that every
week there are Sermons in them all. Amongst the Divines of Geneva, Deodatus is
their great Patron, a great Scholar, and a pricking thorn in the Jesuits
sides.

For the Ecclesiastical Government of Geneva, it is Presbyterian such as
Calvin instituted. For the Political, I conceive it to depend on Aristocracy.

Their State (excepting some private men) has hardly wealth to subsist, yet
every Citizen will lay down his life and means for to maintain their Cause,
and Liberty.

They keep contiauall watch and ward, and not without reason for their own
territory about the City, exceeds not the Lands of many Country Gentlemen
about their houses.

The Savoyards very often make sudden Incursions, so far that they showed us
where they once had scaled the Walls, but were repulst.

Yet if the Duke of Savoye prohibit his Subjects to carry Provisions into
Geneva. The Genevists presently can sallie forth, and take their Cattle or the
like by force. For there is no Castle near to counterpoise the strength of
Geneva. Besides this, in cases of necessity they have the three Protestant
Cantones to help them, with whom they are confederates, as this Inscription
standing in the Town house witnesses.

D. O. M. S.
Anno a vera Religione divinitus cum veteri Liberate Genevae restituta L.
Quasi novo Jubilaeo ineunte Plurimis vitatis Domi and foris InsidIs, and
superatis Tempestatibus, and Helvetiorum. Primar I Tigurini aequo jure in
Societatem perpetuam nobiscum venerint, and veteres fidissimi Soci Bernenses
prius vinculum novo adstrinxerint S. P. Q. G. Quod Felix eSe velit DOM. tanti
Beneficii Monumentum consecrarunt Anno Temporis Vltimi MDXXCIV.

There is little remarkable in the City except in the Townehouse there are kept
fourteen Urnes, which were dug up as they were raising the works of the City.
S. Peter's Church is their chief.

The houses in Geneva are generally well built, but through most of the streets
is a Timber work very offensive to the eye, for it hinders the view of the
houses, nevertheless it is convenient to keep out rain. The greatest
Merchandise Geneva sends to other parts is Books of all sorts. This is the
sum of what I took notice of in those few days I spent at Geneva.

From thence I made the quickest dispatch I could to Paris, and so to my Native
home. But it is now high time to set my last period to this Itinerary of my
Italian voyage.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX ON THE Same Subject.
FOr the Readers fuller satisfaction; and to leave no part of this Empress of
the World undescribed; I have here annexed a captiulation of those Places which
I casually omitted to see, partly collected from my discourse with Italians,
partly from my converse with foreign Authors of this nature.

In my first Digression the City Lucas is most obvious.

This Republickes dominions lie Promiscuously in those of the Duke of
Florence's, and contain not above two days journey in circuit, yet the
vigilance of the State under his Catholic Majesty's Protection, defends their
Liberties against all Opposers.

To maintain their freedom more powerfully, the Luchesi have reduced this
City to that strength as few in Italy can equal it.

It stands on a flat some few miles distant from a Branch of the Appenines.

The compass is but small (as Places of most hard access always are) the
whole not exceeding three mile; which is enclosed and fenc't with gallant Walls
and eleven Bulwarks.

There is little observable within the City except the Palace, Counsell-Hall,
Arcenall, and in the Dome the Volto Santo, which (pardon the tradition) was set
miraculously on an Image of our Savior, carved by Nicodemus his Disciple,
whilst the Artist was surmizing after what form to express that sacred face.

The Inhabitants are very affable to strangers (as I have been informd) so that
some choose to stay there, and their Language is much consonant with the
Sanesian.

The Territory of Luca by the Country man's industry, abounds in fruits, Olives
especially, which are famous here with us.

Out of Luca toward Pistoia, in the high way there runs a Rivolet of salt
Water, and from the same Source (as is imagind) issue those Renowned Bathes; to
go to which from Luca one passes, over the River Serchio upon two Bridges of
admirable Structure.

Advancing toward Rome, it is worth stepping out of the way to Perugia, and
Orvietta Both under the Patrimony of Saint Peter. Perugia.


The first Perugia gives Denomination to the Lacus Thrasimenus, though six
miles distant. Here precisely was fought that memorable Battle Between
Hanniball and the Romans the latter routed.

Perusia stands on a high hill, has but poor Walls, the Citadell well
fortified, the Fountain, the Popes Palace, and the Schools deserve seeing,
yet I heard of nothing more remarkable there, then the delicious muscatelle
Wine.

Orvietta is a great Town on a Mountain too; There is in this City one most
singular Piece to satisfy Curiosity, and that is the Well, made so that they
go down by one side and come up the other; It has a hundred and fifty
stairs, and seventy Windows. The Dome is such as all Italy has few the like,
it is built of Pietra Teverina, and on the Front are most exact Ouerages of
Marble.

In or about Rome I know no place I mist, excepting Bagnaia on this side and
Albano on the other; the latter deserves seeing, if not for the Antiquity, yet
for the good Wine; one of the best sorts in Italy.

However Florus says Alba Latii Caput before Romulus had laid his Cities
foundation: Besides the Tombs of Ascanius, and of the three Horatii yet stand
there.

There are many Ensigns of the Romans greatness, and places often cited
amongst ancient Writers; As Canna, Sulmo Ovids Town, Brundusium, with many
others toward Calabria, but few or none steer that course.

Those that make the circuit in Italy, far il Gyro as they say go to Venice by
the way of Loreto.

Between Rome and Loreto one passes by diverse Remnants of Antiquity, as first
the ruins of Otricoli, then Narnia, which Martial Describes thus.

Narnia Sulphureo quam Gurgiti Candidus Amnis
Circuit Ancipiti vix adeunda Jugo.
Out of the Town there are most huge arches of a Bridge standing over the
River, made by Augustus out of the Sicambrian spoils, the Reliquiae declare it
to have been the work of some flourishing Empire.

It Is of Marble, One Arch though not entire is two hundred foot broad, a
hundred and fifty high, nor can I think Martial spoke of any other Bridge in
the precedent Epigram, which he concludes thus.

Sed jam parce mihi, nec abutere Narnia Quinto.
Perpetuo liceat sic tibi Ponte frui.
There comes an Aquiduct into the City fifteen miles in length, at the
embushment are three fair Fountains of Brass.

Beyond Spoleto runs the River Clitumnus, the water whereof the old Poets
feigned, made the Oxen that drank of it, white, as Virgill in his Georgicks

Hinc albi Clitumne Greges and maxima Tauri,
Victima saepe tuo persusi Flumine sacro.
Romanos ad Templa Deum duxere triumphos.
Keeping on the Via Flaminia you come to Foligni, of old Forum Flaminii; some
step out of the way to Assisa famous for the birth of Saint Francis, institutor
of the Capuchian Order: but the nearest is to go to Recanati and so to Loreto.

Great was Diana of the Ephesians, Loreto.
great is the Lady of Loreto. Loreto is of it self but a little Bourg or
Village, yet by the noise it makes through Christendom, especially in the
Catholic Regions, it is as much frequented as Saint Peter's Chair. He Is no
zealous Romanist that has not made one pilgrimage thither, or sent some
Offering to the Virgin here adored.

The Church is on an Eminence; In the midst with great reverence is kept the
Cottage or chamber (as they tell) where the Virgin Mary lived and conceived her
heavenly Offspring. The house is environd with a case of Marble most curiously
workt, their Legend runs that this lodging was brought out of Palestina by
the Angels, and placed here at the Adriatic shore: Why not at Rome I wonder?
To confirm this story they show the Window where the Angel enterd at the
Salutation.

Here is without dispute the greatest Treasury in Christendom, and is daily
increast by new Oblations from Catholic Princes. Which the Turks and other
Pirates well know, and would make incursions were the place as weak, as it is
little.

Though little it deserves a longer survey then my speed will admit. I pass
now toward Ravenna, and first Ancona presents it self to my view.

Ancona the greatest maritimate under his Holinesses Jurisdiction is
mountainously situated, yet before has a most capacious and commodious Port;
ancient without any farther enquiry; that arch-Triumphall erected by the Senate
to Trajan is so firm and solid an Antiqual, as Rome her self can scarce show
the like, it is of Parian Marble, each stone of a prodigious bigness, cimented
with no Mortar, but with Lead. In the Front these words are legible.

Imp: Caesari. Divi. Nervae. F. Nervae Trajano. OptimO. Aug. Germanic. Daci.
Co. Pont. Max. TR. Pot. XIX. Imp. IX. CosT. VI. P. P. Providentissimo Principi.
Senatus P. Q R. Quod Accessum Italiae. Hoc etiam addito, ex Pecunia sua Portum
tutiorem. Navigantibus Reddiderit.

On the right side. Plotinae. Aug.
Conjugi Aug.


On the left. Divae Marcianae
Sorori Aug.


Ancona gives the name to the Country Marca d' Ancona, anciently Ager Pisenus,
all under the Pope, though the next Cities Senogallia and Fossombrone belong to
the Dukedom of Vrbin.

This Dukedom is at the present vacant, both the Pope and the Duke of Toscany
lay claim thereto, it is thought there will be a public Contest shortly.

After Fossombrone you find the River Metaurus and the Via Flaminia cut
through a Rock. Vrbin is a City amongst the mountains of very hard Access,
Raphael d' Vrbino purchased it a great fame by his deserving Pensill, of which
many excellent Pieces are here extant, one especially, his own Picture drawn
by his own hand. The Palace, the Bibliotheck, and Castello durante ten miles
off may be seen if you have leasu^e. Before the Place are the statues of the
Dukes.

Pesaro succeeds Vrbin a neat City in a plain under the same Duke, the Princes
Palace and his other seats of Pleasance (but above all Mill Fiore) deserve
any ones sight.

The next City of Note is Ariminum, famous for Caesar's ingression when he past
the Rubicon of which take this.

In the Piazza at Rimini, heretofore Forum Ariminense upon the stone whereon
Caesar stood when he made a speech to his Soldiers.

C. CAESAR

Dict.

1555. per Cos. restit.

At the East Gate coming from Pesaro, there is an old decayed Arch of Marble
built by Augustus where the Via Flaminia ended. Over the Marecchio is a bridge
began by Augustus, and finished by Tyberius, as the title thereon intimates.

Arimini stands, on the seaside but the Port is very bad, the place is fair,
graced with the Pope Paulus Quintus his statue in Brass.

Betwixt Ariminum and Cesena near to Cesena on the high way, upon a white
Marble is yet visible the Decree of the Senate when Caesar past the Rubicon,
and said -- Eatur quo Deorum ostenta and inimicorum Iniquitas vocat, jacta sit
Alea. The edict runs thus.

Jussu mandatuve P. R. Cos Imp: Mili. Tyro. Commilito. Manipularive Cent.
Turmaeve Legionariae Armat. Quisquis es hic sistito vexillum, Sinito, nec citra
hunc Amnem Rubiconem, Signa, Arma, Ductum, Commeatum, exercitumve traducito. Si
quis hujusce Jussionis ergo adversus jerit feceritve, Adjudicatus esto hostis
P. R. ac si contra Patriam arma tulerit, sacrosque Penates e Penetralibus
asp^rtaverit.

Sanctio Plebesci Senatusve Consult: Vltra hos fines Arma proferre liceat
nemini.

This stone was restored Tem: Pauli Tertii. Upon one of the sides is writ (as
may be supposed by the Restorer)

Quae fluit Vnda brevis Gallorum terminus olim
Ausoniaeque fuit; Parvulus hic Rubicon.
Advancing toward Ravenna you pass by Cervia, where before the Cathedral an
ancient Sepulcher, made like a Pyramid with two Infants ingrav'd thereon is to
be noted: nearer Revenna is La Pignada that notable Forest of Pines which
furnishes all Italy with that sort of fruit.

Revenna a City very venerable for its Antiquity stands in a Plat very low,
Ravenna.
three miles from the Sea side; It has one great inconvenience, a scarcity of
good water; which Martial knew when he wrote this Epigramme

Sit Cisterna mihi, quam Vinea malo Ravennae
Cum possum multo vendere pluris Aquam.
In the Porta Speciosa for the beauty of the Architecture called Aurea this Title
is to be read

Ti Claudius. Drusi. F. Caesar. Aug. Germanicus. Pont. Max. TR. Pot. Cos. 2.
Des. 3. Imp. P. P. dedit.

At Ravenna it is worth the pains to step into the Church of Saint Apollinary
built by Theodorick King of the Goths. There are two rows of most noble
Columns brought by the same King from Constantinople.

Before the Church of Saint Vidal there are some old Idols of the Pagans, and
in the Convent is the Sepulcher of Galla Placidia.

Hard by are the Ruins of Theodoricks Palace. In the Vessel of a Fountain
stands a Statue of Hercules Horarius the like not in Italy.

The Dome of Ravenna is very sumptuous. The Tradition is that, Saint Apollinary
praying God would show some miraculous sign to whom he would commit the
Bishopric of Ravenna, at a solemn Convention, the Spirit came down in the
likeness of a Dove upon one; the Window whereat the Dove enterd, they conserve
with great Devotion.

In Saint Francis his Convent, is buried the great Italian Poet Dante, with
this Epitaph made by himself.

Jura Monarchiae, superos Phlegetonta lacusque
Lustrando cecini, volverunt fata quousque
Sed quia Pars cessit melioribus Hospita castris.
Actoremque suum petiit felicior astris.
Hic claudor Danthes patriis exornis ab Oris
Quem genuit parvi Florentia matter Amoris.
These are the most considerable rarities at Ravenna.

I will now make a speedy cut through those parts in Lombardy I left out.

Near to Padua is Arquato, where Petrarch lived and past to the other life,
they show his house. On a fair tomb is this his Epitaph.

Frigida Francisci La^pis hic teossa Petrarchae
Suscipe Virgo Parens, animam sat Virgin parce
Fessaque jam terris coeli requiescat in arce.
These Cities in Lombardy, as Mantua, Modena, Parma, Turino, the Capitalls of
four Dukedomes are seldom visited by strangers; and indeed the splendor
those Princes live at drownes the rarities of the Cities, but I have been so
superfluous in curiosities, that I fear Delight should turn too tedious
thererefore in brief.

Mantua stands in the midst of a Lake, which renders the place inaccessable.

There are to come to the City two great Bridges, the one named San Georgio,
the other Molini.

Gradaro is a very fair Church, as likewise the Dome, where there is two
excellent Pieces of the Counsels held at Mantuo.

The Duke has diverse seats and Palaces about the City.

As the Fontana where in a hall there are rangd about wild Boares Heads, that
Vincenzo Father of this present Duke Ferdinand killed with his own hand.

The Favorita and the Thea, and above all the Hall of Giants, where by strange
and unusual art, how low soever one speaks, at the corners it is intelligibly to
be heard, and those in the midst hear nothing.

The Dukes Palace is of a most vast extent, Virgils house is showed near the
City, no memorial but his Statue

-- Man tua me genuit.
In the rest of the Cities of Lombardy, there is little should draw a Traveller
out of his way to be seen, but the Courts of their Princes, till he comes to
Turin the Duke of Savoys amongst the Alps where he may shut this Book.

1648.
The End of the Appendix.
Errata.
PAge 24. line 11. for one Read own. p. 42. l. 12. for e r. and. p. 44. l. 7.
for distance. r. distant. p. 75. l. 5. for Antonius, r. (...) p. 86. 4. for
some r. same. p. 86. l. 4. for Printed r. painted. p. 11. 7 l. 8. o^it s. p.
206. l. 11. for Mar. r. Marmore. p. 206. l. 9. for Constitution r. Institution.

Imprimatur.

NATHANIEL BRENT.
Junii 28. 1648.

