FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS FOR Cap: Thomas Allen Touching the Execution of his
Commission; bearing date the Eight day of January, 1649.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1649.

To the Reader.
(...) to the late K. his uncle, or to him whom he reputes his Successor, has
bin the cause which has moved him to what he has do, since his actions, and
demeanor, especialy his delivering up of Bristow has render him to the most
of his own party, not suspected only but hated; as one sufficiently discoverd
to have no other aim or interest, but, as the proverb is, to fish in troubled
waters, and to patch up his own indigent fortunes, with the spoil and robbery
of whomsoever. The rest of his piraticall arts, and who are his receavers, who
his interlopers, together with the whole model of his trade, may be read plain
anough in the instructions themselves, which were happily intercepted, and here
presented to public view, not his instructions, but discoveries to fore-arme
all those whose affairs necessitate them to traffic, or Sea voyage.

FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS FOR Cap: THOMAS ALLEN touching the execution of his
Commission; bearing date the Eight day of January, 1649.
WHen you have taken any Prize from any of the Rebels against the King of
England, or their assistants, you shall come to Neuport Rode, or to the
Peerehead there, and lade the Goods into Billanders, for Dort, and consign them
to Mr Cornelius Vande Graef, the sraight to pay. But first take away the
Marks, and unpack the Goods, and put them into new Cloth packes, and give
order to the Billander-men, and to some trusty men, whom you shall send with
them, to pass by Zealand without stay, to escape visitation: Keep all your
Prisoners safe aboard your own Ships, suffer none of them to remain in the
Prizes, till you may conveniently send them on shore in England or France after
that the Goods are sold, and the whole Fleet put out to Sea; to prevent noise
and discovery.

If you take a Ship laden with costly Goods, thou send her with trusty men into
Gordy, and give them Instructions to run up the River toward wilderland, and
thence send speedily to Mr. Cornelius Vande Graef, to give notice to Mr.
Revixit van Nassen at Rotterdam with all have to come to you. But be sure to
give me speedy notice thereof if I shall be here. And then get what ready money
you can for the Goods, and appoint what remains unpaid to be returned unto me
or to whom I shall appoint by Bill of Exchange from Mr. Revixit van Nassen son
in Nants, in as short a time as may be obtained.

If you take any Prizes where you cannot so conveniently carry them as
aforesaid, you may cause them to be carried into the Balke, and to go up so
near VVeareing, as you may lie out of right of any Ships going out or in at the
Texell; there hire a Boat, and send one of the trustiest men to Mr. Zachary
Lapie, English Merchant at Eucusen, and procure him to go aboard with your
Messenger, and agree with him for sale of the Goods, for ready money, and such
nocessaries as you want, which he will furnish you with: Keep close the Ships
company of the Prize, as before is appointed you: and let it not be known
whence Mr Lapie comes, let him enter the Ship from what place he thinks sit,
according to the sorts of the Goods, and then bring Lighters to unloade them,
and to bring to your Ships any supplies that you want but let not your Ships
stir out of the Balke till they go to Sea again, nor suffer any of the
Common men to go on shore, to avoid discovery.

If you shall meet with Prizes coming out of Holland, send them for Flanders,
and such as come from Flanders or France, send for Holland if you shall hear
that Marshall Rantzewe is at Dun^^^k, you may have a safe Harbor at that Port.

If you cannot bring your Prizes into any the aforementioned places to be sold,
then in cases of necessity you may dispose of them as you shall conceive to be
for the best advantage of his Highness the Prince of Wales his service,
wherein there is great trust reposed in your care and fidelity, whereof you are
to be careful to give a good account.

Your Randezvous is Helvert Sluice, in case you can put in thither within
eighteen days after the date hereof. But if you shall find that the Fleet is
gone from thence, then if you perceive by the winds that the Fleet is gone
Northward, your Randezvous must be Hamburrough head: But if you shall judge by
the winds, that the Fleet is gone toward the Channel Westward, you are to
follow that way, and your Randezvous is Silley or Pell Isle, according as you
shall find the winds to blow, or meet with any advertisement or Commands from
me to direct you to the Fleet, which you are to endeavor with all speed to
come unto.

If you shall not hear of the Fleet in any of the places appointed for your
Randezous, you are to stay about Silley, and to do there what you shall
conceive to be best for the Kings service in taking Prizes, and further
execution of your Commission and Orders. And when you find your victuals to
begin to be scant, then you are to go toward Cork in Ireland, keeping there
out of Command of the Land, until you be informed how things go in Ireland,
in or^^^ to your safety there; And if you may go safely (...) Kingsale, then
you are to go into that Port.

You are immediately upon the taking of any (...) to be very careful to
advertise me from time to time what Ships or Vessels you shall seize, what the
value of them may be, to what place, and to whom they (...) long, and where you
intend to send them. And for my better satisfaction, you are to send me upon
(...) occasions, Expresses, with Copies of such L^^ters, Invoices, and bills of
lading, as are of importance.

Given this 8th of Janury 1649. New style. RVPERT.

FINIS.

