A TREATISE OF Civil Policy: Being a Resolution of Forty three QUESTIONS
Concerning PREROGATIVE, Right and Privilege, In reference to the Supreme
Prince AND THE PEOPLE.

By SAMUEL RUTHERFORD Professor of Divinity of St Audrews in Scotland.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard near the West end. 1657.

L. An. Senecae Octavia. Nero, Seneca.
Sen. NIhil in propinquos temere constitui decet.


Ner. Iustum esse facile est, cui vacat pectus metu.


Sen. Magnum timoris remedium clementia est.


Ner. Extinguere hostem, maxima est virtus ducis.


Sen. Servare cives major est patriae patri.


Ner. Praecipere mitem convenit pueris senem.


Sen. Regenda magis est fervida adolescentia.


Ner. Aetate in hac satis esse consilii reor.


Sen. Vt facta superi comprobent semper tua.


Ner. Stulte verebor, esse cum faciam, Deos.


Sen. Hoc plus verere, quod licet tantum tibi.


Ner. Fortuna nostra cuncta permittit mihi.


Sen. Creed obsequenti parcius: levis est Dea.


Ner. Inertis est nescire quod liceat sibi.


Sen. Id facere laus est, quod decet, non quod licet.


Ner. Calcat jacentem vulgus.


Sen. Invisum opprimit.


Ner. Ferrum tuetur principem.


Sen. Melius fides.


Ner. Decet timeri Caesarem.


Sen. At plus diligi.


Ner. Metuant necesse est.


Sen. Quicquid exprimitur grave est.


Ner. Iussisque nostris pareant.


Sen. Iusta impera.


Ner. Statuam ipse.


Sen. Quae consensus efficiat rata.


Ner. Despectus ensis faciet.


Sen. Hoc absit nefas.


The PREFACE.
Who doubts (Christian Reader) but innocence must be under the courtesy
and mercy of malice, and that it is a real martyrdom, to be brought under the
lawless Inquisition of the bloody tongue? Christ, the Prophets and Apostles of
our Lord, went to Heaven with the note of Traitors, Seditious men, and such as
turned the world upside down: calumnies of treason to Caesar, were an
ingredient in Christ's cup, and therefore the author is the more willing to
drink of that cup that touched his lip, who is our glorious forerunner: what if
conscience toward God, and credit with men, cannot both go to heaven with the
Saints, the author is satisfied with the former companion, and is willing to
dismiss the other. Truth to Christ, cannot be treason to Caesar, and for his
choice he judges truth to have a nearer relation to Christ Jesus, then the
transcendent and boundless power of a mortal Prince.

He considered that Popery and defection had made a large step in Britain, and
that Arbitrary Government had over-swelled all banks of Law, that it was now at
the highest float, and that this sea approaching the farthest border of fancied
absolutenes, was at the score of ebbing: and the naked truth is, Prelates, a
wild and pushing cattle to the lambs and flock of Christ, had made a hideous
noise, the wheels of their chariot did run an equal pace with the
blood-thirsty mind of the Daughter of Babell. Prelacie, the daughter planted in
her mothers blood, must verify that word, As is the mother, so is the
daughter: why, but do not the Prelates now suffer? True, but their sufferings
are not of blood, or kindred, to the calamities of these of whom Lactantius
says, l. 5. c. 19. O quam honesta voluntate miseri erant. The causes of their
suffering are, 1. Hope of gain and glory, stirring their Helm to a shore they
much affect; even to a Church of Gold, of Purple, yet really of clay and earth.
2. The lie is more active upon the spirits of men, not because of its own
weakness, but because men are more passive in receiving the impressions of
error, then truth; and opinions lying in the worlds fat womb, are of a
conquering nature, what ever notions side with the world, to Prelates and men
of their make are very efficacious.

There is another cause of the sickness of our time; God plagued Heresy, to
beget Atheism and security, as Atheism and security had begotten Heresy,
even as clouds through reciprocation of causes engender rain, rain begat
vapors, vapors clouds, and clouds rain, so do sins overspread our sad times
in a circular generation.

And now judgment presses the kingdoms, and of all the heaviest judgments
the sword, and of swords the civil sword, threatens vastation, yet not, I
hope, like the Roman civil sword, of which it was said, Bella geri placuit
nullos habitura triumphos.



I hope this war shall be Christ's Triumph, Babylons ruin.

That which moved the author, was not as my excommunicate Sacr. san. Epist.
^edi^.
adversary, like a Thraso, says, the escapes of some pens, which necessitated
him to write, for many before me has learnedly trodden in this path; but that
I might add a new testimony to the times.

I have not time to examine the P. Prelates Preface, only, I give a taste of his
gall in this preface, and of a virulent piece, of his ( agnosco stylum et
genium Thrasonis) In which he labors to prove how inconsistent presbyteriall
government is with Monarchy, or any other government.

1 He denies that the Crown and Scepter is under any coactive power of Pope,
or Presbiterie, or censurable, or dethroneable: to which we say, Presbyteries
profess that Kings are under the coactive power of Christ's keys of
discipline, and that Prophets and Pastors, as Ambassadors of Christ, have the
keys of the kingdom of God, to open and let in believing Princes, and also to
shut them out, if they rebel against Christ; the law of Christ excepteth none,
Mat. 16. 19. Mat. 18. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 10. 6. Jer. 1. 9. 18. if the Kings sins
may be remitted in a ministerial way, as Joh. 20. 23, 24. as Prelates and
their Priests absolve Kings; we think they may be bound by the hand that
loosed, Presbyteries never dethroned Kings, never usurped that power; Your
father P. Prelate, has dethroned many Kings; Sacr. san. reg. maj. c. 5.
I mean the Pope, whose power, by your own confession cap. 5. page 58.
differs from yours by divine right, only in extent.

2 When sacred Hierarchy, the order instituted by Christ, is overthrown, what
is the condition of Sovereignty? Ans. Surer then before, when Prelates deposed
Kings. 2. I fear Christ shall never own this order.

3 The Mitre cannot suffer, and the Diadem be secured. Ans. Have Kings no
pillars to their thrones, but Antichristian Prelates? Prelates have trampled
Diadem and Scepter under their feet, as histories teach us.

4 Do they not (Puritans) magisterially determine, that Kings are not of Gods
creation by Authoritative Commission; but only by permission, extorted by
importunity, and way given, that they may be a scourge to a sinful people?
Ans. Any unclean spirit from Hell, could not speak a blacker lie, we hold that
the King, by office, is the Churches nurse father, a sacred Ordinance, the
deputed power of God; but by P. P. his way, all inferior Judges, and Gods
Deputies on earth, who are also our fathers in the fifth Commandments style,
are to be obeyed by no Divine law; the King misled by P. Prelates, shall forbid
to obey them, who is, in right-down truth, a mortal civil Pope, may loose and
liberate subjects from the tie of a Divine law.

5 His inveying against ruling Elders, and the rooting out of Antichristian
Prelacie, without any word of Scripture on the contrary, I pass as the
extravagancy of a malecontent, because he is deservedly excommunicated for
Perjury, Popery, Socinianisme, Tyranny over men's conscience, and invading
places of civil dignity, and deserting his calling, and the camp of Christ,
etc.

6 None were of old anointed, but Kings, Priests and Prophets, who then more
obliged, to maintain the Lords Anointed, then Priests and Prophets? The Church
has never more beauty and plenty under any government, then Monarchy, which is
most countenanced by God, and magnified by Scripture.

Ans. Pastors are to maintain the rights of people, and a true Church, no less
then the right of Kings; but Prelates the Court Parasites, and creatures of the
King, that are born for the Glory of their King, can do no less then profess
this in words, yet it is true, that Tacitus writes of such, Hist. l. 1.
Libentius cum fortuna principis, quam cum principe loquuntur: and it is true,
that the Church has had plenty under Kings, not so much, because they were
Kings, as because they were godly and zealous: except the P. P. say, That the
oppressing Kings of Israel and Judah, and the bloody horns that made war with
the Lamb, are not Kings. In the rest of the Epistle, he extols the Marquis of
Ormond with base flattery, from his Loyalty to the King, and his more then
Admirable prudence in the Treaty of Cessation with the Rebels; a woe is due to
this false prophet, who calls Darkness Light, for the former was abominable,
and perfidious Apostasy from the Lords cause, and people of God, whom he once
defended, and the Cessation was a selling of the blood of many hundred thousand
protestants, Men, Women, and sucking Children.

This cursed P. has written of late a Treatise against A refutation of the P.
P. Pamphlet, touching the inconsistency of the Presbytery with Monarchy. The
pretended Prelates lies and calumnies of the Presbyterits of Scotland.
the Presbyteriall government of Scotland, in which there is a bundle of lies,
hellish calumnies, and gross errors.

The first lie is, that we have Lay Elders, whereas, they are such as rule, But
labor not in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 7. page 3.

2. The second lie, that Deacons who only attend Tables, are joint Rulers with
Pastors, page 3.

3. That we never, or little use the lesser excommunication, that is, debarring
from the Lords Supper. Page 4.

4. That any Church judicature in Scotland, exacteth Page 6.
pecuniary mulcts, and threaten excommunication to the non-payers, and refuses
to accept the repentance of any who are not able to pay: the civil magistrate
only fineth for Drunkenness, and Adultery, Blaspheming of God, which are
frequent sins in Prelates.

5 A calumny it is to say, That ruling Elders are of equal authority to
Preach the Word, as Pastors, Page 7.

6. That Laymen are members of Presbyteries or general 6.
Assemblies; Buchanan, and Mr. Melvin, were Doctors of Divinity: and could have
taught such an Ass as Jo. Maxwell.

7. That exspectants are intruders upon the sacred function, 7. Page 9.
because as sons of the Prophets, they exercise their gifts for trial in
Preaching.

8. That the Presbytery of Edinbrough has a superintending Page 10.
power, because they communicate the affairs of the Church, and writ to the
Churches, what they hear Prelates and Hell devise against Christ and his Church.

9. That the King must submit his Scepter to the Presbytery; the Kings Scepter
is his Royal office, which is not subject to any judicature, no more then any
lawful ordinance of 10.
Christ; but if the King as a man, blaspheme God, murder the innocent, advance
Belly-gods, (such as our Prelates for the most part were) above the Lords
inheritance, the Ministers of Christ are to say, The King troubles Jsraell,
and they have the keys to open and shut heaven to, and upon the King, if he
can offend.

10. That King James said, a Scottish Presbytery, and a 10, 11.
Monarchy, agrees as well as God and the Devil, is true, but King James meant
of a wicked King; else he spoke as a man.

11. That the presbytery out of pride refused to answer King Page 11.
James his Honorable messengers, is a lie, they could not in business of high
concernment, return a present answer to a Prince, seeking still to abolish
Presbyteries.

12. Its a lie, that all sins, even all civil business, come under the
cognizance of the Church, for only sins, as publicly scandalous, fall under
their power, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 20. It is a
calumny that they search out secret crimes, or that ever they disgraced the
innocent, or divided families, where there be flagrant scandals, and pregnant
suspicions; of scandalous crimes, they search out these, as the incest of
Spotswood, P. P. of Saint Andrews, with his own daughter; the adulteries of
Whiteford, P. P. of Brichen, whose Bastard came weeping to the Assembly of
Glasgow in the arms of Pa. 11, 12, 13.
the whore: these they searched out, but not with the damnable oath ex officio,
that the High Commission put upon innocents, to cause them accuse themselves,
against the Law of nature.

13. The Presbytery hinder not lawful merchandise; 14.
scandalous exhortation, unjust suits of Law, they may forbid: and so does the
Scripture, as scandalous to Christians, 2 Cor. 6.

14. They repeal no civil Laws, they Preach against 15.
unjust and grievous laws, as, Esa. cap. 10. 1. does, and censure the
violation of Gods Holyday, which Prelates profaned.

15. We know no Parochial Popes, we turn out no holy Ministers, but only dumb
dogs, non-residents, scandalous, wretched, and Apostate Prelates.

16. Our Moderator has no dominion, the P. P. absolveth Page 7.
him, while he says, All is done in our Church by common consent, p. 7.

17. It is true, we have no Popish consecration, such as P. P. contendeth for
in the Mass, but we have such Page 9.
as Christ and his Apostles used, in Consecrating the Elements.

18. ^f any sell the Patrimony of the Church, the Presbytery censures him; if
any take buds of Malt, Meal, Page 18.
Be^ffe, it is no law with us, no more then the Bishops five hundred marks, or
a years stipend that the intrant gave to the Lord Bishop for a church. And who
ever took buds in these days, (as King James by the Earl of Dumbar, did buy
Episcopacie at a pretended Assembly, by foul budding) they were either men for
the Episcopal way, or perfidiously against their oath became Bishops, all
personal faults of this kind, imputed to Presbyters, agree to them, under the
reduplication of Episcopal men.

19. The leading men, that covered the sins of the dying man and so losed his
soul, were Episcopal men: and though some of them were presbyterians, the
faults of men cannot prejudice the truth of God; but the Prelates always Pa.
17, 18.
cry out against the rigor of Presbyteries, in censuring scandals, because they
themselves do ill, they hate the light; now here the Prelate condemns them of
remissness in Discipline.

20. Satan, a lier from the beginning, says, The Presbytery Page 18.
was a seminary and nursery of fiends, and contentions, and bloods: because
they excommunicated murderers against King James his will: which is all one as
to say. Prophesying is a nurse of bloods, because the Prophets cried out
against King Achab, and the murderers of innocent Naboth: the men of God must
be either on the one side, or the other, or then preach against reciprocation
of injuries.

21. It is false, that Presbyteries usurp both swords: because they censure
sins, which the civil Magistrate should censure and punish. Elias might be
said then to mix himself with the civil business of the Kingdom, because he
prophesied against Idolators killing of the Lords Prophets, which crime the
civil Magistrate was to punish. But the truth is, the Assembly of Glasgow,
1637. condemned the Prelates, because they being Pastors, would be also Lords
of Parliament, of Session, of Secret Counsel, of Exchequer, Judges, Barons,
and in their lawless High Commission, would Fine, Imprison, and use the sword.

22. It is his ignorance, that he says, A provincial synod Page 19.
is an associate body chosen out of all judicial Presbyteries; for all
Pastors, and Doctors, without delegation, by virtue of their place and office,
repair to the Provincial Synods, and without any choice at all, consult and
voice there. Page 22.


23. It is a lie, That some Leading men rule all here; indeed Episcopal men
made factions to rent the Synods: and though men abuse their power to factions,
this cannot prove that Presbyteries are inconsistent with Monarchy; for then
the Prelate, the Monarch of his Diocesian rout, should be Anti-Monarchiall in a
higher manner, for he rules all at his will.

24. The prime men, as Mr. R. Bruce the faithful servant of Christ, was
honored and attended by all, because of his Suffering, Zeal, Holiness, his
fruitful Ministry in gaining many thousand souls to Christ: So, though King
James cast him off, and did swear, By Gods name he intended to be King, (the
Prelate makes Blasphemy a virtue in the King) yet King James swear he could
not find an honest Minister in Scotland to be a Bishop, and therefore he was
necessitated to promote false knaves; but he said sometimes, and wrote it under
his hand, that Mr. R. Bruce was worthy of the half of his kingdom: but will
this prove Presbyteries inconsistent with Monarchies? I should rather think,
that Knave Bishops, by King James his judgment, were inconsistent with
Monarchies.

25. His lies of Mr. R. Bruce, excerpted out of the lying Manuscript of Apostat
Spotswood, in that he would not but preach against the Kings recalling from
exile some Bloody Popish Lords, to undo all, are nothing comparable to the
Incests, Adulteries, Blasphemies, P. 22, 23, 24.
Perjuries, Sabbath-breaches, Drunkenness, Prophanity, etc. committed by
Prelates before the Sun.

26. Our General Assembly is no other then Christ's Court, Act. 15. made up of
Pastors, Doctors, and Brethren or Elders.

27. They ought to have no negative vote, to impede the conclusions of Christ
in his servants.

28. It is a lie, that the King has no power to appoint time and place for the
General Assembly; but his power is not privative to destroy the free Courts of
Christ, but accumulative to aid and assist them.

29. It is a lie, That our general Assembly may repeal Laws, command and
expect performance of the King, or then excommunicate, subject to them, force
and compel King, Judges, and all, to submit to them. They may not force the
conscience of the poorest beggar, nor is any Assembly infallible, nor can it
lay bounds upon souls of Judges, which they are to obey with blind obedience,
their power is ministerial, subordinate to Christ's Law; and what civil Laws
Parliaments make against Gods word, they may Authoritatively declare them to be
unlawful; as though the Emperor, Act. 15. had commanded Fornication and
eating of blood, might not the Assembly forbid these in the Synod? I conceive
the Prelates, if they had power, would repeal the Act of Parliament made, An.
1641. in Scotland, by his Majesty personally present, and the three Estates
concerning the anulling of these Acts of Parliament, and Laws, which
established Bishops in Scotland. Erg. Bishops set themselves as independent
Monarchs, above Kings and Laws: and what they damn in Presbyteries and
Assemblies, that they practice themselves.

30. Commissioners from Buroughs, and Two from Page 31.
Edinbrough, because of the largeness of that Church, not for Cathedral
supereminence, sit in Assemblies, not as sent from Buroughs, but as sent and
Authorized by the Church Session, of the Borough, and so they sit there in a
Church capacity.

31. Doctors both in Accademies, and in Parishes, we Page 31.
desire, and our Book of Discipline holds forth such.

32. They hold (I believe with warrant of Gods word) if the King refuse to
reform Religion, the inferior Judges and Assembly of Godly Pastors, and other
Church Officers may reform; if the King will not kiss the Sun, and Page 33,
34, 35.
do his duty in purging the House of the Lord, may not Eliah and the people do
their duty, and cast out Baals Priests? Reformation of Religion is a personal
act that belongs to all, even to any one private person according to his
place.

33. They may swear a Covenant without the King, if he refuse; and Build the
Lords House, 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. themselves: and relieve and defend one another,
when they are oppressed. For my acts and duties of defending my self and the
oppressed, do not tie my conscience conditionally, so the King consent, but
absolutely, as all duties of the Law of nature do, Jer. 22. 3. Prove. 24. 11.
Esa. 58. 6. Esa. 1. 17.

34. The P. P. condemns our Reformation, because it was done against the will
of our Popish Queen. This shows what estimation he has of Popery, and how he
abhors Protestant Religion.

35. They deposed the Queen for Her Tyranny, but Crowned her Son; all this is
vindicated in the following Treatise.

36. The killing of the monstrous and prodigious wicked Cardinal in the Castle
of St. Andrews, and the violence done to the Prelates, who against all Law of
God and man obtruded a Mass service upon their own private motion, in
Edinbrough An. 1637. can conclude nothing against Presbyteriall Government,
except our Doctrine commend these acts as lawful.

37. What was preached by the servant of Christ, whom p. 46. he calls the
Scottish Pope, is Printed, and the P. P. durst not, could not, cite any thing
thereof as Popish or unsound, he knows that the man whom he so slandereth,
knocked down the Pope and the Prelates.

38. The making away the fat Abbacies and Bishoprics, is a bloody Heresy to
the earthly minded Prelate: the Confession of Faith commended, by all the
Protestant Churches, as a strong bar against Popety, and the book of
Discipline, in which the servants of God labored twenty years, with fasting
and praying, and frequent advice and counsel, from the whole Reformed
Churches, are to the P. P. a negative faith, and devote imaginations; its a
lie, that Episcopacie by both sides was ever agreed on by Law in Scotland.

39. And was it a heresy that M. Melvin taught, that Presbyter and Bishop are
one function in Scripture? and that Abbots and Priors were not in Gods book?
dic ubi legis: and is this a proof of inconsistency of Presbyteries with a
Monarchy?

40 It is a heresy to the P. P. that the Church appoint a Fast, when King
James appointed an unseasonable Feast, when Gods wrath was upon the Land,
contrary to Gods word, Esa. 22. 12, 13, 14. and what, will this prove
Presbyteries to be inconsistent with Monarchies?

41. This Assembly is to judge, what Doctrine is treasonable; His lies of the
general Assemblies of Scotland.
what then? Surely the secret Counsel and King, in a constitute Church is not
Synodically to determine what is true or false Doctrine, more then the Roman
Emperor could make the Church Canon, Act. 15.

42. M. Gibson, M. Black, preached against King James his maintaining the
Tyranny of Bishops, his sympathizing with Papists and other crying sins, and
were absolved in a general Assembly, shall this make Presbyteries inconsistent
with Monarchy? Nay, but it proves only, that they are inconsistent with the
wickedness of some Monarchies; and that Prelates have been like the four
hundred false prophets that ^lattered King Achab; and these men that preached
against the sins of the King, and Court, by Prelates in both Kingdoms, have
been imprisoned, Banished, their Noses ripped, their che^ks burnt, their ears
cut.

43. The Godly men that kept the Assembly of Aberdeen, An. 1603. did stand for
Christ's Prerogative when K. James took away all general Assemblies, as the
event proved; and the King may with as good warrant inhibit all Assemblies for
Word and Sacraments, as for Church Discipline.

44. They excommunicate not for light faults and trifles as the Liar says: our
Discipline says the contrary.

45. This Assembly never took on them to chose the Kings Counselors, but
these who were in authority took K. James, when he was a child, out of the
Company of a corrupt and seducing Papist, Esme Duke of Lennox, whom the P. P.
names, Noble, Worthy, of eminent indowments.

46. It is true, Glasgow Assembly 1637. voted down the High Commission, because
it was not consented unto by the Church, and yet was a Church Judicature, which
took upon them to judge of the Doctrine of Ministers, and deprive them, and did
incroach upon the Liberties of the established lawful Church judicatures.

47. This Assembly might well forbid M. John Graham Minister, to make use of an
unjust decree, it being scandalous in a Minister to oppress.

48. Though Nobles, Barons, and Burgesses, that profess the truth, be Elders,
and so Members of the general Assembly, this is not to make the Church the
House, and the Commonwealth the Hangings; for the constistuent Members, we are
content to be examined by the pattern of Synods, Act. 15. v. 22, 23. Is this
inconsistent with Monarchy?

49. The Commissioners of the general Assembly, ar^ 1. A mere occasional
judicature. 2. Appointed by, and subordinate to the General Assembly. 3. They
have the same warrant of Gods Word, that Messengers of the Synod, Act. 15. v.
22. 27. has.

50. The historical calumny of the 17. day of December, is known to all; 1.
That the Ministers had any purpose to dethrone King James, and that they wrote
to John L. Marquess of Hamilton to be King, because K. James had made
defection from the true Religion: Satan devised, Spotswood and this P. P.
vented this, I hope the true history of this is known to all. The holiest
Pastors, and professors in the Kingdom, asserted this Government, suffered for
it, contended with authority only for sin, never for the power and Office;
These on the contrary side were men of another stamp, who minded earthly
things, whose God was the world. 2. All the forged inconsistency betwixt
Presbyteries and Monarchies, is an opposition with absolute Monarchy; and
concludes with alike strength, against Parliaments, and all Synods of either
side, against the Law, and Gospel, preached, to which Kings and Kingdoms are
subordinate. Lord establish Peace and Truth.

Farewell.
The Table of the Contents of the Book.
QUEST. I.
Whether Government be by a divine Law? Affirmed, Page 1. How Government is
from God, Ibid. Civil Power in the Root, immediately from God, Page 2.
QUEST. II.
Whether or no Government be warranted by the Law of nature? Affirmed, Ibid.
Civil society natural in radice, in the root, voluntary, in modo, in the
manner, Ibid. Power of Government, and Power of Government, by such and such
Magistrates, different, Page 2, 3. Civil subjection not formally from natures
Law, Page 3. Our consent to Laws penal, not antecedently natural, Ibid.
Government by such Rulers, a secondary Law of nature, Ibid. Family Government
and politic, different, Ibid. Government by Rulers, a secondary Law of nature;
Family Government, and Civil, different, Page 4. Civil Government by
consequent, natural, Page 5.
QUEST. III.
Whether Royal Power, and definite Forms of Government be from God? Affirmed,
Ibid. That Kings are from God, understood in a fourfold sense, Page 5, 6. The
Royal Power has warrant from divine institution, Page 6. The three forms of
Government, not different in spece and nature, P. 8. How every form is from
God, Ibid. How Government is an ordinance of man, 1 Pet* 2. 13. Page 8, 9.
QUEST. IV.
Whether or no, the King be only and immediately from God, and not from the
people? Prius distinguitur, posterius pr^rsus Negatur, page 5. How the King is
from God, how from the people, Ibid. Royal Power three ways in the people, P.
6, 10. How Royal Power is radically in the people, P. 7. The people makes the
King, Ibid. How any form of Government is from God, P. 8. How Government is a
humane ordinance, 1 Pet. 2. 3. P. 8, 9. The people creat the King, P. 10, 11.
Making a King, and choosing a King, not to be distinguished, P. 12, 13. David
not a King formally, because anointed by God, P. 14, 15.
QUEST. V.
Whether or no, the P. P. proves, that Sovereignty is immediately from God,
not from the people? p. 16. Kings made by the people, though the Office, in
abstracto, wor^ immediately from God, P. 16. The people have a real action,
more then approbation in making a King, P. 19, Kinging of a person ascribed to
the people, P. 20. Kings in a special manner, are from God, but it follows
not: Ergo, not from the people, P. 21. The place, Prove. 8. 15. proves not, but
Kings are made by the people. P. 22, 23. Nebuchadnezzar and other heathen
Kings, had no just Title before God, to the Kingdom of Judah, and diverse other
subdued Kingdoms, P. 26, 27.
QUEST. VI.
Whether or no, the King be so allanerly from both in regard of Sovereignty and
Designation of his person, as he is no ways from the people, but only by mere
approbation? Negatur, page 28, 29. The Forms of Government, not from God by an
act of naked Providence, but by his approving will, Ibid. Sovereignty not from
the people by sole approbation, P. 29, 30. Though God have peculiar acts of
providence in creating Kings, it follows not hence, that the people makes
not Kings, P. 31. The P. Prelate, exponeth prophecies true only of David,
Solomon, and Jesus Christ, as true of profane heathen Kings, P. 34, 35. The P.
P. makes all the heathen Kings to be Princes, anointed with the holy Oil of
saving grace, Ibid.
QUEST. VII.
Whether the P. Prelate conclude, that neither constitution, nor designation of
Kings is from the people? Negatur, P. 38, 39. The excellency of Kings, makes
them not of Gods only Constitution and Designation, Ibid. How Soveraigntie is
in the people, how not, P. 43. A Community does not surrender their right and
liberty to their Rulers; so much as their power active, to do, and passive, to
suffer violence, P. 44, 45. Gods loosing of the bonds of Kings, by the
mediation of the peoples despising him, proves against the P. P. That the Lord
takes away, and gives Royal Majesty mediately, not immediately, P. 45, 46.
The subordination of people to Kings and Rulers, both natural and voluntary;
the subordination of beasts and creatures to man merely natural, P. 46, 47.
The place, Genesis 9. 5. He that shedeth man's blood, etc. discussed, P. 47, 48.
QUEST. VIII.
Whether or no, the P. Prelate proves, by force of reason, That the people
cannot be capable of any power of Government? Negatur, page 49, 50. In any
community there is an active and passive power to Government, P. 50. Popular
Government is not that wherein all the whole people are Governors, P. 53, 54.
People by nature are equally indifferent to all the three Governments, and are
under not any one by nature, P. 53. The P. Prelate, denies the Pope his father
to be the Antichrist, Ibid. The bad success of Kings chosen by people, proves
nothing against us, because Kings chosen by God, had bad success through their
own wickedness, P. 54, 55. The P. Prelate condemns King Charles his
ratifying, Parl. 2. An. 1641. The whole proceedings of Scotland in this present
Reformation, P. 56. That there be any supreme Judges, is an eminent act of
divine providence, which hinders not, but that the King is made by the
people, P. 57. The people not patients in making a King, as is water in the
Sacrament of Baptism, in the Act of production of grace, P. 58.
QUEST. IX.
Whether or no, Soveraigntie is so in and from the people, that they may resume
their power in time of extreme necessity? Negatur. page 58. How the people is
the subject of Sovereignty, Ibid. No Tyrannical power is from God, P. 59.
People cannot alienate the natural power of self-defence, Ibid. The power of
Parliaments, P. 60. The Parliament has more power then the King, Ibid. Judges
and Kings differ, P. 61. People may resume their power, not because they are
infallible, but because they cannot so readily destroy themselves, as one man
may do, P. 63. That the Sanedrim punished not David, Bathsheba, Joab, is but a
fact, not a law, P. 63, 64. There is a subordination of Creatures natural,
Government must be natural; and yet this, or that form, is voluntary, P. 65,
66, 67.
QUEST. X.
Whether or not Royal birth be equivalent to Divine Unction? Negatur. page 68.
Impugned by eight Arguments. Ibid. Royalty not transmitted from father to
son. ibid. A family may be chosen to a Crown as a single person is chosen,
but the tie is conditional in both. page 68. 69. The Throne by special
promise made to David and his seed, by God, Psalm. 89. no ground to make birth,
In foro Dei, a just title to the crown. page 69 70. A Title by conquest to a
Throne must be unlawful, if birth be gods lawful title. page 70. Royalists
who hold conquest to be a just title to the Crown, teach manifest treason
against King Charles, and his Royal Heirs. ibid. Only, Bona fortunae, not
honor or Royalty properly transmittable from father to son. page 71. Violent
conquest cannot regulate the consciences of people, to submit to a conqueror
as their lawful King. page 72. Naked birth is inferior to that very divine
unction, that made no man a^ King without the peoples election. page 73. If a
Kingdom were by birth the King might sell it. page 74. The Crown is the
Patrimony of the Kingdom, not of him who is King, or of his father page 72,
73, 76. Birth a typical designement to the Crown in Israel. page 74. The
choice of a family to the Crown resolves upon the free election of the
people, as on the fountaine-cause. page 76. Election of a family to the Crown
lawful. page 77.
QUEST. XI.
Whether or no, he be more principally a King, who is a King by birth, or he
who is a King by the free election of the people? Affir. posterius, page 79.
The Elective King comes nearer to the first King. Deuteronomy. 17. page 80. If the
people may limit the King, they give him the power. ibid. A Community have not
power formally to punish themselves. page 81. The Hereditary and the elective
Prince in diverse considerations better, or worse, each one then another. page
82.
QUEST. XII.
Whether or no a Kingdom may lawfully be purchased by the sole Title of
Conquest. Negatur. page 82. 7. Argu. for the negat. a twofold right of
conquest. ibid. Conquest turned in an after-consent of the people, becomes a
just title. page 83. Conquest not a signification to us of Gods approving will.
page 84. Mere violent domineering contrary to the acts of governing. ibid.
Violence has nothing in it of a King. ibid. A bloody Conqueror not a
blessing, per se, as a King is, page 85. Strength as prevailing is not Law or
reason. page 86 Fathers cannot dispone of the liberty of posterity not borne.
ibid. A father as a father has not power of life and death. page 87. Isreal's
and David's Conquests of the Canaanites, Edomites, Ammonites not lawful,
because conquest, but upon a Divine title of Gods promise. page 88. 89.
QUEST. XIII.
Whether or no Royal Dignity have its spring from Nature, and how that is true
(every man is borne free) and how servitude is contrary to nature; Affir. 89.
Seven sorts of superiority and inferiority. page 89, 90. Power of life and
death from a positive Law. ibid. A Dominion antecedent and consequent. 90.
Kings and subjects no natural order. ibid. A man is borne, consequenter, in
politic relation. page 91. Slavery not natural from four reasons. ibid. Every
man borne free in regard of civil subjection (not in regard of natural, such
as of children, and wife to Parents and Husband) proved by seven Arguments.
page 91, 92, 93. Politic Government how necessary, how natural. page 94.
That Parents should inslave their children, not natural. page 95.
QUEST. XIV.
Whether or no the people make a Person their King conditionally, or
absolutely; and whether the King be tied by any such covenant? page 96. The
King under a natural, but no civil obligation to the people, as Royalists
teach. ibid. The Covenant civilly tyeth the King, proved by Scriptures and
reasons, by 8. Argu. ibid. and sequent. If the condition without which one of
the parties would never have entered in Covenant, be not performed, that party
is loosed from the Covenant. page 97. The people and Princes are obliged in
their places for Justice and Religion, no less then the King. page 98. In so
far as the King presses a false Religion on the people, eatenus, in so far
they are understood not to have a King. page 99. The Covenant gives a mutual
coactive power to King and people, to compel each other, though there be not
one in earth higher then both to compel each of them. page 100. The Covenant
binds the King as King, not as he is a man only. page 101. One or two
Tyrannous acts deprive not the King of his Royal right. page 104. Though there
were no positive written Covenant (which yet we grant not) yet there is a
natural, tacit, implicit Covenant tying the King, by the nature of his Office.
page 106 If the King be made King, absolutely, it is contrary to Scripture, and
the nature of his Office. page 107. The people given to the King as a pledge,
not as if they became his own to dispose of at his absolute will. page 108.
The King could not buy, sell, borrow, if no Covenant should tie him to men.
ibid. The Covenant sworn by Judah, 2 Chro. 15. tied the King. page 109.
QUEST. XV.
Whether the King be univocally or only Analogically and by proportion a
father, page 111 Adam not King of the whole earth, because a father. ibid. The
King a Father Metaphorically and improperly, proved by eight Arguments. ibid.
and sequent.
QUEST XVI.
Whether or no a despoticall or masterly dominion agree to the King, because he
is King. Negatur. page 116 The King has no masterly dominion over the
Subjects, as if they were his servants. Proved by 4. Arguments. page 116. The
King not over men as reasonable creatures to domineere. page 117. The King
cannot give away his Kingdom or his people, as if they were his proper goods.
ibid. A violent surrender of liberty tyeth not. page 119 A surrender of
ignorance is in so far, unvoluntary, as it oblige not. ibid. The goods of the
subjects not the Kings, proved by 8. Argu. page 120. All the goods of the
subjects are the Kings in a fourfold sense. page 121.
QVEST. XVII.
Whether or no, the Prince have properly the fiduciary or ministerial power of
a Tutor, Husband, Patron, Minister, Head, Master of a Family, not of a lord or
dominator. Affirmed, p. 124. The King a Tutor rather then a Father, as these
are distinguished* ibid. A free Community not properly, and in all respects, a
minor and pupil, p. 125. The Kings power not properly maritall and husbandly.
ibid. The King a Patron, and Servant. page 126. The Royal power only from God,
Immediatione simplicis constitutionis, and solum solitudine causae primae, but
not Immediatione applicationis dignitatis ad personam. page 126. The King the
Servant of the people both objectively, and subjectively. page 127. The Lord
and the people by one and the same act according to the Physical relation
makes the King. ibid. The King head of the people Metaphorically only, not
essentially, not univocally by 6. Argu. page 128. His power fiduciary only.
page 129,
QVEST. XVIII.
What is the Law or manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8, 9, 11. the place discussed
fully. page 130. The Power and the Offfce badly differenced by Barclay. page
130. What is (...) the manner of the King, by the harmony of Interpretors
ancient and modern, Protestants and Papists. page 131, 132, 133. Crying out, 1 Samuel 8. not necessarily a remedy of tyranny, nor a praying with faith and
patience, page 135, 136. Resisting of Kings that are tyrannous and patience not
inconsistent. ibid. The Law of the King not a permissive Law, as was the Law of
Devorcement. page 136, 137. The Law of the King, 1 Samuel 12. 23, 24. not a Law
of tyranny, page 138, 139.
QVEST. XIX.
Whether or no the King be in Dignity and Power above the people? Neg. Impugned
by 10. Argu. p. 139. In what consideration the King is above the people, and
the people above the King. page 139, 140. A mean as a mean inferior to the
end, how its true. ibid. The King inferior to the people. ibid. The Church
because the Church is of more excellency then the King, because King. page 140,
141. The people being those to whom the King is given, worthier then the gift.
page 141. And the people immortal, the King mortal. page 142. The King a
mean only, not both the efficient or Author of the Kingdom and a mean. Two
necessary distinctions of a mean. page 143, If sin had never been there should
have been no King. page 142. The King is to give his life for his people. ibid.
The consistent cause more excellent then the effect. page 143, 144, 145. The
people then the King. page 144, 145. Impossible people can limit Royal Power,
but they must give Royal Power also. ibid. The people have an action in making
a King, proved by four Arguments. ibid. Though it were granted that God
immediately made Kings, yet it is no consequent God only, and not the people,
can unmake him. page 146. The people appointing a King over themselves, retain
the Fountainepower of making a King. page 147, 148, 149. The mean inferior to
the end, and the King as King is a mean. page 149, 150, 153. The King as a
mean, and also as a man inferior to the people, page 150. To swear
non-selfe-preservation, and to swear selfe-murther, all one. page 151. The
people cannot make away their power. 1. Their whole power, nor 2. irrevocably
to the King. page 152. The people may resume the power they give to the
Commissioners of Parliament, when it is abused, p. 152, The Tables in Scotland
lawful, when the ordinary judicaturies are corrupt, p. 153. Quod efficit tale
id^ipsum magis tale, discussed, the fountain-power in the people, the derived
only in the King, p. 153, 154, 155. The King is a fiduciary, a life-renter,
not a lord or heritor, p. 155, 156. How soveraigntie is in the people, p. 156,
157. Power of life and death, how in a Community, ibid. A Community void of
Ruiers, is yet, and may be a politic body, p. 157. Judges gods Analogically,
p. 158.
QUEST. XX.
Whether Inferior Judges be essentially the immediate Vicegerents of God, as
Kings, not differing in essence and nature from Kings. Affirmatur, Proved by
twelve Arguments. page 159. Inferior Judges the immediate Vicars of God, no
l^sse then the King, ibid. The consciences of inferior Judges, immediately
subordinate to God, not to the King, either mediately or immediately, p. 160.
How the inferior Judge is the deputy of the King? p. 161, 162. He may put to
death murderers, as having Gods sword committed to him, no less then the
King, even though the King command the contrary; for he is not to execute
judgment, and to relieve the oppressed, conditionally, if a mortal King give
him leave; but whether the King will or no, he is to obey the King of Kings, p.
160, 161. Inferior Judges are ministri regni, non ministri regis, p. 162, 163.
The King does not make Judges as he is a man, by an act of private good will;
but as he is a King, by an act of Royal Justice, and by a power that he has
from the people, who made himself supreme Judge, p. 163, 164, 165. The Kings
making of inferior Judges hinders not, but they are as essentially Judges as
the King, who makes them, not by fountainpower, but by power borrowed from the
people, p. 165, 166. The Judges in Israel, and the Kings, differ not
essentially, p. 167. Aristocracy as natural as Monarchy, and as warrantable,
p. 168, 169. Inferior Judges depend some way on the King, in fieri, but not,
in facto esse, p. 169, 170. The Parliament not Judges by derivation from the
King, p. 170. The King cannot, make, nor unmake Judges, ibid. No heritable
Judges, ibid. Inferior Judges more necessary then a King, p. 171, 172.
QUEST. XXI.
What power the People, and States of Parliament, has over the King, and in
the State? p. 172. The Elders appointed by God, to be Judges, p. 173.
Parliaments may conveen, and judge without the King, p. 173, 174. Parliaments
are essentially Judges, and so their consciences neither depends on the King,
quoad specificationem, that is, That they should give out this sentence, not
this, nec quoad exercitium, That they should not in the morning execute
judgment, p. 174, 175. Unjust judging, and no judging at all, are sins in the
States, p. 175. The Parliament coordinate Judges with the King, not advisers
only, By eleven Arguments. p. 176, 177, Inferior Judges not the Kings
Messengers or Legates, but public Governors, p. 176. The Jews Monarchy mixed,
p. 178. A Power executive of Laws more in the King, a Power legislative more in
the Parliament, p. 178, 179.
QUEST. XXII.
Whether the power of the King as King, be absolute, or dependent, and limited
by Gods first mould and pattern of a King? Negatur, Prius, Affirmatur,
Posterius, p. 179. The Royalists make the King as absolute as the Great Turk,
p. 180. The King not absolute in his power, proved by nine Arguments, p. 181.
182, 183, seq. Why the King is a living Law, p. 184. Power to do ill, not from
God, ibid. Royalists say, power to do ill is not from God, but power to do ill
as punishable by man, is from God, p. 186. A King, actu primo, is a plague, and
the people slaves, if the King by Gods institution be absolute, p. 187.
Absoluteness of Royalty against Justice, Peace, Reason, Law, p. 189. Against
the Kings relation of a brother, p. 190. A Damsel forced, may resist the King,
ibid. The goodness of an absolute Prince hinders not, but he is, actu primo,
a Tyrant, p. 189.
QUEST. XXIII.
Whether the King has a Prerogative Royal above Laws? Negatur, p. 192.
Prerogative taken two ways, ibid. Prerogative above Laws, a Garland proper to
infinite Majesty, ibid. A threefold dispensation, 1. Of power, 2. Of justice,
3. Of Grace, p. 194. Acts of mere grace, may be acts of blood, p. 195. An oath
to the King of Babylon, tied not the people of Judah to all that absolute power
could command, ibid. The absolute Prince, is as absolute in acts of cruelty,
as in acts of grace, p. 196. Servants are not, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. interdited of
self-defence, p. 199, 200. The Parliament materially only, not formally, has
the King for their Lord, p. 202. Reason not a sufficient restraint to keep a
Prince from Acts of tyranny, ibid. Princes have sufficient power to do good,
though they have not absolute to do evil. p. 203. A power to shed innocent
blood, can be no part of any Royal power given of God, p. 204. The King,
because he is a public person, wants many privileges that subjects have, p.
205, 206.
QUEST. XXIV.
What relation the King has to the Law? p. 207. Humane Laws considered as
reasonable, or as penal, ibid. The King alone has not a Nemothetick power, p.
208. Whether the King be above Parliaments, as their Judge? p. 208, p. 209,
210, 211. Subordination of the King to the Parliament, and coordination both
consistent, p. 210, 211. Each one of the three Governments has somewhat from
each other, and they cannot any one of them, be in its prevalency, conveniently
without the mixture of the other two, p. 211, 212. The King as a King cannot
err, as he erreth in so far, he is not the remedy of oppression and Anarchie,
intended by God and nature, p. 212. In the court of necessity, the people may
judge the King, p. 213. Humane Laws not so obscure as tyranny is visible and
discernable, p. 213, 214. Its more requisite, that the whole people, Church,
and Religion, be secured, then one man, p. 215. If there be any restraint by
Law on the King, it must be physical; for a moral restraint is upon all men,
p. 214, 215. To swear to an absolute Prince as absolute, is an oath eatenus, in
so far unlawful, and not obligatory, p. 215.
QUEST. XXV.
Whether the supreme Law, the safety of the people, be above the King?
Affirmed, p. 218. The safety of the people to be preferred to the King, for
the King is not to seek himself, but the good of the people, p. 218, 219.
Royalists make no Kings, but Tyrants, p. 222. How the safety of the King is
the safety of the people, p. 223. A King for the safety of the people, may
break through the Letter and paper of a Law, p. 227. The Kings prerogative
above Law and Reason, not comparable to the blood that has been shed in Ireland
and England, p. 225, 226, 228. The power of Dictators prove not a Prerogative
above Law, p. 229, 230.
QUEST. XXVI.
Whether the King be above the Law? p. 230, 231. The Law above the King in four
things, 1. In constitution, 2. Direction, 3. Limitation, 4. Coaction, p. 231.
In what sense the King may do all things, p. 231, 232. The King under the
morality of Laws. 2. Under Fundamental Laws, not under punishment to be
inflicted by himself, nor because of the eminency of his place, but for the
physical incongruity thereof, p. 232, 233. If, and how the King may punish
himself? p. 233. That the King transgressing in a heinous manner, is under the
Coaction of Law, proved by seven Arguments, p. 234, 235, seq. The Coronation of
a King, who is supposed to be a just Prince, yet proves after a Tyrant, is
conditional, and from ignorance, and so unvoluntary; and in so far, not
obligatory in Law, p. 234, 235. Royalists confess, a Tyrant in exercise may be
dethroned, p. 235, 236. How the people is the seat of the power of
Soveraigntie, p. 239, 240. The place, Psalm. 51. Against thee only have I
sinned, etc. discussed, p. 241, 242. Isreal's not rising in arms against
Pharaoh, examined, p. 245, 246, 247, 248, 249. And Judahs not working their own
deliverance under Cyrus, p. 248, 249. A Covenant without the Kings concurrence
lawful, p. 249, 250, 251.
QUEST. XXVII.
Whether or no, the King be the sole, supreme and final Interpreter of the
Law? Negatur, p. 252. He is not the supreme and peremptor Interpreter, p. 254.
Nor is his will the sense of the Law, p. 252, 253. Nor is he the sole, and
only judicial Interpreter of the Law, p. 253, 254, 255, seq.
QUEST. XXVIII.
Whether or no Wars raised by the Estates and Subjects for their own just
defense against the Kings bloody Emissaries be lawful? Affir. p. 257. The
state of the question. P. 257, 258, If Kings be absolute, a superior Judge may
punish an inferior Judge, not as a Judge, but an erring man. ibid. By Divine
institution, all Covenants to restrain their power must be unlawful. p. 258,
259. Resistance in some cases lawful, p. 260, 261, 262. Six Arguments for the
lawfulness of defensive Wars, in this Quest. 260. seq. Many others follow,
Quest. 29. and 30. seq.
QUEST. XXIX.
Whether in the case of defensive War, the distinction of the Person of the
King as a man, who may, and can commit hostile acts of tyranny against his
subjects, and of the Office and Royal Power that he has from God and the
people, can have place? Affirmatur. p. 265. The Kings Person in concreto, and
his Office in abstracto, or which is all one, the King using his Power
lawfully, to be distinguished, Romans 13. p. 265. To command unjustly makes not
a higher power. p. 265. 266. The person may be resisted, and yet the Office
cannot be resisted, prooved by fourteen Arguments, p. 265, 266. seq. Contrary
Objections of Royalists, and of the P. Prelate answered, p. 270, 271. seq. What
we mean by the person and Office in abstracto in this dispute, we do not
exclude the person in concreto altogether, but only the person as abusing his
power, we may kill a person as a man, and love him as a son, father, wife,
according to Scripture, p. 272, 273, 274. We obey the King for the Law, and not
the Law for the King, p. 275, 276. The loosing of habitual and actual Royalty
different, p. 276. Ioh. 19. 10. Pilates power of crucifying Christ, no
Law-power given to him of God, its proved against Royalists by six Arguments,
p. 280.
QVEST. XXX.
Whether or no passive obedience be a mean to which we are subjected in
conscience by virtue of a Divine Commandment? Neg. What a mean resistance is?
that flying is resistance? p. 313. The place 1 Pet. 2. 18. discussed, ibid.
Patient bearing of injuries, and resistance of injuries compatible in one and
the same subject, ibid. Christ's non-resistance has many things rare and
extraordinary, and so is no leading rule to us, p. 315. Suffering is either
commanded to us comparatively only, that we rather choose to suffer then deny
the truth: or the manner only is commanded, that we suffer with patience, p.
317, 318. and sequent. The Physical act of taking away the life, or of
offending, when commanded by the Law of self defense, is no murder, p. 321.
We have a greater dominion over our goods and members, (except in case of
mutilation, which is a little death) then over our life, p. 321. To kill is
not of the nature of self defense, but accidental thereunto, ibid. Defensive
war cannot be without offending, p. 323. The nature of defensive and
offensine Wars. p. 324, 325. Flying is resistance, p. 325, 326.
QUEST. XXXI.
Whether selfe-defence by opposing violence to unjust violence be lawful, by
the Law of God, and Nature? Affirm. p. 326, 327. Self-defence in man natural,
but Modus, the way must be rational and just. p. 327. The method of
selfe-defence. ibid. Violent re-offending in selfe-defence the last remedy. p.
328. Its Physically unpossible for a Nation to fly in the case of persecution
for Religion, and so they may resist in their own self-defence. p. 328. Tutela
Vitae proxima* and remota. p. 329. In a remote posture of selfe-defence, we are
not to take us to re-offending, as David was not to kill Saul when he was
sleeping, or in the Cave, for the same cause, ibid. David would not kill Saul,
because he was the Lords Anointed, p. 330. The King not Lord of chastity, name,
conscience, and so may be resisted, p. 331. By universal and particular
nature, selfe-defence lawful, proved by diverse Arguments, p. 330. And made
good by the testimony of Iurists, p. 331. The love of our selves the measure of
the love of our neighbor, and inforceth selfe-defence, p. 332. Nature makes a
private man his own Judge and Magistrate when the Magistrate is absent, and
violence is offered to his life, as the Law says, p. 334 335. Selfe-defence
how lawful it is, p. 333, 334, 335. What presumption is from the Kings
carriage to the two Kingdoms, are in Law sufficient grounds of defensive
wars, p. 336, 337. Offensive and defensive wars differ in the event and
intentions of men, but not in nature and spece, nor Physically. p. 336, 337,
338. David's case in not killing Saul, nor his men, no rule to us, not in our
lawful defense, to kill the Kings Emissaries, the cases far different, p.
338, 339.
QUEST. XXXII.
Whether or no the lawfulness of defensive warrrs can be proved from the
Scripture, from the examples of David, the peoples rescuing Jonathan, Elisha,
and the 80. valiant Priests who resisted Vzziah? Affirm. p. 340. David
warrantably raised an Army of men to defend himself against the unjust
violence of his Prince Saul, p. 340, 341, 342. David's not invading Saul, and
his men, who did not aim at Arbitrary Government, at subversion of Laws,
Religion, and extirpation of those that worshipped the God of Israel and
opposed Idolatry, but only pursuing one single person, far unlike to our case
in Scotland and England now, p. 342. 343. David's example not extraordinary, p.
343, 344. Elisha's resistance proves defensive wars to be warrantable, p.
344, 345 Resistance made to King Vzziah by eighty valiant Priests proves the
same, p. 346, 347, 348. The peoples rescuing Jonathan proves the same, p. 348,
349. Libnah's revolt proves this, p. 349. The City of Abel defended themselves
against Ioab King David's General, when he came to destroy a City for one
wicked conspirator, Sheba his sake, p. 349, 350.
QUEST. XXXIII.
Whether or no Romans 13. 1. make any thing against the lawfulness of defensive
wars? Neg. p. 350. The King not only understood, Romans 13. p. 351. 352. And the
place Romans 13. discussed. p. 352, 353, 354.
QUEST. XXXIV.
Whether Royalists prove by cogent reasons, the unlawfulness of defensive
wars. p. 355. Objections of Royalists answered, p. 355, 356, 357. seq. The
place Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, etc. answered, p. 357. And
Eccles. 10. 20. p. 358. The place Eccles. 8. 3, 4. Where the word of a King is,
etc. answered. p. 357, 358. The place Job 34. 18. answered, p. 359. And, Act.
23. 3. God shall smite thee thou whited wall, etc. p. 359, 360, 361. The
Emperors in Paul's time not absolute by their Law, p. 361. That objection that
we have no practice for defensive resistance, and that the Prophets never
complain of the omission of the duty of resistance of Princes answered, p.
163, 164, 165. The Prophets cry against the sin of non-resistance, when they
cry against the Judges, because they execute not judgments for the oppressed.
p. 365, 366. seq. Iudahs subjection to Nebuchadnezar a conquering Tyrant, no
warrant for us to subject our selves to tyrannous acts. p. 363, 364, 365.
Christ's subjection to Caesar nothing against defensive wars, p. 365, 366.
QUEST. XXXV.
Whether the sufferings of the Martyrs in the Primitive Church Militant be
against the lawfulness of defensive wars. p. 369, 370. Tertullian neither
ours nor theirs in the question of defensive wars, p. 370, 371, 372.
QUEST. XXXVI.
Whether the King have the power of war only? Negatur. p. 372, 373. Inferior
Judges have the power of the sword no less then the King. p. 372, 373. The
people tied to acts of charity, and to defend themselves, the Church, and their
posterity against a foreign enemy, though the King forbid. p. 373, 374.
Flying unlawful to the States of Scotland and England now, Gods Law tying them
to defend their Country. p. 374. Parliamentary Power a fountain-power above the
King, p. 376, 377.
QUEST. XXXVII.
Whether the Estates of Scotland are to help their Brethren the protestants in
England against Cavaliers? Affirmatur, proved by 13. Arg. p. 378. seq. Helping
of neighbor Nations lawful, diverse opinions concerning the point. p. 378,
379. The Law of Egypt against those that helped not the oppressed, p. 380.
QVEST. XXXVIII.
Whether Monarchy be the best of Governments. Affir. p. 384. Whether Monarchy
be the best of Governments has diverse considerations, in which each one may be
less or more convenient. p. 384, 385. Absolute Monarchy is the worst of
Governments. p. 385. Better want power to do ill as have it, ibid. A mixture
sweetest of all Governments, p. 387. Neither King nor Parliament have a voice
against Law and reason, ibid.
QUEST. XXXIX.
Whether or no, any Prerogative at all above the Law be due to the King? Or if
jura majestatis be any such Prerogative? Negatur, p. 389. A threefold supreme
power, ibid. What be jura regalia, p. 390, 391. Kings confer not honors from
their plenitude of absolute power, but according to the strait line and rule of
Law, justice, and good deserving, ibid. The Law of the King, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11.
p. 392, 393. Difference of Kings and Judges, ibid. The Law of the King, 1 Samuel
8. 9, 11. No permissive Law such as the Law of divorce, p. 394. What dominion
the King has over the goods of the subjects, p. 395, 396, 397.
QUEST. XL.
Whether or no, the people have any power over the King, either by his Oath,
Covenant, or any other way? Affirmed, p. 398, 399. The people have power over
the King, by reason of his Covenant and Promise, ibid. Covenants and promises
violated, infer Coaction, de jure, by Law, though not de facto, p. 399, 400.
Mutual punishments may be, where there is no relation of superiority and
inferioritie, p. 399, 400, 401. Three Covenants made by Arnisaeus, ibid. The
King not King while he swear the oath, and be accepted as King by the people.
ibid. The oath of the Kings of France, ibid. Hu. Grotius, sets down seven
cases, in which the people may accuse, punish, or dethrone the King, p. 403,
404. The Prince a noble Vassal of the Kingdom, upon four grounds, p. 405. The
covenant had an oath annexed to it, ibid. The Prince is but as a private man in
a contract. p. 406. How the Royal power is immediately from God, and yet
conferred upon the King by the people, p. 407, 408, 409.
QUEST. XLI.
Whether does the P. P. with reason ascribe to us the doctrine of Jesuits, in
the Question of lawful defense? Negatur, p. 410, 411, 412. That Sovereignty is
originally and radically in the people, as in the Fountain, was taught by
Fathers, ancient Doctors, sound Divines, Lawyers, before there was a Jesuit,
or a Prelate whelped, in rerum natura, p. 413. The P. P. holds the Pope to be
the Vicar of Christ, p. 414, 415. Jesuits tenets concerning Kings, p. 415,
416, 417. The King not the peoples Deputy by our doctrine; it is only the
calumny of the P. Prelate, p. 417, 418. The P. P. will have power to act the
bloodiest tyrannies on earth, upon the Church of Christ, the essential power
of a King, ibid.
QUEST. XLII.
Whether all Christian Kings are dependent from Christ, and may be called his
Vicegerents, Negatur, p. 422. Why God as God, has a man a Vicegerent under
him, but not as Mediator, p. 422, 423. The King not head of the Church, ibid.
The King a sub-mediator, and an under redeemer, and a sub-priest to offer
sacrifices to God for us, if he be a Vicegerent, p. 423. The King no mixed
person, ibid. Prelates deny Kings to be subject to the Gospel, p. 426, 427. By
no Prerogative Royal, may the King prescribe religious observances, and humane
ceremonies in Gods worship, p. 424, 425. The P. P. gives to the King a power
Arbitrary, supreme and independent to govern the Church, p. 429, 430.
Reciprocation of subjections of the King, to the Church, and of the Church to
the King, in diverse kinds, to wit of Ecclesiastical and civil subjection,
are no more absurd, then for Aarons Priest to teach, instruct and rebuke Moses,
if he turn a tyrannous Achab, and Moses to punish Aaron, if he turn an
obstinate Idolator, p. 430, 4^3
QVEST. XLIII.
Whether the King of Scotland be an absolute Prince, having prerogatives above
Laws and Parliaments? Negatur. p. 433, 434. The King of Scotland subject to
Parliaments by the fundamental Laws, Acts, and constant practices of
Parliaments, ancient and late in Scotland, p. 433, 434, 435, 436. seq. The King
of Scotlands Oath at his Coronation, p. 434. A pretended absolute power given
to K. James 6. upon respect of personal indowments, no ground of absoluteness
to the King of Scotland, p. 435, 436. By Laws and constant practices the Kings
of Scotland subject to Laws and Parliaments, proved by the fundamental Law of
elective Princes, and out of the most partial Historicians, and our Acts of
Parliament of Scotland, p. 439, 440. Coronation oath, ibid. And again at the
Coronation of K. James the 6. that oath sworn; and again, 1 Par. K. Jam. 6.
ibid. and seq. p. 452, 453. How the King is supreme Judge in all causes, p.
437. The power of the Parliaments of Scotland, ibid. The confession of the
faith of the Church of Scotland, authorized by diverse Acts of Parliament, does
evidently hold forth to all the reformed Churches, the lawfulness of defensive
Wars, when the supreme Magistrate is mis^^d by wicked Counsel, p. 440, 441,
442. The same proved from the Confessions of Faith in other reformed Churches,
ibid. The place, Romans 13. exponed in our Confession of Faith, p. 441, 442, 443.
The Confession not only Saxonick, exhibited to the Council of Trent, but also
of Helvetia, France, England, Bohemia, prove the same, p. 444, 445. William
Laud, and other Prelates, enemies to Parliaments, to States, and to the
Fundamental Laws of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, p.
446, 447, 448. The Parliament of Scotland does regulate, limit, and set bounds
to the Kings power, p. 448, 449, Fergus the first King, not a Conqueror, p.
449. The King of Scotland below Parliaments, considerable by them, has no
negative voice, p. 450, 451, seq.
QUEST. XLIV.
General results of the former doctrine in some few Corrolaries, in 22
Questions. p. 454, 455. Concerning Monarchy, compared with other forms, p. 454.
How Royalty is an issue of nature, p. 454, 455. And how Magistrates as
Magistrates be natural, p. 455. How absoluteness is not a Ray of Gods
Majesty, ibid. And resistance not unlawful, because Christ and his Apostles
used it not in some cases, p. 456, 457. Coronation is no ceremony, p. 457. Men
may limit the power that they gave not, p. 457, 458. The Commonwealth, not a
pupil or minor properly, p. 459. Subjects not more obnoxious to a King, then
Clients, Vassals, Children, to their Superiors, p. 459, 460. If subjection
passive be natural, p. 461. Whether King Uzziah was dethroned, p. 461, 462.
Idiots and children not complete Kings, children are Kings in destination
only, p. 462. Denial of passive subjection in things unlawful, not
dishonorable to the King, more then denial of active obedience in the same
things, p. 463. The King may not make away, or sell any part of his Dominions,
p. 463, 464. People may in some cases conveen without the King, p. 464. How,
and in what meaning, subjects are to pay the Kings debts, p. 465. Subsidies the
Kingdoms due, rather then the Kings, p. 465, 466. How the Seas, Ports, Forts,
Castles, Militia, Magazeen, are the Kings, and how they are the Kingdoms, p.
466.
Lex, Rex.
QUEST. I. In what sense Government is from God?
I Reduce all that I am to speak of the power of Kings, to the Author or
efficient. 2. The matter or subject. 3. The form or power. 4. The end and fruit
of their Government; And 5. to some cases of resistance. Henc;

Quest. I. Whether Government be warranted by a divine Law?

The question is, either of Government in general, or of the particular
species of Government; such as are Government by one only, called Monarchy; the
Government by some chief leading men, named Aristocracie; the Government by the
people, going under the name of Democracie. 2. We cannot but put difference
betwixt the institution of the Office, to wit, Government, and the designation
of person, or persons to the Office. 3. What is warranted by the direction of
natures light, is warranted by the Law of nature, and consequently by a divine
Law; for who can deny the Law of nature to be a divine Law?

That power of Government in general must be from God: I How Government is
from God.
make good, 1. Because, Romans 13. -- 1. there is no power but of God; the powers
that be, are ordained of God. 2. God commands obedience, and so subjection of
conscience to powers, Romans 13. 5. Wherefore we must be subject not only for
wrath (or civil punishment) but for conscience sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as Supreme, etc.* Now God only by a divine Law can lay a band of subjection on
the conscience, tying men to guilt, and punishment, if they transgr^sse.

2. Conclus. All civil power is immediately from God in its root. Civil power
in the root immediately from God.
In that, 1. God has made man a sociall creature, and one who inclines to be
governed by man; then certainly he must have put this power in man's nature: so
are we by good reason taught by Aristot. polit. l. 1. c. 2.
Aristotle.

2. God and nature intends the policy and peace of mankind, then must God
and nature have given to mankind, a power to compass this end; and this must
be a power of Government. I see not then why John Prelate, Master Maxwel the
excommunicate P. of Rosse, who speaks in the name Sacro sanc. reg. majestas,
c. 1. p. 1.
of I. A^magh, had reason to say, That he feared that we fancied, that the
Government of Superiors was only for the more perfect, but have no Authority
over or above the perfect, Nec Rex, nec Lex, justo posita. He might have imputed
this to the Brasilians, who teach, That every single man has the power of the
sword to revenge his own injuries, as Molina to. ^. de justit. disp. 22.
Molina says.

QUEST. II. Whether or not, Government be warranted by the Law of nature.
AS domestic society is by natures instinct, so is civil society natural,
in radice, in the root, and voluntary, in modo, in the manner of coalescing.
Politic power of Government, agrees not to man, singly, as one man, except in
that root of reasonable nature; but supposing that men be combined in
societies, or that one family cannot contain a society, it is natural, that
they join in a civil society, though the manner of Union in a politic body;
as Bodin. de rep. l. 1. c. 6.
Bodine says, be voluntary, Genesis 10. 10. Genesis 15. 7. and Suarez to. 1.
delegib. l. 3. c. 3.
Suarez says, That a power of making Laws, is given by God as a property
flowing from nature, Qui dat formam, dat consequentia ad formam, Not by any
special action or grant, different from creation, nor will he have it to
result from nature, while men be united into one politic body: which Union
being made, that power follows without any new action of the will,

We are to distinguish betwixt a power of Government, and a Civil society ^ow
natural.
power of Government by Magistracy. That we defend our selves from violence by
violence, is a consequent of unbroken and sin-lesse nature; but that we defend
our selves by devolving our power over in the hands of one, or more Rulers,
seems rather positively moral, then natural, except that it is natural for
the child to expect help against violence, from his father: For which cause I
Power of Government, and of Government by Magistrates different.
judge that learned Senator Vasquez illust. quaest. l. 1. c. 41. number. 28, 29.
Ferdinandus Vasquius said well, That Princedom, Empire, Kingdom, or
Jurisdiction has its rise from a positive and secundary law of Nations, and
not from the law of pure Nature. L. 2. in princ. F. de inst. and jur. and in
princ. Inst. Cod. tit. c. jus not. 1. disp.
The Law says, there is no law of Nature agreeing to all living creatures for
superiority; for by no reason in Nature, has a Boar dominion over a Boar, a
Lion over a Lion, a Dragon over a Dragon, a Bull over a Bull: And if all Men be
born equally free (as I hope to prove) there is no reason in Nature, why one
Man should be King and Lord over another; therefore while I be otherwise taught
by the forecasten Prelate Maxwell, I conceive all jurisdiction of Man over Man,
to be as it were Artificial and Positive, and that it infers some
servitude, whereof Nature from the womb has freed us, if you except that
subjection of children to parents, and the wife to the husband; and the
Dominium est jus quoddam. l. sin. ad med. C. de long. temp. pressed. l. qui usum
fert. Civil subjection formally not natures Law.
Law says, De jure gentium secundarius est omnis principatus. 2. This also the
Scripture proves, while as the exalting of Saul or David above their Brethren
to be Kings, and Captains of the Lords people, is ascribed, not to Nature, (for
King and Beggar spring of one clay-mettall) but to an act of Divine bounty and
grace, above Nature, so Psalm. 78. 70, 71. He took David from following the
Ewes, and made him King and feeder of his people, 1 Samuel 13. 13.

There is no cause why Royallists should deny Government to be natural, but to
be altogether from God, and that the Kingly power is immediately and only from
God; because it is not natural to us to subject to Government, but against
Nature, and against the hair for us to resign our liberty to a King, or any
Ruler or Rulers; for this is much for us, and proves not but Government is
natural; it concludes that a power of Government tali modo, by Magistracy, is
not natural, but this is but a Sophisme; a (...), ad illud quod est dictum
(...), this special of Government, by resignation of our liberty, is not
natural; Ergo, power of Government is not natural; it follows not, a
negatione speciei non sequitur negatio generis, non est homo, Our consent to
Laws not antecedently natural.
ergo non est animal. And by the same reason I may by an antecedent will, agree
to a Magistrate and a Law, that I may be ruled in a politic Society, and by a
consequent will only, yea and conditionally only agree to the penalty and
punishment of the Law; and it is most true, no man by the instinct of Nature
gives consent to Penal Laws as Penal, for Nature does not teach a man, nor
incline his spirit to yield that his life shall be taken away by the sword, and
his blood shed, except in this remote ground, a man has a disposition, that a
vein be cut by the Physician, or a Member of his body cut off, rather then
the whole body and life perish by some contagious disease; but here reason in
cold blood, not a natural disposition is the nearest prevalent cause, and
disposer of the business* When therefore a community by natures instinct and
guidance, incline to Government, and to defend themselves from violence; they
do not by that instinct formally agree to Government by Magistrates; and when a
natural conscience gives a deliberate consent to good Laws, as to this, He
that does violence to the life of a man, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis
9. 6. He does tacitly consent that his own blood shall be shed; but this he
consents unto consequently, tacitly, and conditionally. If he shall do
violence to the life of his brother: Yet so as this consent proceeds not from
a disposition every way purely natural. I grant, reason may be necessitated to
assent to the conclusion, being as it were forced by the prevalent power of the
evidence of an insuperable and invincible light in the premises, yet from
natural affections there resulteth an act of self-love, for self-preservation.
So David shall condemn another rich man who has many Lambs, and robs his
poor brother of his one Lamb, and yet not condemn himself, though he be most
deep in that fault, 1 Samuel 12. 5, 6. yet all this does not hinder, but
Government by Rulers a secondary Law of nature.
Government even by Rulers has its ground in a secondary Law of nature, which
Lawyers call, secundario jus natural, or jus gentium secundarium; a secondary
Law of nature, which is granted by Plato, and denied by none of sound judgment
in a sound sense, and that is this, Licet vim virepellere, It is lawful to
repeal violence by violence, and this is a special act of the Magistrate.

2. But there is no reason, why we may not defend by good reasons, that
politic Societies, Rulers, Cities, and Incorporations, have their rise and
spring from the secundary Law of nature: 1. Because by Natures Law,
Family-Government has its warrant; and Adam though there had never been any
positive Law, had a power of governing his own family, and punishing
malefactors; but as Ad Tannerus, m. 12. tom. 2. disp. 5. de peccatis, q. 5.
dub. 1. number. 22.
Tannerus says well, and as I shall prove God willing, this was not properly a
Royal or Monarchical power; and I judge by the reasoning of Sotus 4. de
justit. q. 4* ar. 1.
Sotus, Lod. Molina, to. 1. de just. disp. 22.
Molina, and Victoria in relect. de potest. civil. q. 4. art. ^. Family
Government and civil different.
Victoria. By what reason a Family has a power of Government, and of punishing
Malefactors, that same power must be in a society o^ men, Suppose that
soci^tie were not made up of Families, but of single persons; for the power of
punishing ill-doers does not reside in one single man of a family, or in them
all, as they are single private persons, but as they are in a family. But this
argument holds not but by proportion; for paternall government, or a fatherly
power of parents over their families, and a politic power of a Magistrate over
many families, are powers different in nature, the one being warranted by
natures law even in its species, the other being in its spece and kind
warranted by a positive law, and in the general only warranted by a law of
nature.

2. If we once lay the supposition, that God has immediately by Civil
government, by consequent, natural.
the law of nature appointed there should be a Government; and mediately
defined by the dictate of natural light in a community, that there shall be
one, or many Rulers to govern the Community; then the Scriptures arguments
may well be drawn out of the school Romans 13.
of nature: as, 1. The powers that are, be of God; therefore natures light
teaches, that we should be subject to these powers. 2. It is against natures
light to resist the ordinance of God. 3. Not to fear him to whom God has
committed the sword, for the terror of evil doers. 4. Not to honor the
public rewarder of well-doing. 5. Not to pay tribute to him for his work.
Therefore I see not but G^^^rruvias, tr. 2. pract. quest. 1. n 2, 3, 4
Govarruvias, Soto lo^. ^^t.
Soto, Suarez de Reg. lib. 3. c. 4. n. 1, 2.
Suarez, have rightly said, that power of Government is immediately from God,
and this or this definite power is mediately from God, proceeding from God by
the mediation of the consent of a Community, which resigneth their power to
one or more Rulers: and to me Barclaius con. Monarchoma, l. 3. c. 2.
Barclaius says the same: quamvis populus potentiae largitor videatur, etc.

QUEST. III. Whether Royal Power and definite forms of Government be from God?
THe King may be said to be from God and his word in these seveall notions. 1.
By way of permission, Ier. 43. 10. Say to them, thus The King from God,
understood in a foure^old sense.
says the Lord of hoasts the God of Israel, Behold I will send and take
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon
these stones that I have hid, and he shall spread his royal pavilion over
them. And thus God made him a Catholic King, and gave him all Nations to serve
him, Jer. 27. 6, 7, 8. though he was but an unjust Tyrant, and his sword the
best title to those crowns.

2. The King is said to be from God, by way of naked approbation. God giving to
a people power to appoint what Government they shall think good, but
instituting none in special, in his Word. This way some make Kingly power to
be from God in the general, but in the particular to be an invention of men,
negatively lawful, and not repugnant to the Word; as the wretched Popish
ceremonies are from God. But we teach no such thing: let Sacrosan. reg. maj.
the sacred and royal prerogative of Christian Kings c. 1. q. 1. p. 6, 7.
Maxwell free his Master Bellarm. de locis, l. 5. c. 6. not. 5. Politica
universe considerata est de jure divino, in particulari considerata est de jure
gentium.
Bellarmine and other Jesuits, with whom he sideth in Romish Doctrine: we are
free of this. Bellarmine says that politic power in general is warranted by
a Divine law; but the particular forms of politic power, he means
Monarchy, with the first, is not by Divine right, but de jure gentium, by the
law of nations, and flows immediately from humane election, as all things,
says he, that appertein to the law of Nations. So Monarchy to Bellarmine is
but an humane invention, as Mr. Maxwell his Surplice is: and D. Fern, sect. 3.
p. 13. says with Bellarmine.

3. A King is said to be from God, by particular designation, as he appointed
Saul by name for the crown of Israel. Of this hereafter.

4. The Kingly or Royal office is from God by divine institution Royal power
is of divine institution.
and not by naked approbation: for first, we may well prove Aarons Priesthood
to be of divine institution, because God does appoint the Priests qualification
from his family, bodily perfections, and his charge. And we take the Pastor to
be by divine law and Gods institution, because the Holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2,
3, 4. describes his qualification, so may we say that the Royal power is by
divine institution, because God mouldeth him, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Thou shall in any
wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose, one from
amongst thy brethren, etc. Romans 2 13. There is no power but of God, the powers
that be, are ordained of God. 3. That power must be ordained of God as his own
ordinance, to which we owe subjection, for conscience, and not only for fear
of punishment: but every power is such, Romans 13. 4. To resist the Kingly power,
is to resist God. 5. He is the Minister of God for our good. 6. He bears the
sword of God to take vengeance upon ill-doers. 7. The Lord expressly says, 1
Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, honor the King, v. 13. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, 14.
or unto governors, as unto those that are sent by him, etc. Tit. 3. Put them
in mind to be subject to principalities and powers: and so the fifth
Commandment lays obedience to the King on us, no less then to our parents.
Whence I conceive that power to be of God, to which by the moral law of God,
we owe perpetual subjection and obedience. 8. Kings and all Magistrates are
Gods, and Gods deputies and lieutenants upon earth, Ps. 82. 1. 6, 7. Exodus 22.
8. Exodus 4. 16. and therefore their Office must be a lawful ordinance of God.
9. By their Office they are feeders of the Lords people, Ps. 78. 70. 71. 72.
the shields of the earth, Ps. 47. 9. nursing fathers of the Church, Ps. 49. 23.
Captains over the Lords people* 1 Samuel 9. 19. 10. It is a great Judgment of
God, when a Land wants the benefit of such ordinances of God, Esaias 3. 1, 2.
3. 6, 7. 11. The execution of their office is an act of the just Lord of heaven
and earth, not only by permission, but according to Gods revealed Will in his
Word; their judgment is not the judgment of men, but of the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
19. 6. and their Throne is the Throne of God, 1 Chronicles. 19. 21. 12. Hi^romy in
L. 4. Comment. in I^rem.
Hi^rom says, to punish murderers and sacrilegious persons is not bloodshed,
but the ministry and service of good Laws. So if the King be a living law by
Office, and the law put in execution which God has commanded, then as the
Moral Law is by divine institution, so must the Officer of God be, who is
Custos and vindex legis divinae, the keeper, preserver, and avenger of Gods
Law, and Basilius Epist. 125.
Basilius, this is the Princes Office, Vt opem ^erat virtuti, malitiam vero
impugnet, when Paulinus Treverensis, Lucifer Metropolitan of Sardinia,
Dionysius Mediolanensis, and other Bishops, were commanded by Constantine to
write against Athanasius, they answered, Regnum non ipsius esse, sed dei, aquo
acceperit, the Kingdom was Gods, not his; as Athanasius Epist. ad solita.
Athanasius says: Optat. Melevitanus. Lib. 3.
Optatus Milevitanus helps us in the cause where he says with Paul, We are
to pray for heathen Kings. The genuine end of the Magistrate says Epiphanius*
^. 1. tom. 3. Here Is. 40.
Epiphanius, is ut ad bonum ordinem universitatis mundi omnia ex deo been
disponantur atque administrentur. But some object, if the Kingly Power be of
divine institution, then shall any other government be unlawful and contrary
to a divine institution, and so we condemn Aristocracy, and Democracy as
unlawful. Ans. This consequence were good, if Aristocracy and Democracy were
not also of divine institution, as all my arguments prove; for I judge they are
not Governments different in nature, if we speak Morally and Theologically,
only they differ politically and positively; nor is Aristocracy any thing but
diffused and enlarged Monarchy, and Monarchy is nothing but contracted
Aristocracy, even as it is the same hand, when the thumb and the four fingers
are folded together, and when all the five fingers are dilated, and stretched
out, and where ever God appointed a King, he never appointed him absolute, and
a sole independent Angel, but joined always with him Judges, who were no
less to judge according to the Law of God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. then the King,
Deuteronomy. 17. v. 15. And in an obligation moral of judging righteously, the
conscience of the Monarch, and the conscience of the inferior Judges are
equally, with an immediate subjection under the King of Kings, for there is
here a co-ordination of consciences, and no subordination, for it is not in the
power of the inferior Judge to judge, Quoad specificationem, as the King
commands him, because the judgment is neither the Kings, nor any mortal
man's, but the Lords, 2 Chronicles 19. 6, 7.

Hence all the three forms are from God, but let no man say, if they be all
indifferent and equally of God, societies and Kingdoms are left in the dark,
and know not which of the three they shall pitch upon, because God has given
to them no special direction, for one rather than for another. But this is
easily answered, that a republic appoint Rulers to govern them, is not an
action indifferent, How and in what sense any form of Government is
indifferent.
but a Moral action, because to set no Rulers over themselves I conceive were
a breach of the fifth Commandment, which commands government to be one or
other. 2. It is not in men's free will that they have government or no
government, because it is not in their free will to obey, or not to obey the
acts of the Court of nature, which is Gods Court, and this Court enacteth that
societies suffer not mankind to perish, which must necessarily follow, if they
appoint no government; also it is proved else where, that no Moral acts in
their exercises and use are left indifferent to us; so then, the aptitude and
temper of every Commonwealth to Monarchy, rather then to Democracy, or
Aristocracy is Gods Warrant, and nearest call to determine the wills and
liberty of people to pitch upon a Monarchy, Hic and nunc, rather then any other
form of Government, though all the three be from God, even as single life and
Marriage are both the lawful Ordinances of God, and the constitution and
temper of the body is a calling to either of the two; nor are we to think that
Aristocracy and Democracy are either unlawful Ordinances, or men's inventions,
or that those societies which want Monarchy do therefore live in sins.

But some say, that Peter calls any form of Government, an humane Ordinance,
1 Pet. 2. 13. (...). Therefore Monarchy How Government is an Ordinance of man,
1 Pet. 2 3.
can be no Ordinance of God. Answ. Rivetus in d^eal. Mand. 5. pa. 194.
Rivetus, It is called an Ordinance of man, not because it is an invention of
man, and not an Ordinance of God, but respectu subjecti; Pisc. in loc*
Piscator, Not because man is the efficient cause of Magistracy, but because
they are men who are Magistrates. Diodat. annot.
Diodatus, Obey Princes and Magistrates, or Governors made by men, or amongst
men. Oecumenius Quod hominum dispositione consistit, and humanis suffragii^
creatur.
Oecumenius, an humane constitution, because it is made by an humane
disposition, and created by humane suffrages. Dydimus.
Dydimus, presides presidents made by men. Cajetan, officium regiminis, quia
humanis suffragiis creatur.
Cajetanus, Estius in loc.
Estius, Every creature of God (as Preach the Gospel to every creature) in
authority. But I take the word every creature of man, to be put 1.
Emphatically, to commend the worth of obedience to Magistrates, though but men,
when we do it for the Lords sake: Therefore Betrandus tom. 4. Bib.
Betrandus Cardinalis Edn^^sis says, he speaks so for the more necessity of
merit; and Gloss. ordinar.
Glossa Ordinaria says, Be subject to all powers, Etiam ex infidelibus and
incredulis, Even of infidels and unbeleevers. Lyranus.
Lyranus, For though they be men, the image of God shines in them; and the
Syriack* as Syriak.
Lorinus says, leads us thereunto, Lorin. in l^.
(...) Lechullechum benai anasa. Obey all the children of men that are in
authority. 2. It is an Ordinance of men, not effectively; as if it were an
invention, and a dream of men: But 2. subjectively, because exercised by man.
3. Objectively, and (...) for the good of men, and for the external man's peace
and safety especially; Whereas Church Officers are for the spiritual good of
men's souls. And Durandus lib. de orig. juris
Durandus says well, Civil power according to its institution is of God, and
according to its acquisition, and way of use, its of man. And we may thus far
call the forms of Magistrates, an humane Ordinance, That some Magistrates are
ordained to care for men's lives, and matters criminal, of life and death, and
some for men's Lands and estates; some for commodities by Sea, and some by Land;
and Magistrates according to these Determinations or humane Ordinances.

QUEST. IIII. Whether the king be only and imediatly from God, and not from the
people.
THat this question may be the clearer, we are to set down these Considerations.

1. The question is, Whether the Kingly Office it self come from How the King
is from God, and how from the people.
God; I conceive it is, and flows from the people, not by formal
institution; as if the people had by an act of reason, devised and excogitated
such a power: God ordained the power; it is from the people only by a virtuall
emanation, in respect that a community having no Government at all, may ordain
a King, or appoint an Aristocracie. But the question is, concerning the
designation of the person? Whence is it that this man, rather then this man, is
crowned King? and whence is it, from God immediately, and only, that this man
rather then this man, and this race or family rather then that race and family
is chosen for the Crown? or is it from the people also, and their free choice?
for the Pastor and the Doctors Office is from Christ only; but that John
rather then Thomas be the Doctor or the Pastor, is from the will; and choice of
men, the Presbyters and people.

2. The Royal power is three ways in the people; 1. Radically Royal power
three ways in the people.
and virtually, as in the first subject. 2. Collative vel communicative, by way
of free donation, they giving it to this man, not to this man that he may ^ule
over them. 3. Limitate; They giving it so, as these three acts remain with the
people; 1. That they may measure ou^, by ounce weights, so much Royal power,
and no more, and no less. 2. So as they may l^^^, (...), and set banks, and
marches to the ^xccrc^^. 3. That ^^y give it ou^, conditionate, upon this, and
this condition that t^^y take again to themselves what they gave ou^, upon
condition, ^^ ^^^ condition be violated: The first I conceive is clear, 1.
(...) ^^ every ^^ing creature have radically in them a power of (...) ^o defend
themselves from violence, as we see Lions have (...), so^^ How Royal power is
radidically in the people.
beasts have horns, some claws; men being reasonable creatures, united in
society, must have power in a more reasonable and honorable way to put this
power of warding off violence, in the hands of one or more Rulers, to defend
themselves by Magistrates. 2. If all men be borne, as concerning civil power,
alike; (for no man comes out of the womb with a Diadem on his head, or a
Scepter in his hand) and yet men united in a society may give crown and
scepter to this man, and not to this man; then this power was in this united
society, but it was not in them formally, for they should then all have been
one King, and so both above and superior, and below and inferior to
themselves, which we cannot say: therefore this power must have been virtually
in them, because neither man, nor community of men can give that which they
neither have formally, nor virtually in them. 3. Royalists cannot deny, but
Cities have power to choose and create inferior Magistrates, ergo, many Cities
united have power to create an higher Ruler; for Royal power is but the united
and superlative power of inferior Judges, in one greater Judge, whom they call
a King. The people make the King.


2 Conclus. The power of creating a man a King, is from the people, 1. Because
those who may create this man a King, rather then this man, they have power to
appoint a King. For a comparative action does positively infer an action, if
a man have a power to marry this woman, not that woman; we may strongly
conclude, ergo he has power to marry, now, 1 King. 16. The people made Omri
King, and not Zimri; and his son Achab, rather then Tibni the son of
Sinath. Nor can it be replied this was no lawful power that the people used,
for that cannot elude the argument, for, 1 King. 1. the people made Solomon
King, and not Adonijah, though Adonijah was the elder brother; thev say, God
did extraordinarily both make the Office, and ^es^gne Solomon to be King, the
people had no hand in it, but approved Gods fact. Answer. This is that we say,
God by the people, by Nathan the Propher, and the servants of David, and the
states crying, ( God save King Solomon) made Solomon King; and here is a real
action of the people. God is the first Agentin all acts of the Creature, where
a people makes choice of a man to be their King, the States do no other thing
under God but create this man, rather then another; and we cannot here find two
actions, one of God, another of the people; but in one, and the same action;
God by the peoples free suffrages and voices creates such a man King, passing
by many thousands, and the people are not patientes in the action, because by
the authoritat^ve choice of the States, the man is made of a private man, and
no King, a public person, and a crowned King, 2 Samuel 16. 18* Hushai said to
Absalom, nay but whom the Lord and this people, and all the men of Israel
choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide, Judge. 8. 22. The men of
Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over us, Judge. 9. 6. The men of Se^hem made
Abimeleth King, Judge. 11. 8. 11. 2 King. 14. 21: The people made Azariah King,
1 Samuel 12. 1. 2 Chronicles. 23. 3.

2. If God does regulate his people in making such a man King, The people
create a King according to the Scripture.
not such a man, then he thereby insinuates that the people have a power to
make such a man King, and not such a man. But God does regulate his people in
making a King. Ergo the people have a power to make such a man King, not such a
man King. The Proposition is clear, because Gods Law does not regulate a
non-ens, a mere nothing, or an unlawful power; nor can Gods holy Law regulate
an unlawful power, or an unlawful action, but quite abolish it, and interdict
it; the Lord sets not down rules and ways how men should not commit
Treason, but the Lord commands loyalty, and simply interdicteth men of
treason* 2. If people have then more power to create a King over themselves,
then they had to make Prophets, then God forbidding them to choose such a man
for their King, should say as much to his people; as if he would say, I command
you to make Esaiah and Jeremiah Prophets over you, but not these and these men.
This certainly should prove that not God only, but the people also with God
made Prophets; I leave this to the consideration of the godly. The Prophets
were immediately called of God, to be Prophets, whether the people consented
that they should be Prophets, or not. Therefore God immediately, and only sent
the Prophets, not the people; but though God extraordinarily designed some men
to be Kings, and anointed them by his Prophets, yet were they never actually
installed Kings, till the people made them Kings. I prove the assumption, Deuteronomy.
17. -- 14. When thou shall say, I will set a King over me, like all the nations
round about me. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the
Lord thy God shall choose, one from amongst thy brethren shall tho^ set King
over thee, thou may not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.
Should not this be an unjust charge to the people, if God only, without any
action of the people, should immediately set a King over them? Might not the
people reply, We have no power at all to set a King over our selves, no more
then we have power to make Esaiah a Prophet, who saw the visions of God, to
what end then should God mock us, and say, make a brother, and not a stranger
King over you?

3. Expressly Scripture says, that the people made the King, though under God,
Judge. 9. 6. The men of Sechem made Abimelech King, 1 Samuel 11. 15. And all the
people went to Gilgall, and there they made Saul King before the Lord, 2 King.
10. 5. We will not make any King. This had been an irrational speech to Iehu,
if both Iehu and the people held the Royalists Tenet, that the people had no
power to make a King, nor any active or causative influence therein; but that
God immediately made the King, 1 Chronicles. 12. 38. All these came with a perfect
heart to make David King in Hebron; and all the rest were of one heart to make
David King; on the words Lavater com. in Part 12* 38. Hodie quo que in liberis
urbibus, and gencibus, magistratus secundum dei verbum, Exodus 18. and Deuteronomy. 1.
cligendi sunt, non ex affecti^us.
Lavater says, the same way are Magistrates now to be chosen; now this day God
by an immediate Oracle from Heaven appoints the Office of a King; but I am
sure he does not immediately design the man, but does only mark him out to the
people, as one who has the most royal indowments, and the due qualifications
required in a lawful Magistrate, by the Word of God, Exodus 18. 21. Men of
truth, hating covetousness, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. men who will judge causes
betwixt their brethren righteously, without respect of persons, 1 Samuel 10. 21.
Saul was chosen out of the Tribes according to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17. they
might not choose a stranger, and Abulensis, Serrarius, C^rnelius a lapide,
Sancheiz, and other Popish Writers think that Saul was not only anointed with
Oil, first privately by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. 1, 2. but also at two other times
before the people, once at Mizpeh, and another time at Gilgal by a Parliament,
and a Convention of the States, and Samuel judged the voices of the people so
essential to make a King, that Samuel does not acknowledge him as formal
King, 1 Samuel 10. 7, 8, 17, 18, 19. though he honored him, because he was to be
King, 1. Sam. 9 23, 24. while the Tribes of Israel and Parliament were gathered
together to make him King according to Gods Law, Deuteronomy, 17. as is evident. For
Samuel, v. 20. caused all the Tribes of Israel to stand before the Lord, and
the Tribe of Benjamin was taken; the Law provided one of their own, not a
stranger to reign over them; and because some of the States of Parliament did
not choose him, but being children of Belial, de spised him in their heart, v.
27. therefore after King Saul, by that victory over the Ammonites, had
conquered the affections of all the people fully, v. 10, 11. Samuel would have
his coronation and election by the Estates of Parliament renewed, at Gilgall,
by all the people, v. 14, 15. to establish him King. 2. The Lord by Lots found
out the Tribe of Benjamin. 3. The Lord found out the man, by name, Saul the
son of Kish, when he did hide himself amongst the stuff, that the people
might do their part in creating of the King, whereas Samuel had anointed him
before; but the Text says expressly that the people made Saul King, and Calvin,
Martyr, Lavater, and Popish Writers, as Serrarius, Mendoza, Sancheiz, Cornelius
a Lapide, Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Carthusius, Sanctius, do all hence
conclude that the people under God, make the King.

I see no reason why Barclaius, l. 3. cout. Monar^homach. 8. c. 3.
Barclaius should here distinguish a power of choosing a King, which he
grants the people has, and a power of makinga King, which he says is only
proper to God. Answ. Choosing of a King, is either a comparative crowning of
this man, not this Making a king and choosing a king, not to be distinguished.
man; and if the people have this, its a creating of a King under God, who
principally disposes of Kings and Kingdoms: and this is enough for us. The
want of this, made Zimri no King: and those whom the Rulers of Iezreel at
Samaria, 2 King. 10. refused to make Kings, no Kings. This election of the
people made Athaliah a Princess: the removal of it, and translation of the
crown by the people to Ioash, made her no Princess: for I beseech you, what
other calling of God has a race of a family, and a person to the crown, but
only the election of the States? There is now no voice from heaven, no
immediately inspired Prophets, such as Samuel and Elisha, to annoint David, not
Eliab; Solomon, not Adoniah. The (...) or the ^^roick spirit of a Royal
faculty of governing, is, I grant, from God only, not from the people: but I
suppose that makes not a King; for then many sitting on the throne this day,
should be no Kings; and many private persons should be Kings. If he mean by
the peoples choosiag, nothing but the peoples approbative consent, posterior to
Gods act of creating a King; let them show us an act of God making Kings, and
establishing royal power in such a family, rather then in such a family;
which is prior to the peoples consent, distinct from the peoples consent, I
believe there is none at all.

4. Arg. Hence I argue* if there be no calling or title on earth to tie the
Crown to such a Family and Person, but the suffrages of the people; then have
the line of such a family, and the persons now, no calling of God, no right to
the crown, but only by the suffrages of the people, except we say that there be
no lawful Kings on earth now, when Prophetical unction and designation to
Crowns are ceased, contrary to express Scripture, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

But there is no title on earth now to tie crowns to families, to persons, but
only the suffrages of the people: for, 1. Conquest without the consent of the
people, is but royal latrocinie, as we shall see. 2. There is no prophetical
and immediate calling to Kingdoms now. 3. The Lords giving of Regal parts is
somewhat; but I hope Royallists will not deny but a child young in years and
judgment, may be a lawful King. 3. Mr. Maxwell his appointing of the Kingly
office, does no more make one man a lawful King, then another: for this were a
wide consequence. God has appointed that Kings should be; ergo, John a Styles
is a King; yea, ergo, David is a King: It follows not. Therefore it remains
only, that the suffrages of the people of God is that just title and divine
calling that Kings have now to their crowns. I presuppose they have gifts to
govern from God.

5. If the Lords immediate designation of David, and his anointing David not a
King, because anointed by Samuel.
by the divine authority of Samuel, had been that which is alone without the
election of the people, made David formally King of Israel, then there were two
Kings in Israel at one time; for Samuel anointed David, and so he was formally
King, upon the ground laid by Royallists, that the King has no royal power
from the people: and David after he himself was anointed by Samuel, diverse
times, calls Saul the Lords anointed, and that by the inspiration of Gods
spirit, as we and Royallist^ do both agree. Now two lawful supreme Monarchs
in one Kingdom, I conceive to be most repugnant to Gods truth, and sound
reason; for they are as repugnant as two most Highs, or as two Infinites. 2. I^
shall follow, that David all the while betwixt his anointing by Samuel, and his
coronation by the suffrages of all Israel at Hebron. 1. Was in-lacking, in
discharging and acquiting himself of his royal duty, God having made him
formally a King, and so laying upon him ^ ch^rge to execute justice and
judgment, and defend Religion, which he did not discharge. 2. All David's
suffering upon David's ^art must be unjust, for, as King, he should have cut off
the murderer Saul, who killed the Priests of the Lord; especially seeing Saul
by this ground must be a private murderer, and David the only lawful King. 3.
David, if he was formally King, deserted his calling in flying to the
Philistims; for a King should not forsake his Kingdom upon no hazards, even of
his life, no more th^n a Pilot should give over the helm in an ex^reme By the
peoples election one is made of no King a King.
storm: but certainly Gods dispensation in this warranteth us to say no man
can be formally a lawful King, without the suffrages of the people: for Saul,
after Samuel from the Lord anointed him, remained a private man, and no King,
till the people made him King, and elected him. And David, anointed by that
same divine authority, remained formally a Subject, and not a King, till all
Israel made him King at Hebron. And Salom^n, though by God designed and
ordained to be King, yet was never King, till the people made him King, 1 King.
1. ergo, there flows something from the power of the people, by which he who
is no King, now becomes a King, formally, and by Gods lawful call; whereas
before the man was no King, but as touching all royal power a mere private
man. And I am sure birth must be less then Gods designation to a crown, as is
clear. Adoniah was elder then Solomon, yet God will have Solomon, the younger
by birth, to be King, and not Adoniah. And so Mr. Symons and other
Court-Prophets must prevaricate, who will have birth without the peoples
election to make a king, and the peoples voices but a ceremony.

6. I think Royalists cannot deny but a people ruled by Aristocraticall
Magistrates, may elect a King, and a King so elected is formally made a lawful
King by the peoples election, for of six apt and gifted to reign, what makes
one a King, and not the other five? Certainly God disposing the people to
choose this man, and not another man, it cannot be said but God gives the
Kingly power immediately, and by him Kings reign, that is true. The Office is
immediately from God, but now the question is, what is that which formally
applies the Office and Royal Power to this Person, rather then to the other
five as meet. Nothing can here be dreamed of, but God inclining the hearts of
the States to choose this man, and not this men.

QUEST. V. Whether or no P. P. the Author of Sac. San. Regum Majestas, called
the sacred and Royal Prerogative of Kings, proves that God is the immediate
Author of Sovereignty, and that the King is no creature of the peoples making?
COnsider first that the excommunicated Prelate says, cap. 2. p. 19. Kings are
not immediately from God, as by any special Ordinance sent from Heaven by the
ministry of Angels and Prophets, there were but some few such; as Moses, Saul,
David, etc. yet something may immediately proceed from God, and be his special
work without a revelation or manifestation extraordinary from Heaven, so the
designation to a sacred function is from the Church, and from man; yet the
power of Word, Sacraments binding and loosing, is immediately from Jesus Christ.
The Apostle Matthias was from Christ's immediate constitution, and yet he was
designed by men, Act. 1. The soul is by creation and infusion, without any
special ordinance from Heaven, though nature begeteth the body, and disposes
the matter, and prepares it as fit to be conjoined with the soul, so as the
father is said to beget the son. Ans. 1. The unchurched Prelate striveth to
make us hateful by the title of the Chapter, That God is (by his title) the
immediate Author of Soveraingty; and who denies that? Not those, who teach
that the person who is King, is created King by the people, no more then those
who deny that men are now called to be Pastors, and Deacons immediately, and by
a voice from Heaven, or by the ministry of Angels Kings elected and made by
the people, though the Office in the abstract be immediately of God.
and Prophets, because the Office of Pastors and Deacons is immediately from
God. 2. When he has proved that God is the immediate Author of Soveraingty.
What then? shall it follow that the sovereign in concreto may not be resisted?
and that he is above all Law; and that there is no armor against his violence
but prayers and tears. So God is the immediate Author of the Pastors, of the
Apostles Office, ergo, it is unlawful to resist a Pastor, though he turn
robber? ergo, the Pastor is above all the Kings Laws? this is the Jesuit and
all made, ergo, there is no Armor against the robbing Prelate but prayer and
tears. 2. He says in his Title, that the King is no Creature of the peoples
making. If he mean the King in abstracto, that is, the royal dignity, whom
speaks he against? Not against us, but against his own father Bellarmine,
who says Bellarmine l. 5. c. 6. not 5. De Laicis.
that Sovereignty has no warrant by any divine Law. If he mean that the man
who is King is not created and elected King by the people, he contradicts
himself and all the Court Doctors. 3. It is false that Saul and David, their
original of Royalty was only from God by a special Ordinance sent from
Heaven; for their office is, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. from the written Word of God, as the
killing of Idolaters, v. 3, 7. as the Office of the Priests and Levites, 8, 9,
10. and this is no extraordinary Ordinance from Heaven, more than that is from
Heaven which is warranted by the Word of God. If he mean that these men, Saul,
and David, were created Kings by the only extraordinary revelation of God from
Heaven, it is a lie; for beside the Prophetical anointing of them, they were
made Kings by the people, as the word says expressly; except we say that David
sinned in not setting himself down on the Throne, when Samuel anointed him
first King; and so he should have made away his Master King Saul out of the
world; and there were not a few called to the Throne, by the people; but many,
yea all the Kings of Israel and Judah. 4. The Prelate contendeth that a King is
designed to his royal dignity, immediately from God, without an extraordinary
revelation from Heaven, as the man is designed to be a Pastor by men; and yet
the power of Preaching is immediately from God, etc. but he proves nothing,
except he prove that all Pastors are called to be Pastors immediately; and that
God calls and designeth to the Throne such a person immediately, as he has
immediately instituted by the power of Preaching, and the Apostleship, and has
immediately infused the soul in the body, by an act of Creation; and we cannot
conceive how God in our days, when there are no extraordinary revelations,
does immediately create this man a King, and immediately tie the crown to this
family rather then to this; this he does by the people now, without any
Prophetical Unction; and by this medium, to wit, by the free choice of the
people. He needs not bring the example of Matthias more than of any ordinary
Pastor, and yet an ordinary Pastor is not immediately called of God, because the
Office of an ordinary Pastor is from God immediately, and also the man is made
Pastor by the Church.

The P. Prelate says, a thing is immediately from God three ways. Sacr^. Sa.
reg. Ma. 5. 2. page 20. 21, 22, 23.
1. When it is solely from God, and presupposes nothing ordinary or humane,
antecedent to the obteyning of it. Such was the power of Moses, Saul, David.
Such were the Apostles. 2. When the collation of the power to such a person is
immediately from God, though some act of man be antecedent; as Matthias was an
Apostle. A baptized man obtains remission and regeneration, yet aspersion of
water cannot produce these excellent effects. A King gives power to a
favorite to make a Lord or a Baron, yet who is so stupid as to aver the
honor of a Lord comes immediately from the favorite, and not from the King.
3. When a man has by some ordinary humane right, a full and just right, and
the approbation and confirmation of this right is immediately from God.

The first way, Sovereignty is not from God. The second way, Sovereignty is
conferred on Kings immediately, though some created act of Election, succesion,
conquests intervene, the interposed act contains not in it power to confer
Sovereignty; as in Baptism, Regeneration, if there be nothing repugnant in the
suscipient, is conferred, not by water, but immediately by God. In sacred Orders
designation is from men, power to supernatur all acts from God: election,
succession, conquests remotely and improperly constitute a King. To say in the
third sense that sovereignty is immediately from God, by approbation or
confirmation only, is against Scripture, Prove. 8. 15. Psa. 82. 8. Ioh. 19.
then the people say; you are Gods, your power is from below. And Paul's,
(ordained of God) is (approved and confirmed only of God) the power of
designation, or application of the person to royalty is from man; the power of
conferring royal power, or of applying the person to royal power is from God.
A man's hand may apply a faggot to the fire, the fire only makes the faggot to
burn.

Ans. 1. Apostles both according to their Office, and the designation of their
person to the Office were immediately and only from God, without any act of the
people, and therefore are badly coupled with the royal power of David and King
Saul, who were not formally made Kings, but by the people at Mizpeh and Hebron,
2. The second way God gives Royal Power by moving the peoples hearts to
confer royal power, and this is virtually in the people, formally from God.
Water has no influence to produce grace, Gods institution and promise does it;
except you dream with your Jesuits, of opus operatum, that water sprinkled, by
the doing of the deed conferreth grace, nisi ponatur obex, what can the child
do, or one child more then another baptized child, to hinder the flux of
remission of sins, if you mean not that Baptism works as Physic on a sick
man, except strength of humors hinder? and therefore this comparison is not
alike. The people cannot produce so noble an effect as royalty, a beam of God.
True, formally they cannot, but virtually it is in a society of reasonable men,
in whom are left beams of authoritative Majesty, which by a divine institution
they can give, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. to this man, to David, not to Eliab; and I could
well say the Favorite made the Lord, and placed honor in the man whom he made
Lord, by a borrowed power from his Prince; and yet the honor of a Lord is
principally from the King. 3. It is true, theelection of the people contains
not formally Royal dignity, but the Word says, they made Saul, they made
David King: so virtually election must contain it. Samuels oil makes not
David King, he is a subject after he is anointed; the peoples election at
Hebron makes him King; 2. differenceth him from his brethren; 3. puts him
in Royal state; yet God is the principal agent. What immediate action God
has here, is said and dreamed of, no man can divine, except Prophet P.
Prelate. The (...) Royal authority is given organically by that act by which
he is made King: another act is a night-dreame, but by the act of election
David is made of no King, a King. The collation of (...) Royal gifts, is
immediately from God: but that formally makes not a King, if Solomon saw
right, servants riding on horses, Princes going on foot. 4. Judge of the
Prelates subtlety, I dare say, not his own, he The people have a real action
more then approbation in making a King.
steals from Spalato, but tells not, The applying of the person to Royal
authority, is from the people; but the applying of Royal authority to the
person of the King, is immediately and only from God: as the hand puts the
faggot to the fire, but the fire makes it burn. To apply the subject to the
accident, is it any thing else but to apply the accident to the subject? Royal
authority is an accident, the person of the King the subject: the applying of
the faggot to the fire, and the applying of the fire to the faggot, are all
one, to any not forsaken of common sense. When the people applies the person
to the royal authority, they but put the person in the state of royal
authority; and this is to make an union betwixt the Man and royal authority;
and this is to apply royal authority to the person. 5. The third sense is the
Prelates dream, not a Tenet of ours; we never said that soveraigntie in the
King is immediately from God by approbation or confirmation only, as if the
people first made the King, and God did only by a posterior and latter act say
Amen to the deed done, and subscribe, as Recorder, to what the people does: so
the people should deal kingdoms and crowns at their pleasure, and God
behoved to ratify and make good their fact. When God does apply the person to
royal power, what? is this a different action from the peoples applying the
person to royal dignity? It is not imaginable: but the people by creating a
king, applies the person to royal dignity; and God by the peoples act of
constituting the man king, does by the mediation of this act convey royal
authority to the man, as the Church by sending a man, and ordaining him to be
a Pastor, does not by that, as Gods instruments, infuse supernatural powers of
preaching: these powers supernatural may be, and often are in him before he be
in orders; and sometimes God infuseth a supernatural power of government in a
man, when he is not yet a king, as the Lord turned Saul into another man, 1 Samuel 10. 5. 6. neither at that point of time when Samuel anointed him, but
after that, v. 5. After that thou shall come to the hill of God, 6. the spirit
of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy with them, and shall
be turned into another man. Nor yet at that time when he is formally made King
by the people; for Saul was not King formally, because of Samuels anointing,
nor yet was he King because another spirit was infused into him, v. 5, 6. for
he was yet a private man, till the States of Israel chose him King at Mizpeh.
And the word of God uses words of action to express the peoples power, Judge.
9. 6. And all the men of Sechem gathered together, and all the men of Millo,
(...) regnare fecerunt, they caused him to be King. The same is The same word
that is ascribed to the people in making a King, 2 Samuel 16. 18. is given to
God, 1 King 12. 28.
said, 1 Samuel 10. 15. they caused Saul to reign, 2 K. 10. 5. (...) We shall
not King any man, 1 Chronicles. 12. 38. They came to Hebron (...) to King David over
all Israel, Deuteronomy. 17. three times the making of a King is given to the people.
7. When thou shall say, (...) I shall set a King over me: if it were not their
power to make a King, no law could be imposed on them not to make a stranger
their King, 1 King. 12. 20. all the congregation Kinged Jeroboam, or made him
King over all Israel, 2 King. Kinging of a person ascribed to the people.
11. 12. They Kinged Joash, or made Ioash to reign. 6. The people are to say,
You are Gods, and your power is below, says the Prelate: what then? ergo,
their power is not from God also: It follows not, subordinata non pugnant.
The Scripture says both, the Lord exalted David to be King, and, All power is
from God: and so the power of a L. Major of a City: and the people made David
Kings in a special manner from God, but it follows not, ergo, not from the
people.
King also, and the City makes such a man L. Major. It is the Anabaptists
argument; God writes his law in our heart, and teaches his own children,
ergo, books, and the ministry of men are needless: So all Sciences and
lawful arts are from God: ergo, Sciences applied to men, are not from men's
free will, industry and studies. The Prelate extolleth the King, when he will
have his Royalty from God, the way that John Styles is the husband of such a
woman.

P. Prelate. Kings are of God, they are Gods, children of the most Ib. c 24.
High, his servants, public Ministers, their sword and judgment Gods. This he
has said of their royalty in abstracto, and in concreto; their power, person,
charge, are all of divine extract, and so their authority and person are both
sacred and inviolable. Answ. So are all the congregation of the Judges, Psalm.
82. v. 1. 6. all of them Gods: for he speaks not there of a congregation of
Kings. So are Apostles, Kings are from God, yet from the people also.
their office and persons of God; and so the Prelates (they think) the
successors of the Apostles* are Gods servants, their ministry, word, rod of
discipline not theirs, but of God: the judgment of Judges, inferior to the
King, is the Lords judgment, not men's, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2. Chro. 19. 6. Hence by
the Prelates Logic, the persons of Prelates, Majors, Bailiffes, Constables,
Pastors, are sacred and inviolable above all laws, as are Kings. Is this an
extolling of Kings? 2. But where are Kings persons, as men, said to be of God,
as the Royalty in abstract^ i^? The Prelate sees beside his book, Psalm. 82.
7. But ye shall die as men.

P. Prelate. We begin with the Law, in which as God by himself prescribed the
essentialls, substantialls, and ceremonies of his piety and worship, gave
order for justice and piety, Deuteronomy. 17. 14 15. the King is here originally and
immediately from God, and independent from all others, (set over them) Them, is
collective, that is, all and every one. Scripture knows not this State
principle; Rex est singulis major, universis minor. The person is expressed in
concreto, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. This peremptory precept
discharges the people, all, and every one, diffusively, representatively, or
in any imaginable capacity to attempt the appointing of a King, but to leave it
entirely and totally to God Almighty.

Answ. Begin with the Law, but end not with Traditions. If God by himself
prescribed the essentialls of piety and worship, the other part of your
distinction is, that God not by himself, but by his Prelates, appointed the
whole Romish Rites, as accidentalls of piety. This is the Jesuits doctrine.
2. This place is so far from proving the King to be independent, and that it
totally is Gods to appoint a King, that it expressly gives the people power to
appoint a King: for the setting of a King over themselves, such a one, and not
such a one, makes the people to appoint the King, and the King to be less and
dependent on the people, seeing God intends the King for the peoples good,
and not the people for the Kings good. This text shameth the Prelate, who also
confessed, P. 22. That remotely and unproperly succession, election, and
conquest makes the King, and so its lawful for men remotely and improperly to
invade Gods chair.

P. Prelate: Jesuits and Puritans say, it was a privilege of the Jews that
God chose their King. So Suarez, Soto, Navarra.

Answ. 1. The Jesuits are the Prelates brethren, they are under one Banner, we
are in contrary Camps to Jesuits. 2. The Prelate said himself, Page 19. Moses,
Saul, and David, were by extraordinary revelation from God; sure I am, Kings
are not so now. The Jews had this privilege, that no nation had. 1. God named
some Kings to them, as Saul, David, he does not so now. 2. God did tie Royalty
to David's house by a Covenant, till Christ should come, he does not so now. Yet
we stand to Deuteronomy. 17.

P. Prelate. Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign. If the people had The place, Prove.
8. 15. proves not but Kings are made by the people.
right to constitute a King, it had not been King Solomon, but King Adonijah.
Solomon says not of himself, but indefinitely (By me) as by the Author,
efficient, and constituent, Kings reign. (Per) is by Christ, not by the people,
not by the high Priest, State, or Presbytery, not Per me iratum, by me in my
anger, as some Sectaries say. Paul's (...), an Ordinance by high Authority not
revocable: So Sinesius uses the word, Aristotle, Lucilius, Appian, Plutarch,
(...) in me, and by me, as Doctor Andrews. Kings indefinitely, all Kings: none
may distinguish where the Law distinguishes not, they reign in concreto: that
same power that makes Kings, must unmake them.

Ans. 1. The Prelate cannot restrict this to Kings only, it extends to
Parliaments also. Solomon adds (...) and Consules, (...) all the Sirs, and
Princes (...) and Magnificents, and Nobles, and more (...) and all the Judges
of the earth, they reign, rule, and decree justice by Christ. Here then Majors,
Sheriffs, Provosts, Constables, are by the Prelate extolled as persons, sacred,
irresistible: Then, 1. the Judges of England rule not by the King of Britain,
as their Author, efficient, constituent, but by Jesus Christ immediately, nor
does the Commissary rule by the Prelate. 2. All these, and their power, and
persons, rule independently, and immediately by Jesus Christ. 3. All inferior
Judges are (...), the Ordinances of God not revocable. Ergo, The King cannot
deprive any Judge under him; he cannot declare the Parliament no Parliament;
once a Judge and always, and irrevocably a judge. This Prelates poor pleading
for Kings deserves no wages. Lavater intelligit superiores and inferiores
Magistratus, non est potestas nisi a deo, Vatablus confiliarios. 2. If the
people had absolute right, to choose Kings by the Law of Israel, they might
have chosen another, then either Adonijah, or Solomon, but the Lord expressly,
Deuteronomy. 17. 14. put an express Law on them, that they should make no King, but
him whom the Lord should choose: Now the Lord did either by his immediately
inspired Propher, anoint the man, as he anointed David, Saul, Iehu, etc. or
then he restricted, by a revealed promise, the Royal power to a family, and to
the eldest by birth: and therefore the Lord first chose the man, and then the
people made him King: birth was not their rule, as is clear, in that they made
Solomon their King, not Adonijah the elder; and this proves, that God did both
ordain Kingly Government to the Kingdom of Israel, and chose the man, either in
his person, or tied it to the first born of the Line. Now we have no Scripture,
nor Law of God, to tie Royal dignity to one man, or to one family; produce a
warrant for it in the Word, for that must be a privilege of the Jews, for
which we have no Word of God, but we have no immediately inspired Samuels, to
say, Make David, or this man King; and no Word of God to say, Let the first
born of this family, rather then another family sit upon the throne; Therefore
the people must make such a man King, following the rule of Gods Word, Deuteronomy.
17. 14. and other rules showing what sort of men Judges must be, as Deuteronomy 1. 16,
17, 18. 2 Chro. 19. 6, 7. 3. It is true, Kings in a special manner reign by
Christ. Ergo, Not by the peoples free election. The P. Prelate argues like
himself: By this Text, a Major of a City, by the Lord, decrees justice: Ergo,
He is not made a Major of the City, by the people of the City. It follows
not, 4. None of us teach that Kings reign by Gods anger. We judge a King a
great mercy of God to Church, or State: But the Text says not, By the Lord,
Kings and Judges do not only reign and decree justice, but also murder
Protestants, by raising against them an Army of Papists. And the word, 5.
(...), Powers, does in no Greek Author signify, irrevocable powers; for Vzziah
was a lawful King, and yet 2 Chronicles. 26. lawfully put from the throne, and cut
off from the house of the Lord: And Interpreters on this place, deny that the
place is to be understood of Tyrants: so the Chaldee Paraphrase turns it well,
Potentes virga justitiae: so Lavater, and Di^datus, Tho^. 12. q. 93. art. 3.
and Thomas says, this place does prove, That all Kings, and Judges, Laws,
derivari a lege aeterna, are derived from the eternal Law. The Prelate eating
his tongue for anger, striveth to prove, That all power, and so Royal power,
is of God: but what can he make of it? we believe it, though he say Sectaries
prove, by (...), That a man is justified by faith only: so there is no power
Page 30.
but of God only: but feel the smell of a Jesuit; it is the Sectaries
doctrine. That we are justified by faith only; but the Prelates, and the
Jesuits go another way, not by faith only, but by works also. And all power
is from God only, as the first Author, and from no man. What then? Therefore
men and people interpose no humane act in making this man a King, and not this
man: It follows, And let us with the Prelate, join Paul and Solomon together,
and say, That Soveraigntie is from God, of God, by God, as Gods appointment
irrevocable. Then shall it never follow: it is unseparable from the person,
except you make the King a man immortal: as God only can remove the Crown; it
is true, but God only can put an unworthy, and an excommunicated Prelate from
Office and Benefice, but how? Does that prove, that men and the Church may not
also in their place, remove an unworthy Churchman, when the Church following
Gods Word, delivers to Satan? Christ only as head of the Church,
excommunicateth scandalous men: Ergo, The Church cannot do it, and yet the
Argument is as good the one way, as the other; for all the Churches on earth
cannot make a Minister properly, they but design him to the Ministry whom God
has gifted and called: But shall we conclude, ergo, no Church on earth; but
God only, by an immediate action from Heaven, can deprive a Minister? how then
durst Prelates excommunicate, unmake, and imprison so many Ministers in the
three Kingdoms: But the truth is, take this one Argument from the Prelate, and
all that is in his Book, falls to the ground, to wit, Soveraigntie is from
God only. A King is a creature of Gods making only; and what then? Ergo,
Soveraigntie cannot be taken from him: So God only made Aarons house Priests.
2. Solomon had no Law to depose Abiathar from the Priesthood. Possibly the
Prelate will grant all; the place, Romans 13. which he says has tortured us, I
refer to a fitter place, it will be found to torture Court Parasites.

I go on with the Prelate, c. 3. Sacred Sovereignty is to be preserved, and
Kings are to be prayed for, that we may lead a godly life, 1 Timothy 3. What then?
1. All in authority are to be prayed for, even Parliaments, by that text
Pastors are to be prayed for, and without them sound religion cannot well
subsist. 2. Is this questioned, but Kings should be prayed for; or are we
wanting in this duty? but it follows not that all dignities to be prayed for
are immediately from God, not from men. Prelate, Prove. 8. Solomon speaks first
of the establishment of Government, before he speak of the works of Creation,
ergo better not be at all, as be without government. And God fixed government
in the person of Adam before Evah, or any else came into the world; and how
shall government be, and we enjoy the fruits of it, except we preserve the
Kings sacred Authority inviolable? Ans. Moses, Genesis 1. speaks of Creation
before he speaks of Kings, and Moses speaks, Genesis 3. of Adams sins before
he speaks of redemption through the blessed seed; ergo better never be
redeemed at all, as to to be without sin. 2. If God made Adam a governor
before he made Evah, and any of Mankind, he was made a father and a husband
before he had either son or wise. Is this the Prelates Logic? he may prove
that two eggs on his fathers Table are three this way. 3. There is no
government where sovereignty is not keptinviolable. It is true, where there is
a King, sovereignty must be inviolable, What then? Arbitrary government is not
sovereignty. 4. He intimates Aristocracy, and Democracy, and the power of
Parliaments, which makes Kings to be nothing but Anarchie; for he speaks
here of no government, but Monarchy, P. Prelate, there is need of grace to obey
the King, Ps. 18. 43. Ps. 144. 2. It is God who subdueth the people under
David. 2. Rebellion against the King i^ rebellion against God. Pet. 2. 17.
Prove, 24. 12. Ergo Kings have a near alliance with God.

Ans. 1. There is much grace in Papists and Prelates then, who use to write and
Preach against grace. 2. Lorinus your brother Jesuit will with good warrant of
the texts infer, that the King may make a conquest of his own Kingdoms of
Scotland and England by the sword, as David subdued the Heathen. 3. Arbitrary
governing has no alliance with God; a rebel to God, his Country and an
Apostate has no reason to term lawful defense against cutthroat Irish,
rebellion. 4. There is need of much grace to obey Pastors, inferior Judges,
masters, Col. 3. 22, 23. ergo their power is from God immediately, and no more
from men then the King is created King by the people, according to the way of
Royalists.

P. Prelate. God says of Pharaoh, Exo. 9. 7. I have raised thee up. Elisha
from God constituted the King of Syria, 2 King 8. 13. Pharaoh, Abimelech,
Hiram, Hazael, Hadad, are no less honored with the compellation of Kings,
then David, Saul, etc. Ier. 29. 9. Nebuchadnezer is honored to be called by
way of excellency Gods servant, which God gives to David, a King according to
his own heart; and Esaias 45. 1, 2. Thus says the Lord to his anointed Cyrus,
and God names him near a hundredth year before he was borne, Esaias 44. 28. He
is my shepherd, Daniel 2. 19, 20. 17. 24. God gives Kingdoms to whom he
will, Dan. 5. 8. and p. 37. Empires, Kingdoms, Royalties are not disposed of
by the composed contracts of men, but by the immediate hand and work of God,
Hos. 13. 11. I gave them a King in my anger, I took him away in my wrath: Job,
He places Kings in the throne, etc.

Ans. Here is a whole Chapter of seven pages for one raw argument ten times
before repeated, 1. to Exodus 9. 7. I have raised up Pharaoh, Paul expounds
it, Romans 9. to prove that King Pharaoh was a vessel of wrath fitted for
destruction, by Gods absolute Will; and the Prelate following Arminius, with
treasonable charity, applies this to our King. Can this man pray for the King?
2. Elisha anointed but constituted not Hazael King, and foretold he should be
King; and if he be a King of Gods making, who slew his sick Prince, and
invaded the Throne by innocent blood, judge you. I would not take Kings of the
Prelates making. 3. If God give to Nebuchadnezer the same still of the servant
of God, given to David, Ps. 18. 1. and 116. 16. and to Moses, Ios. 1, 2. all
Kings, because Kings are men according to Gods heart. Why is not royalty then
founded on grace? Nebuchadnezer was not otherwise his servant, then he was the
hammer of the earth, and a tyrannous conqueror of the Lords people, and all
the Heathen Kings are called Kings. But how came they to their Thrones for the
most part? as David and Hezekiah? but God anointed them not by his Prophets;
they came to their Kingdoms by the peoples election, or by blood and rapine;
the latter way is no ground to you to deny Athaliah to be a lawful Princess,
she and Abimelech were lawful Princes, and their sovereignty as immediately and
independently from God, as the sovereignty of many heathen Kings. See then how
justly Athaliah was killed as a bloody usurper of the throne; and this would
license your brethren the Jesuits to stab heathen Kings, whom you will have as
well Kings as the Lords anointed, though Nebuchadnezer and many of them made
their way to the Throne, against all Law of God and man, through a bloody
patent. 4. Cyrus is Gods anointed and his Shepherd too, ergo his Arbitrary
government is a sovereignty immediately depending on God, and above all Law; it
is a wicked consequence. 5. God named him near a hundredth year ere he was
borne, God named and designed Judas very individually, and named the Ass that
Christ should ride on to Jerusalem, Zach. 9. 9. some more hundred years then
one. What, will the Prelate make them independent Kings for that? 6. God gives
Kingdoms to whom he will. What then? this will prove Kingdoms to be as
independent and immediately from God, as Kings are; for as God gives Kings to
Kingdoms, so he gives Kingdoms to Kings, and no doubt he gives Kingdoms to
whom he will; so he gives Prophets, Apostles, Pastors to whom he will; and he
gives tyrannous conquests to whom he will: and it is Nebuchadnezer, to whom
Daniel speaks that, from the Lord, and he had no just title to many
Kingdoms, especially to the Kingdom of Judah, which yet God the King of Kings
gave to him, because it was his good pleasure; and if God had not commanded
them by the mouth of his Prophet Jeremiah, might they not have risen, and with
the sword have vindicated themselves and their own liberty, no less then they
lawfully by the sword vindicated themselves from under Moab, Judges 3. from
under Iabin, Iaakin King of Canaan, who twenty years mightily oppressed the
children of Israel, Judges. 4.? now this P. Prelate by all these instances
making Heathen Kings to be Kings by as good a title as David and Hezekiah,
condemns the people of God as rebels, if being subdued and conquered by the
Turk, and Spanish King, they should by the sword recover their own liberty,
and that Israel, and the saviors which God raised to them, had not warrant
from the law of nature to vindicate themselves to liberty, which was taken from
them violently and unjustly by the sword; but from all this it shall well
follow that the tyranny of bloody conquerours is immediately and only dependent
from God, no less then lawful sovereignty; for Nebuchadnezers sovereignty
over the people of God, and many other Kingdoms also was revenged of God as
tyranny, Ier. 50. 6. 7. and therefore the vengeance of the Lord, and the
vengeance of his Temple came upon him and his land, Ier. 50. 16, 17. 18. 28,
29. 30. It is true, the people of God were commanded of God to submit to the
King of Babylon, to serve him, and to pray for him, and to do on the contrary
was rebellion; but this was not because the King of Babylon was their King, and
because the King of Babylon had a command of God, so to bring under his yoke
the people of God. So Christ had a Commandment to suffer the death of the
Cross, John. 10. 18. but had Herod and Pilate any warrant to crucify him?
none at all. 7. He says, Royalties even of Heathen Kings are not disposed of
by the composed Contracts of men, but by the immediate hand and work of God.
But the Contracts of men to give a Kingdom to a person, which a Heathen
community may lawfully do, and so by contract dispose of a Kingdom, is not
opposite to the immediate hand of God, appointing Royalty and Monarchy at his
own blessed liberty. Lastly he says, God took away Saul in his wrath; but I
pray you did God only do it? then had Saul because a King, a Patent Royal
from God to kill himself, for so God took him away; and we are rebels by
this, if we suffer not the King to kill himself. Well pleaded.

QUEST. VI. Whether the King be so from God only both in regard of his
Sovereignty, and of the designation of his person to the Crown, as that he is
no ways from the people, but by mere approbation?
Dr. Fern, a man much for Monarchy says, Though Monarchy has its excellency,
being first set up of God, in Moses, yet neither Dr. Fern, 3. S. 13.
Monarchy, Aristocracy, nor any other form, is jure divino, but we say (says
he) the power it self, or that sufficiency of authority to govern, that is in
a Monarchy, or Aristocracy, abstractly considered from the qualification of
other forms, is a flux and constitution subordinate to that providence; an
ordinance of that Dixi, or silent word by which the world was made, and shall
be governed under God. This is a The forms of Government not from God by a
naked act of Providence, but by his approving will.
great debasing of the Lords anointed, for so sovereignty has no warrant in
Gods Word formally as it is such a government, but is in the world by
providence, as sin is, and as the falling of a Sparrow to the ground; whereas
Gods Word has not only commanded that government should be, but that fathers
and mothers should be. 2. and not only that politic Rulers should be, but also
Kings by name, and other Judges Aristocraticall should be, Romans 13. 3. Deuteronomy.
17. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Prove. 24. 21. Prove. 15. 16. 3. If the power of Monarchy
and Aristocracy abstracted from the forms be from God, then it is no more
lawful to resist Aristocraticall Government, and our Lords of Parliament, or
Judges, then it is lawful to resist Kings.

But hear the Prelates reasons to prove that the King is from the people by
approbation only.

P. Prelate. The people, Deuteronomy. 17. is said to set a King over them cap. 4. page
41.
only, as 1 Cor. 6. The Saints are said to judge the world, that is, by
consenting to Christ's Judgment. So the people do not make a King by
transferring on him sovereignty, but by accepting, acknowledging, reverencing
him as King, whom God has both constituted and designed King. Answ. This is
said, but not a word proved: for the Queen of Sheba, and Hiram acknowledged,
reverenced and obeyed Soveraigntie not from the people by sole approbation.
Solomon as King, and yet they made him not King, as the Princes of Israel
did. 2. Reverence and obedience of the people is relative to the Kings laws,
but the peoples making of a King is not relative to the laws of a King; for
then he should be a King giving laws, and commanding the people, as King,
before the people make him King. 3. If the peoples approving and consenting
that an elected King be their King, presupposes that he is a King designed,
and constituted by God, before the people approve him as King; Let the P.
Prelate give us an act of God now designing a man King: for there are no
immediate voices from heaven, saying to a people, This is your King, before the
people elect one of six to be their King. And this infallibly proves that God
designeth one of six to be a King, to a people who had no King before, by no
other act but by determining the hearts of the States to elect and design this
man King, and pass any of the other five. 4. When God, Deuteronomy. 17. forbids
them to choose a stranger, he presupposes they may choose a stranger: for Gods
law now given to man in the state of sin, presupposes he has corruption of
nature to do contrary to Gods law: Now if God did hold forth, that their
setting a King over them, was but the peoples approving the man whom God shall
both constitute and design to be King, then he should presuppose that God was
to design a stranger to be the lawful King of Israel; and the people should
be interdicted to approve and consent, that the man should be King whom God
should choose: for it was unpossible that the people should make a stranger
King, (God is the only immediate King-creator) the people should only approve
and consent that a stranger should be King; yet upon supposall that God first
constituted and designed the stranger King, it was not in the peoples power
that the King should be a Brother rather then a stranger; for if the people
have no power to make a King, but do only approve him, or consent to him, when
he is both made and designed of God to be King, it is not in their power that
he be either brother or stranger, and so God commands what is simply
impossible. 2. Consider the sense of the command by the Prelates vain Logic:
I Jehovah, as I only create the world of nothing, so I only constitute and
design a man, whether Jew, or Nebuchadnezzar a stranger to be your King; yet I
inhibit you under the pain of my curse, that you set any King over your selves,
but only a brother. What is this, but I inhibite you to be creators by
omnipotent power? 5. To these add the reasons I produced before, that the
people by no shadow of reason can be commanded to make such a man King, not
such a man, if they only consent to the man made King, but have no action in
the making of the King.

P. Prelate. All the acts real and imaginable, which are necessary for the
making of Kings, are ascribed to God: Take the first King as a ruling case, 1 Samuel 12. 13. Behold the King whom you have chosen and desired, and behold the
Lord has set a King over you. This election of the people can be no other but
their admittance or acceptance of the King whom God has chosen and
constituted, as the words, whom ye have chosen, imply, 1 Samuel 9. 17. 1 Samuel 10.
1. You have Saul's election and constitution, where Samuel as Priest and Prophet
anointeth him, doing reverence and obeisance to him, and ascribing to God, that
he did appoint him supreme and Sovereign over his inheritance. And the same
expression is, 1 Samuel 12. 13. The Lord has set a King over you: which is Psalm.
2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. Neither man nor Angel has
any share in any act of constituting Christ King, Deuteronomy. 17. The Lord
vindicateth as proper and peculiar to himself, the designation of the person.
It was not arbitrary to the people to admit or reject Saul so designed; it
pleased God to consummate the work by the acceptance, consent and approbation
of the people* ut suaviore modo, that by a smoother way he might encourage Saul
to undergo the hard charge, and make his people the more heartily^, without
grumbling and scruple, reverence and obey him. The peoples admittance possibly
added something to the solemnity, to the pomp, but nothing to the essential
and real constitution or necessity; it only puts the subjects in mala fide,
if they should contraveen, as the intimation of a Law, the coronation of an
hereditary King, the inthronization of a Bishop. And, 1 King. 3. 7. Thou have
made thy servant King, 1 Samuel 16. 1. I have provided me a King, Psalm. 18. 50.
He is Gods King, Psalm. 89. 19. I have exalted one chosen out of the people, v.
20. He anointeth them, 27. adopteth them. I will make him my first borne, Psalm.
82. 6. the first borne is above every brother severally, and above all, though
a thousand jointly.

Answ. 1. By this reason, inferior Judges are no less immediate Deputies of
God, and so irresistible, then the Kings, because God took off the spirit that
was on Moses, and immediately powered it upon the seventy Elders, who were
Judges inferior to Moses, Number. 11. 14. 15. 16. Answ. 2. This P. P. cannot make
a Syllogism: If all the acts necessary to make a King, be given to God, none
to the people; then God both constituteth and designeth the King. But the
former the Scripture says, ergo, if all the acts be given to God, as to the
prime King-mak^r, and disposer of Kings and Kingdoms, and none to the people in
that notion, then God both constituteth and designeth a King. Both major and
minor is false. The major is as false as the very P. Prelate himself. All the
acts necessary for warmaking, are in an eminent manner given to God, as 1. the
Lord fights for his people. 2. The Lord scattered the enemies. 3. The Lord
slew Og King of Bashan. 4. The battle is the Lords. 5. The victory the Lords;
ergo, Israel never fought a battle. So Deuteronomy. 32. The Lord alone led his
people; the Lord led them in the wilderness; their bow and their sword gave
them not the land: God wrought all their works for them, Esa 26. 12. ergo,
Moses led them not; ergo, the people went not on their own legs through the
wilderness; ergo, the people never shot an arrow, never drew a sword. It
follows not. 1. God did all these as the first, eminent, principal and
efficacious pre-determinator of the creature, (though this Arminian and Popish
Prelate mind not so to honor God.) 2. The assumption is also false; for the
people made Saul and David Kings; and it were That Kings in an eminent act of
divine providence, have their crowns from God, hinders not but they have
their crowns from the people also.
ridiculous, that God should command them to make a brother, not a stranger
King, if it was not in their power whether he should be a Jew, a Scythian, an
Ethiopian, who was their King, if God did only without them both choose, 2.
constitute, 3. design the person, and perform all acts essential to make a
King, and the people had no more in them but only to admit and consent, and
that for the solemnity and pomp, not for the essential constitution of the
King. 3. 1 Samuel 9. 17. 1 Samuel 10. 1. we have not Saul elected and constituted
king, and Samuel did obeisance to him and kissed him, for the honor Royal
which God was to put upon him: for before this prophetical unction, 1 Samuel 9.
22. he made him sit in the chief place, and honored him as king, when as yet
Samuel was materially King, and the Lords Vicegerent in Israel. If then the
Prelate conclude any thing from Samuel his doing reverence and obeisance to him
as King, it shall follow that Saul was formally King, before Samuel, 1 Samuel 10.
1. anointed him, and kissd him; and that must be before he he was formally
King, otherwise he was in Gods appointment King, before ever he saw Samuels
face; and it is true, he ascribes honor to him, as to one appointed by God to
be supreme Sovereign, for that which he should be, not for that which he was,
as c. 9. 22. he set him in the chiefest place, and therefore it is false, that
we have Saul's election and constitution to be King, 1 Samuel 10. for after that
time the people are rebuked for seeking a King, and that with a purpose to
dissuade them from it, as a sinful desire, and he is chosen by Lots after
that, and made King, and after Samuels anointing of him, he was a private, man,
and did hide himself amongst the stuff, v. 22. 3. The Prelate if of
ignorance, or wilfully I know not, says, the expression and phrase is the
same, 1 Samuel 12. 13. and Ps. 2. 6. which is false; for 1 Samuel 12. 13. it is
(...) behold the Lord has given you a King, such is the expression, Hos. 13.
11. I gave them a King in my wrath; but that expression is not Psalm. 2. 6. but
this (...) but I have established him my King; and though it were the same
expression, it follows not that the people have not hand any other way in
appointing Christ their head; (though that phrase also be in the word, Hos. 1.
v. 11.) then by consenting, Phrases ascribing the making of Kings in a peculiar
manner to God prove not that the free will of the people has no hand in the
making Kings.
and believing in him as King; but this proves not that the people in
appointing a King, has no hand but naked approbation, for the same phrase does
not express the same action, nay the Judges are to kiss Christ, Ps. 2. 12.
the same way, and by the same action that Samuel kissed Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and
the Idolaters kissed the calves, Hos. 13. 2. for the same Hebrew word is used
in all the three places, and yet it is certain the first kissing is
spiritual, the second a kiss of honor, and the third an Idolatrous kissing.
4. The anointing of Saul cannot be a leading rule to the making of all Kings to
the worlds end; for the P. Prelate forgetting himself said, that only some
few, as Moses, Saul, and David, etc. by extraordinary manifestation from Heaven
were made Kings, pa. 19. 5. he says it was not Arbitrary for the people to
admit, or reject Saul so designed. What means he? it was not morally
arbitrary, because they were under a law, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15. to make him King,
whom the Lord should choose. That is true, but was it not arbitrary to them to
break a law Physically? I think he who is a professed Arminian will not side
with Manicheans and Fatalists so, but the P. Prelate must prove it was not
Arbitrary, either Morally or Physically to them not to accept Saul as their
King, because they had no action at all in the making of a King, God did it
all, both by constituting and designing the King, why then did God, Deuteronomy. 17.
give a Law to them to make such a man King, not such a man, if it was not in
their free will to have any action or hand in the making of a King at all? but
that some sons of Belial would not accept him as their King, is expressly
said, 1 Samuel 10. 27. and how did Israel conspirc with Absalom, to unking and
dethrone David, whom the Lord had made King? If the Prelate mean it was not
Arbitrary to them physically to reject Saul, he speaks wonders, the sons of
Belial did reject him; ergo they had physical power to do it: If he mean it
was not arbitrary, that is, it was not lawful to them to reject him, that is
true; but does it follow they had no hand nor action in making Saul King,
because it was not lawful for them to make a King in a ^infull way, and to
refuse him whom God chose to be King? then see what I infer. 1. Then they had
no hand in obeying him as King, because they sin in obeying unlawful
commandments against Gods Law; and so they had no hand in approving and
consenting he should be King, the contrary whereof the P. Prelate says. 2. So
might the P. Prelate prove men are patientes, and have no action in violating
all the Commandments of God, because it is not lawful to them to violate any
one Commandment. (6) The Lord Deuteronomy. 17. vindicates this as proper and peculiar
to himself to choose the person, and to choose Saul. What then? ergo now the
people choosing a King have no power to choose or name a man, because God
anointed Saul and David by immediate manifestation of his Will to Samuel; this
consequence is nothing, and also it follows in no wise, that therefore the
people made not Saul King. 7. That the peoples approbation of a King is not
necessary* is Bellarmines and Papists saying, and that the people chose their
Ministers in the Apostolic Church, not by a necessity of a divine
Commandment, but to conciliate love betwixt Pastor and people. Papists hold
that if the Pope make a p^pish King the head and King of Britain against the
peoples will, yet is he their King. 8. David was then King all the time that
Saul presecuted him; he sinned truly in not discharging the duty of a King,
only because he wanted a ceremony, the peoples approbation, which the Prelate
says is required to the solemnity and pomp, not to the necessity and truth,
and essence of a formal King. So the Kings Coronation Oath, and the peoples
Oath must be Ceremonies; and because the Prelate is perjured himself,
therefore perjury is but a ceremony also. 9. The enthronization of Bishops is
like the Kinging of the Pope; the Apostles must spare Thrones, while they come
to Heaven, Luke 22. 29, 30. the P. Prelates with their head the Pope must be
enthroned. 10. The hereditary King he makes a King before his Coronation, and
his Acts are as valid before as after his Coronation; it might cost him his
head to say that the Prince of Wales is now no less King of Britain, and his
Acts, Acts of Kingly Royalty, no less Prophesies of Christ expounded by the P.
Prelate of profane Heathen Kings. The P. Prelate expounds Prophesies of
David, Solomon and Jesus Christ as true of profane heathen Kings.
then our Sovereign is King of Britain, if Laws and Parliaments had their
own vigor from royal Authority. 11. I allow that Kings be as high as God
has placed them, but that God said of all Kings, I will make him my first
borne, etc. Psalm 89. 26, 27. which is true of Solomon as the Type, 2 Samuel, 7. 1
Chro. 17. 22. 2 Samuel 7. 12. and fulfilled of Christ, and by the Holy Ghost
spoken of him, Heb. 1. 5, 6. is blasphemous; for God said not to Nero, Julian,
Dioclesian, Belshazer, Evilmerodach, who were lawful Kings. I will make him my
first borne; and that any of these blasphemous Idolatrous Princes should cry to
God, he is my Father, my God, etc. is Divinity well beseeming an excommunicated
Prelate. Of the Kings dignity above the Kingdom I speak not now; the Prelate
pulled it in by the hair, but hereafter we shall hear of it.

P. Prelate. God only anointed David, 1 Samuel 16. 4. the men of Bethleem, yea
Samuel knew it not before. God says, with mine holy oil have I anointed him,
Ps. 89. 91. 1. He is the Lords anointed Sacro sancta Maj. 43. 44.
2. The oil is Gods, not from the Apothecaries shop, nor the Priests Vial;
this oil descended from the Holy Ghost* who is no less the true Olive, then
Christ is the true Vine; yet not the oil of saving grace, as some Fantasticks
say, but holy, 1. From the Author God. 2. From influence in the person, it
makes the Person of the King sacred. 3. From influence on his charge, his
function and power is sacred. Ans. 1. The Prelate said before David's anointing
was extraordinary; here he draws this anointing to all Kings. 2. Let David be
formally both constituted and designed King diverse years before the States
made him King at Hebron, and then 1. Saul was not King, the Prelate The P. P.
makes all the Heathen Kings to be anointed with grace from Heaven.
will term that treason. 2. This was a dry oil, David his person was not
made sacred, nor his authority sacred by it; for he remained a private man, and
called Saul his King, his Master, and himself a subject 3. This oil was no
doubt Gods Oil, and the Prelate will have it the Holy Ghosts, yet he denies
that saving grace, yea (p. 2. c. 1) he denies that any supernatural gift
should be the foundation of Royal dignity, and that it is a pernicious tenent.
So to me he would have the Oil from Heaven, and not from Heaven. 4. This holy
oil wherewith David was anointed, Psalm 89. 20. to Aug. in locum, unxi m^num
fort^m, servum obedienten^ ideo in co posui adjutorium.
Augustine, is the oil of saving grace: His own dear brethren the Papists say
so, and especially Lyra. Gratia est babitualis, qui^ stat pugil contra di^bolum.
Lyranus, Gloss. ord^^. and
Glossa ordinaria, Hugo Cardinalis, Olco laetitiae qu^ prae consortibu^ unctus
fuit Christus, Ps. 45.
Hugo Cardinal, Bellarm. ^^.
his beloved Bellarmine, Lorinus.
and Lorinus, Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat. If these be Fanatics (as I think
they are to the Prelate) yet the Text is evident, that this oil of God was the
oil of saving grace, bestowed on David, as on a special type of Christ, who
received the spirit above measure, and was the anointed of God, Ps. 45. 7.
whereby all his garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia, ver. 8. and his
name Messiah is as an ointment powered out, Cant. 1. 2. This anointed shall be
head of his enemies. 3. His dominion shall be from the sea to the rivers, v.
25. 4. He is in the covenant of grace, v. 26. 5. He is higher then the Kings of
the earth. 6. The grace of perseverance is promised to his seed, v. 28, 29, 30.
7. His kingdom is eternal, as the days of Heaven, verse. 35. 36. 8. If the
Prelate will look under himself to Theodatus.
Diodatus, and Ainsworth, annot.
Ainsworth, they say, this holy oil was powered on David by Samuel, and on
Christ was powered the Holy Ghost, and that by 1 Samuel 16 1. 13, 4 Luke 4. 18.
21. 10. 3. 34.
warrant of Scripture, and Iunius ^^not. in lo.
Junius, and Mollerus com. ibid.
Mollerus says with them. Now the Prelate takes the Court way, to power this
oil of grace on many dry Princes, who without all doubt are Kings essentially
no less then David. He must see better then the man who finding Pontius Pilate
in the Creed, said, he behoved to be a good man: so because he has found Nero
the tyrant, Julian the apostate, Nebuchadnezzar, Evil-Merodach, Hazael, Hagag,
all the Kings of Spain, and I doubt not, the Great Turk, in the 89 Psalm, v.
19, 20. so all these Kings are anointed with the oil of grace, and all these
must make their enemies necks their footstool; all these be higher then the
Kings of the Earth, and are hard and fast in the covenant of grace, etc.

P. Prelate. All the royal ensigns and acts of Kings are ascribed to God. The
Crown is of God, Esa. 62. 3. Psalm. 21. 3. in the Emperors coin was an hand
putting a crown on their head: the Heathen said they were (...) as holding
their Crowns from God* Psalm. 18. 39. Thou have girt me with strength (the
sword is the emblem of strength) unto battle. See Iud. 7. 17. their scepter,
Gods scepter. Exodus 4. 20, 17, 9. we read of two rods, Moses and Aarons; Aarons
rod budded; God made both the rods; Their judgment is the Lords. 2 Chronicles. 19.
6. their throne is Gods, 1 Chronicles. 19. 21. The Fathers called them, sacra
vestigia, sacra majestas; their commandments, Divalis jussio. The Law says,
all their goods are res sacrae., Ergo, our new Statists disgrace Kings, if they
blaspheme not God, in making them the derivatives of the people, the basest
extract of the basest of irrational creatures, the Multitude, the Communaltie.

Answ. This is all one Argument from the Prelates beginning of Places, Esa. 62
3. Ps. 21 3. spoken of the Church and Christ, by the P. P. expounded of profane
Kings.
his book to the end; In a most special and eminent act of Gods providence,
Kings are from God; but therefore they are not from men, and men's consent: It
follows not. From a most special and eminent act of Gods providence, Christ
came into the world, and took on him our nature: ergo, he came not of David's
loins. It is a vain consequence. There could not be a more eminent act then
this, Psalm. 40. A body thou have given me; Ergo, he came not of David's house,
and from Adam by natural generation, and was not a man like us in all things
except sin. It is tyrannical and domineering Logic. Many things are
ascribed to God only, by reason of a special and admirable act of providence:
as the saving of the world by Christ, the giving of Canaan to Israel, the
bringing his people out of Egypt, and from Chaldea, the sending of the Gospel
to both Jew and Gentile, etc. But shall we say, that God did none of these
things by the ministry of men, and weak and frail men? 2. How proves the
Prelate that all royal ensigns are ascribed to God, because Esa. 62. the
Church universal shall be as a crown of glory, and a royal diadem in the
hand of the Lord; ergo, baculus in angulo, the Church shall be as a seal on
the heart of Christ. what then? Hieronymus, Procopius, Cyrillus, with good
reason render the meaning thus: Thou O Zion, and Church, shall be to me a
royal Priesthood, and a holy people. For that he speaks of his own Kingdom
and Church, is most evident, v. 1. 2. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace,
etc. 3. God put a crown of pure gold on David's head, Psalm. 21. 3. therefore
Julian, Nero, and no elective Kings, are made and designed to be Kings by the
people: He shall never prove this consequence. The Chald. par.
Chaldee paraphrase applies it to the reign of King Messiah. Diodat. an.
Diodatus he speaks of the kingdom of Christ. Ainsworth. Athanasius,
Eusebius, Origin. Augustine* Dydimus.
Ainsworth makes this crown a sign of Christ's victory. Athanasius,
Eusebius, Origin, Augustine, Dydimus, expound it of Christ and his kingdom.
The Prelate extends it to all Kings, as the blasphemous Rabbines, especially
Ra. Solomon, deny that he speaks of Christ here: but what more reason is
there to expound this of the crowns of all Kings given by God (I deny not) to
Nero, Julian, etc. then to expound the foregoing and following verses as
applied to all Kings? Did Julian rejoice in Gods salvation? did God grant Nero
his hearts desire? did God grant (as it is, v. 4.) life eternal to Heathen
Kings, as Kings? which words all Interpreters expound of the eternity of
David's throne, till Christ come, and of victory and life eternal purchased by
Christ, as Ainsw. an. in v. 5.
Ainsworth with good reason expounds it. And what though God give David a
Crown; ergo, not by second causes, and by bowing all Isreal's heart to come in
sincerity to Hebron to make David King, 1 King. 12. 38. God gave corn and
wine to Israel, Hos. 2. shall the Prelate and the Anabaptist infer; Ergo, he
gives it not by plowing, sowing, and the art of the husbahd-man? 3. The
Heathen acknowledged a Divinity in Kings; but he is blind who reads them,
and sees not in their writings, that they teach that the people makes Kings.
4. God girt David with strength, while he was a private man, and persecuted by
Saul, and fought with Goliath, as the title of the same bears; and he made him
a valiant man of war to break bows of steel; ergo, he gives the sword to
Kings, as Kings, and they receive no sword from the people. This is poor
Logic. 5. The P. Prelate sends us Judge. 7. 17. to the singular and
extraordinary power of God with Gideon: and I say, that same power behoved to
be in Oreb and Zeba, v. 27. for they were (...) Princes, and such as the
Prelate from Pro. 8. 15. says, have no royal power from the people. 6. Moses
and Aaron their two rods were miraculous. This will prove that Priests are also
Gods, and their persons srcred. I see not (except the Prelate would be at
worshipping of Relics) what more royal Divinity is in Moses his rod,
because he wrought miracles by his rod, then there is in Elias his staff, in
Peter's napkin, in Paul's shadow. This is like the strong symbolicall Theology
of his fathers the Jesuits, which is not argumentative, except he say that
Moses as King of Jesurum wrought miracles; and why should not Nero, Caligula,
Pharaoh, and all Kings rods then dry up the red sea, and work miracles? 7. We
give all the styles to Kings that the Fathets gave, and yet we think not, when
David commands to kill Vriah, and a King commands to murder his innocent
subjects in England and Scotland, that that is Divalis jussio, the command of a
God; and that this is a good consequence, What ever the King commands, though
it were to kill his loyallest Subjects, is the commandment of God, Ergo, the
King is not made King by the people. 8. Ergo, (says he) these new Statists
disgrace the King. If a most New Statist sprung out of a poor pursevant of
Kraill, from the dunghill to the Court, could have made himself an old
Statist, and more expert in state affairs, then all the Nobles and soundest
Lawyers in Scotland and England, this might have more weight. 9. Therefore the
King (says P. P.) is not the extract of the basest of rational creatures. He
means, fex populi* his own house and lineage; but God calls them his own
people, a royal Priesthood, a chosen generation, and, ps. 78. 71. will warrant
us to say the people is much worthier before God, then one man, seeing God
choose David for Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance, that he might
feed them, John P. P. his fathers suffrage in making a King will never be
sought. We make not the multitude, but the three Estates including the Nobles
and Gentry to be as rational creatures, as any Apostate Prelate in the three
Kingdoms.

QUEST. VII. Whether or no the P. Prelate the aforesaid Auth^r does by force of
reason evince, that neither constitution nor designation of the King is from
the people?
THe P. Prelate aymeth (but it is an empty aim) to prove that the people are
wholly excluded. I answer only Arguments not pitched on before, as the Prelate
says.

P. Prelate. 1. To whom can it be more proper to give the rule over men, then
to him who is the only King truly and properly of the whole world? 2. God is
the immediate Author of all rule and power that is amongst all his creatures,
above or below. 3. Man before the fall received dominion, and empire over all
the creatures below immediately, as Genesis 1. 28. Genesis 9. 2. ergo we cannot deny
that the most noble government (to wit Monarchy) must be immediately from God,
without any Contract or compact of men. Ans. The first reason concludes not
what is in question; for God only gives rule and power to one man over
another; ergo he gives it immediately, it follows not. 2. It shall as well
prove that God does immediately constitute all Judges, and therefore it shall be
unlawful for a city to appoint a Major, or a shire a Justice of peace. 3. The
second argument is inconsequent also, because God in creation is the immediate
Author of The excellency of Kings makes them not of Gods only constitution and
designation*
all things, and therefore without consent of the creatures, or any act of the
creature, created an Angel a nobler creature then man, and a man then a woman,
and men above beasts; because those that are not, can exercise no act at all.
But it follows not; ergo all the works of providence, such as is the
government of Kingdoms are done immediately by God, for in the works of
providence, for the most part in ordinary, God works by means; it is then as
good a consequence as this. God immediately created man, ergo he keeps his
life immediately also without food and sleep. God immediately created the
Sun, ergo God immediately without the mediation of the Sun gives light to
the world. The making of a King is an act of reason, and God has given a man
reason to rule himself; and therefore has given to a society an instinct of
reason, to appoint a governor over themselves, but no act of reason goes
before man be created; ergo it is not in his power whether he be created a
creature of greater power then a beast or no. 4. God by creation gave power to
a man over the creatures, and so immediately; but I hope a man cannot say, God
by creation has made a man King over men. 5. The Excellency of Monarchy (if it
be excellenter then any other government, of which hereafter) is no ground why
it should be immediately from God, as well as man's dominion over the creature;
for then the work of man's redemption being more excellent then the ray^ing of
Lazarus, should have been done immediately without the incarnation, death and
satisfaction of Christ (for no act of God without himself is comparable to the
work of redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. Col. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.) and Gods
less excellent works, as his creating of beasts and worms should have been
done mediatly, and his creating of man immediately.

P. P. They who execute the judgment of God, must needs have the power to
judge from God. But Kings are Deputies in the exercises of the Judgments of
God, ergo, the proposition is proved. How is it imaginable that God reconcileth
the world by Ministers, and saves man by them, 1 ^or. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 16. except
they receive a power so to do from God? the assumption is, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 1
Chro. 19. 6. Let none say Moses and Iehosaphat speak of inferior Judges, for
that which the King does to others, he does by himself; also 5. The execution
of the Kingly power is from God, for the King is the Servant, Angel, Legate,
Minister of God, Romans 13. 6, 7. God properly and primarily is King, and King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, 1. Tim. 6. 15. Rev. 1. 5. 21. 27. 29. 20. all Kings
related to him, are Kings equivocally, and in resemblance, and he the only
King. Ans. That which is in question is never concluded; to wit, that the King
is both immediately constituted and designed King, by God only, and not by the
mediation of the people* for when God reconcileth and saves men by Pastors, he
saves them by the intervening action of men, so he scourges his people by
men, as by his sword, Psalm. 17. 14. and hand, staff, and rod, Esaias 10* 5. his
hammer. Does it follow that God only does immediately scourge his people, and
that wicked men have no more hand and action in scourging his people, then the
Prelate says the people have an hand in making a King? and that is no hand at
all, by the Prelates way.

2. We may borrow the Prelates argument: inferior Judges execute the judgment
of the Lord, and not the judgment of the King; ergo, by the Prelates argument,
God does only by immediate power execute judgment in them, and the inferior
Judges are not Gods ministers executing the judgment of the Lord. But the
Conclusion is against all truth, and so must the Prelates argument be. And that
inferior Judges are the immediate substitutes and deputies of God, is hence
proved, and shall be hereafter made good, if God will. 3. God is properly King
of Kings, so is God properly causa causarum, the cause of causes, the life of
life's, the joy of joys. What, shall it then follow, that he works nothing in
the creatures by their mediation, as causes? Because God is light of lights,
does he not enlighten the earth and air by the mediation of the Sun? then God
communicates not life mediately by generation, he causes not his Saints to
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, by the intervening mediation of the
Word. These are vain consequences. Sovereignty, and all power and virtue is in
God infinitely: And what virtue and power of action is in the creatures, as
they are compared with God, are in the creatures equivocally and in
resemblance, and (...) in opinion, rather then really. Hence it must follow, 1.
that second causes work none at all, no more then the people has a hand or
action in making the King, and that is no hand at all, as the Prelate says,
And God only and immediately works all works in the creatures, because both
the power of working and actual working comes from God, and the creatures in
all their working, are Gods instruments: and if the Prelate argue so frequently
from power given of God, to prove that actual reigning is from God
immediately, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. The Lord gives the power, to get wealth: will it
follow that Israel gets no riches at all, or that God does not mediately by
them and their in dustrie get them? I think not.

P. Prelate. 6. To whom can it be due to give the Kingly office, but to him
only who is able to give the indument and ability for the office? now God only
and immediately gives ability to be a King, as the Sacramental anointing
proves, Josh. 3. 10. Othniel is the first Judge after Joshua; and it is said,
And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and and he judged Israel; the like is
said of Saul and David. Ans. God gave royal indowments immediately, ergo he
immediately now makes the King. It follows not, for the species of government
is not that which formally constituteth a King, for then Nero, Caligula, Julian
should not have been Kings, and those who come to the Crown by conquest and
blood, are essentially Kings, as the Prelate says; but be all these Othniels,
upon whom the spirit of the Lord comes? then they are not essentially Kings
who are babes and children, and foolish and destitute of the royal endowments,
but it is one thing to have a royal gift, and another thing to be formally
called to the Kingdom, David had royal gifts after Samuel anointed him, but
if you make him King, before Saul's death, Saul was both a traitor all the time
that he persecuted David, and so no King, and also King and Gods anointed, as
David acknowledges him; and therefore that spirit that came on David, and
Saul, makes nothing against the peoples election of a King, as the Spirit of
God is given to Pastors under the new Testament, as Christ promised; but it
will not follow that the designation of the man who is to be Pastor, should not
be from the Church and from men, as the Prelate denies that either the
constitution or designation of the King is from the people, but from God only.
2. I believe the infusion of the spirit of God upon the Judges will not prove
that Kings are now both constituted and designed of God solely, only, and
immediately; for the Judges were indeed immediately and for the most part
extraordinarily raised up of God, and God indeed in the time of the Jews was
the King of Israel in another manner then he was the King of all the nations,
and is the King of Christian Realms now, and therefore the peoples despising
of Samuel, was a refusing that God should reign over them, because God in the
Judges revealed himself even in matters of Policy, as what should be done to
the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, and the like, as he does not
now to Kings.

P. Prelate. Soveraigntie is a ray of divine glory and majesty: but this
cannot be found in people, whether you consider them jointly, or singly; if you
consider them singly, it cannot be in every individual man; for Sectaries say,
That all are born equal with a like freedom: and if it be not in the people
singly, it cannot be in them jointly; for all the contribution in this compact
and contract which they fancy to be humane composition, and voluntary
constitution, is only, by a surrender of the native right that every one had
in himself; from whence then can this majesty and authority be derived?
Again, where the obligation amongst equals is by contract and compact,
violation of the faith, plighted in the contract, cannot in proper terms, be
called disobedience, or contempt of authority* it is no more but a receding
from, and a violation of that which was promised, as it may be in States or
Counties confederate. Nature, reason, conscience, scripture, teach, That
disobedience to Sovereign power is not only a violation of Truth, breach of
Covenant, but also high disobedience and contempt, as is clear, 1 Samuel 10. 26.
So when Saul, Chap. 11. sent a yoke of Oxen, hewed in pieces, to all the
Tribes, the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one
consent, 1 Samuel 11. 17. so Job 11. 18. He loses the bonds of Kings, that is,
he loses their authority, and brings them in contempt; and he girdeth
there loins with a girdle, that is, he strengthens their authority, and
makes the people to reverence them. Heathens observe, that there (...) some
divine thing in Kings. Profane Histories say, that this was so eminent in
Alexander the great, that it was a terror to his enemies, and a powerful
Loadstone to draw men to compose the most seditious Counsels, and cause his
most experienced Commanders, embrace, and obey his counsel, and command. Some
stories write, that upon some great exigence, there was some resplendent
majestic in the eyes of Scipio. This kept Pharaoh from lifting his hand against
Moses, who charged him so boldly with his sins. When Moses did speak with God,
face to face in the Mount, this resplendent glory of Majesty so awed the
people, that they durst not behold his glory, Exodus 34. This repressed the fury
of the people enraged against Gideon from destroying their idol, Judge. 6. And
the fear of man is naturally upon all living creatures below, Genesis 9. So what
can this reverence, which is innate in the hearts of all subjects toward their
Sovereigns be, but the Ordinance unrepealable of God, and the natural effect
of that majesty of Princes, with which they are endowed with from above?

Ans. 1. I never heard any shadow of reason while now, and yet Antonin. de
dominis Archiepis. de dom. l. 6. c. 2. n. 5, 6. seq.
(because the lie has a latitude) here is but a shadow, which the Prelate
stole from M. Antonius de Dominis Archiepisc. Spalatensis, and I may say
confidently, this Plagiarius has not one line in his book which is not
stolen; and for the present Spalato his argument is but spilt, and the nerves
cut from it, while it is both bleeding and famed. Let the Reader compare them,
and I pawn my credit he has ignorantly clipped Spalato: But I answer, 1.
Soveraigntie is a beam and ray (as Spalato says) of divine majesty, and is
not either formally or virtually in the people. So he. It is false, that it is
not virtually in the people: for there be two things in the Judge, either
inferior or supreme (for the argument holds in the majesty of a Parliament,
as we shall hear) 1. The gift or grace of Governing (the Arminian Prelate will
offend at this.) 2. The Authority of governing: 1. The gift is supernatural,
and is not in man naturally, and so not in the King; for he is physically but a
mortal man, and this is a gift received; for Solomon asked it by prayer from
God. There is a capacity passive in all individual men for it: as for the
official authority it self, it is virtually in all, in whom any of gods image
is remaining, since the fall, as is clear; as may be gathered from, Genesis 1. 28.
yea, the Father, the Master, the Judge, have it by Gods institution in some
measure, over son, servant, and subject, though it be more in the supreme
Ruler* and for our purpose, it is not requisite that authoritative majesty
should be in all. (What is in the Father and Husband, I hope to clear) I mean,
it needs not to be formally in all, and so all are born alike and equal: But
he who is a Papist, a Socinian, an Arminian, and therefore delivered to Satan
by his mother Church, must be the Sectarie, for we are where this Prelate left
us, maintainers of the Protestant Religion, continued in the Confession of
Faith, and National Covenant of Scotland, when this Demas forsook us, and
embraced the World. 2. Though not on single man in Israel be a Judge, or King
by nature, nor have in them formally any ray of Royalty, or of Magistraticall
Authority; yet it follows not, that Israel Parliamentarily convened, has no
such authority, as to make Saul King in How Soveraigntie is in the people, and
how not.
Mizpah, and David King in Hebron, 1 Samuel 10. 24, 25. 1 Chro. 11. 1, 2. Chap.
12. 38, 39. One man alone has not the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, (as the
Prelate dreameth) But it follows not, that many convened in a Church way,
has not this power, Matthew. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. One man has not
strength to fight against an Army of ten thousand: does it follow? Ergo, An
Army of twenty thousand has not strength to fight against these ten thousand:
So one Paul cannot Synodically determine the question, Acts 15. It follows
not; Ergo, The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, convened from diverse
Churches, has not power to determine it in a lawful Synod: And therefore,
from a disjoined and scattered power, no man can argue to a united power: So
not any one man is an inferior Ruler, or has the rays and beams of a number
of Aristocraticall Rulers: but it follows not. Ergo, All these men combined
in a City, or Society, have not power in a joint Political body, to chose
Inferior or Aristocraticall Rulers. 3. The P. Prelates reason is nothing. All
the Contribution (says he) in the compact body to make a King, is only by a
surrender of the native right of every single man, (the whole being only a
voluntary constitution.) How then can there be any majesty derived from them?
I answer. Very well. For the surrender is so voluntary, that it is also
natural, and founded on the Law of nature, That men must have Governors,
either many, or one supreme Ruler: And it is voluntary, and depends on a
positive institution of God, Whether the Government be by one supreme Ruler, as
in a Monarchy, or in many, as in an Aristocracie, according as the necessity
and temper of the Commonwealth do most require. This Constitution is so
voluntary, as it has below it, the Law of nature for its general foundation;
and above it, the supervenient institution of God, ordaining, That there should
be such Magistrates, both Kings, and other Judges, because without such, all
humane societies should be dissolved. 4. Individual persons in creating a
Magistrate, does A Community does not surrender their right and liberty to
their Rulers, so much as their power active to do, and passive to suffer unjust
violence.
not properly surrender their right, which can be called a right; for they do
but surrender their power of doing violence to these of their fellows in that
same Community; so as they shall not now have Moral power to do injuries
without punishment; and this is not right or liberty properly, but servitude:
for a power to do violence and injuries, is not liberty, but servitude and
bondage. But the Prelate talks of Royalty, as of mere Tyranny, as if i^ were
a proper Dominion, and servile Empire, that the Prince has over his people,
and not more paternall and fatherly, then lordly, or masterly. 5. He says,
Violation of faith plighted in a contract amongst equals, cannot be called
disobedience, but disobedience to the authority of the Sovereign is not only
breach of Covenant; but high disobedience and contempt. But violation of faith
amongst equals, as equals, is not properly disobedience; for disobedience is
betwixt a superior and an inferior: but violation of faith amongst equals,
when they make one of their equals their Judge and Ruler, is not only
violation of truth, but also disobedience. All Israel and Saul while he is a
private man seeking his fathers Asses, are equals by Covenant obliged one to
another; and so any injury done by Israel to Saul in that case, is not
disobedience, but only violation of ^aith; but when all Israel makes Saul
their King, and swears to him obedience, he is not now their equal, and an
injury done to him now, is both a violation of their faith, and high
disobedience also. Suppose a City of Aldermen, all equal amongst themselves
indignity and place, take one of their number, and make him their Major and
Provost; a wrong done to him now, is not only against the rules of
fraternity, but disobedience to one placed by God in authority over them. 6.
1 Samuel 11. 7. The fear of the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with
one consent to obey Saul. Ergo, God has placed authority in Kings, which is
not in people: It is true, because God has transferred the scattered
authorities that are in all the people, in one Mass; and by virtue of his own
Ordinance, has placed them in one man who is King. What follows? Ergo, God
conferreth this authority immediately upon the King, without the mediation of
any action of the people; yea, the contrary rather Gods losing of the bond of
Kings, by the mediation of the peoples dispising him, proves against P. P.
that the Lord takes and gives Royal Majesty mediately.
follows. 7. God loses the bond of Kings; that is, when God is to cast off
Kings, he causes them to lose all authority, and makes them come in contempt
with the people. But what does this prove? That God takes away the majesty
and authority of Kings immediately; And therefore God gave to Kings this
authority Immediately, without the peoples conveiance? Yea, I take the
Prelates weapon from him. God does not take the authority of the King from him
immediately, but mediately by the people their hating and dispising him, when
they ^ee his wickedness, as the people see Nero a Monster, a prodigeous
blood-sucker; upon this, all the people contemn him, and despise him, and so
the majesty is taken from Nero, and all his Mandates and Laws, when they see
him trample upon all Laws divine and humane; and that mediately by the peoples
heart, dispising of his majesty, and so they repeat and take again that
aw-some authority, that they once gave him: And this proves, that God gave
him the authority mediately, by the consent of man. 8. Nor speaks he of
Kings only, but Verse. 21. He powers contempt (...) super munificos. Pineda.
Aria. Mont. super Principes. Upon Nobles and great men. And this place may
prove, That no Judges of the earth are made by men. 9. The Heathen say, That
there is some divinity in Princes, as in Alexander the great, toward his
enemies, and Scipio: But this will prove, That Princes and Kings have a
Superiority over those who are not their native Subjects; for something of God
is in them, in relation to all men, that are not their Subjects. If this be a
ground, strong and good, because God only, and independently from men, takes
away this majesty; as God only, and independently gives it, then a King is
sacred to all men, subjects, or not subjects; then it is unlawful to make war
against any foreign King and Prince, for in invading him, or resisting him,
you resist that divine majesty of God, that is in him; then you may not
lawfully flee from a tyrant, no more then you may lawfully fly from God. 10.
Scipio was not a King. Ergo, This divine majesty is in all Judges of the
earth, in a more or less measure. Ergo, God only and immediately, may take
this spark of divine majesty from inferior Judges: It follows not. And
Kings certainly cannot infuse any sparkle of a divine majesty, on any
inferior Judges; for God only, immediately infuseth it in men. Ergo, It is
unlawful for Kings to take this divinity from Judges, for they resist God,
who resist Parliaments, no less then those who resist Kings. Scipio has
divinity in him, as well as Caesar, and that immediately from God, and not from
any King. 10. Moses was not a King when he went to Pharaoh, for he had not as
yet a people; Pharaoh was the King, and because Pharaoh was a King, the Divines
of Oxford must say, His Majesty must not, in words of rebuke, be resisted,
more then by deeds. 11. Moses his face did shine as a Prophet receiving the Law
from God, not as a King: and is this Sunshine of Heaven upon the face of Nero,
and Julian? It must be, if it be a beam of Royal Majesty, if this pratler say
right, but 2 Cor. 3. 7. this was a majesty typical, which did adumbrate the
glory of the Law of God, and is far from being a royalty due to all Heathen
Kings. 12. I would our King would evidence such a Majesty in breaking the
Images and Idols of his Queen, and of Papists about him. 13. The fear of Noah,
and the regenerated, who are in Covenant with the Beasts of the field, Job. 5.
23. is upon the Beasts of the earth, not by any approbation only, as the people
makes Kings, by the Prelates way; nor yet by free consent, as the people
freely transfer their power to him, who is King. The creatures inferior to
man, have by no act of freewill, chosen man to be their Ruler, and transferred
their power to him, because they are by nature inferior to man, and God by
nature has subjected The subordination of creatures natural, not voluntary as
is the subordination of people to Kings and Rulers.
the creatures to man, Genesis 1. 28. and so this proves not, that the King by
nature is above the people, I mean the man who is King; and therefore though
God had planted in the hearts of all subjects, a fear and reverence toward the
King; upon supposall, that they have made him King: It follows not, That this
authority and majesty, is immediately given by God to the man who is King,
without the interveening consent of the people; for there is a native fear in
the Scholar to stand in awe of his Teacher, and yet the Scholar may willingly
give himself to be a disciple to his Teacher, and so give his Teacher power
over him. Citizens naturally fear their supreme Governor of the City, yet
they give to the man who is their supreme Governor, that power and Authority
which is the ground of awe and reverence. A Servant naturally fears his
Master, yet often he gives his liberty, and resigneth it up voluntarily to his
Master, and this was not unordinary amongst the Jews, where the servant did
entirely love the Master, and is most ordinary now when servants do for hyre,
tie themselves to such a Master; and Soldiers naturally fear their
Commanders, yet they may, and often do, by voluntary consent make such men
their Commanders; and therefore from this it follows no way, that the
Governor of a City, the Teacher, the Master, the Commander in War have not
their power and authority only and immediately from God, but from their
inferiors, who by their free consent appointed them for such places.

P. Prelate. This seems, or rather is an unanswerable Argument, 7. Arg. page
51. 52. The place Genesis 9. 5. He that sheddeth man's blood, etc.
No man has power of life and death, but the Sovereign Power of life and
death; to wit God, Genesis 9. 5. God says thrice he will require the blood of man
at the hands of man, and this power God has committed to Gods Deputy, who so
sheddeth man's blood (...) by man shall die, by the King, for the world knew not
any kind of government at this time, but Monarchiall; and this Monarch was Noah;
and if this power be from God, why not all sovereign power? seeing it is
Homogeneous, and as ^^rists say in indivisibili posita, a thing in its nature
indivisible, and that cannot be distracted, or impaired, and if every man had
the power of life and death, God should not be the God of Order.

The P. Prelate takes the pains to prove out of the text that a Magistracy is
established in the text. Ans. 1. Let us consider this unanswerable Argument, 1.
It is grounded upon a lie, and a conjecture never taught by any but himself;
to wit, that (...) by, or in, or through man, must signify a Magistrate. 2.
and a King only. 3. This King was Noah, never interpreter; nay not common
sense can say, that no Magistrate is here understood but a King; the
consequence is vain, his blood shall be shed by man, ergo by a Magistrate, it
follows not, ergo by a King, it follows not: there was not a King in the
world yet as; some make Belus the father of Ninus the first King, and the
builder of Babylon, this Ninus is thought the first builder of the City, after
called Ninivie, and the first King of the Assyrians, so says Quint. Curtius,
l. 5.
Quintus Curtius and others; but grave Authors believe that Nimrod was no other
then Belus the father of Ninus, so says Aug. dc civ. Dei, l. 16. c. 17.
Augustine, Eusebius. in exo. Cronic.
Hierome, Hieron. in c. 2. Hos.
Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 9. de prepar. Evan. c. 3.
Hieronym. And Clemens recog. l. 4.
Eusebius makes him the first founder of Babylon: So says Pirerius in Genesis c.
10. v. 8, 9. disp. 3. n. 67. Illud quoque mihi fit percredibile, Nimrod fuisse
eundem, atque enim quem alii appellant Belum patrem Nini.
Clemens, Eusebius. prolog l. 1. Chron.
Pirerius; and Josephus says the same. 1. their times, 2. their cruel natures
are the same. Paul Orosius. l. 1. de Ormesta mundi.
Calvin says, Noah yet lived while Nimrod lived: and the Scripture says,
Nimrod began to reign, and be powerful on the Earth. And Babel was (...) the
beginning of his kingdom. No writer, Moses nor any other can show us a King
before Nimrod. So Hieron. in traditio Hebrei in Genesis
Eusebius, Tostat. Abulens. in Genesis c. 10. 9. 6.
Paul. Orosius, Calvin com.
Hieronym. Josephus in c. 10. Ge.
Josephus say that he was the first King. And Luth. co. ib.
Tostatus Abulens. and our own Musculus.
Calvin, Ainsw. com.
Luther, Morlar.
Musculus on the place, and Pircrius in Genesis c. 9. v. 3, 4. n. 37. Vatablus
has diverse interpretations; In homine, id est, in conspectu omnium and
public, aut in homine, i. e. hominibus testificantibus. alii* iu homine, i. e.
propter hominem, qui^ occidit hominem, jussu magistratus. Cajotan expounds
(...) contra hominem, in despite of man.
Ainsworth, make him the first King, and the founder of Babylon. How Noah was a
King, or there was any Monarchical government in the world then, the Prelate
has alone dreamed it: There was but Familie-government before this. 2. And if
there be a Magistracy here established by God, there is no warrant to say it
is only a Monarchy: For if the Holy Ghost intends a policy: it is a
policy to be established to the worlds end, and not to be limited (as the P.
Prelate does) to Noah's (h) Calvin com. in c. 9. Genesis
days: all Interpreters upon good ground establish the same policy that our
Savior speaks of, when he says, He shall perish by the sword, who takes
the sword, Matthew. 26. 52. So the Netherlands have no lawful Magistrate, who
have power of life and death, because their Government is Aristocraticall, and
they have no King. So all acts of taking away the lives of ill-doers, shall be
acts of homicide in Holland: how absurd? 3. Nor do I see how the place in the
native scope does establish a Magistracy. (s) Calvin says not so: and
Interpreters deduce by consequence the power of the Magistrate from this place.
But the Text is general: He who kills man, shall be killed by man: either he
shall fall into the Magistrates hand, or into the hand of some Murderer: so
Calvin, (t) Marlorat. And he speaks (says (w) Pirerius) not of the fact and
event it self, but of the deserving of murderers; and it is certain, all
murderers fall not into the Magistrates hands; but he says, by Gods and ma^s
(q) Calv. com. Quanquam hoc loco non simpliter fertur lex politica, ut
plectantur homicidae.
(r) Calv. in lect.
laws. Ergo, They ought to dye, though sometime one murderer kills another.
4. The Sovereign power is given to the King, ergo, it is given to him
immediately without the consent of the people. It follows not. 5. Power of
life and death is not given to the King only, but also to other Magistrates,
yea, and to a single private man in the just defense of his own life. Other
arguments are but what the Prelate has said already.

QUEST. VIII. Whether the Prelate proves by force of reason, that the people
cannot be capable of any power of Government?
P. Prelate. God and nature gives no power in vain, and which may not be
reduced into action; but an active power, or a power of actual governing, was
never acted by the Community; therefore this power cannot be seated in the
Community as in the prime and proper subject; and it cannot be in every
individual person of a Community, because Government intrinsecally and
essentially includes a specified distinction of Governors, and some to be
governed; and to speak properly, there can no other power be conceived in the
Community naturally and properly, but only potestas passiva regiminis, a
capacity or susceptabilitie to be governed, by one or by more, just as the
first matter desires a form. This obliges all, by the dictate of Natures
law, to submit to actual government: and as it is in every individual person,
it is not merely and properly voluntary, because howsoever nature dictates,
that government is necessary for the safety of the society, yet every singular
person, by corruption and self-love, has a natural averseness and
repugnancie to submit to any; every man would be a King himself: This
universal desire, app^titus universalis aut naturalis, or universal
propension to Government, is like the act of the understanding assenting to the
first undeniable principles of truth, and to the wills general propension to
happiness in general, which propension is not a free act, except our new
Statists, as they have changed their faith, so they overturne true reason, it
will puzzle them infinitely to make any thing in its kind passive, really
active and collative of positive acts and effects. All know, no man can give
what he has not: an old Philosopher would laugh at him who would say, that a
matter perfected and actuated by union, with a form, could at pleasure shake
off its form, and marry it self to another: they may as well say, every wife
has power to resume her freedom, and marry another, as that any such power
active is in the Community, or any power to cast off Monarchy.

Ans. The P. Prelate might have thanked Spalato for this Argument, but he does
not so much as cite him, for fear his theft be deprehended, but Spalato has
it set down with stronger nerves, then the Prelates head was able to copy out
of him. But M. Anto. de domini. Arch. Spalatens. l. 6. c. 2. n. 5. 6. (...)
potius heb^t ^ na^^ra, non t^m vim active rectivam aut gubernativam, quam
inclinationem passive re gibilem (ut ita loquar) and gubernabilem, qua volens
and libens sese submittit rectoribus etc.
Iac* de Almain, and Almain. de potest. and La. 1 q. 1. c. 1. 6. and q. 2. 3, 5.
Navarrus, with the Parision Doctors said in the Concell of Paris, that
politic power is immediately from God, but first from the community; but so,
that the community apply their power to this o^ that Government, not of
liberty, but by natural necessity, but Spalato and the Plagiarie Prelate do
both look beside the book. The question is not now concerning the vis rectiva
the power of governing in the people, but concerning the power of government,
for these two dister much, the former is a power of ruling and Monarchical
commanding of themselves, this power is not formally in the people, but only
vertually; and no reason can say, that a vertuall power is idle, because it
cannot be actuated by that same subject that it is in, for then it should not
be a vertuall, but a formal power. Do not Philosophers say such a Herb
vertually makes hot* and can the sottish Prelate say, this vertuall power is
idle, and ^vaine given of God, because it does not formally (c) Navarrus
heat your hand when you touch it. 2. The P. Prelate who (d) Nem. don* iud.
not. 3. n. 85. In any community there are active and passive power to
government.
is excommunicated for Popery, Socinianisme, Arminianisme, and is now turned
Apostate to Christ, and his Church must have changed his faith* not we, and be
reasonlesly ignorant to press that axiom, that the power is idle that cannot
be reduced to acts; for a generative power is given to living and sensitive
creatures, this power is not idle though it be not reduced in act, by all and
every individual sensitive creature. A power of seeing is given to all who
naturally do, or ought to see, yet it is not an idle power, because diverse are
blind, seeing it is put forth in action in diverse of the kind; so this power in
the community is not idle, because it is not put forth in acts in the people,
in which it is vertually, and is put forth in action in some of them, whom they
choose to be their Governors; nor is it reasonable to say that it should be
put forth in action by all the people, as if all should be Kings and
Governors. But the question is not of the power of governing in the people,
but of the power of Government, that is, of the power of making Governors and
Kings, and the community does put forth in act this power, as a free,
voluntary, and active power, for 1. a Community transplanted to India or any
place of the world, not before inhabited have a perfect liberty to choose
either a Monarchy, or a Democracy, or an Aristocracy; for though nature incline
them to Government in general, yet are they not naturally determinated to any
one of those three, more than another. 2. Israel did of their free will choose
the change of government, and would have a King, as the Nations had, ergo they
had free will, and so an active power so to do, and not a a passive
inclination only to be governed, such as Spalato says agrees to the first
matter, 3, Royalists teach that a people under Democracy, or Aristocracy have
liberty to choose a King, and the Romans did this, ergo they had an active
power to do it, ergo the Prelates simile crookes, the matter at its pleasure
cannot shake off its form, nor the wife cast off her husband being once
married; but Barclaius, Grotius, Arnisaens, Blackwood, and all the Royalists
teach that the people under any of these two forms of Democracy or
Aristocracy, may resume their power, and cast off these forms and choose a
Monarch, and if Monarchy be the best government as Royalists say, they may
chose the best, and is this but a passive capacity to be governed? 2. Of ten
men fit for a Kingdom they may design one, and put the Crown on his head,
and refuse the other nine, and Israel crowned Solomon and refused Adoniah. Is
this not a voluntary action, proceeding from a free active, elective power? It
will puzzle the pretended Prelate to deny this, that which the community does
freely, they do not from such a passive capacity, as is in the first matter,
in regard of the form. 3. It is true that people through corruption of nature
are averse to submit to Governors, for conscience sake, and as to the Lord,
because the natural man remaining in the state of nature can do nothing that
is truly good, but it is false that men have no active Moral power to submit
to superiors, but only a passive capacity to be governed, he quite
contradicts himself, for he said before, c. 4. page 49. that there is an
innate fear and reverence in the hearts of all men naturally, even in Heathen
toward their Severaign; yea as we have a natural moral active power to love
our Parents and superiors (though it be not Evangelically, or legally in Gods
Court, good) and so to obey their commandments, only we are averse to penal
Laws of superiors; but this proves no way, that we have only by nature, a
passive capacity to government; for Heathens have by instinct of nature both
made Laws morally good, submitted to them, set Kings and Judges over them;
which clearly proves that men have an active power of Government by nature.
4. yea, what difference makes the Prelate betwixt men and beasts, for beasts
have a capacity to be governed, even Lions and Tigers; but here is the matter,
if men have any natural power of Government, the P. Prelate would have it with
his brethren Jesuits and Arminians to be not natural, but done by the help
of universal grace, for so do they confound nature and grace. But it is
certain our power to submit to Rulers and Kings as to rectors, and guides and
fathers, is natural, to submit to Tyrants in doing ills of sin, is natural,
but in suffering ills of punishment its not natural. 5. No man can give that
which he has not, is true, but that people have no power to make their
Governors, is that which is in question, and denied by us. 6. This argument
does prove that people has no power to appoint Aristocraticall Rulers more
then Kings, and so the Aristocraticall and Democraticall Rulers are all
inviolable and sacred, as the King. 2. by this the people may not resume their
freedom if they turn tyrants and oppressors; this the Prelate shall deny, for
he averreth, p. 96. out of Augustine, that the people may without sin change a
corrupt Democracy into a Monarchy.

P. Prelate. If Sovereignty be originally inherent in the people, then Page 95,
96.
Democracy, or Government by the people, were the best Government, because it
comes nearest to the fountain and stream of the first and radical power in
the people, yea and all other forms of government were unlawful; and if
Sovereignty be natively inherent in the multitude, it must be proper to every
individual of the community, which is against that false Maxim of theirs,
Quisque nascitur liber, every one by nature is borne a free man, and the
posterity of those who first contracted with their elected King, are not bound
to that Covenant, but upon their native rest and liberty, may appoint another
King without breach of covenant. The posterity of Joshua, and the Elders in
their time, who contracted with the Gibeonites to incorporate them, though in a
serving condition, might have made their fathers government nothing.

Ans. The P. Prelate might thank Spalato for this Argument also, Spalatensis,
Ibid. page 648.
for it is stolen, but he never once names his name, lest his theift should
be deprehended; so are his other Arguments stolen from Spalato, but the
Prelate weakeneth them, and it is seen, stolen goods are not blessed. Spalato
says then, by the law of nature every Commonwealth should be governed by the
people, and by the law of nature, the people should be under the badest
Government* but this consequence is nothing; for community of many families is
formally and of themselves under no government, but may choose any of the
three, for popular government is not that wherein Popular Government is not
that in which the whole people are Governors. People by nature, are equally
indifferent to all the three forms of Government.
all the people are Rulers, for this is confusion, no government, because all
are Rulers, and none are governed and ruled; but in popular government many are
chosen out of the people to rule, and that this is the worst government, is
said gratis, without warrant, and if Monarchy be the best of it self, yet when
men are in the state of sin, in some other respects, it has many
inconveniences. 2. I see not how Democracie is best, because nearest to the
multitudes power of making a King; for if all the three depend upon the free
will of the people, all are alike a far off, and alike near hand, to the
peoples free choice, according as they see most conducible for the safety and
protection of the Commonwealth: And seeing the forms of Government are no more
natural, then politic Incorporations of Cities, yea, then of Shires: But from
a positive institution of God who erecteth this form, rather then this, not
immediately now, but mediately by the free will of men; not one comes
formally, and e^ natura rei, nearer to the fountain then another, except that
materially Democracie may come nearer to the peoples power, then Monarchy, but
the excellency of it above Monarchy, is not hence concluded; for by this
reason, the number of four should be more excellent then the number of five, of
ten, of an hundredth, of a thousand, or of millions, because four comes near to
the number of three, which Aristotle calls the first perfect number, cui
additur (...) of which yet formally all do alike share in the nature and
essence of number. 2. It is denied, that it follows from this antecedent, The
people have power to chose their own Governors. Ergo, All Governments, except
Democracie, or Government by the people, must be sinful and unlawful. 1.
Because Government by Kings is of Divine institution, and of other Judges also,
as is evident by Gods Word, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 17. 14. Prove. 8. 15, 16. 1
Pet. 2. 13, 14. Psalm. 2. 10, 11, etc. 2. Power of chosing any form of
Government, is in the people: Ergo, There is no Government lawful, but popular
Government; it follows no ways, but presupposes that power to chose any
form of Government, must be formally actual Government, which is most false,
yea, they be contrary, as the prevalency or power, and the act are contrary, so
these two are contrary, or opposite; neither is Soveraigntie, nor any
Government formally inherent in either the Community, by nature, nor in any
one particular man, by nature; and that every man is born free, so as no man,
rather then his brother, is born a King and Spalato 16. August. de lih. arb. l.
1. c. ^. Si depravatus populus rem privatam Reipub. preferat. atque haheat
venale suffragium cor ruptusque ab iis qui honores amant, regnum in s^factiosis
cons^eleratisque committat; non ne item recte, si quis tunc extilerit vir bonus
qui plurimum posfit, adimat huic populo potestatem dandi honores, and in
pavcorum bonorum, vel etiam unjus red regat arbitrium? Page 97. sacr. sanc.
regum majest.
Ruler, I hope, God willing to make good, so as the Prclate shall never answer
on the contrary. 3. It follows not, that the Posterity living, when their
Fathers made a Covenant with their first elected King, may without any breach
of Covenant on the Kings part, make void and null their Fathers election of a
King, and chose another King, because the lawful Covenant of the Fathers in
point of Government, if it be not broken, tieth the children; but it cannot
deprive them of their lawful liberty naturally inherent in them to chose the
fittest man to be King: But of this hereafter more fully. 4. Spalato adds,
(the Prelate is not a faithful thief) If the Community by the Law of nature,
have power of all forms of Government, and so should be, by nature, under
popular Government, and yet should refuse a Monarchy, and an Aristocracie; yet
Augustine adds, If the people should prefer their own private gain to the
public good, and sell the Commonwealth, then some good man might take their
liberty from them, and against their will er^ct a Monarchy, or an
Aristocracie: But 1. the Prelate and Augustine, supposes the people to be
under Popular Government; this is not our case, for Spalato and the Prelate
presupposes by our grounds, that the people by nature, must be under Popular
Government; Augustine dreameth no such thing, and we deny that by nature, they
are under any form of Government. 2. Augustine in a case most considerable,
thinks one good, and potent man, may take the corrupt peoples power of giving
Honors, and making Rulers from them, and give it to some good men, few, or
many, or to one; then Augustine lays done as a ground, that which Spalato and
the Prelate denies, That the people has power to appoint their own Rulers;
otherwise, how could one good man take that power from them? And the Prelates
fifth Argument, is but a Branch of the fourth Argument, and is answered already.

P. Prelate, Chap. 11. He would prove, That Kings of the peoples making, are
not blessed of God. The first creature of the peoples making, was Abimelech,
Judge. 9. 22. who reigned only three years, well near Antichrists time of
endurance; he came to it by blood, and an evil spirit rose betwixt him, and the
men of Sechem, and he made a miserable end. The next was Jeroboam, who had this
Motto, He made Israel to sin, the people made him King, and he made the same
pretense of a glorious Reformation, that our Reformers now make, new Calves,
new Altars, new Feasts are erected; they banish the Levites, and take in the
scum and dross of the vulgar, etc. 3. Every action of Christ, is our
instruction; Christ was truly a born King, notwithstanding, when the people
would make him a King, he disclaimed it, he would not be an arbiter betwixt two
brethren differing.

Answ. I am not to follow the Prelates order every way, though God willing, I
shall reach him in the foregoing Chapters. Nor purpose I to answer his
treasonable railing against his own Nation, and the Judges of the Land, whom
God has set over this seditious excommunicated Apostate. He lays to us
frequently the Jesuits The P. Prelate holds the Pope not to be the
Antichrist, but that as Papists say, the Antichrist shall be one single man.
Tenets, when as he is known himself to be a Papist: In this Argument he faith,
Abim^lech did reign only three years, well near Antichrists reign: Is not
this the basis, and the mother principle of Popery, That the Pope is not the
Antichrist? for the Pope has continued many ages. 1. He is not an individual
man, but a race of men, but the Antichrist, says Belarmine, Stapleton,
Becanus, and the nation of Jesuits, and Poplings, shall be one inviduall man,
a born Iaw, and shall reign only three years and a half. But 1. The Argument
from success, proves nothing, except the Prelate prove The bad success of
Kings chosen by the people proves nothing, because Kings chosen by God had bad
success, through their own wickedness.
their bad success to be from this, because they were chosen of the people.
When as Saul chosen of God, and most of the Kings of Israel and Judah, who
undeniably, had Gods cal^ing to the Crown, were not blessed of God, and their
Government was a ruin to ^oth people and Religion, as the people were removed
to all the Kingdoms of the earth, for the sins of Manass^h, Iere. 15. 4. Was
therefore Manasseh not lawfully called to the Crown? 2. For his instance of
Kings unlawfully called to the Crown, he brings us, whole two, and tells
us, that he doubts as many learned men do, Whether Jeroboam was a King by
permission only, or by a commission from God. 3. Abimelech was cursed, because
he wanted Gods calling to the throne, for then Israel had no King, but Judges
extraordinarily raised up by God, and God did not raise him at all, only he
came to the throne by blood, and carnal reasons moving the men of Sechem to
advance him: The Argument presupposes, that the whole lawful calling of a
King, is the voices of the people; This we never taught, though the Prelate
make conquest a just title to a Crown, and it is but a title of blood and
rapine. 4. Abimelech was not the first King, but only a Judge; all our Divines
with the Word of God makes Saul the first King. 5. For Jeroboam he had Gods
Word and Promise to be King, 1 King. 11. 34, 35, 37, 38. But in my weak
judgment he waited not Gods time, and way of coming to the Crown; but that his
coming to the throne was unlawful, because he came by the peoples election, is
in question. 5. That the peoples Reformation, and their making a new King, was
The P. Prelate condemns King Charles his ratifying in Parliament, 2. An.
1641. the proceedings of Scotland in this present Reformation.
like the Kingdom of Scotlands Reformation, and the Parliament of Englands way
now, is a traitorous calumny. For 1. It condemns the King, who has in
Parliament declared all their proceedings to be legal. Rehoboam never declared
Ieroboams Coronation to be lawful, but contrary to Gods Word made war against
Israel. 2. It is false that Israel pretended Religion in that change, the cause
was the rough answer given to the supplication of the Estates, complaining of
their oppression, they were under in Solomon's reign. 3. Religion is still
subjected to policy by Prelates and Caveliers, not by us in Scotland, who
sought nothing but Reformation of Religion, of Laws, so far as they serve
Religion, as our Supplications, Declarations, and the event proves. 4. We have
no new Calves, new Altars, new Feasts, but profess, and really do hazard life
and estate, to put away the Prelates Calves, Images, Tree-worship,
Altar-worship, Saints Feast-dayes, Idolatry, Masses; and nothing is said here
but Jesuits, and Cananites, and Baalites, might say, (though salsly) against
the Reformation of Josiah: Truth and purity of worship this year, is new in
relation to Idolatry the last year, but it is simpliciter older. 5. We have not
put away the Lords Priests, and Levites, and taken in the scum of the vulgar,
but have put away Baals Priests, such as excommunicated Prelate Maxwel, and
other Apostates, and resumed the faithful servants of God, who were deprived
and banished, for standing to the Protestant Faith sworn too, by the Prelates
themselves. 6. Every action of Christ, such as his walking on the Sea, is not
our instruction in that sense, that Christ's refusing a Kingdom, is directly our
instruction: And did Christ refuse to be a King, because the people would have
made him a King? that is, non causa pro causa; he refused it, because his
Kingdom was not in this world, and he came to suffer for men, not to reign over
man. 7. The Prelate and others who were Lords of Session, and would be Judges
of men's Inheritances, and would usurp the sword by being Lords of Counsel,
and Parliament, have refused to be instructed by every Action of Christ, who
would not judge betwixt brother and brother.

P. Prelate. Jephtah came to be a Judge by Covenant, betwixt him and the
Gileadites; here you have an interposed Act of man, yet the Lord himself in
authorizing him as Judge, vindicateth it no less to himself, then when
extraordinarily he authorized Gideon and Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 11. Ergo,
whatsoever act of man interveeneth, it contributeth nothing to Royal
Authority, it cannot weaken or repeal it.

Answ. It was as extraordinary that Jepthah a bastard, and the son of an
harlot, should be Judge, as that Gideon should be Judge. God vindicateth to
himself, that he gives his people favor in the That any are supreme Judges,
is an eminent act of special providence, which hinders no^ but that the King
is made by the people.
eyes of their enemies; but does it follow, that the enemies are not agents,
and to be commended for their humanity in favoring the people of God? So
Psalm. 65. 9, 10. God makes corn to grow; therefore clouds, and earth, and
sun, and summer, and husbandry contributeth nothing to the growing of corn.
But this is but that which he said before. We grant that this is an eminent and
singular act of Gods special providence, that he moves and boweth the wills
of a great multitude to promote such a man, who by nature comes no more out
of the womb a crowned King, then the poorest shepherd in the land: and it is
an act of grace to endue him with heroic and royal parts for the government.
But what is all this? does it exclude the peoples consent? in no ways. So the
works of supernatural grace, as to love Christ above all things, to believe in
Christ in a singular manner, are ascribed to the rich grace of God: but can the
Prelate say, that the understanding and will in these acts are mere patients,
and contribute no more then the people contributeth to Royal authority in the
King, and that is just nothing, by the Prelates way? And we utterly deny, that
as water in baptism has no action at all in the working of remission of
sins, so the people The people not patients, in making a King, as is water in
producing grate baptism.
has no influence in making a King, for the people are worthier, more
excellent then the King, and they have an active power of ruling and directing
themselves toward the intrinfecall end of humane policy, which is the
external safety and peace of a society, in so far as there are moral
principles of the Second Table for this effect written in their heart, and
therefore that royal authority, which by Gods special providence, is united
in one King, and as it were overgilded and lustered with Princely grace and
royal endowments, is diffused in the people, for the people has an
after-approbative consent in making a King, as Royalists confess, water has
no such action in producing grace.

QUEST. IX. Whether or no Soveraigntie is so from the people, that it remains
in them in some part, so as they may in case of necessity resume it?
THe Prelate will have it Babylonish confusion, that we are divided in opinion.
Jesuits (says he) place all Soveraigntie in the community. Of the Sectaries;
some warrant any one subject to make away his King, and that such a work is no
less to be rewarded then when one kills a wolf: Some say, this power is in
the whole Community: some will have it in the collective body, not conveened
by warrant or writ of Sovereignty, but when necessity (which is often fancied)
of reforming State and Church, calls them together. Some in the Nobles, and
Peers, some in the three Estates assembled by the Kings writ, some* in the
inferour Judges.

I answer: If the Prelate were not a Jesuit himself, he would not bid his
brethren take the mote out of their eye: but there is nothing Barclaius contr.
Monarch. l. 4. c. 10. p. 268. ut hosts publicos non solu ab universo populo,
sed ^ singulis etiam impeti oaedique jure optimo posse tota Antiquitas censuit.
here said but which Barclaius said better before this Plagarius. To which I
answer, We teach that any private man may kill a a Tyrant void of all title:
and a great Royalist Barclaius says so also. And if he have not the consent of
the people, he is an usurper, for we know no external lawful calling that
Kings have now, or their family to the Crown, but only the call of the people;
all other calls to us are now invisible and unknown, and God would not command
us to obey Kings, and leave us in the dark, that we shall not know who is the
King: the Prelate places his lawful calling to the Crown in such an
immediate, invisible, and subtle act of omnipotency, as that whereby God
conferreth remission of sins by sprinkling with water in baptism, and that
whereby God directed Samuel to anoint Saul and David, not Eliab, nor any other
brother. It is the Devil in the P. P. not any of us, who teach that any
private man may kill a lawful King, though tyrannous in his government. For
the subject of Royal power, we affirm, the first, and ultimate, How the
people is the subject of Soveraigntie.
and native subject of all power is the Community, as reasonable men naturally
inclining to a society: but the ethicall and political subject, or the legal
and positive receptacle of this power is various, according to the various
constitutions of the policy. In Scotland and England, it is the three Estates
of Parliament, in other Nations some other Judges or Peers of the Land. The
Prelate had no more common sense for him to object a confusion of opinions to
us, for this, then to all the Commonwealths on earth, because all have not
Parliaments, as Scotland has; all have not Constables, and Officials, and
Churchmen, Barons, Lords of Council, Parliaments, etc. as England had. But the
truth is, the Community orderly conveened, as it includes all the Estates
civil, have hand, and are to act in choosing their Rulers: I see not what
privilege Nobles have above Commons in a Court of Parliament, by Gods law; but
as they are Judges, all are equally Judges, and all make up one congregation of
Gods. But the question now is, if all power of governing (the Prelate, to make
all the people Kings, says, if all Sovereignty) be so in the people, that they
retain power to guard themselves against Tyranny? And, if they retain some of
it, habitu, in habit, and in their power? I am not now unseasonably, according
to the Prelates order, to dispute of the power of lawful defense against
tyranny; but I lay down this maxim of Divinity; Tyranny being a work of
Satan, is not from God, because sin either habitual or actual, is not from
God, the power that is, must be from God; the Magistrate as Magistrate, is
good, in nature of office, and the intrinsecall end of his office, Romans 13. 4.
for he is the Minister of God for thy good; and therefore a power ethicall,
politic, or moral, to oppress, is not from God, and is not a power, but a
licentious deviation of a power, and is no more from God, but from sinful
nature, and the old serpent, then a license to sin: God in Christ gives
pardons of sin; but the Pope, not God, gives dispensations to sin. 2. To
this add, If for nature to defend it self be lawful, no Community, without
sin, has power to alienate and give away this power: for as no power given to
man to murder his brother, is of God, so no power to suffer his brother to be
murdered, is of God; and no power to suffer himself ( a fortiori) far less
can be from God. Here I speak not of physical power, for if free will be the
creature of God, a physical power to acts which in relation to Gods law are
sinful, must be from God.

But I now follow the P. Prelate. Some of the adversaries, as Buchanan, Sac.
Reg. Maj. The sacred and royal prerogative of Kings c. 9. p. 101. 102.
say that the Parliament has no power to make a law, but only a (...) without
the approbation of the Community. Others, as the the Observator, say, that the
right of the Gentry and Communalty is entirely in the Knights and Burgesses of
the House of Commons, and will have their Orders irrevocable. If then the
common Stolen from Barclaius.
people cannot resume their power, and oppose the Parliament, how can Tables
and Parliaments resume their power, and resist the King?

Answ. The ignorant man should have thanked Barclaius for this Argument, and
yet Barclaius need not thank him, for it has not the nerves that Barclaius
gave it. But I answer, 1. if the Parliament should have been corrupted by fair
hopes (as in our age we have seen the like) the people did well to resist the
Prelates obtruding the Mass Book, when the Lords of the Counsel pressed it
against all Law of God and man, upon the Kingdom of Scotland, and therefore it
is denied that the Acts of Parliament are irrevocable, the observator said they
were irrevocable by the King, he being but one man, the P. Prelate wrongeth
him, for he said only, The power of Parliaments.
they have the power of a Law, and the King is obliged to confent, by his
Royal Office to all good Laws, and neither King nor people may oppose them.
Buchanan said Acts of Parliament are not Laws obliging the people till they be
promulgated, and the peoples silence when they are promulgated is their
approbation, and makes them obligatory Laws to them; but if the people speak
against unjust Laws, they are not Laws at all, and Buchannan knew the power
of the Scottish Parliament, better then this ignorant Statist. 2. There is not
like reason to grant so much to the King, as to Parliaments, because certainly
Parliaments who make Kings under God, or above any one man, and they must have
more authority and wisdom then any one King, except Solomon (as base
flatterers The Parliament has more power then the King.
say) should return to the thrones of the earth. And as the power to make just
Laws is all in the Parliament, only the people have power to resist
tyrannical Laws, the power of all the Parliament was never given to the King,
by God, the Parliament are as essentially Judges as the King, and therefore the
Kings deed may well be revoked, because he acts nothing as King; but united
with his great or lesser Council, no more then the eye can see, being
separated from the body. The Peers and Members of Parliament have more then
the King, because they have both their own power, being parts and special
Members of the people, and also they have their high places in Parliament,
either from the peoples express, or tacit consent. 3. We allow no Arbitrary
power to the Parliament, because their just Laws are irrevocable, for the
irrevocable power of making just Laws does argue a legal, not an irreovocable
Arbitrary power; nor is there any arbitrary power in the people, or in any
mortal man, but of the Covenant betwixt King and people hereafter.

P. Prelate, If Sovereign power be habitually in the community so, C. 10. page
105.
as they may resume it at their pleasure, then nothing is given to the King but
an empty title, for at the same instant he receives Empire and Sovereignty,
and lays down the power to rule or determine in matters which concern
either private or public good, and so he is both a King and a Subject. Ans.
This naked consequence the Prelate says, and proves not, and we deny it, and
give this reason, the King receives Royal power with the States to make good
Laws, and 2. power by his royalty to execute those Laws, and this power the
community has devolved in the hands of the King, and States of Parliament, but
the community keeps to themselves a power to resist tyranny, and to coerce
it, and eatenus in so far is Saul subject, that David is not to compeare before
him, nor to lay down Goliahes sword, nor disband his Army of defense, though
the King should command him so to do.

P. Prelate. By all Politicians, Kings, and enferiour Magistrates C. 16. 105,
106, 107.
are differenced by their different specifice entity, but by this they are not
differenced; nay a Magistrate is in a better condition then a King, for the
Magistrate is to judge by a known Statute and Law, and cannot be censured and
punished but by Law. But the King is censurable, yea disabled by the multitude,
yea the basest of subjects may cite, and convent the King, before the underived
Majesty of the community, and he may be judged by the Arbitrary Law thut is in
the closet of their heart, not only for real misdemeanour, but for fancied
jealousies -- It will be said, good Kings are in no danger -- the contrary
appears this day, and ordinarily the best are in greatest danger; no
Government except Plato'es Republic wants incommodities, subtle spirits may
make them, apprehend them. The poor people bewitched, follow Absalom in his
treason, they strike not at Royalty at first, but labor to make the Prince,
naked of the good counsel of great Statesmen, etc.

Ans. Whether the King and the under Magistrate differ essentially, Judges and
Kings differ.
we shall see. The P. Prelate says all Politicians grant it, but he says
untruth; he brings Moses, and the Judges, their power to prove the power of
Kings; and so either the Judges of Israel and the Kings differ not essentially,
or then the Prelate must correct the spirit of God tearming one book of
Scripture (...) Kings, and another (...) Judges, and make the book of Kings
the book of Judges. 2. The Magistrates condition is not better then the Kings,
because the Magistrate is to judge by an known Statute and Law, and the King
not so. God molded the first King, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. when he sits judging on
his Throne, to look to a written Copy of the Law of God, as his rule. Now a
power to follow Gods Law is better then a power to follow man's sinful will: so
the Prelate puts the King in a worse condition then the Magistrate, not we,
who will have the King to judge according to just statutes and laws. 3.
Whether the King be censurable and deposable by the multitude, he cannot
determine out of our writings. 4. The communities law is the law of nature, not
their arbitrary lust. 5. The Prelates treasonable raylings, I cannot follow; he
first says, that we agree not ten of us to a positive faith, and that our
faith is negative, but his faith is Privative, Popish, Socinian, Arminian,
Pelagian and worse, for he was once of that same faith that we are of. 2. Our
Confession of Faith is positive, as the confession of all the reformed
Churches, but I judge he thinks the Protestant Faith of all the reformed
Churches but negative. 3. The incommodities of Government before our
reformation were not fancied, but printed by Authority, all the body of Popery
was printed, and avowed as the Doctrine of the Church of Scotland and England,
as the learned Author, and my much respected brother evidenceth in his
Ludensium, (...), The Canterburian self conviction. 4. The Parliament of
England was never yet found guilty of Treason. 5. The good Counselors of great
Statesmen, that Parliaments of both Kingdoms would take from the Kings
Majesty, are a faction of perjured Papists, Prelates, Jesuits, Irish
cut-throates, Strafords, and Apostate subverters of all Laws divine, humane,
of God, of Church, of State.

P. Prelate. In whom so ever this power of Government be, it is the Cap. ^5. p.
147 148.
only remedy to supply all defects, and to set right what ever is disjoynted
in Church and State, and the subject of this super-intending power must be free
from all error in Judgment and Practice, and so we have a Pope in
temporalibus; and if the Parliament err, the people must take order with them,
else God has left Church and State remediless. Ans. This is stolen from
Barolaius also; 1. but the same Barclaius Barclaius contra Monarchum. l. 5. c.
12. Idem. l. 3 c. ult page 2, 3.
says, Si Rex regnum suum alien^ ditioni manciparit, regno cadit. If the King
shall sell his Kingdom, or inslave it to a foreign power, he falls from
all right to his Kingdom: but who shall execute any such Law against him, not
the people, not the Peers, not the Parliament; for this Mancipium ventris and
aulae, this slave says, p. 147. I know no power in any to punish or curb
Sovereignty, but in Almighty God. 2. We see no super-intending power on earth
in King or people infallible, nor is the last power of taking order with a
Prince who inslaveth his Kingdom to a foreign power People may resume their
power in some cases, not because they are infallable, but because they cannot
so ea^ily err as one man.
placed by us in the people, because they cannot err; Court flatterer^* who
teach that the will of the Prince is the measure of all right and wrong, of Law
and no Law; and above all Law must hold that the King is a temporal Pope, both
in Ecclesiastical and Civil matters; but because they cannot so readily
destroy themselves, (the law of Nature having given to them a contrary
internal principle of self preservation) as a Tyrant who does care for
himself, and not for the people. 3. And because Extremis morbis extrema
remedia in an extraordinary exigent, when Achab and Iezabell did undo the
Church of God, and Tyrannize*over both the bodies and consciences of Priest,
Prophet, and people, Elias procured the convention of the States, and Elias
with the peoples help killed all Baals Priests, the King looking on, and no
question, against his heart. In this case I think its more then evident that
the people resumed their power. 4. We teach not that people should supply all
defects in Government, nor that they should use their power when any thing is
done amiss by the King, no more then the King is to cut off the whole people
of God, when they refuse an Idolatrous service obtruded upon them against all
Law; the people is to suffer much before they resume their power, but this
Court slave will have the people to do what he did not himself, for when King
and Parliament summoned him, was he not obliged to appear? Non-compearance
when lawful, royal, and Parliamentory power summoneth, is no less
resistance, then taking of Forts and Castles.

P. Prelate. Then this super-intending power in people, may call a King to
account, and punish him for any misdemeanour, or act of injustice. Why might
not the people of Isreal's Peers, or Sanedrin have convented David before them,
judged and punished him for his* Adultery with Bathsheba, and his murder of
Uriah; but it is holden by all, that Tyranny should be an intended universal,
total, manifest destruction of the whole Commonwealth, which cannot fall in
the thoughts of any but a mad man. What is recorded in the Story of Nero his
wish in this kind, may be rather judged the expression of transported passion,
then a fixed resolution.

Ans. The P. Prelate contrary to the scope of his book, which is all for the
subject and seat of Sovereign power, against all order has plunged himself
in the deep of Defensive arms, and yet has no new thing. 1. Our law of
Scotland will warrant any subject, if the King take from him his heritage, or
invade his possession against Law, to resist the invaders, and to summon the
Kings intruders before the Lords of Session for that act of injustice: Is this
against Gods Word, or Conscience? 2. The Sancdrim did not punish David; Ergo,
it is not lawful to challenge a King for any one act of injustice: from the
practice of the Sanedrim, to conclude a thing lawful or unlawful, is logic;
we may resist. 3. By the P. Prelates doctrine, the law might not put Bathshebah
to death, nor yet Joab the nearest agent of the murdering That the Sanedrim
punished not David, Bathsheha, Ioab, proves nothing in law, as a fact or non
fact is not law.
of innocent Vriah, because Bathshebaes adultery was the Kings adultery, she
did it in obedience to King David: Joabs murder was Royal murder, as the
murder of all the Cavaliers; for he had the Kings handwriting for it. Murder
is Murder, and the murderer is to dye, though the King by a secret Let alone,
a private and illegal warrant command it. Ergo, the Sanedrim might have taken
Bathshebaes life, and Joabs head also: and consequently the Parliament of
England, if they be Judges (as I conceive God and the Law of that ancient and
renowned Kingdom makes them) may take the head of many Joabs and Jermines,
for murder; ^or the command of a King cannot legitimate murder. 4. David
himself, as King, speaks more for us then for the Prelate, 2 Samuel 12. 7. And
David's anger was greatly kindled against the man, (the man was himself, v. 7.
Thou art the man) and he said to Nathan, as the Lord lives, the man that has
done this, shall surely dye. 5. Every act of injustice does not un-King a
Prince before God, as every act of uncleanness does not make a wife no wife
before God. 6. The Prelate excuses Nero, and would not have him resisted, if
all Rome were one neck, that he might cut it off with one stroke (I read it of
Caligula; If the Prelate see more in History then I do, I yield.) 7. He
says, the thoughts of total eversion of a Kingdom, must only fall on a mad
man. The King of Britain was not mad, when he declared the Scots Traitors,
because they resisted the service of the Mass; and raised an Army of
Prelaticall cutthroats to destroy them, if all the Kingdom should resist
Idolatry, (as all are obliged.) The King sleeped upon this Prelaticall
resolution many months: passions in servor have not a days reign upon a man.
And this was not so clear as the sun, but it was as clear as written printed
Proclamations, and the pressing of Soldiers, and the visible marching of
Cutthroats, and the blocking of Scotland up by sea and land could be visible
to men having five senses.

Covaruv. a* great Lawyer, says, 1. that all Civil power is penes (a)
Covarruvias, tom. 2. pract. quest.* c. 1. n. 2. 3. 4.
remp. in the hands of the Commonwealth. 1. Because Nature has given to man
to be a sociall creature, and impossible he can preserve himself in a
society, except he being in community, transform his power to an head. 2. He
says; Hujus vero civilis societatis and resp. rector ab alio quam ab ipsamet
repub. constitui non potest just and absque Tyrannide. Siquidem ab ipso Deo
constitutus non est, ^ec electus cuilibet civili societati immediate Rex aut
Princeps. Arist. polit. 3. c. 10. says, It is better that Kings got by
election then by birth; because Kingdoms by succession are vere regia, truly
Kingly: these by birth are more Tyrannical, masterly, and proper to Barbarous
Nations. And Covarruvias, tom. 2. pract. quest. de jurisd. Castellan. Reip. c.
1. n. 4. faith, Hereditary Kings are also made hereditary by the tacit consent
of the people, and so by law and consuetude.

Spalato. Let us grant (says he) that a society shall refuse to have a
Governor over them, shall they be for that free? in no sort: but Spalato de
rep. eccles. l. 6. c. 2. n. 32.
there be many ways by which a people may be compelled to admit a governor;
for then no man might rule over a Community against their will. But nature
has otherwise disposed, ut quod singuli nollent, universi vellent, that which
every one will not have, a Commnnitie naturally desires. And the P. Prelate
says, God is no less the author Sa. sa. maj. The sacred and royal
prerogative of Kings c. 7. p. 82, 83, 84.
of Order, then he is the author of Being; for the Lord who creates all,
conserveth all; and without government all humane societies should be dissolved
and go to ruin: Then government must be natural, and not depend upon a
voluntary and arbitrary constitution of men. In nature, the liveles creatures
inferior give a tacit consent and silent obedience to their superior, and the
superior have a powerful influence on the inferior. In the subordination of
creatures, we ascend from one superior to another, till at last we come to one
supreme, which by the way pleads for the excellency of Monarchy. Amongst
Angels there is an order: how can it then be supposed that God has left it to
the simple consent of man to establish a heraldrie of sub and supra, of one
above another, which neither nature nor the Gospel does warrant? To leave it
thus arbitrary, that upon this supposed principle, Mankind may be without
government at all, is vain; which paradox cannot be maintained. In nature God
has established a superiority inherent in superior creatures, which is no ways
derived from the inferior by communication, in what proportion it will, and
resumeable upon such exigents as the inferior lists: therefore neither has
God left to the multitude, the community, the collective, the representative
or virtuall body, to derive from it self, and communicate s^veraigntie,
whether in one or few, or more, in that measure and proportion pleases them,
which they resume at pleasure.

Answ. 1. To answer Spalato: No society has liberty to be without all
government, for God has given to every society (says Covarr. to. 4 pract.
quest. c. 1. ^. 2.
Covarruvias) a faculty of preserving themselves, and warding off violence and
injuries; and this they could not do, except they gave their power to one or
many Rulers. But all that the Prelate builds on this false supposition, which
is his fiction and calumny, not our doctrine, to wit, that it is voluntary to
man to be without all government, because it is voluntary to them to give away
their power to on^ Government how both natural, and also voluntary.
or moc Rulers, is a mere non-consequence. 1. We teach that Government is
natural, not voluntary; but the way and manner of Government is voluntary:
All societies should be quickly ruined, if there were no Government: but it
follows not therefore, God has made some Kings, and that immediately,
without the interveening consent of the people, and ergo, it is not arbitrary
to the people to choose one supreme Ruler, and to erect a Monarchy, or to
choose more Rulers, and to erect an Aristocracie. It follows no way. It is
natural to men to express their mind by humane voices; Is not speaking of
this or that language, Greek rather then Latin, (as Aristotle says) (...) by
humane institution? It is natural for men to eat; ergo, election of this or
that meat is not in their choice. What reason is in this consequence? and so
its a poor consequence also; Power of Soveraigntie is in the people naturally;
ergo it is not in their power to give it out in that measure that pleases
them, and to resume it at pleasure. It follows no way. Because the inherencie
of Soveraigntie is natural, and not arbitary, ergo, the alienation and giving
out of the power to one, not to three, thus much, not thus much, conditionally,
not absolutely and irrevocably, must be also arbitrary. It is as if you should
say, a father having six children, naturally loves them all, ergo, he has not
freedom of will in expressing his affection to give so much of his goods to
this son, and that conditionally, if he use these goods well; and not more or
less of his goods, at his pleasure. 2. There is a natural subordination in
nature, in creatures superior and inferior, without any freedom There is a
subordination of creatures natural, and government must be natural, and yet
this or that form is voluntary.
of election: the earth made not the heavens more excellent then the earth, and
the earth by no freedom of will made the heavens superior in excellency to it
self. Man gave no superiority of excellency to Angels above himself: the
Creator of all Beings did both immediately without freedom of election in the
creature, create the being of all creatures, and their essential degrees of
superiority and inferiority, but God created not Saul by nature King over
Israel; nor is David by the act of creation, by which he is made a man, created
also a King over Israel; for then David should from the womb and by nature be
a King, and not by Gods free gift. Here both the free gift of God, and the free
consent of the people interveene: indeed God made the office and royalty of a
King above the dignity of the people; but God by the interveening consent of
the people makes David a King, not Eliab; and the people makes a covenant at
David's inauguration, that David shall have so much power, to wit, power to be a
Father, not power to be a Tyrant; power to fight for the people, but no power
to waste and destroy them. The inferior creatures in nature give no power to
the superior, and therefore they cannot give in such a proportion power. The
denial of the positive degree, is a denial of the comparative and
superlative, and so they cannot resume any power: But the designing of such a
man, or such men to be Kings or Rulers, is a rational voluntary action, not an
action of nature, such as is Gods act of creating an Angel a nobler creature
then a man, and the creating of man a more excellent creature then a beast: and
for this cause the argument is vain and foolish: for inferior creatures are
inferior to the more noble and superior by nature, not by voluntary
designation, or, as Royalists say, by naked approbation, which yet must be an
arbitrary and voluntary action. 3. The P. Prelate commends order, while we
come to the most supreme: hence he commends Monarchy above all governments,
because it is Gods government. I am not against it, that Monarchy well
tempered is the best government, though the question to me is most
problematick; but because God is a Monarch, who cannot err or deny himself,
therefore that sinful Man be a Monarch, is miserable logic: and he must argue
solidly forsooth by this, because there is order (as he says) amongst Angels,
will he make a Monarch and a King-Angell? His argument, if it have any weight
in it, drives at that, even that there be crowned Kings amongst the Angels.

QUEST. X. Whether or not Royal birth be equivalent to divine unction?
SYmmons holds, that Birth is as good a title to the Crown, as Edward
Symmons, in his loyal subjects belief, sect. 3. p. 16. Royalty not
transmittable from father to son. Upon what term a people chooses a
Family to reign over them by succession.
any given of God. How this question can be cleared, I see not, except we
dispute that, Whether or not Kingdoms be proper patrimonies derived from the
father to the son? 2. I take, there is a large difference betwixt a thing
transmittable by birth from the father to the son, and a thing not
transmittable. 3. I conceive, as a person is chosen to be a King over a people,
so a family or house may be chosen, and a Kingdom at first choosing a person
to be their King, may also tie themselves to choose the first borne of his
body: but as they transfer their power to the father, 1. for their own
safety and peace, (not if he use the power they give him, to their
destruction) the same way they tie themselves to his first borne, as to their
King. 2. As they chose the father not as a man, but a man gifted with Royal
grace, and a Princely faculty for government; so they can but tie themselves
to his first borne, as to one graced with a faculty of governing: and if his
first borne shall be borne an idiot and a fool, they are not obliged to make
him King; for the obligation to the son can be no greater then the obligation
to the father, which first obligation is the ground, measure and cause of all
posterior obligations. If Tutors be appointed to govern such an one, the
Tutors have the Royal power, not the Idiot; nor can he govern others, who
cannot govern himself. That Kings go not as heritage from the father to the
son, I prove; 1. God, Deuteronomy. 17. could not command them to choose such a one
for the King, and such a one who sitting on his throne shall follow the
direction of God speaking in his word, if birth were that which gave him Gods
title and right to the Crown; for that were as much as such a man should be
heir to his fathers inheritance, and the son not heir to his fathers crown,
except he were such a man: But God in all the Law moral or judicial, never
required that the heir should be thus and thus qualified, else he should not
be heir: but he requires that a man, and so that a family should be thus and
thus qualified, else they should not be Kings: and I confirm it thus: The
first King of divine institution must be the rule, pattern and measure of all
the rest of the Kings, as Christ makes the first Marriage, Mat. 19. 8. a
pattern to all others, and Paul reduces the right administration of the Supper
to Christ's first institution, 1 Cor. 11. 23. now the first King, Deuteronomy. 17. 14,
15. is not a man qualified by naked birth, for then the Lord in describing the
manner of the King and his due qualifications, should seek no other but this;
You shall choose only the first borne, or the lawful son of the former
King. But seeing the King of Gods first moulding is a King by election, and
what God did after by promises and free grace give The Thron^ by special
promises of God* made to David and his seed, Ps. 89. no ground to make birth in
foro dei a just title to the Crown.
to David and his seed, even a throne till the Mesiah should come, and did
promise to some Kings, if they would walk in his Commandments; that their
sons, and sons son should sit upon the Throne, in my judgment is not an
obliging Law, that sole birth should be as just a title, in foro Dei, (for I
now dispute the question in point of conscience) as royal unction. 2. If by
divine institution God have impawned in the peoples hand a subordinate power to
the most High, who gives Kingdoms to whom he will, to make and create Kings,
then is not sole birth a just title to the Crown. But the former is true; both
by precept, Deuteronomy. 17. 1. and God expressly says, Thou shall choose him King,
whom the Lord shall choose. And if it had not been the peoples power to create
their own Kings, how does God after he had designed Saul their King, yet
expressly 1 Samuel 10. inspire Samuel 17. to call the people before the Lord at
Mizpeh, to make Saul King? and how does the Lord v. 22. expressly show to
Samuel, and the people, the man that they might make him King? and because all
consented not that Saul should be King, God will have his Coronation renewed,
v. 14. Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgall, and
renew the Kingdom there. 15. And all the people went to Gilgall, and there
they made Saul King before the Lord in Gilgall. And how is it that David
anointed by God is yet no King, but a private subject, while all Israel make
him King at Hebron?

3. If royal birth be equivolent to royal unction, and the best title, 3 Arg.
M. Symmons, Loyal Subjects belief, Sect. 3. p. 16.
and if birth speak and declare to us the Lords appointment and Will, that the
first born of a King should be King, as M. Symmons and others say; then is all
title by conquest, where the former King stands, in title to the Crown, and
has an Heir, unlawful. But the latter is against all the nation of the
Royalists, for Arnisaeus, Barclay, Grotius, Io. Roffensis Episco. the Bishop of
Spalato, Dr. Fern, M. Symmons, the excommunicate Prelat, if his poor learning
may bring him* in the roll, teach that conquest is a lawful title to a Crown.
I prove the Proposition, 1. because if birth speak Gods revealed Will, that
the Heir of a King is the lawful King, then conquest cannot speak the
contradicent Will of God, that he is no lawful Title to a Crown by conquest
must be unlawful if truth be Gods just Title to a Crown.
King, but the conqueror is the lawful King. Gods revealed Will should be
contradictory to himself, and birth should speak it is Gods Will, that the
Heir of the former King be King, and the conquest being also Gods revealed
Will, should also speak that that Heir should not be King. 2. If birth speak
and reveal Gods Will that the Heir be King, it is unlawful for a conquered
people to give their consent that a conqueror be their King. For their consent
being contrary to Gods revealed Will, (which is, that birth is the just title)
must be an unlawful consent. If Royalists say, God the King of Kings who
immediately makes Kings, may, and does transfer Kingdoms to whom he will,
and when he puts the sword in Nebuchadnezers hand, to conquer the King and
Kingdom of Judah, then Zedikiah or his son is not King of Judah, but
Nebuchadnezer is King, and God being above his Law, speaks in that case his
Will by conquests, as before he spoke his Will by birth; this is all can be
said. Ans. They answer black treason in saying so, for if Jeremiah from the
Lord had not commanded expressly, that both the King and Kingdom of Judah
should submit to the King of Royalists who hold conquests a just title to the
Crown, teach manifest treason against our Sovereign King Charles and his
Heirs.
Babylon, and serve him, and pray for him, as their lawful King, it had been
as lawful to them to rebel against that Tyrant, as it was for them to fight
against the Philistimes, and the King of Ammon; but if birth be the just and
lawful title, in foro Dei, in Gods Court, and the only thing that evidenceth
Gods Will without any election of the people, that the first borne of such a
King is their lawful King, then conquests cannot now speak a contrardictory
Will of God; for the question is not whether or not, God gives power to
Tyrants to conquer Kingdoms from the just Heirs of Kings, which did reign
lawfully before their sword made an empty Throne; But whether conquest now,
when Jeremiahs are not sent immediately from God to command? for example;
Britain to submit to a violent intruder, who has expelled the lawful Heirs
of the royal Line of the King of Britain, whether I say does conquest in such
a violent way, speak that it is Gods revealed Will, called Voluntas signi, the
will that is to rule us, in all our Moral duties to cast off the just Heirs
of the blood Royal, and to swear homage to a conqueror, and so as that
conqueror now has as just right, as the King of Britain had by birth* This
cannot be taken off by the wit of any, who 1. maintain that conquest is a
lawful title to a Crown, and 2. that royal birth without the people election
speaks Gods regulating Will in his Word, that the first borne of a King is a
lawful King by birth; for God now a days does not say the contrary of what he
revealed in his Word. If birth be Gods regulating Will, that the Heir of the
King is in Gods Court a King, no act of the conqueror can anull that Word of
God to us, and the people may not lawfully, though they were ten times subdued,
swear homage and allegiance to a conqueror, against the due right of birth,
which by Royalists Doctrine reveals to us the plain contradictory Will of
God. It is, I grant, often Gods Decree revealed by the event, that a conqueror
be on the Throne, but this Will is not our rule, and the people are to swear
no Oath of Allegiance contrary to Gods Voluntas signi, which is his revealed
Will in his Word regulating us.

4. Things transferrible and communicable by birth from father 4. Arg. Only
bona fortunae, not honor is transmittable from father to son.
to son, are only, in Law, those which Heathen call bona fortunae, riches,
as lands, houses, moneys and heritages; and so says the Law also. These things
which essentially include gifts of the mind, and honor properly so called, I
mean honor founded on virtue, as Aristotle with good reason makes honor
praeminum virtu^is, cannot be communicated by birth from the father to the
son; for royal dignity includes these three constituent parts essentially,
of which none can be communicable by birth. 1. The royal faculty of governing,
which is a special gift of God, above nature, is from God. Solomon asked it
from God, and had it not by generation from his father David. 2. The royal
honor to be set above the people because of this royal virtue, is not from
the womb, for then Gods spirit would not have said, Blessed art thou O Land,
when thy King is the son of Nobles, Eccles. 10. 17. this honor springing
from virtue, is not borne with any man, no^ is any man borne with either the
gift, or honor to be a Judge; God makes high and low, not birth. Nobles are
borne to great estates, if judging be heritage to any, it is a municipall
positive law. I now speak in point of conscience. 3. The external lawful
title, before men come to a Crown must be Gods Will, revealed by such an
external sign, as by Gods appointment and warrant is to regulate our will,
but according to Scripture nothing regulateth our will, and leads the people
now that they cannot err, following Gods rule in making a King, but the free
suffrages of the States choosing a man whom they conceive God has endued with
these royal gifts required in the King whom God holds forth to them in his
Word, Deuteronomy. 17. now there be but these to regulate the people, or to be a rule
to any man to ascend lawfully ( in foro Dei) in Gods Court to the Throne; 1.
Gods immediate designation of a man by Prophetical and Divinely Violent
conquest cannot regulate the consciences of people to submit to a conqueror as
their lawful King.
inspired unction, as Samuel anointed Saul, and David; this we are not to
expect now, nor can Royalists say it. 2. Conquest, seeing it is an act of
violence, and Gods revenging Justice for the sins of a people, cannot give in
Gods Court such a just title to the Throne, as the people are to submit their
consciences unto, except God reveal his regulating will by some immediate
voice from Heaven, as he commanded Judah to submit to Nebuchadnezer as to their
King by the mouth of Jeremiah; now this is not a rule to us, for then, if the
Spanish King should invade this Island, and as Nebuchadnezer did, deface the
Temple, and instruments and means of Gods Worship, and abolish the true
worship of God, it should be unlawful to resist him, after he had once
conquered the Island, neither Gods Word, nor the Law of nature could permit
this; I suppose even by grant of adversaries, now no act of violence done to a
people, though in Gods Court they have deserved it, can be a testification to
us of Gods regulating Will; except it have some warrant from the Law and
testimony, it is no rule to our conscience to acknowledge him a lawful
Magistrate, whose sole law to the Throne is an act of the bloody instrument of
divine wrath, I mean the sword. That therefore Judah was to submit, according
to Gods Word, to Nebuchadnezer, whose conscience and best warranted calling to
the Kingdom of Judah was his bloody sword, even if we suppose Jeremiah had not
commanded them to submit to the Naked birth is inferior to the divine unction,
which yet made no man a King, without the peoples election.
King of Babylon, I think cannot be said. 3. Naked birth cannot be this
external signification of Gods regulating Will to warrant the conscience of
any to ascend to the Throne, for the Authors of this opinion make royal birth
equivalent to divine unction, for David anointed by Samuel, and so anointed by
God, is not King, Saul remained the Lords anointed many years, not David, even
anointed by God; the peoples making him King at Hebron founded upon divine
unction, was not the only external lawful calling that we read of, that David
had to the Throne, then royal birth, because it is but equivalent only to
divine unction, not superior to divine unction, it cannot have more force to
make a King, then divine unction. And if birth was equivalent to divine
unction, what needed Ioash who had royal birth, be made King by the people?
and what needed Saul and David, who had more then royal birth, even divine
unction, be made Kings by the people? and Saul having the vocal and infallible
testimony of a Prophet, needed not the peoples election, the one at Mizpeh and
Gilgall, and the other at Hebron.

5. If royal birth be as just a title to the Crown as divine unction, and so,
as the peoples election is no title at all; then is it unlawful that there
should be a King by election in the world now: but the latter is absurd, so is
the former. I prove the Proposition, because where conquerours are wanting, and
there is no King for the present, but the people governing, and so much
confusion abounds, they cannot lawfully appoint a King, for his lawful title
before God must either be conquest, which to me is no title, (and here, and in
this case there is no conquest) or if the title must be a Prophetical word
immediately inspired by God, but this is now ceased; or thirdly the title must
be royal birth, but here there is no royal birth, because the government is
popular; except you imagine that the society is obliged in conscience to go
and seek the son of a foreign King to be their King. But I hope that such a
royal birth should not be a just title before God to make him King of that
society, to which he had no relation at all, but is a mere stranger. Hence in
this case no title could be given to any man to make him King, but only the
peoples election; which is that which we say. And it is most unreasonable that
a people under popular Government cannot lawfully choose a King to themselves,
seeing a King is a lawful Magistrate, and warranted by Gods Word, because they
have not a King of royal birth to sit upon the throne.

Mr. Symmons says that birth is the best title to the Crown, because Symmons
loyal Subjects belief. Sect. 3. p. 16.
after the first of the family had been anointed, unction was no more used in
that family, (unless there arose a strife about the Kingdom, as betwixt
Solomon and Adonijah, Ioash and Athalia) the eldest son of the pred^cessor
was afterward the chosen of the Lord, his birthright spoke the Lords
appointment, as plainly as his fathers unction. Ans. It is a conjecture that
unction was not used in the family, after the first unction, except the contest
was betwixt two Brethren, that is said, not proved, for a King. 23. 30. when
good Josiah was killed, and there was no contest concerning the Throne of that
beloved Prince, the people of the Land took Iehoahaz his son and anointed him,
and made him King in his fathers stead; and the Priests were anointed, Levit.
6. 22. yea, all the Priests were anointed, Number. 3. 8. yet read we not in the
History, where this or this* man was anointed. 2. In that Adonijah, Solomon's
elder Brother was not King, it is clear, That Gods anointing, and the peoples
electing, Birth a typical designment to the crown.
made the right to the Crown, and not birth. 3. Birth de facto did design the
man, because of Gods special promises to David's house; but how does a typical
descent made to David, and some others by Gods special promise, prove, that
birth is the birthright, and lawful call of God to a Crown in all after ages?
For as gifts to reign, goes not by birth, so neither does Gods title to a
Crown go.

M. Symons. A Prince once possessed of a Kingdom coming to him by inheritance,
can never, by any, upon any occasion be dispossessed thereof, without horrible
impiety, and unjustice. Royal unction was an indeloble Character of old, Saul
remained the Lords anointed till the last gasp; David durst not take the right
of Government actually into him, although he had it in reversion, being already
anointed thereunto, and had received the spirit thereof.

Answ. That is the question, If a Prince once a Prince by inheritance, cannot
be dispossessed thereof without unjustice: For if a Kingdom be his by birth, as
an inheritance transmitted from the father to the son, I see not but any man
upon necessary occasions, If a Kingdom were by birth, the King might fell it.
may sell his inheritance; but if a Prince sell his Kingdom, a very Barelay and
an Hug. Grotius with reason will say, he may be dispossessed and dethroned, and
take up his indeleble Character then. 2. A Kingdom is not the Princes own so,
as it is unjustice to take it from him, as to take a man's purse from him; the
Lords Church (in a Christian Kingdom) is Gods heritage, and the King only a
shepherd, and the sheep in the court of conscience, are not his. 3. Royal
unction is not an indeleble Character; for neither Saul nor David were all
their days Kings thereby, but lived many days private men after divine
unction, while the people anointed them Kings, except you say, 1. That there
were two Kings at once in Israel. 2. And that Saul killing David, should have
killed his own Lord, and his anointed. 4. If David durst not take the right of
Government actually on him, then divine unction made him not King, but only
designed him to be King: the peoples election must make the King.

M. Symons adds, He that is born a King and a Prince, can Symons, sect. ^.
page 7.
never be unborn, Semel Augustus semper Augustus; yea, I believe the eldest son
of such a King is in respect of birth, the Lords anointed in his fathers life
time, even as David was before Saul's death, and to deprive him of his right of
reversion, is as true unjustice, as to dispossess him of it.

Answ. It is proper only to Jesus Christ to be born a King, sure I am, No man
brings out of the womb with him a Scepter, and a Crown on his head. Divine
unction gives a right infallibly to a Crown; but birth does not so, for one
may be born here to a Crown, as was hopeful Prince Henry, and yet never live
to be King. The eldest son of a King, if he attempt to kill his father, as
Absalom did, and raise forces against the lawful Prince, I conceive he may be
killed in battle, without any unjustice. 2. If in his fathers time he be the
Lords anointed, there be two Kings, and the heir may have a son, and so there
shall be three Kings, possibly four; all Kings by divine right.

The Prelate of Rochester says, The people and nobles give no right Joan.
Epis^^^ Roffens. de potest. Papae. l. 2. c. 5.
to him, who is born a King, they only declare his right.

Answ. This is said, not proved. A man born for an inheritance, is by birth an
heir, because he is not born for these Lands, as a mean for the end, but by the
contrary, these Lands are for the heir as the mean for the end: But the King is
for his Kingdom, as a mean for the end, as the watchman for the City, the
living Law for peace, and safety to Gods people; and therefore is not here is
hominum, An heir of men, but men are rather heredes regis, heirs of the King.

Arnisaeus. Many Kingdoms (says he) are purchased by just war, Arnisaeus de
authorit. princip. c. 1. n. 13.
and transmitted by the Law of heritage from the father to the son, beside the
consent of the people, because the son receives right to the Crown, not from
the people, but from his parents, nor does he possess the Kingdom, as the
patrimony of the people, keeping only to himself the burden of protecting and
governing the people, but as a propriety given to him lege regni, by his
parents, which he is obliged to defend and rule, as a father looks to the
good and welfare of the family, yet so also as he may look to his own good.

Answ. We read in the Word of God, That the people made Solomon King, not that
David, or any King can leave in his Testament, a Kingdom to his son. 2. He
says, The son has not the right The heir of a Crown has the Crown as the
patrimony of the Kingdom, not of the King his father.
of reigning, as the patrimony of the people, but as a propriety, given by the
Law of the Kingdom, by his parents: Now this is all one, as if he said, The son
has not the right of the Kingdom, as the patrimony of the people, but as the
patrimony of the people, which is good nonsense; For the propriety of
reigning, given from father to son, by the Law of the Kingdom, is nothing but a
right to reign, given by the Law of the people, and the very gift and patrimony
of the people, for Lex regni, This Law of the Kingdom is the Law of the people,
tying the Crown to such a Royal Family; and this Law of the people is prior
and ancienter then the King, or the right of reigning in the King, or which the
King is supposed to have from his Royal father, because it made the first
father, the first King of the Royal Line. For I demand, How does the son
succeed to his fathers Crown, and Throne? Not by any promise of a divine
Covenant, that the Lord makes to the father, as he promised, that David's seed
should sit on his throne, till the Messiah should come: this, as I conceive, is
vanished with the Commonwealth of the Jews, nor can we now find any immediate
divine constitution, tying the Crown now to such a race: nor can we say, this
comes from the will of the father King, making his son King: For 1. there is
no Scripture can warrant us to say, The King makes The choice of a family to
the Crown, resolves upon the free election of the people, as on the
fountain-cause.
a King, but the Scripture holds forth, that the people made Saul, and David,
Kings. 2. This may prove, That the father is some way a cause, why this son
succeeds King; but he is not the cause of the Royalty conferred upon the
whole Line; because the question is, Who made the first father a King? Not
himself; nor does God now immediately by Prophets anoint men to be Kings, then
need force, the people choose the first man, then must the peoples election of
a King, be prior and more ancient then the birth-law to a Crown: And election
must be a better right then birth. 2. The question is, Whence comes it that
not only the first father should be chosen King; but also whence is that,
whereas it is in the peoples freewill to make the succession of Kings go by
free election, as it is in Denmark and Pol; yet the people does freely choose,
not only the first man to be King, but also the whole race of the first born of
this man's Family to be Kings. All here must be resolved in the free will of the
Community; now since we have no immediate and prophetical enthroning of men:
it is evident, That the lineall deduction of the Crown from father to son,
through the whole line, is from the people, not from the parent.

Hence I add this, as my sixth Argument, That which takes 6. Argum.
away that natural aptitude, and natures birthright, in a Community given to
them by God and nature, to provide the most efficacious, and prevalent mean for
their own preservation and peace in the fittest Government, that is not to be
holden, but to make birth the best title to the Crown, and better then free
election, takes away and impedeth that natural aptitude, and natures
birthright of chosing, not simply a Governor, but the best, the justest, the
more righteous, and tyeth, and fettereth their choice to one of a house,
whether he be a wise man, and righteous, and just, or a fool and an unjust man;
therefore to make birth the best title to the Crown, is not to be holden.

It is objected: That parents may bind their after Generations, to choose one
of such a line; But by this Argument, their natural birthright of a free
choice, to elect the best and fittest, is abridged and clipped, and so the
posterity shall not be tied to a King of the Royal Line, to which the
Ancestors did swear. See for this, the learned Author, Sect. 4. p. 39.
of Scripture, and Reasons, pleaded for defensive Arms.

Answ. Frequent elections of a King, at the death of every Prince Election of a
family to the Crown lawful
may have, by accident, and through the corruption of our nature, bloody, and
tragical sequels, and to eschew these, people may tie and oblige their
children to chose one of the first born, Male or Female, as in Scotland and
England, of such a line; but I have spoken of the excellency of the title by
election, above that of birth, as comparing things according to their own
nature together; but give me leave to say, That the posterity are tied to that
Line, 1. Conditionally: So the first born, ceteris paribus, be qualified, and
have an head to sit at the helm. 2. Elections of Governors would be performed,
as in the sight of God; and in my weak apprehension, the person coming nearest
to Gods judge, Fearing God, hating covetousness, and to Moses his King, Deuteronomy.
17. one who shall read in the Book of the Law, and it would seem now, that
gracious morals are to us instead of Gods immediate designation. 3. The genuine
and intrinsecall end of making Kings, is not simply governing, but governing
the best way in peace, honesty, and godliness, 1. Tim. 2. Ergo, These are to
be made Kings, who may most expeditely procure this end: neither is it my
purpose to make him no King, who is not a gracious man, only here I compare
title with title.

7. Argument. Where God has not bound the conscience, men may not bind
themselves, or the consciences of the posterity. But God has not bound any
nation irrevocably, and unalterably to a Royal Line, or to one kind of
Government. Ergo, No nation can bind their conscience, and the conscience of
the posterity, either to one Royal Line, or irrevocably and unalterably to
Monarchy. The proposition is clear.

1. No Nation is tied, jure divine, by the tie of a divine Law to a Monarchy,
rather then to another Government. The Parisian Doctors prove, That the precept
of having a Pope is affirmative, and so tyeth not the Church, ad semper, for
ever; and so the Church is the body of Christ without the Pope; and all oaths
to things of their nature indifferent, and to things, the contrary whereof is
lawful, and may be expedient and necessary, lay on a tie only conditionally,
in so far, as they conduce to the end. If the Gibeonites had risen in Joshuaes
days, to cut off the people of God, I think no wise man can think, that Joshua
and the people were tied by the oath of God, not to cut off the Gibeonites in
that case: For to preserve them a live as enemies, was against the intent of
the oath* which was to preserve them alive, as friends demanding, and
supplicating peace, and submitting. The assumption is clear If a Nation sees
that Aristocraticall Government is better then Monarchy, hic and nunc: That the
sequels of such a Monarchy is bloody, destructive, tyrannous, that the Monarchy
compels the free subjects to Turcisme, to gross Idolatry, they cannot by
the divine bond of any oath captive their natural freedom, which is to choose
a Government, and Governors, for their safety, for a peaceable and godly
life; or fetter and chain the wisdom of the posterity unalterably to a
Government, or a Royal Line, which hic and nunc, contrary to the intention of
their oath, proves destructive, and bloody. And in this case, even the King,
though tied by an oath to govern, is obliged to the practices of the Emperor
Otho. And as Speed says, of Richard the second, to resign the Crown, for the
Speed, Hist. page 757.
eschewing of the effusion of blood: And who doubts but the second wits of
the experienced posterity, may correct the first wits of their fathers; nor
shall I ever believe, that the fathers can leave in legacy, by oath, any
chains of the best gold to fetter the after wits of posterity to a choice
destructive to peace and true Godliness.

To these add; 8. That 1. an heritor may defraud his first borne of his
heritage, because of his dominion he has over his heritage: A King cannot
defraud his firstborn of the Crown. 2. An heritor may divide his heritage
equally amongst his twelve sons: A King cannot divide his Royal Dominions in
twelve parts, and give a part to every son; for so he might turn a Monarchy
into an Aristocracie, and put twelve men in the place of one King. 3. Any
heritor taken captive, may lawfully oppignorate, yea and give all his
inheritance as a ransom for his liberty; for a man is better then his
inheritance: but no King may give his Subjects as a price or ransom.

Yet I shall not be against the succession of Kings by birth, with good
limitations; and shall agree, that through the corruption of man's nature, it
may be in so far profitable, as it is peaceable, and preventeth bloody tumults,
which are the bane of humane societies. Consider further for this, Aegid.
Romanus, l. 3. de reg. princi. cap. 5. Turrecremat. and Joan. de terra Reubea,
1 tract. contr. Rebels, ar. 1. ^on. 4. Yet Aristotle the flower of Natures
wit, l. 3. polit. c. 10. prefers Election to Succession; He prefers
Carthage to Sparta, though their Kings came of Hercules. Plutarch in Scylla,
says, he would have Kings as dogs, that is, best hunters, not those who are
borne of best dogs. Tacitus, lib. 1. Nasci and generari a Principibus,
fortuitum, nec ultra aestimantur.

QUEST. XI. Whether or no he be more principally a King, who is a King by
birth, or he who is a King by the free election and suffrages of the people?
Without deteining the Reader, I desire liberty to assert, that,

1 Assert. Where God establishes a Kingdom by Birth, that government, hic and
nunc, is best: and because God principally distributeth Crowns, when God
establishes the Royal line of David to reign, he is not principally a King,
who comes nearest and most immediately to the fountain of Royalty, which is
Gods immediate will; but God established, his and nunc, for typical reasons
(with reverence of the learned) a King by birth.

2 Assert. But to speak of them, ex natura rei, and according A King by
election comes nearer to the first King then a King by succession.
to the first mould and pattern of a King by law. A King by election is more
principally King ( magis univoce and per se) then an hereditarie Prince; 1.
Because in hereditary Crowns, the first family being chosen by the free
suffrages of the people, for that cause ultimate, the hereditary Prince comes
to the throne, because his first father, and in him the whole line of the
family was chosen to the Crown, and, propter quod unumquodque tale, id ipsum
magis tale. 2. The first King ordained by Gods positive law, must be the
measure of all Kings, and more principally the King, then he who is such by
derivation. But the first King is a King by election, not by birth, Deuteronomy. 17.
15. Thou shall in any wise set (him) King over thee, whom the Lord thy God
shall choose, (One) from amongst thy brethren shall thou set over thee. If the
free will of the people be not the nearest cause of the first molded King, God
could have made no positive law to choose such a man, not such a man; for all
positive laws presuppose free election. 3. The Law says, Surrogatum fruitur
privilegiis ejus, in cujus locum surrogatur: He who is substituted in the place
of another, enjoys the privileges of him in whose place be succeeds. But
the hereditary King has Royal privileges from him who is chosen King.
Solomon has the Royal privileges of David his father, and is therefore King
by birth, because his father David was King by election. And this I say, not
because I think sole birth is a just title to the Crown, but because it
designeth him who indeed virtually was chosen, when the first King of the race
was chosen. 4. Because there is no dominion of either Royalty, or any other way
by nature, no more then an Eagle is born King of Eagles, a Lion, King of Lions;
neither is a man by nature, born King of men: and therefore, he who is made
King by suffrages of the people, must be more principally King, then he who
has no title, but the womb of his mother.

Doct. Fern is so far with us to father Royalty upon the peoples D. Fern,
part 3. sect. ^. p. 14.
free election, as on the formal cause* that he says, If to design the
person, and to procure limitation of the power in the exercise of it, be to
give the power; we grant the power is from the people, but (says he) you will
have the power originally from themselves; in another sense, for you say, they
reserve power to depose and displace the Magistrate, sometime they make the
Monarch supreme, and then they divest themselves of all power, and keep none to
themselves, but before established Government, they have no politic power,
whereby they may lay a command on others, but only a natural power of private
resistance, which they cannot use against the Magistrate.

Ans. But to take off those by the way, 1. If the King may choose If the people
may limit the King, they may give him power
A. B. an Ambassador, and limit him in his power, and say, Do this, and say
this to the foreign State you go to, but no more; half a wit will say the
King creates the Ambassador, and the Ambassadors power is originally from
the King; and we prove the power of the Lion is originally from God, and of the
Sea, and the fire is originally from God, because God limiteth the Lion in the
exercises of its power, that it shall not devour Daniel, and limiteth the Sea,
as Jeremiah says, when as he will have its proud Waves to come thither, and no
farther, and will have the fire to burn those who throw the three Children
into the fiery furnace, and yet not to burn the three Children, for this is as
if Doctor Fern said, the power of the King of six degrees, rather then his
power of five is from the people, therefore the power of the King is not from
the people, yea the contrary is true. 2. That the people can make a King
supreme, that is, Absolute, and so resign natures birthright; that is, a
power to defend themselves is not lawful, for if the people have not absolute
power to destroy themselves, they cannot resign such a power to their Prince.
3. It is false that a community, before they be established with formal
Rulers, have no politic power, for consider them as men only, and not as
associated, they have indeed no politic power; but before Magistrates be
established, they may convene and associate themselves in a body, and appoint
Magistrates; and this they cannot do if they had no politic power at all. 4.
They have virtually a power to lay on Commandments, in that they have power to
appoint to themselves Rulers, who may lay commandments on others. 5. A
community has not formally power to punish themselves, for to punish is to
inflict Malum disconveniens naturae, an evil contrary to nature; but in
appointing A community have not power formally to punish themselves.
Rulers, and in agreeing to Laws they consent they shall be punished by
another upon supposition of transgression, as the child willingly going to
school submits himself in that to Schoolediscipline, if he shall fail
against any School Law; and by all this it is clear, a King by election is
principally a King* Barclay then fails, who says, No man denies but
succession to a Crown by Barclay cont. Monarcham* c. 2, p. 5* 6.
birth is agreeable to nature; it is not against nature, but it is no more
natural, then for a Lion to be borne a King of Lions.

Obj. Most of the best Divines approve an hereditary Monarch, rather then a
Monarch by election. Ans. So do I in some cases, in respect of Empire simply
it is not better, in respect of Empire now under man's fall in sin; I grant it
to be better in some respect. So Salust In Iugurth. Natura mortalium imperij
avida. Tacitus, Hist. The elective King and the hereditary King better and
worse, every one then another, in diverse relations.
2. Minore discrimine princeps sumitur, quam queritu, there is less danger to
accept of a Prince at hand, then to seek one a far off. 2. In a Kingdom to
be constituted, election is better; in a constituted Kingdom birth seems
less evil. 3. In respect of liberty election is more convenient; in respect
of safety and peace, birth is safer and the nearest way to the Well. See Bodin,
De Rep. l. 6. c. 4. Thol. ozan, De Rep. l. 7. c. 4.

QUEST. XII. Whether or not a Kingdom may lawfully be purchased by the sole
title of conquest?
THe Prelate averreth confidently that a Title to a Kingdom Sac. sanc. Reg.
May. c. 17. p. 158.
by Conquest, without the consent of the people, is so just and evident by
Scripture, that it cannot be denied; but the man brings no Scripture to prove
it. Mr. Marshall says, a conquered Kingdom Letter p. 7.
is but c^ntinuata injuria, a continued robbery. A right of conquest is
twofold; 1. When there is no just cause. 2. When there is just reason Twofold
right of conquest.
and ground of the war; in this latter case, if a Prince subdue a whole Land,
which justly deserves to dye, yet by his grace who is so mild a conqueror
they may be all preserved alive. Now amongst those who have thus injured the
conqueror as they deserve death, we are to difference the persons offending,
and the wives, children especially not borne, and such as have not offended.
The former sort may resign their personal liberty to the conqueror, that the
sweet life may be saved; but he cannot be their King properly, but I conceive
that they are obliged to consent that he be their King, upon this condition,
that the conqueror put not upon them violent and tyrannical conditions that
are harder then death: now in reason we cannot think that a tyrannous and
unjust domineering can be Gods lawful mean of translating Kingdoms, and for
the other part; the conqueror cannot domineere as King over the innocent, and
especially the children not yet borne.

1. Assertion. A people may be by Gods special Commandment, subject to a
conquering Nebuchadnezer, and a Caesar, as to their King, as was Judah
commanded by the Prophet Jeremiah to submit unto the yoke of the King of
Babylon, and to pray for him, and the people of the Jews were to give to
Caesar the things of Caesar; and yet both those were unjust conquerours: for
those Tyrants had no command of God to oppress and reign over the Lords
people, yet were they to obey those Kings, so the passive subjection was just
and commanded of God, and the active unjust and tyranous, and forbidden of God.

2. Assert. This title by conquest through the peoples after consent may be
turned into a just title, as its like the case was with the Jews in Caesar's
time, for which cause our Savior commanded to obey Caesar, and to pay tribute
unto him; as Dr. Fern confesses. Sect. 7. p. 30.
But two things are to be condemned in the Doctor: 1. That God manifests his
Will to us in this work of providence, whereby he translateth Kingdoms. 2.
That this is an overawed consent; now to the former I reply, if the act of
conquering be violent and Unjust conquest is no signification of Gods approving
Will.
unjust, it is no manifestation of Gods regulating and approving Will, and can
no more prove a just title to a Crown, because it is an act of Divine
providence, then Pilate and Herod their crucifying of the Lord of Glory, which
was an act of Divine providence, flowing from the Will and Decree of Divine
providence, Act. 2. 23. Act. 4. 28. is a manifestation that it was Gods
approving Will, that they should kill Jesus Christ. 2. Though the consent be
some way overawed, yet is it a sort of Contract and Covenant of loyal
subjection made to the conqueror, and therefore sufficent to make the title
just; otherwise if the people never give their consent, the conqueror
domineering over them by violence has no just title to the Crown.

3. Assert. Mere conquest by the sword without the consent of the people, is
no just title to the Crown; 1. Because the lawful title that Gods Word
holds forth to us, beside the Lords choosing and calling of a man to the
Crown, is the peoples election, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. all that had any lawful calling
to the Crown in Gods Word, 1 Arg.
as Saul, David, Solomon, etc. were called by the people, and the first lawful
calling is to us a rule and pattern to all lawful callings. 2. A King as a
King, and by virtue of his Royal Office is the Father of 2 Arg.
the Kingdom, a Tutor, a Defender, Protector, a Shield, a Leader, a Shepherd,
an Husband, a Patron, a Watchman, a Keeper of the people Mere violent
domineering is contrary to the rules of governing,
over which he is King, and so the Office essentially includes acts of
fatherly affection, care, love and kindness to those over whom he is set, so
as he who is clothed with all these relations of love to the people, cannot
exercise those official Acts on a people against their will, and by mere
violence. Can he be a Father, and a Guide, a Patron to us against our will? and
by the sole power of the bloody sword? a benefit conferred upon any against
their will is no benefit: Will he, by the awsome dominion of the sword be our
father, and we unwilling to be his sons? an head over such as will not be
menbers? will he guide me as a Father, an Husband against my will? he cannot
come by mere violence to be a Patton, a Shield, and a defender of me through
violence. 3. It is 3 Arg. Violence has nothing in it of a King.
not to be thought that, that is Gods just Title to a Crown which has nothing
in it of the essence of a King; but a violent and bloody purchase, which is in
its prevalency in an oppressing Nymrod, and the cruellest tyrant that is, has
nothing essential to that which constituteth a King: for it has nothing of
Heroic and Royal wisdom and gifts to govern, and nothing of Gods approving
and regulating will which must be manifested to any who would be a King, but by
the contrary cruelty has rather baseness and witless fury, and a plain
reluctance with Gods revealing Will, which forbideth murder, Gods Law should
say, ( Murder thou, and prosper and reign) and by the act of violating the
sixth Commandment, God should declare his approving Will, to wit, his lawful
call to a Throne. 4. There be none under a Law of God who may resist 4* Arg.
a lawful call to a lawful Office, but men may resist any impulsion of God
stirring them up to murder the maniest and strongest, and chief men of a
Kingdom, that they may reign over the fewest, the weakest, and the young and
lowest of the people against their will, therefore this call by the sword is
not lawful. If it be said, that the Divine impulsion stirring up a man to make
a bloody conquest, that the ire and just indignation of God in Justice may be
declared on a wicked Nation, is an extraordinary impulsion of God, who is above
a Law, and therefore no man may resist it. Ans. then all bloody Conquerors must
have some extraordinary revelation from Heaven to warrant their yielding of
obedience to such an extraordinary impulsion. And if it be so, They must show a
lawful and immediate extraordinary impulsion now; but it is certain, the
sins of the people conquered, and their most equal and just demerit, before
God, cannot be a just plea to legitimate the Conquest: for though the people of
God deserved vastation and captivity by the Heathen, in regard of their
sins, before the throne of Divine Justice, yet the Heathen grievously sinned
in conquering them, Zach. 1. 15. And I am very sore displeased with the Heathen
that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward
the affliction. So though Judah deserved to be made captives, and a conquered
people, because of their idolatry, and other sins, as Jeremiah had
prophesied; yet God was highly displeased at Babylon for their unjust and
bloody Coneuest, Jer. 50. 17, 18, 33, 34. c. 51. 35. The violence done to me
and to my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitants of Zion say; and my
blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. And that any other
extraordinary impulsion to be as lawful a call to the Throne as the peoples
free election, we know not from Gods word, and we have but the naked word of
our Adversaries, that William the Conqueror, without the peoples consent, made
himself by blood, the lawful King of England, and also of all their
posterity; And that King Fergus conquered Scotland. 5. A King is a special
gift of God, given to feed and defend the people 5 Arg. A King given to a
people by a bloody Conquest, must be a judgment, not a blessing, and so not
p^^ se a King.
of God, that they may lead a godly and peaceable life under him, Isal. 78. v.
71, 72. 1 Timothy 2. 2. as it is a judgment of God, that Israel's without a King
for many days, Hos. 3. 4. and that there is no Iu^ge, no King, to put evil
doers to shame, Judge. 19. 1. but if a King be given of God, as a King by the
acts of a bloody Conquest to be avenged on the sinful land over which he is
made a King, he cannot be given, actu primo, as a special gift and blessing of
God to feed, but to murder and to destroy; for the genuine end of a Conqueror,
as a Conqueror, is not peace, but fire and sword. If God chang^ his heart to be
of a bloody Vastator, a father, Prince, and feeder of the people, ex officio,
now he is not a violent Conqueror and he came to that meeknes by contraries,
which is the proper work of the omnipotent God, and not proper to man, who as
he cannot work miracles, so neither can he lawfully work by contraries: and
so if Conquest be a lawful title to a Crown, and an ordinary calling, as the
opponents presume; every bloody Conqueror must be changed into a loving
father, Prince and feeder; and if God call him, none should oppose him, but the
whole Land should dethrone their own native Sovereign (whom they are obliged
before the Lord to defend) and submit to the bloody invasion of a strange Lord,
presumed to be a just Conqueror, as if he were lawfully called to the Throne
both by birth and the voices of the people. And truly they deserve no wages,
who thus defend the Kings Prerogative royal: for if the sword be a lawful
title to the crown, suppose the two Generals of both Kingdoms should conquer
the most and the chiefest of the Kingdom now when they have so many forces in
the field, by this wicked reason the one should have a lawful call of God to
be King of England, and the other to be King of Scotland; which is absurd. 6.
Either conquest, as conquest, is a just title to 6 Arg.
the crown, or as a just conquest. If as Conquest, then all conquests are just
titles to a Crown; then the Ammonites, Zidonians, Canaanites, Edomites, etc.
subduing Gods people for a time, have just title Strength, as prevailing
strength, is not law or reason.
to reign over them; and if Absalom had been stronger then David, he had then
had the just title to be the Lords Anointed and King of Israel, not David; and
so strength actually prevailing, should be Gods lawful call to a Crown. But
strength, as strength victoriou^, is not law, nor reason: it were then reason
that Herod behead Jo^^ Baptist, and the Roman Emperors kill the witnesses of
Christ Ieus. If Conquest, as just, be the title and lawful claim before Gods
court, to a Crown; then certainly a stronger King for pregna^t national
injuries, may lawfully subdue and reign over an in^ocent posterity not yet
borne. But what word of God can, 1. warrant a posterity not borne, and so
accessarie to no offense against the Conqueror (but only sin original) to be
under a Conquerou^ against their will, and who has no right to reign over
them, but the bloody sword? for so Conquest, as Conquest, not as just, makes
him King over the posteritity. But 2. the fathers may engage the Fathers cannot
dispose of the liberty of the posterity not borne.
posterity by an oath to surrender themselvos as loyal subject* to the man who
justly and deservedly made the fathers vassals by the title of the sword of
justice. I answer, the fathers may indeed dis^ose of the inheritance of their
children, because that inheritance ^elongeth to the father as well ar to the
son; but because the liberty of the son being borne with the son, (all
men being bo^ne free from all Civil subjection) the father has no more power
to resign the liberty of his children, then their lives; and the father, as a
father has not power of the life of his child, as a Magistrate he A father as
a father has not power of life and death. Hugo G^otius de iute belli and pacis
l. 2. c. 4. n. 10.
may have power, and as something more then a father, he may have power of life
and death. I hear not what Grotius says, Those who are not borne have no
accidents, and so no rights, Non entis nulla sunt accidentia; then Children not
borne have neither right, nor liberty, and so no injury (may some say) can be
done to Children not borne, though the fathers should give away their liberty
to the conqueror, those who are not capable of Law, are not capable of injury
contrary to Law. Ans. There is a virtuall alienation of rights and lives of
children not borne unlawful, because the children are not borne; to say that
children not borne, are not capable of law and injuries virtuall, which become
real in time might say, Adam did not an injury to his posterity by his first
sin, which is contrary to Gods Word: so those who vowed yearly to give seven
innocent children to the Minotaure to be devoured, and to kill their children
not borne to bloody Molech, did no acts of bloody injury to their children; nor
can any say then that fathers cannot tie themselves and their posterity to a
King by succession, but I say, To be tied to a lawful King is no making away
of liberty, but a resigning of a power to be justly governed, protected and
awed from active and passive violence. 7. No lawful King may be dethroned, nor
lawful Kingdom 7 Arg.
dissolved; but Law and reason both says, Quod vi partum est imperium, vi
dissolvi potest. Every conquest made by violence may be dissolved by violence:
Censetur enim ipsa natura jus dare ad id omne, sine quo obtineri non potest
quod ipsa imperat.

It is objected, that the people of God by their sword conquered seven nations
of the Canaanites, David conquered the Ammonites for the disgrace done to his
Ambassadors. So God gave Egypt to Nebuchadnezar for his hire, in his service
done against Judah; had David no right ^ver the Ammonites and Moabites but by
expecting their consent? ye will say, A right to their lands, goods and lives,
but not to challenge their moral subjection, well, we doubt not but such
conquerours will challenge and obtain their moral consent; but if the people
refuse their consent, is there no way? for providence gives no right. So D.
Fern, so Part 3. Sect. 3. p^g. 20. Arnisaeus de authoritat. Pri^cip. c. 1. n.
1 ^
Arnisaeus. Ans. A facto ad jus non valet consequentia, God, to whom belongs
the world and the fullness thereof, disponed to Abraham and his seed the Land
of Canaan for their inheritance, and ordained that they should use their bow
and their sword, for the actual possession thereof; and the like divine right,
had David to the The peoples and David's conquest of Canaanites, Amonites, and
Edomites, do not prove conquest to be a good title to a Crown.
Edomites and Ammonites, though the occasion of David's taking possession of
these Kingdoms by his sword, did arise from particular and occasional
exigences and injuries; but it follows in no sort, That therefore Kings now
wanting any word of promise, and so of divine right to any Lands, may ascend to
the Throns of other Kingdoms then their own, by no better title then the bloody
sword. That Gods will was the chief patent here, is clear, in that God forbad
his people to conquer Edom or Esau's possession, when as he gave them command
to conquer the Ammorites. I doubt not to say, if Joshua and David had had no
better title, then their bloody sword, though provoked by injuries, they could
have had no right to any kingly power over these Kingdoms: and if only
success by the sword, be a right of providence, it is no right of precept.
Gods providence, as providence without precept or promise, can conclude a thing
is done, or may be done, but cannot conclude a thing is lawfully, and
warrantably done, else you might say the selling of Joseph, the crucifying of
Christ, the spoiling of Job were lawfully done. 2. Though Conquerors extort
consent, and oath of Loyalty; yet that makes not over a Royal right to the
Conqueror, to be King over their posterity without their consent. 3. Though
the Children of Ammon did a high injury to David, yet no injury can be
recompensed in justice with the pressure of the constrained subjection of
Loyalty to a violent Lord; if David had not had an higher warrant from God
then an injury done to his messengers, he could not have conquered them. But 1.
The Ammonites were the declared enemies of the Church of God, and raised forces
against David, when they themselves were the injurer's and offenders; and if
David's Conquest will prove a lawful title by the sword to all Conquerours,
then may all Conquerours lawfully do to the conquered people, as David did;
that is, they may put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under
axes of iron, and cause them pass through David's conquest of the Ammonites
more rigorous then that it can legitimate Crowns by ^onquest.
the Brick-kilne. But I beseech you, will Royalists say, that Conquerours who
make themselves Kings by their sword, and so make themselves fathers, heads,
defenders, and feeders of the people may use the extremest Tyranny in the
world, such as David us^d against the children of Ammon, which he could not
have done, by the naked title of sword-conquest, if God had not laid a
Commandment of an higher nature on him to serve Gods enemies so? I shall then
say, if a conquering King be a lawful King, because a Conqueror, then has
God made such a lawful King, both a father, because a King, and a Tyrant, and
cruel, and lyon-hearted oppressor of these whom he has conquered; for God
has given him Royal power by this example, to put these, to whom he is a 2 Samuel 12. 30. 31.
father and defender by office, to torment, and also to be a torturer of them,
by office, by bringing their backs under such Instruments of cruelty, as saws
and harrows of iron, and axes of iron.

QUEST. XIII. Whether or no Royal dignity have its spring from nature, and
how that is true (every man is born free) and how servitude is contrary to
nature?
I Conceive it to be evident that Royal dignity is not immediately, and
without the intervention of the peoples consent given by God to any one person.
2. That conquest and violence, is no just title to a Crown. Now the question
is, If Royalty flow from nature, if Royalty be not a thing merely natural,
neither can subjection to Royal power be merely natural; but the former is
rather civil, then natural: and the question of the same nature is, Whether
subjection or servitude be natural?

I conceive, that there be diverse subjections to these that are above 7 sorts
of superiority and inferioritie.
us, some way natural, and therefore I rank them in order thus. 1. There is a
subjection in respect of natural being, as the effect to the cause, so though
Adam had never sinned, this morality of the fifth command, should have stood in
vigor, that the son by nature, without any positive Law, should have been
subject to the father, because from him he has his being, as from a second
cause: But I much doubt, if the relation of a father, as a father, does
necessarily infer a Royal or Kingly authority of the father over the son; or
by natures Law, that the father has power of life and death over, or above his
children, and the reasons I give, are, 1. Because power of life and death is by
a positive Law, presupposing Power of life and death from a positive law, not
from the superiority of father and children.
sin, and the fall of man; and if Adam standing in innocence, could lawfully
kill his son, though the son should be a Malefactor, without any positive Law
of God, I much doubt. 2. I judge, that the power Royal, and the fatherly power
of a father over his children, shall be found to be different, and the one is
founded on the Law of nature, the other to wit, Royal power on a mere
positive Law. The 2. degree or order of subjection natural, is a subjection in
respect of gifts, or age: so Aristotle, 1 Polit. cap. 3. says, (...).
that some are by nature servants: his meaning is good, that some gifts of
nature, as wisdom natural, or aptitude to govern, has made some men of gold,
fitter to command, and some of iron, and clay, fitter to be servants and
slaves. But I judge this title to make a King by birth, seeing Saul whom God by
supervenient gifts made a King, seems to ow small thanks to the womb, or
nature, that he was a King, for his cruelty to the Lords Priests speaks
nothing but natural baseness. Its possible Plato had a good meaning, Dialog.
3. de legib. who made six orders here. 1. That fathers command their sons. 2.
The noble the ignoble. 3. The elder the younger. 4. The masters the servants.
5. The stronger the weaker. 6. The wiser the ignorant. 3. Aquinas 22. q. 57.
art. 3. Driedo de libert. Christ. l. 1. page 8. following Aristotle, polit. l.
7. c. 14. hold, though man had never sinned, there should have been a sort A
dominion antecedent and consequent.
of dominion of the more gifted, and wiser, above the less wise and weaker,
not antecedent from nature, properly, but consequent, for the utilitie and good
of the weaker, in so far, as it is good for the weaker to be guided by the
stronger, which cannot be denied to have some ground in nature: but there is no
ground for Kings by nature here. 1. Because, even these who plead, that the
mothers Kings and subjects no natural order.
womb must be the best title for a Crown, and make it equivalent to Royal
unction, are to be corrected in memory, thus; That it is merely accidental,
and not natural, for such a son to be born a King, because the free consent of
the people making choice of the first father of that Line to be their King, and
in him making choice of the first born of the family, is merely accidental to
father and son, and so cannot be natural. 2. Because Royal gifts to reign are
not holden by either us or our adversaries, to be the specifice essence of a
King; for if the people Crown a person their King, say we, if the womb bring
him forth to be a King; say the opponents, he is essentially a King, and to be
obeyed as the Lords anointed, though nature be very Parca, sparing, and a
niggard in bestowing Royal gifts: Yea, though he be an idiot, say some, if he
be the first born of a King, he is by just title a King, but must have Curators
and Tutors to guide him, in the exercise of that Royal right that he has from
the womb. But Buchanan says well* He who cannot govern himself, shall never
govern Buchan. de jure Regni apud Scoles. A man is born consequenter, in a
politic ^^lation.
others.

1 Assert. de facto, As a man comes into the world a member of a politic
society, he is by consequence borne subject to the laws of that society; but
this makes him not from the womb and by nature subject to a King, as by
nature he is subject to his Father who begat him; no more then by nature a Lion
is borne subject to another King-Lyon; for it is by accident that he is borne
of parents under subjection to a Monarch, or to either Democraticall or
Aristocraticall governors, for Cain and Abel were borne under none of these
forms of Government properly: and if he had been borne in a new planted
Colonie in a wilderness, where no government were yet established, he should
be under no such Government.

2 Assert. Slavery of servants to Lords or Masters, such as were Slavery not
natural.
of old amongst the Jews, is not natural, but against nature; 1. Because
slaverie is malum naturae, a penal evil, and contrary to nature, and a
punishment of sin. 2. Slaverie should not have been in the world, if man had
never sinned, no more then there could have been buying and selling of men;
which is a miserable consequent of sin, and a sort of death, when men are put
to the toyling pains of the hireling, who longs for the shadow, and under
iron harrowes and sawes, and to hew wood, and draw water continually. 3. The
original of servitude was, when men were taken in war, to eschew a greater
evil, even death, the captives were willing to undergo a less evil,
slaverie. S. Servitus, 1. de jur. Pers. 4. A man being created according to
Gods image, he is res sacrae, a sacred thing, and can no more by natures law be
sold and bought, then a religious and sacred thing dedicated to God. S. 1.
Instit. do invtil. scrupl. l. inter Stipulantem. S. Sacram. F. de verber.
Obligat.

3 Assert. Every man by nature is a freeman borne, that is, by nature Every man
by nature free borne in regard of civil subjection. 1 Arg.
no man comes out of the womb under any civil subjection to King, Prince,
or Judge, to master, captain, conqueror, teacher, etc. 1. Because freedom is
natural to all, except freedom from subjection to Parents: And subjection
politic is merely accidental, coming from some positive laws of men, as
they are in a politic society; whereas they might have been borne with all
concomitants of n^ure, though borne in a single family, the only natural and
first society in the world. 2. Man is borne by nature free 2 Arg.
from all subjection, except of that which is most kindly and natural, and
that is fatherly or filial subjection, or matrimonial subjection of the wife
to the husband, and especially he is free of subjection to a Prince by nature;
Because to be under jurisdiction to a Judge or King, has a sort of
jurisdiction. Argument. L. Si quis sit fugitivus F. de edil. edict. in S.
penult. vel fin. especially to be under penal laws now in the state of sin.
The learned Senator Ferdinandus Vasquez says, l. 2. c. 82. n. 15. Every
subject is to lay down his life for the Prince: now no man is borne under
subjection to penal laws or dying for his Prince. 3. Man by nature is borne
free, and as free as 3 Arg.
beasts; but by nature no beast, no Lion is born King of Lions; no Horse, no
Bullock, no Eagle, King of Horses, Bullocks, Eagles; nor is there any
subjection here, except that the young Lion is subject to the old, every soul
to its damme, and by that same law of nature no man is borne King of men, nor
any man subject to man in a civil subjection by nature, (I speak not of
natural subjection of children to parents) and therefore Ferdi. Vasquez.
illustr. quest. l. 2. c. 82. n. 6. said that Kingdoms and Empires were brought
in, not by Natures law, but by the law of Nations: he expounds himself
elsewhere to speak of the law of nature secondary, otherwise the primarie law
of Nations is indeed the law of Nature, as appropriated to man. If any reply,
that the freedom natural of beasts and birds who never sinned, cannot be one
with the natural freedom of man who are now under sin, and so under bondage
for sin: my answer is, That the subjection of the misery of man by nature,
because of sin, is more then the subjection of beasts, comparing spece and
kind of beasts and birds with mankind, but comparing individuals of the same
kind amongst themselves, a Lion with Lion, Eagle with Eagle, and so Man with
Man; in which respect, because he who is supposed to be the man borne free from
subjection politic, even the King borne a King, is under the same state of
sin, and so by reason of sin, of which he has a share equally with all other
men by nature, he must be, by nature, borne under as great subjection penal
for sin (except the King be borne void of sin) as other men; Ergo, he is
not borne freer by nature then other men, except he 4 Arg.
come out of the womb with a Kings crown on his head. 4. To be a King, is a
free gift of God, which God bestows on some men above others, as is evident,
2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. Psalm. 75. 6. Dan. 4. 32. and therefore all must be borne
Kings, if any one man be by nature a King borne, and another a borne subject.
But if some be by Gods grace made Kings above others, they are not so by
nature; for things which agree to man by nature, agree to all men equally; but
all men equally are not borne Kings, as is evident; and all men are not equally
borne by nature under politic subjection to Kings, as the Adversaries grant;
because those who are by nature Kings, cannot be also by nature subjects. 5. If
men be not by nature free from 5 Arg.
politic subjection, then must some, by the law of relation, by nature be
Kings; But none are by nature Kings, because none have by nature these things
which essentially constitute Kings, for they have neither by nature the calling
of God, nor gifts for the throne; nor the free election of the people, nor
conquest: and if there be none a King by nature, there can be none a Subject by
nature. And the Law faith, Omnes sumus natura liberi, nullius ditioni subjecti.
l. Manu^iss. F. de just. and jur. S. jus autem gentium, Ius. de jur. not. We
are all by nature free. and D. L. ex h^c jure cum simil. 6. Politicians 6 Arg.
Politque society natural in radice, free in modo rei.
agree to this as an undeniable truth, that as domestic society is natural,
being grounded upon Natures instinct; so Politic society is voluntary, being
grounded on the consent of men; and so politic society is natural, in
radice, in the root, and voluntary and free, in modo, in the manner of their
union: and the Scripture clears to us, that a King is made by the free
consent of the people, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. and so not by nature. 7. What is from the
womb, and 7 Arg.
so natural, is eternal, and agrees to all societies of men: but a Monarchy
agrees not to all societies of men; for many hundred years de facto, there was
not a King, till Nimrods time, the world being governed by families, and till
Moses his time we find no institution for Kings, Genesis 7. and the numerous
multiplication of mankind did occasion Monarchies, otherwise Fatherly
government being the first, and measure of the rest, must be the best; for it
is better that my father govern me, then that a stranger govern me; and
therefore the Lord forbad his people to set a stranger over themselves to be
their King. The P. Prelate contendeth for the contrary. Every Sac. sanct. Reg.
ma. c. 12. p. 12*
man (says he) is borne subject to his father, of whom immediately he has his
existence in nature: and if his Father be the subject of another, he is borne
the subject of his fathers superior. Answ. But the consequence is weak, every
man is borne under natural subjection to his father, ergo he is borne
naturally under civil subjection to his fathers superior or King, it
follows not; yea because his father was borne only by nature subject to his
own father, ergo he was subject to a Prince or King only by accident, and by
the free constitution of men who freely choose politic government, whereas
there is no government natural, but fatherly or martial, and therefore the
contradictory consequence is true.

P. Prelat. Obj. 2. Every man by nature has immunity and liberty from
despoticall and herill Empire, and so may dispose of his own at will, and
cannot inslave himself without his own free will; but God has laid and
cannot inslave himself without his own free will; but God has laid a
necessity on all men to be under government, and nature also laid this
necessity on him, therefore this sovereignty cannot protect us in
righteousness and honesty, except it be entirely endowed with sovereign power
to preserve it self, and protect us.

Ans. The Prelate here deserteth his own consequence, which is strong against
himself, for if a man be naturally subject to his fathers superior, as he
said before, why is not the son of a slave naturally subject to his fathers
superior and master? 2. As a man may not make away his liberty without his own
consent, so can he not without his own consent give his liberty to be subject
to penal Laws, under a Prince without his own consent, either in his fathers
or in the representative society in which he lives. 3. God and nature has
laid a necessity on all men to be under government, a natural necessity from
the womb to be under some government, to wit, a paternall government, that is
true; but under this government politic, and namely under sovereignty, it is
false; and that is but said, for why is he naturally under sovereignty rather
then Aristocracy? I believe any of the three forms are freely chosen by any
society 4. It is false that one cannot defend the people, except he have entire
power, that is to say, he cannot do good, except he have a vast power to do
both good and ill.

Obj. 3. It is accidental to any to render himself a slave, being P. Prelate.
occasioned by force or extreme indigence, but to submit to Government
congrnous to the condition of man, and is necessary for his happy being, and
natural, and necessary by the inviolable Ordinance of God and nature. Ans. If
the father be a slave, it is natural and not accidental, by the Prelates
Logic, to be a slave. 2. it is also accidental to be under Sovereignty, and
sure not natural, for then Aristocracy and Democracy must be unnatural, and
so unlawful Politic Government how natural.
Governments. 3. If to be congruous to the condition of man be all one with
natural man (which he must say if he speak sense) to believe in God, to be an
excellent Mathematician, to swim in deep waters, being congruous to the nature
of man, must be natural. 4. Man by nature is under government Paternall, not
Politic properly, but by the free consent of his will.

Obj. 4. Luke 11. 5. Christ himself was (...) subject to P. Prelate. Sac.
sanct. May. p. 126.
his Parents, the word that is used, Romans 13. ergo none is exempted from
subjection to lawful government, Ans. We never said, that any was exempted
from lawful government; the Prelate and his fellow Jesuits teach that the
Clergy is exempted from the laws of the civil Magistrate, not we; but because
Christ was subject to his Parents, and the same word is used, Luke 11. that is,
Romans 13. it will not follow therefore, men are by nature subject to Kings,
because they are by nature subject to parents.

Obj. 5. The father had power over the children by the Law of God and nature to
redeem himself from debt, or any distressed condition, by inslaving his
children begotten of his own body, if this power was not by the right of
nature, and by the Warrant of God, I can see no other, for it could not be by
mutual and voluntary contract of children and fathers, Inslaving of children
by the parents not natural.
Ans. 1. Show a law of nature, that the father might inslave his children by a
Divine positive law presupposing sin, the father might do that, and yet I
think that may be questioned, whether it was not a permission rather then a
law, as was the Bill of devorce, but a law of nature it was not. 2. The P.
Prelate can see no Law but the law of nature here, but it is because he is
blind or will not see; his reason is, it was not by mutual and voluntary
contract of children and fathers, ergo it was by the law of nature; so he that
cursed his father was to dye by Gods Law. This law was not made by mutual
consent betwixt the Father and the Son, ergo it was a law of inature, the
Prelate will see no better. Nature will teach a man to inslave himself to
redeem himself from death, but that it is a Dictate of nature that a man
should inslave his son, I conceive not. 3. What can this prove, but that if
the son may by the law of nature, be inslaved for the father, but that the
son of a slave is by nature under subjection to slavery, and that by natures
law, the contrary whereof he spoke in the page preceding, and in this same page.

As for the Argument of the Prelate to answer Suarez, who labors to prove
Monarchy not to be natural, but of free consent, because it is various in
sundry nations, it is the Jesuits Argument, not ours* I own it not. Let
Jesuits plead for Jesuits.

QUEST. XIIII. Whether or no the people make a Person their King conditionally,
or absolutely? and whether there be such a thing as a Covenant tying the King
no less then his subjects?
THere is a Covenant Natural and a Covenant Politic and Civil, there is no
politic or civil covenant betwixt the King and his Subjects, because there be
no such equality (say Royalists) betwixt The King under a natural, but no
civil obligation to the people, say Royalists.
the King and his people, as that the King can be brought under any civil or
legal obligation in man's Court, to either necessitate the King civilly to
keep an Oath to his people, or to tie him to any punishment, if he fail, yet
(say they) he is under natural obligation ^n Gods Court to keep his Oath, but
he is comptible only to God, if he violate his Oath.

Asser. 1. There is an Oath betwixt the King and his people, laying on, by
reciprocation of bands, mutual civil obligation upon the King to the people,
and the people to the King, 2 Samuel 5. 3. So ^ll the Elders of Israel came to
the King to Hebron, and King David made a Covenant with them in Hebron before
the Lord, and they anuoynted David King over Israel, 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. And David
made a covenant with them before the Lord, and they anointed David King over
Israel, according to the Word of the Lord by Samuel, 2 Chronicles. 23. 2. And they
went about in Judah and gathered the Levites out of all the Cities of Judah,
and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they come to Jerusalem. 3. And all
the congregation made a covenant with the King Ioash in the house of God, 2
King. 11. 17. and Jehoiada made a covenant betwixt the Lord and the King, and
the people that they should be the Lords people, between the King also and his
people, Eccles. 8. 2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that
in regard of the Oath of God; then it is evident there was a covenant betwixt
the King and the people. 2. That was not a covenant that did tie the King to
God only, and not to the people, 1. because the covenant betwixt the King and
the people is clearly differenced from the Kings covenant with the Lord, 2
King. 11. 17. 2. there were no necessity that this covenant should be made
publicly before the people, if the King did not in the covenant tie and oblige
himself to the people; nor needed it be made solemnly before the Lord is the
House of God. 3. It is expressly a covenant, that was between Ioash the King and
his people, and David made a covenant at his Coronation with the Princes and
Elders of Israel; therefore the people give the Crown to David Covenant-wise,
and upon condition that he should perform such and such duties to them; and
this is clear by all Covenants in the Word of God, even the Covenant between
God and man is so mutual; I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. The
covenant is so mutual, that if the people break the covenant, God is loosed
from his part of the covenant, Zach. 11. v. 10. 2. The covenant gives to the
believer a sort of action of Law, and jus quoddam, to plead with God, in
respect of his fidelity to stand to that covenant that binds him by reason of
his fidelity, Esaias 43. 26. Es. 63. 16. Daniel 9. 4, 5. and far more a
covenant gives ground of a civil action and claim to a people and the free
estates against a King, seduced by wicked counsel to make war against the
Land, whereas he did swear by the most high God, that he should be a father
and protector of the Church of God. 2. All covenants and contracts between man
and man, yea all solemn promises bring the covenante^s under a Law, and a
claim before men, if the Oath of God be broken as the Covenant betwixt Abraham
and Abimelech, Genesis 21. 27. Jonathan and David, I Sam. 18. 3. the spies
profess to Rahab in the covenant that they made with him, Josh. 2. v. 20. And
if thou utter this our business (say they) we will be quit of thine Oath,
which thou have made us to swear. There be no mutual contract made upon
certain conditions, but if the conditions be not fulfilled, the party injured
is loosed from the contract. Barclay says, That this covenant obliges the If
the condition without the which one of the parties would never have entered in
covenant, be not performed, that person is loosed from the covenant. Arnis. de
authorit. prin. ^. ^. n. 6. 7.
King to God, but not the King to the people. Ans. It is a vain thing to say
that the people and the King make a covenant, and that David made a covenant
with the Elders and Princes of Israel; for if he be obliged to God only, and
not to the people by a covenant made with the people, it is not made with the
people at all, nay, it is no more made with the people of Israel, nor with the
Chaldeans, for it binds David no more to Israel, nor to Chaldea, as a
covenant made with men. Arnisaeus says, when two parties contract, if one
perform the duty, the other is acquitted. Sect. Ex hujusmod ubi vult just. de
duob. reis, l. 3. F. because every one of them are obliged fully. Sect. 1.
Just. cod. to God, to whom the Oath is made (for that is his meaning) and if
either the people perform what is sworn to the Lord, or the King, yet one of
the parties remains still under obligation, and neither does the peoples
obedience exempt the King from punishment, if he fail, nor the Kings obedience
exempt the people, if they fail, but every one bears the punishment of his
own sin; and there is no mutual power in the parties to compel one another
to perform the promised duty, because that belongs to the Praetor or
Magistrate, before whom the contract was made. The King has jurisdiction over
the people, if they violate their Oath, but the people has no power over the
Prince, and the ground that Arnisaeus lays down is that, 1. The King is not
a party contracting with the people, as if there were mutual obligations
betwixt the King and the people, and a mutual coactive power* on either side.
2. That the care of Religion belongs not to the people, for that has no
warrant in the Word (says he) 2. We read not that the people was to command
and compel the Priests and the King to reform Religion and abolish Idolatry,
as it must follow, if the covenant be mutual. 3. Iehoiada, 2 King. 11.
obliges himself and the King, and the people, by a like law to serve God, and
here be not two parts, but three; the high Priest, the King, the People, if
this example prove any thing. 4. Both King and people shall find the revenging
hand of God against them, if they fail in the breach of their Oath; but with
this difference, and every one of the two, King and people by the Oath stand
obliged to God, the King for himself, and the people for themselves, but with
this difference, the King owes to God proper and due obedience as any of the
subjects, and also to govern the people according to Gods true religion, Deuteronomy.
17. 2 Chro. 29. and in this the Kings obligation differs from the peoples
obligation, the people, as they would be saved must serve God, and the King for
the same cause, 1 Samuel 12. But besides this, the King is obliged to rule and
govern the people, and keep them in obedience to God; but the people is not
obliged to govern the King, and keep him in obedience to God, for then the
people should have as great power of jurisdiction over the King, as the King
has oover the people, which is against the Word of God, and the examples of
the Kings of Judah; but this comes not from any promise or covenant that the
King has made with the people, but from a peculiar obligation whereby he is
obliged to God as a man, not as a King.

This is the mystery of the business, but I oppose this in these The people
and Princes in their place are obliged to maintain Religion and Justice, no
less then the King.
Assertions.

1. Assert. As the King is obliged to God for the maintenance of true Religion,
so are the people and Princes no less in their place obliged to maintain true
Religion, for 1. the people are rebuked because they burnt Incense in all high
places, 2 King. 17. 11. 2 Chronicles. 33. 17. Hos. 4. 13. And the reason why the
high places are not taken away, 2 Chro. 20. 33. is given, for as yet the people
had not prepared their heart unto the God of their fathers; but you will reply,
elicite acts of maintenance of true Religion are commanded to the people, and
that the places prove; but the question is De actibus imperatis, of commanded
acts of Religion, sure none but the Magistrate is to command others to worship
God according to his Word. I answer, in ordinary only, Magistrates (not the
King only) but all the Princes of the Land, and Judges are to maintain
Religion by their commandments, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. 2 Chro. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
Eccles. 5. 8. Hab. 1. 4. Mic. 3. 9. Zach. 7. 9. Hos. 5. 10. 11. and to take
care of Religion; but when the Judges decline from Gods way, and corrupt the
Law, we find the people punished and rebuked for it, Ier. 15. 4. And I will
cause them to be removed to all Kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the
son of Hezekiah King of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem, 1 Samuel 12.
24. only fear the Lord -- 25. But if ye do still wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both ye and your King. And this case ^ grant is extraordinary, yet
so as Iunius Brutus proves well and strongly, that Religion is not given only
to the King, that he only should keep^ it, but to all the inferior Judges and
people also in their kind; but because the estates never gave the King power to
corrupt Religion, In so far as the King presses a false Religion on the
people, catenus, in so far they are understood not to have a Kingly power.
and press a false and Idolatrous worship upon them, therefore when the King
defends not true Religion, but presses upon the people a false and
Idolatrous Religion, in that they are not under the King, but are presumed to
have no King eatenus so far, and are presumed to have the power in
themselves, as if they had not appointed any King at all: as if we presume the
body had given to the right hand a power to ward off strokes, and to defend the
body, if the right hand should by a Palsy, or some other disease become
impotent, and be withered up; when ill is coming on the body, it is presumed
that the power of defense is recurred to the left hand, and to the rest of the
body to defend it self, in this case as if the body had no right hand, and had
never communicated any power to the right hand at all. So if an incorporation
accused of Treason, and in danger of the sentence of death* shall appoint a
Lawyer to Advocate their cause, and to give in their just defenses to the
Judge; if their Advocate be stricken with dumbness, because they have losed
their legal and representative tongue, none can say that this incorporation
has loosed the tongues that Nature has given them, so as by Natures law they
may not plead in their own just and lawful defense, as if they had never
appointed the foresaid lawyer to plead for them. The King, as a man, is not
more obliged to the public and regal defense of the true Religion, then any
other man of the land; but he is made by God and the people King, for the
Church and people of God's sake, that he may defend true Religion, for the
behalf and salvation of all. If therefore he defend not Religion for the
salvation of the souls of all in his public and royal way, it is presumed as
undeniable, that the people of God, who by the law of nature are to care for
their own soul, are to defend in their way, true Religion, which so nearly
concerns them and their eternal happiness.

2 Assert. When the covenant is betwixt God, on the one part, and the King,
Priests, and people on the other part, it is true, if the one perform for his
part to God, the whole duty, the other is acquitted; as if two men be indebted
to one man ten thousand pounds, if the one pay the whole sum, the other is
acquitted: but the King and People are not so, contracting parties in covenant
with God, as that they are both indebted to God for one and the same sum of
complete obedience, so as if the King pay the whole sum of obedience to God,
the people is acquitted; and if the People pay the whole sum, the King is
acquitted: for every one stands obliged to God for himself; for the people
must do all that is their part, in acquitting the King from his Royal duty,
that they may free him and themselves both from punishment, if he disobey the
King of Kings: Nor does the Kings obedience acquit the people from their duty.
And Arnisaeus dreamed, if he believed that we make King and People this way
party contractors in covenant with God. Nor can two copartners in covenant
with God, so mutually compel one another to do their duty; for we hold, that
the covenant is made betwixt the King and the People, betwixt mortal men; but
they both bind themselves before God to each other. But, says Arnisaeus, It
belongs to a Praetor or Ruler, who is above both King and People, to The
covenant between King and People gives a coactive power to each other.
compel each of them; the King to perform his part of the covenant to the
people, and the people to perform their part of the covenant to the King. Now
there is no Ruler but God, above both King and People. But let me answer: The
consequence is not needful, no more then when the King of Judah and the King
of Israel make a covenant to perform mutual duties one to another: no more
then it is necessary that there should be a King and superior Ruler above the
King of Israel and the King of Judah, who should compel each one to do a duty
to his fellow King; for the King and People are each of them above, and below
others in diverse respects: The People, because they create the man King, they
are so above the King, and have a virtuall power to compel him to do his
duty: and the King, as King, has an authoritative power above the People,
because Royalty is formally in him, and originally and virtually only in the
People; therefore may he compel them to their duty, as we shall hear anon;
and therefore there is no need of an earthly Ruler higher then both, to compel
both.

3 Assert. We shall hereafter prove the power of the people above the King, God
willing. And so it is false that there is not mutual coactive power on each
side.

4 Assert. The obligation of the King in the covenant, flows The covenant
binds the King, as King, not as he is a man only.
from the peculiar obligation national betwixt the King and the Estates, and
it binds the King, as King, and not simply as he is a man. 1. Because it is a
covenant betwixt the people and David, not as he is the son of Jesse, for
then it should oblige Eliab, or any other of David's brethren; yea, it should
oblige any man, if it oblige David as a man: but it obliges David as a King,
or as he is to be their King, because it is the specifice act of a King, that
he is obliged unto, to wit, to govern the people in Righteousness and
Religion with his Royal power. And so it is false that Arnisaeus says, that
the King, as a man, is obliged to God by this covenant, not as a King. 2. He
says, by covenant the King is bound to God as a Man, not as a King. But so the
man will have the King, as King, under no law of God, and so he must either be
above God, as King, or coequall with God; which are manifest blasphemies: for I
thought ever, the Royalists had not denied, but the King, as King, had been
obliged to keep his oath to his subjects, in relation to God, and in regard of
natural obligation; so as he ^mneth before God, if he break his covenant with
his people: though they deny that he is obliged to The covenant tyeth the King
to the People politically as well as to God naturally or religiously.
keep his covenant in relation to his Subjects, and in regard of politic or
civil obligation to men. Sure I am, this the Royalists constantly teach. 3. He
would have this covenant so made with men, as it obliges not the King to men,
but to God. But the contrary is true. Beside the King and the Peoples covenant
with the Lord, King Joash made another covenant with the People, and Jehoiada
the Priest was only a witness, or one who in Gods name performed the rite of
anointing, otherwise he was a subject on the peoples side, obliged to keep
allegiance to Joash, as to his Sovereign and Master. But certainly, who ever
makes a covenant with the people, promising to govern them according to Gods
word, and upon that condition and these terms receives a throne and crown
from the people, he is obliged to what he promises to the people, Omnis
promittens facit alteri, cui promissio facta est, jus in promittent^m; Who ever
makes a promise to another, gives to that other a sort of right or
jurisdiction to challenge the promise. The covenant betwixt David and Israel
were a shadow, if it tie the people to allegiance to David as their King, and
if it tie not David as King to govern them in righteousness; but leave David
loose to the people, and only tie him to God; then it is a covenant betwixt
David and God only: But the Text says, It is a covenant betwixt the King and
the People, 2 King. 11. 17. 2 Samuel 5. 3.

Hence our second Argument. He who is made a minister of God, 2 Arg.
not simply, but for the good of the subject; and so he take heed to walk in
Gods law as a King, and govern according to Gods will, he is in so far only
made King by God, as he fulfilleth the condition; and in so far as he is a
minister for evil to the subject, and rules not according to that which the
book of the Law commands him as King, in so far he is not by God appointed
King and Ruler, and so must be made a King by God conditionally: But so has
God made Kings and Rulers, Romans 13. 4. 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. Ps. 89. 30, 31. 2 Samuel
7. 12. 1 Chronicles. 28. 7, 8, 9. This argument is not brought to prove that
Jeroboam or Saul leave off to be Kings, when they fail in some part of the
condition; or as if they were not Gods Vicegerents to be obeyed in things
lawful, after they have gone on in wicked courses: For, the People consenting
to make Saul King, they give him the Crown, pro hac vice, at his entry,
absolutely: there is no condition required in him before they make him King,
but only that he covenant with them to rule according to Gods law: The
conditions to be performed, are consequent, and posterior to his actual
coronation, and his sitting on the Throne. But the argument presupposing that
which the Lords word teaches, to wit, that the Lord and the people gives a
crown by one and the same action; for God formally makes David a King by the
Princes and Elders of Isreal's choosing of him to be their King at Hebron; and
therefore seeing the people makes him a King covenant-wise, and conditionally,
so he rule according to Gods Law, and the people resigning their power to him
for their safety, and for a peaceable and godly life under him, and not to
destroy them, and tyrannize over them; it is certain God gives a King that
same way, by that same very act of the people; and if the King tyrannize, I
cannot say it is beside the intention of God making a King, not yet beside his
intention as a just punisher of their transgressions; for to me as I conceive,
nothing either good or evil falls out beside the intention of him, who does
all things according to the pleasure of his Will; if then the people make a
King as a King conditionally for their fafety, and not for their destruction
(for as a King he saves, as a man he destroys, and not as a King and Father)
and if God by the peoples free election make a King, God makes him a King
conditionally, and so by covenant; and therefore when God promises 2 Samuel 7.
12. 1 Chronicles. 28. 7, 8, 9. to David's seed, and to Solomon a Throne, he promises
not a Throne to them immediately, as he raised up Prophets and Apostles, without
any mediate action and consent of the people, but he promises a Throne to them
by the mediate consent, election, and covenant of the people; which condition
and covenant he expresses in the very words of the people, covenant How the
covenant is conditional, and what breach dissolveth the* covenant.
with the King, so they walk as Kings in the Law of the Lord, and take heed to
Gods Commandments and Statutes to do them* Obj. But then Solomon falling in
love with many outlandish women, and so not walking according to Gods Law,
loses all royal dignity and Kingly power, and the people is not to
acknowledge him as King, since the Kingly power was conferred upon him, rather
then Adonijah, upon such a condition, which condition not being performed by
him, it is presumed that neither God, nor the people under God, as Gods
instruments in making King, conferred any royal power on him. Ans. It does not
follow, that Solomon falling in love with strange women does lose Royal
dignity, either in the Court of Heaven, or before men; because the conditions
of the covenant upon which God by the people made him King must be exponed by
the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. now that cannot bear, that any one act contrary to the
Royal Office, yea that any one or two acts of Tyranny does denude a man of the
Royal dignity that God and the people gave him, for so David committing two
acts of tyranny, one of taking his own faithful subjects wife from him, and
another in killing himself, should denude himself of all the Kingly power
that he had, and that therefore the people after his Adultery and Murder were
not to reknowledge David as their King, which is most absurd; for as one single
act of unchastity is indeed against the matrimonial covenant, and yet does not
make the woman no wife at all, so it must be such a breach of the Royal
Covenant, as makes the King no King, that anulleth the Royal Covenant, and
denudeth the Prince of his Royal authority and power, that must be interpreted
a breach of the Oath of God, because it must be such a breach upon supposition,
whereof the people would not have given the Crown, but upon supposition of his
destructivenesse to the Commonwealth, they would never have given to him the
Crown.

Obj. 2. Yet at least it will follow, that Saul after he is rejected of God for
disobedience, in not destroying the Amalekites, as Samuel speaks to him, 1 Samuel 15. is no longer to be acknowledged King by the people, at least after he
commits such acts of tyranny, as are 1. Sam. 8. 12, 13, 14, 15. etc. and
after he had killed the Priests of the Lord, and persecuted innocent David
without cause, he was no longer either in the Court of Heaven, or the Court of
men to be acknowledged as King, seeing he had manifestly violated the royal
covenant made with the people, 1 Samuel 11. v. 14, 15. and yet after those
breaches David acknowledges him to be his Prince, and the Lords anointed.
Ans. The Prophet Samuel his threatening, 1 Samuel 17. is it not exponed of actual
unkinging and rejecting of Saul at the present; for after that, Samuel both
honored him as King before the people, and prayed for him, and mourned to God
on his behalf as King, 1 Samuel 16. 1. 2. but the threatening was to have effect
in Gods time, when he should bring David to the Throne, as was prophesied, upon
occasion of less sin, even his sacrificing and not waiting the time
appointed, as God had commanded, 1 Samuel 13. v. 13, 14.

2. The people and David's acknowledgment of Saul to be the One or two tyrannous
acts deprive not a King of his Royal right.
Lords anointed, and a King, after he had committed such acts of Tyranny as
seem destructive of the Royal Covenant, and inconsistent therewith, cannot
prove that Saul was not made King by the Lord, and the people, conditionally,
and that for the peoples good and safety, and not for their destruction; and it
does well prove that those acts of blood and tyranny committed by Saul, were
not done by him as King, or from the principle of Royal power given to him by
God and the people. 2. That in these acts they were not to acknowledge him as
King. 3. That these acts of blood were contrary to the covenant that Saul did
swear at his inauguration, and contrary to the conditions that Saul in the
covenant took on him to perform at the making of the Royal covenant. 4. They
prove not but the States who made Saul King, might lawfully dethrone him, and
anoint David their King. But David had reason to hold him for his Prince, and
the Lords Anointed, so long as the people recalled not their grant of Royal
dignity, as David or any man is obliged to honor him as King whom the people
makes King, though he were a bloodier and more tyrannous man then Saul. Any
Tyrant stands in titulo, so long as the People and Estates who made him King,
have not recalled their grant; so as neither David, nor any single man, though
six hundred with him, may unking him, or detract obedience from him as King;
So, many acts of disloyalty, and breaches of laws in the Subjects, though
they be contrary to this Covenant that the States make with their Prince, does
not make them to be no Subjects: and the Covenant mutual stands thus.

3 Arg. If the people as Gods instruments, bestow the benefit The covenant
between King and people conditional.
of a Crown on their King, upon condition that he will rule them according to
Gods word; then is the King made King by the people conditionally: but the
former is true; Ergo, so is the latter. The assumption is proved thus: because
to be a King, is to be an adopted father, tutor, a Politic servant and Royal
watchman of the State; and the Royal honor, and Royal maintenance given to
him, is a reward of his labors, and a Kingly hire. And this is the Apostles
argument, Romans 13. 6. For this cause pay you tribute also; (there is the wages)
for they are Gods ministers, attending continually upon this very thing; There
is the work. Qui non implet conditionem a se promissam, cadit benefi^io. It is
confirmed thus. The people either makes the man their Prince conditionally,
that he rule according to Law; or absolutely, so that he rule according to will
or lust: or, 3. without any vocal transactions at all, but only brevi manu,
say, Reign thou over us, and, ( God save the King.) And so there be no
conditions spoken on either side; Or, 4. The King is obliged to God for the
condition which he promises by oath to perform toward the people; but he is
to make no reckoning to the people, whether he perform his promise or no; for
the people being inferior to him, and he, solo Deo minor, only next and
immediate to God, the people can have no jus, no law over him by virtue of any
covenant. But the first standing, we have what we seek; The second is contrary
to Scripture. He is not Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16. made absolutely a King to rule
according to his will and lust; for, [ Reign thou over us] should have this
meaning; Come thou and play the Tyrant over us, and let thy lust and will be a
law to us: which is against natural sense: nor can the sense and meaning be
according to the third, That the people without any express, vocal, and
positive covenant, give a Throne to their King to rule as he pleases; because,
1. it is a vain thing for the Prelate and other Mancipia Aulae, Courtbellies,
to say Scotland and England must produce a written authentic covenant betwixt
the first King and their People, because, say they, its the Laws word, De non
apparentibus and non existentibus eadem lex; that covenant which appears not,
it is not. For in positive covenants that is true, and in such contracts as are
made according Though there be no positive written covecant (which yet we grant
not) yet there is a natural, tacit, and implicit covenant betwixt the King
and ths people.
to the Civil or Municipall laws, or the secondary law of Nations: But the
general covenant of nature is presupposed in making a King, where there is no
vocal or written covenant, if there be no conditions betwixt a Christian King
and his people, then those things which are just and right according to the law
of God, and the rule of God in moulding the first King, are understood to
regulate both King and People, as if they had been written: and here we produce
our written covenant, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Josh. 1. 8, 9. 2* Chr. 31* 32. 1. Because
this is as much against the King as the people, and more; for if the first King
cannot bring forth his written and authentic tables to prove that the Crown
was given to him and his heirs, and his successors absolutely and without any
conditions, so as his will shall be a law, ca lit causa, he loses his cause
(say they) The King is in possession of the Royal power absolutely, without
any condition, and you must put him from his possession by a law. I answer,
this is most false; 1. Though he were in mala fide, and in unjust possession,
the law of Nature will warrant the people to repeal their right, and plead for
it, in a matter which concerns their heads, lives, and souls* 2. The
Parliaments of both Kingdoms standing in possession of a nomothetick power to
make laws, proves clearly that the King is in no possession of any Royal
dignity conferred absolutely and without any condition upon him: and therefore
it is the Kings part by law to put the Estates out of possession. And so though
there were no written covenant, the standing law and practice of many hundredth
acts of Parliament, is equivalent to a written covenant.

2. When the people appoints any to be their King, the voice of Nature
exponeth their deed, though there be no vocal or written covenant; For that
fact of making a King, is a moral lawful act warranted by the word of God,
Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16. Romans 13. 1. 2. and the law of Nature: and therefore they
having made such a man their King, they have given him power to be their
father, feeder, healer, protector; and so must only have made him King
conditionally, so he be a father, a feeder, and tutor. Now if this deed of
making a King, must be exponed to be an investing with an absolute, and not a
conditional power; this fact shall be contrary to Scripture, and to the law of
Nature: for if they have given him Royal power If the King be made King
absolutely, he is made such an one contrary to the word of God and nature of
his office.
absolutely, and without any condition, they must have given to him power to be
a father, protector, tutor, and to be a tyrant, a murderer, a bloody lion to
waste and destroy the people of God.

3. The Law permits the bestower of a benefit to interpret his own mind in
the bestowing of a benefit, even as a King and State must expone their own
Commission given to their Ambassador, so must the Estates expone whether they
bestowed the Crown upon the first King conditionally or absolutely.

For the 4th. if it stand, then must the people give to their first elected
King a power to wast and destroy themselves, so as they may never control it,
but only leave it to God and the King to reckon together, but so the condition
is a Chimera ( We give you a Throne, upon condition you swear by him who made
heaven and earth, that you will govern us according to Gods Law; and you shall
be answerable to God only, not to us, whether you keep the covenant you make
with us* or violate it;) but how a covenant can be made with the people, and
the King obliged to God, not to the people, I conceive not. 2. This
presupposes that the King as King cannot do any sin, or commit any act of
tyranny against the people, but against God only; because if he be obliged to
God only as a King by virtue of his covenant: How can he fail against an
obligation where there is no obligation? but as a King he owe no obligation of
duty to the people, and indeed so do our good men expound that Psalm. 51.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, not against Vriah; for if he sinned not
as King against Vriah, whose life he was obliged to conserve as a King, he was
not obliged as a King by any royal duty to conserve his life. Where there is
no sin, there is no obligation not to sin, and where there is no obligation not
to sin, there is no sin: By this the King as King is loosed from all duties of
the second Table, being once made a King, he is above all obligation to love
his neighbor as himself, for he is above all his neighbors, and above all
mankind, and only less then God.

4. Arg. If the people be so given to the King, that they are The people are
not given to the Kings keeping so as they be his own, as sheep or money are
given.
committed to him as a pledge, oppignorated in his hand, as a pupil to a
Tutor, as a distressed man to a Patron, as a flock to a Shepherd; and so as
they remain the Lords Church, his people, his flock, his portion, his
inheritance, his vineyard, his redeemedones, then they cannot be given to the
King as Oxen and Sheep, that are freely gifted to a man; or as a gift or sum
of gold or silver, that the man to whom they are given may use, so that he
cannot commit a fault against the oxen, sheep, gold or money, that is given to
him, how ever he shall dispose of them.

But the people are given to the King to be tutored and protected of him, so as
they remain the people of God, and in covenant with him, and if the people
were the goods of fortune (as Heathens say) he could no more sin against the
people then a man can sin against his gold; now though a man by adoring gold,
or by lavish profusion and wasting of gold may sin against God, yet not against
gold; nor can he be in any covenant with gold, or under any obligation of
either duty or sin to gold, or to livelesse and reasonlesse creatures properly,
therefore he may sin in the use of them, and yet not sin against them, but
against God. Hence of necessity the King must be under obligation to the Lords
people in another manner, then that he should only answer to God, for the loss
of men, as if men were worldly goods under his hand, and as if being a King he
were now by this Royal Authority privileged from the best*halfe of the law of
nature, to wit, from acts of mercy, and truth, and covenant keeping with his
brethren. The King could not buy or sell, borrow or contract debt if his
covenant with men did not bind him.


5. Arg. If a King because a King were privileged from all covenant obligation
to his subjects, then could no Law of men lawfully reach him for any contract
violated by him, then he could not be a debtor to his subjects, if he borrowed
money from them, and it were utterly unlawful either to crave him money, or to
sue him at Law for debts, yet our Civil Laws of Scotland tyeth the King to
pay his debts, as any other man; yea and King Solomon's traffiquing, and buying
and selling betwixt him and his own subjects would seem unlawful; for how
can a King buy and sell with his subjects if he be under no covenant obligation
to men, but to God only. Yea then a King could not marry a wife, for he could
not come under a covenant to keep his body to her only, nor if he committed
adultery, could he sin against his wife, because being immediate unto God, and
above all obligation to men, he could sin against no covenant made with men,
but only against God.

6. If that was a lawful covenant made by Asa, and the States of The covenant
sworn by Asa and all Judah, 2 Chronicles. 15. obliges the King.
Judah, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of their
fathers, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman:
this obliges the King for ought I see, and the Princes, and the people, but it
was a lawful covenant, ergo the King is under a covenant to the Princes and
Judges, as they are to him; it is replied, If a Master of a School should make
a law, whoever Barclay.
shall go out at the School doors without liberty obtained of the Master,
shall be whipped, it will not oblige the Schoolmasters that he shall be
whipped, if he go out at the School doors without liberty; so neither does
this Law oblige the King the supreme Lawgiver. Ans. Suppose that the
Scholars have no less hand and authority magisteriall in making the law, then
the Schoolmasters, as the Princes of Judah had a collateral power with King
Asa about that law; it would follow, that the Schoolmasters is under the same
law. 2. Suppose going out at School doors were that way a moral neglect of
studying in the Master, as it is in the Scholars, as the not seeking of God is
as heinous a sin in King Asa, and no less deserving death then it is in the
people; then should the Law oblige Schoolmaster and Scholar both without
exception. 3. The Schoolmaster is clearly above all laws of discipline which
he imposes on his Scholars, but none can say that King Asa was clearly above
that law of seeking of the Lord God of his fathers. Diodorus Siculus, l. 17.
says, the Kings of Persia were under an oath, and that they might not change
the Laws; and so were the Kings of Egypt and Ethiopia. The Kings of Sparta,
which Aristotle calls just Kings, renew their oath every month. Romulus so
covenanted with the Senate and People. Carolus V. Austriacus, swears he shall
not change the Laws, without the consent of the Electors, nor make new laws,
nor dispose or impledge any thing that belongs to the Empire. So read we,
Spec. Saxon. l. 3. Act. 54. and Xenophon Cyriped. l. 8. says, Alber. Gentilis
in disput. Regal. l. 2. c. 12. l. 3. c. 14; 15. 16. Hug. Grotius de jure belli,
and poc. l. 2. c. 11, 12, 13. Arnisaeus d^ authorit. princip. c. 1. n. 7. 8.
10. Haenon. disp. 2.
there was a covenant between Cyrus and the Persians. The nobles are crowned
when they crown their King, and exact a special Oath of the King. So does
England, Polonia, Spain, Arragonia, etc. Alberi. Gentilis. Hug. Grotius, prove
that Kings are really bound to perform Oaths and contracts to their people;
but notwithstanding there be such a covenant, it follows not from this, says
Arnisaeus, that if the Prince break his covenant and rule tyrannically, the
people shall be free, and the contract or covenant nothing. Ans. The covenant
may be materially broken, while the King remains King, and the subjects
remain subjects, but when it is both materially and formally declared by the
States to be broken, the people must be free from their Allegiance; but of this
more hereafter.

Arg. 7. If a Master bind himself by an Oath to his servant, he shall not
receive such a benefit of such a point of service; if he violate the Oath, his
Oath must give his servant Law and right, both to challenge his Master, and he
is freed from that point of service; an Army appoints such a one their Leader
and Captain, but they refuse to do it, except he swear he shall not betray
them to the enemy, he does betray them, then must the soldiers be loosed from
that contract; if one be appointed Pilate of a ship, and not but by an Oath, if
he sell the Passengers to the Turk, they may challenge the Pilate of his Oath;
and it is clear that 1. the estates should refuse to give the Crown, to him
who would refuse to govern them according to Gods Law, but should profess
that he would make his own will a Law, therefore the intention of the Oath is
clearly conditional. 2. When the King swears the Oath, he is but King in
fieri, and so not as King above the States of Kingdoms, now his being King
does not put him in a case above all civil obligation of a King to his
subjects, because the matter of the Oath is, that he shall be under them so
far, in regard of the Oath of God.

Arg. 8. If the Oath of God made to the people do not bind him to the people
to govern according to Law, and not according to his will and lust, it should
be unlawful for any to swear such an Oath, for if a power above law agree
essentially to a King as a King, as Royalists hold, he who swears such a
Oath, should both swear to be a King to such a people, and should swear to be
no King in respect by his Oath he should renounce that which is essential to a
King.

Arnisaeus objecteth; Ex particularibus non potest colligi conclusio
universalis, some few of the Kings, as David and Ioash, made a covenant with
the people; it follows not that this was a universal law. Ans. Yea, the
covenant is Deuteronomy. 17. and must be a rule to all; if so just a man as David was
limited by a covenant, then all the rest also.

QUEST. XV. Whether or no the King be Vnivocally, or only Analogically, and by
proportion a father?
IT is true, Aristotle Polit. l. 3. c. 11. says, That the Kingly power Joan.
Roffens. de potest. pap^. l. 2. c. 5. Adam suppose he had lived till now should
not have bin King of the whole earth because ^ father.
is a fatherly power; and Justin. Novell 12. c. 2. Pater quamvis legum
contemptor, quamvis impius sit, tamen pater est. But I do not believe that, as
Royalists say, that the Kingly power is essentially and univocally that same
with a paternall or fatherly power; or that Adam as a father, was as a father
and King, and that suppose Adam should live in Noah's days, that by divine
institution and without consent of the Kingdoms and communities on earth, Adam
hoc ipso, and for no other reason but because he was a father, should also be
the universal King, and Monarch of the whole world; or suppose Adam were
living to this day; that all Kings that has been since, and now are, held
their Crowns of him, and had no more Kingly power then inferior Judges in
Scotland have under our sovereign King Charles, for so all that has been, and
now are lawful Kings should be unjust usurpers; for if fatherly power be the
first and native power of commanding, it is against nature that a Monarch who
is not my father by generation, should take that power from me, and be a King
over both me and my children.

But I assert, that though the Word warrant us to esteem Kings King a father
Metaphorically only.
fathers, Esa. 49. 23. Jud. 5. 7. Genesis 20. v. 2. yet are not they essentially
and formally fathers by generation, Number. c. 11. v. 12. Have I conceived all
this people? have I begotten them? and yet are they but fathers metaphorically;
1. By office, because they should care for them as fathers do for children,
and so come under the name of fathers in the fifth Commandment; and therefore
rigorous and cruel Rulers are Leopards and Lions, and Wolves, Ezech. 22. 27.
Zeph. 3. 3. If then tyrannous Judges be not essentially and formally Leopards
and Lions, but only metaphorically, neither can Kings be formally fathers. 2.
Not only Kings, but all Judges are fathers in defending their subjects from
violence and the sword, and fighting the Lords battles for them, and
counselling them. If therefore Royalists argue rightly, A King is essentially a
father, and, fatherly power and royal power are of the same essence and
nature; As therefore he who is once a father, is ever a father, and his
children cannot take up arms against him to resist him, for that is
unnatural, and repugnant to the 5. Commandment: So he who is once a King, is
evermore a King, and it is repugnant to the fifth Commandment to resist him
with arms. It is answered, that the Argument presupposes that Royal power,
and Fatherly power is one and the same in nature, whereas they differ in
nature, and are only one by analogy and proportion: for so Pastors of the Word
are called fathers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. it will not follow, that once a Pastor,
evermore a Pastor; and that if therefore Pastors turn wolves, and by
heretical doctrine corrupt the flock, they cannot be cast out of the Church.
3. A father, as a father, has A fatherly power and a politic power are not
one and the fame.
not power of life and death over his sons, because, Romans 13. by divine
institution the sword is given by God to Kings and Judges: and if Adam had had
any such power to kill his son Cain, for the killing of his brother Abel, it
had been given to him by God as a power politic, different from a fatherly
power: for a fatherly power, as such, is formally to conserve the life of the
childaen, and not to take away the life: yea, and Adam, though he had never
sinned, nor any of his posterity, Adam should have been a perfect father, as
he is now endued with all fatherly power that any father now has; yea should
not God have given the sword or power of punishing ill doers, since that power
should have been in vain, if there had been no violence, nor bloodshed, or
sin on the earth: for the power of the sword and of lawful war, is given
to men now in the state of sin. 4. Fatherly government and power is from the
bosom and marrow of that fountain law of nature; but Royal power is not from
the law of nature, more then Aristocraticall or Democraticall power. D. Fern
says, Monarchy is not jure divino, (I am not D. Fern, par. 1. sect. 3. page
8.
of his mind) nor yet from the law of Nature, but, ductu naturae, by the
guidance of nature. Sure it is from a supervenient commandment of God, added
to the first law of nature, establishing Fatherly power. 5. Children having
their life and first breathings of nature from their parents, must be in a more
entire relation from their father, then from their Prince: Subjects have not
their Being natural, but their civil, politic and peaceable well-being from
their Prince. 6. A father is a father by generation, and giving the being of
nature to children, and is a natural head and root, without the free consent
and suffrages of his children, and is essentially a father to one child, as
Adam was to one Cain: but a Prince is a Prince by the free suffrages of a
community, and cannot be a King to one only, and he is the politic head of a
civil Corporation. 7. A father, so long as his children lives can never leave
off to be a father, though he were mad, and surious, though he be the most
wicked man on earth. Qui genuit filium non potest non genuisse filium, what is
once past cannot by any power be not passed, a father is a father for ever. But
by confession of Royalists, as Barclay, Hug. Grotius, and Arnisaeus and others
grant, if a King sell his subjects by sea or land to other nations, if he turn
a furious Nero, he may be dethroned, and the power that created the King under
such express conditions, as if the King violate them by his own consent, he
shall be put from the Throne, may cease to be a King, and if a stronger King
conquer a King and his subjects, Royalists ^ay the conqueror is a lawful
King; and so the conquered King must also lawfully come down from his Throne,
and turn a lawful captive sitting in the dust. 8. Learned Politicians, as
Bartholomeus Romulus, Defens. part. 1. number. 153. Ioannes de Anania in c. fin.
de his qui fill. occid. teach that the father is not obliged to reveal the
conspiracy of his son against his Prince, nor is he more to accuse his son,
then to accuse himself; because the father loves the son better then
himself. D. Listi quidem. Sect. Fin. quod. met. cause. and D. L. fin. c. de
cura furiosi, and certainly a father had rather dye in his own person as choose
to dye in his sons, in whom he affects a sort of immortality, In specie,
quando non potest in individuo: but a King does not love his subjects with a
natural or fatherly love thus; and if the affections differ, the power which
secondeth the affection, for the conservation either of being, or well being,
must also differ proportionally.

The P. Prelate objecteth against us thus, stealing word by word Sacr. sanct.
Reg. May. c. 7. page 87. Arnisaeus de potest. princip. c. 3. u. 1. 2.
from Arnisaeus: When a King is elected Sovereign to a multitude, he is
surrogated in the place of a common father, Exodus 20. 5. Honor thy father;
then as a natural father receives not Paternall right, power, or authority
from his sons, but has this from God, and the ordinance of nature, nor can
the King have his right from the community. 2. The maxim of the Law is,
Surrogatus gaudet privilegiis ejus cui surrogatur, and qui succedit ^n locum,
succedit in jus. The person surrogated, has all the Privileges that he has,
in whose place he succeeds, he who succeeds to the place, succeeds to the
right; the adopted son, or the bastard who is legittimated, and comes in
the place of the lawful borne son, comes also in the privileges of the
lawful borne son; a Prince elected comes to the full possession of the
Majesty of a natural Prince and Father, for Modu^ acquirendi non tollit
natural jus possidendi (says Arnisaeus, more fully then the poor Plagiarius)
the manner of acquiring any thing takes not away the natural possession, for
how ever things be acquired, if the title be just, possession is the Law of
Nations; then when the King is chosen in place of the father, as the father
has a divine right by nature, so must the King have that same: and seeing the
right proprietor (says the Pamphleting Prelate) had his right by God, by
nature, how can it be, but howsoever the designation of the person is from the
disordered community, yet the collation of the power is from God immediately,
and from his sacred and inviolable ordinance. And what can be said against the
way by which any one elected obtained his right, for seeing God does not now
send Samuells or Elisha's to anoint or declare Kings, we are in his ordinary
providence to conceive the designation of the person is the manifestation of
Gods Will, called Voluntas signi, as the Schools speak, just so as when the
Church designeth one to sacred orders.

Ans. 1. He that is surrogated in the place of another, due to him, by a
positive Law of man, he has Law to all the privileges that he has in whose
place he is surrogated, that is true. He who is made Assignee to an Obligation
for a sum of money, has all the rights that the principal party to whom the
Bond or Obligation was mad^, he who comes in the place of a Major of a City,
of a Captain in an Army, of a Pilot in a ship, of a Pope, has all the
privileges and Rights that his predecessors had by Law. Jus succedit juri,
persona jure predita personae jure preditae. So the Law, so far as my reading
can reach, who profess my self a Divine; but that he who succeeds to the
place of a father, by nature, should enjoy all the natural Rights and
Privileges of the person to whom he succeeds; I believe the Law never
dreamed it, for then the adopted son coming in place of the natural son,
has right to the natural affection of the father; if any should adopt Maxwell
the Prelate, should he love him as the Pursevant of Craile, Maxwell his father
loved him? I conceive not; has the adopted son his life, his being, the
figure bodily, the manners of the son in whose place he is adopted? or does
he naturally resemble the father as the natural son does? The Prelate did
not read this Law in any approved Iurist, though he did steal the argument
from Arnisaeus, and stole the citations of Homer and Aristotle out of him, with
a little Metathesis: A natural son is not made a son by the consent of
Parents, but he is a son by generation, so must the adopted son be adopted
See Aristotle says the Prelate, Eth. 8. 10. pol. 1. c. Homer. Odys. 1. he
might have said, see Arnisaeus lo. tit.
without the free consent and grace of the father adopting: so here the King
comes in the place of a natural father, but I conceive the Law says not
that the elected King is a King without consent of the subjects, as the
natural father is a father without consent of his sons. 2. Nor is it a Law
true, as once a father always a father, so once an elected King, always a
King, though he sell his subjects, being induced thereunto by wicked
Counselors. 3. If the King have no privileges, but what the natural father
has in whose place he comes, then as the natural father in a free Kingdom
has not power of life and death over his sons, neither has the King power
of life and death over his subjects, this is no Law. 4. This maxim should
prove good, if the King were essentially a father, by generation and natural
propagation, but he is only a father Metaphorically, and by a borrowed speech.
A father non generando, sed politice alendo, tuendo, regendo, therefore an
elected Prince comes not in the full possession of all the natural power and
rights of a natural father. 2. The P. Prelate speaks disgracefully of the
Church of God, calling it a disorderly community, as if he himself were borne
of Kings, where as God calls the King their Shepherd, and the people, Gods
flock, inheritance and people; and they are not a disorderly body by nature,
but by sin; in which sense the Prelate may call King, Priest and people, a
company of Heirs of Gods wrath, except he be an Arminian still, as once he
was. 3. If we are in ordinary providence now, because we have not Samuels, and
Prophets to anoint Kings, to hold the designation of a person to be King, to be
the manifestation of Gods Will, called voluntas ^igni, is Treason, for if
Scotland and England should design Maxwell in the place of King Charles our
native Sovereign (an odious comparison) Maxwell should be lawful King for
what is done by Gods Will, called by our Divines (they have it not from
Schoolmen, as the Prelate ignorantly says) his signified will which is our
rule, is done lawfully, there can be no greater treason put in print then this.

QUEST. XVI. Whether or no a despotiticall and masterly dominion of men and
things, agree to the King, because he is King.
I May here dispute whether the King be Lord, having a masterly dominion both
over men and things. But I first discuss shortly his dominion over his
subjects.

It is agreed on by Divines, that servitude is a penal fruit of sin, and
against nature. Institut. de jure personarum, Sect. 1. and F. de statu hominum.
l. libertas; Because all men* are borne by nature of equal condition.

1 Assert. The King has no proper, masterly, or herile dominion The King as
King, has no masterly domion over the people, but only fiduciarie.
over his subjects: his dominion is rather fiduciary and ministerial, than
masterly.

1. Because Royal Empire is essentially to feed* rule, defend, and to govern
in Peace and Godliness, 1 Timothy 2. 2. as the father does his children, Ps. 78.
71. He brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance, Esa*
55. 4. I gave him for a leader and commander to the people, 2 Samuel 5. 2. Thou
shall feed my people Israel, 2 Samuel 5. 2. 1 Chronicles 11. 2. 1 Chronicles* 17. 6. And so
it is, for the good of the people, and to bring those, over whom he is a feeder
and ruler, to such a happy end; and, as says Althusius, polit. c. 1. n. 13.
and Marius Salomonius, de princ. ^. 2. it is to take care of the good of those
over whom the Ruler is set, and, conservare est, rem illaesam servare, to keep
a thing safe. But to be a Master, and to have a masterly and herile power over
slaves and servants, is to make use of servants for the owners benefit, not for
the good of the slave, L. 2. de leg. L. Servus de servit. expert. Danae polit.
l. 1. Tolossan. de Rep. l. 1. c. 1. n. 15, 16. therefore are servants bought
and sold as goods, jure belli. F. de statu hominum, l. and servorum.

2. Not to be under Governors and Magistrates, is a judgment of God, Esa. 3. 6
7. Esa. 3. 1. Hos, 3. 4. Judge. 19. 1, 2. But not to be under To be a King, is
by office, and actu primo, to defend, save, feed, and not to hurt or inthral.
a master, as slaves are, is a blessing, seeing freedom is a blessing of God,
Ioh. 8. 33. Exodus 21. 2. v. 26, 27. Deuteronomy. 15. 12. so he that kills Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 25. his fathers house shall be free in Israel, Ier. 34. 9. Act. 22.
28. 1 Cor. 9. 19. Gal. 4. 26. 31. Therefore the power of a King cannot be an
herile and masterly power; for then to be under a Kingly power, should both be
a blessing, and a curse and just punishment of sin.

3. Subjects are called the servants of the King, 1 Samuel 15. 2. 2 Chronicles. 13. 7.
1 King. 12. 7. Exodus 10. 1, ^. Exodus* 9. 20. but they are not slaves, because,
Deuteronomy. 17. 20. they are his brethren: That the Kings hear be not lifted up
against his brethren. And his sons, Esa. 49. 23. And the Lord gave his people
a King as a blessing, 1 King. 10. 9. Hos. 1. 11. Esa. 1. 26. Ier. 17. 25. And
brought them out of the house of bondage, Exodus 20. v. 2. as out of a place of
misery. And therefore to be the Kings servants, in the places cited, is some
other thing then to be he Kings slaves.

4. The Master might in some cases sell the servant for money, yea for his own
gain he might do it, Nehem. 5. 8. Eccles. 2. 7. 1 King. 2. 32. G^n 9 25. Genesis
26* 14. 2 King. 4. 1. Genesis 20. 14. and might give away his servants; and the
servants were the proper goods and riches of the master, Eccles. 2. 7. Genesis 30.
43. Genesis 20. 14. Job. 1. 3. 15. But the King may not sell his Kingdom or
Subjects, or give them away for money, or any other way; for Royalists grant
that King to be a Tyrant, and worthy to be dethroned, who shall sell his
people: for the King may not delapidate the rents of the Crown, and give them
away to the hurt and prejudice of his successors, L. ult. Sect. sed nostr. C.
Comment. de lege, l. pet^. 69. Sect. fratrom de lege, 2. l. 32. ul^imo. D. T.
and far less can he lawfully sell men, and give away a whole Kingdom to the
hurt of his successors, for that were to make merchandise of the living
Temples of the Holy Ghost. And Arnisaus, de authorit. Princip. c. 3. n. 7.
says, Servitude is praeter naturam, beside nature; he might have said,
contrary to nature, l. 5. de stat* homin. Sect. 2. Just. de jur. person. c. 3.
and Novel. 89. but the subjection of subjects is so consonant to nature, that
it is seen in Bees and Cranes. Therefore a dominion is defined a faculty of
using of things to what uses you will. Now a man has not this way an absolute
dominion over his beasts, to dispose of them at his will; for a good man has
mercy on the life of his beast, Prove. 12. 10. nor has he dominion over his
goods to use them as he will, because he may not use them to the damage of the
Commonwealth, he may not use them to the dishonor of God; and so God and the
Magistrate has laid some bound on his dominion. And because the King being
made a King, leaves not off to be a reasonable creature, he must be under a
Law, and so his will and lust cannot be the rule of his power A King not over
men as reasonable men.
and dominion, but law and reason must regulate him. Now if God had given to
the King a dominion over men as reasonable creatures* his power and dominion
which by Royalists is conceived to be above Law, should be a rule to men as
reasonable men, which would make men under Kings no better then bruit beasts;
for then should subjects exercise acts of reason, not because good and honest,
but because their Prince commands them so to do; and if this cannot be said,
none can be at the disposing of Kings in politic acts liable to Royal
government, that way that the slave is in his actions under the dominion of his
master.

The Prelate objecteth out of Spalato, Arnisaeus, and Hug. Grotius, Prelat^.
Sacr. sanct. mas. c. 16. p. 15. Hugo Grotius has the same de jur. bell. and
pacis, l. 1. c. 3.
(for in his book there is not one line which is his own, except his raylings)
1. All government and superiority in Rulers is not primely and only for the
Subjects good: for some are by God and Nature appointed for the mutual and
inseparable good of the superior and inferior, as in the government of
husband and wife, or father and son; and in herili dominio, in the government
of a Lord and his servant, the good and benefit of the servant is but secondary
and consecutively intended, it is not the principal end, but the external and
advent^tious, as the gain that comes to a Physician, is not the proper and
internal end of his art, but follows only from his practice of Medicine.

Ans. The Prelates logic tends to this; some government tends to the
mutual good of the superior and inferior, but Royal Government is some
government, ergo nothing follows from a major proposition, Ex particulari
affirmante, in prima figura. Or of two particular propositions. 2. If it be
thus formed, every maritall government, and every government of the Lord and
servant is for the mutual good of the superior and inferior: But Royal
Government is such, ergo etc. the assumption is false, and cannot be proved, as
I shall anon clear.

2. Obj. Solomon disposed of Cabul, and gave it to Hiram, ergo a conquered
Kingdom is for the good of the conqueror especially. Ans. Solomon's special
giving away some Titles to the King of Tire, being a special fact of a Prophet
as well as a King, cannot warrant the King of England to sell England to a
foreign Prince, because William made England his own by conquest; which also
is a most false supposition: and this he stole from Hugo Grotius, who
condemns selling of Kingdoms.

3 Object. A man may render himself totally under the power of a Master,
without any conditions: and why may not the body of a people do the like? even
to have peace and safety, surrender themselves fully to the power of a King? A
lord of great Mannours may admit no man to live in his Lands, but upon a
condition of a full surrender of A compelled surrender of liberty tyeth not.
him, and his posterity to that lord. Tacitus shows us it was so anciently
amongst the Germans, and the Campanians surrendered themselves fully to the
Romans.

Answ. What compelled people may do to redeem their lives with loss of
liberty, is nothing to the point; such a violent Conqueror who will be a
father and a husband to a people, against their will, is not their lawful
King; and that they may sell the liberty of their posterity, not yet born, is
utterly denied as unlawful; yea, a violentated father to me is a father, and
not a father, and the posterity may vindicate their own liberty given away
unjustly, before they were born: Qua omne regnum vi partum potest vi dissolvi.

Object. 4. But ( says Doct. Fern) these which are ours, and given awa^ to
another, in which there redoundeth to God by donation a special interest, as
in things devoted to holy uses, though after they be abused, yet we cannot
recall them. Ergo, If the people be once forced to give away their liberty,
they cannot recall it; far less, if they willingly resign it to their Prince.

Answ. This is not true, when the power is given for the conservation of the
Kingdom, and is abused for the destruction thereof, for a power to destruction
was never given, nor can it by rational nature be given. 2. Mortifications
given to religious uses by a positive law, may be recalled by a more divine and
stronger law of nature, such as is this: I will have mercy and not sacrifice.
Suppose David of his own proper heritage, had given the Shewbread to the
Priests, yet when David and his men are famishing, he may take it back from
them against their will. Suppose Christ man had bought the Corns, and dedicated
them to the Altar, yet might he and his Disciples eat the Ears of Corn in their
hunger. The vessels of silver dedicated to the Church, may be taken and
bestowed on wounded Soldiers. 2. A people free may not, and ought not totally
surrender their liberty to a Prince, confiding on his goodness; 1. Because
liberty is a condition of nature, that all A surrender of ignorance and
mistake, is some way unvoluntary and obliges not.
men are born with, and they are not to give it away, no not to a King, except
in part, and for the better, that they may have peace and justice for it, which
is better for them, hic and nunc. 2. If a people trusting in the goodness of
their Prince, inslave themselves to him, and he shall after turn Tyrant; a rash
and temerarious surrender obliges not, Et ignorantia facit factum quasi
involuntarium: Ignorance makes the fact some way unvoluntary; for if the
people had believed that a meek King would have turned a rouring Lion, they
should not have resigned their liberty into his hand; and therefore the
surrender was tacitly conditional to the King as meek, or whom they believed
to be meek, and not to a tyrannous Lord; and therefore, when the contract is
made for the utilitie of the one party, the law says their place is for after
wits, that men may change their mind, and resume their liberty, though if they
had given away their liberty for money, they cannot recall it; and if violence
made the surrender of liberty, here is slavery, and slaves taken in war so soon
as they can escape, and return to their own, they are free. D. Sect. item. e^
Justit. de rerum divin. l. nihil. F. de capt. l. 3. So the learned Ferdin.
Vasquez illustri. l. 2. c. 82. ^. 15. says, The bird that was taken, and has
escaped, is free; nature in a forced people, so soon as they can escape from a
violent Conqueror makes them a free people: and si solo tempore (says Ferd.
Vasquez, l. 2. c. 82. n. 6.) justificatur subjectio, solo tempore facilius
justificabitur liberatio.

Assert. 20. All the Goods of the Subjects belongs not to the The Goods of
the Subjects not the Kings.
King: I presuppose, that the division of Goods does not necessarily flow from
the law of nature, for God made man before the fall, Lord of the creatures
indefinitely; but what Goods be Peter's, and not Paul's, we know not. But
supposing man's sin, though the light of the Sun and Air be common to all, and
religious places be proper to none, yet it is morally unpossible, that there
should not be a distinction of meum and tuum, mine and thine: and the decalogue
forbidding theft, and coveting the wife of another man, (yet is she the wife of
Peter, not of Thomas by free election, not by an act of natures law) does
evidence to us, that the division of things is so far forth, (men now being in
the state of sin) of the law of nature, that it has evident ground in the Law
of nations; and thus far natural, that the heat that I have from my own coat
and cloak, and the nourishment from my own meat, are physically incommunicable
to any Quod jure gentium dicitur. F. de justi tia and jure. l. ex he. Quod
partim jure civili. Iusti. de rerum divisio. sect. singulorum.
. But I hasten to prove the Proposition: If 1. I have leave to premit, that in
time of necessity all things are common by Gods Law: A man traveling, might
eat Grapes in his neighbors vineyard, though he was not licenced to carry any
away. I doubt if David wanting money, was necessitated to pay money for the
Shewbread, or for Goliahs sword, supposing these to be the very Goods of
private men, and ordinarily to be bought and sold: natures Law in extremity,
for self preservation, has rather a Prerogative Royal above all Laws of
Nations, and all civil Laws then any mortal King; and therefore by the civil
Law, all are the Kings, in case of extreme necessity; in this meaning, any one
man is obliged to give all he has for the good of the Commonwealth, and so
far the good of the King, in as far as he is head and father of the
Commonwealth L. item si verberatum. F. de rei vindicat. Ias. plene m. l.
Barbarius. F. de o^fici. praetor. all the goods of the people are the Kings in
a fourfold notion, but not in propriety.
. 2. All things are the Kings, in regard of his public power, to defend all
men, and their Goods from unjust violence. 3. All are the Kings in regard of
his Act of conservation of Goods, for the use of the just owner. 4. All are the
Kings in regard of a legal limitation, in case of a damage, offered to the
Commonwealth, justice requires confiscation of Goods for a fault; but
confiscated Goods are to help the interessed Commonwealth, and the King, not
as a man (to bestow them on his children) but as a King; to this we may refer
these called bona cadu^a and inventa, things losed by Shipwreck, or any other
providence, Vlpian. tit. 19. t. c. de bonis vacantibus. C. de Thesauro.
Subjects are propriators of their own Goods. Argum. 1.


And the Reasons why private men are just Lords and proprietors of their own
Goods, are, 1. Because by order of nature, division of Goods comes nearer to
natures law, and necessity, then any King or Magistrate in the world; for
because it is agreeable to nature, that every man be warmed by his own fleece,
nourished by his own meat; therefore to conserve every man's Goods to the just
owner, and to preserve a community from the violence of rapine and theft, a
Magistrate and King was devised. So it is clear, men are just owners of their
own Goods, by all good order, both of nature and time, before there be any such
thing as a King or Magistrate. Now if it be good that every man enjoy his own
Goods, as just proprietor thereof for his own use, before there be a King, who
can be proprietor of his Goods, and a King being given of God for a blessing,
not for any man's hurt and loss; the King comes in to preserve a man's Goods,
but not to be lord and owner thereof himself, nor to take from any man Gods
right to his own Goods.

2. When God created man at the beginning, he made all the Argum. 2.
creatures for man* and made them by the law of nature, the proper possession
of man, but then there was not any King formally as King; for certainly Adam
was a father before he was a King, and no man being either born, or created a
King over an other man, no more then the first Lion, and the first Eagle, that
God created, were by the birthright, and first-start of creation, by nature,
the King of all Lions, and all Eagles to be after created; no man can by
natures law, be the owner of all Goods of particular men: And because the law
of nations founded upon the law of nature, has brought in meum and tuum, mine
and thine, as proper to every particular man, and the introduction of Kings
cannot overturn natures foundation; neither civility, nor grace destroys, but
perfiteth nature: and if a man be not born a King, because he is a man, he
cannot be born the possessour of my Goods.

3. What is a Character, and note of a Tyrant, and an oppressing Argum. 3.
King as a Tyrant, is not the just due of a King as a King: But to take the
proper Goods of Subjects, and use them as his own, is a proper Character, and
note of a Tyrant, and an oppressor. Ergo, the proposition is evident. A King
and a Tyrant are by way of contradiction contrary one to another: the
assumption is proved thus, Ezekiel. 45. 9. Thus says the Lord, Let it suffice
you, O Princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and
justice, take away your exactions from my people, says the Lord, Verse. 10. Ye
shall have just balances, and a just Ephah, and a just bath. If all be the
Kings, he is not capable of extortion and rapine, Micah 3. 2. God complains
of the violence of Kings: Is it not for you to know judgment? Verse. 3. Who eat
the flesh of my people, and flea their skins from off them, and they break
their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the
chaldron, Isai. 3. The answer of Hybreas to a extorting Prince Autonius. Argum.
4. Species enim furti est de alieuo largiri, and beneficii debitorem sihi
acquirere, L. si pignore, sect. de furt.
14. Zeph. 3. 3. and was it not an act of tyranny in King Achab, to take the
vineyard of Naboth, and in King Saul? 1 Samuel 8. 14. to take the people of Gods
fields and vineyards, and olive-yards, and give them to their servants? Was it
a just fault that Hybreas objected to Antonius, exacting two tributes in one
year, that he said, If thou must have two tributes in one year, then make for
us two Summers and two Harvests, in one year? This cannot be just; if all be
the Kings, the King takes but his own.

4. Subjects under a Monarch could not give alms, nor exercise works of
charity; for charity must be my own, Isai. 58. 7. Is it not to deal thy bread
to the hungry? etc. Eccles. 11. 1. Cast thy bread into the waters; and the Law
says, It is theft to give of another man's to the poor: yea, the distinction of
poor and rich, should have no place under a Monarchy, he only should be rich.

5. When Paul commands us to pay tribute to Princes, Romans 13. Argum. 5.
6. because they are the Ministers of God, he lays this ground, That the King
has not all, but that the subjects are to give to him of their goods.

6. It is the Kings place, by justice to preserve every man in his Argum. 6.
own right, and under his own fig tree. Ergo, Its not the Kings house.

7. Even Pharaoh could not make all the victual of the land his Argum. 7.
own, while he had bought it with money: and every thing is presumed to be
free. Allodialis, free land, except the King prove that it is bought or
purchased. L. actius, C. de servit. and aqua. and Joan. And. m. C. F. de ind.
and hosti. in C. minus de jur.

8. If the subjects had no propriety in their own goods, but all Argum. 8.
were the Princes due, then the subject should not be able to make any contract
of buying and selling without the King, and every subject were in the case of a
slave. Now the Law says, L. 2. F. de Noxali. act. l. 2. F. ad legem aquil.
When he makes any Covenant, he is not obliged civilly to keep it, because the
condition of a servant, he not being sui juris, is compared to the state of a
beast, though he be obliged by a natural obligation, being a rational
Creature, in regard of the law of nature, L. naturaliter, L. si id quod, L.
interdum, F. de cond. indebit. cum aliis. 2. The subject could not by Solomon
be forbidden to be surety for his friend; as King Solomon does counsel, Prove.
6. 1, 2, 3. he could not be condemned to bring on himself poverty by
sluggishnesse, as Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. nor were he to honor the Lord with
his riches, as Prove. 3. 9. nor to keep his Covenant, though to his loss, Psalm.
15. 4. nor could he be merciful and lend, Psalm. 37. 26. nor had he power to
borrow; nor could he be guilty in not paying all again, Psalm. 37. 21. For
subjects under a Monarch, can neither perform a duty, nor fail in a duty, in
the matter of Goods; If all be the Kings, what power or dominion has the
subject in disposing of his Princes Goods? See more in Petr. Rebuffus, tract.
congruae portionis, number. 225. page 109, 110. Sed quoad dominiumrerum, etc.

QUEST. XVII. Whether or not the Prince have properly a fiduciarie, and
ministerial power of a Tutor, Husband, Patron, Minister, head, father of a
family, not of a Lord or dominator?
THat the power of the King is fiduciarie, that is given to him The Kings power
fiduciarie.
immediately by God in trust, Royallists deny not; but we hold that the t^ust is
put upon the King by the people. 2. We deny that the people give themselves to
the King as a gift, for what is freely given cannot be taken again; but they
gave themselves to the King as a pawn; and if the pawn be abused, or not used
in that manner as it was conditionated to be used, the party in whose hand the
pawn is entrusted, fails in his trust.

1. Assertion. The King is more properly a Tutor then a Father, The King a
Tutor.
1. Indigencie is the original of Tutors, the Parents dye; what then shall
become of the Orphan and his inheritance? he cannot guide it himself;
therefore nature devised a Tutor to supply the Difference between a father and
a Tutor.
place of a father, and to govern the Tutor; but with this consideration, the
father is Lord of the inheritance, and if he be distressed, may sell it, that
it shall never come to the son, and the father for the bad deserving of his
son may dis-inherite him; but the Tutor being but a borrowed father, cannot
sell the inheritance of the pupil, nor can he for the pupills bad deserving,
by any dominion of Justice over the pupil, take away the inheritance from him,
and give it to his own son; so a Community of it self, because of sin, is a
naked society that can but destroy it self, and every one eat the flesh of
his brother, therefore God has appointed a King or governor, who shall take
care of that community, rule them in peace, and save all from reciprocation of
mutual acts of violence, yet so, as because a trust is put on the Ruler of a
community, which is not his heritage, he cannot dispose of it as he pleases,
because he is not the proper owner of the inheritance.

2. The Pupil when he comes to age, may call his Tutor to an account for his
administration; I do not acknowledge that as a truth, which Arnisaeus says,
De authoritate. prin. c. 3. n. 5. The Commonwealth is always minor, and under
Tutory, because it always has need of a curator and governor, and can never
put away its governor, but the pupil may grow to age and wisdom, so as he
may be without all Tu^ors, and can guide himself, and so may call in question
his Tutor, and the pupil cannot be his Judge; but must stand to the sentence
of a superior Judge, and so the people cannot judge or punish their Prince,
God must be Judge betwixt them both.

But this is 1. a begging of the question, every comparison halteth, no
community but it is Major in this, that it can appoint its own A free
Community no pupil or minor.
Tutors, and though it cannot be without all Rulers, yet it may well be without
this or that Prince and Ruler, and therefore may resume its power, which it
gave conditionally to the Ruler for its own safety and good, and in so far
as this condition is violated, and power turned to the destruction of the
Commonwealth, it is to be esteemed as not given; and though the people be not
a politic Judge in their own cause, yet in case of manifest oppression,
nature can teach them to oppose defensive violence against offensive: a
community in its politic body is also above any Ruler, and may judge what is
manifestly destructive to it self.

Obj. The Pupil has not power to appoint his own Tutor, nor does he give
power to him, so neither does the people give it to the King. Ans. The Pupil
has not indeed a formal power to make a Tutor, but he has vertually a legal
power in his father, who appoints a Tutor for his son, and the people have
vertually all Royal power in them, as in a sort of immortal and eternal
fountain, and may create to themselves many Kings.

Asser. 2. The Kings power is not properly and univocally a Maritall The Kings
power not properly Maritall or husbandly.
and husbandly power, but only Analogically, 1. The Wife by nature is the
weaker Vessel, and inferior to the man, but the Kingdom, as shall be
demonstrated is superior to the King. 2. The Wife is given as an help to the
man, but by the contrary the man here is given as an help and father to the
Commonwealth, which is presumed to be the wife. 3. Maritall and husbandly
power is natural, though it be not natural, but from free election that Peter
is Anae's Husband, and should have been, though man had never sinned: but
Royal Power is a politic constitution, and the world might have subsisted,
though Aristocracy or Democracy had been the only and perpetual governments.
So let the Prelate glory in his borrowed Logic, he had it from Barclay. It is
not in the power of the Wife to repudiat her Husband, though never so wicked,
she is tied to him for ever, and may not give to him a bill of Divorcement, as
by Law the Husband might give to her; if therefore the people swear loyalty to
him, they must keep, though to their hurt. Ps. 15. Aas. There Is nothing here
said, except Barclay and the Plagiarie prove, that the Kings Power is properly
a Husbands power, which they cannot prove, but from a Simile that crooketh; but
a King elected upon conditions, that if he sell his people, he shall lose his
Crown, is as essentially a King, as Adam was Evahs Husband, and yet by grant of
parties, the people may devorce from such a King, and dethrone him, if he sell
his people; but a Wife may never devorce from her Husband, as the Argument
says. And this poor Argument the Prelate stole from Dr. Fern, part 2. Sec.
3. page 10, 11. 2. The keeping of Covenant though to our hu^t, is a penal
hurt, and loss of goods, not a moral hurt, and loss of Religion.

Assert. 3. The King is more properly a sort of Patron, to defend The King a
Patron rather then a Lord.
the people, and therefore has no power given either by God or man to hurt the
people, and a Minister or public and honorable servant, Romans 13. 4. for he is
the Minister of God to thee for good; he is the Commonwealths servant
objectively, because all the Kings The King an honorable servant.
service, as he is King, is for the good, safety, peace and salvation of the
people, and in this he is a servant. 2. He is the servant of the people
Representatively, in that the people has impawned in his hand all their power
to do Royal service. Obj. He is the servant of God, ergo he is not the
peoples Servant, but their sovereign Lord. Ans. It follows not, because all
the service the King as King performs to God, they are acts of Royalty, and
acts of Royal service, as terminated on the people; or acts of their
Sovereign Lord, and this proves that to be their Sovereign, is to be their
servant, and watchman. Royal power only from God, and only from the people in
diverse respects.


Object. 2. God makes a King only, and the Kingly power is in him only, not in
the people. Ans. The Royal power is only from God, immediately, Immediatione
simplicis constitutionis, and solum a Deo solitudine primae causae, by the
immediation of simple constitution, none but God appointed there should be*
Kings; but 2. Royal power is not in God, nor only from God; immediatione
applicationis regiae dignitatis ad personam, nec a Deo solum, solitudine*
causae applicantis dignitatem, huic, non illi, in respect of the applying of
Royal dignity to this person, not to this.

Object. 3. Though Royal power were given to the people, it is not given to
the people, as if it were the Royal power of the people, and not the Royal
power of God, neither is it any other ways bestowed on the people but as on a
beam, a channel, an instrument, by which it is derived to others, and so the
King is not the minister or servant of the people.

Ans. It is not in the people as in the principal cause; Sure all Royal power
that way is only in God; but it is in the people as in the instrument: and when
the people makes David their King at Hebron, in that same very act, God by the
people using their free suffrages and consent, makes David King at Hebron: so
God only gives rain, and none of the vanities and supposed gods of the
Gentiles can give rain, Ier. 14. 22. and yet the Clouds also give rain, as
nature, as an organ and vessel out of which God powers down rain upon the
dry earth, Amos 9. 5. and every instrument under God, that is properly an
instrument* is a sort of Vicarious cause in Gods room, and so The King the
servant of the people both objectively and subjectively.
the people as in Gods room, applies Royal power to David, not to any of
Saul's sons, and appoints David to be their Royal Servant to govern, and
in that to serve God, and to do that, which a Community now in the state of
sin cannot formally do themselves: and so I see not how it is a service to
the people, not only objectively, because the Kings Royal service tends to
the good, and peace, and safety of the people; but also subjectively, in regard
he has his power and Royal authority which he exercises as King, from the
people under God, as Gods instruments: and therefore* the King and Parliament
give ou^ Laws and Statutes in the name of the whole people of the Land. And
they are but flatterers, and belie the Holy Ghost, who teach that the people
do not make the King; for Israel made Saul King at Mizpeh, and Israel made
David King at Hebron.

Object. 3. Israel made David King, that is, Israel designed David's person to
be King, and Israel consented to Gods act of making David King, but they did
not make David King.

Ans. I say not that Israel made the Royal dignity of Kings: By one and the
same act the Lord of Heaven, and the People make the King according to the
physical realitie of the act.
God, Deuteronomy. 17. instituted that himself: but the Royalist must give us an act
of God going before an act of the peoples making David King at Hebron, by which
David of no King is made formally a King: and then another act of the People,
approving only and consenting to that act of God, whereby David is made
formally of no King to be a King. This Royalists shall never instruct, for
there be only two acts of God here; 1. Gods act of anointing David by the hand
of Samuel; and 2. Gods act of making David King at Hebron: and a third they
shall never give. But the former is not that by which David was essentially and
formally changed from the state of a private subject, and no King, into the
state of a public Judge and supreme Lord and King, for (as I have proved)
after this act of anointing of David King, he was designed only and set apart
to be King in the Lords ^it time; and after this anointing, he was no more
formally a King then Doeg or Nabal were Kings, but a subject who called Saul
the Lords anointed and King, and obeyed Saul as another subject does his King:
but it is certain God by no other act made David King at Hebron, then by
Isreal's act of free electing him to be King and leader of the Lords people, as
God by no other act sends down rain on the earth, but by Gods melting the
clouds, and causing rain to fall on the earth: and therefore to say Israel
made David King at Hebron, that is, Israel approved only and consented to a
prior act of Gods making David King, is all one as to say Saul prophesied, that
is, Saul consented to a prior act of the Spirit of God who prophesied: and
Peter preached, Act. 2. that is, Peter approved and consented to the Holy
Ghosts act of preaching. Which to say, is childish.

Assert. 4. The King is an head of the Commonwealth only metaphorically, The
King head of the Community only metaphorically
by a borrowed speech, in a politic sense, because he rules, commands,
directs the whole politic body in all their operations and functions. But
he is not univocally and essentially the head of the Commonwealth. 1. The same
very life in number that is in the head, is in the members: there be diverse
distinct souls and lives in the King, and in his Subjects. 2. The head
natural is not made an head by the free election and consent of arms,
shoulders, legs, toes, fingers, etc. The King is made King only by the free
election of his people. 3. The natural head, so long as the person lives, is
ever the head, and cannot cease to be a head while it is seated on the
shoulders: The King, if he sell his people, their persons and souls, may leave
off to be a King and Head. 4. The head and members live together, and dye
together: the King and the people are not so; the King may dye, and the People
live. 5. The natural head cannot destroy the members, and preserve it self:
but King Nero may waste and destroy his people. D. Fern, M. Simmons, the P.
Prelate, when they draw arguments from the head, do but dream, as the members
should not resist the head. Natural members should not, or cannot resist the
head, though the hand may pull a tooth out of the head, which is no small
violence to the head. But the members of a Politic body may resist the
Politic head. 2. This or that King is not the adequate and total Politic
head of the Commonwealth: and therefore though you cut off a Politic head,
there is nothing done against nature. If you cut off all Kings of the Royal
line, and all Governors Aristocraticall, both King and Parliament, this were
against nature; And a Commonwealth which would cut off all Governors, and all
Heads, should go against nature, and run to ruin quickly. I conceive a
society of reasonable men cannot want Governors. 6. The natural head
communicates life, sense, and motion to the members, and is the seat of
external and internal senses: the King is not so.

Hence Assert. 5. the King is not properly the head of a family, The King but
metaphorically only Lord of the family.
for, 1. (as Tholossa says well de Rep. l. 5. c. 5.) Nature has one intention
in making the thumb, another intention in making the whole hand, another in
forming the body: so there is on^ intention of the God of nature in governing
of one man, another in governing a Family, another in governing a City: nor
is the thumb King of all the members: so domestic government is not
Monarchical properly. 1. The mother has a parentall power as the father has,
Prove. 4. 5. and 10. 3. and 31. 17. so the 5. Command says, Honor thy father
and thy mother. 2. Domestic government is natural, Monarchical politic. 3.
Domestic is necessary, Monarchical is not necessary, other governments may be
as well as it. 4. Domestic is universal, Monarchical not so. 5. Domestical
has its rise from natural instinct without any farther instruction: a
Monarchical government is not, but from election, choosing one Government, not
another.

Hence that is a fiduciarie power, or a power of trust, wherein The King not
heir nor proprietor of the Kingdom.
1. the thing put in trust is not his own proper either heritage or gift, so as
he may dispose of it as he pleases, as men dispose of their goods or heritage.
But the King may not dispose of men as men, as he pleases; nor 2. of Laws as
he pleases; nor 3. of governing men, killing or keeping alive, punishing and
rewarding, as he pleases.

2. My life and Religion, and so my Soul, in some cases, are committed to the
King as to a public Watchman, even as the flock to the feeder, the City to
the Watchmen: And he may betray it to the Enemy. Ergo, he has the trust of
Life and Religion, and has both tables of the Law in his custody, ex officio,
to see that other men then himself keep the Law: But the Law is not the Kings
own, but given to him in trust. 3. He who receives a Kingdom conditionally,
may be dethroned if he sell it, or put it away to any other is a fiduciarie
Patron, and has it only in trust. So Hottoman, quest. ill. 1. Ferdinand.
Vasquez, illust. quest. l. 1. c. 4. Althusius polit. c. 24. n. 35. so says the
law of every Factor or Deputy, l. 40. l. 63. procur. l. 16. C. dict. 1.
Antigonus dixit Regnum esse nobilem servitutem. Tyberius Caesar called the
Senate, Dominum suum, his Lord. Suetonius in vita Tiberii, c. 29.

QUEST. XVIII. What is the law of the King, and his Power? 1 Samuel 8. 11. This
will be the manner of the King who shall reign over you, etc.
THis place, 1 Samuel 8, 9. and v. 11. The law or manner of the King The place, 1 Samuel 8, 9, 11. discussed.
is alleged to prove both the absolute power of Kings, and 2. the
unlawfulness of resistance: therefore I crave leave here to vindicate the
place, and to make it evident to all, that the place speaks for no such
matter. 1. Grotius de ju. bell. and pacis, l. 1. c. 4. n. 3.
Hug. Grotius argues thus: that by this place, the people oppressed with
injuries of a Tyrannous King, have nothing left them but prayers and cries to
God; and therefore there is no ground for violent resisting. Barclaius contra
Monarchom. l. 2. p. 64. Potostatem intelligit non ^a^ quae competit ex
praecepto, neque etiam quae ex permissu est, quatenus liberat a peccato, sed
quatenus paenis legalibus ^ximit operantem.
Barclay will have us to distinguish inter officium Regis, and potestatem,
between the Kings office, and the Kings power: And he will have the Lord here
speaking, not of the Kings office, what he ought to do before God, but what
power a King has beside and above the power of Judges, to tyrannize over the
people, so as the people has no power to resist it. He will have the Office of
the King spoken of Deuteronomy. 17. and the Power of the King, 1 Samuel 8* and that
power which the People was to obey and submit unto, without resisting. But I
answer, 1. It is a vain thing to distinguish betwixt the office and the power;
for the power is either a power to rule according to (c) Barclaius contra
Monarcho. l. 2. p. 56, 57.
Gods law, as he is commanded, Deuteronomy. 17. and this is the very office or
official power which the King of Kings has given to all Kings under him: and
this is a power of the Royal office of a King, to govern for the Lord his
maker; or this is a power to do ill, and The power and office of the King,
badly disterenced by Barclay.
tyrannize over Gods people: but this is accidental to a King, and the
character of a Tyrant, and is not from God: and so the Law of the King in this
place must be the Tyranny of the King, which is our very mind. 2. Barclay.
Reges sine dominatione ne concipi quidem possunt. -- Iudices dominationem in
populum minime habebant. Hence it is clear that Barclay says, that the Judges
of Israel, and the Kings are different in essence and nature; so that
domination is so essential to a King, that you cannot conceive a King, but he
must have domination, whereas the Judges of Israel had no domination over the
people. Hence I argue that, whereby a King is essentially distinguished from a
Judge, that must be from God; but by domination, which is a power to oppress
the subject, a King is essentially distinguished from a Judge of Israel. Ergo,
Domination and a power to do Acts of Tyranny, as they are expressed, Verse 11,
12, 13. and to oppress a subject, is from God, and so must be a lawful power;
but the conclusion is absurd, the assumption is the doctrine of Barclay: The
major proposition I prove. 1. Because both the Judge and the King was from God,
for God gave Moses a lawful calling to be a Judge, so did he to Eli, to
Samuel, and Deuteronomy. 17. 15. the King is a lawful Ordinance of God: If then the
Judge and the King, be both lawful Ordinances, and if they differ essentially,
as Barclay says; then that specifice form which distinguishes the one from
the other, to wit, Domination and a power to destroy the subject, must be from
God, which is blasphemous; for God can give no moral power to do wickedly; for
that is license, and a power to sin against a Law of God, which is absolutely
inconsistent with the holiness of God; for so the Lord might deny himself, and
dispense with sin (God avert such blasphemies.) Now if the kingly power be from
God, That which essentially and specifically constituteth a King, must be from
God, as the Office it self is from God: And Barclaius, l. 3* c. 2.
Barclay says expressly, That the kingly power is from God, and that same
which is the specifice form, that constituteth a King, must be that which
essentially separateth the King from the Judge, if they be essentially
different, as Barclay dreameth. Hence have we this jus Regis, this Manner or
Law of the King, to tyrannize and oppress, to be a power from God, and so a
lawful power; by which you shall have this result of Barclayes interpretation,
That God made a Tyrant as well as a King. 3. By this difference that Barclay
puts betwixt the King and the Judge, the Judge might be resisted; for he had
not this power of domination, that Saul has, contrary to Romans 13. 2. Exodus 22.
28. and 20, 12.

But let us try the Text first (...) the word cannot enforce us to expone (...)
a law; our English renders, Show them the manner of the King. Arr. Mon. Haec
erit ratio Regis.
Arri. Montanus turns it ratio Regis. I grant the Seventy render it, 70.
Interpret. Vatabul. judica ^is judicium and consuetudinem, i. mores and ib. bis
moribus and hac consuetudine utentur erga vos reges.
(...). The Chalde Paraphrase says, Statutum regis. Chald. Para. (...). 70.
Interp. 70. Interp.
Hieronimus translateth it jus regis; so Calvin: but I am sure the Hebrew both
in words and sense bears a consuetude; yea, and the word (...) signifies not
always a law, as Josh. 6. 14. They compassed the citi^ (...) seven times. 70.
(...). 2 King. 17. 26. They know not the manner of the God of the Land, Verse.
33. They served their ^^n gods, after the manner of the Heathen. (...) It
cannot be according to the Law or right of the Heathen, except (...), be taken
in an evil part. 70. (...). Verse. 34. Until this day they do after these
manners, 1 Kings 18. 28. Baals Priests cut themselves with Knives (...) after
their manner. 70. (...), Genesis 40. 13. Thou shall give the cup to Pharaoh,
according as thou wast wont to do. (...), Exodus 21. 19. He shall deal with her
after the manner of daughters, 1 Samuel 27. 11. And David saved neither man nor
woman alive, to bring (tidings) to Gath, saying, So did David, and so will his
manner be, (...). It cannot be, they meaned that it was David's law, right, or
privilege to spare none alive, 1 Samuel 2. 13. And the Priests custom with the
people was, etc. (...) This was a wicked custom, not a law, and the 70.
turns it, (...); and therefore (...) is not always taken in a good meaning:
so P. Martyr. coment. 1 Samuel 8. verum jus regium describit in Deuteronomy. apud
Samuelem autem usurpatum.
P. Martyr, He means here of an usurped law, says he; Calvin Calvin. conc. 1 Samuel 8.
Non jus a deo prescriptum, sed tyranidem. He speaks not of Gods, law here
(says he) but of tyranny. Andr. Rivetus in decal. ^. 20. Exodus in ^. mundat.
p. 195.
And Rivetus, (...) signifies not ever jus, law. Sed aliquando morem sive
modum and rationem agendi, The custom and manner of doing, so Junius Junius
annot. in 1 Samuel 2 13.
and Tremellius. Diodatus annot. 1 Samuel 8. 3.
Diodatus exponeth jus; This law, namely (says he) that which is now grown to
a common custom, by the consent of nations, and Gods toleration. Glossa
interlinearis.
The interline gloss (to speak of Papists) exactionem and dominationem; The
extortion and domination of King Saul is here meant. Lyra in locum, hic
accipitur jus large sumptum quod reputatur jus propter malum abusum. Nam illa
quae dieuntur hic de jure. Reg is, magis contingunt per Tyranidem.
Lyra exponeth it tyranny. Tostatus Abulens. in 1 Reg. 8. q. 17. deq. 21.
Tostatus Abulens. He means here of Kings indefinitely, who oppressed the
people with taxes and tributes, as Solomon and others. Cornelius a Lapid. in
locum.
Cornelius a lapide: This was an unjust law. Cajetan. in locum.
Cajetanus* calls it, tyranny. Hugo Cardinal. in loc.
Hugo Cardinal, names them, exactiones and servitutes, exactions and
slaveries: And Serrarius in locum.
Serrarius, he speaks not here, Quid Reges jure possint, What they may do by
right and law; Sed quid audeant, What they will be bold to do, and what they
tyrannically decern against all Laws of nature and humanity. And so Thom.
Aquin. l. 3. de Regni Princip. c. 11.
speaks Tho. Aquinas: Mendoza, jus Tyrannorum.
So also Mendoza, says he, speaks of the law of Tyrants: and Clemens
Alexand. page 26.
amongst the fathers, Clemens Alexandrinus says on this place, Non humanum
pollicetur dominum, sed insolentem daturum minatur tyrannum, He promises not a
humane Prince, but threatens to give them an insolent Tyrant; and the like
also says Beda, l. 2. expo. in Samuel.
Beda. And an excellent Petrus Rebuffus tract. de incongrua. prert. p. 110.
Osiander, he sets not down the Office of the King, what he ought to be, but
what manner of King they should have. Pelican. that ruled by will, not by law.
Willet. Such as decline to Tyranny. Borhaius, Tyrants, not Kings.
Lawyer, Pet. Rebuffus says, Etiam loquitur de Tyranno qui non erat a Deo
electus. And that he speaks of Saul's Tyrannical usurpation, and not of the
law prescribed by God, Deuteronomy. 17. I prove, 1. He speaks of such a power, as is
answerable to the Acts here spoken of; but the Acts here spoken of, are Acts of
mere tyranny, Verse. 11. And this will be the manner of your King, that shall
reign over you, he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
Chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariots: Now
to make slaves of their sons, was an Act of Tyranny. 2. To take their fields
and vineyards, and oliveyards from them, and give them to his servants, was no
better then Ahabs taking Naboths vineyard from him, which by Gods law he might
not lawfully sell, except in the case of extreme poverty, and then in the year
of Jubilee, he might redeem his own inheritance. 3. Verse 15, 16. To put the
people of God to bondage, and make them servants, was to deal with them, as the
Tyrant Pharaoh did. 4. He speaks of such a law, the execution whereof should
make them cry out to the Lord, because of their King: but the execution of the
just Law of the King, Deuteronomy. 17. is a blessing, and not a bondage which should
make the people cry out of the bitterness of their spirit. 5. It is clear
here, that God is by his Prophet, not instructing the King in his duty, but as
Rabb. Levi Ben. Gersom. in 1 Samuel 8. Pezelius in exp. leg. Mosai. l. 4. c. 8.
Tossan. in not. Bibl. Bosseus de Rep. Christ. potest. supra regem, c. 2. n.
103. Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. c. 19. Breutius, homil. 27. in 1 Samuel 8. Mos regis
non de jure, sed de vulga^a consuetudine.
Rabbi Levi Ben. Gersom says, Terrifying them from their purpose of seeking a
King, and foretelling the evil of punishment that they should suffer under a
tyrannous King; But he speaks not one word of these necessary and comfortable
Acts of favor, that a good King by his good Government was to do for his
people, Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16. But he speaks of contrary facts here; and that he
is dissuading them from suiting a King, is clear from the Text. 1. Because he
says, Give them their will; but yet protest against their unlawful course. 2.
He bids the Prophet lay before them the tyranny, and oppression of their
King; which tyranny Saul exercised in his time, as the story shows. 3.
Because how uneffectuall Samuels exhortation was, is set down, Verse 19.
Nevertheless, they would not obey the voice of Samuel, but said, Nay, but we
will have a King over us; if Samuel had not been dehorting them from a King,
how could they be said in this, to refuse to hear the voice of Samuel? 6. The
ground of Barclay and Royalists, here is weak, Doct. Fern, p. 2. sect. page 55.
For they say, that the people sought a King like the Nations, and the Kings of
the Nations were all absolute, and so Tyrants; And God granted their unlawful
desire, and gave them a Tyrant to reign over them, such as the Nations had. The
plain contrary is true, they sought not a Tyrant, but one of the special
reasons why they sought a King, was to be freed of Tyranny; for 1 Samuel 8. 3.
Because Samuels sons turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted
judgment; therefore all the Elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and
came to Samuel, to Ramah, and their they sought a King. 7. One could not more
clearly speak with the mouth of a false Prophet, then the Author of active and
passive obedience does, while he Active and passive, Obed. page 24.
will have Samuel here to describe a King, and to say; ye have formerly
committed one error in shaking off the yoke of God, and seeking a King; so now
beware you fall not in the next error, in casting of the yoke of a King, which
God at your own desire has laid on you; for God has only power, both to make
and unmake Kings; therefore prepare your selves patiently to suffer and bear.
Answ. For if he were exhorting to patient suffering of the yoke of a King, he
should presume it were Gods revealed and regulating will, that they should have
a King; But the scope of Samuels Sermon, is to dissuade them from a King, and
they by the contrary ( Verse 19. say they) Nay, but we will have a King; and
there not one word in the Text, that may intimate patience under the yoke of a
King. 2. There is here the description of a Tyrant, not of a King. 3. Here is a
threatening and a prediction, not any thing that smells of an exhortation.

Object. But it is evident, that God teaching the people how to behave D.
Fern. 3. p. Sect. 2. page 10.
themselves under the unjust oppressions of their King, he sets down no remedy
but tears, crying to God, prayer, and patience; therefore resistance is not
lawful.

Answ. Though this be not the place due to the doctrine of Resistance, Learned
Authors teach that Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 17. and the (...) a manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8, 9. are opposite one to another, so Gerson in trinprin^. sac. adu. lat.
par. 4. Alp. 66. lit. l. cons. 8. Buchan. de jure regni. apud Scot. Chasson.
cat. glo. mundi cons. 24. n. 162. cons. 35. Tholoss. l. 9. c. 1. Rossen. De
polus Rep. c. 2. n. 10. Magdeburg. in trac. de. off. ma. Crying to God not the
only remedy against a tyrant.
yet to vindicate the place; I say, there is not one word of any lawful remedy
in the Text, only it is said, (...), Et clamatis in illa die a faciebus regis
vestri: It is not necessarily to be exponed of praying to God, Job 35. 9. by
reason of the multitude of the oppression, They make the oppressed to cry,
(...) clamare faciunt, Isai. 15. 4. And Heshbon shall cry. (...) The armed
soldiers of Moab shall cry out. There is no other word here, then does
express the idolatrous prayers of Moab, Isai. 17. 12. and Habbak. 2. 11. The
stone shall cry out of the wall (...), Deuteronomy. 22. 24. You shall stone the maid
(...), because she cried not (...); but she is not to be stoned, because she
prayed not to God, Ps. 18. 4. David's enemies cried, and there was none to save,
even to the Lord, and he heard not. 2. Though it were the Prophets meaning,
they cried to the Lord, yet it is not the crying of a people humbled, and in
faith speaking to God in their troubles, Zach. 7. 13. They cried, and I will
not hear, therefore Royalists must make crying to God out of the bitterness
of affliction, without humiliation and faith, and such prayets of sinners as
God hears not, Psalm. 18. 41. Ioh. 9. 31. Esaias 17. 12. to be the only remedy
of a people oppressed by a Tyrannous King; now it is certain, God prescribes
no unlawful means to an oppressed people, under their affliction, therefore
it is clear here, that God speaks only of evils of punishment, such as is
to cry in trouble, and not be heard of God, and that he prescribes here no
duty at all, nor any remedy. 3. All Protestant Divines say; Ex particulari non
valet argumentum negative, from one particular place, a negative argument is
not good. This remedy is not written in this particular place, therefore it is
not written at all in other places of Scripture; so 1 Timothy 1. 19. The end of
excommunication is, that the party excommunicated may learn not to blaspheme,
ergo the end is not also that the Church be not infected, it follows not, the
contrary is clear, 1 Cor. 5. v. 6. D. Fern and other Royalists teach us, that
we may supplicate and make prayers to a Tyranous King. 2. We may fly from a
tyranous King: but neither supplicating the King, nor flying from his sury
shall be lawful means left by this Argument, because these means are no more
in this text (where Royalists say the spirit of God speaks of purpose of the
means to be used against Tyranny) then violent resisting, is this text.

Barclay, Fern, Grotius, Arnisaeus, the P. Prelate following them says, An
ill King is a punishment of God, for the sins of the people, Fern par. 3. page
95. Resisting of tyrants, and patience not inconsistent.
and there is no remedy but patient suffering. Ans. Truly it is a silly
Argument. The Assyrians coming against the people of God, for their sins, is a
punishment of God, Esa. 10. 5. 12. 13. But does it follow that it is unlawful,
for Israel to fight and resist the Assyrians, and that they had warrant to do
no other thing, but lay down Arms, and pray to God, and fight none at all? Is
there no lawful resisting of ills of punishment, but mere prayers and
patience? The Amalikites came out against Israel for their sins, Senahkerib
against Ezekiah, for the sins of the people. Asa his enemies fought against him
for his sins, and the peoples sins; shall Moses and the people, Hezekiah, Asa,
do then nothing but pray and suffer? Is it unlawful with the sword to resist
them? I believe not, Famine is often a punishment of God in a Land, Amos. 4. 7,
8. is it therefore in famine, unlawful to till the earth, and seek bread by
our industry and are we to do nothing but to pray for daily bread? It is a
vain Argument.

Observe therefore the wickedness of Barclay, contra Monarch. l. 2. p. 56. for
he would prove, that a power of doing ill, and that without any punishment to
be inflicted by man, is from God; because our Laws punish not perjurie, but
leaves it to be punished of God, l. 2. l. de Reb. cred. Cujacius, l. 2. obs.
c. 19. And the husband in Moses his law, had power to give a bill of divorce to
his wife, and send her away; and the husband was not to be punished. And also
Stews and workhouses for harlots, and to take usurie, are tolerated in many
Christian Commonwealths, and yet these are all sorts of murders, by the
confession of Heathen: Ergo, ( says Barclaius) God may give a power for
Tyrannous acts to Kings, so as they shall be under no punishment to be
inflicted by men.

Ans. All this is an argument from fact. 1. A wicked Magistracy may permit
perjurie and lying in the Commonwealth, and The Law of the King not a
permissive law as was the law of devorcement
that without punishment; and some Christian Commonweales, he means his own
Synagogue of Rome, spiritual Sodom, a cage of unclean birds, suffers
Harlotrie by Law, and the whores pay so many thousands yearly to the Pope, and
are free of all punishment by Law, to eschew homicides, adulteries of Romish
Priests, and other greater sins: Therefore God has given power to a King to
play the Tyrant, without any fear of punishment to be inflicted by man. But 1.
if this be a good argument, The Magistrate to whom God has committed the sword
to take vengeance on evil doers, Romans 13. 3, 4, 5, 6. such as are perjured
persons, professed whores and harlots, has a lawful power from God to connive
at sins and gross scandals in the Commonwealth, as they dream that the King
has power given from God to exercise all acts of Tyranny without any
resistance. But, 1. this was a grievous sin in Eli, that he being a father
and a Judge, punished not his sons for their uncleanness, and his house, in
Gods heavy displeasure, was cut off from the Priesthood therefore. Then God
has given no such power to the Judge. 2. The contrary duty is lying on the
Judge, To execute judgment for the oppressed, Job 29. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Ier. 22. 15, 16. and perverting of judgment, and conniving at the heinous
sins of the wicked, is condemned, Number. 5. 31, 32. 1 Samuel 15. 23. 1 King. 20.
42, 43. Esa. 1. 17. and 10. 1. and 5, 23. and therefore God has given no power
to a Judge to permit wicked men to commit grievous crimes, without any
punishment. As for the Law of Divorce, it was indeed a permissive law, whereby
the husband might give the wife a bill of divorce, and be free of punishment
before men, but not free of sin and guiltiness before God, for it was
contrary to Gods institution of Marriage at the beginning, as Christ says: and
the Prophet says, Mal. 2.
that the Lord hates putting away. But that God has given any such permissive
power to the King, that he may do what he pleases, and cannot be resisted:
This is in question. 3. The Law spoken of in the Text, is by Royalists called,
not a consuetude of Tranny, but the divine law of God, whereby the King is
formally and essentially distinguished from the Judge in Israel: Now if so, a
power to sin, and a power to commit acts of Tyranny, yea, and a power in the
Kings Sergeants and bloody Emissaries to waste and destroy the people of God,
must be a lawful power given of God: for a lawful power it must be, if it
comes from God, whether it be from the King in his own person, or from his
servants at his commandment, and by either put forth in acts, as the power of
a bill of Divorce was a power from God, exempting either the husband from
punishment before men, or freeing the servant, who at the husbands command,
should write it, and put it in the hands of the woman. I cannot believe that
God has given a power, and that by Law, to one Man to command twenty thousand
Cutthroats to kill and destroy all the Children of God, and that he has
commanded his Children to give their necks and heads to Babels sons without
resistance. This I am sure is another matter then a Law for a bill of Divorce
to one woman, married by free election of a humorous and unconstant man. But
sure I am, God gave no permissive law from heaven, like the law of Divorce, for
the hardness of the heart, not of the Jews only, but also of the whole
Christian and Heathen Kingdoms under a Monarch; that one Emperor may, by such
a Law of God, as the Law of Divorce, kill, by bloody Cutthroats, such as the
Irish Rebels are, all the Nations that call on Gods name, men, women, and
sucking infants. And if Providence impede the Catholic issue, and dry up the
seas of Blood, it is good: but God has given a law, such as the law of
Divorce, to the King, whereby he, and all his, may without resistance, by a
legal power given of God, who gives Kings to be fathers, nurses, protectors,
guides, yea the breath of nostrils of his Church, as special mercies and
blessings to his people, he may (I say) by a law of God, as it is 1 Samuel 8. 9,
11. cut off Nations, as that Lion of the world, Nebuchadnezzar did. So
Royalists teach us.

Barclaius l. 2. cont. Monarchoma. page 69. The Lord spoke to Samuel the Law of
the King, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord. But what Law?
That same law which he proposed to the people when they first sought a King:
but that was the Law contemning Precepts rather for the peoples obeying, then
for the Kings commanding, for the people was to be instructed with those
precepts, not the King. Those things that concerned the Kings duty, Deuteronomy. 17.
Moses commanded to be put into the Arc, but so if Samuel had commanded the
King, that which Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. commanded, he had done no new thing, but had
done again what was once done, actum egisset, but there was nothing before
commanded the people concerning their obedience and patience under evil
Princes. Joseph. Antiq. l. 6. c. 5. he wrote (...), the evils that were to
befall them. Ans. It was not that same Law, for though this Law was written to
the people, yet it was the Law of the King: and I pray you, did Samuel write in
a book all the Rules of Tyranny, and teach Saul and all the Kings The law of
the King written in a book, ^ Sam. 11. not the law of Tyranny.
after him (for this book was put in the Ark of the Covenant, where also was
the book of the Law) how to play the Tyrant? And what instruction was it to
King or people to write to them a book of the wicked ways of a King, which
nature teaches without a Doctor? Sanctius says on the place, These things
which by men's fraud, and to the hurt of the public may be corrupted, were kept
in the Tabernacle, and the book of the Law was kept in the Arc. Cornelius a
Lapide says, It was the Law common to King and people, which was commonly kept
with the book of the Law, in the Arc of the Covenant. Lyra contradicts
Barclay, he exponeth Legem, legem regni non secundum usurpationem supra
positam, sed secundum ordinationem Dei positam, Deuteronomy. 17. Theodat. excellently
exponeth it the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, inspride by God to temper
Monarchy, with a liberty befitting Gods people, and with equity toward a Nation
-- to withstand the abuse of an absolute power. 2. Can any believe Samuel would
have written a Law of Tyranny, and put that book in the Arc of the Covenant
before the Lord, to be kept to the posterity, seeing he was to teach both King
and people the good and the right way, 1 Samuel 12. 23, 24, 25. 3. Where is the
Law of the Kingdom called a Law of punishing innocent people? 4. To write the
duty of the King in a book, and apply it to the King, is no more superfluous,
nor to teach the people the good and the right way out of the Law, and apply
generals to persons. 5. There is nothing in the Law, 1 Samuel 8. 9. 11. 12. of
the peoples patience, but rather of their impatient crying ou^, God not hearing
nor helping; and nothing of that in this book, for any thing that we know, and
Josephus speaks of the Law, 1 Samuel 8. not of this Law, 1 Samuel 12.

QUEST. XIX. Whether or no the King be in Dignity and power above the people?
IN this grave question diverse considerations are to be pondered. 1. There is a
Dignity material in the people scattered, they being In what considerations
the King is wo^thier then the people, and the people worthier then the King.
many representations of God and his Image, which is in the King also, and
formally more as King, he being endued with formal Magistraticall and public
Royal Authority, in the former regard this or that man is inferior to the
King, because the King has that same remander of the Image of God that any
private man has and something more, ^e has a politic resemblance of the
King of Heavens, being a little God, and so is above any one man.

2. All these of the people taken collectively having more of God, as being
representations, are according to this material dignity excellenter then the
King, because many are excellenter then one, and the King according to the
Magistraticall and Royal Authority he has, is excellenter then they are,
because he partaketh formally of Royalty, which they have not formally.

3. A mean or medium, as it is such, is less then the end, though A mean as
a mean inferior to the end.
the thing materially that is a mean, may be excellenter; every mean as a
mean, under that reduplication has all its goodness and excellency in
relation to the end, yet an Angel that is a mean, and a ministering Spirit,
ordained of God for an heir of life eternal, Heb. 1. 13. considered
materially, is excellenter then a man, Psalm. 8. 5. Heb. 2. 6, 7, 8.

4. A King and leader in a military consideration, and as a Governor and
conserver of the whole Army, is more worth then ten thousand of the people, 2 Samuel 18. 3.

5. But simply and absolutely the people is above, and more excellent A King
inferior to the people. Argum.
then the King, and the King in Dignity inferior to the people; and that upon
these Reasons. 1. Because he is the mean ordained for the people, as for the
end, that he may save them, 2. Sam. 19. 9. a public shepherd to feed them,
Ps. 78. 70, 71, 72, 73. the Captain and Leader of the Lords inheritance, 1 Samuel 10. 1. to defend them, the Minister of God for their good, Romans 13. 4. 2.
The Pilot Argum. 2.
is less then the whole Passengers, the General less then the whole Army,
the Tutor less then all the children, the Physician less then all the living
men whose health he cares for; the Master or Teacher less then all the
Scholars, because the part is less then the whole: the King is but a part and
a member (though I grant a very eminent and Noble Member) of the Kingdom. 3. A
Christian Argum. 3.
people especially is the portion of the Lords inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. the
sheep of his pasture, his redeemed ones, for whom God gave his blood, Act. 20.
28. And the killing of a man is to violate the Image of God, Genesis 9. 6. and
therefore the death and destruction of a Church, and of thousand thousands of
men is a sadder and a more heavy matter then the death of a King, who is but
one man. 4. A King as a King, or because a King is not the inheritance of God,
Argum. 4.
nor the chosen and called of God, nor the sheep or flock of the Lords
pasture, nor the redeemed of Christ, for those excellencies agree not to Kings,
because they are Kings; for then all Kings should be endued with those
excellencies, and God should an be accepter of persons, if he put those
excellencies of Grace upon men for external respects of highness and Kingly
power, and worldly glory and splendour; for many living Images and
representations of God, as he is holy, or more excellent then a politic
representation of Gods greatness and Majesty, such as the King is; because
that which is the fruit of a love of God, which comes nearer to Gods most
special love, is more excellent then that which is farther remote from his
special love; now though Royalty be a beam of the Majesty of the greatness
of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; yet is it such a fruit and beam of
Gods greatness, as may consist with the eternal reprobation of the party
loved, so now Gods love from whence he communicates his Image, representing
his own holiness, comes nearer to his most special love of election of men
to glory.

5. If God give Kings to be a ransom for his Church, and if he Argum. 5. The
Church because the Church of more worth then the King because King.
slay great Kings for their sake, as Pharaoh King of Egypt, Esa. 43. 3 and
Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, Ps. 136. 18, 19, 20. if he
plead with Princes and Kings for destroying his people, Esa. 3. v. 12, 13, 14.
if he make Babylon and her King a threshing-floore, for the violence done to
the inhabitants of Zion, Ier. 51. 33, 34, 35. then his people as his people,
must be so much dearer and more precious in the Lords eyes, then Kings because
they are Kings, by how much more his Justice is active to destroy the one, and
his Mercy to save the other. Neither is the Argument taken off, by saying the
King must in this question be compared with his own people; not a foreign
King with other foreign people over whom he does not Reign, for the Argument
proves that the people of God are of more worth then Kings as Kings; and
Nebuchadnezer and Pharaoh for the time were Kings to the people of God, and
foreign Kings are no less essentially Kings, then Kings native are.

6. Those who are given of God as gifts for the preservation of Argum. 6.
the people, to be Nurse-fathers to them; those must be of less worth before
God, then those to whom they are given, since the gift, as the gift, is less
then the party on whom the gift is bestowed. But the King is a gift for the
good and preservation of the people, as is clear, Esa 1. 26. And from this
that God gave his people a King in his wrath, we may conclude, that a King of
himself, except God be angry with his people, must be a gift.

7. That which is eternal, and cannot politically die, yea which Argum. 7.
must continue as the days of heaven, because of Gods promise; That is more
excellent then that which is both accidental, temporary and mortal. But the
People is both eternal, as People, because Eccles. 1. 4. one generation
passes away, and another generation People in the spece immortal, King not so.
comes: And as a people in covenant with God, Ier. 32. 40, 41. in respect
that a People and Church, though mortal in the individuals, yet the Church,
remaining the Church, cannot dye; but the King, as King, may, and does dye: It
is true, where a Kingdom goes by succession, the Politicians say, the man who
is King, dies; but the King never dies, because some other, either by birth
or free election, succeeds in his room. But I answer, 1. People by a sort of
necessity of nature succeeds to People, generation to generation, except Gods
judgment, contrary to nature, intervene to make Babylon no people, and a land
that shall never be inhabited, (which I both believe and hope for, according to
Gods word of Prophecy) But a King by a sort of contingencie succeeds to
Kings: for nature does not ascertaine us there must be Kings to the worlds end;
because the essence of Governors is kept safe in Aristocracie and Democracie,
though there were no Kings. And that Kings should If sin had never been,
there should have been no need of Kings.
necessarily have been in the world, if man had never fallen in sin, I am
not, by any cogent argument, induced to believe. I conceive there should have
been no Government but these of Fathers and Children, Husband and Wife; and
(which is improperly Government) some more gifted with supervenient additions
to nature, as gifts and excellencies of Engines. Now in this point, Althusius
polit. c. 38. n. 114. says, the King in respect of office is worthier then the
people; (but this is but an accidental respect) but as the King is a man, he
is inferior to the people.

But, 8. he who by office is obliged to expend himself, and to Arg. 8. The
King is to expend his life for the people, and so inferior to them.
give his life for the safety of the people, he must be inferior to the people.
So Christ says, the life is more then raiment or food, because both these give
themselves to corruption for man's life: so the beasts are inferior to man,
because they die for our life, that they may sustain our life: And Caiaphas
prophesied right, that it was better that one man die, then that the whole
Nation perish, Joh. 11. v. 50. and in nature, Elements against their particular
inclination defraud themselves of their private and particular ends, that the
Commonwealth of Nature may stand, as heavy elements ascend, light descend, lest
nature should perish by a vacuitie. And the good shepherd, Ioh. 10. gives his
life for his sheep. So Saul and David both were made Kings to fight the Lords
battles, and to expose their lives to hazard for the safety of the Church and
people of God. But the King by office is obliged to expend his life for the
safety of the people of God; he is obliged to fight the Lords battles for them,
to go betwixt the Flock and death, as Paul was willing to be spent for the
Church. It may be objected, Jesus Christ gave himself a Ransom for his
Church, and his life for the life of the World, and was a gift given to the
world, Ioh. 3. 16. and 4. 10. and he was a mean to save us: And so what
arguments we have before produced to prove that the King must be inferior to
the people, because A mean is considered reduplicatively and formally as a
mean, and materially, as thething which is the mean: in this latter sense the
mean may be of more worth then the end, but not so in the former sense.
he is a ransom, a mean, a gift; are not concludent. I answer: Consider a
mean reduplicatively, and formaliter, as a mean, and secondly, as a mean
materially, that is, the thing which is a mean. 2. Consider that which is only
a mean, and ransom, and gift, and no more; and that which, beside that it is a
mean, is of a higher nature also. So Christ formally as a mean, giving, 1.
his temporal life; 2. for a time; 3. according to the flesh: For, 1. the
eternal life; 2. of all the Catholic Church to be glorified eternally; 3. not
his blessed Godhead and glory, which, as God, he had with the Father from
eternity. In that respect Christ has the relation of a servant, ransom,
gift, and some inferioritie in comparison of the Church of God: and his Fathers
glory, as a mean, is inferior to the end, but Christ materially, in concreto:
Christ is not only a mean to save his Church, but as God, (in which
consideration he was the immortal A mean may be considered as a mean only,
and as more then a mean.
Lord of life) he was more then a mean, even the author, efficient and Creator
of heaven and earth: and so there is no ground to say that he is inferior to
the Church; but the absolute head, King, the chief of ten thousand, more in
excellency and worth then ten thousand millions of possible worlds of men and
Angels. But such a consideration cannot befall any mortal King; because,
consider the King materially as a mortal man, he must be inferior to the whole
Church, for he is but one, and so of less worth then the whole Church, as the
thumb, though the strongest of the fingers, yet it is inferior to the hand,
and far more to the whole body, as any part is inferior to the whole. 2.
Consider the King reduplicative, and formally as King, and by the official
relation he has, he is no more then but a Royal servant, an official mean,
tending, ex officio, to this end, to preserve the people, to rule and govern
them; and a gift of God, given, by virtue of his office, to rule the people of
God: and so any way inferior to the people.

9. Those who are before the King* and may be a People without a King, must be
of more worth then that which is posteriour, The people may be with out the
King, but not the King without the people.
and cannot be a King without them. For thus Gods self sufficiency is proved,
in that he might be, and eternally was blessed for ever, without his Creature,
but his creature cannot subsist in being without him. Now the people were a
people many years, before there was any government (save domestic) and is a
people where there is no King, but only an Aristocracy, or a Democracy; but the
King can be no King without a people. It is vain that some say, the King and
Kingdom are relatives, and not one is before another; for its true in the
naked relation, so are father and son, Master and servant, Relata simul
natura; but sure there is a priority of worth and independency for all that, in
the father above the son, and in the master above the servant, and so in the
people above the King, take away the people, and Dyonisius is but a poor
Schoolmasters.

2. Asser. The people in power are superior to the King, 1. because 10. Argum.
every efficient and constituent cause is more excellent then the effect. Every
mean is inferior in power to the end, so Iun. Brutus, q. 31. Bucher l. 1. c.
16. Author. Lib. De offic. Magistr. q. 6. Henaenius disp. 2. n. 6. Joan.
Roffensis Epist. De potest. pap. l. 2. c. 5. Spalato de Repu. Ecclesiast. l. 6.
c. 2. n. 31. but the people is the efficient and constituent cause, the King is
the effect, the people is the end; both intended of God to save the people, to
be a healer and a Physician to them, Esaias 3. v. 7. and the people appoint and
create the King out of their indigence, to preserve themselves from mutual
violence. Many things are objected against this, 1. That the efficient and
constituent cause is God, and the people is only the isntrumental cause; and
Spalato says, that the people does indirectly only give Kingly power, because
God, at their act of election, ordinarily gives it. Ans. The Scripture says
plainly, as we heard before, the people made Kings, and if they do, as other
second causes produce their effects, it is all one that God as the principal
cause makes Kings, else we should not argue from the cause to the effect
amongst the creatures. 2. God by that same action that the people creates The
people wortheir as the ^t^stituent cause then the King, who is the effect.
a King, does also, by them, as by his instruments create a King, and that God
does not immediately, at the naked presence of the act of popular election,
confer Royal dignity on the man, without any action of the people, as they
say by the Churches act of conferring Orders, God does immediately without any
act of the Church, infuse from Heaven supernatural habilities on the man,
without any active influence of the Church, is evident by this, 1. The Royal
Argum. 1.
power to make Laws with the King, and so a power eminent in their states
representative to govern themselves, is in the people, for if the most high
acts of Royalty be in them, why not the power also? and so what need to fetch a
Royal power from Heaven, to be immediately infused in him, seeing the people
has such a power in themselves at hand? 2. The people can, and does limite,
and bind Argum. 2.
Royal power in elected Kings, ergo they have in them Royal power to give to
the King; those who limit power, can take away so many degrees of Royal power,
and those who can take away power, can give power; and it is unconceiveable, to
say that people Impossible that people can limit Royal power, but they must
give Royal power.
can put restraint upon a power immediately coming from God, if Christ
immediately infuse an Apostolic spirit in Paul, mortal men cannot take from
him any degrees of that infused spirit; if Christ infuse a spirit of nine
degrees, the Church cannot limit it to six degrees only; but Royalists consent
that the people may choose a King, upon such conditions to reign, as he has
Royal power of ten degrees, whereas his Ancester had by birth a power of
foureteen degrees. 3. It is not intelligible that the Holy Ghost should give
Commandment Argum. 3.
to the people to make such a man King, Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16. and forbid them to
make such a man King, if the people had no active influence in making a King at
all, but God solely and immediately from Heaven did infuse Royalty in the King
without any action of the people, save a naked consent only, and that after God
had made the King, they should approve only with an after-act of naked
approbation. 4. If the people by other Governors, as by heads of families,
Argum. 4.
and other choice men, govern themselves, and produce these same formal
effects of Peace, Justice, Religion, on themselves, which the King does
produce, then is there a power of the same kind, and as excellent as the Royal
power in the people, and no reason, but this power should be holden to come
immediately from God, as the Royal Power, for it is every way of the same
nature and kind, and as I shall prove, Kings and Judges differ not in nature
and spece, but it is experienced that people do, by Aristocraticall guides,
govern themselves, etc. so then, if God immediately infuse Royalty, when the
people chooses a King, without any action of the people, then must God
immediately infuse a beam of governing on a Provost and a Bailiffe, when the
people choose such, and that without any action of the people, because all
Powers are, in abstracto, from God, Romans 13. 2. and God as immediately makes
inferior Judges, as superior, Prove. 8. 16. and all promotion, even to be a
Provost or Major, comes from God only, as to be a King, except Royalists say,
all promotion comes from the East, and from the West, and not from God,
except promotion to the Royal Throne, the contrary whereof is said, Ps. 75. 6,
7. 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. not only Kings, but all Judges are Gods, Ps. 82. 1, 2. and
therefore all must be the same way created and molded of God, except by
Scripture Royalists can show us a difference. An English Prelate gives Except.
2. Joan. Rossens. De potest. pap. l. 2. c. 5.
Reasons, why People, who are said to make Kings as efficients, and Authors,
cannot unmake them: the one is, because God as chief and sole supreme
Moderator makes Kings, but I say, Christ as the chief Moderator, and head of
the Church, does immediately confer abilities to a man to be a Preacher, and
though by industry the man acquire abilities, yet in regard the Church does not
so much as instrumentally confer those abilities, they may be said to come
from God immediately, in relation to the Church, who calls the man to the
ministry, yea Royalists, as our excommunicated Prelate learned Though God
immediately create Kings without the people, yet can the people unmake Kings.
from Spalato, say that God, at the naked presence of the Churches call, does
immediately infuse that from Heaven, by which the man is now in Holy Orders, and
a Pastor, whereas he was not so before; and yet Prelates cannot deny, but they
can unmake Ministers, and have practiced this in their unhallowed Courts: and
therefore though God immediately without any action of the people make Kings,
this is a weak reason, to prove they cannot unmake them. As for their
undeleble character, that Prelates cannot take from a Minister, it is nothing,
if the Church may unmake a Minister, though Though God should immediately give
a talent and gift for Prophesying, as he gave to Balaam, Caiaphas and others,
yet they may lose that talent by digging it in the earth, and be deprived by
the Church.
his character go to prison with him: we seek no more but to anull the
reason. God immediately makes Kings and Pastors, ergo no power on earth can
unmake them; this consequence is as weak as water. 2. The other cause is,
because God has erected no Tribunal on earth higher then the Kings Tribunal,
ergo no power on earth can unmake a King; the Antecedent and consequence is
both denied, and is a begging of the question: for the Tribunal that made the
King is above the King. 2. Though there be no Tribunal formally regal and
Kingly above the King, yet is there a Tribunal vertuall eminently above him in
the case of tyranny, for the States and Princes have a Tribunal above him.

3. To this the constituent cause is of more power and dignity then Except. 3.
(...). sanc. Majes. c. 9. p. 98. 99 Arnis^us De authorit. princip. cap. 1. ^. 1.
the effect, and so the people is above the King. The P. Prelate borrowed an
answer from Arnisaeus, and Barclay, and other Royalists, and says, If we knew
any thing in Law, or were ruled by reason; Every constituent ( says Arnisaeus
and Barclay more accurately then the P. Prelate had a head to transcribe their
words) where the constituent has resigned all his power in the hand of the
Prince whom he constitutes, is of more worth, and power, then he in whose hand
they resign the power: so the proposition is false. The servant who has
constituted his Master Lord of his liberty, is not worthier then his Master
whom he has made his Lord, and to whom he has given himself as a slave; for
after he has resigned his liberty he cannot repent, he must keep covenant
though to his hurt: yea such a servant is not only not above his Master, but he
cannot move his foot without his Master. The Governor of Britain (says
Arnisaeus) being despised by King Philip, resigned himself as Vassal to King
Edward of England, but did not for that make himself superior to King Edward:
indeed he who constituteth another under him as a Legate, is superior; but the
people do constitute a King above themselves, not a King under themselves, and
therefore the people are not by this made the Kings superior, but his
inferior.

Ans. 1. It is false that the people does, or can by the Law of nature resign
their whole liberty in the hand of a King, 1. they cannot resign to others
that which they have not in themselves, Nemo potest dare quod non habet, but
the people has not an absolute power in themselves to destroy themselves, or
to exercise those tyrannous acts spoken of, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, etc.
for neither God, nor Natures Law has given any such power. 2. He who
constituteth himself a slave is supposed to be compelled to that unnatural
fact of alienation of that liberty, which he has from his Maker, from the
womb, by violence, constraint, or extreme necessity, and so is inferior to
all free men, but the people does not make themselves slaves when they
constitute a King over themselves, because God giving to a people a King, the
best and excellentest Governor on earth, gives a blessing and special
fafour, Esaias 1. 26. Hosea 1. v. 11. Esaias 3. 6, 7. Ps. 79. 70, 71, 72. but to
lay upon his people the state of slaverie, in which they renounce their whole
liberty, is a curse of God, Genesis 9. 25. Genesis 27. 29. Deuteronomy. 28. 32. 36. But the
people having their liberty to make any of ten or twenty, their King, and to
advance one from a private state The people putting a King above themselves,
retain the fountainpower, and so are superior to the King.
to an honorable throne, whereas it was in their liberty to advance another,
and to give him Royal power of ten degrees, whereas they might give him power
of twelve degrees, and of eight, or six, must be in excellency and worth
above the man, whom they constitute King, and invest with such honor: as
Honor in the fountain, and honos participans and originans, must be more
excellent and pure then the derived honor in the King, which is honos
particip^tus and originatus. 2. If the servant give his liberty to his master,
ergo, he had that liberty in him; and in that act, liberty must be in a more
excellent way in the servant, as in the Fountain, then it is in the master:
and so this liberty must be purer in the people then in the King: and
therefore in that, both the servant is above the master, and the People
worthier then the King: and when the people give themselves conditionally and
Covenant-wise to the King, as to a Public servant, and Patron, and Tutour, as
the Governor of Britain, out of his humor, gave himself to King Edward;
there is even here a note of superiority; Every giver of a benefit, as a
giver, is superior to him to whom the gift is given; though after the servant
has given away his gift of liberty, by which he was superior, he cannot be a
superior, because by his gift he has made himself inferior. 3. The People
constituteth a King above themselves, I distinguish, supra se, above
themselves, according to the fountain power of Royalty, that is false; for
the fountaine-power remains most eminently in the people, 1. because they
give it to the King, ad modum recipientis, and with limitations, ergo, it is
unlimited in the people, and bounded and limited in the King, and so less in
the King then in the people. 2. If the King turn distracted, and an ill spirit
from the Lord come upon Saul, so as reason be taken from a Nebuchadnezzar, it
is certain the people may put Curators and Tutors over him, who has the
Royal power. 3. If the King be absent, and taken captive, the People may give
the Royal power to one, or to some few to exercise it as custodes regni. And
4. if he die, and the Crown go by election, they may create another with more
or less power: all which evinceth, that they never constituted over themselves
a King, in regard of fountaine-power; for if they give away the fountain, as a
slave sells his liberty, they could not make use of it. Indeed they set a
King above them, quoad potestatem legum executivam, in regard of a power of
executing laws and actual government, for their good and safety: but this
proves only that the King is above the people, (...), in some respect; but the
most eminent and fountaine-power of Royalty remains in the people, as in an
immortal spring, which they communicate by succession to this or Ulpian l. 1.
ad Sc. Tupil. Populus omne suum imperium and potestatene confert in Regem.
Bartolus ad l. hosts 24. f. de capt. and host.
that mortal man, in the manner and measure that they think good: And Vlpian
and Bartolus, cited by our Prelate out of Barclaius, are only to be understood
of the derived, secondary and borrowed power of executing laws, and not of the
fountain power, which the people cannot give away, no more then they can give
away their rational nature; for it is a power natural, to conserve
themselves, essentially adhering to every created Being: For, if the People
give all their power away, 1. What shall they reserve to make a new King, if
this man dye? 2. What if the Royal line surcease? there be no Prophets
immediately sent of God, to make Kings. 3. What if he turn Tyrant, and destroy
his Subjects with the sword? The Royalists say, they may sly: but when they
made him King, they resigned all their power to him, even their power of
flying; for they bound themselves by an oath (say Royalists) to all passive and
lawful active obedience: and, I suppose, to stand at his Tribunal, if h^
summoned the three Estates, upon Treason, to come before him, is contained in
the oath, that Royalists say, binds all, and is contradictorie to flying.

Arnisaeus* a more learned Iurist and Divine then the P. Prelate, answers the
other Maxim, The end is worthier then the mean leading Arnis. c. 3. n. 10.
to the end, because it is ordained for the end. These means, says he, which
refer their whole nature to the end, and have all their excellency from the
end, and have excellency from no other thing but from the end, are less
excellent then the end; that is true, such an end as medicine is for health.
And Hugo Grotius, l. 1. c. 3. n. 8. Those means which are only for the end,
and for the good of the end, and are not for their own good, also are of less
excellency, and inferior to the end. But so the assumption is false. But those
means which beside their relation to the end, have an excellency of nature in
themselves, are not always inferior to the end. The Disciple, as he is
instituted, is inferior to the Master; but as he is the son of a Prince, he
is above the Master. But by this reason, the shepherd should be inferior to
bruit beasts, to sheep. And the master of the family is for the family, and
refers all that he has for the entertaining of the family: but it
follows not therefore the family is above him. The form is for the action,
therefore the action is more excellent then the form, and an accident then the
subject or substance? And Grotius says, Every government is not for the good
of another, but some for its own good, as the government of a master over the
servant, and the husband over the wife.

Ans. I take the answer thus: Those who are mere means, and only means
referred to the end, they are inferior to the end: but the King, as King, has
all his official and relative goodness in the world, The King, as King, a
mean and inferior to the people.
as relative to the end. All that you can imagine to be in a King, as a King,
is all relative to the safety and good of the people, Romans 13. 4. He is a
minister for thy good. He should not, as King, make himself, or his own gain
and honor, his end. I grant, the King, as a man, shall dye as another man, and
so he may secondarily intend his own good; and what excellency he has as a
man, is the excellency of one mortal man, and cannot make him amount in
dignity, and in the absolute consideration of the excellency of a man, to be
above many men and a whole Kingdom: for the more good things there be, the
better they are, so the good things be multiplicable, as a hundred men are
better then one: Otherwise, if the good be such as cannot be multiplied, as one
God, the multiplication makes them The King both as a man, and as a King
inferior to the people.
worse, as many Gods are inferior to one God. Now if Royalists can show us any
more in the King then these two, we shall be obliged to them; and in both, he
is inferior to the whole.

The Prelate and his followers would have the Maxim to lose credit; for then
(say they) the shepherd should be inferior to the sheep: But in this the Maxim
fails indeed. 1. Because the shepherd is a reasonable man, and the sheep
bruit beasts, and so must be excellenter then all the flocks of the world. Now
as he is a reasonable man, he is not a shepherd, nor in that relation referred
to the sheep and their preservation, as a mean to the end; but he is a shepherd
by accident, for the unrulinesse of the creatures, for man's sin, withdrawing
themselves from that natural dominion that man had over the creatures, before
the fall of man: in that relation of a mean to the end, and so by accident, is
this official relation put on him; and according to that official relation,
and by accident, man is put to be a servant to the brutish creature, and a
mean to so base an end. But all this proves him, through man's sin, and by
accident, to be under the official relation of a mean, to baser creatures
then himself, as to the end, but not as a reasonable man. But the King, as
King, is an official and Royal mean to this end, that the people may lead a
godly and peaceable life under him. And this official relation being an
accident, is of less worth then the whole people, as they are to be governed.
And I grant, the Kings son, in relation to blood and birth, is more excellent
then his Teachers: but as he is taught, he is inferior to his Teacher: but in
both considerations the King is inferior to the people; for though he command
the people, and so have an executive power of law above them, yet have they a
fountain power above him, because they made him King, and in Gods intention he
is given as King for their good, according to that, Thou shall feed my people
Israel: and that, I gave him for a leader of my people.

4. Says the P. Prelate: The constituent cause is excellenter then Except. 4.
Sacr. sanct. maj. c. 9. p. 98.
the effect constituted, where the constitution is voluntary, and depends
upon the free act of the will, as when the King makes a Viceroy or a Judge,
durante beneplacito, during his free will: but not when a man makes over his
right to another; for then there should be neither faith nor truth in
covenants, if people might make over their power to their Observe here, that
the P. P. yields there is a free covenant, by which the people resign their
power to the King: but whether Royal power, or some other, he dare not assert,
lest he destroy his own principles. To swear non-selfe-preservation, and to
swear selfmurther, all one. 5 Reply. Sac. sanct. maj. c. 9. p. 129. stolen
from Barclaius, l. 5. c. 12.
King, and retract and take back what they have once given.

Ans. This is a begging of the question: for it is denied that the people can
absolutely make away their whole power to the King: It depends on the people
that they be not destroyed. They give to the King a politic power for their
own safety, and they keep a natural power to themselves, which they must
conserve, and cannot give away; and they do not break their covenant, when
they put in act that natural power to conserve themselves; for though the
people should give away that power, and swear, though the King should kill
them all, they should not resist, nor defend their own lives; yet that being an
oath against the sixth Command, which enjoyneth natural selfe-preservation, it
should not oblige the conscience; for it should be intrinsecally sinful; and
it is all one to swear to non-self-preservation, as to swear to selfe-murther.

5. If the people (says the Prelate, begging the answer from Barclay) the
constituent be more excellent then the effect, and so the people above the
King, because they constitute him King. Then the Counties and Corporations may
make void all the Commissions given to the Knights and Burgesses of the House
of Commons, and send others in their place, and repeal their Orders, therefore
Buchanan says, that Orders and Laws in Parliament were but (...) preparatorie
consultationis, and had not the force of a Law, till the people give their
consent, and have their influence authoritative, upon the Statutes and Acts of
Parliament. But the observator holds that the legislative power is whole and
entire in the Parliament. But when the Scots were preferring Petitions and
Declarations, they put all power in the collective body, and kept their
distinct tables. Ans. There is no consequence here, the Counties and
Incorporations that send Commissioners to Parliament, may make void their
Commissions and anull their Acts, because they constitute them Commissioners;
if they be unjust acts, they may disobey them, and so disanull them, but it is
presumed God has given no moral power to do ill, nor can the Counties and
Corporations give any such power to evil, for they have not any such from God,
if they be just acts, The people cannot make away their power to the King
irrevocably
they are to obey them, and cannot retract Commissions to make just Orders.
Illud tantum possumus quod jure possumus, and therefore as power to govern
justly is irrevocably committed by the three estates who made the King, to the
King, so is that same power committed by the Shires and Corporations to their
Commissioners, to decree in Parliament, what is just and good irrevocably* and
to take any just power from the King which is his due, is a great sin; but when
he abuses his power to the destruction of his subjects, it is lawful to throw
a sword out of a mad-mans hand, though it be his own proper sword, and though
he have due right to it, and a just power to use it for good, for all fiduciary
power abused may be repealed; and if the Knights and Burgesses of the The
people may resume the power they gave to Commissioners of Parliament, when they
abuse that power.
House of Commons abuse their fiduciary power to the destruction of these
Shires and Corporations, who put the trust on them, the observator did never
say that Parliamentary power was so entire and irrevocably in them, as that the
people may not resist them, anull their Commissions, and rescind their acts,
and denude them of fiduciary power, even as the King may be denuded of that
same power by the three estates, for particular Corporations are no more to be
denuded of that fountain-power of making Commissioners, and of the self
preservation, then the three estates are. 2. The P. Prelate comes not home to
the mind of Buchanan, who knew the fundamental Laws of Scotland, and the power
of Parliaments, for his meaning was not to deny a legislative power in the
Parliament, but when he calls their Parliamentary declarations (...) his
meaning Buchanan not understood by the P. P.
is only that which Lawyers and Schoolmen both say, Leges non promulgatae non
habent vim legis actu completo obligatoriae, Laws not promulgated do not
oblige the subject while they be promulgated, but he falsifies Buchannan, when
he says, Parliamentary Laws must have the authoritative influence of the
people, before they can be formal Laws, or any more then (...) or preparatory
Tables lawful when the secret Counsel is corrupted, and Parliaments are
denied. 6 Rep. Barc. l. 4. conc. Monarcho. c. 11 page 27.
notions. And it was no wonder, when the King denied a Parliament, and the
supreme Senate of the secret Counsel was corrupted, then that the people did
set up Tables, and extraordinary judicatures of the three estates, seeing there
could not be any other government for the time.

6. Barclay answers to that, The mean is inferior to the end, it holds
not, the Tutor and Curator is for the minor, as for the end, and given for his
good; but it follows not that therefore the Tutor in the administration of
the minor or Pupils inheritance is not superior to the minor. Ans. 1. It
follows well that the Minor virtually, and in the intention of the Law is
more excellent then the Tutor, though the Tutor can exercise more excellent
acts then the Pupil, by accident, for defect of age in the Minor, yet he does
exercise those acts with subordination to the Minor, and with correction,
because he is to render an account of his doings to the Pupil coming to age:
so the Tutor is only more excellent, and superior in some respect, (...) but
not simply, and so is the King in some respect above the people.

The P. Prelate beggeth from the Royalists another of our Arguments, 7. Rep.
Saer. sanc. May. c. 13. p. 130. stolen out of Arnisaeus de jure Majest. cap. 3.
n. ^. page 34.
Quod efficit tale, est magis tale. That which makes another such, is far
more such it self; if the people give Royal Power to the King, then far
more is the Royal Power in the people. By this (says the Prelate) it shall
follow if the observator give all his goods to me, to make me rich, the
observator is more rich; if the people give most part of their goods to foment
the Rebellion, then the people are more rich, having given all they b^ve upon
the Public Faith. Ans. 1. This greedy Prelate was made richer then ten poor
Pursevants, by a Bishopric, it will follow well; ergo the Bishopric is
richer then the Bishop, whose goods the curse of God blasteth. 2. It holds in
efficient causes, so working in other things as the virtue of the effect
remains in the cause, even after the production of the effect. As the Sun
makes all things light, the Fire all things hot, therefore the Sun is more
light, the Fire more hot; but where the cause does alienate and make over, in a
corporal manner, that which it has to another, as the hungry Prelate would
have the Observators goods, it holderh not; for the effect may exhaust the
virtue of the cause, but the people does, as the fountain, Quod ofsicit ^ale,
etc. holds when the agent makes not away all its virtue by alicnation.
derive a stream of Royalty to Saul, and make him King, and yet so as they
keep Fountain-power of making Kings in themselves; yea when Saul is dead to
make David King at Hebron, and when he is dead to make Solomon King, and after
him, to make Rehoboam King: and therefore in the people there is more fountain
power of making Kings then in David, in Saul, in any King of the world; as for
the Prelates jeere about the peoples giving of their goods to the good cause, I
hope it shall by the blessing of God enrich them more, whereas Prelates by the
Rebellion in Ireland (to which they assent, when they counsel His Majesty to
sell the blood of some hundred thousands of innocents killed in Ireland) are
brought from thousands a year, to beg a morsel of bread.

The Prelate answers that Maxim, Quod efsicit tale, id ipsum 8. Rep. Sacr.
sanc. May. page 131.
est magis tale. That which makes another such, it is it self more such. It
is true, De principio formali effectivo (as I learned in the University) of
such an Agent as is formally such in it self, as is the effect produced. Next,
it is such as is effective and productive of it self, as when fire heateth
cold water, so the quality must be formally inherent in the Agent, as Wine
makes drunk, it follows not, Wine is more drunk, because Drunkenness is
not inherent in the Wine, nor is it capable of drunkenness; and therefore
Aristotle qualifieth the Maxim with this, Quod efficit tale est magis tale,
modo utrique insit. And it holds not in Agents, who operate by donation, if
the right of the King be transferred from the people to the King. The donation
devesteth the people totally of it, except the King have it by way of loan,
which to my thinking, never yet any spoke -- Sovereignty never was, never can
be in the Community; Sovereignty has power of life and death, which none has
over himself, and the community conceived without government, all as equal,
endowed with Natures and native liberty, of that community can have no power
over the life of another. And so the Argument may be turned home, if the people
be not tales, such by nature (as has formally Royal power, he should say)
they cannot give the King Royal Power. Also none has power of life and death
either eminenter or formally, the people either singly or collectively have not
power over their own life, much less over their neighbors.

Ans. 1. The Prelate would make the maxim true of a formal cause, and this he
learned in the University of St. Andrews, he wrongeth the University, he
rather learned it while he kept the Propter quod unumquodque etc. not
understood by the P. P.
Calves of Craile, the wall is white from whiteness, ergo whiteness is more
white by the Prelates learning; never such thing was taught in that learned
University. 2. Principium formale effectivum is as good Logic, as principium
effectivum materiale, formale, finale. The Prelate is in his acuracy of Logic
now, he yet makes the causality of the formal cause all one with the
causality of the efficient, but he is weak in his Logicks. 3. He confounds a
cause equivocall, and a cause univocall, and in that case the Maxim holds
not. Nor is it necessary to make true the maxim, that the quality be inherent
in the cause, the same way. For a City makes a Major, but to be a Major is one
way in the City, and another way in him who is created Major; and the Prelates
Maxim would help him, if we reasoned thu^: The people makes the King, ergo
the people is more a King, and more formally a Sovereign then the King. But
that is no more our Argument, then the simile that Maxwell used, as near heart
and mouth both. Wine makes drunk the Prelate, ergo Wine is more drunk. But we
reason this, the Fountainepower of making six Kings is in the people, ergo
there is more fountain-power of Royalty in the people then in any one King; for
we read that Israel made Saul King, and made David King, and made Abimelech
King; but never that King Saul made another King, or that an earthly King made
another Absolute King. 4. The Prelate will have the Maxim false, where the
Agent works by donation, which yet holds true by his own grant, c. 9. page
98. The King gives power to a Deputy, ergo there is more power in the King. 5.
He supposes that which is the Basis and foundation of all the question, that
people devesteth themselves totally of their Fountaiue power, which is most
false. 6. Either they must divest themselves totally (says he) of their power,
or the King has power from the people, by way of loan, which to my thinking
never any yet spoke. But the P. Prelates thinking is short, and no rule to
Divines and Lawyers, for to the thinking of the learned Jurists this power of
the King is but fiduciary, and that is (whether the Prelate think it, or
think it not) a sort of power by trust, pawned or loan. Rex director The King
has Sovereignty by loan and i^ trust.
Regni, non proprietarius, Molinae. in consuet. Parisi. Tit. 1. 9. 1. Glos. 7.
n. 9. The King is a life-renter, not a Lord, or proprieter of his Kingdom. So
Novel. 85. in princip. etc. 18. Quod magistratus sit nudus dispensator and
defensor jurium regni, non proprietarius, constat ex eo quodnon posset alienare
imperium, oppida, urbes, regionesve, velres subditorum, bon^ve regni. So
Gregory, l. 3. c. 8. de Repub. per c. 1. Sect. praeterea, de propo. feud.
Hottoman. quest. illust. 1. Ferdinan* Vasquez. l. 1. c. 4. Bossius de princip.
and privileg. illius, n. 290. The King is only a steward, and a defender of the
laws of the Kingdom, not a proprietor, because he has not power to make away
the Impire, Cities, Towns, Countries, and goods of the Subjects: and, bona
commissa Magistratui, sunt subjecta restitutioni, and in prejudtcium
successorum alienari non possunt, per l. ult. Sect* sed nost. C. Comment. de
leg. l. peto 69. fratrem de leg. 2. l. 32. ult. d. t. All the goods committed*
to any Magistrate, are under Restitution: for he has not power to make them
away to the prejudice of his successors. The Prelates thoughts reach not the
secrets of Jurists, and therefore he speaks with a warrant; he will say no
more then his short-travel'd thoughts can reach; and that is but at the door.
7* Soveraigntie is not Soveraigntie how in the Community, how not.
in the Community (says the P. Prelate.) Truly it neither is, nor can be,
more then ten, or a thousand, or a thousand thousands, or a whole Kingdom can
be one man; for Soveraigntie is the abstract, the Sovereign is the concrete:
Many cannot be one King or one Sovereign: a Sovereign must be essentially
one; and a multitude cannot be one: but what then? may not the Sovereign power
be eminently, fontaliter; originallp and radically in the people? I think it
may, and must be, A King is not an under-Iudge, he is not a Lord of Council or
Session formally, because he is more: The people is not King formally, because
the people is eminently more then the King; for they make David King, and Saul
King. And the power to make a Lord of Council and Session, is in the King (say
Royalists.) 8. A Community has not power of life and death. A King has power
of life and death, (says the Prelate) What then? ergo, a Community is not
King. I grant all. But (poor man!) Ergo, the power of making a King, who has
power of life and death, is not in the people. It is like Prelates logic.
Samuel is not a King; ergo, he cannot make David a King. It follows not, by
the Prelates ground. So the King is not an in inferior Judge: What? ergo,
Power of life and death, how in the Community.
he cannot make an inferior Judge. 9. The power of life and death is eminently
and virtually in the people, collectively taken* though not formally. And
though no man can take away his own life, or has power over his own life
formally; yet a man, and a body of men has power over their own lives,
radically and virtually; in respect they may render themselves to a Magistrate,
and to Laws, which if they violate, they must be in hazard of their lives, and
so they virtually have power of their own lives, by putting them under the
power of good laws for the peace and safety of the whole. 10. This is a weak
consequence: None has power of his own life, Ergo, far less of his
neighbors (says the Prelate.) I shall deny the consequence. The King has
not power of his own life, that is, according to the Prelates mind, he can
neither by the law of nature, nor by any Civil law. kill himself: Ergo, the
King has far less power to kill another. It follows not: for the Judge has
more power over his neighbors life, then over his own. 11. But, says the P.
Prelate, The Community conceived without government, A Community of it self,
wanting Rulers, is a Politic body, and how.
all as equal, endowed with natures and native liberty, has no power of life
and death, because all a^e borne free, and so none is borne with dominion and
power over his neighbors life. Yea but so, Mr. P. Prelate, a King considered
without government, and as born a free man, has not power of any man's life,
more then a Community has: for King and Beggar are borne both alike free. But
a Community in this consideration, as they come from the womb, have no
Politic consideration at all. If you consider them as without all policy,
you cannot consider them as invested with policy: yea if you consider them so
as they are by nature, void of all policy, they cannot so much as add their
after-consent and approbation to such a man to be their King, whom God
immediately from heaven makes a King: for to add such an after-consent, is an
act of government. Now as they are conceived to want all government, they
cannot perform any act of government. And this is as much against himself, as
against us.

2. The power of a part, and the power of the whole is not alike, Royalty
never advances the King above the place of a member: And Lawyers say, The King
is above the subjects, in sensu diviso, in a divisive sense he is above this or
that subject: but he is inferior to all the subjects collectively taken,
because he is for the whole Kingdom, as a mean for the end. Object. If this
be a good reason, that he is a mean for the whole Kingdom, as for the end;
that he is therefore inferior to the whole Kingdom: then is he also inferior
to any one subject; for he is a mean for the safety of every subject, as for
the whole Kingdom. Answ. Every mean is inferior to its complete, adequate and
whole end: and such an end is the whole Kingdom in relation to the King: but
every man is not always inferior to its incomplete, inadequate and partial
end. This or that subject is not adequate, but the inadequate and incomplete
end in relation to the King. The Prelate says, Kings are Dii Elohim, Gods;
Sacr. sanc. maj. c. 4. p. 43.
and the manner of their propagation is by filiation, by adoption, sons of
the most high, and Gods first borne. Now the first borne is not above every
brother severally: but if there were thousands, millions, numberless The
propagation of Kings is by filiation, says the P. P. A speech that has
neither sense nor reason. Filiation is later then propagation: one must be
propagated ere he be a son.
numbers, he is above all in precedencie and power. Answ. Not only Kings, but
all inferior Judges are Gods, Psalm. 82. God stands in the congregation of
the Gods, that is not a congregation of Kings. So Exo. 22. 8. the master of the
house shall be brought, (...) to the Gods, or to the Judges. And that there
were more Judges then one, is clear by verse. 9. and if they shall condemn
(...) jarshignur, condemnarint, Joh. 10. 35. (...), He called them Gods. Exodus
4. 16. Thou shall be to Aaron (...) as a God. They are Gods analogically only.
God is infinite, not so the King. 2. Gods will is a law, not so the Kings. 3.
God is an end to himself, not so the King. The Judge is but God by office, and
representation, and conservation of the people. 2. It is denied that the
firstborn is in power before all his brethren, though there were millions.
That is but said. One, as one, is inferior to a multitude: as the firstborn
was a Politic Ruler to his brethren, he was inferior to them politically.

Object. 3. The collective University of a Kingdom are subjects, sons, and
the King their father, no less then this or that subject is the Kings subject.
For the universitie of Subjects are either the King, or the King subjects: for
all the kingdom must be one of these two; but they are not the King, Ergo,
they are his subjects.

Answ. All the Kingdom in any consideration is not either King or Subjects. I
give a third: The Kingdom collective is neither properly King nor Subject: but
the Kingdom embodied in a State, having collateral or coordinate power with
the King.

Object. 4. The universitie is ruled by laws, Ergo, they are inferior to the
King who rules all by law.

Answ. The Universitie properly is no otherwise ruled by laws, then the King
is ruled by laws. The Universitie formally is the complete Politic body,
endued with a nomothetick faculty, which cannot use violence against it self,
and so is not properly under a Law.

QUEST. XX. Whether or no inferior Judges be univocally and essentially
Judges, and the immediate Vicars of God, no less then the King, or if they be
only the Deputies and Vicars of the King?
IT is certain that in one and the same Kingdom, the power of the King is more
in extension, then the power of any inferior Judge: but if these powers of the
King, and the inferior Judges differ intenfive and in spece, and nature, is
the question, though it be not all the question.

Assert. Inferior Judges are no less essentially Judges, and the immediate
Vicars of God, then the King. 1. These who judge in Inferior Judges no less
Gods immediate Vicars then the King.
the room of God, and exercise the judgment of God, are essentially Judges,
and the Deputies of God, as well as the King: but inferior Judges are such.
Ergo, The proposition is clear, the formal reason, why the King is univocally
and essentially a Judge is, because the Kings throne is the Lords throne, 1 Chronicles. 29. 23. And Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord, as King, instead of
David his father, 1 King. 1. 13. It is called David's throne, because the King
is the Deputy of Jehovah, and the judgment is the Lords: I prove the
assumption. Inferior Judges appointed by King Iehoshaphat have this place, 2
Chro. 19. 6. The King said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do, (...), for ye
judge not for man, but for the Lord: then they were Deputies in the place of
the Lord, and not the Kings Deputies in the formal and official acts of
judging. 7. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and
do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons,
or taking of gifts.

Hence I argue, If the Holy Ghost in this good King, forbid inriour Judges
wresting of judgment, respecting of persons, and taking of gifts, because the
judgment is the Lords; and if the Lord himself were on the Bench, he would not
respect persons, nor take gifts; then he presumes, that inferior Judges are
in the stead and place of Jehovah: and that when these inferior Judges should
take gifts, they make (as it were) the Lord, whose place they represent, to
take gifts, and to do iniquity, and to respect persons: but that the holy Lord
cannot do. 2. If the inferior Judges in the act of judging, were the Vicars,
and Deputies of King Jehoshaphat, he would have said, Judge righteous
judgment; Why? For the judgment is mine, and if I the King were on the Bench,
I would not respect persons, nor take gifts; and you judge for me the supreme
Judge, as my Deputies: but the King says, They judge not for man, but for the
Lord. 3. If by this they were not Gods immediate Vicars, but the Vicars and
Deputies of the King, then being mere servants, the King might command them to
pronounce such a sentence, and not such a sentence as I may command my servant
and deputy, in so far, as he is a servant and deputy, to say this, and say not
this: but the King cannot limit the conscience of the inferior Judge, because
the judgment is not the Kings, but the Lords. 4. The King cannot command any
other to do that, as King; for the doing whereof, he has no power from God
himself, but the King has no power from God to pronounce what sentence he
pleases, because the judgment is not his own, but Gods: And though inferior
Judges be sent of The conscience of the inferior Judge is immediately
subordinate to God, not to the King either mediately, or immedia^ely.
the King, and appointed by him to be Judges, and so have their external call
from Gods deputy, the King; yet because judging is an act of conscience, as one
man's conscience cannot properly be a deputy for another man's conscience, so
neither can an inferior Judge, as a Judge, be a deputy for a King: therefore
the inferior Judges have designation to their office from the King; but if
they have from the King, that they are Judges, and be not Gods deputies, but
the Kings, they could not be commanded to execute judgment for God, but for
the King: and Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Moses appointed Judges, but not as his deputies to
judge and give sentence, as subordinate to Moses: For the judgment (says he)
is the Lords, not mine. 6. If Grotius de jure Belli and pac. l. 1. c. 4. Nam
omnis facultas gubernandi in Magistratibus, summae potestati ita subjicitur ut
quicquid contra voluntatem summi imperantis faciant, id defectum sit ^a
facultate, ac proinde de proactu privato habendum.
all the inferior Judges in Israel, were but the deputies of the King, and not
immediately subordinate to God, as his deputies, then could neither inferior
Judges be admonished, nor condemned in Gods word for unjust judgment, because
their sentence should be neither righteous, nor unrighteous judgment, but in
so far, as the King should approve it, or disapprove it; and indeed, that
Royalist Hugo Grotius says so, That an inferior Judge can do nothing against
the will of the supreme Magistrate, if it be so: When ever God commands
inferior Judges to execute righteous judgment, it must have this sense,
Respect not persons in judgment, except the King command you, crush not the
poor, oppress not the fatherless, except the King command you. I understand
not such policy: Sure I am, The Lords commandments, rebukes, and threats,
oblige in conscience the inferior Judge as the superior, as is manifest in
these Scriptures, Jerem. 5. 1. Isai. 1. 17, 21. and 5. 7. and 10. 2. and 59.
14. Jere. 22. 3. Ezekiel. 18. 8. Amos 5. 7. Micah 3. 9. Habak. 1. 4. Levit. 19.
15. Deuteronomy. 17. 11. and 1. 17. Exodus 23. 2.

Grotius says, It is here as in a Categorie: the middle Spece is in Grotius
ibi. species intermedia, si genus respicias, ^st species, si speciem infra
positam, est genus: ita magistratus illi, inferiorum quidem ratione habita sunt
publicae, personae, at supper^ores si considerentur, sunt privati.
respect of the Superior a Spece, in respect of the inferior a Genus; so
inferior Magistrates in relation to these who are inferior to them, and under
them, they are Magistrates or public persons, but in relation to superior
Magistrates, especially the King, they are private persons, and not
Magistrates.

Answ. Jehoshaphat esteemed not Judges appointed by himself private men, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Ye judge not for men, but for the Lord. 2. We shall prove,
that under Judges are powers ordained of God. 3. In Scotland the King can take
no man's inheritance from him, because he is King: But if any man possess Lands
belonging to the Crown, the King by his Advocate must stand before the
Lord-Iudges of the Session, and submit the matter to the Laws of the Land; and
if the King for property of Goods, were not under a Law, and were not to
acknowledge Judges as Judges, I see not how the subject in either Kingdoms have
any propriety. 4. I judge it blasphemy to say, That a sentence of an
inferior Judge must be no sentence, though never so legal, nor just, if it be
contrary to the Kings will, as Grotius says.

He cites that of Augustine: If the Consul command one thing, Grot. 16.
and the Emperor another thing, you contemn not the power, but you choose to
obey the highest: Peter says, He will have us one way to be subject to the
King, as to the supreme, sine ulla exceptione, without any exception, but to
these who are sent by the King, as having their power from the King.

Answ. When the Consul commands a thing lawful, and the King that same
thing lawful, or a thing not unlawful, we are to obey the King, rather then
the Consul: so I expone Augustine. 2. We are not to obey the King and the
Consul the same way, that Inferior Judges truly Judges in relation to the
King.
is with the same degree of reverence and submission; for we owe more
submission of spirit to the King, then to the Consul; but magis and minus non
variant speciem, more or less varieth not the natures of things: but if the
meaning be that we are not to obey the inferior Judge commanding things
lawful, if the King command the contrary, this is utterly denied: But says
Grotius, The inferior Judge is but the Deputy of the King, and has all his
power from him; therefore we are to obey him for the King. Answ. The inferior
Judge may be called the Deputy of the King, (where it is the Kings place to
make Judges) because he has his external call from the King, and is Judge, in
foro Soli, in the name and authority of the The inferior judge, how the Deputy
of the King.
King; but being once made a Judge in foro poli, before God, he is as
essentially a Judge, and in his official acts no less immediately subjected
to God, then the King himself.

Argum. 2. These powers to whom we are to yield obedience, because they are
ordained of God; these are as essentially Judges, as the supreme Magistrate the
King; but inferior Judges are such. Ergo, Inferior Judges are as essentially
Judges, as the supreme Magistrate. The proposition is Romans 13. 1. For that is
the Apostles Arguments; whence we prove, Kings are to be obeyed, because they
are powers from God: I prove the assumption. Inferior Magistrates are powers
from God, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and 19. 6, 7. Exodus 22. 7. Jere. 5. 1. and the Apostle
says, The powers that are, are ordained of God.

3. Christ testified, that Pilate had power from God as a Judge (say Royalists)
no less then Caesar the Emperor, John 19. 11. and 1 Pet. 2. 12. We are
commanded to obey the King, and these that are sent by him, and that for the
Lords sake, and for conscience to God, Inferior Judges powers ordained of God.
Rebuked for perverting judgment.
and Romans 13. 5. We must be subject to all powers that are of God, not only
for wrath, but for conscience.

4. These, who are rebuked, because they execute not just judgment, as well as
the King, are supposed to be essentially Judges, as well as the King; but
inferior Judges are rebuked, because of this, Ierem. 22. 15, 16, 17. Ezekiel. 45.
9, 10, 11, 12. Zeph. 3. 3. Amos 5. 6, 7. Eccles. 3. 16. Micah 3. 2, 3, 4.
Jerem. 5. 31. Ierem. 5. 1.

5. He is the Minister of God for good, and has the sword not in They are the
Ministers of God.
vain, but to execute vengeance on the evil doers; no less then the King, Romans
13. 2, 3, 4. He to whom agrees, by an Ordinance of God, the specific acts of
a Magistrate, he is essentially a Magistrate.

6. The resisting of the inferior Magistrate in his lawful commandmen^s, To
resist them is to resist God.
is the resisting of Gods Ordinance, and a breach of the fifth Commandment, as
is disobedience to parents, and not to give him tribute, and fear, and honor,
is the same transgression, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

7. These styles of Gods, of Heads of the people, of Fathers, of Physicians,
and healers of the sons of the most High, of such as Reign and Decree by the
wisdom of God, etc. that are given to Kings, for the which Royalists make
Kings only Judges, and all inferior Judges, but deputed, and Judges by
participation, and at the second hand, or given to inferior Judges, Exodus 22.
8, 9. Ioh. 10. 35. These They are Gods
who are appointed Judges under Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. are called in Hebrew or
Chaldee, 1 Kings 8. 1, 2. Chap. 5. 2. Mic. 3. 1. Josh. 23. 2. Number. 1. 16. (...)
rasce, (...) fathers, Act. 7. 2. Josh. 14. 1. c. 19. 51. 1 Chro. 8, 28.
Healers, Esai. 3. 7. Gods, and sons of the most High, Psalm. 82. 1. 2. 6. 7.
Prove, 8. 16, 17. I much doubt, if Kings can infuse Godheads in their Subjects.
I conceive they have from the God of Gods these gifts, whereby they are
inhabled to be Judges, and that Kings may appoint them Judges, but can do no
more, they are no less essentially Judges then themselves.

8. If inferior Judges be Deputies of the King, not of God, and have all their
authority from the King, then may the King limit the practice of these
inferior Judges. Say that an inferior Judge has condemned to death an
Paricide, and he be conveying him to the place of execution, the King comes
with a force to rescue him out of his hand, if this inferior Magistrate bear
Gods sword for the terror of ill doers, and to execute Gods vengeance on
murderers, he cannot but resist the King in this, which I judge to be his
Office: for the inferior Judge is to take vengeance on ill doers, and to use
the coactive force of the sword, by virtue of his Office, to take away this
Paracide, now if he be the Deputy of the King, he is not to break the jaws of
the wicked, Job 29. 17. not to take vengeance By this the Parliame nt of both
Kingdoms ought to put to death cut-rhroat-* Cavaliers ^aising war against
the subject, though the King commands the contrary. Sac. Sanc. may. c. 4. page
46.
on evil doers, Romans 13. 4. nor to execute judgment on the wicked, Ps. 149,
9. nor to execute judgment for the fatherless, De. 10. 18. except a mortal
man his Creator, the King say, Amen. Now truly then God, in all Israel, was to
rebuke no inferior Judge for perverting judgment, As he does, Exodus 23. 2. 6.
Mic. 3. 2, 3, 4. Zach. 3. 3. Numb. 25. 5. Deuteronomy. 1. 16. For the King only is
Lord of the conscience of the inferior Judge, who is to give sentence, and
execute sentence righteously upon condition, that the King the only univocall
and proper Judge, first, decree the same, as Royalists teach.

Hear our Prelate: How is it imaginable that Kings can be said to Judge in
Gods place, and not receive the power from God? but Kings Judge in Gods place,
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chro. 19. 6. Let no man stumble, (this is his Prolepsis) at
this, that Moses in the one place, and Iehosaphat in the other speak to
subordinate Judges under them, this weakeneth no ways our Argument, for it is
a ruled case in Law; Quod quis facit per alium, facit per se; all Judgments of
inferior Judges are in the name, authority, and by the power of the supreme,
and are but communicatively, and derivatively from the Sovereign power.

Ans. How is it possible that inferior Judges, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2. Chron. 19. 6.
can be said to judge in Gods place, and not receive the power from God
immediately, without any consent or covenant of men? So the Prelate. But
inferior Judges judge in the Gods place, as both the P. Prelate and Scripture
teach, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2. Chro. 19. 6. Let the Prelate see to the stumbling
conclusion, for so he fears it proves to his bad cause. 2. He says the
places, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chro. 19. 6. prove that the King judges in the Room of
God, because their Deputies judge in the place of God. The Prelate may know, we
would deny this stumbling and lame consequence; for 1. Moses and Iehosaphat are
not speaking to themselves, but to other inferior Judges, who does publicly
exhort them. Moses and Iehosaphat are persuading the regulation of the
personal actions of other men, who might pervert Judgment. 2. The Prelate is
much upon his Law, after he had forsworn the Gospel, and Religion of the How
the King judges by inferior Judges.
Church, where he was baptized. What the King does by another, that he does by
himself; but were Moses and Jehosaphat feared that they should pervert
Judgment in the unjust Sentence pronounced by under Judges, of which Sentence
they could not know any thing? And do inferior Judges so judge in the name,
authority, and power of the King, as not in the Name, Authority and Power of
the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings? or is the Judgment the Kings? no, the
Spirit of God says no such matter, the Judgment executed by those inferior
Judges, is the Lords, not a mortal Kings, ergo a mortal King may not hinder
them to execute Judgment. Obj. He cannot suggest an unjust Sentence, and
command an inferior Judge to give out a sentence absolvatory on cut-throates,
but he may hinder the exocution of any sentence against Irish cut-throates,
Ans. It is all one to hinder the execution of a just sentence, and to suggest
or command the inferior Judge to pronounce an unjust one, for inferior Judges
by conscience of their Office, are both to judge righteously, and by force and
power of the sword given to them of God, Romans 13. 2, 3, 4. to execute the
sentence, and so God has commanded inferior Judges to execute Judgment, and
has forbidden them to wrest Judgment, to take gifts, except the King Command
them so to do.

Master Symmont, The King is by the Grace of God, the inferior Simmons loyal
subjects belief. Sect. 1. page 3.
Judge is Judge by the grace of the King, even as the man is the image of God,
and the woman the man's image* Ans. This distinction is neither true in Law, nor
conscience; not in Law, for it distinguishes not betwixt Ministros regis, and
ministros regni. The servants of the King are his domestics, the Judges are
Ministri regni, non regis; the Ministers and Judges of the Kingdom, not of the
King. The King does not show grace, as he is a man, in making such a man a
Judge, but Justice as a King, by a Royal Power received from the people, and
by an Act of Justice, he makes Judges of deserving men, he should neither for
favor, nor bribes make any Judge in the Land. 2. It is the grace of God that
men are to be advanced The honor of an inferior Judge comes neither from
East, nor from West, more then from the King.
from a private condi^ion to be inferious Judges, as Royal Dignity is a free
gift of God, 1 Samuel 2. 7. The Lord brings low, and lifts up, Ps. 75. 7. God
pu^t^th down one, and seteth up another. Court flatterers take from God, and
give to Kings; but to be a Judge inferior, is no less an immediate favor of
God, then to be King; though the one be a greater favor then the other. Magis
honos, and Majoc honos are to be considered.

9. Arg. Those powers which differ gradually, and per magis and Argu. 9. Power
of Kings and of inferior Judges differ gradually, not specifically.
minus, by more and less only, differ not in nature and spece, and constitute
not Kings and inferior Judges different univocally. But the power of Kings and
inferior Judges are such, therefore Kings and Inferior Judges differ not
univocally. That the powers are the same in nature, I prove 1. by the specifice
acts, and formal object of the power of both, for 1. both are power ordained
of God, Romans 13. 1. to resist either, is to resist the ordinance of God, v. 2.
both are by Office a terror to evil works, v. ^3. The specific acts and
formal object of Kings and inferior Judges are the same.
3. both are the Ministers of God for good. 2. Though the King send and give a
call to the inferior Judge, that does no more make the inferior Judges powers
in nature and spece different, then Ministers of the Word called by Ministers
of the Word, have Offices different in nature. Timotheus Office to be Preacher
of the Word differs not in specie, from the Office of the Presbytery, which
laid hands on him, though their Office by extension, be more then Timothies
Office. 3. The peoples power is put forth in those same acts, when they choose
one to be their King and supreme Governor, and when they set up an
Aristocraticall Government, and choose many, or more then one, to be their
Governors* for the formal object of one or many Governors is Justice and
Religion, as they are to be advanced. 2. The form and manner of their
opperation is, brachio seculari, by a coactive power, and by the sword. 3. The
formal acts of King and many Judges in Aristocracy, are these same, the
defending of the poor and needy from violence, the conservation of a Community
in a peaceable and a godly life, The same obligation of conscience that lies
on the King in all things, lies on the inferior Judge.
1 Timothy 2. 2 Job 29. 12, 13. Esaias 1. 17. 4. These same Laws of God that
regulateth the King in all His Acts of Royal Government, and tyeth and
obliges his conscience, as the Lords Deputy to execute Judgment for God, and
not in the stead of men, in Gods Court of Heaven, does in like manner tie, and
oblige the conscience of Aristocraticall Judges, and all inferior Judges, as
is clear and evident by these places, 1 Timothy 2. 2. not only Kings, but all in
authority (...) are obliged to procure that their subjects lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. All in conscience are obliged,
Deuteronomy. 1. 16. to judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the
stranger that is with them. 17. Neither are they to respect persons in
judgment, but are to hear the small as well as the great, nor to be afraid
of the face of men, the judgment administered by all, is Gods. 2. Chro. 19. 6.
All are obliged to fear God, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. 20. to keep the words of the Law,
not to be lifted up in heart above their brethren, Esaias 1. 17. Ier. 22. 2, 3.
Let any man show me a difference according to Gods Word, but in the extention
that what the King is to do as a King in all the Kingdom, and whole
Dominions, (if God give to him many) as he gave to David and Solomon, and
Joshua, that the inferior Judges are to do in such and such Circuits, and
limited places, and I quit the cause, so as the inferior Judges are little
Kings, and the King a great and delated Judge, as a compressed hand or fist,
and the hand stretched out in fingers and thumb, are one hand, so here. 4. God
owneth inferior Judges as a congregation of Gods, Ps. 82. 1. 2. for that God
sits in a congregation or Senate of Kings or Monarchs I shall not believe,
till I see Royalists show to me a Commonwealth of Monarchs convening in one
Judicature; all are equally called Gods, Ioh. 10. 35. Exodus 22. 8. if for any
cause, but because all Judges even inferior are the immediate Deputies of the
King of Kings, and their sentence in Judgment as the sentence of the Judge of
all the earth, I shall be informed by the P. Prelate when he shall answer my
reasons, if his interdicted Lordship may cast an eye to a Inferiores Iudices
sunt improprie Vicarii Regis, quoad missionem externam ad officium, sed
immediati Dei vicarii, quoad officium in quod missi sunt. Barcl. l. 2. contr.
Monarchom. p. 56, 57. Arnisaeus de authorit. Princ. c. 3. ^. 9. Marant. disp.
1. Zoan. tract. 3. de defens. Mynsin g. obs. 18. cent. 5. Symmons, sect. ^ p.
2. The Judges of Israel, and the Kings after them, differed, but not
essentially.
poor Presbyter below, and as wisdom is that by which Kings reign, Prove. 8.
15. so also v. 16. by which Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth; all that is said against this is: That the King has a Prerogative
Royal, by which he is differenced from all Judges in Israel, called jus regis
(...) for (says Barclay) The King as King essentially has a Domination and
power above all, so as none can censure him, or punish him but God, because
there be no thrones above his, but the throne of God. The Judges of Israel, as
Samuel, Gedeon, etc. had no domination, the dominion was in Gods hand. 2. We
may resist an inferior Judge (says Arnisaeus) otherwise there were no appeal
from him, and the wrong we suffer were irreparable, as says Marantius. And all
the Judges of the earth (says Edw. Symmons) are from God more remotely, namely
(mediante Rege) by the mediation of the Supreme, even as the lesser stars
have their light from God by the mediation of the Sun. To the first I answer,
There was a difference betwixt the Kings of Israel and their Judges, no
question: but if it be an essential difference, it is a question: for, 1. The
Judges were raised up in an extraordinary manner, out of any Tribe, to defend
the people, and vindicate their liberty, God remaining their King: the King by
the Lords appointment was tied, after Saul, to the Royal tribe of Judah, till
the Messiahs coming. God took his own blessed liberty to set up a succession
in the ten tribes- 2. The Judges were not by succession from father to son:
the Kings were, as I conceive, for the typical eternity of the Messiahs
throne, presignified to stand from generation to generation. 3. Whether the
Judges were appointed by the election of the people, or no, some doubt, because
Iepthah was so made Judge: but I think it was not a law in Israel that it
should be so: but the first mould of a King, Deuteronomy. 17. is by election. But that
God gave power of domineering, that is, of Tyrannizing, to a King, so as he
cannot be resisted, which he gave not to a Judge, I think no Scripture can
make good: For by what Scripture can Royalists warrant to us that the people
might rise in arms to defend themselves against Moses, Gideon, Eli, Samuel,
and other Judges, if they should have tyrannized over the people: and that it
is unlawful to resist the most Tyrannous King in Israel and Judah? Yet Barclay
and others must say this, if they be true to that principle of Tyranny, That
the jus Regis, the law or manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11. and 1 Samuel 10.
25, does essentially difference betwixt the Kings of Israel, and the Judges of
Israel: but we think God gave never any power of Tyranny to either Judge or
King of Israel; and domination in that sense was by God given to none of them.
2. Arnisaeus has as little for him, to say the inferior Magistrate may be
resisted, because we may appeal from him: but the King cannot be resisted,
quia sanctitas Majestatis id non permittit, the sanctity of Royal majesty
will not permit us to resist the King. Ans. That is not Paul's argument, to
prove it unlawful to resist Kings, as Kings, and doing their office, because
of the sanctity of their Majesty, that is, as the man intends, because of
the supreme absolute and illimited power that God has given him. But this is a
begging of the question, and all one as to say, the King may not be resisted,
because he may not be resisted: for sanctity of Majesty, if we believe
Royalists, includes essentially an absolute supremacy of power, whereby they
are above the reach of all thrones, laws, powers, or resistance on Earth. But
the Argument is, Resist not, because the Power is of God. But the inferior
Magistrates power is of God. 2. Resist not, because you resist Gods ordinance,
in resisting the Judge: But the inferior Judge is Gods ordinance, Romans 13. 1.
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chro. 19. 6. 3. Mr. Symmons says, all Judges on earth are from
the Kings, as stars have their light from the Sun. I answer, 1. Then
Aristocracie were unlawful, for it has not its power Sacr. sanct. maj. c. 7.
p. 81, 82.
from Monarchy. Had the Lords of the Philistims, have the States of Holland no
power but from a Monarchy? Name the Monarch. Have the Venetians any power from
a King? Indeed our Prelate says from Augustine, Confess. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Generale pactum est societatis humana, obedire Regibus suis: It is an
universal covenant of humane society, and a dictate of nature, that men obey
their Kings. I beg the favor of Sectaries (says ^he) to show as much for
Aristocracie and Democracie. Now all other governments to bellies borne at
Court, are the inventions of men. But I can show that same warrant for the one
as for the other, because it is as well the dictate of nature, that People obey
their Judges and Rulers, as it is that they obey their Kings. And Austin
speaks of all Judges, in that place, though he name Kings; for Kingly
government is no more of the law of nature, then Aristocracie or Democracie:
nor are any borne Judges, or Subjects at all: There is a natural aptitude in
all to either of these, for the conservation of nature, and that is all. Let us
see that men naturally inclining to Government, incline Nature is a^ near to
Aristocracy as to Monarchy, for the wise cannot be under the husband, as a
subject under a Monarch, she by the fifth Commandment ha^h a joint ^headship
with the husband.
rather to Royal Government, then to any other. That the P. Prelate shall not
be able to show. For fatherly government being in two, is not Kingly, but
nearer to Aristocracy; and when many families were on earth, every one
independent within themselves, if a commune enemy should invade a tract of Land
governed by families, I conceive, by natures light they should incline to
defend themselves, and to join in one politic body for their own safety, as
is most natural; but in that case they having no King, and there were no
reason of many fathers all alike loving their own families and self
preservation, why one should be King over all, rather then another, except by
voluntary compact; so it is clear that Nature is nearer to Aristocracy before
this contract, then a Monarchy: and let him show us in multitudes of families
dwelling together before there was a King, as clear a warrant for Monarchy, as
here is for Aristocracy, though to me both be lawdable and lawful ordinances
of God, and the difference merely accidental, being one and the same power
from the Lord, Romans 13. 1. which is in diverse subjects in one, as a Monarchy,
in many as in Aristocracy, and the one is as natural as the other: and the
subjects are accidental to the nature of the power. 2. The Stars have no
light at all, but in actual aspect toward the Sun, and they are not lightsome
bodies by the free will of the Sun, and have no immediate light from God
formally, but from the Sun, so as if there were no Sun, there should be no
Stars. 3. for actual shining and sending out of beams of light actusecundo,
they depend upon the presence of the Sun, but for Judges inferior depend on
the King, in fieri when the constitution* of the Kingdom is such, but not in
facto esse nor in their essence.
inferior Judges though they have their call from the King, yet have they
gifts to govern from no King on earth, but only from the King of Kings. 4.
When the King is dead the Judges are Judges, and they depend not on the King
for their second acts of judging, and for the actual emission and putting
forth their beams and rays of justice, upon the poor and needy, they depend
on no voluntary aspect, information or commandment of the King, but on that
immediate subjection of their conscience to the King of Kings. And their
Judgment which they execute is the Lords immediately, and not the Kings, and so
the comparison halteth.

Arg. Our 10th. Arg. If the King dying, the Judges inferior remain Arg. 10.
powers from God, the Deputies of the Lord of Hoasts having their power from
God, then are they essentially Judges; yea and if the estates in their prime
representators, and leaders, have power in the death of the King, to choose and
make another King, then are they not Judges and Rulers by derivation and
participation, Inferior Judges, after the King is dead, as also the States of
Parliament remain Judges.
or unproperly, but the King is rather the Ruler by derivation and
participation, then these who are called inferior Judges. Now if these Judges
depend in their Sentences upon the immediate will of him who is supposed to be
the only Judge, when this only Judge dies, they should cease to be Judges: for
Expirante mandatore expirat mandatum, because the Fountain Judge drying up,
the streams must dry up. Now when Saul dyed, the Princes of the Tribes remain
by Gods institution Princes, and they by Gods Law and Warrant, Deuteronomy. 17. choose
David their King.

11. If the King through absolute power do not send inferior Arg. 11.
Judges, and constitute them, but only by a power from the people; and if the
Lord have no less immediate influence in making inferior Judges, then in
making Kings, then is there no ground that the God, not the absolute Prince,
makes the inferior Judges.
King should be sole Judge, and the inferior Judge only Judge by derivation
from him, and essentially his Deputy, and not the immediate Deputy of God. But
the former is true, ergo so is the latter. And first that the Kings absolute
Will makes not inferior Judges, is clear, from Deuteronomy. 1. 15. Moses might not
follow his own will in making inferior Judges whom he pleased: God tied him
to a Law, v. 13. that he should take wise men, known amongst the people, and
fearing God, and hating covetousness. And these qualifications were not from
Moses, but from God; and no less immediately from God then the inward
qualification of a King, Deuteronomy. 17. and therefore it is not Gods Law that the
King may make inferior Judges only, Durante beneplacito, during his absolute
will; for if these Divine qualifications remain in the seventy Elders, Moses
at his will could not remove them from their places. 2. That the King can make
heritable Judges more then he can communicate faculties and parts of judging, I
doubt, riches are of fathers, but not promotion, which No heritable Judges
according to Gods Word.
is from God, and neither from the East, nor the West. That our Nobles are
borne Lords of Parliament, and Judges by blood, is a positive Law. 3. It
seems to me from Esaias 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. that the inferior Judge is made by
consent of the people, nor can it be called a wronging of the King, that all
cities and Buroughs of Scotland and England, have power to choose their own
Provests, Rulers, and Majors. 4. If it be warranted by God, that the lawful
Call of God to the Throne, be the election of the people, the call of inferior
Judges must also be from the people, mediatly or immediately: So I see no ground
to say that, the inferior Judge is the Kings Vicegerent, or that he is in
respect of the King, or in relation to supreme Authority, only a private man.

12. These Judges cannot but be univocally and essentially Judges, no less
then the King, without which in a Kingdom Justice is Physically unpossible:
and Anarchie and violence and confusion must follow, if they be wanting in the
Kingdom. But without inferior Judges, though there be a King, Justice is
Physically unpossible, and Anarchie and confusion must follow, etc.

Now this Argument is more considerable, that without inferior Judges, though
there be a King in a Kingdom, Justice and safety are unpossible, and if there
be inferior Judges, though there be no King, as in Aristocracy, and when the
King is dead, and another not Crowned, or the King is Minor, or absent, or a
captive in the enemies Land, yet justice is possible, and the Kingdom
preserved; the Medium of the Argument is grounded upon Gods Word, Number. 11. 14,
15. when Moses is unable alone to judge the people, Inferior Judges more
necessary in a large Kingdom then the Kfng, and fo Aristocracy in that more
suitable to the natural end of government then Monarchy.
seventy Elders re-joyned with him, 16. 17. so were the Elders adjoined to
help him, Exo. 24. 1. Deuteronomy. 5. 23. c. 22. 16. Josh. 23. 2. Judge. 8. 14. Judge.
11. 5. Judge. 11. ^^. 1 Samuel 11. 3. 1 King. 20. 7. 2 King. 6. 32. 2 Chro. 34.
29. Ruth 4. 4. Deuteronomy. 19. 12. Ezech. 8. 1 Lament. 1. 19. then were the Elders of
Moab thought they had a King. 2. The end natural of Judges has been indigence
and weakness, because men could not in a society defend themselves from
violence, therefore by the light of nature they gave their power to one, or
more, and made a Judge, or Judges to obtain the end of self preservation. But
Nature uses the most efficacious means to obtain its end, but in a great
society and Kingdom the end is more easily attained by many Governors, then
by one only; for where there is but one, he cannot minister Justice to all, and
the farther that the children are removed from their father and tutor, they are
the nearer to violence and unjustice. Justice should be at as easy a rate to
the poor, as a draught of water* Samuel went yearly through the Land to
Bethell, Gilgall, Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. 16. and brought Justice to the doors of
the poor. So were our Kings of Scotland obliged to do of old; but now justice
is as dear as gold. it is not a good argument to prove inferior Judges to be
only Vicars and Deputies of the King, because the King may censure and punish
them when they pervert judgment. 1. Because the King, in that, punishes them
not as Judges, but as men. 2. That might prove all the Subjects to be Vicars
and Deputies of the King*, because he can punish them all, in the case of their
breach of laws.

QUEST. XXI. What power the People and States of Parliament have over the King,
and in the State?
IT is true, the King is the head of the Kingdom; but the States of the
Kingdom are as the temples of the head, and so as essentially Principes sunt*
capitis tempora, Rex vertex.
parts of the head, as the King is the crown of the head.

Assert. 1. These Ordines Regni, the States, have been in famous Nations: so
there were fathers of families, and Princes of Tribes amongst the Jews: The
Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians, Polyb. hist. l. 6. The Senate amongst the
Romans: The forum Superbiense amongst the Arragonians: The Parliaments, in
Scotland, England, France, Spain. 2 Samuel 3. 17. Abner communed with the Elders
of Israel, to bring the King home. And there were Elders in Israel, both in the
time of the Judges, and in the time of the Kings; who did not only give advice
and counsel to the Judges and Kings, but also were Judges, no less then the
Kings, and Judges; which I shall make good by these places: Deuteronomy. 21. 19. The
rebellious Son is Elders of a land jointly in Parliament, must have as much, if
not more, ( vis unita fortior)* then when they are divided in several tribes,
^ities, shires: but, divided, they are as essentially. Judges, as the King. The
whole must have more power in extension, then the part. Jer. 38. 25* they had
power against the Kings will, to put Jeremiah to death. Jeremiah says, Do
whatsoever seems good to you, v. 10. The power of conveening Parliaments, in
the Estates, without the King. Ps. 122. 2, 3. Why are thrones set for judgment
for all the tribes, if only the King judge.
brought to the Elders of the City, who had power of life and death, and
caused to stone him. Deuteronomy. 22. 18. The Elders of the City shall take that man,
and chastise him. Josh. 20. 4. But beside the Elders of every City, there were
the Elders of Israel, and the Princes, who had also judicial power of life and
death, as the Judges and King had. Josh. 22. 30. Even when Joshua was Judge in
Israel, the Princes of the Congregation, and heads of the Thousands of Israel,
did judicially cognosce whether the Children of Reuben, of Gad, and of half
the tribe of Manasseh, were apostates from God, and the Religion of Israel. 2 Samuel 5. 3. All the Elders of Israel made David King at Hebron: and Number. 11.
They are appointed by God not to be the advisers only and helpers of Moses,
but, v. 14, 17. to bear a part of the burden of ruling and governing the
people, that Moses might be eased. Jeremiah is accused, c. 26. 10. upon his
life, before the Princes, Josh. 7 4. The Princes sit in judgment with Joshua,
Josh. 9. 15. Joshua and the Princes of the Congregation swear to the
Gibeonites, that they would not kill them. The Princes of the house of Israel
could not be rebuked for oppression in judgment, Mic. 3. 1, 2, 3. if they had
not had power of judgment. So Zeph. 3. 3. And Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2. Chron. 19. 6, 7.
They are expressly made Judges in the place of God. And 1 Samuel 8. 2. without
advise or knowledge of Samuel the supreme Judge, they conveene and ask a King:
and without any head or superior, when there is no King, they conveene a
Parliament, and make David King at Hebron: And when David is banished, they
conveen to bring him home again: when Tyrannous Athalia reigns, they
conveene and make Ioash King, and that without any King. And Josh. 22. there is
a Parliament conveened, and, for any thing we can read, without Joshua, to take
cognizance of a new Altar. It had been good that the Parliaments both of
Scotland, and of England, had conveened, though the King had not indicted and
summoned a Parliament; without the King, to take order with the wicked Clergy,
who had made many idolatrous Altars: And the P. Prelate should have brought an
argument to prove it unlawful, in foro Dei, to set up the Tables and
Conventions in our Kingdom, when the Prelates were bringing in the grossest
idolatry into the Church, a service for adoring of Altars, of Bread, the work
of the hand of the Baker; a God more corruptible Tables in Scotland lawful.
then any god of silver and gold.

And against Achabs will and mind, 1 King 18, 19. Elias causes to kill the
Priests of Baal, according to Gods express law. It is true, it was
extraordinary; but no otherwise extraordinary then it is at this day. When the
supreme Magistrate will not execute the judgment of the Lord, Those who made
him supreme Magistrate under God, who have, under God, sovereign liberty to
dispose of crowns and kingdoms, are to execute the judgment of the Lord,
when wicked men make the law of God of none effect. 1 Samuel 15. 32. so Samuel
killed Hagage, whom the Lord expressly commanded to be killed; because Saul
disobeyed the voice of the Lord. I deny not but there is necessity of a clear
warrant that the Magistrate neglect his duty, either in not conveening the
States, or not executing the judgment of the Lord. 3. I see not how the
conveening of a Parliament is extraordinary to the States; for none has power
ordinary when the King is dead, or when he is distracted, or captive in another
land, to conveene the Estates and Parliament, but they only; and in their
defect, by the law of Nature, the people may conveene. But, 4. If they be
essentially Judges no less then the King. as I have demonstrated to the
impartial Reader, in the former Chapter; I conceive, though the State make a
positive law, for Orders cause, that the King ordinarily conveene Parliaments;
Yet, if we dispute the matter in the court of Conscience, the Estates have
intrinsecally (because they are the Estates, and essentially Judges of the
Land) ordinary power to conveene themselves: 1. Because when Moses, by Gods
rule, has appointed seventie men to be Catholic Judges in the Land, Moses
upon his sole pleasure and will, has not power to restrain them in the
exercise of judgment given The inferior Judges are not subject in their
conscience to the King, in their acts of judgment, either, quoad
specificationem, to give unjust sentences at his will; nor quoad exercitium, to
execute, or not execute judgment for the oppressed.
them of God: for as God has given to any one Judge power to judge righteous
judgment, though the King command the contrary; so has he given to him power
to sit down in the gate, or the bench, when and where the necessity of the
oppressed people calls for it: For, 1. the express commandment of God,
which says to all Judges, Execute judgment in the morning; involveth
essentially a precept to all the Physical actions, without which it is
impossible to execute judgment: As namely, if by a divine precept the Judge
must execute judgment; ergo, he must come to some public place, and he must
cause party and witnesses come before him, and he must consider, cognosce,
examine in the place of judgment, things, persons, circumstances: and so God
who commands positive acts of judgeing, commands the Judges locomotive
power, and his natural actions of compelling by the sword the parties to come
before him: even as Christ who commands his servants to preach, commands
that the Preacher and the People go to Church, and that he stand or sit in a
place where all may hear, and that he give himself to reading and meditating,
before he come to preach. And if God command one Judge to come to the place of
judgment, so does he command seventie, and so all Estates to conveen in the
place of judgment. It is objected, That the Estates are not Judges ordinary
and habitually, but only Judges at some certain occasions, when the King, for
cogent and weighty causes, calls them, and calls them not to judge, but to
give him advise and counsel how to judge. Ans. 1. They are no less Judges
habitually then the King, when the common affairs of the whole Kingdom
necessitateth these Public Watchmen to come together: for even the King
judges not actually, but upon occasion. 2. This is to beg the question, to say
that the Estates are not Judges, but when the King calls them, at such and
such occasions: for the Elders, Princes and Heads of families and Tribes, were
Judges ordinary, because they made the King. And 2. the Kingdom, by God, yea,
and Church, Justice and Religion, so far as they concern the whole Kingdom,
are committed not to the keeping of the King only, but to all the Judges,
Elders, and Princes of the Land: And they are rebuked as evening wolves, lions,
oppressors, Ezech. 22. 27. Zaca. 3. 3. Esa. 3. 14, 15. Mic. 3. 1, 2, 3. when
they oppress the people in judgment, So are they, Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 16, 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. made Judges, and therefore they are no more to be restrained
not to conveene, by the Kings power, (which is in this, accumulative and
auxiliarie, not privative) then they can be restrained in judgment, and in
pronouncing such Unjust judgeing, and no judging at all, are sins in the
States.
a sentence, as the King pleased, and not such a sentence: Because as they are
to answer to God for unjust sentences, so also for no just sentences, and for
not conveening to judge, when Religion and Justice, which are fallen in the
streets, calls for them. 3. As God in a law of nature, has given to every
man the keeping and selfepreservation of himself, and of his brother; Ca^n
ought in his place to be the keeper of Abel his brother. So has God committed
the keeping of the Commonwealth, by a positive law, not to the Junius Brut. q.
2. p. 51. vind. contr. Tyran.
King only, because that is impossible, Number. 11. 14, 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. 1 Chronicles. 27. 4. If the King had such a power as King, and so from God,
he should have power to break up the meeting of all Courts of Parliament,
Secret Council, and all inferior Iudicatures: And when the Congregation of
gods, as Ps. 82. in the midst of which the Lord stands, were about to
pronounce just judgment for the oppressed and poere, they might be hindered by
the King; and so they should be as just as the King makes them, and might
pervert judgment, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him,
Esa. 5. 23. because the King commands: And the cause of the poor should not
come before the Judge, when the King so commands. And shall it excuse the
Estates, to say, We could not judge the cause of the poor, nor crush the
Priests of Baal, and the idolatrous Masse-Preltes, because the King forbad us.
So might the King break up the meeting of the Lords of Session, when they were
to decerne that Naboths vineyard should be restored to him; and hinder the
States to repress Tyranny: And this were as much as if the States should say,
We made this man our King, and with our good will we agree, he shall be a
Tyrant. For if God gave it to him as a King, we are to consent that he enjoy
it. 5. If Barclay and other flatterers have leave to make the Parliament but
Counselors and Advisers of the King; and the King to be the only and sole The
Parliament Judges not advisers only.
Judge: 1. The King is, by that same reason, the sole Judge, in relation to all
Judges; the contrary whereof is clear, Number. 11. 16. Deuteronomy, 1. 15, 16, 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Yea but (say they) the King,
when he sends an Ambassador, he may tie him to a written Commission; and in
so far as he exceeds that, he is not an Ambassador: and clear it is, that
all inferior Judges, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. are but sent by the King, ergo, they
are so Judges, as they are but messengers, and are to adhere to the Royal
pleasure of the Prince that sent them.

Ans. 1. The Ambassador is not to accept an unjust Embassage, Ieferiour Judges
not the Legates, or Servants, or Messengers of the King.
that fights with the Law of nature. 2. The Ambassador and the Judge differ,
the Ambassador is the King and States Deputy, both in his call to the
Embassage, and also in the matter of the Embassage; for which cause he is not
to transgress what is given to him in Writ, as a Rule; but the inferior
Judges, and the high Court of Parliament, though they were the Kings Deputies
(as the Parliament is in no sort his Deputy, but he their Deputy Royal) yet it
is only in respect of their call, not in respect of the matter of their
Commission, for the King may send the Judge to judge in general according to
the Law, and Justice and Religion, but he cannot depute the sentence, and
command the conscience of the Judge to prononnce such a sentence, not such, the
inferior Judge in the act of judging is as independent, and his conscience as
immediately subject to God, as the King, therefore the King owes to every
sentence his approbative suffrage as King, but not his either directive
suffrage, nor his imperative suffrage of absolute pleasure, 6. If the King
should sell his Country* and bring in a foreign Army, the estates are to
convene, to take course for the safety of the Kingdom. 7. If David exhort the
Princes of Israel to help King Solomon in governing Public Government
belongs to the States, and Elders as to the King.
the Kingdom, in building the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 32. 3. Ezechiah took counsel
with his Princes, and his mighty men in the matter of holding off the
Assyrians, who were to invade the Land, if David 1 Chronicles. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.
consult with the Captains of thousands, and hundreds to bring the Ark of God
to Kireath jearim, if Solomon 1 King. 8. 1. Assemble the Elders of Israel, and
all the Heads of the Tribes, and the chief of the fathers to bring the Arc of
the Tabernacle, to the congregation of the Lord. And Achab gather together the
States of Israel, in a matter that nearely concerned Religion. If the Elders
and people, 1 King. 20. 8. counsel and decree, that King Achab should hearken
to Benhadad King of Syria, and if Ahasuerus make no Decrees, but with consent
of his Princes, Ester, 1. 21. nor Darius any Act without his Nobles and
Princes, if Hamor and Schechem, Genes. 34. 20. would not make a Covenant with
Jacobs Sons, without the consent of the men of the City, and Ephron the Hittite
would not sell Abraham a burial place in his Land without the consent of the
children of Heth, Genesis 23. 10. Then must the estates have a power of judging
with the King or Prince in matters of Religion, Justice, and Government, which
concern the whole Kingdom; but the former is true by the Records of
Scripture, ergo, so is the latter.

8. The men of Ephraim complain that Iephtah had gone to Arg. 8.
war against the children of Ammon without them, and hence rose war betwixt
the men of Ephraim, and the men of Gilead, Iud. 12. 1, 2, 3. and the men of
Israel ^iercely contend with the men of Judah, because they brought King* David
home again without them, pleading that they were therein despised, 2 Samuel 19.
41, 42, 43. which evinceth that the whole States have hand in matters of
public government, that concern all the Kingdom; and when there is no King,
Judge. 20. The chief of the people, and of all the Tribes go out in battle,
against the children of Benjamin.

9. These who make the King* and so have power to unmake him Arg. 9.
in the case of Tyranny, must be above the King in power of Government; but the
Elders and Princes made both David and Saul Kings.

10. There is not any who say that the Princes and people, 1 Samuel Arg, 10.
14. did not right in rescuing innocent Jonathan from death, against the Kings
Will, and his Law.

11. The special ground of Royalists is to make the King the absolute Arg. 11.
supreme, giving all life and power to the Parliament and States, and of mere
grace convening them. So Fern, the Author of Ossorianum, p. 69. but this
ground is false, because the Kings power is fiduciary, and put in his hand upon
trust, and must be ministerial, and borrowed from these who put him in trust,
and so his power must be less, and derived from the Parliament: but the
Parliament has no power in trust from the King, because the time was, when the
man who is the King, had no power, and the Parliament had the same power that
they now have; and now when the King has received power from them, they have
the whole power that they had before. That is, to make Laws, and resigned no
power to the King, but to execute Laws, and his convening of them is an Act of
Royal Duty, which he owes to the Paliament by virtue of his Office, and is
not an act of grace, for an act of grace is an act of free Will, and what the
King does of free Will, he may not do, and so he may never convene a
Parliament. But when David, Solomon, Asa, Ezekiah, Iehosaphat, Achas convened
Parliaments, they convened Parliaments as Kings, and so Ex debito and virtute
officii, out of debt and Royal Obligation, and if the King as the King, be Lex
animata, a breathing and living Law, the King as King must do by obligation of
Law, what he does as King, and not from spontaneous and Arbitrary grace. 2. If
the Scripture holds forth to us a King in Jsrael, and two Princes and Elders
who made the King, and had power of life and death, as we have seen; then is
there in Israel Monarchy tempered with Aristocracy; and if there were Elders
and Rulers in every City, as the Scripture says, here was also Aristocracy and
Democracy. And for the warrant of the power of the Estates I appeal to
Iurists, and to approved Authors. Argu. l. aliud. 160.. 1. De Iur. Reg. l. 22.
Mortuo de fidei. l. 11. 14. ad Mum. l. 3. 1. 4. Sigonius De Rep. Iudaeor. l. 6.
c. 7. Cornelius Bertramo, c. 12. Iunius Brutus Vindic. contra. Tyran.. 2.
Author Libelli de jur Magistrate. in subd. q. 6. Althus. Politic. c. 18. Calvin
Institut. l. 4. c. 20. Pareus Coment. in Romans 13. Pet. Martyr in Lib. Iudic. c.
3. Joan. Marianus de rege Lib. 1. c. 7. Hottoman de jure Antiq. Regni Gallici
l. 1. c. 12. Buchanan De jure Regni apud Scotos.

Obj. The King after a more noble way represents the people, then the Estates
does; for the Princes and Commissioners of Parliament have all their power from
the people, and the peoples power is concentricated in the King.

Ans. The Estates taken collectively do represent the people both in respect
of Office, and of persons, because they stand Judges for them; for many
represent many, ratione numeri and officii, better then one does. The King
does unproperly represent the people, though the power for actual execution of
Laws, be more in the King, yet a legislative power is more in the Estates.
Neither will it follow, that if the Estates of a Kingdom do any thing but
counsel a King, they must then command him; for a legal and judicial advice
has influence in the effect to make it a Law, not on the Kings Will, to cause
him give the being of a Law to that, which without his Will is no Law, for this
supponeth that he is only Judge.

Obj. What power the people reserveth, they reserve it to themselves in
unitate, as united in a Parliament; and therefore what they do out of a
Parliament is tumultous.

Ans. I deny the consequence, they reserve the power of self preservation out
of a Parliament, and a power of convening in Parliament for that effect, that
they may by Common Counsel defend themselves.

QUEST. XXII. Whether the power of the King as King be absolute, or dependent
and limited by Gods first mould and pattern of a King?
DOctor Fern shows us it was never his purpose to plead for Fern par. 3.
Defense. Sect. 3. page page 1^.
absoluteness of an Arbitrary commandment, free from all Moral restraint
laid on the power by Gods Law; but only he striveth for a power in the King
that cannot be resisted by the subject. But truly we never disputed with
Royalists of any absolute power in the King, free from Moral subjection to
Gods Law 1. Because any bond that Gods Law imposes on the King, it comes
wholly from God, and the nature of a Divine Law, and not from any voluntary The
question is not, if the King be so absolute as he is freed from all Moral
restraint coming from Gods Law.
contract, or covenant, either express, or tacito, betwixt the King and the
people who made him King, for if he fail against such a covenant, though he
should exceed the cruelty of a King, or a man, and become a Lion and a Nero, a
Mother-killer, he should in all his inhumanity and breach of covenant be
countable to God, not to any man on earth. 2. To dispute with Royalists, if
Gods Law lay any Moral restraint upon the King, nor to dispute whether the
King be a rational man, or no; and whether he can sin against God, and shall
cry in the day of Gods wrath (if he be a wicked Prince) Hills fall on us, and
cover us, as it is Revel. 6. 15, 16. and whether Tophet be prepared for all
workers of iniquity; and certainly I justify the Schoolmen in that question:
Whether or no God could have created a rational creature, such a one as by
nature is impeccable, and not naturally capable of sin before God? if
Royalists dispute this question of their absolute Monarch, they are wicked
Divines.

2. We plead not at this time ( says the Prelate stealing from Grotius, Sacr.
sanc. Maj. cap. 14. p. 1^3.
Barclaius, Arnisaeus, who spoke it with more sinews of reason) for a
(masterly, or) despoticall, or rather a slavishing Sovereignty, which is
Dominium herile, an absolute power, such as the great Turk this day exercises
over his subjects, and the King of Spain has over, and in his territories
without Europe: we maintain only regiam potestatem, quae fundatur in paterna,
such royal fatherly Sovereignty as we live under* blessed be God, and our
predecessors. This (says he) as it has its Royal Prerogative inherent to the
Crown naturally, and inseparable from it, so it trencheth not upon the liberty
of the person, or the property of the goods of the subject, but in, and by the
lawful and just acts of jurisdiction.

Ans. 1. Here is another absolute power disclaimed to be in the King, he has
not such a masterly and absolute liberty as the Turk has. Why? John P. P. in
such a tender and high point as concerns soul and body of subjects in three
Christian Kingdoms, you should have taught us 1. What bonds and fetters any
covenant or paction betwixt the King and people lays upon the King, why he
has not as King the power of the great Turk. I will tell you* The Great Turk
may command any of his subjects to leap into a mountain of fire, and burn
himself quick, in conscience of obedience to his Law. And what if the subject
disobey the Great Turk? if the Great Turk be a lawful Prince, as you will not
deny. And if the King of Spain should command foreign conquered slaves to do
the like. By your Doctrine neither the one, nor the other were obliged to
resist by violence, but to pray, or fly, which both were to No resisting of the
most Turkish Tyran by the Royalists way.
speak to stones, and were like the man, who in case of shipwreck, made his
devotion of praying to the waves of the sea, not to enter the place of his b^d
and drown him. But a Christian King has not this power; Why, and a Christian
King (by Royalists doctrine) has a greater power then the Turk (if greater
can be) he has power to command his subjects to cast themselves into Hellfire;
that is, to press on them a service wherein it is written: (Adore the work of
men's hands in the place of the living God) and this is worse then the Turks
commandment of bodily burning quick. And what is left to the Christian
Subjects, in this case, is the very same, and no other then is left to the
Turkish and foreign Spanish subject; Either flee, or make prayers* There is
no more left to us. 2. Many Royalists maintain, that England is a conquered An
absolute King more absolute then the Great Turk, by Royalists way.
Nation. Why then, see what power, by law of Conquest, the King of Spain has
over his slaves, the same must the King of England have over his subjects. For,
to Royalists, a title by Conquest to a Crown, is as lawful as a title by birth
or election. For lawfulness, in relation to Gods law, is placed in an
indivisible point, if we regard the essence of lawfulness: And therefore there
is nothing left to England, but that all Protestants who take the oath of a
Protestant King, to defend the true Protestant Religion, should, after prayers,
conveyed to the King through the fingers of Prelates and Papists; leave the
Kingdom empty to Papists, Prelates and Atheists.

3. All power restrained, that it cannot arise from ten degrees No law at all,
by Royalists way, to impede a King from a superinundation of overflowing
Tyrann^*
to foureteen, from the Kingly power of Saul, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11. to the Kingly
power of the Great Turk, to fourteen; 1. must either be restrained by Gods
law; 2. or by Man's law; or 3. by the innate goodness and grace of the Prince; or
4. by the providence of God. A restraint from Gods law is vain: for it is no
question between us and Royalists, but God has laid a moral restraint on
Kings, and all men, that they have not moral power to sin against God. 2. Is
the restraint laid on by man's law? What law of man? 1. The Royalist says, 1.
The King, as King, is above all law of man. Then (say I) no law of man can
hinder the Kings power of ten, to arise to the Turkish power of foureteen. 2.
All law of man, as it is man's law, is seconded either with Ecclesiastical and
spiritual coaction, such as Excommunication; *or with Civil and temporal
coaction, such as is the Sword, if it be violated. But Royalists deny, that
either the sword of the Church in Excommunication, or the Civil sword, should
be drawn against the King. 3. This law of man should be produced by this
profound Iurist, the P. Prelate, who mocketh at all the Statists and Lawyers of
Scotland. It is not a covenant betwixt the King and People, at his Coronation:
for though there were any such covenant, yet the breach of it does bind before
God, but not before man: nor can I see, or any man else, how a law of man can
lay a restraint on the Kings power of two degrees, to cancel it within a Law,
more then on a power of ten, or fourteen degrees. If the King of Spain, the
lawful Sovereign of those over-European people, (as Royalists say) have a
power of fourteen degrees over those conquered Subjects, as a King; I see not
how he has not the like power over his own Subjects of Spain, to wit, even of
Foureteen: for what agrees to a King, as a King, (and Kingly power from God he
has as King) he has it in relation to all Subjects, except it be taken from
him in relation to some Subjects, and given by some law of God; or in relation
to some other Subjects. Now, no man can produce any such law. 4. The nature of
the goodness and grace of the Prince, cannot lay bonds on the King, to cancel
his power, that he should not usurp the power of the King of Spain toward his
over-Europeans. 1. Royalists plead for a power due to the King, as King, and
that from God; such as Saul had, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11. 1 Samuel 10. 25. But this power
should be a power of grace and goodness in the King, as a good man; not in the
King, as a King, and due to him by law: And so the King should have his Legal
power from God, to be a Tyrant. But if he were not a Tyrant, but should lay
limits on his own power, through the goodness of his own nature; No thanks to
Royalists that he is not a Tyrant: For, actu primo, and as he is a King, (as
they say) he is a Tyrant, having from God a Tyrannous power of ten degrees, as
Saul had, 1 Samuel 8. and why not of foureteen degrees, as well as the Great
Turk, or the King of Spain? if he use it not, it is his own personal
goodness, not his official and Royal power. 4. The rastraint of Providence
laid by God upon any power to do ill, hinders only the exercise of the power
not to break forth in as Tyrannous acts as ever the King of Spain, or the
great Turk can exercise toward any. Yea, Providence lays Physical
restraint, and possibly moral, sometimes, upon the exercise of that power that
Devils, and the most wicked men of the world has: but Royalists must show us
that Providence has laid bounds on the Kings power, and made it fatherly, and
not masterly; so that if it the power exceed bounds of fatherly power, and
pass over to the dispoticall and masterly power, it may be resisted by the
Subjects. But that they will not say. 4. This paternall and fatherly power that
God has given to Kings, as Royalists teach, it trencheth not upon the liberty
of the Subjects, and property of their goods; but in, and by lawful and just
acts of Jurisdiction (says the P. Prelate:) Well; Then it may trench upon the
liberty of soul and body of the Subjects; but in, and by lawful and just
acts of of jurisdiction: But none are to judge of these acts of Jurisdiction,
whether they be just or not just, but the King, the only Judge of supreme and
absolute authority and power. And if the King command the idolatrous service
in the obtruded Service-booke, it is a lawful and a just act of jurisdiction:
For to Royalists, who make the Kings power absolute, all acts are so just to
the Subject, though he command Idolatry and Turcisme, that we are to suffer
only, and not to resist. 5. The Prelate presumes that Fatherly power is
absolute: But so if a father murder his child, he is not comptable to the
Magistrate therefore; but being absolute over his children, only the Judge of
the World, not any power on earth can punish him. 6. We have proved that the
Kings power is paternall or fatherly only, by analogy, and improperly. 7. What
is this Prerogative Royal, we shall hear by and by, 8. There is no restraint
on Earth, laid upon this fatherly power of the King, but Gods law, which is a
moral restraint. If then the King challenge as great a power as the Turk
has, he only sins against God; but no mortal man on earth may control
him, as Royalists teach: and who can know what power it is that Royalists plead
for, whether a dispoticall power of Lordly power, or a fatherly power? If it be
a power above law, such as none on earth may resist it; it is no matter whether
it be above law of two degrees, or of twenty, even to the Great Turks power.

These go for Oracles, at Court* Tacitus. Principi summum rerum arbitrium Dii
dederunt, subditis obsequii gloria relicta est. Seneca. Indigna digna habenda
sunt, Rex quae facit. Salustius. Impun^ quidvis facere, id est, Regem esse. As
if to be a King, and to be a God, who cannot err, were all one. But certainly,
these Authors are taxing the License of Kings, and not commanding their power.

But that God has given no absolute and unlimited power to a King, above the
law, is evident by this:

Arg. 1. He who in his first institution, is appointed of God, by 1 Arg.
against Absoluteness of Kings.
office, even when he sits on the throne, to take heed to read on a written
copy of Gods law, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep all
the words of this law, etc. He is not of absolute power above law. But, Deuteronomy.
17. 18, 19* the King, as King, while he sits on the Throne, is to do this;
Ergo, the Assumption is clear: for this is the law of the King, as King; and
not of a man, as a man. But as he sits on the Throne, he is to read on the
book of the Law: and ver. 20. Because he is King, his heart is not to be
lifted up above his brethren. And as King, v. 16. he is not to multiply horses,
etc. So Politicians make this argument good: They say, Rex est lex viva,
animata* and loquens lex: The King, as King, is a living, breathing, Why the
King a breathing Law? three reasons.
and speaking Law. And there be three reasons of this: 1. If all were innocent
persons, and could do no violence one to another; the Law would rule all, and
all men would put the Law in execution, agendo sponte, by doing right of their
own accord; and there should be no need of a King to compel men to do right.
But now, because men are, by nature, averse to good laws, therefore there was
need of a Ruler, who by office should reduce the Law into practice: and so is
the King the Law reduced in practice. 2. The Law is ratio sive men's, the reason
or mind, free from all perturbations of anger, lust, hatred, and cannot be
tempted to ill; and the King, as a man, may be tempted by his own passions; and
therefore as King, he comes by office out of himself to reason and law; and
so much as he has of Law, so much of a King; and in his remotest distance from
Law and Reason, he is a Tyrant. 3. Abstracta concretis sunt puriora and
perfectiora. Justice is perfecter then a just man, Whitenes perfecter then the
white wall: so the nearer the King comes to a Law, for the which he is a King,
the nearer to a King; Propter quod unumquodque tale, id ipsum magis tale.
Therefore Kings throwing laws to themselves, as men, whereas they should have
conformed themselves to the Law, have erred. Cambyses the son of Cyrus,
because he loved his own sister, would have the marriage of the brother with the
sister, lawful. Anaxarchus said to Alexander, grieved in mind that he had
killed Clytus: Regi ac Iovi Themin atque Iustitiam assidere: Judgment and
Righteousness did always accompany God and the King in all they do. But some
to this purpose say better; The Law, rather then the King, has power of life
and death.

Arg. 2. The power that the King has (I speak not of his gifts) 2. Argument
against an absolute King: The People have no absolute power over themselves,
and so cannot make over any such power to the King.
he has it from the people, who makes him King, as I proved before: but the
people have neither formally nor virtually any power absolute to give the King,
all the power they have, is a legal and natural power to guide themselves in
peace and godliness, and save themselves from unjust violence, by the benefit
of Rulers. Now an absolute power above a Lawis a power to do ill, and to
destroy the people, and this the people have not themselves, it being repugnant
to nature, that any should have a natural power in themselves to destroy
themselves, or to inflict upon themselves an evil of punishment to
destruction. Though therefore it were given, which yet is not granted, that the
people had resigned all power that they have into their King, yet if he use a
Tyrannical power against the people for their hurt and destruction, he uses a
power that the people never gave him; and against the intention of nature: for
they invested a man with power to be their father, and defender for their good,
And he fails against the peoples intention in usurping a^ over power to
himself, which they never gave, never had, never could give, for they cannot
give what they never had, and power to destroy themselves they never had.

3. Arg. All Royal Power, whereby a King is a King, and Arg. 3.
differenced from a private man, armed with no power of the sword, is from God.

But absolute power to Tyranize over the people, and to destroy Against an
absolute Prince.
them, is not a power from God: Ergo there is not any such royal power
absolute. The proposition is evident, because that God who makes Kings, and
disposes of Crowns, Prove. 8. 15, 16. 2 Samuel 12. 7. Daniel 4. 32. must also
create and give that Royal and Official power, by which a King is a King, 1.
Because God created man, he must be the Author of his reasonable soul; if God
be the Author of things, he must be the Author of their forms, by which they
are, that which they are. 2. All power is Gods. 1 Chro. 29. 11 Matthew. 6. 13.
Ps. 62. 11. Ps. 68. 35. Dan. 2. 37. And that absolute power to Tyrannize, is
not from God. 1. Because if this Moral Power Tyrannical is not from God.
power to sin be from God, it being formally wickedness, God must be the
Author of sin. 2. What ever Moral power is from God, the exercises of that
power, and the acts thereof must be from God, and so these acts must be Morally
good and just; for if the Moral power be of God, as the Author, so must the
acts be. Now the acts of a Tyrannical power are acts of sinful unjustice and
oppression, and cannot be from God. 3. Politicians say, There is no power in
Rulers to do ill, but to help and defend the people, as the power of a
Physi^ian to destroy; of a Pilot to cast away the ship on a Rock, the power of
a Tutor to wast the inheritance of the Orphan, and the power of father and
mother to kill their children, and of the mighty to defraud and oppress, are
not powers from God. So Ferdinand Vasquez illustr. quest. l. 1. c. 26. c. 45.
Pruckman d. c. 3.. Soluta potestas. Althus. pol. cap. 9. n. 25.

Barclaim, Grotius, Doct. Fern, ( The P. Prelates wit could come Barclaius
contr. Monarcho. l. 2. page 62.
up t^o it) say, That absolute power to do ill, so as no mortal man can
lawfully resist it, is from God; and the King has this way power from God as
no subject ^an resist it, but he must resist the Ordinance of God, and yet the
power of tyranny is not simply from God.

Answ. The Law says, Illud possumus quod jure possumus, Papinus That evasion
removed, Tyrannical power is not from God, but a power to do ill, so as no
mortal man may resist, is from God.
F. filius, D. de cond. Just. The Law says, It is no power which is not
lawful power. The Royalists say, power of Tyranny in so far as it may be
resisted, and is punishable by men, is not from God; but what is the other part
of the distinction; it must be, that Tyrannical power is simpliciter from God,
or in it self it is from God, but as it is punishable or restrainable by
subjects, it is not from God: now to be punishable by subjects, is but an
accident and tyrannical power is the subject, yea, and it is an separable
accident; for many Tyrants are never punished, and their power is never
restrained, such a Tyrant was Saul, and many persecuting Emperors: Now if the
Tyrannical power it self was from God, the argument is yet valid, and
remains unanswered; and shall not this fall to the ground as false, which
Arnisaeus de autho. princ. c. 2. n. 10. Dum contra officium facit, Magistratus
non est Magistratus, quippe a quo non injuria, sed jus nasci debeat, l.
meminerint. 6. C. unde vi. din. in C. quod quis, 24. n. 4, 5. -- Et de ho^
neminem dubitare aut dissentire scribit, Marant. disp. 1. number. 14. When the
Magistrate does by violence, and without law any thing, in so far doing
against his Office, he is not a Magistrate; then say I, that power by which he
does, is not of God. 2. None does then resist the Ordinance of God, who resist
the King in Tyrannous acts. 2. If the power, as it cannot be punished by the
subject* nor restrained, be from God. Ergo, the Tyrannical power itself, and
without this accident (that it can be punished by men) it must be from God
also; but the conclusion is absurd, and denied by Royalists. I prove the
connection: For if the King have such a power above all restraint, the power
itself, to wit, King David's power to kill innocent Vriah, and defloor
Bathshebah, without the accident, of being restrained or punished by men, is
either from God, or not from God; if it be from God, it must be a power against
the sixth and seventh Commandment, which God gave to David, and not to any
subject, and so David lied when he confessed this sin* and this sin cannot be
pardoned because it was no sin; and Kings because Kings, are under no tie of
duties of mercy and truth, and justice to their subjects, contrary to that
which Gods Law requires of all Judges, Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 16, 17. and 17. 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20. 2 Chro. 19. 6, 7. Romans 13. 3, 4. If this power be from God, as
it is unrestrainable and unpunishable by the subject, it is not from God at
all; for how can God give a power to do ill, that is unpunishable by men, and
not give that power to do ill; it is unconceiveable: For in this very thing
that God gives to David, a power to murder the innocent, with this respect,
That it shall be punishable by God only, and not by men, God m^st give it as a
sinful power to do ill, which must be a power of dispensation to sin, and so
not to be punished by either God, or man, which is contrary to his revealed
will in his word: If such a power as not restrainable by man, be from God, by
way of permission, as a power to sin in devils, and men is, then it is no
Royal power, nor any Ordinance of God, and to resist this power, is not to
resist the Ordinance of God.

Argum. 4. That power which makes the benefit of a King, to Argum. 4. Against
an absolute Prince. A King as a King must be a plague, i^ God be the Creator of
an absolute Prince.
be no benefit, but a judgment of God, as a making all the people slaves, such
as were slaves amongst the Romans and Jews, is not to be asserted by any
Christian: but an absolute power to do ill, and to Tyrannize, which is supposed
to be an essential and constitutive of Kings, to difference them from all
Judges, makes the benefit of a King no benefit, but a judgment of God, as
making all the people slaves. That the major may be clear, It is evident to
have a King, is a blessing of God, because to have no King is a judgment,
Judge. 17. 6. Every man does what seems good in his own eyes, Judge. 18. 1. and
19. 1. and 21. 25. 2. So it is a part of Gods good providence to provide a King
for his people, 1 Samuel 16. 1. so 2 Samuel 5. 12. And David perceived that the
Lord had established him King over Israel, and that he had exalted his Kingdom,
for his people Isreal's sake, 2 Samuel 15. 2, 3, 6. 2 Samuel 18. 3. Romans 13. 2, 3,
4. If the King be a thing good in it self, then can he not actu primo, be a
curse and a judgment, and essentially a bondage and slavery to the people:
also the genuine and intrinsecall end of a King is the good, Romans 13. 4. and
the good of a quiet a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.
2. and he is by Office, custos utriusque tabulae, whose genuine end is to
preserve the law from violence, and to defend the subject; he is the peoples
debtor for all happiness possible to be procured by Gods sword, either in
peace or war, at home or abroad. For the assumption, it is evident. An absolute
and Arbitrary power is a King-law, such as Royalists say God gave to Saul, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11. and 10. 25. to play the Tyrant, and this power Arbitrary and
unlimited above all Laws, is that which 1. Is given of God. 2. Distinguishes
essentially the Kings of Israel from the Judge, ^aith Banclay, Grotius,
Arnisaeus. 3. A constitutive form of a King, therefore it must be actu primo a
benefit, and a blessing of God: but if God has given any such power absolute
to a King, as 1. His will must be a law, either to do or suffer all the Tyranny
and cruelty of a Tiger, Leopard, or a Nero, and a Julian, then has God given
actu primo, a power to a King as King, to inslave the people and slock of God,
redeemed by the blood of God, as the slaves among the Romans and Jews, who were
so under their masters, as their bondage was a plague of God, and the lives of
the people of God under Pharaoh, who compelled them to work in brick and clay.
2. Though he cut the throats of the people of God, as the Lioness Queen Mary
did, and command an Army of soldiers to come and burn the Cities of the Land,
and kill man, wife, and children; yet in so doing, he does the part of a King,
so as you cannot resist him as a man, and obey him as a King, but must give
your necks to him, upon this ground, because this absolute power of his is
ordained of God; and there is no power, even to kill, and destroy the innocent,
but it is of God, so says Paul, Romans 13. If we believe Court-Prophets, or
rather Lying-Spirits, who persuade the King of Britain, to make war against his
three Dominions. Now it is clear, that the distinction of bound and free,
continued in Israel even under the most tyrannous Kings, 2 Kings 4. 1. yea,
even when the Jews were captives under Ahasuerus, Esther 7. 4. And what
difference should there be between the people of God under their own Kings, and
when they were captives under Tyrants, serving wood and stone, and false gods,
as was threatened, as a curse in the Law, Deuteronomy. 28. 25, 36, 64, 68. If their own
Kings by Gods appointment have the same absolute power over them; and if he be
a Tyrant, actu primo, that is, if he be endued with absolute power, and so have
power to play the Tyrant, then must the people of God be actu primo, slaves,
and under absolute subjection, for they are relatives, as lord and servant,
conqueror and captive. It is true, they say, Kings by office are fathers, they
cannot put forth in action their power to destroy: I answer, it is their
goodness of nature, that they put not forth in action, all their absolute
power to destroy, which God has given them as Kings; and therefore thanks are
due to their goodness, for that they do not actu secundo play the Tyrant; for
Royalists teach that by virtue of their office, God has given to them a Royal
power to destroy. Ergo, The Lords people are slaves under them, though they
deal not with them as slaves, but that hinders not, but the people by
condition are slaves: so, many Conquerours of old, did deal kindly with these
slaves whom they took in war, and dealt with them as sons, but as Conquerours
they had power to sell them, to kill them, to put them to work in brick and
clay: so say I here, The goodness of an absolute Prince in not putting forth
his power in actual destroying of the people, hinders not the power to be
actu primo, Tyrannical.
Royal power and a King, cannot be a blessing, and actu primo a favor of God
to the people; for the which they are to pray, when they want a King, that they
may have one, or to praise God when they have one. But a King must be a curse
and a judgment, if he be such a creature as essentially, and in the intention
and nature of the thing it self, has by office a Royal power to destroy, and
that from God; for then the people praying ( Lord give us a King) should pray (
make us slaves, Lord, take our Liberty and power from us, and give a power
illimited and absolute to one man, by which he may (if he please) waste us and
destroy us, as all the bloody Emperors did the people of God.) Surely, I see
not but they should pray for a temptation, and to be led in temptation when
they pray God to give them a King, and therefore such a power is a vain thing.

Argum. 5. A power contrary to justice. 2. To peace and the Argum. 5. Against
absolute Princes. An absolute Prince against justice, peace, reason, law, etc.
good of the people. 3. That looks to no law as a rule, and so is
unreasonable, and forbidden by the Law of God, and the Civil Law, L. 15.
filius de condit. Instit. cannot be a lawful power, and cannot constitute a
lawful Judge; but an absolute and unlimited power is such: How can the Judge
be the Minister of God for good to the people, Romans 13. 4? If he have such a
power as a King given him of God to destroy and waste the people?

Argum. 6. An absolute power is contrary to nature, and so unlawful; Argum. 6.
Against an absolute Prince.
for it makes the people give away the natural power of defending their life
against illegal and cruel violence, and makes a man who has need to be
ruled and lawed by nature, above all rule and law; and one who by nature can
sin against his brethren, It is against* nature.
such a one as cannot sin against any, but God only, and makes him a Lion and
an unsociall man. What a man is Nero, whose life is poesy and paintry,
Domitian only an Archer. Valentinian only a Painter, Charles the 9th. of France
only an Hunter, Alphonsus Dux Ferrariensis only an Astronomer, Philippe of
Macedo only a Musician, and all because they are Kings? This our King denies
when he says, Art. 13. There is power legally placed in the Parliament, more
then sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny. But if they had
not power to play the Lions, it is not much that Kings are Musicians, Hunters,
etc.

7. God in making a King to preserve his people, should give liberty Arg. 7.
Against an absolute Prince, contrary to the fifth Commandment.
without all politic restraint, for one man to destroy many; which is contrary
to Gods end in the fifth Commandment, if one have absolute power to destroy
souls and bodies of many thousands.

8. If the Kings of Israel and Judah were under censures and Arg. 8. Against an
absolute Prince. The King remains a brother when he is King, and may be
rebuked, may not take his neighbors vineyard from him.
rebukes of the Prophets, and sinned against God and the people in rejecting
these rebukes, and in persecuting the Prophets, and were under this Law not to
take their neighbors wife, or his Vineyard from him against his will, and the
inferior Judges were to accept the persons of none in Judgment, small or
great; and if the King yet remain a brother, notwithstanding he be a King,
then is his power not above any Law nor absolute: for what reason? 1. He should
be under one Law of God to be executed by men, and not under another Law?
Royalists are to show a difference from Gods Word. 2. His neighbors, brother,
or subjects may by violence keep back their Vineyards, and chastity from the
King: Naboth may by force keep his own Vineyard from Achab; by the Laws of
Scotland, if a subject obtain a Decree of the King of violent possession of
the Heritages of a subject, he has by Law, power to cast out, force, apprehend
and deliver to prison these who are Tenants, brooking these Lands by the Kings
personal Commandment. A Damsel forced by the King may violently resist.
If a King should force a Damsel, she may violently resist, and by violence,
and bodily opposing of violence to violence, defend her own chastity. Now that
the Prophets have rebuked Kings is evident. Samuel rebuked Saul, Nathan David,
Elias King Achab. Jeremiah is commanded to Prophecy against the Kings of Judah
Ier. 1. 18. and the Prophets practiced it, Ier. 19. 3. c. 21. 2. c. 22. 13, 14,
15. Hos. 5. 1. Kings are guilty before God, because they submitted not their
Royal power and greatness to the rebukes of the Prophets, but persecuted them.

2 Deuteronomy. 17. 20. The King on the Throne remains a Brother, Psalm. 22. 22. and
so the Judges or three Estates are not to accept of the Person of the King, for
his greatness, in Judgment, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. and the Judge is to give out
such a sentence in Judgment as the Lord, with whom there is no iniquity, would
give out, if the Lord himself were sitting in Judgment; because the Judge is
in the very stead of God, as his Lieutenant, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Ps. 82. 1, 2.
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. And with God there is no respect of persons, 2 Chro. 19. 7. 1 Pet.
1. 17. Act. 10. 34. I do not intend that, any inferior Judge sent by the
King, is to judge the King, but these who gave him the Throne, and made him
King are truly above him, and to judge him without respect of persons, as God
would judge himself, if he himself were sitting in the Beanch.

3. God is the Author of Civil Laws and Government, and his No sufficient
means against all cruelties and unjust violences, if an absolute Prince be
from God, all go to confusion.
intention is therein the external peace and quiet life, and godliness of his
Church and people, and that all Judges according to their places be
Nurse-fathers to the Church, Esaias 49. 23. Now God must have appointed
sufficient means for this end; but there is no sufficient means at all, but a
mere Anarchy and confusion, if to one man an absolute and unlimited power be
given of God, whereby at his pleasure he may obstruct the fountains of
Justice, and command Lawyers and Laws to speak not Gods mind, that is
Justice, righteousness, safety, true Religion, but the sole lust and pleasure
of one man. And 2. this one having absolute and irresistible influence on all
the inferior Instruments of Justice, may by this power turn all into Anarchy,
and put the people in a worse condition, then if there were no Judge at all in
the Land. For that of Politicians, that Tyranny is better then Anarchy, is to
be taken Cum grano salis; but I shall never believe, that absolute power of one
man, which is actu primo, Tyranny is Gods sufficient way of peaceable
government. Therefore Barclaius says nothing for the contrary, when he says,
Barclaius cont, Monarch. l. 2* page 76, 77.
The Athenians made Draco and Solon absolute Lawgivers, For, a facto adjus non
valet consequentia. What if a roving people trusting Draco and Solon to be
Kings above mortal men, and to be gods, gave them power to make Laws written,
not with Ink, but with blood: Shall other Kings have from God the like
Tyrannical and bloody power from that, to make bloody Laws? Chytreus, Lib. 2.
and Sleidan cites it. l. 1. Sueton. Sub paena periurii non tenentur fidem
sevare regi degeneri.

9. He who is regulated by Law, and swears to the three Estates 9. Argument
against an absolute Prince. The conditions tacit or express, upon which the
Prince receives the crown fight with all absolute power.
to be regulated by Law, and accepts the Crown Covenantwise, and so as the
Estates would refuse to make him their King, if either he should refuse to
swear, or if they did believe certainly that he would break his oath; he has
no illimited and absolute power from God or the People: for, faedus
conditionatum, aut premissio conditionalis mutua, facit jus alteri in alterum:
A mutual conditional Covenant gives law and power over one to another. But
from that which has been said; The King swears to the three Estates, to be
regulated by Law; He accepts the Crown upon the tenor of a mutual covenant,
etc. for if he should, as King, swear to be King, that is, one who has
absolute power above a Law; and also to be regulated by a Law: he should swear
things contradictorie, that is, that he should be their King, having absolute
power over them, and according to that power to rule them: and he should
swear, not to be their King, and to rule them, not according to absolute
power, but according to Law. If therefore this absolute power be essential to
a King, as a King; no King can lawfully take the oath to govern according to
Law: for then he should swear not to reign as King, and not be their King;
For how could he be their King, wanting that which God has made essential to
a King, as a King?

QUEST. XXIII. Whother the King has any Royal prerogative, or a power to
dispense with Laws? And some other-grounds against absolute Monarchy.
A Prerogative Royal, I take two ways: 1. Either to be an act Prerogative
taken two ways.
of mere will and pleasure, above, or beside Reason or Law: Or, an act* of
dispensation, beside, or against the letter of the Law.

Assert. 1. That which Royalists call the Prerogative Royal of Princes, is the
salt of Absolute Power; and it is a supreme and highest power of a King, as a
King, to do above, without, or contrary to a Law, or Reason: which is
unreasonable.

1. When Gods word speaks of the power of Kings and Judges, Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16,
17. Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 16, 17. and elsewhere, there is not any footstep, or ground
for such a power: and therefore (if we speak according to conscience) there is
no such thing in the No Prerogative Royal in the Scripture.
world: And because Royalist^ cannot give us any warrant, it is to be rejected.

2. A Prerogative Royal must be a power of doing good to the people, and
grounded upon some reason or law: but this is but a branch of an ordinary
limited power, and no prerogative above or beside law. Yea, any power not
grounded on a reason different from mere will or absolute pleasure, is an
irrational and brutish power; and therefore it may well be jus personae, the
power of the Jus personae, jus corouae.
man who is King; it cannot be jus coronae, any power annexed to the Crown: for
this holds true of all the actions of a King, as a King. Illud potest Rex,
and illud tantum quod jure potest. The King, as King, can do no more, then
that which upon right and law he may do.

3. To dispute this question, Whether such a Prerogative agree The question
touching Prerogative Royal, vain.
to any King, as King; is to dispute whether God has made all under a Monarch,
slaves, by their own consent: which is a vain question. 2. Those who hold such
a Prerogative, must say, the King is so absolute and illimited a God on earth,
that either by law, or his sole pleasure beside law, he may regularly and
rationally move all wheels in Policy; and his uncontrolled will shall be the
axeltree on which all the wheels are turned.

4. That which is the garland and proper flower of the King of Prerogative
Royal of Royalists, Gods due.
Kings, as he is absolute above his creatures, and not tied to any law, without
himself, that regulateth his will; That must be given to no mortal man, or
King, except we would communicate that which is Gods proper due, to a sinful
man; which must be idolatry. But to do Royal acts out of an absolute power
above Law and Reason, is such a power as agrees to God, as is evident in
positive laws, and in acts of Gods mere pleasure, where we see no reason
without the Almighty, for the one side, rather than for the other; as Gods
forbidding the eating of the tree of knowledge, makes the eating, sin, and
contrary to reason; but there is no reason in the object: Acts founded upon the
sole^ pleasure of the Agent, proper to God.
for if God should command eating of that tree, not to eat, should be also
sin. So Gods choosing Peter to glory, and his refusing Judas, is a good and a
wise act, but not good or wise from the object of the act, but from the sole
wise pleasure of God; because, if God had chosen Judas to glory, and rejected
Peter, that act had been no less a good and a wise act, then the former. For
when there is no law in the object, but only Gods will, the act is good and
wise, seeing infinite wisdom cannot be separated from the perfect will of God:
but no act of a mortal King, having sole and only will, and neither law nor
reason in it, can be a lawful, a wise, or a good act.

Assert. 2. There is something which may be called a Prerogative A threefold
dispensation.
by way of dispensation. There is a threefold dispensation; one of power,
another of justice, and a third of grace. A dispensation of power, is, when the
will of the Lawgiver makes that act to be no sin, which without that will
would have been sin: As if Gods commanding Will had not interveened, the
Israelites borrowing the eare-rings and jewels of the Egyptians, and not
restoring them, had been a breach of the 8 Commandment: and in this sense no
King has a Prerogative to dispense with a Law.

2. There is a dispensation of law and justice, not flowing from A
dispensation, 1. of sole pleasure, 2. of justice, 3. of grace.
any Prerogative, but from the true intent of the Law. And thus the King, yea
the inferior Judge, is not to take the life of a man, whom the letter of the
Law would condemn; because the Justice of the Law, is the intent and life of
the Law: and where nothing is done against the intent of the Law, there is no
breach of any Law.

The Third is not unlike unto the Second, when the King exponeth A twofold
exponing of the Law by grace.
the Law by Grace: and this is twofold; 1. Either when he exponeth it of his
wisdom and merciful nature, inclined to mercy and justice; yet according to
the just intent, native sense and scope of the Law, considering the occasion,
circumstances of the fact, and comparing both with the Law: and this
dispensation of grace I grant to the King; As when the tribute is great, and
the man poor, In re dubia possunt dispensare Principes, quia nullus sensus
presumitur, qui vincat principalem, l. 1. Sect. initium ib.
the King may dispense with the custom. 2. The Law says, In a doubtful case
the Prince may dispense, because it is presumed, the Law can have no sense
against the principal sense and intent of the Law.

But there is another dispensation that Royalists do plead for, and that is, a
power in the King, ex mera gratia absolutae potestatis regalis; Out of mere
grace of absolute Royal power, to pardon crimes, which Gods law says, should
be punished by death. Now this they call a power of Grace; but it is not a
power of mere Grace.

But, 1. Though Princes may do some things of Grace, yet not of mere Grace:
because, what Kings do, as Kings, and by virtue of their Royal office, that
they do ex debito officii, by debt and right Kings, as Kings, cannot do things
of mere grace, because they must do all ex debito officii, by necessity of
their office.
of their office; and that they cannot but do, it not being arbitrarie to them
to do the debtfull acts of their office: But what they do of mere grace,
that they do as good men, and not as Kings: and that they may not do. As for
example: Some Kings, out of their pretended prerogative, have given four
pardons to one man, for four murders: Now this the King might have left
undone without sin; But of mere grace he pardoned the murderer, who killed
four men. But the truth is, the King killed the three last; because he has no
power in point of Conscience, to dispute with blood, Number. 35. 31. Genesis 9. 6.
These pardons are acts of mere grace to one man; but acts of blood to the
Community.

2. Because the Prince is the Minister of God for the good of the subject; and
therefore the Law says, He cannot pardon, and free the guilty, of the
punishment due to him. Contra l. quod favore, F. de leg. l. non ideo minus. F.
de proc. l. legata inutiliter. F. de lega. 1. And the reason is clear; He is
but the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
And if the Judgment be the Lords, Rom-13. 4.
not man's, not the Kings, as it is indeed, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. he
cannot draw the sword against the innocent, nor absolve the guilty, Prove. 17.
15.
except he would take on himself to carve and dispose of that which is proper
to his master. Now certain it is, God only, univocally and essentially, as
God, is the Judge, Ps. 75. 7. and God only and essentially King, Ps. 97. 1. Ps.
99. 1. and all men in relation to him, are mere ministers, servants, legates,
deputies: and in relation to him equivocally and improperly, Judges or Kings,
and mere created Kings, equivocally Kings.
and breathing shadows of the power of the King of Kings. And look as the
Scribe, following his own device, and writing what sentence he pleases, is not
an officer of the Court in that point, nor the pen and servant of the Judge: so
are Kings, and all Judges, but forged intruders, and bastard Kings and Judges,
in so far as they give out the sentences of men, and are not the very mouths
of the King of Kings, to pronounce such a sentence as the Almighty himself
would do, if he were sitting on the Throne or Bench.

3. If the King from any supposed prerogative Royal, may do acts of mere
grace, without any warrant of Law, because he is above Law, by office: then
also may he do acts of mere rigorous Justice, and kill and destroy the
innocent, out of the same supposed Prerogative; For Gods word equally tyeth him
to the place of a The King may as well do acts of mere cruelty, from his
supposed Prerogative, as acts of mere grace to one man, out of the same
fountain.
mere minister in doing good, as in executing wrath on evil doers, Romans 13.
3, 4. And reason would say, he must be as absolute in the one, as in the other,
seeing God tieth him to the one, as to the other, by his office and place* yea
by this, acts of Justice to ill-doers, and acts of reward to well-doers, shall
be arbitrary morally, and by virtue of office to the King, and the word
Prerogative Royal says this; for the word Prerogative is a supreme power
absolute* that is loosed from all Law, and so from all reason of Law, and
depending on the Kings mere and naked pleasure and will; and the word Royal or
Kingly, is an Epithete of office, and of a Judge, a created and limited Judge,
and so it must tie this supposed Prerogative to Law, Reason, and to that which
is debitum legale officii, and a legal duty of an office; and by this our
masters the Royalists make God to frame a rational creature, which they call a
King, to frame acts of Royalty, good and lawful, upon his own mere pleasure,
and the super-dominion of his will, above a Law and Reason. And from this it is
that deluded Counselors, made King James (a man not of shallow understanding)
and King Charles, to give pardons to such bloody murderers, as James a Grant,
and to go so far on, by this supposed Prerogative Royal, that King Charles in
Parliament at Edinburgh, 1633. did command an high point of Religion, That
Ministers should use in officiating in Gods service, such Habits and Garments
as he pleases; that is, all the Attire and Habits of the idolatrous
Mass Priests, that the Romish Priests of Baal uses in the oadest point of
idolatry (the adoring of Bread) that the earth has; and by this Prerogative,
the King commanded the Service Book in Scotland, An. 1637. without or above Law
and Reason. And I desire any man to satisfy me in this, If the If Prerogative
may over leap Law in one, why not in twenty*
Kings Prerogative Royal, may over-leap Law and Reason in two degrees, and if
he may as King, by a Prerogative Royal, command the body of Popery in a Popish
Book; If he may not by the same reason, over-leap Law and Reason by the
elevation of twenty degrees; And if you make the King a Julian (God avert, and
give the spirit of revelation to our King) may he not command all the Alcaron,
and the Religion of the Heathen and Indians? Royalists say, The Prerogative of
Royalty excludes not reason, and makes not the King to ^^ as a brute beast
without all reason; but it gives a power to a King to do by his Royal
pleasure, not fettered to the dictates of a Law; for in things which the King
does by his Prerogative Royal, he is to follow the advice and counsel of his
wise counsel, though their counsel and advice does not bind the Royal will
of the King. I answer, it is to me, and I am sure to many Learneder, a great
question; If the will of any reasonable creature, even of the damned angels,
can will, or chose any thing which their reason corrupted, as it is, does not
No Tyrant can do any the most cruel act, but under the notion of apprehended
good.
dictate, hic and nunc to be good. For the object of the will of all men is
good, either truly, or apparently good to the doer; for the devil could not
suite in marriage souls, except he war in the cloths of an Angel of light; sin
as sin cannot sell, or obtrude it self upon any, but under the notion of good.
I think it seems good to the great Turk* to command innocent men, to cast
themselves over a precipie two hundredth fadom high in the Sea, and drown
themselves to pleasure him: So the Turks reason (for he is rational, if he be
a man) dictateth to his vast pleasure, that that is good which he commands.

2. Counselors to the King, who will speak what will please the Queen, are
but naked empty Titles, for they speak que placent, non que prosunt; what may
please the King whom they make glad with their lies, not what law and reason
dictateth.

3. Absoluteness of an unreasonable Prerogative, does not deny Counsel and
Law also; for none more absolute, de facto, I cannot say de jure then the Kings
of Babylon, and Persia: for Daniel says of one of them, Dan. 5. 19. Whom he
would, he slew, and whom he would, he kept alive, and whom he would, he set up,
and whom he would, he put down; and yet these same Kings did nothing, but by
advice of their Princes and Counselors, yea, so as they could not alter a
decree and law, as is clear, Ester 1. 14, 15, 16, 17, 21. Yea Darius de facto
an absolute Prince, was not able to deliver Daniel, because the Law was passed,
that he should be cast into the Lions den, Dan. 6. 14, 15, 16.

4. That which the spirit of God condemns as a point of Tyranny Pretended
Prerogative Royal of Royalists Tyranny Polanus in Daniel, c. 5. 19. Rollocus,
com. 16. ib.
in Nebuchadnezzar, that is no lawful Prerogative Royal: but the spirit of
God condemns this as Tyranny in Nebuchadnezzar, That he slew whom he would,
he kept alive whom he would, he set up whom he would, he put down, this is too
God-like, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. So Polanus, Rollocus, on the place, say, he did these
things, Verse. 19. Ex abusu legitime potestatis; for Nebuchadnezzars will in
matters of death and life, was his Law, and he did what pleased himself above
all Law beside, and contrary to it: and our flatterers of Kings draw the Kings
Pretogative out of Vlpians words, who says, That is a Law which seems good
to the Prince; but Vlpian was far from making the Princes will a rule of good
and ill, for he says the contrary, That the Law rules the just Prince.

5. It is considerable here, that Sanches defines the absolute Th. Sanches de
matr. tom. 1. l. 2. dis. 15. n. 3. est arb^^rii plenitudo, nulli necessitati
subjecta, nulliusque publici juris regulis limita ta. Baldus, l. 2. n. 40. C.
de servit. and aqua. Sue^oni. in Calign. cap. 29. memento tibi omnia, and in
omnes licere. Coelius Rodigi, l. 8. Lect. Antiq. c. 1.
power of Kings to be a plenitude and fullness of power, subject to no
necessity, and bounded with rules of no public Law, and so did Baldus before
him: but all Politicians condemn that of Caligula (as Suetonius says) which he
spoke to Alexander the Great* Remember that thou may do all things, and that
thou have a power to do to al men, what thou please: And Lawyers say, that
this is Tyranny: Chilon one of the seven wise of Greece (as Rodigi) says
better, Princes are like gods, because they only can do that which is just.
And this power being merely Tyrannical, can be no ground of a Royal
Prerogative: There is another power (says Sanches) absolute, by which a Prince
dispenses without a cause in a humane law; and this power, says he, may be
defended: but he says, What the King does by this absolute power, he does it
valide, validly, but not jure by Law; but by valid acts the Jesuit must mean
Royal Acts, but no acts void of Law and Reason (say we) can be Royal Acts;
for Royal Acts are acts performed by a King, as a King, and by a Law, and so
cannot be Acts above, or beside a Law. It is true, a King may dispense with the
breach of an humane Law, as a humane Law, that is, If the Law be death to any,
who goes up on the Walls of the City, the King may pardon any, who going up,
discovers the enemies approach, and saves the City. But, 1. The inferior
Judge according to the (...) that benign interpretation that the soul and
intent of the Law requires, may do this as well as the King. 2. All acts of
independent Prerogative are above a Law, and acts of freewill having no cause
or ground in the Law, otherwise it is not founded upon absolute power, but on
power ruled by Law and Reason: but to pardon a breach of the letter of the Law
of man, by exponing it, according to the true intent of the Law and benignly,
is an act of legal obligation, and so of the ordinary power of all Judges; and
if either King or Judge kill a man for the violation of the Letter of the Law,
when the intent of the Law contradicts Vasquez, illust. quest. l. 1. c. 26.
n. 2.
the rigid sentence, he is guilty of innocent blood. If that learned Ferdin.
Vasquez be consulted, he is against this distinction of a power ordinary and
extraordinary in men; and certainly, if you give to a King a Prerogative above
a Law, it is a power to do evil, as well as good; but there is no lawful
power to do evil, and Doct. Fern is plunged in a contradiction by this, for
he says, Sect. A contradiction in Fern.
9. page 58. I ask when these Emperors took away lives and goods at pleasure,
Was that power ordained by God? No. But an illegal will and Tyranny: But, Page
61. The power though abused to execute such a (wicked) commandment, is an
Ordinance of God.

It is objected 1. For the lawfulness of an absolute Monarchy. Treaties of
Monarchical Government. c. 2. page 6, 7.
The Eastern, Persian, and Turks Monarchy, makes absolute Monarchy lawful,
for it is an Oath to a lawful obligatory thing, and judgment, Ezech. 17. 16,
18. is denounced against Judah, for breaking the Oath of the King of Babylon,
and it is called the Oath of God, and doubtless was an Oath of absolute
subjection, and the power, Romans 13. was absolute, and yet the Apostle calls
it an Ordinance of God. The sovereignty of Masters over servanes was absolute,
and the Apostle exhorts not to renounce that title as to ridged, but
exhorts to moderation in the use of it,

Ans. That the Persian Monarchy was absolute, is but a facto ad jus, and no
rule of a lawful Monarchy, but that it was absolute, I believe not. Darius who
was an absolute Prince (as many think) The King of Persia not absolute.
but (I think not) would gladly have delivered Daniel from the power of a Law,
and Dan. 6. 14. And he set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labored
till the going down of the Sun to deliver him, and was so sorrowful, that he
could not break through a Law, that he interdicted himself of all pleasures
of Musicians, and if ever he had used the absoluteness of a Prerogative
Royal, I conceive he would have done it in this, yet he could not prevail:
But in things not established by Law, I conceive Darius was absolute, as to me
is clear, Daniel 6. v. 24. but absolute not by a Divine Law, but, De facto,
quod transierat in jus humanum, by fact, which was now become a lrw.

2. It was Gods Oath, and God tied Judah to absolute subjection, The Oath of
Judah to the King of Babylon tied them notto renounce natural self
preservation.
ergo people may tie themselves. It follows not, except you could make good
this inference, God is absolute, ergo the King of Babylon may lawfully be
absolute; this is a blasphemous consequence. 2. That Judah was to swear the
Oath of absolute subjection in the latitude of the absoluteness of the Kings
of Chaldea, I would see proved; their absoluteness by the Chaldean Laws was
to command murder, Idolatry, Daniel 3. 4, 5. and to make wicked Laws, Dan. 6.
v. 7, 8. I believe Jeremiah commanded not absolute subjection in this sense.
But the contrary, Ier. 10. v. 11. They were to swear the Oath in the point of
suffering; but what if the King of Chaldea had commanded them all, the whole
holy Seed, men, women and children, out of his Royal power, to give their
necks all in one day to his sword, were they obliged by this Oath to prayers
and tears, and only to suffer? and was it against the Oath of God to defend
themselves by Arms? I believe the Oath did not oblige to such absolute
subjection, and though they had taken Arms in their own lawful defense,
according to the Law of Nature, they had not broken the Oath of God. The Oath
was not a tie to an absolute subjection of all and every one, either to worship
Idols, or then to fly, or suffer death. Now the Service-booke commanded in the
Kings absolute authority all Scotland to commit grosser Idolatry, in the
intention of the work, if not in the intention of the Commander, then was in
Babylon. (We read not that the King of Babylon pressed the consciences of Gods
people to Idolatry) or that all should either fly the Kingdom, and leave their
inheritances to Papists and Prelates, or then come under the mercy of the sword
of Papists and Atheists by sea or land. 3. God may command against the Law of
Nature; and Gods Commandment makes subjection lawful; so as men may not now,
being under that Law of God, defend themselves. What then? Ergo we owe
subjection to absolute Princes, and their power must be a lawful power, it no
ways is consequent. Gods Commandment by Jeremiah made the subjection of Judah
lawful, and without that Commandment they might have taken Arms against the
King of Babylon, as they did against the Philistines, and Gods Commandment
makes the Oath lawful. As suppone Ireland would all rise in Arms, and come
and destroy Scotland, the King of Spain leading, then we were by this Argument
not to resist. 4. I^ is denied, that the power, Romans 13. as absolute, is Gods
ordinance. And I deny utterly that Christ and his Apostles did swear
non-resistence absolute to the Roman Emperor.

Obj. 2. It sesmeth, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. if well doing be mistaken by the reason
and judgment of an absolute Monarch for ill doing, and we punished, yet the
Magistrates will is the command of a reasonable will, and so to be submitted
unto, because such a one suffers by Law, where the Monarchs Will is a Law,
and in this case some power must judge. Now in an absolute Monarchy all
judgment resolves in the Will of the Monarch, as the supreme Law: and if
Ancestors have submitted themselves by Oath, there is no repeal, or redresment.

Ans. Who ever was the Author of this Treatise, he is a bad defender of the
defensive wars in England, for all the lawfulness of wars then must
depend, on this. 1. Whether England be a conquered Nation at the beginning? 2.
If the Law-will of an absolute Monarch, or a Nero be a reasonable Will, to
which we must submit in suffering ill, I see not but we must submit to a
reasonable will; if it be reasonable will in doing ill, no less then in
suffering ill. 3. Absolute Will in absolute Monarchs is no Judge De jure, but
an unlawful and a usurping Judge. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. Servants are not
commanded simply to suffer (I can prove suffering formally not to fall under
any Law of God, but only patient suffering. I except Christ, who was under a
peculiar Servants are not by 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. interdited of selfedefence.
commandment to suffer.) But servants, upon supposition that they are
servants, and buffeted unjustly by their Masters, are by the Apostle Peter
commanded, v. 20. to suffer patiently. But it does not bind up a servants hand,
to defend his own life with weapons, if his Master invade him, without cause
to kill him: otherwise if God call him to suffer, he is to suffer in the manner
and way as Christ did, not reviling, not threatening. 4. To be a King and an
absolute Master, to me are contradictory; a King essentially is a living Law.
An absolute man is a creature, that they call a Tyrant, and no lawful King;
yet do I not mean, that any that is a King, and usurpeth absoluteness,
leaves off to be a King: but in so far as he is absolute, he is no more a
King, then in so far as he is a Tyrant. But Declar. at New Market, Mar. 9. 1641.
further, the King of England says in a Declaration. 1. The Law is the measure
of the Kings Power. 2. Parliaments are essentially Lord Judges to make Laws
essentially, as the King is, ergo the King is not above the Law. 3. Magna
Charta says the King, can do nothing, Magna Charca against an absolute Prince.
but by Laws, and no obedience is due to him, but by Law. 4. Prescription
takes away the title of conquests.

Obj 3. The King, not the Parliament is the Anointed of God,

Ans. The Parliament is as good, even a Congregation of Gods. Psalm 82. 1. How
the King is Lord of the Parliament.


Obj. 4. The Parliament is the Court, in their Acts, they say, with consent of
our Sovereign Lord.

Ans. They say not, at the Commandment, and absolute pleasure of our
Sovereign Lord. 2. He is their Lord materially, not as they are formally a
Parliament, for the King made them not a Parliament, but sure I am, the
Parliament had power before he was King, and made him King, 1 Samuel 10. 17, 18.

Obj. 5. In an absolute Monarchy there is not a resignation of Monarch.
Governa. part 2. c. 1. page 31.
men to any will as will, but to the reasonable will of the Monarch, which
having the law of reason to direct it, is kept from injurious acts.

Ans. If reason be a sufficient restraint, and if God has laid no other
restraint upon some lawful King, ye reason, Then is Migistracy a lame, a
needless ordinance of God, for all Mankind has reason to keep themselves
from injuries, and so there is no need of Judges or Kings to defend them from
either doing or suffering injuries. But certainly this must be admirable. If
God as Author of nature should make the Lion King of all beasts, the Lion
remaining a devouring beast, and should ordain by nature all the sheep and
Lambs to come and submit their corpse to him, by instinct of nature, and to be
eaten at his will, and then say, The nature of a beast in a Lion is a
sufficient restraint to keep the Lion from devouring Lambs. Certainly a King
being a sinful man, and having no restraint on his power, but reason, he may
think it reason to allow rebels to kill, drown, hang, torture to death an
hundred thousand Protestants, men, women, infants in the womb, and sucking
babes, as is clear in Pharaoh, Manasseh and other Princes.

Obj. 6. There is no Court or Judge above the King. ergo he is absolutely
supreme.

Ans. The Antecedent is false. The Court that made the King of a private man, a
King, is above him; and here are limitations laid on him at his Coronation. 2.
The States of Parliament are above him, to censure him. 3. In case of open
Tyranny, though the States had not time to conveen in Parliament, if he bring
on his people an host of Spaniards or foreign Rebels, his own conscience is
above him, and the conscience of the people far more, called conscientia
terrae, may judge him in so far, as they may rise up and defend themselves.

Obj. 7. Here the Prelate borrowing from Grotius, Barclay, Sac. sanc. May. c.
14. p. 144.
Arnisaeus; (or its possible he be not so far traveled) for Doct. Fern has
the same. Sovereignty weakened in Aristocracy cannot do^ its work, and is in
the next place to Anarchy and confusion. When Zedekiah was over Lorded by his
Nobles, he could neither save himself, nor the people, nor the Prophet the
servant of God Jeremiah; nor could David punish Ioab, when he was overawed by
that power he himself had put in his hand. To weaken the head, is to distemper
the whole body, if any good Prince or his Royal Antecessors be cheated of
their sacred right by fraud or force, he may at his fittest opportunity, resume
it. What a sin is it to rob God, or the King of their due?

Ans. Aristocracy is no less an ordinance of God, then Royalty, for Romans 13.
1. and 1 Timothy 2. 1. All in Authority are to be acknowledged as Gods
Vicegerents, the Senate, the Consuls as well as the Emperor: And so one
ordinance of God cannot weaken another, nor can any but by a lawless Animal
say, Aristocracy bordereth with confusion; but he must say, Order and Light are
sister Germans to confusion and darkness. 2* Though Zedekiah, a man void of
God, were overawed with his Nobles, and so could not help Jeremiah; it
follows not, that because Kings may not do this and this good, therefore they
are to be invested with power to do all ill: if they do all the good that
they have power to do, they will find way to help the oppressed Jeremiahes: and
because power to do both good and evil is given by the Devil to our Scottish
Witches, its a poor consequent, that the States should give to the King power
absolute to be a Tyrant. 3. A State must give a King Princes are not to be
invested with power to all Tyranny, upon this pretense, that they cannot do
good, except they have also absolute power to do evil.
more power then ordinary, especially to execute Laws, which requires singular
wisdom, when a Prince cannot always have his great Council about with him to
advise him. But, 1. That is power borrowed, and by loan, and not properly his
own; and therefore, it is no sacrilege in the States, to resume what the King
has by a fiduciary Title, and borrowed from them. 2. This power was given to
do good, not evil. David had power over Joab, to punish him for his murder,
but he executed it not upon carnal fears, and abused his power to kill
innocent Vriah, which power neither God nor the States gave him. But how
proves he the States took power from David, or that Ioab took power from
David, to put to death a murderer, that I see not. 3. If Princes power to do
good, be taken from them, they may resume it, when God gives opportunity; But
this is to the Prelate Perjury, that the people by Oath give away their power
to their King, and resume it when he abuses it to Tyranny: But it is no
perjurie in the King to resume a taken away power, which if it be his own, is
yet lis sub judice, a great controversy, Quod in Cajo licet, in Nevio non
licet. So he teaches the King, That Perjurie and Sacrilege is lawful to him.
If Princes power to do ill, and cut the whole Land off, as one neck (which was
the wicked desire of Caligula) be taken from them by the States. I am sure, 1.
This power was never theirs, and never the peoples, and you cannot take the
Princes power from him, which was never his power. 2. I am also sure, the
Prince should never resume an unjust power, though he were cheated of it.

P. Prelate. It is a poor shift to acknowledge no more for the Royal
Prerogative, then the Municipall Law has determined, as some smatterers in the
Law say. They cannot distinguish betwixt a Statute Declarative, and a Statute
Constitutive: but the Statutes of a Kingdom do declare only, what is the
Prerogative Royal, but do not constitute or make it, God Almighty ^^th by
himself constituted it: It is laughter to say, the Decalogue was not a Law,
till God wrote it.

Answ. Here a profound Lawyer calls all smatters in the Law, who cannot say,
that non ens, a Prerogative Royal, that is, a power contrary to God and man's
Law, to kill and destroy the innocent, came not immediately down from Heaven:
but I profess my self no Lawyer, but do maintain against the Prelate, that no
Municipall Law can constitute a power to do ill; nor can any Law, either justly
constitute, or declare such a fancy as a Prerogative Royal; so far is it from
being like the Decalogue, that is, a Law before it be written, that this
Prerogative is neither Law, before it be written, nor after Court Placebo's
have written for it: for it must be eternal as the Decalogue, if it have any
blood from so noble a house. 2. In what Scripture has God Almighty spoken of
a fancied Prerogative Royal?

P. Prelate. Prerogative rests not in its natural seat, but in the Sae. Maj.
page 145.
King. God says, Reddite, not, Date, render to Kings that which is Kings, not
give to Kings; it shall never be well with us, if his anointed, and his Church
be wronged.

Answ. The Prelate may remember a Country Proverb. He and his Prelates, called
the Church, (the scum of men, not the Church) are like the Tinkers dogs, they
like good company, they must be ranked with the King. And 2. Here a false
Prophet, It shall never be well with the Land, while Arbitrary power, and
Popery be erected, says he, in good sense.

P. Prelate. The King has his right from God, and cannot make it Sacr. sanc.
Maj. c. 16. p. 170, 171.
away to the people. Render to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. Kings
persons, their Charge, their Right, their Authority, their Prerogative are by
Scriptures, Fathers, Iurists, Sacred, inseparable Ordinances inherent in their
Crowns, they cannot be made away; and when they are given to inferior Judges,
it is not ad minuendam majestatem, sed solicitudinem, to lessen Sovereign
Majesty, but to case them.

Answ. The King has his right from God: What then, not from the people? I read
in Scripture, The people made the King; Never: That the King made the people.
2. All these are inseparably in the Crown, but he steals in Prerogative
Royal in the clause which is now in question? Render to Caesar all Caesar's:
And therefore A power to shed innocent blood, is no part of a true Prerogative.
says he, Render to him a Prerogative, that is an absolute power to pardon and
sell the blood of thousands. Is power of blood, either the Kings; or inherent
inseparably in his Crown? Alas, I fear Prelates have made blood an inseparable
accident of his Throne. 3. When Kings by that public power given to them, at
their Coronation, makes inferior Judges, they give them power to judge for
the Lord, not for men, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Now they cannot both make
away a power, and keep it also; for the inferior Judges conscience hangs not
at the Kings girdle, he has no less power to judge in his sphere, then the
King has in his sphere, though the Orb and circle of Motion be larger in
compass in the one, then in the other; and if the King cannot give himself
Royal Power, but God and the people must do it, how can he communicate any
part of that power to inferior Judges, except by trust? Yea, he has not that
power that other men have in many respects.

1. He may not marry whom he pleases, for he might give his The King because
of the publikenesse of his office inferior to subjects and other Judges, in
many privileges.
body to a Leper woman, and so hurt the Kingdom.

2. He may not do, as Solomon and Achab, marry the daughter of a strange god,
to make her the mother of the heir of the Crown. He must in this follow his
great Senate. 2. He may not expose his person to hazard of Wars.

3. He may not go over Sea, and leave his Watchtower, without consent.

4. Many Acts of Parliament of both Kingdoms, discharge Papists to come within
ten miles of the King.

5. Some pernicious Counselors have been discharged his company, by Laws.

6. He may not eat what Meats he pleases.

7. He may not make Wasters his Treasurers.

8. Nor Delapidate the Rents of the Crown.

9. He may not dis-inherit his eldest son of the Crown, at his own pleasure.

10. He is sworn to follow no false gods, and false religions, nor is it in his
power to go to Mass.

11. If a Priest say Mass to the King, by the Law, he is hanged drawn and
quartered.

12. He may not write Letters to the Pope, by Law.

13. He may not by Law pardon seducing Priests and Jesuits.

14. He may not take Physic for his health, but from Physicians sworn to be
true to him.

15. He may not educate his heir, as he pleases.

16. He has not power of his children, nor has he that power that other
fathers have, to marry his eldest son, as he pleases.

17. He may not befriend a Traitor.

18. It is high Treason for any woman to give her body to the King, except she
be his married wife.

19. He ought not to build sumptuous Houses, without advice of his Council.

20. He may not dwell constantly where he pleases.

21. Nor may he go to the Country to Hunt; farlesse, to kill his subjects, and
desert the Parliament.

22. He may not confer honors and high places without his Council.

23. He may not deprive Judges at his will.

24. Nor is it in his power to be buried where he pleases, but amongst the
Kings.

Now in most of these twenty four points, private persons have their own
liberty, far less restricted then the King.

QUEST. XXIV. What power has the King in relation to the Law, and the people?
And how a King and a Tyrant differ?
Mr. Symmons says, That Authority is rooted rather in the Prince, Loyal
subjects belief, Sect. 6. p. 19.
then in the Law; for as the King gives Being to the inferior Judge, so he
does to the Law it self, making* it authorizable; for propter quod unum-quodque
tale, id ipsum magis tale, and therefore the King is greater then the Law:
others say, That the King is the Fountain of the Law, and the sole and only
Lawgiver.

Assert. 1. The Law has a twofold consideration, 1. Secundum Barcl. l. 4. c.
23. p. 325.
esse paenale, in relation to the punishment to be inflicted by man* 2.
Secundum esse legis, as it is a thing legally good in it self: In the former
notion, it is this way true, Humane Laws take life and being, Humane Laws as
penal, take life from Law makers: as reasonable, they have life from the
eternal Law of God.
inway to be punished, or rewarded by men, from the will of Princes and
Lawgivers, and so Symmons says true, Because men cannot punish or reward
Laws, but where they are made; and the will of Rulers puts a sort of stamp
on a Law, that it brings the Commonwealth under guiltiness, if they break
this Law. But this makes not the King greater then the Law; for therefore do
Rulers put the stamp of relation to punishment on the Law, because there is
intrinsecall worth in the Law, Prior to the Act of the will of Lawgivers, for
which it meriteth to be inacted; and therefore, because The King not greater
then the Law.
it is authorizable as good and just, the King puteth on it this stamp of a
Politic Law. God forms Being, and moral Aptitude to the end in all Laws,
to wit, the safety of the people; and the Kings will is neither the measure,
nor the cause of the goodness of things.

2. If the King be he who makes the Law good and just, because he is more such
himself, then as the Law cannot crook, and err, nor sin; neither can the King
sin, nor break a Law. This is blasphemy, Every man is a liar; a Law which
deserves the name of a Law, cannot lie.

3. His ground is, That there is such majesty in Kings, that their No
necessity that an unjust will of a King be either done by us, or on us.
will must be done either in us, or on us: A great untruth. Achabs will must
neither be done of Elias, for he commands things unjust; nor yet on Elias,
for Elias fled, and lawfully we may sly Tyrants: and so Achabs will in killing
Elias was not done on him,

Assert. 2. Nor can it be made good, that the King only has The King has no
Nomothetick power, his alone.
power of making Laws; because his power were then absolute, to inflict
penalties on Subjects, without any consent of theirs; and that were a dominion
of Masters, who command what they please, and under what pain they please. And
the people consenting to be ruled by such a man, they tacitly consent to
penalty of laws, because natural reason says, An ill-doer should be
punished. Florianus in l. inde. Vasquez, l. 2. c. 55. n. 3. Therefore they must
have some power in making these laws.

2. Jer. 26. It is clear, The Princes judge with the people: A nomothetick
power differs gradually only from a judicial power, both being collarerall
means to the end of Government, the peoples safety. But Parliaments judge,
ergo, they have a nomothetick power with the King.

3. The Parliament gives all supremacy to the King; ergo, to prevent
Tyranny, it must keep a coordinate power with the King, in the highest acts.

4. If the Kingly line be interrupted, if the King be a Child, or a Captive,
they make Laws, who make Kings; Ergo, this nomothetick power recurreth into
the States, as to the first subject.

Obj. The King is the fountain of the law, and Subjects cannot Symmons, Loyal
Subject, Sect. 5. page 8.
make Laws to themselves, more then they can punish themselves. He is only the
Supreme.

Answ. The People being the fountain of the King, must rather be the fountain
of Laws. 2. It is false, that no man makes laws to himself. Those who teach
others, teach themselves also, 1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 34. though Teaching be
an act of authority. But they agree to the penalty of the Law secondarily
only; and so does the King, who, as a father, does not will evil of punishment
to his children, but by a consequent will. 3. The King is the only Supreme, in
the power ministerial of executing laws: but this is a derived power, so as
no one man is above him; but in the fountaine-power of Royalty, the States are
above him.

5. The Civil law is clear, that the laws of the Emperor have force only from
this fountain, because the People have transferred their power to the King.
Lib. 1. digest. tit. 4. de constit. Princip. leg. 1. sic Vlpian. Quod Principi
placuit, (loquitur de Principe formaliter, qua Princeps est, non qua est homo)
legis habet vigorem, utpote cum lege Regia, quae de imperio ejus lata est.
populus ^i, and in eum, omne suum imperium and potestatem conferat. Yea, the
Emperor himself may be conveened before the Prince Elector. Aurea Bulla
Carol. 4. Imper. c. 5. The King of France may be conveened before the Senate of
Paris. The States may resist a Tyrant, as Bossius says, de Principe, and
privileg. ejus, n. 55. Paris de puteo, in tract. syno. tit. de excess. Reg. c.
3. Divines acknowledge that Elias rebuked the halting of Israel betwixt God and
Baal, that their Princes permitted Baals Priests to converse with the King. And
is not this the sin of the Land, that they suffer their King to worship
Idols? and therefore the Land is punished for the sins of Manasseh, as Knox
observes in his Dispute with Lethington, where he proves that the States of
Scotland should not permit the Queen of Scotland to have her abominable Mass:
Hist. of Scotland, l. 4. p. 379. edit. an. 1644. Surely the power or
Sea-Prerogative of a sleepie or mad Pilot to split the Prerogative Royal,
warranteth not the Prince to destroy himself; nor is the people to permit him
to cooperat for destruction to themselves.
ship on a rock, as I conceive, is limited by the Passengers. Suppose a father,
in a distemper, would set his own house on fire, and burn himself, and his
ten sons; I conceive, his Fatherly prerogative, which neither God nor Nature
gave, should not be looked to in this; but they may bind him. Yea, Althusius,
polit. c. 39. n. 60. answering that, That in Democracie the people cannot both
command and obey; says, It is true, secundum idem, ad idem, and eodem tempore:
But the people may (says he) choose Magistrates by succession. Yea, I say, 1.
they may change Rulers yearly, to remove envy: A yearly King were more
dangerous, the King being almost above envy; Men incline more to flatter then
to envy Kings. 2. Aristotle says, polit. l. 4. c. 4. l. 6. c. 2. The people
may give their judgment of the wisest.

Obj. Williams B. of Ossorie, Vindic. Reg. [A Looking-glass for Rebels] says,
p. 64. To say the King is better than any one, does not prove him to be better
then two: and if his supremacy be no more, then any other may challenge as
much: for the Prince is singulis major: A Lord is above all Knights; a Knight
above all Esquires: and so the People have placed a King under them, not above
them.

Ans. The reason is not alike: for all the Knights united cannot The King
inferior to the People.
make one Lord; and all the Esquires united, cannot make one Knight; but all
the People united, made David King at Hebron. 2. The King is above the people,
by eminency of derived authority, as a Watchman; and in actual supremacy;
and he is inferior to them in fountaine-power, as the effect to the cause.

Object. 2. The Parliament ( says Williams) may not command Parliaments
supplicate not the King, ex debito.
the King: Why then make they supplications to him, if their Vote be a Law?

Ans. They supplicate, ex decentia, of decency and conveniencie for his place;
as a City does supplicate a Lord Major: but they supplicate not ex debito, of
obligation, as beggars seek alms: then should they be ciphers. 2. When a
Subject oppressed, supplicateth his Sovereign for justice; the King is obliged
by office to give justice: And to hear the oppressed, is not an act of grace
and mercy, as to give alms, though it should proceed from mercy in the
Prince, Psalm. 72. 13. but an act of Royal debt.

3. The P. Prelate objecteth: The most you claim to Parliaments, Sac. sanct.
maj. ^. ^. p. 103, 104
is a coordinate power, which in law and reason run in equal terms, In Law,
par in parem non habet imperium; an equal cannot judge an equal, much less
may an inferior usurpeto judge a superior. Our Lord knew, gratia visionis,
the woman taken in adultery, to be guilty; bat he would not scntence her: to
teach us, not improbably, not to be both Judge and Witness. The Parliament are
Judges, accusers, and witnesses against the King in their own cause, against
the Imperial laws.

Ans. 1. The Parliament is coordinate ordinarily with the King, Subordination
of the King to the Parliament, and coordinatio^, both consistent.
in the power of making Laws: but the coordination on the Kings part, is by
derivation; on the Parliaments part, originaliter and fontaliter, as in the
fountain. 2. In ordinary there is coordination: but if the King turn Tyrant,
the Estates are to use their fountainepower. And that of the Law, Par in parem,
etc. is no better from his Pen, that steals all he has, then from Barclaius,
Grotius, Arnisaeus, Blackwood, etc. It is cold and sour. We hold the
Parliament that made the King at Hebron, to be above their own creature the
King. Barclaius says more acurately, l. 5, cont. Monarch. p. 129. It is
absurd, that the People should both be subject to the King, and command the
King also.

Ans. It is not absurd, that a Father natural, as a private man, should be
subject to his Son; even that Jesse, and his elder brother, the Lord of all
the rest, be subject to David their King. Royalists say, Our late Queen, being
supreme Magistrate, might by Law have put to death her own husband, for
adultery or murder.

2. The Parliament should not be both Accuser, Judge, and Witness in their own
cause. 1. It is the Cause of Religion, of God, of Protestants, and of the whole
people. 2. The oppressed accuse: there is no need of witnesses in raising arms
against the Subjects. 3. The P. Prelate could not object this, if against the
Imperial laws the King were both Party and Judge in his own cause, and in
these acts of arbitrarie power, which he has done, through bad counsel, in
wronging Fundamental laws, raising arms against his subjects, bringing in
foreign enemies into both his Kingdoms, etc. Now this is properly the cause
of the King, as he is a man; and his own cause, not the cause of God, and by
no Law of nature, reason, or Imperial Statutes can he be both Judge and party.

4. If the King be sole supreme Judge without any fellow sharers in power, 1.
He is not obliged by Law to follow Counsel, or hold Parliaments; for Counsel
is not Command. 2. It is unpossible to limit him even in the exercises of his
power, which yet Dr. Fern says cannot be said: for if any of his power be
retrinched, God is robbed, says Maxwell. 3. He may by Law play the Tyrant,
gratis.

Fern objecteth.. 7. page 26. The King is a fundamental with Do. p. 3. Sect.
4. page 2^.
the Estates, now foundations are not to be stirred or removed.

Ans. The King as King inspired with Law is a fundamental, and his power is
not to be stirred, but as a man wasting his people, he is a destruction to the
house, and community, and not a fundamental in that notion.

Some object, The three Estates as men, and looking to their own ends, not to
Law, and the public good, are not fundamentalls, and are to be judged by the
King.

Ans. By the people, and the conscience of the people they are to be judged.

Obj. But the people also do judge as corrupt men, and not as the people, and
a Politic Body, providing for their own safety.

Ans. I grant all, when God will bring a vengeance on Jerusalem, Prince and
people both are hardened to their own destruction. Now God has made all the
three, in every Government where there is Democracy, there is some chosen ones
resembling an Aristocracy, and some one for order presiding in Democraticall
courts, resembling a King. In Aristocracy as in Holland, there is somewhat of
Democracy, the people have their Commissioners, and one Duke or General, as
the^ Prince of Orange is some ^mbrage of Royalty, and in Monarchy there are the
three Estates of Parliament, and these contain the three Estates, and so
somewhat of the three forms of Government, and there is no one Government just
that has not some of all three; power and absolute Monarchy is Tyranny,
unmixed Democracy, is confusion, untempered Aristocracy is factious Dominion,
and a limited Monarchy has from Democracy respect to public good without
confusion. From Aristocracy safety Temperament of all the three in a limited
Monarchy.
in multitude of Counsels without factious emulation, and so a bar laid on
Tyranny, by the joint powers of many; and from Sovereignty union of many
children in one father: and all the three thus contempered have their own
sweet fruits through Gods blessing, and their own diseases by accident, and
through men's corruption; and neither reason nor Scripture shall warrant any one
in its rigid purity without mixture: And God having chosen the best government
to bring men fallen in sin to happiness, must warrant in any one a mixture
of all three, as in mixed bodies the four Elements are reduced to a fit temper
resulting of all the four, where the acrimony of all the four first qualities
is broken, and the good of all combined in one.

The King as the King is an unerring and living Law, and by grant Burel. Ad
verfus Monarchomachous l. 1. page 24. A King as King how excellent a head of
the people, how contrary to a Tyrant.
of Barclay, of old was one of excellent parts, and noble through virtue and
goodness; and the goodness of a father as a father, of a tutor as a tutor, of
a head as a head, of a husband as a husband do agree to the King as the King,
so as King he is the Law it self, commanding, governing, saving. 2. His Will
as King, or his Royal Will is reason, conscience, Law. 3. This Will is
politickly present (when his person is absent) in all Parliaments, Courts, and
inferior Iudicatures. 4. The King as King cannot do wrong or violence to any.
5. Amongst the Romans the name King and Tyrant were common to one thing. 1.
Because de facto, some of their Kings were Tyrants, in respect of their
Dominion, rather then Kings. 2. Because he who was a Tyrant De facto, should
have been, and was a King too de jure. 6. It is not lawful to either disobey
or resist a King as a King, no more then it is lawful to disobey a good Law.
7. What violence, what unjustice, and excess of passion the King mixeth in,
with his Acts of Government, are merely accidental to a King as King! for
because men by their own innate goodness* will not, yea Morally cannot do
that which is lawful, and just one to another, and do naturally, since the
fall of man, violence one to another; therefore, if there had not been sin,
there should not have been need of a King, more then there should have been
need of a Tutor to defend the child, whose father is not dead, or of a
Physician to cure sickness where there is health; for remove sin, and there
is neither death nor sickness, but because sin is entered into the world,
God devised, as a remedy of violence The King as an erring man no remedy
against confusions, and oppressions of Anarchy.
and unjustice, a living, rational breathing Law called a King, a Judge, a
Father: now the aberrations, violence, and oppression of this thing which is
the living, rational, breathing Law is no Medium, no mean intended by God,
and nature to remove violence. How shall violence remove violence? Therefore an
unjust King, as unjust, is not that genuine ordinance of God, appointed to
remove unjustice, but accidental to a King. So we may resist the unjustice of
the King, and not resist the King. 8, If then any cast off the nature of a
King, and become habitually a Tyrant, in so far he is not from God, nor any
ordinance which God does own: If the Office of a Tyrant (to speak so) be
contrary to a Kings Offices, it is not from God, and so neither is the power
from God. 9. Yea Laws (which are no less from God, then the Kings are) when
they begin to be hurtful, Cessant materialiter, they leave off to be Laws;
because they oblige Non secundum vim verborum, sed in vim sensus, not according
to the force of words, but according to sense, ^. Non figura literarum F. de
action and obligatione, l. ita stipulatus. But who (says the Royalists) shall
be judge betwixt the King and the people, when the people allege that the King
is a Tyrant.

Ans. There is a Court of necessity, no less then a Court of A Court of
necessity, and a Court of Justice.
Justice; and 2. The fundamental Laws must then speak, and it is with the
people in this extremity, as if they had no Ruler.

Obj. 1. But if the Law be doubtsome, as all humane, all Civil, all municipall
Laws may endure great dispute, the peremptory person exponing, the Law must be
the supreme Judge. This cannot be the people, ergo, it must be the King.

Ans. 1. As the Scriptures in all fundamentalls are clear, and Humane Laws not
so obscure as Tyranny is legible.
expone themselves, and Actu primo condemn Hercsies, so all Laws of men in
their fundamentals, which are the Law of Nature, and of Nations are clear. And
2. Tyranny is more visible and intelligible then Heresy, and its soon
decerned. If a King bring in upon his native subjects twenty thousand Turks
armed, and the King lead them. It is evident, they come not to make a friendly
visit to salute the Kingdom, and depart in peace: the people have a natural
throne of policy in their conscience to give warning, and materially sentence
against the King, as a Tyrant, and so by nature are to defend themselves: Where
Tyranny is more obscure, and the thread small, that it escape the eye of men,
the King keeps possession; but I deny that Tyranny can be obscure long.

Object. 2. Doct. Fern. A King may not, or cannot easily alter Fern, part. 3.
sect. 5. page 39.
the frame of fundamental Laws, he may make some actual invasion, in some
transient, and not fixed acts; and it is safer to bear these, then to raise a
civil War of the Body, against the Head.

Answ. 1. If the King as King, may alter any one wholesome Law, It is
ridiculous to say, a King cannon be so void of reason, as to destroy his people.
by that same reason he may alter all. 2. You give short wings to an Arbitrary
Prince, if he cannot over fly all Laws to the subversion of the Fundamentalls
of a State, if you make him as you do. 1. One who has the sole Legislative
power, who allanerly by himself, makes Laws, and his Parliament and Council
are only to give him advice, which by Law he may as easily reject, as they can
speak words to him. He may in one transient act (and it is but one) cancel all
Laws made against idlolatry and Popery, and command, through bad Counsel, in
all his Dominions; the Pope to be acknowledged as Christ's Vicar, and all his
doctrine to be established as the Catholic true Religion. It is but one
transient act to seal a pardon to the shedding of the blood of two hundred
thousand, killed by Papists. 2. You make him a King, who may not be resisted in
any case; and though he subvert all Fundamental Laws, he is countable to God
only, his people have no remedy, but prayers, or flight.

Object. 3. Fern* Limitations and mixtures in Monarchies Part. 3. sect. 5.
page 39.
do not imply a forceable restraining power in subjects, for the preventing of
the dissolution of the State, but only a legal restraining power; and if such
a restraining power be in the subjects, by reservation, then it must be
expressed in the constitution of the Government, and in the Covenant betwixt
the Monarch and his people: but such a condition ^^ unlawful, which will not
have the Sovereign power secured, is unprofitable for King, and people; a
seminary for seditions and jealousies.

Answ. I understand not a difference betwixt forceable restraining and legal
restraining: For he must mean by (legal) man's Law, because he says, It is a
Law in the Covenant betwixt the Monarch, and his people. Now if this be not
forceable, and physical, it is If there be a civil restraint from man's Law,
laid upon the King, it must be forceable.
only Moral in the conscience of the King, and a Cipher, and a mere vanity,
for God, not the people puts a restraint of conscience on the King, that he
may not oppress his poor subjects; but he shall sin against God, that is a
poor restraint: the goodness of the King a sinful man inclined from the womb
to all sin, and so to Tyranny, is no restraint. 2. There Is no necessity, that
the reserve be expressed in the Covenant between King, and people, more then in
contract of marriage between a husband and a wife, beside her joynter; you
should set down this clause in the contract, that if the husband attempt to
kill the wife, or the wife the husband, in that case it shall be lawful to
either of them to part companies: For Doct. Fern says, That personal defense
is lawful in the people, if the Kings assault be 1. Sudden. 2. Without color
of Law. 3. Inevitable: Yet the reserve of this power of defense, is not
necessarily to be expressed in the contract, betwixt King and people. Exigences
of the Law of nature cannot be set down in positive Covenants, they are
presupposed. 3. He says, A reservation of power, whereby soveraigntie is not
secured, is unlawful. Lend me this Argument: The giving away of a power of
defense, and a making the King absolute, is unlawful, because by it the people
is not secured; but one man has thereby the sword of God put Its more
requisite, the people, religion, and Church, be secured, then one man.
in his hand, whereby ex officio, he may as King cut the throats of thousands,
and be countable to none therefore, but to God only: now if the non-securing
of the King, make a condition unlawful, the non-securing of a Kingdom and
Church, yea, of the true religion (which are infinitely in worth above one
single man) may far more make the condition unlawful. 4. A legal restraint on
a King, is no more unprofitable, and a seminary of jealousies between King and
people, then a legal restraint upon people; for the King out of a
non-restraint, as out of seed, may more easily educe tyranny, and subversion of
religion: If outlandish women tempt even a Solomon to idolatry, as people may
educe sedition out of a legal restraint laid upon a King, to say nothing, that
Tyranny is a more dangerous sin, then sedition; by how much more the lives of
many, and true religion, are to be preferred to the safety of one, and a false
peace.

Object. 4. An absolute Monarch i^ free from all forceable restraint, D. Fern,
p. 3. sect. 5. page 40.
and so far, as he is absolute from all legal restraint of positive Laws: now
in a limited Monarch there is only sought a legal restraint, and limitation
cannot infer a forceable restraint, for an absolute Monarch is limited also,
not by civil compact, but by the Law of nature and nations, which he cannot
justly transgress; if therefore an absolute Monarch being exorbitant, may not
be resisted, because he transgresses the Law of nature; how shall we think a
limited Monarch may be resisted, for transgressing the bounds set by civil
agreement.

Answ. A legal restraint on the people, is a forceable restraint: For if Law
be not backed with force, it is only a Law of rewarding weldoing, which is no
restraint, but an encouragement to do evil. If then there be a legal restraint
upon the King, without any force, it is no restraint, but only such a request
as this, Be a just Prince, and we will give your Majesty two Subsidies in one
year. 2. I utterly deny, that God ever ordained such an irrational creature,
as an absolute Monarch. If a people unjustly, and against natures dictates make
away, irrevocably, their own liberty, and the liberty of their posterity,
which is not their's to dispose off, and set over themselves, as base slaves, a
sinning creature with absolute power, he is their King, but not as he is
absolute, and that he may not be forceably resisted; notwithstanding, the
subjects did swear to his absolute To swear to an absolute Prince, as absolute,
is an oath Eatenus, in so far, not obligatory.
power (which oath in the point of absoluteness, is unlawful, and so not
obligatory) I utterly deny. 3. An absolute Monarch (says he) is limited, but
by Law of nature: That is, Master Doctor, he is not limited as a Monarch, not
as an absolute Monarch, but as a son of Adam, he is under the limits of the
Law of nature, which he should have been under, though he had never been a
King, all his days, but a slave. But what then? Therefore he cannot be
resisted. Yes, Doctor, by your own grant he can be resisted: If he invade an
innocent subject (say you) 1. Suddenly. 2. Without color of Law. 3.
Inevitably: And that because he transgresses the Law of nature. 4. You say, a
limited Monarch can less be resisted for transgressing the bounds set by
civil agreement. But, 1. What if the thus limited Monarch transgress the Law
of nature, and subvert Fundamental Laws, he is then, you seem to say, to be
resisted; it is not for simple transgression of a civil agreement, that he is
to be resisted. 2. The limited Monarch is as essentially the Lords anointed,
and the power ordained of God, as the absolute Monarch. Now resistance by all
your grounds, is unlawful, because of Gods power and place conferred upon him,
not because of men's positive covenant made with him.

To find out the essential difference betwixt a King and a Tyrant: Difference
betwixt a Tyrant in act, and a Tyrant in habit.
We are to observe, that it is one thing to sin against a man, another thing
against a State. David killing Vriah, committed an act of murder: But on this
supposition, that David is not punished for that murder, he did not so sin
against the State, and Catholic good of the State, that he turns Tyrant, and
cease to be a lawful King. A Tyrant is he who habitually sins against the
Catholic good of the Subjects and State, and subverteth Law. Such a one should
not be, as Jason, of whom it is said by Aeneas Epist. 45.
Silvius, Graviter ferebat, si non regnaret, quasi nesciret esse privatus. When
such as are monstrous Tyrants, are not taken away by the Estates, God pursues
them in wrath. Domitian was killed by The tragical end of many Tyrannous
Princes.
his own Family, his wife knowing of it. Aurelianus was killed with a
thunderbolt. Darius was drowned in a River. Dioclesian fearing death, poisoned
himself. Salerius died eaten with Worms: The end of Herod, and Antiochus.
Maxentius was swallowed up in a standing River. Julian died, being stricken
through with a Dart thrown at him by a man, or an Angel, it is not known.
Valens the Arian was burnt with fire in a little Village by the Goths.
Anastasius the Eutychian Emperor, was stricken by God with thunder. Gundericus
Vandalus, when he rose against the Church of God, being apprehended by the
Devil, died. Some time the State have taken order with Tyrants. The Empire was
taken from Vitellius, Heliogabalus, Maximinus, Didius, Iulianus: So was the two
Childerici of France served: So were also Sigebertus, Dagabertus, and Lodowick
the 11. of France. Christiernus of Denmark, Mary of Scotland, who killed her
husband, and raised Forces against the Kingdom: So was Henricus Valesius of
Pol, for fleeing the Kingdom. Sigismundus of Pol, for violating his faith to
the States.

QUEST. XXV. What force the Supreme Law has over the King* even that Law of
the Peoples safety, called, Salus Populi.
THe Law of the 12. Tables, is, Salus populi, Suprema lex. The safety of the
People is the supreme and Cardinal law, to which all Laws are to stoop. And
that from these Reasons:

1. Originally: Because, if the People be the first Author, Fountain, Reasons
why the Peoples safety, is the Sovereigns Law.
and Efficient, under God, of Law and King, then their own safety must be
principally sought, and their safety must be far above the King, as the
safety of a Cause, especially of an universal Cause, such as is the People,
must be more then the safety of one, as Aristotle says, l. 3. polit. alias l.
5. (...). The part cannot be more excellent then the whole: nor the effect
above the cause.

2. Finaliter. This Supreme law must stand; for if all Law, Policy,
Magistrates and Power be referred to the peoples good, as the end, Romans 13. 4.
and to their quiet and peaceable life in godliness and honesty: then must
this Law stand, as of more worth then the King, as the end is of more worth
then the means leading to the end; for the end is the measure and rule of the
goodness of the mean* and, finis ultimus in influxu est potentissimus. The
King is good, because he conduces much for the safety of the People; Ergo,
the safety of the people must be better.

3. By way of limitation: Because no Law, in its letter, has force, where the
safety of the Subject is in hazard: and if Law, or King be destructive to the
people, they are to be abolished. This is clear in a Tyrant, or a wicked man.

4. In the desires of the most holy: Moses, a Prince, desired for the safety
of Gods people; and rather then God should destroy his people, that his name
should be razed out of the book of life. And David says, 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. Let
thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me, und on my fathers house; but
not on thy people, that they should be plagued. This being a holy desire of
these two public A good Prince is to postpon^ his own safety to the safety
of the people.
Spirits, the object must be in it self true; and the safety of God^ people,
and their happiness, must be of more worth then the salvation of Moses, and
the life of David, and his Fathers house.

The Prelate borrows an answer to this, (for he has none of Sac. sane. Maj.
c. 16. 159. Dr. Fern, Conscience not satisfied, Sec. ^* p. 28.
his own) from D. Fern. The safety of the Subjects is the prime end of the
constitution of Government: but it is not the sole and adequate end of
government in Monarchy; for that is the safety of both King and People. And
it beseems the King to proportion his laws for their good; and it becomes
the People to proportion all their obedience, actions and endeavors, for the
safety, honor, and happiness of the King. It Is impossible the people can
have safety, when Soveraigntie is weakened.

Ans. The Prelate would have the other half of the end, why a King is set over
a People, to be the safety and happiness of the King, as well as the safety
of the People. This is new Logic indeed, The King in his government is to
seek the safety of the people, not himself.
that one and the same thing should be the mean, and the end. The question is,
For what end is a King made so happy, as to be exalted King? The Prelate
answers; He is made happy, that he may be happy; and made a King, that he may
be made a King. Now is the King, as King, to intend this half end? that is,
Whether or no accepts he the burden of setting his head and shoulders under
the Crown, for this end, that he may not only make the people happy, but also
that he may make himself rich and honorable above his brethren, and enrich
himself? I believe not: but that he feed the people of God. For if he intend
himself, and his own honor, it is the intention of the man who is King, and
intentio operantis; but it is not the intention of the King, as the King, or
intentio operis. The King, as a King, is formally and essentially the Minister
of God for our good, Romans 13. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 2. and cannot come under any notion
as a King, but as a mean, not as an end, nor as that which he is, to seek
himself. I conceive, God did forbid this, in the moulding of the first King,
Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 26. He is a minister by office, and one who receives honor
and wages for this work, that exofficio, he may feed his people. But the
Prelate says, the people are to intend his riches and honor. I cannot say but
the people may intend to honor the King: but that is not the question, whether
the people be to refer the King and his government as a mean to honor the
King? I conceive not. But that end which the people in obeying the King in
being ruled by him, may intend, is, 1 Timothy 2. 2. That under him they may lead a
quiet and a peaceable life, in all Godliness and honesty. And Gods end in
giving a King, is the good and safety of his people.

P. Prelate. To reason from the one part and end of Monarchical Sac. sanc.
maj. ^^. 160.
government, The safety of the Subjects; to the destruction and weakening of
the other part of the end of the power of Soveraigntie, and the Royal
prerogative: is a caption a divisis. If the King be not happy, and invested
with the full power of a Head, the Body cannot be well. By Anti-Monarchists;
The people at the beginning were necessitated to commit themselves, lives and
fortunes to the government of a King, because of themselves they had not
wisdom and power enough to do it: and therefore they enabled him with honor
and power, without which he could not do this, being assured that he could not
choose but most earnestly and carefully endeavor this end, to wit, his own,
and the peoples happiness. Ergo, the safety of the people issues from the
safety of the King, as the life of the natural body from the soul. Weak
Government is near to Anarchie. Puritans will not say, Quovis modo esse, etiam
poenale, is better then non esse: The Scripture says the contrary; It were
better for some never to have been borne, then to be. Tyranny is better then no
Government.

Ans. 1. He knows not Sophismes of Logic, who calls this Argument, a
divisis: for the Kings Honor is not the end of the Kings Government: He should
seek the safety of State and Church, not himself; Himself is a private end,
and a step to Tyranny.

2. The Prelate lies, when he makes us to reason from the safety of the
Subject to the destruction of the King. Fern, Barclay, Grotius, taught the
hungry Scholar to reason so. Where read he this? The People must be saved;
That is the Supreme law: Ergo, destroy the King. The Devil and the Prelate
both, shall not fasten this on us. But thus we reason: When the man who is the
King, endeavoreth not the end of his Royal place, but, through bad counsel,
the subversion of Laws, Religion, and bondage of the Kingdom; The free
Estates are to join with him for that end of Safety, according as God has
made them heads of Tribes, and Princes of the people: And if the King refuse to
join with them, and will not do his duty; I see not how they are in
conscience liberated, before God, from doing their part.

3. If the P. Prelate call resisting the King by lawful defensive wars, the
destruction of the Head; He speaks with the mouth of one excommunicated, and
delivered up to Satan.

4. We endeavor nothing more then the safety and happiness of the King, as
King: but his happiness is not to suffer him to destroy his Subjects, subvert
Religion, arm Papists, who have slaughtered above two hundred thousand
innocent Protestants, only for the profession of that true Religion which the
King has sworn to maintain. Not to rise in arms to help the King against
these, were to gratify him as a Man, but to be accessarie to his souls
destruction, as a King.

5. That the Royal Prerogative is the end of a Monarchy ordained by God;
neither Scripture, Law, nor Reason can admit.

6. The people are to intend the safety of other Judges, as well as the Kings.
If Parliaments be destroyed, whose it is to make Laws and Kings; the People
can neither besafe, free to serve Christ, nor happy.

7. It is a lie, that people were necessitated, at the beginning, to commit
themselves to a King: for we read of no King, while Nimrod arose: Fathers of
families (who were not Kings) and others, did govern till then.

8. It was not want of wisdom, (for in many, and in the people, there must be
more wisdom then in one man:) but rather corruption of nature, and
reciprocation of injuries, that created Kings, and other Judges.

9. The King shall better compass his end, to wit, the safety of the people,
with limited power, ( placent mediocria) and with other Judges added to help
him, Number. 11. 14, 16. Deuteronomy. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. then to put in one man's hand
absolute power: for a sinful man's head cannot bear so much new wine, such as
exorbitant power is.

10. He is a base flatterer, who says, The King cannot choose but earnestly
and carefully endeavor his own, and the peoples happiness: that is, the King
is an Angel, and cannot sin, and decline from the duties of a King. Of the
many Kings of Judah and Israel, how many chose this? All the good Kings that
have been, may be written in a gold ring.

11. The peoples safety depends indeed on the King, as a King and a happy
Governor; but the people shall never be fattened to eat the wind of an
imaginary Prerogative Royal.

12. Weak Government, that is, a King with a limited power, who has more
power about his head, nor within his head; is a strong King, and far from
Anarchy.

13. I know not what he means, but Arminius, his Masters Iac. Armini. Declar.
Remonstrant. in suod. dordrac.
way and words are here, for Arminians say, That being in the damned eternally
tormented is no benefit, it were better they never had being, then to be
eternally tormented; and this they say to the defiance of the Doctrine of
eternal Reprobation, in which we teach, That though by accident, and because
of the Damned their abuse of being and life, it were to them better not to be;
as is said of Judas, yet simpliciter comparing being with non-being, and
considering the eternity of miserable being in relation to the absolute liberty
of the Former of all things, who makes use of the sinful being of
Clay-vessells for the illustration of the glory of his Justice and power, Romans
9. 17, 22. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Jude v. 4. It is a censuring of God, and his
unsearchable Wisdom, and a condemning of the Almighty of cruelty ( God avert
blasphemy of the unspotted and holy Majesty) who by Arminian grounds, keeps
the Damned in life, and being to be fuel eternally for Tophet, to declare the
glory of his Justice. But the Prelate behoved to go out of his way to salute
and gratify, a proclaimed enemy of free Grace Arminius, and hence he would
infer, That the King wanting his Prerogative Royal, and fullness of absolute
power to do wickedly, is in a penal and miserable condition, and that it were
better for the King to be a Tyrant, with absolute liberty to destroy, and save
alive at his pleasure, as is said of a Tyrant, Dan. 5. v. 19. then to be no
King at all. And here consider a Principle of Royalists Court faith.

1. The King is no King, but a lame and miserable Judge, if he The Royalists
principles drive at this, to make none Kings but only rank Tyrants.
have not irresistible power to wast and destroy.

2. The King cannot be happy, nor the people safe; nor can the King do good in
saving the needy, except he have the uncontrollable and unlimited power of a
Tyrant, to crush the poor and needy, and lay wast the mountain of the Lords
inheritance: such Court-ravens, who feed upon the souls of living Kings, are
more cruel then Ravens and Vultures, who are but dead carcasses.

Williams B. of Ossarie answers to the Maxim, Salus populi, etc. Vindix
regum. page 65.
No wise King but will carefully provide for the peoples safety, because his
safety and honor is included in theirs, his destruction in theirs. And it is,
says Lipsius, egri animi proprium nihil diu pati. Absalom persuaded there was
no justice in the Land, when he intends Rebellion. And the poor Prelate
following him, spends pages to prove Sac. sanc. Mat. 16 page 161, 162, 163.
that Goods, Life, Chastity and Fame depends on the safety of the King, as
the breath of our nostrills, our Nurse-father, our Head, cornerstone, and
Judge, c. 17. 6. 18. 1. The reason why all disorder was in Church and State,
was not because there was no Judge, no Government; none can be so stupid as to
imagine that. But because 1. They wanted the excellentest of Governments. 2.
Because Aristocracy was weakened so, as there was no right. No doubt Priests
there were, but Hos. 4. either they would not serve, or were overawed, no
doubt in those days they had Judges, but Priests and Judges were stoned by a
rascally multitude, and they were not able to rule; therefore it is most
consonant to Scripture to say, Salus regis suprema populi salus. The safety of
the King and his Prerogative Royal is the safest sanctuary for the people. So
Hos. 3. 4. Lament. 2. 9.

Ans. 1. The question is not of the Wisdom, but of the Power of the King, if
it should be bounded by no Law.

2. The flatterer may know, there be more foolish Kings in the world then wise,
and that Kings misled with Idolatrous Queens, and by name Achab ruined
himself, and his posterity and Kingdom.

3. The salvation and happiness of men standing in the exalting of Christ's
Throne and the Gospel, ergo every King, and every man will exalt the Throne,
and so let them have an incontrollable power without constraint of Law, to do
what they list, and let no bounds be set to Kings over subjects; by this
Argument their own wisdom is a law to lead them to Heaven.

4. It is not Absoloms mad Malcontents in Britane, but there were really no
justice to Protestants, all indulgence to Papists, Popery, Arminianisme,
Idolatry printed, Preached, professed, rewarded by Authority, Parliaments, and
Church Assemblies, the Bulwarks of Justice and Religion were denied,
dissolved, crushed, etc.

5. That by a King he understands a Monarch, Judge. 17. and that such a one,
as Saul, of Absolute power, and not a Judge, cannot be proved, for there were
no Kings in Israel in the Judges days, the Government not being changed till
near the end of Samuels Government.

6. And that they had no Judges, he says, It is not imaginable, but I rather
believe God then the Prelate, Every one did what was right in his own eyes,
because there was none to put ill doers to shame. Possible the Estates of
Israel governed some way for mere necessity, but wanting a supreme Judge which
they should have, they were loose: but this was not because where there is no
King, as P. P. would insinuate, there was no Government, as is clear.

7. Of tempered and limited Monarchy, I think as honorably as the Prelate,
but that absolute and unlimited Monarchy is excellenter then Aristocracy, I
shall then believe when Royalists shall prove such a Government, in so far it
is absolute, to be of God.

8. That Aristocracy was now weakened I believe not, seeing God so highly
commends it, and calls it his own reigning over his people, 1 Samuel 8. 7.
The weakening of it through abuse, is not to a purpose, more then the abuse of
Monarchy.

9. No doubt (says he) Hos. 4. They were Priests and Judges, Hos. 4. but they
were overawed as they are now. J think he would say, Hos. 3. 4. otherwise he
cites Scripture sleeping. That the Priests of Antichrist be not only
overawed, but out of the earth; I yield, that the King be limited, not
overawed, I think Gods Law, and man's Law allows.

10. The safety of the King as King, is not only safety, but a blessing to
Church and State, and therefore this P. Prelate and his fellows deserve to be
hanged before the Sun, who have led him on a war to destroy him, and his
Protestant subjects. But the safety and flourishing of a King in the exercises
of an Arbitrary, unlimited power against Law, and Religion, and to the
destruction of his subjects, is not the safety of the people, nor the safety of
the Kings soul, which these men, if they be the Priests of the Lord, should
care for.

The Prelate comes to refute the learned and worthy Observator. Sacr. san.
May. page 165.
The safety of the people is the supreme Law, ergo the King is bound in duty to
promote all and every one of his subjects to all happiness. The Observator
has no such inference, the King is bound to promote some of his subjects even
as King, to a Gallows, especially Irish Rebels, and many bloody Malignants.
But the Prelate will needs have God rigorous (hallowed be his name) if it be
so, for it is unpossible to the tenderest-hearted father to do so: actual
promotion of all is unpossible, that the King intend it of all his subjects, as
good subjects, by a Throne established on righteousness and judgment, is that
which the worthy Observator means; other things here are answered.

The sum of his second answer is, a repetition of what he has said; I give
my word in a Pamphlet of one hundred ninety and four pages, I never saw more
idle repetitions, of one thing twenty times before said. But page one hundred
sixty and eight, he says, The safety of the King and his subjects in the
Moral notion may be esteemed Morally the same, no less then the soul and the
body make one personal subsistence.

Ans. This is strange Logic, the King and his subjects are Ens por
aggregationem; and the King as King has one Moral subsistence, and the people
another. Has the Father and the son, the Master and the servant one Moral
subsistence? but the man speaks of their well being: and then he must mean
that our Kings Government that was not long ago, and is yet, to wit, the
Popery, Arminianisme, Idolatry, cutting of men's ears, and noses, banishing,
imprisonment, for speaking against Popery, arming of Papists to slay
Protestants, pardoning the blood of Ireland, that I fear, shall not be soon
taken away, etc. are identically the same with the life, safety, and happiness
of Protestants, then life and death, justice and unjustice, Idolatry and
sincere worship are identically one, as the soul of the Prelate and his body
are one.

The third is but a repitition. The Acts of Royalty (says the Observator) The
subjects may gratify the King for doing what he is obliged to do by his
office.
are Acts of duty and obligation; Ergo, not acts of grace properly so called.
Ergo, We may not thank the King for a courtesy. This is no consequence. What
fathers do to children, are acts of natural duty, and of natural grace; and
yet children owe gratitude to parents, and subjects to good Kings, in a legal
sense. No, but in way of courtesy only. The Observator said, The King is not
a father to the whole collective body, and its well said, he is son to them,
and they his maker. Who made the King? Policy answers, The State made him,
and Divinity: God made him.

4. The Observator said well: The peoples weakness is not the Sac. sacr. May.
page 170.
Kings strength. The Prelate says, Amen: He said, That that perishes not to
the King, which is granted to the people. The Prelate denies. Because, What
the King has in trust from God, the King cannot make away to another, nor can
any take it from him, without sacrilege.

Answ. True indeed, If the King had Royalty by immediate trust, and infusion by
God, as Elias had the spirit of prophecy, that he cannot make away: Royalists
dream that God immediately from heaven, now infuseth faculty and right to
Crowns, without any word of God. Its enough to make an Euthysiast leap up to
the Throne, and kill Kings. Judge if these Fanatics be favorers of Kings: But
if the King have Royalty mediately by the peoples free consent from God, there
is no reason, but people give as much power even by ounce weights (for power is
strong Wine, and a great mocker) as they know a weak man's head will bear, and
no more; power is not an immediate inheritance from heaven: But a birthright
of the people borrowed from them, they may set it out for their good, and
resume it when a man is drunk with it. 2. The man will have it conscience on
the King to fight and destroy his three Kingdoms, for a dream, his prerogative
above Law. But the truth is, Prelates do engage the King, his house, honor,
subjects, Church, for their cursed Mytres.

The Prelate vexes the Reader with Repetitions, and says, The Page 172.
King must proportion his Government, to the safety of the people on the one
hand, and to his own safety and power on the other hand.

Ans. What the King does as King, he does it for the happiness of his people,
the King is a relative, yea even his own happiness that he seeks, he is to
refer to the good of Gods people. He says farther, The safety of the people
includes the safety of the King, because Symmons has the same very thing in
his Loyal Subjec. unbelief. p. 39. Page 175.
the word populus is so taken, which he proves by a raw sickly rabble of
words, stolen out of Passerats Dictioner. His father the Schoolmasters may
whip him for frivolous Etymologies.

This supreme Law (says the Prelate) is not above the Law of Prerogative
Royal, the highest Law, nor is Rex above Lex. The Democracie of Rome had a
supremacy above Laws, to make and unmake Laws: and will they force this
power on a Monarch, to the destruction of Soveraigntie?

Answ. This, which is stolen from Spalato, Barclay, Grotius, and The safety
of the people, far above the King
others, is easily answered. The supremacy of People, is a Law of natures
selfe-preservation, above all positive Laws, and above the King; and is to
regulate Soveraigntie, not to destroy it. 2. If this supremacy of Majesty was
in people, before they have a King, then 1. they lose it not by a voluntary
choice of a King; for a King is chosen for good, and not for the peoples loss,
ergo they must retain this power in habit, and potency, even when they have a
King. 2. Then supremacy of Majesty is not a beam of Divinity proper to a King
only. 3. Then the people having Royal sovereignty vertually in them, make, and
so unmake a King, all which the Prelate denies.

This supreme Law (says the Prelate, begging it from Spalato, Page 176.
Arnisaeus, Grotius) advance the King, not the people: and the sense is, The
Kingdom is really some time in such a case, that the Sovereign must exercise
an Arbitrary Power, and not stand upon private men's interests, or transgressing
of Laws, made for the private good of individualls, but for the preservation
of it self, and the public, may break through all Laws. This he may, in the
case when sudden foreign invasion threatens ruin inevitably to King and
Kingdom; a Physician may rather cut a Gangreened member, then suffer the whole
body to perish. The Dictator in case of extreme dangers (as Livie and Dion.
Halicarnass. show us) had power according to his own Arbitrament, had a
sovereign Commission in peace and war of life, death, persons, etc. not
coordinate, not subordinate to any.

Ans. It is not an Arbitrary power, but naturally tied and fettered to this
same supreme Law, Salus populi, the safety of the people, that a King break
through, not the Law, but the letter of the Law for the safety of the people;
as the Chyrurgion, not by any A King may though we should deny all Prerogative,
break through the letter of a Law, for the safety of the whole Land.
prerogative that he has above the Art of Chyrurgery, but by necessity,
cutteth off a Gangreened member, thus its not Arbitrary to the King to save his
people from ruin, but by the strong and imperious Law of the peoples safety he
does it; for if he did it not, he were a murderer of his people. 2. He is to
stand upon transgression of Laws according to their genuine sense of the
peoples safety, for good Laws are not contrary one to another, though when he
breaks through the letter to the Law, yet he breaks not the Law, for if
twenty thousand Rebels invade Scotland, he is to command all to rise, though
the formality of a Parliament cannot be had to indict the war, as our Law
provideth; but the King does not command all to rise, and defend themselves by
a Prerogative Royal, proper to him as King, and incommunicable to any but to
himself.

1. There is no such dinne and noise to be made for a King, and his
incommunicable Prerogative, for though the King were not at all, yea though he
command the contrary (as he did when he came against Scotland with an English
Army) the law of Nature teaches all to rise without the King.

2. That the King command this as King, it is not a particular positive Law;
but he does it as a man, and a member of the Kingdom; The law of Nature, (which
knows no dream of such a Prerogative) forces him to it, as every member is,
by Natures indictment, to care for the whole.

3. It is poor hungry skill in this New Statist, (for so he names all
Scotland) to say, that any Laws are made for private interests, The Kings
supposed Prerogative, nothing, in comparison of the lives and blood of so many
thousands as are killed in England and Ireland.
and the good of some individuals. Laws are not Laws, if they be not made for
the safety of the people.

4. It is false, that the King in a public danger is to care for himself as a
man, with the ruin and loss of any: Yea, in a public calamity, a good King,
as David, is to desire he may die, that the Public may be saved, 2 Samuel,
24. 17. Ex^dus 32. 32. It is commended of all, that the Emperor Otho, yea and
Richard the 2. of England, as M. Speed says, Hist. of England, p. 757.
resigned their Kingdoms to eschew the eff^sion of blood. The Prelate advises
the King to pass over all laws of Nature, and slay thousands of innocents,
and destroy Church and State of three Kingdoms, for a straw, and supposed
Prerogative Royal. Now certainly, Prerogative, and Absolutenes to do good and
ill, must be inferior to a Law, the end whereof is the safety of the People.
For David wills the pestilence may take him away, and so his Prerogative,
that the People may be saved, 2 Samuel 24. 17. for Prerogative is cumulative, to
do good, not privative to do ill; and so is but a mean to defend both the
Law and the People.

2. Prerogative is either a power to do good, or ill, or both: If the first be
said, it must be limited by the End, and Law, for which it is ordained. A mean
is no farther a mean, but in so far as it conduces to the end; the safety of
all. If the second be admitted, It is License and Tyranny, not power from God.
If the third be said, both reasons plead against this, that Prerogative should
be the Kings end in the present wars.

3. Prerogative being a power given by the mediation of the people; yea,
suppose (which is false) that it were given immediately of God; yet it not a
thing for which the King should raise war against his Subjects: for God will
ask no more of the King, then he gives to him: The Lord reapeth not, where he
sows not. If the Militia, and other things, be ordered hitherto for the
holding off Irish and Spanishe invasion by Sea, and so for the good of the
Land, seeing the King, in his own person, cannot make use of the Militia; he is
to rejoice that his Subjects are defended. The King cannot answer to God for
the justice of war on his part: It is not a case of conscience that the King
should shed blood for, to wit, because the Underofficers are such men, and not
others of his choosing; seeing the Kingdom is defended sufficiently, except
where Cavaliers destroy it. And to me, this is an unanswerable argument, that
the Cavaliers destroy not the Kingdoms for this Prerogative Royal, as the
principal ground; but for a deeper design, even for that which was working by
Prelates and Malignants, before the late troubles in both Kingdoms.

4. The King is to intend the safety of his People; and the safety of the
King, as a Governor, but not as this King, and this man, Charles: that is a
self end: a King David is not to look to that: for when the people was
seeking his life and crown, he says, Ps. 3. 8. Thy blessing upon thy People.
He may care for, and intend that the King and Government be safe: for if the
Kingdom be destroyed, there cannot be a new Kingdom and Church on earth
again to serve God, in that generation, Psalm. 89. 47. but they may easily have
a new King again: and so the safety of the one, cannot in reason be intended,
as a collateral end, with the safety of the other: for there is no imaginable
comparison betwixt one man, with all his accidents of Prerogative and
Absoluteness, and three National Churches and Kingdoms* Better the King weep
for a Childish tri^le of a Prerogative, than Popery be erected, and three
Kingdoms be destroyed by Cavaliers, for their own ends.

5. The Dictators power is, 1. a fact, and proves not a point of The power of
the Dictator no plea for a Prerogative above Law.
Conscience. 2. His power was in an exigence of extreme danger of the
Commonwealth. The P. Prelate pleads for a constant absoluteness above Laws,
to the King at all times, and that jure Divino. 3. The Dictator was the Peoples
creature; ergo, the Creator, the People, had that soveraigntie over him. 4. The
Dictator was not above a King: but the Romans ejected Kings. 5. The Dictators
power was not to destroy a State: 2. He might be, and was resisted. 3. He might
be deposed.

Prelate. The safety of the People is pretended as a Law, that the Page 177.
Jews must put Christ to death; and that Saul spared Agag.

Ans. No shadow for either, in the word of God. Caiaphas prophesied, and knew
not what he said. But that the Jews intended the salvation of the Elect, in
kil^ing Christ: or that Saul intended a public good in sparing Agag, shall be
the Prelates Divinity, not mine.

2. What, howbeit many should abuse this Law of the peoples safety, to wrong
good Kings, it cease not therefore to be a Law, and licenseth not ill Kings,
to place a Tyrannical Prerogative above a just Dictate of nature.

In the last Chapter, the Prelate has no reasons, only he would Sac. sanc.
maj. cap. 16.
have Kings holy, and this he proves from Apocrypha Books, because he is ebb
in holy Scripture; but it is Romish holiness, as is clear.

2. He must preach something to himself, that the King adore a tree-Altar. Thus
Kings must be most reverend in their gestures, page 182.

3. The King must hazard his sacred life and three Kingdoms, his Crown, Royal
posterity, to preserve sacred things, that is, Antichristian Romish Idols,
Images, Altars, Ceremonies, Idolatry, Popery.

4. He must upon the same pain maintain sacred persons, that is, greasy
Apostate Prelates. The rest I am weary to trouble the Reader withal, but know
ex ungue leonem.

QUEST. XXVI. Whether the King be above the Law or no?
WE may consider the question of the Laws supremacy over The Law above the
King in four considerations.
the King, either in the supremacy of constitution of the King, 2. or of
direction, or 3. of limitation, or 4. of coaction and punishing. Those who
maintain this, [ The King is not subject to the Law] if their meaning be [ The
King as King is not subject to The meaning of this [The King is not subject to
the Law.] The Law above the King in supremacy of constitution
the Laws direction] They say nothing; for the King as the King is a living
Law; then they say [ The Law is not subject to the Laws direction] a very
improper speech; or, The King as King, is not subject to the coaction of the
Law; that is true, for he who is a living Law, as such, cannot punish himself,
as the Law says.

1. Assert. The Law has a supremacy of constitution above the King;

1. Because the King by nature is not King, as is proved; Ergo, he must be King
by a politic constitution and Law, and so the Law in that consideration is
above the King, because it is from a civil Law, that there is a King, rather
then any other kind of Governor.

2. It is by Law, that amongst many hundred men, this man is King, not this
man; and because, by the which a thing is constituted, by the same thing it is,
or may be dissolved; therefore,

3. As a Community finding such and such qualifications as the Law requires to
be in a King, in this man, not in this man; therefore upon Law-ground,

5. They make him a King, and upon Law-grounds and just demerit, they may
unmake him again; for, what men voluntarily do upon condition, the condition
being removed, they may undo again.

2. Assert. It is denied by none; but the King is under the directive power of
the Law, though many liberate the King from the coactive power of a civil Law.
But I see not what direction a civil Law can give to the King, if he be above
all obedience, or disobedience to a Law, seeing all Law-direction is in ordine
ad obedientiam, in order to obey; except thus far, that the light that is in
the civil Law, is a moral or natural guide to conduct a King in his walking;
but this is the morality of the Law which inlightneth and informs, not any
obligation that aweth the King; and so the King is under Gods and Natures Law,
this is nothing to the purpose.

3. Assert. The King is under the Law, in regard of some coercive limitation:

1. Because there is no absolute power given to him to do what he lists, as a
man. And because,

2. God, in making Saul a King, does not by any Royal stamp give him a power
to sin, or to play the Tyrant; for which cause I In what sense the King may do
all things.
expone these of the Law, Omnia sunt possibilia Regi, Imperator omnia potest.
Baldus in. F. de no. for* fidel. in F. and in prima constitut. C. col. 2.
Chassanaeus in Catalog. gloriae mundi. par. 5. considerat. 24. and tanta est
ejus celsitudo, ut non posset ei imponi lex in regno suo. Curt. in consol. 65.
col. 6. ad. F. Petrus Rebuff. Notab. 3. repet. l. unicae. C. de sentent. quae
pro eo quod nu. 17. page 363. All these go no otherwise but thus, The King can
do all things which by Law he can do, and that holds him: id possumus quod
jure possumus. And therefore the King cannot be above the Covenant and Law made
betwixt him and his people, at his Coronation Oath; for then the Covenant and
Oath should bind him only, by a natural obligation, as he is a man, not by a
civil or politic obligation, as he is a King.

So then, 1. it were sufficient that the King should swear that Oath in his
Cabinet-chamber, and it is but a mocking of an Oath, that he swear it to the
people.

2. That Oath given by the Representative-Kingdom, should also oblige the
Subjects naturally, in foro Dei, not politically, in foro humano, upon the same
reason.

3. He may be resisted as a man.

4. Assert. The fourth case is, if the King be under the obliging politic
coaction of civil Laws, for that he in foro Dei, be under the morality of civil
Laws, so as he cannot contraveen any Law in that notion, but he must sin
against God, is granted on all hands, Deuteronomy. 17. 20. Josh. 1. 8. 1 Samuel 12. 15.
That the King bind himself to the same Law that he does bind others, is
decent, and obliges the King as he is a man;

1. Because, Matthew. 7. 12. It is said to be the Law and the Prophets, All
things, whatsoever ye would men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.

2. It is the Law, Jmperator L. 4. dignae vox. C. de lege and tit. Quod quisque
juris in alium statuit, eodem and ipse utatur. Julius Caesar commanded the
youth who had defloured the Emperors daughter, to be scourged, above that
which the Law allowed. The youth said to the Emperor, Dixisti legem Caesar;
You appointed Plutarch in Apotheg. l. 4.
the Law, Caesar. The Emperor was so offended with himself, that he had failed
against the Law, that for the whole day he refused to taste meat.

Assert. 5. The King cannot but he subject to the coactive power of
Fundamental Laws: Because this is a Fundamental Law, that the The King under
the fundamental Laws.
free Estates lay upon the King, that all the power that they give to the King
as King, is for the good and safety of the people; and so what he does to the
hurt of his subjects, he does it not as King.

2. The Law says, Qui habet potestatem constituendi etiam and jus adimendi. l.
nemo. 37. l. 21. de reg. jure. Those who have power to make, have power to
unmake Kings.

3. What ever the King does as King, that he does by a power borrowed from, (or
by a fiduciary power which is his by trust) the Estates, who made him King. He
must then be nothing but an eminent servant of the State, in the punishing of
others. If therefore he be unpunishable, it is not so much because his Royal
power is above all Law-coaction, as because one and the same man cannot be both
the punisher and the punished, and this is a Physical incongruity rather then
a Moral absurdity. So the Law of God lays a duty on the inferior
Magistrate, to use the sword against the murderer, and that by virtue of his
Office, but I much doubt if for that, he is to use the sword against himself
in the case of Murder, for this is a truth I purpose to make good; that
suffering as suffering according Whether the King be punishable, or be to he
punished. Two diverse questions. Magistratus ipse est judex and executor contra
scipsum, in propria causa, propter excellentiam sui officii, l. se pater
familia^. and l. and boc Tiberius Caesar F. De Hered. hoc. just.
to the substance and essence of passion, is not commanded by any Law of God or
nature to the sufferer, but only the manner of suffering: I doubt if it be not,
by the Law of Nature, lawful even to the ill doer who has deserved death by
Gods Law, to fly from the sword of the lawful Magistrate; only the manner of
suffering with patience is commanded of God. I know the Law says here, That
the Magistrate is both Judge, and the Executor of the sentence against
himself, in his own cause, for the excellency of his Office. Therefore these
are to be distinguished, whether the King Ratione demeriti and jure, by Law be
punishable, or if the King can actually be punished corporally by a Law of man,
he remaining King; and since he must be a punisher himself, and that by virtue
of his Office. In matters of goods the King may be both Judge and punisher of
himself, as our Law provideth that any subject may plead his own heritage
from the King before the inferior Judges, and if the King be a violent
possessour, and in Mala fide for many years, by Law he is obliged upon a
Decree of the Lords, to execute the sentence against himself, Ex officio, and
to restore the Lands, and repay the damage to the just owner, and this the
King is to do against himself, ex officio. I grant here the King as King
punishes himself as an unjust man, but because bodily suffering is mere
violence to nature, I doubt if the King ex officio, is to do or inflict any
bodily punishment on himself: Nemo potest a seipso cogi. l. ille a quo. 13..
The King above some Laws.


Assert. 6. There be some Laws made in favor of the King as King, as to pay
tribute. The King must be above this Law as King. True, but if a Noble man of a
great rent be elected King, I know not, if he can be free from paying to
himself as King, tribute, seeing this is not allowed to the King by a Divine
Law, Romans 13. 6. as a reward of his work; and Christ expressly makes tribute a
thing due to Caesar as a King, Matthew. 22. v. 21. There be some solemnities of
the Law from which the King may be free, Prickman. D. c. 3. n. 78. and he
relates what they are, they are not Laws, but some circumstances belonging to
Laws, and Prickman answers to many places alleged out of the Lawyers, to
prove the King to be above the Law, Maldorus in 12. Art. 4, 5, 9, 96. will have
the The King above Laws that concern subjects as subjects.
Prince under that Law, which concerns all the Commonwealth equally in
regard of the matter, and that by the Law of nature, but he will not have him
subject to these Laws which concerns the subjects as subjects, as to pay
tribute. He cites Francisc. a Vict. Covarruvia, and Turrecremata. He also will
have the Prince under positive Laws, such as not to transport victuals, not
because the Law binds him as a Law. But because the making of the Law binds
him, Tanquam conditio sine qua non, even as he who teaches another that he
should not steal, he should not steal himself, Romans 2. But the truth is,
this is but a branch of the Law of Nature, that I should not commit Adultery,
and Theft, and Sacrilege, and such sins as nature condemns, if I shall
condemn them in others, and does not prove that the King is under the coactive
power of Civil Laws.

Vlpianus, l. 31. F. de regibus says, The Prince is loosed from Some Lawyers
and Schoolmen free the King from the Law.
Laws, Bodine de Repub. l. 7. c. 8. Nemo imperat sibi, No man commands
himself. Tholosanus says, Ipsius est dare, non accipere leges. The Prince
gives Laws, but receives none, De Rep. l. 7. c. 20. Donellus Lib. 1.
Comment. c. 17. distinguishes betwixt a Law, and a Royal Law proper to the
King. Trentlerus Volum. 1. 79. 80. says, The Prince is freed from Laws; and
that he obeys Laws, de honestate, non de necessitate, Upon honesty, not of
necessity. Thomas P. Reasons to prove that the King is under the Law. That a
King has no superior but God, a false ground to liberate the the King from
the coaction of Law.
1. q. 96. Art. 5. and with him Soto, Gregorius de Valentia, and other
Schoolmen, subject the King to the directive power of the Law, and liberate
him of the coactive power of the Law.

Assert. 7. If a King turn a Paricide, a Lion, and a waster and destroyer of
the people, as a man he is subject to the Coactive power of the Laws of the
Land. If any Law should hinder that a Tyrant should not be punished by Law, it
must be, because he has not a superior but God; for Royalists build all upon
this, but this ground is false: because the Estates of the Kingdom who gave
him the Crown, are above him, and they may take away what they gave him; as
the Law of Nature and God says, If they had known he would turn Tyrant, they
would never have given him the sword: and so how much ignorance is in the
contract they made with the King, as little of will is in it, and so it is not
every way willing, but being conditional is supposed to be against their will.
2. They gave the power to him only for their good, and that they make the King,
is clear, 2 Chronicles. 23. 11. 1 Samuel 10. 17, 24. Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15, 16, 17. 2
King. 11. v. 12. 1 King. 16. 21. 2 King. 10. 5. Iud. 9. 6. 2. 2 Chronicles. 26. 18.
fourscore valiant men of the Priests withstood Vzziah in a corporal violence,
and thrust him out, and cut him off from the house of the Lord. And,

2. If the Princes place do not put him above the Laws of Argum. 2.
Church Discipline, (Matthew. 18. for Christ excepteth none, and how can men
except?) and if the rod of Christ's lips smite the earth, and stay the wicked,
Esaias 11. 4. and the Prophets Elias, Nathan, Jeremiah, Esaiah, etc. John
Baptist, Jesus Christ, and his Apostles have used this rod of censure and
rebuke, as servants under God, against Kings, this is a sort of spiritual
coaction of Laws put in execution by men, and by due proportion corporal
coaction being the same ordinance of God, though of another nature, must have
the like power over all, whom the Law of God has not excepted, but Gods Law
excepteth none at all.

3. It is presumed that God has not provided better for the safety Argum. 3.
of the part, then of the whole, especially when he makes the part a mean for
the safety of the whole.

But if God have provided that the King, who is a part of the Commonwealth,
shall be free of all punishment, though he be a habitual destroyer of the
whole Kingdom, seeing God has given him to be a Father, Tutor, Savior,
Defender thereof, and destinated him as a mean for their safety, then must God
have worse, not better provided, for the safety of the whole, then of the part.
The Proposition is clear in that God, Romans 13. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 2. has ordained
the Ruler, and given to him the sword to defend the whole Kingdom and City;
but we read no where, that the Lord has given the sword to the whole Kingdom,
to defend one man a King, though a Ruler come going on in a Tyrannical way of
destroying all his subjects.

The assumption is evident: for then the King, turning Tyrant, might set an
Army of Turks, Jews, cruel Papists, to destroy the Church A Tyrant in
exercise, may be punished by the confession of our adversaries, Winzetus,
Barclat. Hag. Grotius.
of God, without all fear of Law or punishment. Yea, this is contrary to the
doctrine of Royalists: for, Winzetus* adversus Buchananum, p. 275. says of
Nero, that he seeking to destroy the Senate and people of Rome, and seeking to
make new laws for himself, excidit jure Regni, lost right to the Kingdom.
And Barclai^s advers. Monarcho-Machous, l. 3. c. ult. p. 212, 213. says, A
Tyrant, such as Caligula, spoliare se jure Regni, spoileth himself of the
right to the But how this can consist with the doctrine of Royalists, I see
not: to wit, Once a father, always a father; once a King, ever a King. None can
punish a King, save God Almighty, say they.
Crown. And in that same place: Regem, si regnum suum alienae ditioni
manciparit, regno cadere: If the King sell his Kingdom, he loses the title to
the Crown. Grotius de jure belli and pacis, l. 1. c. 4. n. 7, Si Rex hostili
animo in totius populi exitium feratur, amittit regnum: If he turn Enemy to
the Kingdom, for their destruction, he loses his Kingdom, because (says he)
Voluntas imperandi, and voluntas perdendi, simul consistere non possunt: A will
or mind to govern, and to destroy, cannot consist together in one. Now if
this be true, that a King turning Tyrant, loses title to the Crown; this is
either a falling from his Royal title only in Gods court; or it is a losing of
it before men, and in the court of his Subjects. If the former be said, 1. He
is no King, having before God lost his Royal title: and yet the people is to
obey him as the Minister of God, and a power from God, when as he is no such
thing. 2. In vain do these Authors provide remedies to save the people from a
Tyrannous waster of the people, if they speak of a Tyrant who is no King in
Gods court only, and yet remains a King to the people in regard of the Law:
for the places speak of Remedies that God has provided against Tyrants cum
titulo, such as are lawful Kings, but turn Tyrants. Now by this they provide
no remedy at all, if only in Gods court, and not in Man's court also, a Tyrant
lose his title. As for Tyrants sine titulo, such as usurp the throne, and have
no just claim to it: Barclaius adver. Monarcho-Ma. l. 4. c. 10. p. 268. says,
Any private man may kill him, as a public enemy of the State: but if he lose
his title to the Crown in the court of Men, then is there, 1. a Court on Earth
to judge the King, and so he is under the coactive power of a Law. 2. Then a
King may be resisted, and yet those who resist them, do not incur damnation;
the contrary where of Royalists endeavor to prove from Romans 13. 3. Then the
people may un-king one who was a King. But 4. I would know who takes that
(...), from him, whereby he is a King, that beam of Divine majesty? Not the
people; because Royalists say, they neither can give, nor take away Royal
dignity, and so they cannot un-king him.

4. The more Will be in the consent* (says Ferd. Vasquez, l. 1. c. 41.) Arg.
4. The King under the strictest obligation of Law.
the obligation is the stricter. So* doubled words (says the Law, l. 1.. 13.
n. 13.) oblige more strictly. And all laws of Kings, who are rational
fathers, and so lead us by Laws, as by rational means to peace and external
happiness; are contracts of King and People. Omnis lex sponsio and contractus
Reip.. 1. Just. de ver. relig. Now the King at his Coronation-covenant with the
people, gives a most intense consent, an Oath, to be a keeper and preserver of
all good Laws: and so hardly he can be freed from the strictest obligation that
Law can impose: And if he keep Laws by office, he is a mean to preserve
Laws; and no mean can be superior and above the end, but inferior thereunto.

5. Bodine proves, de Rep. l. 2. c. 5. p. 221. that Emperors at first Arg. 5.
A King remains a man, and a sociall creature.
were but Princes of the Commonwealth: and that Soveraigntie remained still in
the Senate and people. Marius Salomonius, a learned Roman Civilian, wrote six
books de Principatu, to refute the supremacy of Emperors above the State.
Ferd. Vasq. illust. quest. part. 1. l. 1. n. 21. proves, that the Prince, by
Royal dignity, leaves not off to be a Citizen, a member of the Politic
body; and not a King, but a Keeper of Laws.

Hence, 6. The Prince remains, even being a Prince, a sociall creature, a
Man, as well as a King; one who must buy, sell, promise, contract, dispose:
Ergo, he is not Regula regulans, but under rule of law: for impossible it is,
if the King can, in a political way, live as a member of society, and do and
perform acts of policy, and so perform them, as he may by his office, buy,
and not pay; promise, and vow, and swear to men, and not perform, nor be
obliged to men to render a reckoning of his Oath, and kill and destroy, and yet
in Curia politicae societatis, in the Court of humane policy, be free: and
that he may give inheritances, as just rewards of virtue and well-doing, and
take them away again. Yea, seeing these sins that are not punishable before
men, are not sins before men: If all the sins and oppressions of a Prince
be so above the punishment that men can inflict, they are not sins before
men, by which means the King is loosed from all guiltiness of the sins
against the Second Table: for, the ratio formalis, the formal reason, why the
Judge, by warrant from God, condemns, in the Court of men, the guilty man,
is, because he has sinned against humane society, either through the scandal
of blasphemy, or through other heinous sins he has defiled the Land. Now
this is incident to the King, as well as to some other sinful man.

To these, and the like, hear what the excommunicated Prelate Sac. sanc. May.
c. 15. p. 146, 147.
has to say; 1. They say ( he means the Jesuits) Every society of men is a
perfect Republic, and so must have within it self a power to preserve it
self from ruin, and by that to punish a Tyrant. He answers, A society
without a Head, is a disorderly rout, not a Politic body; and so cannot have
this power.

Ans. 1. The Pope gives to every Society, Politic power to make away a
Tyrant, or heretical King, and to un-king him, by his brethren the Jesuits
way. And observe, how Papists (of which number I could easily prove the P.
Prelate to be, by the Popish doctrine that he delivered, while the iniquity of
time, and dominion of Prelates in Scotland, advanced him, against all worth of
true learning and holiness, to be a Preacher in Edinborough) and Jesuits
agree, as the builders of Babylon. It is the purpose of God to destroy Babylon.

2. This answer shall infer, that the Aristocraticall Governors of any free
State, and that the Duke of Venice, and the Senate there, is above all Law, and
cannot be resisted, because without their Heads they are a disorderly Rout.

3. A Political society, as by Natures instinct, they may appoint a Head, or
Heads to themselves: so also if their Head, or Heads become ravenous Wolves,
the God of Nature has not left a perfect Society remediless; but they may
both resist, and punish the Head or Heads, to whom they gave all the power that
they have, for their good, not for their destruction.

4. They are as orderly a body Politic, to unmake a Tyrannous Commander, as
they were to make a just Governonr. The Prelate says, It is alike to conceive
a Politic body without a Governor, as to conceive the natural body without
a Head. He means, None of them can be conceivable. I am not of his mind.
When Saul was dead, Israel was a perfect Politic body: and the Prelate, if he
be not very obtuse in his head, (as this hungry piece stolen from others,
shows him to be) may conceive a visible Political society performing a
Political action, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. making David King at a visible and
conceivable place, at Hebron; and making a Covenant with him. And that they
wanted not all Governors, is nothing to make them Chymera's unconceivable: For
when so many families before Nimrod, were governed only by fathers of families,
and they agreed to make either a King, or other Governors, a Head, or Heads
over themselves: though the several families had government, yet these
consociated families had no government; and yet so conceivable a Politic
body, as if Maxwell would have compeared amongst them, and called them a
disorderly rout, or an unconceivable Chymera, they should have made the Prelate
know, that Chymera's can knock down Prelates. Neither is a King the life of a
Politic body, as the soul is of the natural body: The body creates not the
soul: but Israel created Saul King; and when he was dead, they made David
King, and so, under God, many Kings, as they succeeded, till the Messiah came.
No natural body can make souls to it self by succession; Nor can Seas create
new Prelates always.

P. Prelate. Jesuits and Puritans differ infinitely; We are hopeful God shall
cast down this Babel. The Jesuits, for ought I know, seat the superintendent
power in the Community: Some Sectaries follow them, and warrant any
individual person to make away a King in case of defects, and the work is to
be rewarded as when one kills a ravenous Wolf. Some will have it in a
collective body, but how? not met together by warrant, or writ of Sovereign
Authority, but when fancy of reforming Church and State calls them. Some
will have the power in the Nobles and Peers; some in the three Estates
assembled by the Kings Writ; some in the inferior Judges. I know not where this
power to curb Soveraigntie is, but in Almighty God.

Ans. 1. Jesuits and Puritans differ infinitely: true. Jesuits deny the Pope
to be Antichrist, hold all Arminian doctrine, Christ's local descension to
hell: all which the Prelate did preach. We deny all this.

2. We hope also the Lord shall destroy the Jesuits Babel; the ^uburbs
whereof, and more, are the Popish Prelates in Scotland and England. In what
considerations the people is the subject of all politic power.


3. The Jesuits, for ought he knows, place all superintendent power in the
Community. The Prelate knows not all his brethren the Jesuits ways: but it
is ignorance, not want of good will. For Bellarmine, Beucanus, Suarez, Gregor,
de Valentia, and others his dear fellows say, That all superintendent power
of policy, in ordine ad spiritualia is in the man, whose foot Maxwell would
kiss for a Cardinals Ha^.

4. If these be all the differences, it is not much, the Community is the
remote and last subject, the representative body the nearest subject, the
Nobles a partial subject; the Judges as Judges sent by the King, are so in the
game, that when an Arbitrary Prince at his pleasure sets them up, and at
command that they judge for men, and not for the Lord, and accordingly obey,
they are by this power to be punished, and others put in their place.

5. A true cause of convening Parliaments the prelate makes a Fancy at this
time; it is as if the thieves and robbers should say a Justice Court were a
fancy; but if the Prelate might compeare before the Parliament of Scotland (to
which he is an outlaw, like his father, 2 Thessalonians: 2. 4.) such a fancy I
conceive should hang him, and that deservedly.

P. Prelate. The subject of this superintending power must be secured Sac. May.
p. 147, 148.
from error, in judgment and practice, and the community and States then
should be infallible.

Ans. The consequence is naught, no more then the King the absolute independent
is infallible. 2. It is sure the people are in less hazard of Tyranny and
self destruction, then the King is to subvert Laws, and make himself
absolute, and for that cause there must be a superintendent power above the
King; and God Almighty also must be above all.

P. Prelate. The Parliament may err, then God has left the state remediless
except the King remedy it.

Ans. There Is no consequence here, except the King be impeccable. 2. Posteriour
Parliaments may correct the former. 3. A State is not remediless, because Gods
remedies, in sinful men's hands may miscarry. But the question is now, whether
God has given power to one man to destroy men, subvert Laws, and Religion,
without any power above him to coerce, restrain or punish.

P. Prelate. If when the Parliament erreth, the remedy is left to the C. 15. p.
148.
Wisdom of God, why not when the King erreth?

Ans. Neither is Antecedent true, nor the consequence valid, for the sounder
part may resist; and it is easier to one to destroy many, having a power
absolute, which God never gave him, then for many to destroy themselves. Then
if the King Vzzah intrude himself and sacrifice, the Priests do sin in
remedying thereof.

P. Prelate. Why might not the people of Israel, Peers or Sanedrim Stolen
from Arnisaus D^ authorit. Prin. c. 4. number, 5. page 73.
have convened before them, judged, and punished David, for his Adultery and
Murder? Romanists and new Statists acknowledge no case lawful, but Heresy,
Apostasy, or Tyranny; and tyranny they say must be universal, 2. Manifest as
the Sun. 3. And with obstinacy, and invincible by prayers; as is recorded of
Nero, whose wish was rather a transported passion, then a fixed resolution,
this cannot fall in the attempts of any but a Madman. Now this cannot be
proved of our King; but though we grant in the foresaid case, that the
community may resume their power, and rectify what is amiss, which we canno
grant, but this will follow by their doctrine in every case of male
administration.

Ans. The Prelate draws me to speak of the case of the Kings If David in his
Murdering Vriah and his Adultery sinned against none but God.
unjust Murder, confessed Ps. 51. to which I answer* He takes it for
confessed, that it had been treason in the Sanedrin and States of Israel to
have taken on them to judge and punish David for his Adultery and his Murder;
but he gives no reason for this, nor any word of God; and truly though I will
not presume to go before others in this, Gods Law, Genesis 9. 6. compared with
Number. 35. 30. 31. seems to say against them.

Nor can I think that Gods Law, or his Deputy the Judges are Arg. 6.
to accept the persons of the great, because they are great, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2
Chro. 19. 6, 7. and we say, We cannot distinguish where the Law distinguishes
not, The Lord speaks to under Judges, Levit. 19. 15. Thou shall not respect
the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, or of the Prince,
for we know what these names (...) and (...) means. I grant, it is not Gods
meaning that the King should draw the sword against himself, but yet it
follows not, that if we speak of the demerit of blood, that the Law of God
accepts any Judge, great or small, and if the Estate be above the King, as I
conceive they are, though it be a humane politic constitution, that the King
be free of al coaction of Law, because it conduces for the peace of the
Commonwealth, yet if we make a matter of conscience, for my part I see no
exception that God makethit, if men make, I crave The place Psa. 51. Against
he only have I sinned, Discussed.
leave to say, A facto ad jus non sequitur. And I easily yield that in every
case the Estates may coerce the King, if we make it a case of conscience. And
for the place Ps. 51. 4. Against thee only have I sinned. (...) flatterers
allege it to be a place that proves that the King is above all earthly
Tribunals, and all Laws, and that there was not on earth any who might punish
King David; and so they cite Clemens Alexandria. Strom. l. 4. Arnobi. Psalm. 50.
Dydimus, Hieronim. But Calvine on the place gives the meaning that most of the
Fathers give. Domine, etiam si me totus mundus absolvat, mihi tamen plusquam
satis est, quod te solum judicem sentio. It is true, Beda, Euthymius,
Ambrosius, Apol. David, c. 4. and. c. 10. do all acknowledge from the place, De
facto, there was none above David to judge him, and so does Augustine,
Basilius, Theodoret say, and Chrysostomus, and Cyrillus, and Hyeronim. Epist.
22. Ambrose Sermo. 16. in Psalm. 118. Gregorius, and Augusti. Joan. 8. says, he
means no man durst judge or punish him, but God only. Lorinus the Jesuit
observes eleven interpretatio^s of the Fathers all to this sense, since Lyra,
says he, sinned only against God, because God only could pardon him; Hugo
Cardinalis, because God only could wash him, which he asks in the Text. And
Lorin. Solo Deo conscio peccavi. But the simple meaning is, Against thee only
have I sinned, as my eye witness and imediate beholder; and therefore he
adds, and have done this evil in thy sight. 2. Against thee only, as my
Judge, that thou may be justified when thou judge, as clear from all
unrighteousness, when thou Against thee only, etc. cannot exclude men, as if
David had sinned against no mortal men on earth, as Royalists would teach.
shall send the sword on my house. 3. Against thee, O Lord only, who can wash
me, and pardon me, v. 1, 2. And if this ( thee only) exclude all together,
Vriah, Bathsheba, and the Law of the Judges, as if he had sinned against none
of these in their kind, then is the King because a King free, not only from a
punishing Law of man, but from the duties of the second Table simply, and so a
King cannot be under the best and largest half of the Law, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. 2. He shall not need to say, Forgive us our sins, as
we forgive them that sin against us; for there is no reason from the nature of
sin, and the nature of the Law of God, why we can say more the subjects and
sons sin against the King and Father, then to say the Father and King sin
against the sons and subjects. 3. By this, the King killing his Father Iesse,
should sin against God, but not break the fist Command, nor sin against his
father. 4. God should in vain forbid fathers to provoke their children to
wrath.

1. And Kings to do unjustice to their subjects, because by this the superior
cannot sin against the inferior, for as much as Kings can sin against none,
but those who have power to judge and punish them; but God only, and no
inferiors, and no subjects have power to punish the Kings, therefore Kings can
sin against none of their subjects, and where there is no sin, how can there be
a Law? neither Major or Minor can be denied by Royalists.

2. We acknowledge Tyranny must only unking a Prince. The Prelate denies it,
but he is a green Statist. Barclay, Grotius, Winzetus, as I have proved
grants it.

3. He will excuse Nero as of infirmity, wishing all Rome to have one neck,
that he may cut it off. And is that charitable of Kings, that they will not be
so mad as to destroy their own Kingdom? But when Stories teach us there have
been more Tyrants then Kings, the Kings are more obliged to him for flattery,
then for State-wit, except we say that all Kings who cate the people of God, as
they do bread, owe him little, for making them all mad and frantic.

4. But let them be Nero's, and mad, and worse, there is no coercing of them,
but all must give their necks to the sword, if the poor Prelate be heard; and
yet Kings cannot be so mad as to destroy their subjects. Mary of England was
that mad, the Romish Princes who have given, Revel. 17. 13. their power and
strength to the beast, and do make war with the Lamb; and Kings inspired
with the spirit of the beast, and drunk with the wine of the Cup of Babells
fornications, are so mad, and the ten Emperors are so mad, who wasted
their faithfullest subjects.

P. Prelate. If there be such a power in the Peers, resumable in the exigent
of necessity, as the last necessary remedy for safety of Church and State, God
and nature not being deficient in things necessary, it must be proved out of
the Scripture, and not taken on trust, for Affirmanti incumbit probatio.

Ans. Mr. Bishop, what better is your Affirmanti incumbit, etc, then mine? for
you are the affirmer. I can prove a power in the King, limited only to feed,
govern, and save the people; and you affirm that God has given to the King,
not only a power official and Royal to save, but also to destroy and cut off,
so as no man may say, Why do thou this? Shall we take this upon the word of
an excommunicated Prelate? Profer tabulas, John P. P. I believe you not, Royal
power is Deuteronomy. 17. 18. Romans 3. 14. I am sure there is there a power given to
the King to do good, and that from God: Let John P. P. prove a power to do
ill, given of God to the King.

2. We shall quickly prove that the States may repress this power, and punish
the Tyrant, not the King: when he shall prove that a Tyrannous power is an
Ordinance of God, and so may not be resisted. For the law of Nature teaches,
If I give my sword to my fellow to defend me from the murderer, if he shall
fall to, and murder me with my own sword, I may (if I have strength) take my
sword from him.

Prelate. It is infidelity, to think that God cannot help us; and
impatience, that we will not wait on God. When a King oppresses us, it is
against Gods wisdom, that he has not provided another mean for our safety,
than intrusion on Gods right. 2. It is against Gods power, 3. his Holiness, 4.
Christian Religion, that we necessitate God to so weak a mean, to make use of
sin: and we cast the aspersion of Treason on Religion, and deter Kings to
profess Reformed Catholic Religion. 5. We are not to justle God out of his
right.

Ans. I see nothing but what D. Fern, Grotius, Barclay, Blackwood have said
before, with some color of proving the consequence. The P. Prelate gives us
other men's arguments, but without bones, All were good, if the States coercing
and curbing a power which God never gave to the King, were a sin, and an act
of impatience, and unbelief: And, if it were proper to God only, by his
immediate hand, to coerce Tyranny.

2. He calls it not Protestant Religion, either here, or elsewhere; but
cautelously gives a name that will agree to the Roman Catholic Religion: For
the Dominicans, Franciscans, and the Parisian Doctors and Schoolmen, following
Occham, Gerson, Almain, and other Papists, call themselves Reformed
Catholics. 2. He lays this for a ground, in 3 or 4 pages, where these same
Arguments are again and again repeated in terminis, as his second Reason, p.
149. was handled ad nauseam, p. 148. his 3. Reason is repeated in his 6.
Reason, p. 151. He lays (I say) down this ground, which is the begged
Conclusion, and makes the Conclusion the Assumption, in 8 raw and often
repeated Arguments: to wit, That the Parliaments coercing and restraining of
Arbitrarie power, is rebellion, and resisting the Ordinance of God. But he dare
not look the place Romans 13. on the face: other Royalists have done it with bad
success. This I desire to be weighed, ^^d I retort the Prelates argument* But
it is indeed the trivial Argument of all Royalists, especially of Barclay,
obvious in his 3. Book. If Arbitrarie and Tyrannical power above any Law that
the lawful Magistrate commands under the pain of death, ( Thou shall not
murder one man) (Thou shall not take away the vineyard of one Naboth
violently) be lawful and warrantable by Gods word; then an Arbitrarie power
above all Divine laws, is given to the keeping of the Civil Magistrate. And
it is no less lawful Arbitrarie, or rather Tyrannical power, for David to
kill all his Subjects, and to plunder all Jerusalem, (as I believe, Prelates,
and Malignants, and Papists would serve the three Kingdoms, if the King should
command them) then to kill one Vriah, or for Achab to spoil one Naboth. The
essence of sin must agree alike to all, though the degrees vary.

Of Gods remedy against Arbitrary power, hereafter, in the Question of
Resistance: but the confused ingine of the Prelate brings it in here, where
there is no place for it.

His 7. Argument is: Before God would authorize Rebellion, and give a bad
president thereof for ever, he would rather work extraordinary and wonderful
miracles, and therefore would not authorize the people to deliver themselves
from under Pharaoh, but made Moses ^ Prince, to bring them out of Egypt with a
stretched-out arm: nor did the Lord deliver his people by the wisdom o^
Moses, or strength of the people, or any act that way of theirs, but by his own
immediate hand and power.

Ans. I reduce the Prelates confused words to a few: for I speak not of his
Popish term of Saint Steven, and others the like* because all that he has
said in a book of 149 pages, might have been said in three sheets of paper.
But, I pray you, what is this Argument to the Question in hand, which is,
Whether the King be so above all Laws, as People and Peers, in the case of
Arbitrarie power, may resume their power, and punish a Tyrant? The P. Prelate
draws in the Question of Resistance by the hair. Isreal's not rising in arms
against K. Pharaoh, proves nothing against the power of a Free Kingdom
against a Tyrant.

1. Moses, who wrought miracles destructive to Pharaoh, might pray a vengeance
against Pharaoh, God having revealed to Moses, that Pharaoh was a Reprobate*
But may Ministers and Nobles pray so against King Charles? God forbid.

2. Pharaoh had not his Crown from Israel.

3. Pharaoh had not sworn to defend Israel, nor became he their King upon
condition he should maintain and profess the Religion of the God of Israel:
Therefore Israel could not, as free Estates, challenge him in their supreme
Court of Parliament, of breach of oath* and upon no terms could they un-king
Pharaoh; He held not his Crown of them.

4. Pharaoh was never circumcised, nor within the Covenant of the God of
Isrdel, in profession.

5. Israel had their lands by the mere gift of the King. I hope the King of
Britain stands to Scotland and England in a fourefold contrary relation.

All Divines know, that Pharaoh his Princes, and the Egyptians, were his Peers
and People, and that Israel were not his native Subjects, but a number of
strangers, who by the laws of the King and Princes, by the means of Joseph,
had gotten the land of Goshen for their dwelling, and liberty to serve the God
of Abraham, to whom they prayed in their bondage, Exodus 2. 23, 24. and they
were not to serve the Gods of Egypt, nor were of the Kings Religion: And
therefore his Argument is thus: A number of poor exiled strangers under King
Pharaoh, who were not Pharaohs Princes and Peers, could not restrain the
Tyranny of King Pharaoh: Ergo, the three Estates in a free Kingdom may not
restrain the Arbitrarie power of a King.

2. The Prelate must prove that God gave a Royal and Kingly power to King
Pharaoh, due to him by virtue of his Kingly calling, (according as Royalists
expone 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11.) to kill all the male children of Israel, to make
slaves of themselves, and compel them to work in brick and clay, while their
lives were a burden to them: And that if a Romish Catholic, Mary of England,
should kill all the male Children of Protestants, by the hands of Papists, at
the Queens commandment, and make bondslaves of all the Peers, Judges, and
three Estates, who made her a free Princess: yet notwithstanding that Mary had
sworn to maintain the Protestant Religion; they were to suffer, and not to
defend themselves. But if God give Pharaoh a power to kill all Israel, so as
they could not control it; then God gives to a King a Royal power by office
to sin: only the Royalist saves God from being the author of sin, in this,
that God gave the power to sin, but yet with this limitation, that the
Subjects should not resist this power. 2. He must prove that Israel was to give
their Male-children to Pharaohs Butchers, for to hide them, was to resist a
Royal power, and to disobey a Royal power given of God, is to disobey God. 3.
The Subjects may not resist the Kings Butchers coming to kill them, and their
Male-children, For to resist the servant of the King in that, wherein he is a
servant, is to resist the King, 1 Samuel 8. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Romans 13. 1. 4. He
must prove that upon the supposition, That Israel had been as strong as Pharaoh
and his people; that without Gods special commandment (they then wanting the
written Word) they should have sought with Pharaoh; and that we now for all
wars, must have a word from Heaven, as if we had not Gods perfect* Will in his
Word, as at that time Israel behoved to have in all wars, Judge. 18. 5. 1 Samuel
14. 37. Esa. 30. 2. Iere. 38. 37. 1 King. 22. 5. 1 Samuel 30. 5. Judge. 20. 27. 1 Samuel 23. 2. 2 Samuel 16. 23. 1 Chronicles. 10. 14. But because God gave not them an
answer to fight against Pharaoh, therefore we have no warrant now to fight
against a foreign Nation, invading us; the consequence is null, and therefore
this is a vain Argument, The Prophets never reprove the people for not
performing the duty of defensive wars against Tyrannous Kings. Ergo* There is
no such duty enjoined by any Law of God to us; For the Prophets never rebuke
the people for non-performing the duty of offensive wars against their
enemies; but where God gave a special command, and responce, from his own
Oracle, that they should fight: And if God was pleased never to command the
people to rise against a Tyrannous King, they did not sin where they had no
commandment of God: but I hope we have now a more sure word of prophecy to
inform us. 5. The Prelate conjectureth Moses his miraeles, and the deliverance
of the people, by dividing the Red Sea, was to forbid, and condemn, defensive
wars of people against their King; but he has neither Scripture, nor Reasons
to do it. The end of these miracles, was to Seal to Pharaoh the Truth of Gods
calling of Moses and Aaron, to deliver the people, as is clear, Exodus 4. 1, 2,
3, 4. compared with Chap. 7. verse. 8, 9, 10. And that the Lord might get to
himself a name on all the earth, Romans 9* 17. Exodus 9. 16. and 13. 13, 14. and
15. 1, 2, 3. and seq. But of the Prelates conjecturall end, the Scripture is
silent, and we cannot take an excommunicated man's word. What I said of Pharaoh,
who had no^ ^is Crown from Israel, that I say of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Kings
of Persia, keeping the people of God captive.

P. Prelate. So in the Book of the Judges, when the people were delivered Sac.
sanct. maj. page 153.
over to the hand of their enemies, because of their sins; he never warranted
the ordinary Judges, or Community, to be their own Gods delivering his people
by Judges, and by Cyrus nothing against the power of a free people.
deliverers, but when they repented, God raised up a Judge. The people had no
hand in their own deliverance out of Babylon, God effected it by Cyrus,
immediately and totally. Is not this a real proof, God will not have inferior
Judges, to rectify what is amiss; but we must wait in patience till God
provide lawful means, some Sovereign power immediately sent by himself, in
which course of his ordinary providence, he will not be deficient.

Answ. All this is beside the question, and proves nothing less, then that
Peers and Community, may not resume their power to curb an Arbitrary power:
For in the first case, there is neither Arbitrary, nor lawful supreme Judge.
2. If the first prove any thing, it proves, That it was rebellion in the
inferior Judges, and Community of Israel, to fight against foreign Kings,
not set over them by God; and that offensive wars against any Kings whatsoever,
because they are Kings, though strangers, are unlawful. Let Socinians and
Anabaptists consider, if the P. Prelate help not them in this, and may prove
all wars to be unlawful. 3. He is so Malignant to all inferior Judges, as if
they were not powers sent of God, and to all Governors, that are not Kings,
and so upholders of Prelates, and of himself as he conceives, that by his
arguing, he will have all deliverance by Kings only, the only lawful means
in ordinary providen^^: and so Aristocracy and Democracy except in Gods
extraordinary providence, and by some divine dispensation must be
extraordinary, and ordinarily unlawful: 2. The Acts of a State, when a King is
dead, and they choose another, shall be an Anticipating of Gods providence. 3.
If the King be a child, a captive, or distracted, and the Kingdom oppressed
with Malignants, they are to wait, while God immediately from Heaven, create a
King to them, as he did Saul long ago. But have we now Kings immediately sent
as Saul was? 1. How is the spirit of Prophecy and Government infused in them,
as in King Saul? Or are they by prophetical inspiration, anointed as David
was: I conceive their calling to the throne on Gods part, do differ as much
from the calling of Saul and David, in some respect, as the calling of ordinary
Pastors, who must be gifted by industry and learning, and called by the Church,
and the calling of Apostles. 4. God would deliver his people from Babylon, by
moving the heart of Cyrus immediately, the people having no hand in it, not so
much as supplicating Cyrus. Ergo, The People and Peers who made the King,
cannot curb his Tyrannical power, if he make captives and slaves of them, as
the Kings of Chaldea made slaves of the people of Israel. What? Because God
uses another mean. Ergo, This mean is not lawful. It follows in no sort; If
we must use no means, but what the captive people did under Cyrus* we may not
lawfully fly, nor supplicate, for the people did neither.

P. Prelate. You read of no Covenant in Scripture made without the King, Exodus
34. Moses King of Iesurum: neither Tables nor Parliament framed it. Joshua
another, Josh. 24. and Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. and 2 Chronicles. 34. and Ezra 10. The
Covenant of Iehojada in the nonage of Ioash, was the High Priests Act, as the
Kings Governor. There is a covenant with Hell, made without the King, and a
false Covenant, Hos. 10. 3, 4.

Answ. We argue this negatively; This is neither commanded, nor practiced, nor
warranted by promise. Ergo, It is not lawful. But this is not practiced in
Scripture: Ergo, It is not lawful. It follows it. Show me in Scripture the
killing of a Goaring On who killed a man; the not making battlements on an
house; the putting to death of a man lying with a Beast; the killing of
seducing Prophets, who tempted the people to go a whoring, and serve another
God, then Jehovah: I mean, a god made by the hand of the Baker, such a one as
the excommunicated Prelate is known to be, who has Preached this Idolatry in
three Kingdoms, yet Deuteronomy. 13. This is written, and all the former Laws are
divine Precepts; shall the Precept make them all unlawful, because they are
not practiced by some in Scripture? By this? I ask, Where read ye, that the
people entered in a Covenant with God, not to worship the Golden Image, and the
King; and these who pretend they are the Priests of Jehovah, the Churchmen and
Pelates refused to enter in Covenant with God? By this argument, the King and
Prelates in non-practising with us, wanting the precedent of a like practice in
Scripture, are in the fault. 2. This is nothing to prove the conclusion in
question. 3. All these places prove it is the Kings duty, when the people
under him, and their fathers, have corrupted the worship of God, to renew a
Covenant with God, and to cause the people to do the like, as Moses, Asa,
Iehoshaphat did. 4. If That the people may swear a Covenant for Reformation, of
Religion, without the King, is pro^ed.
the King refuse to do his duty, where is it written, That the people ought
also to omit their duty, and to love to have it so, because the Rulers corrupt
their ways, Ierem. 5. 31? To renew a Covenant with God, is a point of service
due to God, that the people are obliged unto; whether the King command it, or
no. What if the King command not his people to serve God; or, What if he forbid
Daniel to pray to God? Shall the people in that case serve the King of Kings,
only at the nod, and Royal command of an earthly King? Clear this from
Scripture. 5. Ezra 5. had no commandment in particular from Artaxerxes King of
Persia, or from Darius, but a General, that Ezr. 7. 23. Whatsoever is
commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done far the house of the
God of Heaven: But, the Tables in Scotland, and the two Parliaments of England
and Scotland, who renewed the Covenant, and entered in Covenant not against the
King (as the P. P. says) but to restore Religion to its ancient Purity, have
this express Law from King James and King Charles both, in many Acts of
Parliament, that Religion be kept pure. Now as Artaxerxes knew nothing of the
Covenant, and was unwilling to subscribe it, and yet gave to Ezra and the
Princes a warrant in general, to do all that the God of Heaven required to be
done, for the Religion, and house of the God of Heaven, and so a general
warrant, for a Covenant without the King; and yet Ezra, and the people, in
swearing that Covenant, failed in no duty against their King: to whom, by the
fifth Commandment, they were no less subject then we are to our King, just so
we are, and so have not failed; but they say, The King has committed to no
Lieutenant and Deputy under him, to do what they please in Religion, without
his Royal consent in particular, and the direction of his Clergy, seeing he is
of that same Religion with his people; whereas Artaxerxes was of another
Religion, then were the Jews, and their Governor. Answ. Nor can our King take
on himself, to do what he pleases, and what the Prelates (amongst whom these
who ruled all, are known before the World and the Sun, to be of another
Religion, then we are) pleases in particular. But see what Religion and
Worship the Lord our God, and the Law of the Land (which is the Kings revealed
will) allows to us, that we may swear, though the King should not swear it;
otherwise, we are to be of no Religion, but of the Kings, and to swear no
Covenant, but the Kings, which is to join with Papists against Protestants. 6.
The strangers of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon fell out of Israel in
abundance to Asa, when they saw that the Lord his God was with him, 2 Chronicles.
15. 9, 10. And swear that Covenant without their own Kings consent, their own
King being against it; If a people may swear a Religious Covenant, without
their King, who is averse thereunto, far more may the Nobles, Peers, and
Estates of Parliament do it without their King: And here is an example of a
practice, which the P. Prelate requires. 7. That Jehojadah was Governor and
Viceroy, during the nonage of Joash, and that by this Royal Authority, the
Covenant was sworn, is a dream, to the end he may make the Pope, and the
Arch-Prelate, now Vice-Royes and Kings, when the throne varieth. The Nobles
were Authors of the making of that Covenant, no less then Iehojadah was; yea,
and the People of the Land, when the King was but a child, went unto the house
of Baal, and brake down his Images, etc. Here is a Reformation made without the
King by the people. 8. Grave Expositors say, That the Covenant with death and
hell, Esaias 28. was the Kings Covenant with Egypt. 9. And the Covenant, Hos. 10.
is by none exponed of a Covenant made without the King. I heard say, this
Prelate Preaching on this Text before the King, exponed it so, But he spoke
words (as the Text is) falsely. The P. Prelate, to the end of the Chapter,
gives instance of the illsuccesse of Popular Reformation, because the people
caused Aaron to make a Golden Calf, and they revolted from Rehoboam to
Jeroboam, and made two Golden Calves, and they conspired with Absalom against
David. Answ. If the first example make good any thing, neither the High Priest,
as was Aaron, nor the P. Prelate, who claims to be descended of Aarons house,
should have any hand in Reformation at all, for Aaron erred in that; and to
argue from the peoples sins, to deny their power, is no better then to prove
Achab, Jeroboam, and many Kings in Israel and Judah, committed Idolatry. Ergo,
They had no Royal power at all. In the rest of the Chapter, for a whole Page,
he sings over again his Mattens in a circle, and gives us the same Arguments
we heard before; of which you have these three notes. 1. They are stolen, and
not his own. 2. Repeated again and again to fill the field. 3. All hang on a
false supposition, and a begging of the question: That the people without the
King, have no power at all.

QUEST. XXVII. Whether or no the King be the sole supreme and final
interpreter of the Law?
THis Question conduces not a little to the clearing of the doubts concerning
the Kings absolute power, and the supposed sole nomothetick power in the King.
And I think it not unlike to the question, whether the Pope and Romish Church
have a sole and peremptory power of exponing Laws, and the Word of God? We are
to consider that there is a twofold exposition of Laws, one speculative in a
School way, so exquisite Iurists have a power to expone A twofold exposition
of Laws.
Laws. 2. Practical, in so far as the sense of the Law falls under our
Practice, and this is twofold; either private and common to all, or judicial
and proper to Judges, and of this last is the question.

For this Public, the Law has one fundamental rule, Salus populi, like the
King of Planets the Sun, which lends Starlight to all Laws, and by which
they are exponed; whatever interpretation swarveth either from fundamental
Laws of policy, or from the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations, and
especially from the A Rule to expone Laws.
safety of the public, is to be rejected as a perverting of the Law: and
therefore, Conscientia humani generis, the natural conscience of all men, to
which the oppressed people may appeal unto, when the King exponeth a Law
unjustly, at his own pleasure, is the last rule on earth, for exponing of
Laws. Nor ought Laws to be made so obscure, as an ordinary wit cannot see
their connection with fundamental truths of policy, and the safety of the
people, and therefore I see no inconvenience, to say that, The Law it self is
Norma and regula judicandi, the Rule and directory to square the Judge, and
that the Judge is the public practical interpreter of the Law.

Assert. 1. The King is not the sole and final interpreter of the Law. The
King not the sole interpreter of the Law.


1. Because then inferior Judges should not be interpreters of the Law, but
inferior Judges are no less essentially Judges, then the King. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. L Pet. 2. 14. Romans 13. 1, 2. and so by Office must interpret the
Law, else they cannot give sentence according to their conscience and equity,
now exponing of the Law judicially is an act of judging, and so a personal and
incommunicable act, so as I can no more judge and expone the Law according to
another man's conscience, then I can believe with another man's soul, or
understand with another man's understanding, The Kings conscience no rule of
judging to the inferior Judge.
see with another man's eye: The Kings pleasure therefore cannot be the rule of
the inferior Judges conscience, for he gives an immediate account to God the
Judge of all, of a just or an unjust sentence. Suppo^e Caesar shall expone the
Law to Pilate, that Christ deserves to dye the death, yet Pilate is not in
conscience to expone the Law so. If therefore inferior Judges judge for the
King, they judge only by power borrowed from the King, not by the pleasure,
will, or command of the King thus and thus exponing the Law, ergo the King
cannot be the sole interpreter of the Law.

2. If the Lord say not to the King only, but also to other inferior Judges,
Be wise, understand, and the cause that you know not, search out; then the King
is not the only interpreter of the Law. But the Lord says not to the King
only, but to other Judges also, Be wise, understand, and the cause that you
know not search out, ergo the King is not the sole Lawgiver. The Major is
clear from Ps. 2. 10. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth. So are commands and rebukes for unjust judgment given to
others then to Kings, Ps. 82. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ps. 58. 1, 2. Esaias 1. 17, 23 25,
26. Esaias 3. 14. see Job. 29. 12, 13, 14, 15. c. 31. v. 21. 22.

3, The King is either the sole interpreter of Law, in respect, he is to follow
the Law as his Rule, and so he is a ministerial interpreter of the Law, or he
is an interpreter of the Law according to that super-dominion of absolute
power, that he has above the Law. If the former be holden, then it is clear
that the King is not the only interpreter, for all Judges, as they are Judges,
have a ministerial power to expone the Law by the Law: but the second is the
sense of Royalists.

Hence our second Assertion is, That the Kings power of exponing The King not
the authentic peremtory and Lordly interpreter of the Law.
the Law, is a mere ministerial power, and he has no dominion of any
absolute Royal Power, to expone the Law as he will, and to put such a sense
and meaning of the Law as he pleases.

1. Because Saul makes a Law, 1 Samuel 14. 24. Cursed be the man that tastes
any food till night, that the King may be avenged on his enemies, the Law
according to the letter was bloody, but according Argum. 1.
to the intent of the Lawgiver, and substance of the Law profitable, for the
end was that the enemies should be persued with all speed. But King Saul's
exponing the Law after a Tyrannical way, against the intent of the Law, which
is the Diamond and Pearl of all Laws, the safety of the innocent people, was
justly resisted by the people, who violently hindered innocent Jonathan to be
killed. Whence it is clear, that the people and Princes put on the Law its
true sense and meaning, for Ionathans tasting of a little honey, though as it
was against that sinful and precipitate circumstance a rash oath, yet it was
not against the substance and true intent of the Law, which was the peoples
speedy pursuit of the enemy. Whence it is clear, that the people including
the Princes, has a ministerial power to expone the Law aright, and according
to its genuine intent, and that the King as King has no absolute power to
expone the Law as he pleases.

2. The Kings absolute pleasure can no more be the genuine sense ^rgu^. 2. The
Will of the King is not the sense of the Law.
of a just Law, then his absolute pleasure can be a Law, because the genuine
sense of the Law is the Law it self, as the formal essence of a thing
differs not really, but in respect of reason from the thing it self. The
Pope and Romish Church cannot put on the Scripture, Ex plenitudine potestatis,
what ever meaning they will, no more then they can, out of absolute power, make
Canonicke Scripture. Now so it is, that the King by his absolute power cannot
make Law no Law.

1. Because he is King by, or according to Law, but he is not The King is King
according to the Law, but not King of the Law.
King of Law. Rex est Rex secundum legem, sed non est Dominus and Rex legis.

2. Because although it have a good meaning, which Vlpian says, Quod principi
placet legis vigorem habet. The Will of the Prince is the Law, yet the meaning
is not that any thing is a just Law, because it is the Princes Will, for its
rule formally: for it must be good and just before the Prince can will it, and
then he finding it so, he puteth the stamp of a humane Law on it.

3. This is the difference between Gods Will, and the will of the Argum. 3.
King, or any mortal creature. Things are just and good, because God wills
them, especially things positively good (though I conceive it hold in all
things) and God does not will things, because they are good and just, But the
creature, be he King, or any never so eminent, do will things, because they
are good and just, and the Kings willing of a thing, makes it not good and
just: for only Gods will, not the Creatures will, can be the cause why things
are good and just. If therefore it be so, it must undeniably hence follow, that
the Kings will makes not a just Law to have an unjust and bloody sense: and he
cannot, as King, by any absolute superdominion over the Law, put a just sense
on a bloody and unjust Law.

4. The advancing of any man to the Throne and Royal dignity, puts not the
man above the number of rational men: But no rational man can create, by any
act of power, never so transcendent or boundless, a sense to a Law, contrary
to the Law. Nay, give me leave to doubt if Omnipotency can make a just Law to
have an unjust and bloody sense, aut contra: because it involveth a
contradiction; the true meaning of a Law, being the essential form of the
Law. Hence judge what brutish, swinish flatterers they are, who say, That it
is the true meaning of the Law, which the King, the only supreme and
independent expositor of the Law, says is the true sense of the Law. There was
once an Animal, a Fool of the first magnitude, who said, He could demonstrate
by invincible reasons, that the Kings dung was more nourishing food, then bread
of the floor of the finest wheat. For my part, I could wish it were the
Demonstrators only food for seven days; and that should be the best
demonstration he could make for his proof.

5. It must follow, that there can be no necessity of written laws Arg. 5.
There can be no written Law, if the King only be the authentic expositor of
the Law.
to the Subjects; against Scripture, and natural reason, and the law of
Nations, in which all accord, That Laws not promulgated and published, cannot
oblige as Laws: Yea, Adam, in his innocence, was not obliged to obey a Law
not written in his heart by Nature, except God had made known the Law; as is
clear, Genesis 3. 11. Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that
thou should not eat? But if the Kings absolute Will may put on the Law what
sense he pleases, out of his independent and irresistible Supremacy; The
Laws promulgated and written to the Subjects, can declare nothing, what is to
be done by the Subjects, as just, and what is to be avoided as unjust: because
the Laws must signify to the Subjects, what is just, and unjust, according to
their genuine sense. Now, their genuine sense, according to Royalists, is not
only uncertain and impossible to be known, but also contradictorious: for the
King obliges us without gainsaying, to believe that the just Law has this
unjust sense. Hence this of flattering Royalists, crueller to Kings, than
Ravens, (for these eat but dead men, and they devour living men) when there is
a controversy between the King and the Estates of Parliament, who shall expone
the Law, and render its native meaning? (say Royalists) not the Estates of
Parliament, for they are Subjects, not Judges to the King, and only Counselors
and advisers of the King. The King therefore must be the only judicial and
final expositor. As for Lawyers (said Strafford) the Law is not enclosed in a
Lawyers Cap. But I remember this was one of the Articles laid to the chargeb of
Richard the Second, that he said, The Law was in his Imperator so leges in
scrinio condere dicit. l. omnium, C. de testam.
head and breast. And indeed it must follow, if the King, by the plenitude of
absolute power, be the only supreme, uncontrollable Expositor of the Law, that
is not Law which is written in the Acts of Parliament, but that is the Law
which is in the Kings breast and head: which Josephus, lib. 19. Antiq. c. 2.
objected to Caius. And all justice, and injustice should be finally and
peremptorily resolved on the Kings will and absolute pleasure.

6. The King either is to expone the Law by the Law it self; or, Arg. 6.
by his Absolute power loosed from all Law, he exponeth it; or according to the advice of his Great Senate. If the first be said, he is nothing more then other
Judges. If the second be said, he must be omnipotent, and more. If the third be
said, he is not absolute, if the Senate be only Advisers, and he yet the only
Judicial expositor. The King often professes his ignorance of the Laws; and
he must then both be absolute above the Law, and ignorant of the Law, and 2.
the sole and final Judicial exponer of the Law: And by this, all Parliaments,
and their power of making Laws, and of judging, is cried down.

They object, Prove. 16. 10. A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, His
mouth transgresses not in judgment, ergo, he only can expone the Law.

Ans. 1. Lavater says, (and I see no reason on the contrary) by a King, he
means all Magistrates. 2. Aben Ezra, and Isidorus read the words
imperatively. The Tigurine version: They are Oracles which proceed from his
lips: let not therefore his mouth transgress in judgment. Vatabulus: When he
is in his prophecies, he lies not. Iansenius: Non facile errabit in judicando.
Mich. Iermine: If he pray. Calvine: If he read in the book of the Law, as God
commands him, Deuteronomy. 17. But why stand we on the place? He speaks of good
Kings, says Cornel. a Lapide. Otherwise, ^eroboam, Achab, Manasseh, erred in
judgment. And except, (as Mercerus exponeth it) We understand him to speak of
Kings according to their office, not their facts and practice, we make them
Popes, and men who cannot give out grievous and unjust sentences on the Throne:
against both the Word, and experience.

Object. 2. Sometimes all is cast upon one man's voice, why may not the King be
this one man?

Answ. The Antecedent is false, the last Voter in a Senate, is not the sole
Judge, else why should others give suffrages with him. 2. This were to take
away inferior Judges, contrary to Gods Word, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7.
Romans 13. 1, 2, 3.

QUEST. XXVIII. Whether or no, Wars raised by the Subjects and Estates, for
their own just defense against the Kings bloody Emissaries, be lawful?
ARnisaeus perverteth the question; he says, The question is, Arnisaeus de
authori. Princ. c. 1. n. 2. The state of the question concerning resistance.
Whether or no, the Subjects may according to their power, judge the King, and
dethrone him; that is, Whether or no, is it lawful for the Subjects in any
case, to take arms against their lawful Prince, if he degenerate, and shall
wickedly use his lawful power?

The state of the question is much perverted, for these be different questions,
Whether the Kingdom may dethrone a wicked and Tyrannous Prince? And whether may
the Kingdom take up arms against the man who is the King, in their own innocent
defense: For the former is an Act offensive, and of punishing, the latter is an
Act of Defense.

2. The present question is not of Subjects only, but of the Estates, and
Parliamentary Lords of a Kingdom; I utterly deny these as they are Judges, to
be subjects to the King; for the question is, Whether is the King, or the
representative Kingdom greatest, and which of them be subject one to another: I
affirm, Amongst Judges as Judges, not one is the Commander or Superior, and
the other, the commanded or subject. Indeed, one higher Judge may correct and
punish a Judge, not as a Judge, but as an erring man.

3. The question is not so much concerning the authoritative Act of War, as
concerning the power of natural Defense, upon supposition, That the King be
not now turned an habitual Tyrant, but that upon some acts of misinformation,
he come in arms against his Subjects.

2. Arnisaeus makes two sort of Kings, Some Kings integrae Arnisae. 16. n. 4.
Majestatis, of entire power and Sovereignty; some Kings by pactions or
voluntary agreement, between King and people. But I judge this a vain
distinction: For the limited Prince, so he be limited to a power only of doing
just and right; by this is not a Prince integrae Majestatis of entire Royal
Majesty, whereby he may do both good, and also play the Tyrant; but a power to
do ill, being no ways essential, yea, repugnant to the absolute Majesty of
the King of Kings, cannot be an essential part of the Majesty of a lawful
King; and therefore the Prince limited by voluntary and positive paction only,
to rule according to law and equity, is the good, lawful, and entire Prince,
if he have not power to do every thing just and good in that regard, only he
is not an entire and complete Prince. So the man will have it lawful to resist
the limited Prince, not the absolute Prince; by the contrary, it is more
lawful to me to resist the absolute Prince, then the limited, in as much, as
we may with safer consciences resist the Tyrant, and the Lion, then the just
Prince and the Lamb. Nor can I assent to Cunnerus de officio princip. Christia.
c. 5. and 17. Who holds, that these voluntary pactions betwixt King and
people, in which the power of the Prince is diminished, cannot stand, because
their power is given to them by Gods Word, which cannot be taken from them, by
any voluntary paction, lawfully; and from the same ground, Winzetus in velit.
contr. Buchan. p. 32. will have it unlawful to resist Kings, because God has
made them unresistable. I answer, If God by a divine institution If Kings be
absolute by divine Institution, then all Covenants restraining them, must be
unlawful spoiling of Kings, of that which God has given them.
make Kings absolute, and above all Laws (which is a blasphemous supposition,
the holy Lord can give to no man a power to sin, for God has not himself any
such power) then the Covenant betwixt the King and people, cannot lawfully
remove and take away what God by institution has given; but because God, Deuteronomy.
17. has limited the first lawful King, the mould of all the rest, the people
ought also to limit him by a voluntary Covenant; and because the lawful power
of a King to do good, is not by divine Institution placed in an indivisible
point. It is not a sin for the people to take some power, even of doing good
from the King, that he solely, and by himself, shall not have power to pardon
an involuntary homicide, without advice, and the judicial suffrages of the
Council of the Kingdom, least he, instead of this, give pardons to Robbers, to
abominable Murderers, and in so doing, the people robs not the King of the
power that God gave him as King, nor ought the King to contend for a sole power
in himself, of ministering justice to all; for God lays not upon Kings,
burdens unpossible, and God by Institution, has denied to the King, all power
of doing all good, because it is his Will that other Judges be sharers with the
King in that power, Number. 14. 16 Deuteronomy. 1. 14. 15, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Romans 13.
1, 2, 3, 4. And therefore the Duke of Venice to me comes nearest to the King,
molded by God, Deuteronomy. 17. in respect of power, de jure, of any King I know in
Europe. And in point of conscience, the inferior Judge discerning a murderer,
and bloody man to die, may in foro conscientiae, despise the Kings unjust
pardon, and resist the Kings force by his sword and coactive power that God
has given him, and put to death the bloody murderer, and he sins, if he do
not this; for to me it is clear, The King cannot judge so justly and
understandingly of a murderer in Scotland, as a Judge, to whom God has
committed the sword in Scotland: Nor has the Lord laid that unpossible burden
on a King to judge so of a murder four hundredth miles, removed from the King,
as the Judge nearer to him, as is clear by Number. 14 16. 1 Samuel 7. 15, 16, 17.
The King should go from place to place, and judge; and whereas it is unpossible
to him, to go through three Kingdoms, he should appoint faithful Judges, who
may not be resisted, no not by the King.

2. The question is, If the King command A. B. to kill his father, his pastor;
the man neither being cited nor convicted of any fault, may lawfully be
resisted.

3. Queritur, If in that case in which the King is captived, imprisoned, and
not sui juris, and awed or overawed by bloody Papists, and so is forced to
command a barbarous and unjust War; and if being distracted Physically or
Morally through wicked Counsel, he command that which no father in his sober
wits would command, even against Law and Conscience, That the sons should yield
obedience and subjection to him, in maintaining with lives and goods, a bloody
Religion, and bloody Papists: If in that case, the King may not be resisted in
his person, because the power lawful and the sinful person cannot be
separated? We hold the King using, contrary to the oath of God, and his Royal
Office, violence in killing against Law and Conscience his Subjects, by bloody
Emissaries, may be resisted by defensive Wars, at the commandment of the
Estates of the Kingdom.

But before I produce Arguments, to prove the lawfulness of resistance,
Resistance in some cases lawful, according to D. Fern.
a little of the case of resistance. 1. Doct. Fern, part. 3. sect. 5. page 39.
grants resistance by force to the King to be lawful. 1. When the assault is
sudden. 2. Without color of a Law, and Reason. 3. Inevitable. But if Nero burn
Rome, he has a color of Law and Reason; yea, if all Rome, and his mother, in
whose Womb he lay, were one neck. A man who will with reason go mad, has
color of Reason, and so of Law, to invade and kill the innocent.

2. Arnisaeus says, If the Magistrate proceed extra-judicialiter, De author.
Princ. c. 2. n. 10.
without order of Law by violence, the Laws gives every private man power to
resist, if the danger be irrecoverable; yea, though it be recoverable. L.
prohibitum, C. de jur. fisc. l. quemadmodum. 39.. Royalists hold it lawful to
resist an inferior Judge.
Magistratus ad l. Aquil. l. nec Magistratibus, 32. de injur. Because while the
Magistrate does against his office, he is not a Magistrate, for Law and right,
not injury, should come from the Magistrate. L. meminerint. 6. C. unde vi. Yea,
if the Magistrate proceed judicially, and the loss be irrecoverable. Jurists
say, That a private man has the same Law to resist, Marantius* dis. 1. n. 35.
And in a recoverable loss, they say, every man is holden to resist, si
evidenter constet de iniquitate; If the iniquity be known to all, D. D. Jason.
n. 19. dec. n. 26. ad l. ut vim de just. and jur.

3. I would think it not fit, easily to resist the Kings unjust Exactors The
Exactors of unjust tribute, not easily to be resisted.
of custom or tribute; 1. Because Christ paid tribute to Tiberius Caesar, an
unjust usurper, though he was free from that, by Gods Law, least he should
offend. 2. Because we have a greater dominion over Goods, then over our Lives
and Bodies; and it is better to yield in a matter of Goods, then to come to
Arms; for of sinlesse evils, we may choose the least.

4. A Tyrant without a Title may be resisted by any private man. Quia licet vim
vi repellere; Because we may repel violence by violence, yea, he may be
killed. V^ l. and vim. F. de iustit. and jure, ubi plene per omnes. Vasquez, l.
1. c. S. n. 33. Barcla. contra. Monaroho. l. 4. c. 10. page 268.

For the lawfulness of resistance in the matter of the Kings unjust Arguments
for the lawfulness of resisting unjust violence.
invasion of life and Religion, we offer these Arguments.

1. That power which is obliged to command and rule justly and religiously, for
the good of the subjects, and is only set over the Argum. 1.
people on these conditions, and not absolutely, cannot tie the people to
subjection without resistance, when the power is abused to the destruction of
Laws, Religion, and the subjects. But all power of the Law is thus obliged,
Romans 13. 4. Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 18, 19, 20. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Ps. 132. 11, 12. Ps.
89. 30, 31. 2 Samuel 7. 12. Ier. 17. 24, 25. and has, and may be abused by
Kings, to the destruction of Laws, Religion, and Subjects.

The Proposition is clear, for the powers that tie us to subjection, only are
of God. 2. Because to resist them, is to resist the ordinance of God. 3.
Because they are not a terror to good works, but to evil. 4. Because they
are Gods Ministers for our good, but abused powers are not of God, but of men,
or not ordinances of God: they are a terror to good works, not to evil; they
are not Gods Ministers for our good.

2. That power which is contrary to Law, and is evil and Tyrannical, Argum. 2.
can tie none to subjection, but is a mere Tyrannical power and unlawful;
and if it tie not to subjection, it may lawfully be resisted. But the power of
the King abused to the destruction of Laws, Religion, and subjects, is a power
contrary to Law, evil and Tyrannical, and tyeth no man to subjection;
wickedness by no imaginable reason can oblige any man. Obligation to suffer of
wicked men, falls under no Commandment of God, except in our Savior. A
Passion, as such, is not formally commanded, I mean a Physical Passion, such
as to be killed. God has not said to me in any Moral Law, Be thou killed
tortured, beheaded; but only, be thou patient, if God deliver thee to wicked
men's hands, to suffer these things.

3. There is not a stricter Obligation Moral betwixt King and Argum. 3.
people, then betwixt Parents and Children, Master and servant, Patron and
Clients, Husband and Wife, the Lord and the Vassell; between the Pilot of a
Ship and the Passengers, the Physician and the sick, the Doctor and the
scholars: but the Law grants l. Minime 35. De Relig. and sumpt. funer. If
these betray their trust committed to them, they may be resisted; if the father
turn distracted, and arise to kill his sons, his sons may violently
apprehend him, and bind his hands, and spoil him of his Weapons: for in that
he is not a father, Vasquez, Lib. 1. Illustr. question. c. 8. n. 18. Si dominus
subditum enormiter and atrociter oneraret, princeps superior vassallum posset
ex t^^o e^imere a sua jurisdictione, and etiam tacente subdito and nihil
petente. Quid papa in suis decis. Parliam. great. decis. 62. si quis Baro.
abutentes dominio privari possunt. The servant may resist the Master, if he
attempt unjustly to kill him; so may the Wife do to the Husband: if the Pilot
should wilfully run the ship on a Rock to destroy himself and his Passengers,
they might violently thrust him from the Helm. Every Tyrant is a furious man,
and is morally distracted, as Althusius says, Politi. c. 28. n. 30. and seq.

4. That which is given as a blessing and a favor, and a Scrine between
Argum. 4.
the peoples liberty and their bondage, cannot be given of God, as a bondage,
and slavery to the people. But the power of a King is given as a blessing, and
favor of God to defend the poor and needy, to preserve both Tables of the
Law, and to keep the people in their liberties from oppressing and treading
one upon another. But so it is, that if such a power be given of God to a King,
by which, Actu primo, he is invested of God, to do acts of Tyranny, and so to
do them, that to resist him in the most innocent way, which is self defense,
must be a resisting of God, and Rebellion against the King, his Deputy, then
has God given a Royal power as incontrollable by mortal men, by any
violence, as if God himself were immediately and personally resisted, when the
King is resisted, and so this power shall be a power to wast and destroy
irresistably, and so in it self a plague and a curse; for it cannot be
ordained both according to the intention and genuine formal effect, and
intrinsecall operation of the power to preserve the Tables of the Law, Religion
and Liberty, Subjects and Laws, and also to destroy the same; but it is taught
by Royalists that this power is for Tyranny, as well as for peaceable
Government, because to resist this Royal Power put forth in Acts either ways,
either in acts of Tyranny, or just Government, is to resist the Ordinance of
God, as Royalists say, from Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. And we know to resist Gods
ordinances and Gods Deputy, formaliter, as his Deputy, is to resist God
himself, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Mat. 10. 40. as if God were doing personally these Acts,
that the King is doing, and it imports as much as the King of Kings does
these Acts in, and through the Tyrant. Now it is blasphemy to think or say,
that when a King is drinking the blood of innocents, and wasting the Church of
God, that God, if he were personally present, would commit these same acts of
Tyranny, ( God would avert such blasphemy) and that God in, and through the
King, as his lawful Deputy, and Vicegerent in these acts of Tyranny, is
wasting the poor Church of God. If it be said in these sinful acts of
Tyranny, he is not Gods formal Vicegerent, but only in good and lawful acts
of Government, yet he is not to be resisted in these acts, not because the acts
are just and good, but because of the dignity of his Royal Person. Yet this
must prove that these who resist the King in these acts of Tyranny, must resist
no ordinance of God, but only that we resist him, who is the Lords Deputy,
though not as the Lords Deputy; what absurd is there in that more then to
disobey him, refusing active obedience to him who is the Lords Deputy, but not
as the Lords Deputy, but as a man commanding, beside his Masters Warrant?

5. That which is inconsistent with the care and providence of Arg. 5.
God in giving a King to his Church, is not to be taught. Now Gods end in
giving a King to his Church, is the feeding, safety, preservation, the
peaceable and quiet life of his Church, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Esa. 49. 23. Psalm. 79. 71.
But God should cross his own end in the same act of giving a King, if he
should provide a King, who, by office, were to suppress Robbers, Murderers,
and all oppressors and wasters in his holy Mount: and yet should give an
irresistible power to one crowned Lion, a King, who may kill a thousand
thousand Protestants for their Religion, in an ordinary Providence, and they
are by an ordinary law of God to give their throats to his Emissaries and
bloody executioners. If any say, The King will not be so cruel: I believe it;
because, actu secundo, it is not possibly in his power to be so cruel.

2. We owe thanks to his good will, that he kills not so many* but no thanks
to the nature and genuine intrinsecall end of a King, who has power from God
to kill all these, and that without resistance made by any mortal man. Yea, no
thanks (God avert blasphemy) to Gods ordinary providence, which (if Royalists
may be believed) puts no bar upon the illimited power of a man inclined to
sin, and abuse his power to so much cruelty. Some may say, the same
absurdity does follow, if the King should turn Papist, and the Parliament all
were Papists; in that case there might be so many Martyrs for the truth put to
death: and God should put no bar of providence upon this power, then, more then
now: and yet in that case, the King and Parliament, should be Judges given of
God, actu primo, and by virtue of their office obliged to preserve the people
in Peace and Godliness. But I answer: If God gave a lawful official power to
King and Parliament to work the same cruelty upon millions of Martyrs, and it
should be unlawful for them by arms to defend themselves; I should then think
that King and Parliament were both ex officio, by virtue of their office, and
actu primo, Judges and Fathers, and also by that same office, Murderers and
Butchers. Which were a grievous aspersion to the unspotted Providence of God.

6. If the Estates of a Kingdom give the power to a King, it is Arg. 6.
their own power in the fountain; and if they give it for their own good, they
have power to judge when it it used against themselves, and for their evil;
and so power to limit and resist the power that they gave. Now that they may
take away this power, is clear in Athaliahs case. It is true, she was a Tyrant
without a Title, and had not the right of Heaven to the Crown; yet she had, in
Men's Court, a title. For supposing all the seed Royal to be killed, and the
peoples Consent; we cannot say, That for these six years, or thereabout, she
was no Magistrate. 2. That there were none on the Throne of David at this time.
3. That she was not to be obeyed as Gods Deputy. But grant that she was no
Magistrate: yet when Iehoash is brought forth to be crowned, it was a
controversy to the States, to whom the Crown should belong. 1. Athaliah was in
possession. 2. Iehoash himself being but seven years old, could not be Judge.
3. It might be doubted, if Ioash was the true son of Ahaziah, and if he was
not killed with the rest of the blood Royal.

Two great Adversaries say with us: Hugo Grotius, de jur* belli and pacis, l.
1. c. 4. n. 7. He says, He dare not condemn this, if the lesser part of the
People, and every one of them indifferently, should defend themselves against a
Tyrant, ultimo necessitatis praesidio. The case of Scotland, when we were
blocked up by Sea and Land, with Arms: The case of England, when the King,
induced by Prelates, first attempted to bring an Army to cut off the
Parliament, and then gathered an Army, and fortified York, and invaded Hull,
to make the Militia his own, sure is considerable. Barclay says, The People
has jus se tuendi adversus immanem saevitiem. Advers. Monarchomach. l. 3. c.
8. A power to defend themselves against prodigious cruelty. The case of
England and Ireland, now invaded by the bloody Rebels of Ireland, is also
worthy of consideration. I could cite hoasts more.

QUEST. XXIX. Whether, in the case of Defensive war, the distinction of the
person of the King, as a man, who can commit acts of hostile Tyranny against
his Subjects: and of the Office and Royal power that he has from God, and the
People, as a King; can have place?
BEfore I can proceed to other Scripture-proofes for the lawfulness The Kings
person as a man, in concreto and as a King and his office, in abstracto, are
very different in this dispute.
of Resistance; this Distinction, rejected by Royalists, must be cleared. This
is an evident and sensible distinction: The King in concreto, the Man who is
King; And the King in abstracto, the Royal office of the King. The ground of
this distinction we desire to be considered from, Romans 13. we affirm with
Buchanan, that Paul, Romans 13, speaks of the office and duty of good
Magistrates, and that the text speaks nothing of an absolute King, nothing of
a Tyrant; and the Royalists distinguish where the Law distinguishes not,
against the Law, l. pret. 10. gl. Bart. de pub. in Rem. and therefore we move
the question here, Whether or no to resist the illegal and Tyrannical will of
the man, who is King, be to resist the King, and the ordinance of God, we say
no: Nor do we deny the King, abusing his power in unjust acts, to remain
King, and the Minister of God, whose person for his royal office, and his
Royal Office both are to be honored, reverenced and obeyed. God forbid that
we should do so as the sons of Belial, imputing to us the doctrine of
Anabaptists, and the doctrine falsely imputed to Wicliffe, That Dominion is
founded upon supernatural grace, and that a Magistrate being in the state of
mortal sin, cannot be a lawful Magistrate* we teach no such thing. The P.
Prelate shows us his sympathy with Papists, and that he builds the
Monuments and Sepulchers of the slain and murdered Prophets* when he refusing
to open his mouth in the Gates for the righteous, professes he will not purge
the Witnesses of Christ, the Waldenses and Wicliffe, and Husse of Sacr. sanc.
Reg. May. c. 1. page 2.
these notes of disloyalty, but that these acts proceeding from this root of
bitterness, the abused power of a King should be acknowledged with obedience
active or passive, in these unjust acts, we deny.

1. Assert. It is evident from Romans 13. That all subjection and obedience to
higher powers commanded there is subjection to the power and office of the
Magistrate in abstracto, or (which is all one) to the person using the power
lawfully, and that no subjection is due by that text, or any Word of God, to
the abused and Tyrannical power of the King, which I evince from the Text, and
from other Scriptures. 1. Because the Text says, Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers. But no powers commanding things unlawful, and killing the
innocent people of God, can be (...) higher powers, but in that lower powers.
1. He that commands not what God commands, and punishes and kills where
God is personally and immediately present, would neither command nor punish, is
not in these acts to be subjected unto, and obeyed as a superior power, though
in habit he may remain a superior power, for all habitual, all actual
superiority is a formal participation of the power of the most high. 2.
Arnisaeus well says, That Arnisae. de authoritat. Princip. c. 4. n. n. page
96. Every one that commands obedience active or passive unjustly, is eatenus,
no higher power.
of Aristotle must be true, It is against nature, that better and worthier men
should be in subjection to unworthier, and more wicked men: but in this when
Magistrates command wickedness, and kills the innocent, the non-obeyers
eatenus in so far, are worthier the commanders (whatever they be in habit and
in office) actually, or in these wicked acts are unworthier and inferior, and
the nonobeyers are in that worthier, as being zealous adherents to Gods
Command, and not to man's will. I desire not to be mistaken, if we speak of
habitual excellency, godly and holy men as the Witnesses of Christ in things
lawful, are to obey wicked and Infidel Kings and Emperors, but in that these
wicked Kings have an excellency Arnisaeus 16. Laertius, l. 3. in Plato.
in respect of office above them; but when they command things unlawful, and
kill the innocent, They do it not by virtue of any office, and so in that they
are not higher powers, but lower and weak ones. Laertius does explain Aristotle
well, who defines a Tyrant by this, That he commands his subjects by
violence, and Arnisaeus The person or the man who is the Magistrate, may
lawfully be resisted, and the man as using the power lawfully, or the office
can not be resisted.
condemns Laertius for this, Because one Tyrannical action does no more
constitute a Tyrant, then one unjust action does constitute an unjust man. But
he may condemn (as he does indeed) for this also Covarruvias pract. quest. c.
1. and Vasquez Illustr. quest. l. 1. c. 47. nu. 1. 12. for this is essential
to a Tyrant, to command and rule by violence. If a lawful Prince do one, or
more acts of a Tyrant, he is not a Tyrant for that, yet his action in that is
Tyrannical, and he does not that as a King, but in that act as a sinful man,
having something of Tyranny in him. 2. The Powers, Romans 13. 1. that are,
ordained of God, as their author and efficient; But Kings commanding unjust
things, and killing the innocent, in these acts, are but men, and sinful men;
and the power by which they do these acts, a sinful and an usurped power, and
so far they are not powers ordained of God, according to his revealed Will,
which must rule us. Now the authority and official power, in abstracto, is
ordained of God, as the Text says, and other Scriptures do evidence. And this
Politicians do clear, while they distinguish betwixt jus Personae, and jus
Coronae, the power of the Person, and the power of the Crown and Royal office.
They must then be two different things. 3. He that resists the power, that
is, the official power, and the King, as King, and commanding in the Lord,
resists the Ordinance of God, and Gods lawful constitution, v. 2. But he who
resists the Man, who is the King, commanding that which is against God, and
killing the innocent; resists no ordinance of God, but an ordinance of Sin
and Satan: for a man commanding unjustly, and ruling Tyrannically, has, in
that, no power from God. 4. They that resist the power and Royal office of the
King in things just and right, shall receive to themselves damnation, ver. 3.
but they that resist, that is, refuse, for Conscience, to obey the man who is
the King, and choose to obey God rather then men, as all the Martyrs did, shall
receive to themselves salvation. And the 80 valiant men, the Priests, who used
bodily violence against King Vzzahs person, and thrust him out of the house of
the Lord, from offering incense to the Lord, which belonged to the Priest only:
received not damnation to themselves, but salvation in doing Gods will, and in
resisting the Kings wicked will.

Arg. 5. The lawful Ruler, as a Ruler, and in respect of his office, Arg. ^.
is not to be resisted, because he is not a terror to good works, but to
evil; and no man who does Good, is to be afraid of the Office, or the Power,
but to expect praise, and a reward of the same, v. 3. But the man who is a
King, may command an idolatrous and superstitious Worship, send an Army of
Cutthroats against them, because they refuse that Worship: and may reward
Papists, Prelates, and other corrupt men, and may advance them to places of
State and Honor, because they kneel to a Tree-Altar, pray to the East, adore
the letters and sound of the word [ Jesus] teach and write Arminianisme: And
may imprison, deprive, confine, cut the ears, and* rip the noses, and burn
the faces of those who speak, and preach* and write the truth of God: and may
send Armies of Cutthroats, Irish Rebels, and other Papists, and malignant
Atheists, to destroy and murder the Judges of the Land, and innocent defenders
of the Reformed Religion, etc. The Man (I say) in these acts, is a terror to
Good works, an encouragement to Evil: And those that do Good, are to be
afraid of the King, and to expect no praise, but punishment and vexation from
him; Ergo, this reason in the Text will prove that the Man, who is the King, in
so far as he does these things that are against his office, may be resisted;
and that in these we are not to be subject, but only we are to be subject to
his power and Royal authoririe, in abstracto, in so far as according to his
office, he is not a terror to good works, but to evil. 6. The lawful Ruler
is the minister of God, or the servant of God, for Good to the Commonwealth:
And to resist the servant in that wherein he is a servant, and using the power
that he has from his Master, is to resist the Lord his Master, v. 4. But the
man who is the King, commanding unjust things, and killing the innocent; in
these acts, is not the minister of God, for the Good of the Commonwealth: he
serves himself, and Papists and Prelates, for the destruction of Religion,
Laws and Commonwealth: therefore the Man may be resisted, by this Text, when
the office and power cannot be resisted. 7. The Ruler, as the Ruler, and the
nature and intrinsecall end of the office is, that he bear Gods sword, as an
avenger to execute wrath on him that does evil, v. 4. and so cannot be
resisted without sin. But the man who is the Ruler, and commands things
unlawful, and kills the innocent; carries the Papists and Prelates sword, to
execute, not the righteous judgment of the Lord, upon the ill-doer; but his
own private revenge, upon him that does well: Ergo, the Man may be resisted,
the Office may not be resisted: and they must be two different things. 8. We
must needs be subject to the Royal office, for conscience, v. 5. by reason of
the fifth Commandment. But we must not needs be subject to the man who is
King, if he command things unlawful: for D. Fern warranteth us to resist, if
the Ruler invade us suddenly; 2. Without color of Law or Reason; 3.
Vnavoydably. And Winzetus, and Barclay, and Grotius, as before I cited, give us
leave to resist a King, turning a cruel Tyrant. But Paul, Romans 13. forbids
us to resist the Power, in Abstracto; Ergo, it must be the Man, in concreto,
that we must resist. 9. Those we may not resist, to whom we owe tribute, as a
reward of the onerous work, on which they, as Ministers of God, do attend
continually. But we owe not tribute to the King as a man; for then should we be
addebted tribute to all men: but as a King, to whom the wages of tribute is
due, as to a Princely workman, a King as a King: ergo, the Man and the King are
different. 10. We owe fear and honor as due, to be rendered to the man who is
King, because he is a King, not because he is a man; for it is the highest
fear and honor due to any mortal man, which is due to the King, as King. 11.
The Man, and the inferior Judge are different: and we cannot, by this Text,
resist the inferior Judge, as a Judge, but we resist the ordinance of God, as
the Text proves. But Cavaliers resist the inferior Judges as men, and have
killed diverse members of both Houses of Parliament: but they will not say, that
they killed them as Judges, but as Rebels. If therefore to be a Rebel, as a
wicked Man, and to be a Judge, are differenced thus: then, to be a Man, and to
commit some acts of Tyranny; and to be the supreme Judge and King, are two
different things. 12. Mr. Knox, Hist. of Scotland, l. 2. Page 141.
The Congregation, in a letter to the Nobility, say: There is great difference
betwixt the Authority, which is Gods Ordinance, and the Persons of those who
are placed in authority. The Authority, and Gods ordinances can never do
wrong; for it commands that Vice and wicked men be punished, and Virtue, with
virtuous men and just. be maintained: But the corrupt Person placed in this
Authority, may offend, and most commonly do contrary to this Authority: and
is then the corruption of Man to be followed, by reason that it is clothed with
the name of Authority? And they give instance in Pharaoh and Saul, who were
lawfall Kings, and yet corrupt Men. And certainly, the Man, and the Divine
authority, differ as the Subject and the Accident; as that which is under a
Law, and can offend God; and that which is neither capable of Law, nor sin.
13. The King, as King, is a just creature, and by office a living and breathing
Law: His Will, as he is King, is nothing but a just Law: But the King, as a
sinful man, is not a just creature, but one who can sin, and play the
Tyrant: and his Will, as a private sinful man, is a private Will, and may be
resisted. So the Law says, The King, as King, can do no wrong: but the King,
as a Man, may do a wrong. While as then the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
resist the Kings private will, as a Man, and fight against his illegal
Cutthroats, sent out by him, to destroy his native subjects, they fight for
him as a King, and obey his public Legal will, which is his Royal will, de
jure, and while he is absent from his Parliaments as a man, he is Legally and
in his Law-Power present, and so the Parliaments are as Legal, as if he were
personally present with them.

Let me answer Royalists. The P. Prelate says it is Solomon's Sac. san^. mac. 2
page 28. page 30. 31.
word, By me Kings reign. Kings in concreto, with their Sovereignty, he says
not, By me Royalty or Sovereignty reigns. And elsewhere he says, that
Barclay says, Paul writing to the Romans, keeps the Roman usual diction in
this, who express by Powers in abstracto, the persons authorized by Power, and
it is the soriptures Dialect; By him were created thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, that is Angels, to say Angels, in abstracto, were created, 2
Pet. 2. 10. They speak ill of dignities, Arnisaen de potest. prin. c. 2. 11. 17.
Iud. 8. despise dominion. That is, they speak ill of Cajus, Caligula, Nero;
our Levites rail against the Lords Anointed, the best of Kings in the world.
Nero, Romans 13. 4. in concreto bears not the sword in vain. Arnisaeus says it
better then the Prelate, (he is a witless thief. Romans 13. 4. the Royal Power
in abstracto, does not bear the sword, but the Person, not the Power but the
Prince himself bears the sword. And the Prelate poor man following Doctor
Fern page 3. sec. 5. page 30. Royalists reasons that to resist the man or
person is to resist the King, office or ordinance of God.
says, Its absurd to pursue the Kings Person with a canon-bullet at Edgehill,
and preserve his authority at London, or elsewhere. So says Fern 16. sect. 10.
page 64. The concret Powers here are purposed as objects of our obedience,
which cannot be directed, but upon power in some person, for it is said (...),
the powers that are, are of God, now Power cannot be (...) existent, but in
some person; and Page 69. says Fern, can Power in the abstract have praise? Or
is tribute paid to the Power in the abstract. Yea the Power is the reason why
we yield obedience to the person, etc. and the Prelate has as much learning as
to copy out of Fern, and Barclay, Arniseus, and others these words and the
like, but has not wit to add the sinews of these Authors reason, and with
all this he can in his Preface call it his own, and provoke any to answer him
if they dare, whereas while I answer this excommunicated Pamphletter.

I answer these learned Authors, from which he steals all he has, and yet he
must persuade the King, he is the only man can defend his Majesty's Cause, and
the importunity, forsooth, of friends extorted this piece, as if it were a
fault, that this Delphick Oracle (giving out railings, and lies for responses)
should be silent. 2. Not we only, but the Holy Ghost, in terminis, has this
distinction, Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29. We ought to obey God rather then men. Them
Rulers (for of Rulers sitting in judgment is that speech uttered) commanding
and tyrannizing over the Apostles, are men contradistinguished from God; and as
they command and punish unjustly, they are but men, otherwise commanding for
God, they are Gods, and more then men. 2. From Theophylact also, or from
Chrysostom, on Romans 13. we have this; The Apostle speaks not (say they)
(...). 3. Soveraigntie or Royalty, does not properly reign or bear the sword,
or receive praise, and this accident does not bear a sword; nor do we think, or
Paul speak, Romans 13. of the abstracted Jew of power and Royalty, subsisting
out of its subject; nor dream we, that the naked accident of Royal Authority,
is to be feared and honored as the Lords anointed; the person or man who is
the King, and bears the Crown on his head, and holds the scepter in his
hand, is to be obeyed; accidents are not persons, but they speak nonsense, and
like brute beasts, who deny that all the kingly honor due to the King, must be
due to him as a King, and because of the Royal dignity that God has given to
him, and not because he is a man; for a Pursevants son is a man, and if a
Pursevants son would usurp the throne, and take the Crown on his head, and the
scepter in his hand, and command that all souls be subject to such a superior
Power, because he is a man, the Laws of Scotland would hang a man for a less
fault, we know: and the P. Prelate was wont to edify women, and converted
souls to Christ, with such a distinction as objectum quod, and objectum quo, in
the Pulpits of Edinburgh, and it has good use here, we never took abstract
Royalty to be the King. The Kings of Scotland of old were not second notions,
and we exclude not the person of the King, yet we distinguish with leave of the
P. Prelate betwixt the person in linea physica, we must take (physica) largly
here and in linea morali, obedience, fear, tribute, honor is due to the person
of the King, and to the man who is King, not because of his person, or because
he is a man (the P. Prelate may know in what notion, we take the name ( Person)
but because God by the peoples election, has exalted him to Royal dignity,
and for this cause ill doers are to subject their throats and necks to the
sword of the Lords Annoynteds executioner or hangman with patience, and
willingly, because in taking away the head of ill doers, for ill doing, he is
acting the Office of the Lord, by whom he Reigns; but if he take away their
heads, and send out the long-tusked Vultures and Boares of Babylon, the Irish
Rebels to execute his wrath, as he is in that act a misinformed man, and
wants the authority of Gods Law, or man's Law, he may be resisted with Arms.
For 1. If Royalists say against this, then if a King turn an habitual Tyrant,
and conduce an hundred thousand Turks to destroy his subjects upon mere
desire of revenge, they are not to resist, but to Grot. d^ iur. belli and
pacis. l. 1. c. 4. n. 7. Winzetus Velitat. adver. Buchanan. Barclay, adv.
Monarchom. l. 3. c. 8.
be subject, and suffer for conscience. I am sure Grotius says, If a King sell
his subjects, he loses all title to the Crown, and so may be resisted, and
Winzetus says, A Tyrant may be resisted, and Barclay, It is lawful for the
people in case of Tyranny to defend themselves Adversus immanem saevetiam,
against extreme cruelty: and I desire the Prelate to answer how people are
subject in suffering such cruelty of the higher power, because he is Gods
ordinance, and a power from God, except he say, as he sells his people, and
barbarously destroys by Cutthroat Irishes, his whole subjects refusing to
worship Idols, he is a man and a sinful man, eatenus, and an inferior power
inspired by wicked counsel, not a King, eatenus, not a higher power, and that
in resisting him thus, the subjects resist not the ordinance of God. Also
suppone King David defend his Kingdom and people against Iesse his natural
father, who we suppose comes in against his son and Prince, King David, with
a huge army of the Philistimes, to destroy him and his Kingdom, if he shall
kill his own native father, in that war at some Edgehill, how shall he
preserve at Jerusalem that honor, and love that he owes to his father, by
virtue of the fifth Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, etc. Let
them answer this, except King David consider Iesse in one relation, in
abstracto, as his father, whom he is to obey, and as he is a wicked man, and a
perfidious subject, in another relation, and except King David say, he is to
subject himself to his father as a father, according to the fifth
Commandment, and that in the act of his fathers We may kill a person as a man,
and love him as a son, a father, a wife, according to Gods, Word.
violent invasion, he is not to subject himself to him, as he is a violent
invader, and as a man. Let the Royalist see how he can answer the Argument, and
how Levy is not to know his father and mother as they are sinful men, Deuteronomy.
33. 9. and yet to know and honor them as Parents; and how an Israelite is not
to pity the wife that lies in his bosom, when she inticeth him to go a
whooring after strange Gods, but is to kill her, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8. and yet the
husband is to love the wife as Christ loved his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. If the
husband take away his wives life in some mountain in the holy Land, as Gods
Law commands, let the Royalists answer us, where is then the meritall love he
owes to her, and that respect due to her as she is a wife and a helper. But let
not the Royalist infer, that I am from these examples pleading for the killing
of Kings, for lawful resistance is one thing, and killing of Kings is another;
the one defensive and lawful, the other offensive and unlawful, so long as he
remains a King, and the Lords Anointed: But if he be a murderer of his
father, who does counsel his father to come to a place of danger, where he may
be killed, and where the King ought not to be, as Abner was worthy of death,
who watched not carefully King Saul, but slept when David came to his bed side,
and had opportunity to kill the King, they are Traitors and murderers of the
King, who either counseled his Majesty to come to Edgehill, where the danger
was so grett, or did not violently restrain him from coming thither, seeing
Kings safety and lives are as much, yea more in the disposing of the people
then in their own private will, 2 Samuel 18. 2, 3. for certainly the people
might have violently restrained King Saul from killing himself, and the King
was guilty of his own death, and sins against his Office and subjects, who
comes out in person to any such battles where he may be killed, and the
contrary party free of his blood. And here our Prelate is blind, if he see not
the clear difference between the Kings Person, and the Office as he is King,
and between his private Will, and his public and Royal Will. 3. The Angels
may be named Thrones and Dominions in abstracto, and yet created, in concreto,
and we may say the Angel and his power are both created at once; but David was
not both borne the Son of Iesse, and a King at once: and the P. Prelate, by
this may prove it is not lawful to resist the Devil (for he is of the number
of these created Angels, Col. 1.) as he is a Devil, because in* resisting the
Devil as a Devil, we must resist an Angel of God, and a Principality. 4. To
speak ill of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. and Iud. 8. Piscator insinuates is, to
speak evil of the very Office of Rulers, as well as of their manners; and
Theodat. says, on 2 Pet. 2. that these Raylers spoke evil of the place of
Governors and Masters, as unb^seeming believers. All our Interpreters, as
Beza, Calvin, Luther, Bucer, Marloratus from the place says, It is a special
reproof of Anabaptists and Libertines, who in that time maintained, that we
are all free men in Christ, and that there should not be Kings, Masters, nor
any Magistrates; however the abstract is put for the concrete, its true, and it
says we are not to rail upon Nero, but to say Nero was a persecutor of
Christians, and yet obey him commanding what is just, are very consistent. 5.
The persons are proposed, Romans 13. to be the object of our obedience, says D.
Fern, it is very true; but he is ignorant of our mind in exponing the word
Person: we never meant that fear, honor, royalty, tribute, must be due to the
abstracted accident of Kingly Authority, and not to the man who is King. Nor is
it our meaning that Royalty in abstracto is Crowned King, and is anointed, but
that the Person is crowned and anointed. But again by a person we mean
nothing less then the man Nero wasting Rome, burning, crucifying Paul, and
torturing Christians, and that we owe subjection to Nero, and to his person in
concreto as to Gods ordinance, Gods Minister, Gods sword bearer in that notion
of a Person; is that only that we deny. Nay in that Nero in concreto to us, is
no Power ordained of God, no Minister of God, but a Minister of the Devil, and
Satan's armor-bearer, and therefore we owe not fear, honor, subjection, and
tribute to the Person of Nero. But the How the person and office ^f the Ruler
are both theobject of our subjection.
Person thus far is the object of our obedience; that fear, honor,
subjection, and tribute must be due to the man in concreto, to his Person who
is Prince; but not because he is a man, or a person simply, or a sword* bearer
of Papists, but for his office, for that eminent place of royal dignity that
God has conferred on his Person. We know the light of the Sun* the heat of
fire, in abstracto, do not properly give light and heat, but the Sun and fire,
in concreto; yet the principium quo, ratio qua, the principles of these
operations in Sun and fire be light and heat, and we ascribe illuminating of
dark bodies, heating of cold bodies to Sun and fire in concreto, yet not to the
subjects simply, but to them as affected with such accidents: so here we honor
and submit to the man who is King, not because he is a man, that were treason;
not because he uses his sword against the Church, that were impiety: but
because of his Royal Dignity, and because he uses it for the Lord. It is
true, Arnisaeus, Barclay, Fern, say, That Kings leave not off to be Kings,
when they use their power and sword against the Church and Religion. And also
it is considerable, that when the worst of Emperors bloody Nero did reign, the
Apostle presses the duty of subjection to him, as to a power appointed of God,
and condemns the resisting of Nero, as the resisting of an ordinance of God.
And certainly if the cause and reason in point of duty Moral, and of
conscience before God remain in Kings, to wit, that while they are enemies and
persecutors as Nero was, their Royal Dignity given them of God remains, then
subjection upon that ground is lawful, and resistance unlawful. Ans. It is
true so long as Kings remain Kings, subjection is due to them because Kings,
but that is not the question. But the The question of subjection touches the
persons as abusing their power.
question is, if subjection be due to them, when they use their power
unlawfully and Tyrannically. What ever David did, though he was a King, he did
it not as King, he deflowred not Bathsheba as King, and Bathsheba might with
bodily resistance and violence lawfully have resisted King David, though Kingly
Power, remained in him, while he should thus attempt to commit Adultery; else
David might have said to Bathshba, Because I am the Lords Anointed, it is
rebellion in thee a subject to oppose any bodily violence to my act of forcing
of thee, it is unlawful to thee to cry for help, for if any shall offer
violently to rescue thee from me, he resists the ordinance of God. Subjection
is due to Nero as an Emperor, but not any subjection is due to him in the
burning of Rome, and torturing of Christians, except you say that Nero's power
abused in these acts of cruelty was, 1. A power from God. 2. An ordinance of
God. 3. That in these, he was the Minister of God for the good of the
Commonwealth. Because some believed Christians were free from the yoke of
Magistracy, and that the dignity it self was unlawful. And 2. because, chapter
12. he had set down the lawful Church Rulers, and in this and the following
chapter the duties of brotherly love of one toward another. So here chapter 13. he
teaches that all Magistrates, suppose Heathen, are to be obeyed and submitted
unto in all things, so far as they are Ministers of God. Arnisaeus objecteth to
Buchan. If we are by this place to subject our selves to every power in
abstracto, then also to a power contrary to the truth, and to a power of a King
exceeding the limits of a King, for De Authorit. princ. c. 2. n. 18.
such a power is a power, and we are not to distinguish where the Law
distinguishes not.

Ans. The Law clearly distinguishes we are to obey Parents in the Lord, and
if Nero command Idolatry, this is an excessive power; are we obliged to obey,
because the Law distinguishes not? 2. The text says, we are to obey every
power, 1. from God, 2. That is Gods ordinance, 3. by which the man is a
Minister of God for good; but an unjust and excessive power is none ofthese
three. 3. The text in words distinguishes not obedience active in things
wicked, and lawful: yet we are to distinguish.

Mr. Symmons. Is authority subjected solely in the Kings Law, and Loyal
Subjects belief. page 49.
no whit in his Person, though put upon him both by God and Man? Or, is
Authority only the subject; and the Person exercising the Authority, a bare
accident to that, being in it only more separably, as pride and folly are in a
man: Then if one in Authority command, out of his own Will, and not by Law: if
I neithr actively, nor passively obey, J do not so much as resist abused
Authority: and then must the Prince by his disorderly Will have quite lost his
authority, and become like* another man; and yet his Authority has not fled
from him.

Ans. If we speak acurately, neither the Man solely, nor his Power only is
resisted: but the Man clothed with lawful habitual power, is resisted, in
such and such acts flowing from an abused power. 2. It is an ignorant speech,
to ask, Is Authority subjected solely in the Kings Law, and no whit in his
Person? for the Authority has all its power by Law, not from the Man's person;
The Authority has nothing from the Person, but a naked inherencie in the
Person, as in the subject: and the Person is to be honored for the Authority,
not the Authority for the Person. 3. Authority is not so separable from the
person, as that for every act of lawless Will, the King loses his Royal
authority, and cease to be King: no, but every act of a King, in so far can
claim subjection of the inferior, as the act of commanding and ruling, has
law for it; and in so far as it is lawless, the Person in that act repugnant
to Law, loses all due claim of actual subjection in that act, and in that
act, power actual is losed, as is clear, Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29. The Apostles
say to Rulers, It is safer to obey God than Men. What? were not these Rulers
lawful Magistrates, armed with power from God? I answer, habitually they were
Rulers, and more then men, and to obey them in things lawful, is to obey God:
But actually in these unlawful commandments, especially being commanded to
speak no more in the name of Jesus; the Apostles do acknowledge them to be no
more but Men: and so their actual authority is as separable from the person,
as pride and folly from men.

Symmons. The distinction holds good of inferior Magistrates, Sect. 5. page 9.
That they may be considered as Magistrates, and as Men: because their
authority is only sacred, and adds veneration to their persons; and is
separable from the person; The Man may live, when his Authority is
extinguished: but it holds not in Kings. King Saul's person is venerable as
his authority, and his authority comes by inheritance, and dies, and
lives inseparably with his person: and Authority and Person add honor each
one to another.

Ans. 1. If this be true, Manasseh, a King, did not shed innocent blood, and
use sorcerie: he did not these great wickednesses as a man, but as a King.
Solomon played the Apostate as a King, not as a man: if so, the man must make
the King more infallible then the Pope; for the Pope, as a man, can err; as a
Pope he cannot err, say Papists. But Prophets, in their persons, were anointed
of God, as Saul and David were: then must we say, Nathan and Samuel erred not
as men, because their persons were sacred and anointed: and they erred not as
Prophets, sure; Ergo, they erred not all. A King, as a King, is an holy
Ordinance of God, and so cannot do injustice, Ergo, they must do acts of
Justice, as men. 2. The inferior Judge is a Power from God. 2. To resist him,
is to resist an ordinance of God. 3. He is not a terror to good works, but to
evil. 4. He is the minister of God for good. 5. He is Gods Sword Bearer; his
official power to rule, may by as good right come by birth, as the Crown: and
the Kings person is sacred only for his office, and is anointed only for his
office. For then the Chaldeans dishonored not inferior Judges, Lam. 5. 12. when
they hanged the Prince, and honored not the faces of Elders. It is in question,
if the Kings actual authority be not as separable from him, as the actual
authority of the Judge.

Symmons, p. 24. The King himself may use this distinction. As a Christian, he
may forgive any that offends against his person: but as a Judge, he must
punish, in regard of his office. Ans. Well then, Flatterers will grant the
distinction, when the King does good, and pardons the blood of Protestants,
shed by bloody Rebels: But when the King does acts of injustice, he is neither
man, nor King, but some in dependent absolute God.

Symmons, p. 27. Gods Word tyeth me to every one of his personal
commandments, as well as his legal commandments: nor do I obey the Kings
law, because it is established, or because of its known penalty* nor yet the
King himself, because he rules according to Law. But I obey the Kings law,
because I obey the King: and I obey the King, because I obey God: I obey the
King, and his Law, because I obey God and his Law. Better obey the Command, for
a reveren^ regard to the Prince, then for a penalty. Ans. It is hard to answer
a sick man. It is blasphemy, to seek this distinction of Person and Office, in
the King of Kings; because by (Person) in a mortal King, we understand a Man
that can sin. 1. I am not obliged to obey his personal commandment, except
I were his domestic: nor his unlawful personal commandments, because they
are sinful. 2. It is false that you obey the Kings Law, because you obey the
King: for then you say but this, I obey the King, because I obey the King. The
truth is, Obedience is not formally terminated on the person of the King;
Obedience is relative to a precept* and it is Men-service, to obey a Lew, not
because it is good and just; but upon this formal motive, because it is the
will of a mortal man to command it. And Reverence, Love, Fear, being acts of
the Affection, are not terminated on a Law, but properly on the Person of the
Judge: and they are modifications, or laudable qualifications of acts of
obedience; not motives, not the formal reason why I obey, but the manner how I
obey. And the Apostle makes expressly, Romans 13* 4. fear of punishment, a
motive of obedience, while he says, He bears not the sword in vain; Ergo,
Be subject to the King. And this hinders not personal resistance to unjust
commandments.

Symmons, p. 27, 28, 29. You say, To obey the Princes Personal commandment
against his Legal will, is to obey himself against himself. So say I, To
obey his Legal will against his Personal will, is to obey himself against
himself: for I take his Person to be himself

Ans. To obey the Kings personal will, when it is sinful, (as we now suppose)
against his legal will, is a sin, and a disobedience to God, and the King
also, seeing the Law is the Kings will, as King: but to obey his Legal will
against his sinful personal will (as it must be sinful, if contrary to a
just Law) is obedience to the King as King, and so obedience to God. 2. You
take the Kings person to be himself; but you take quid pro quo, for his person
here, you must take not Physically for his suppost of soul and body; but
morally, it is the King, as a sinning man doing his worst will, against the Law
which is his just and best will, and the rule of the Subjects: and the Kings
personal will is so far just, and to regulate the Subjects, in so far, as it
agrees with his legal Will, or his Law, and this will can sin, and
therefore may be crossed without breach of the fifth Commandment: but his
Legal Will cannot be crossed without disobedience both to God and the King.

Symmons, p. 28. The Kings Personal will does not always presuppone passion:
and if it be attended with passion, yet we must bear it for conscience sake.
Ans. We are to obey the Kings Personal will, when the thing commanded, is not
sin; but his Subjects as Subjects, have little to do with his personal will
in that notion. It concerns his domestic servant, and is the Kings will as
he is the master of servants, not as he is King in relation to Subjects; but we
speak of the Kings personal will, as repugnant to Law, and contrary to the
Kings will as King, and so contrary to the fifth Commandment; and this is
attended often, not only with Passion, but also with prejudice; and we owe no
subjection to prejudice, and Passions, or to Actions commanded, by these
misordered powers, because they are not from God, nor his Ordinances, but from
men, and the flesh, and we owe no subjection to the flesh.

Doct. Fern, Sect. 9. page 58. The distinction of personal and legal will,
has place in evil actions, but not in resistance, where we cannot sever the
person, and the dignity, or authority, because we cannot resist the power, but
we must resist the person who has the power. Saul had lawfully the command of
Arms, but that power he uses unjustly, against innocent David. I ask when
these Emperors took away lives and goods at their pleasure; was that a power
ordained of God? No, but an Illegal will, a Tyranny, but they might not
resist: nay, but they cannot resist: for that power and soveraigntie employed
to compass these illegal commandments, was ordained and settled in them. When
Pilate condemned our Savior, it was an illegal will, yet our Savior
acknowledges in it Pilates power, that was given him from above. Answ. 1. Here
we have the distinction, denied by Royalists, granted by D. Fern; but if when
the King commands us to do wickedness, we may resist that personal will, and
when he commands us to suffer unjustly we cannot resist his will, but we must
resist also his Royal person. What? Is it not still the King, and his person
sacred, as his power is sacred, when he commands the subjects to do unjustly,
as when he commands them to suffer unjustly? It were fearful to say, when
Kings command any one act of idolatry, they are no longer Kings; if for
conscience I am to suffer unjustly, when Nero commands unjust punishment,
because Nero commanding so, remains Gods Minister. Why? But when Nero
commands me to worship an Heathen God, I am upon the same ground to obey that
unjust will in doing ill: For Nero in commanding Idolatry, remains the Lords
Minister, his person is sacred in the one commandment of doing ill, as in
inflicting ill of punishment. And do I not resist his person in the one, as in
the other? His power and his person are unseparably conjoined by God in the
one, as in the other, 2. In bodily thrusting out of Vzzah from the Temple,
these fourscore valiant men did resist the Kings person, by bodily violence, as
well as his power. 3. If the power of killing the Martyrs in Nero, was no power
ordained of God, then the resisting of Nero, in his taking away the lives of
the Martyrs, was but the resisting of Tyranny: And certainly, if that power in
Nero was (...) a power ordained of God, and not to be resisted, as the place,
Romans 13. is alleged by Royalists, then it must be a lawful power, and no
Tyranny; and if it cannot be resisted, because it was a power ordained and
settled in him, it is either settled by God, and so not Tyranny; except God be
the Author of Tyranny, or then settled by the devil, and so may well be
resisted; but the Text speaks of no power, but of that which is of God. 4. We
are not to be subject to all powers in concreto, by the Text; for we are not to
be subject to powers lawful, yet commanding active obedience to things
unlawful. Now subjection includes active obedience of honor, love, fear,
paying tribute, and therefore of need force, some powers must be excepted. 5.
Pilates power is merely a power by divine permission, not a power ordained of
God, as are the powers spoken of Romans 13. Gregori. mor. l. 3. c. 11. expressly
says, This was Satan's power given to Pilate, against Christ. Manibus Satanae
pro nostra redemptione se traddit. Lyra. A Principibus Romanorum and ulterius
permissum a Deo, qui est potestas, superior. Calvin, Beza, Diodatus, says the
same, and that he cannot mean of Legal power from Gods regulating will is
evident; 1. Because Pilates power to crucify Christ, was no Law-power given by
God to Pilate as a Judge.
Christ is answering Pilate, John 19. 10. Know thou not, that I have power
to crucify thee? This was an untruth. Pilate had a command to worship him, and
believe in him; and whereas Fern says, Sect. 9. page 59. Pilate had power to
judge any accused before him: It is true, but he being obliged to believe in
Christ, he was obliged to be persuaded of Christ's innocence; and so neither to
judge, nor receive accusation against him: and the power he says, he had to
crucify, was a Law-power in Pilates meaning, but not in very deed any
Law-power; because a Law-power is from Gods regulating will in the fifth
Commandment; but no creature has a lawful or a Law-power to crucify Christ.
2. A Law-power is for good, Romans 13. 4. A power to crucify Christ, is for ill.
3. A Lawpower is a terror to ill works, and a praise to good. Pilates power to
crucify Christ, was the contrary. 4. A Law-power is to execute wrath on
ill-doing, a power to crucify Christ is no such. 5. A Lawpower conciliateth
honor, fear, and veneration to the person of the Judge, a power to crucify
Christ, conciliateth no such thing, but a disgrace to Pilate. 6. The Genuine
Acts of a lawful power, are lawful Acts; for such as is the Fountain-power,
such are the Acts flowing therefrom; good Acts flow not from bad powers,
neither has God given a power to sin, except by way of permission.

QUEST. XXX. Whether or no Passive Obedience be a mean to which we are
subjected in conscience, by virtue of a Divine Commandment, and what a mean
Resistance is. That Flying is Resistance.
MUch is built, to commend patient suffering of ill, and condemn all
resistance of Superiors, by Royalists, on the place 1 Pet. 2. 18. Where we are
commanded, being servants, to suffer buffets, not only for ill doing, of good
masters, but also undeservedly, and when we do well, we are to suffer of these
masters that are evil; and so much more are we patiently, without Resistance,
to suffer of Kings. But it is clear, the place is nothing against Resistance,
as in these Assertions I clear.

Assertion 1. Patient suffering of wicked men, and violent resisting are not
incompatible, but they may well stand together: So this consequence is the
basis of the argument, and it is just nothing. To wit, Servants are to suffer
unjustly wounds and buffeting of their wicked Masters, and they are to bear it
patiently; Ergo, Servants are in conscience obliged to non-resistance. Now
Scripture makes this clear; The Church of God is to bear with all patience,
the indignation Patient bearing of ill, and resistance, are compatible in one
and the same person.
of the Lord, because she has sinned, and to suffer of wicked enemies, which
were to be trodden as mire in the streets, Micah 7. 9, 10, 11, 12. but withal
they were not obliged to non-resistance, and not to fight against these
enemies, yea they were obliged to fight against them also. If these were,
Babylon, Judah might have resisted and fought, if God had not given a special
commandment of a positive law, that they should not fight, if these were the
Assyrians and other enemies, or rather both, the people were to resist by
fighting, and yet to endure patiently the indignation of the Lord. David did
bear most patiently the wrong that his own son Absolon and Achitophel, and the
people inflicted on him in pursuing him to take his life and the kingdom from
him: as is clear by his gracious expressious, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. chap. 16.
ver. 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 3. 1, 2, 3. Yea he prays for a blessing on the people,
that conspired against him. Psalm. 3. 8. Yet did he lawfully resist Absalom, and
the conspiratours, and sent out Ioab and a huge army in open battle against
them. 2 Samuel 18. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and fought against them. And were not the
people of God patient to endure the violence done to them in the wilderness, by
Og king of Bashan, Siho^ king of Heshbon, by the Ammorites, Moabites, etc? I
think Gods law tyeth all men, especially his people, to as patient a suffering
in wars, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. God then trying and humbling his people, as the servant
is to endure patiently, unjustly inflicted buffets, 1 Pet. 2. 18. And yet Gods
people at Gods command did resist these Kings and people, and did fight and
kill them, and possess their land, as the history is clear. See the like
Josh. 11. ver. 18, 19. 2. One act of grace and virtue is not contrary to
another. Resistance is in the Children of God an innocent act of
self-preservation, as is patient suffering, and therefore they may well subsist
in one. And so says Amasa by the spirit of the Lord, 1 Chro. 12. 18. Peace,
peace be unto thee, and peace to thy helpers, for God helps thee. Now David
in that, and all his helpers were resisters of King Saul. 3. The scope of the
place 1 Pet. 2. is not to forbid all violent resisting, Resistance not
forbidden, 1 Pet. 2. 18. but patient suffering only recommended.
as is clear, he speaks nothing of violent resisting either one way or other,
but only he forbids revengefull resisting of repaying one wrong with
another, from the example of Christ, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, when he suffered he threatened not. Therefore the argument is a falacy,
ab eo quod docitur (...), ad illud quod dicitur (...). Though therefore the
master should attempt to kill an innocent servant, and invade him with a weapon
of death. 1. Suddenly. 2. Without all reason or cause. 3. Vnavoidably, Doctor
D. Fern, part 3. 2. p. 10.
Fern in that case does free a Subject from guiltynesse, if he violently
resist his Prince: Ergo the servant who should violently resist his Master in
the aforesaid case, should, and might patiently suffer, and violently resist,
notwithstanding any thing that Royalists can conclude on the contrary. 4. No
Prince has a Masterly or herile dominion over his subjects, but only a free,
ingenious, paternall and tutorly oversight for the good of the people, Romans
13. 4. The Master, especially in the Apostle Peter's time, had a dominion over
servants, as over their proper goods.

2. Assertion. Neither suffering formally as suffering, and so neither can
non-resisting passive fall under any moral law of God, except Suffering and
non-resistance passive, fell under no law.
in two conditions: 1. In the point of Christ's passive obedience, he being the
eternal God, as well as Man, and so Lord of his own blood and life, by virtue
of a special commandment imposed on him by his Father, was commanded to lay
down his life, yea and to be an Agent as well as a Patient in dying. Ioh. 10.
18. Yea and actively he was to contribute something for his own death, and offer
himself willingly to death, Mat. 28. 20. And knowing the hour that he was to
depart out of this world unto the Father, John Christ's nonresisting of Pilate,
no plea against resistance of unjust violence*
13. 1. would not only not flee, which is to Royalists lawful, to us a
special point of resistance, Ioh. 14. 31. Ioh. 18. 4, 5, 6, 7. and but
upbraided Peter, as the Agent of Satan, who would dissuade him to die, Mat.
16. 22, 23. and would fight for him. And he does not fetch any argument against
Peter's drawing of his sword, from the unlawfulness of self-defence, and
innocent resistance, (which he should have done, if Royalists plead with any
color of reason from his example, against the lawfulness of Resistance and
self-defence) but from the absolute power of God. 2. From Gods positive will,
who commanded him to die, Mat. 26. 53, 54. if therefore Royalists prove any
thing against the lawfulness of resisting Kings, when they offer (most
unjustly) violence to the life of Gods servants, from this one merely
extraordinary and rare example of Christ, the like whereof was never in the
world, they may from the same example prove it unlawful to flee; for Christ
would not flee, Psalm. 40. 6, 7. Heb. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. Ioh. 14. 31. Ioh. 18. 4,
5, 6, 7. 2. They may prove that people sought by a Tyrant to be crucified for
the Cause of God, or to reveal and discover themselves to an Army of men who
come to seek them, Ioh. 13. 1, 2. Ioh. 18. 4, 5, 6, 7. 3. That Martyrs are of
purpose to go to the place where they know they shall be apprehended and put
to death, for this Christ did, and are willingly to offer themselves to the
enemies Army, for so did Christ, Ioh. 14. 3. Mar. 14. 41, 42. Mat. 26. 46, 47.
and so by his Many things not imitable by us in Christ's non-resistance.
example, all the Parliament, all the Innocents of the City of London, and
Assembly of Divines, are obliged to lay down Arms, and to go to their own
death to Prince Rupert, and the bloody Irish Rebels. 4. By this example it is
unlawful to resist the cutthroats of a King, for Caesar in his own Royal
person, the High Priest in person came not out against Christ. Yea it is not
lawful for the Parliament to resist a Judas, who has fled as a traitorous
Apostate from the Truth and the Temple of Christ. 5. It is not lawful for
innocents to defend themselves by any violence against the invasion of
superiors in D. Fernes three cases, in which he allows resistance. 1. When
the Invasion is sudden. 2. Unavoidable. 3. Without D. Fern, part 3.. 2. p. 10.
all color of Law and Reason. In the two last cases, Royalists defend the
lawfulnes of self-defence. 6. If the example be pressed, Christ did not this
and this, he resisted not with violence to save his own life, therefore we are
to abstain from resistance, and such and such means of self-preservation,
then because Christ appealed not from inferior Judges to the Emperor Caesar;
who, no doubt, would have shown him more favor, then the Scribes and
Pharisees did, and because Christ conveyed not a humble supplication to his
Sovereign and Father Caesar, then because he proffered not a humble petition
to Prince Pilate for his life, he being an innocent man, and his cause just,
because he neither conduced an Orator to plead his own just cause, nor did he
so plead for himself, and give in word and writ, all lawful and possible
defenses for his own safety, but answered many things with silence, to the
admiration of the Judge, Mark 15. 3, 4. 5. and was thrice pronounced by the
Judge to be innocent, Luke 22. ver. 23. because, I say, Christ did not all
these for his own life, therefore it is unlawful for Scotland and England to
appeal to the King, to supplicate, to give in Appologi^s, etc. I think
Royalists dare not say so. But if they say, he would not resist, and yet might
have done all these lawfully, because these be lawful means, and resistance
with the sword unlawful; because, He that takes the sword, shall perish by
the sword. Let me Answer then, 1. They leave the argument from Christ's example,
who was thus far subject to higher powers, that he would not resist, and
plead from the unlawfulness of resistance; this is petitio principii. 2. He
that takes the sword without Gods warrant, which Peter had not, but the
contrary, he was himself a Satan to Christ, who would but council him not to
die; but there is no shadow of a word to prove that violent resisting is
unlawful, when the King and his Irish cutthroats pursue us unjustly; only
Christ says, when God may deliver extraordinarily by his Angels, except it be
his absolute will, that his Son should drink the cup of death, then to take the
sword, when God has declared his will on the contrary, is unlawful; and that
is all: Though I do not question but Christ's asking for swords, and his
arresting all his enemies to the ground, Ioh. 18. 6. backward, is a justifying
of selfe-defence. But hit herto it is clear by Christ's example, that he only
was commanded to suffer. Now the second case in which suffering falls under a
Commandment, is indirectly and comparatively, when it comes to the election
of the witness of Jesus, that it is referred to them, either to deny the truth
of Christ and his name, or then to suffer death, the choice is apparently
evident, and this choice that persecuters refer us unto, is to us a
Commandment of God, that we must choose suffering for Christ, and refuse
sinning against Christ: but the supposition must stand, that this alternative
is unavoydable, that is not in our power to decline either suffering for
Christ, or denying of Christ before men; otherwise no man is to expect the
reward of a witness of Jesus, who having a lawful possible means of
eschewing suffering, does yet cast himself into suffering needlessly. But I
prove that suffering by men of this world, falls not formally and directly
under any divine positive Law, for the Law of nature, what ever Arminians in
their Declaration, or this Arminian excommunicate think with them, (for Conses.
Remonstrant.
they teach that God gave a Commandment to Adam, to abstain from such and
such fruit with pain and trouble to sinlesse nature) does not command
suffering, or any thing contrary to nature as nature Suffering not commanded of
God formally.
is sinlesse: I prove it thus, 1. What ever falls under a positive
Commandment of God, I may say here, under any Commandment of God, is not a
thing under the free will and power of others, from whom we are not descended
necessarily by natural generation, but that men of the world kill me, even
these from whom I am not descended by natural generation (which I speak to
exclude Adam, who killed all his posterity) is not in my free will, either as
if they had my common nature in that act, or as if I were accessory by
counsel, consent, or approbation to that act, for this is under the free will
and power of others, not under my own freewill: Ergo, that I suffer by others
is not under my free will, and cannot fall under a Commandment of God: And
certainly, it is an irrational Law, (glorified be his name) that God should
command Antipas either formally to suffer, or formally not to suffer death by
these of the Synagogue of Satan, Revel. 2. 13. because if they be pleased not
to kill him, it is not in his free will to be killed by them; and if they shall
have him in their power (except God extraordinarily deliver) it is not in his
power, in an ordinary providence, not to be killed. 2. All these places of Gods
word, that recommendeth suffering to the followers of Christ, do not command
formally that we suffer; Ergo, suffering falls not formally under any
Commandment of God; I prove the Antecedent, because if they be considered,
they prove only that comparatively we are to choose rather to suffer, then to
deny Christ before men, Mat. 10, 28, 32. Revel. 2. 13. Mat. 10. 37. Mat. 16.
24. c. 19. 29. or then they command not suffering according to the substance of
the passion, but according to the manner, that we suffer willingly, We are
comparatively rather to suffer, then to deny the truth, but we are not
commanded formally to suffer.
cheerfully, and patiently. Hence Christ's word to take up his Cross, which is
not a mere passion, but commends an act of the virtue of patience. Now no
Christian virtue consists in a mere passion, but in laudable habits, and good
and gracious acts, and the Text we are now on, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. does not
recommend suffering from the example of Christ, but patient suffering, and so
the word (...), not simply enjoined, but (...), in all fear, ver. 18. and the
words (...) and (...), to suffer with patience, as 2 Timothy, 3. 11. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and (...) is to suffer patiently, 1 Cor. 13. 7. Love, (...), suffers all
things, Heb. 12. 17. if you suffer correction, 1 Timothy 5. 5. She continues
patiently in prayers, Heb. 12. 2. Christ endured the Cross (patiently) and
Romans 15. 5. Romans 8. 25. Luke 8. 15. and 21. 29. the derivats hence signify
patience, so do all our Interpreters, Beza, Calvin, Marlorat, and Popish
expositors, as Lorinus, Estius, Carthusian, Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis expound it of
patient suffering, and the text is clear, it is suffering like Christ, without
rendering evil for evil, and reviling for reviling. 3. Suffering simply
according to substance of the passion (I cannot say action) is common to good
and ill, and to the wicked, yea to the damned in hell, who suffer against their
will, and that cannot be joined according to its substance as an act of formal
obedience and subjection to higher powers, Kings, Fathers, Masters, by force of
the fifth commandment, and of the place Romans 13. 1, 2. Patience in suffering
is commanded, not suffering it self formally.
Which according to its substance, wicked men suffer, and the damned in hell
also against their will. 4. Passive obedience to wicked Emperors can but be
enjoined, Romans 13. but only in the manner, and upon supposition, that we must
be subject to them, and must suffer against our wills, all the ill of
punishment, that they can inflict, we must suffer patiently; and because it is
Gods permissive will that they punish us unjustly; for it is not Gods ruling
and approving will (called voluntas signi) that they should against the law of
God and man kill us, and persecute us, and therefore neither Romans 13. nor 1
Pet. 2. nor any place in Gods word, nor any common Divine, natural, of
nations, or any municipal Law commands formally obedience passive, or
subjection passive, or non-resistance under the notion of passive obedience,
yea to me obedience passive, (if we speak of obedience properly called as
relative essentially to a law) is a chymera, a dream, and repugnantia in
adjecto, and therefore I utterly deny that resistance passive or subjection
passive, does formally fall under either commandment of God affirmative, or
negative, only the unlawful manner of resistance by way of revenge, or for
defense of Popery and false Religion, and out of impatient tolleration of
Monarchy or any Tyranny is forbidden in Gods word, and certainly all the words
used Romans 13. as they fall under a formal commandment of God, or words of
action, not of any Chymericall passive obedience, as we are not to resist
actively Gods ordinance, as his ordinance, ver. 1. 2. that is, to resist God
actively. 2. We are to do good works, not evil, if we would have the ruler no
terror to us, ver. 3. 3. We must not do ill, if we would be free of vengeances
sword: ver. 7. we are to pay tribute and to give fear and honor to the ruler,
ver. 7. all which are evidently actions, not passive subjection, and if any
passive subjection be commanded, it is not here, nor in the first commandment,
commanded, but in the first commandment under the hand of patience and
submission under Gods hand in sufferings, or in the third commandment under
the hand of rather dying for Christ, or denying his truth before men; hence I
argue here Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2. and Tit. 3. is nothing else, but an
exposition of the fifth commandment, but in the fifth commandment only
active obedience is formally commanded, and the subordination of inferiors to
superiors is ordained, and passive obedience is no where commanded, but only
modus rei, the manner of suffering, and the occasion of the commandment, here
it is thought that the Jews converted under this pretext, that they were Gods
people, believed that they should not be subject to the Romans. A certain
Galilean made the Galileans believe that they should not pay tribute to
Strangers, and that they should call none Lord, but the God of heaven, as
Joseph. says, Antiq. Iudaic. l. 20. c. 2. and De bell. Iudaic. l. 7. c. 29.
yea and Hieron. Com. in 3. Tit. says, At this time the sect of the Galileans
were on foot. It is like the Jews were thought to be Galileans, and that their
liberty purchased in Christ could not consist with the order of master and
servant, King and subject. And to remove this, Paul establishes Magistracy,
and commands obedience in the Lord; and he is more to prove the office of the
Magistrate to be of God, then any other thing; and to show what is his due,
then to establish absoluteness in Nero to be of God; yea to me, every word in
the Text speaks limitednesse of Princes, and cries down absoluteness: 1.
No power of God, 2. No ordinance of God, 3. Who is a terror to evil, but a
praise to good works, 4. No minister of God for good, etc. can be a power to
which we submit our selves on earth, as next unto God, without controlment. 5.
That passive obedience falls formally under no commandment of God, I prove
thus: All obedience liable to a divine commandment, does commend morally the
performer of obedience, as having a will conformed to Gods moral Law, and
deformity betwixt the will of him who performs not obedience, involveth the
non-obedient in wrath and guiltiness. But non-passive subjection to the sword
of the Judge does not morally commend him that suffers not punishment, for no
man is formally a sinner against a moral law, because he suffers not the ill
of punishment; nor is he morally good, or to be commended, because he
suffers ill of punishment, but because he does the ill of sin. And all evil
of punishment u^justly inflicted has Gods voluntas beneplaciti, the
isntrumental and hidden decree of God, which orders both good and ill,
Ephesians. 1. 11. for its rule and cause, and has not Gods will of approbation
called, voluntas signi, for its rule, both is contrary to that will; I am sure
Epiphanius li. 1. tom. 3. here is. 40. Basilius in Psalm. 32. Nazianzen Orat. ad
subd. and imper at. Hilar. li. ad Constant. August. cites these words, and
says the same. If then passive subjection be not commanded, non-subjection
passive cannot be forbidden, and this text, Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2. cannot a
whit help the bad cause of Royalists; All then must be reduced to some action
of resisting, arguments for passive subjection though there were ship-fulls of
them, they cannot help us.

Assert. 3. By the place 1 Pet. 2. The servant unjustly buffeted is
Re-offending in ended is contrary to patient subjection.
not to buffet his master again, but to bear patiently as Christ did, who when
he was reviled, did not revile again. Not because the place condemns
resistance for self-defence, but because buffeting again is formally
re-offending, not defending; defending is properly a warding of a blow or
stroke: if my neighbor come to kill me, and I can by no means save my life by
flight, I may defend my self, and all Divines say, I may rather kill, ere I be
killed, because I am nearer by the law of nature, and dearer to my self, and my
own life then to my brother: but if I kill him out of malice, or hatred, the
act of defending, by the unlawful manner of doing, becomes an act of
offending, and murder, whence the mind of the blood-shedder will vary the
nature of the action, from whence this corolarie does naturally issue, that the
physical action of taking away the life makes The physical act of taking
away of the li^^ make^h not hom^cide.
not murder, nor homicide, and so the physical action of offending my
neighbor is not murder: Abraham may kill his son, he for whom the cities of
refuge were ordained, and did kill his brother, yet not hating him, he was not,
by Gods law, judged a murderer. And 2. It necessarily hence follows, that an
act which is physically an act of offending my brother, yea even to the taking
away of his life is often morally and legally an act of lawful self-defence:
an offending of another necessitated from the sole invention of self-defence is
no more but an act of innocent self defense: if David with his men had killed
any of Saul's men, in a set battle, David and his men only intending self
defense, the waren David's part was mere defensive, for physical actions of
killing, indifferent of themselves, yet imperated by a principle of natural
self-defence, and clothed with this formal end of self-defence, or according
to the substance of the action, the act is of self-defence. If therefore one
shall wound me deadly, and I know it is my death, after that, to kill the
killer of my self, I being only a private man, must be no act of
self-defence, but of homicide, because it cannot be imperated by a sinlesse
dictate of a natural conscience, for this end of self-defence, after I know I
am killed. Any mean not used for preventing death, must be an act of revenge,
not of self-defence, for it is physically unsuitable for the intended end of
self-defence. And so for a servant buffeted, to buffet again, is of the same
nature: the second buffet not being a conducible mean to ward the first
buffet, but a mean to procure heavier strokes and possibly killing, it cannot
be an act of self defense, for an act of self defense must be an act destinated
ex naturarei, only for defense, and if it be known to be an act of sole
offending, without any known necessary relation of a mean to selfdefence as the
end, it cannot be properly an act of self-defence.

Assert. 4. When the matter is lighter, as in paying tribute, or suffering a
buffet of a rough master, though un justly, we are not to use We have a greater
dominion over our goods and members (mutilation excepted) then over our life.
any act of re-offending. For though* I be not absolute Lord of my own goods,
and so may not at my sole pleasure give tribute and expend moneys to the
hurting of my children, where I am not by Gods Law or Man's Law obliged to pay
tribute; and though I be not an absolute Lord of my members, to expose face,
and cheeks, and back to stripes and whips at my own mere will, yet have we a
comparative dominion given to us of God in matters of goods, and disposing of
our members, (I think I may except the case of mutilation, which is a little
death) for buffets, because Christ no doubt to teach us the like, would rather
give of his goods, and pay tribute, where it is not due, then that this
scandal lay on the way of Christ, that Christ was no loyal subject to lawful
Emperors and Kings. And 1 Cor. 9. Paul would rather not take stipend, though it
was due to him, then hinder the course of the Gospel. And the like is 1 Cor. 6.
where the Corinthians were rather to suffer loss in their goods, then to go
to Law before Infidel Judges, and by the like to prevent greater
inconveniences, and mutilation, and death; the Christian servant has that
dominion over his members, rather to suffer buffets, then to ward off buffets
with violent resistance. But it is no consequent that innocent subjects should
suffer death of tyrants, and servants be killed by masters, and yet that they
shall not be allowed by the law of nature to defend themselves, by
re-offending, when only self-defence is intended, because we have not that
dominion over life and death. And therefore as a man is his brothers murderer,
who, with froward Cain, will not be his brothers keeper, and may preserve his
brothers life, without loss of his own life, when his brother is unjustly
preserved; so when he may preserve his own life, and does not that which
Natures Law allows him to do, rather to kill ere he be killed, he is guilty
of self-murder; because he is deficient in the duty of lawful self-defence.
But I grant to offend or kill is not of the nature of defensive war, but
accidental thereunto, and yet killing of cutthroats sent forth by the illegal
commandment of the King may be intended, as a mean and a lawful mean of
self-defence. 2. Of two ills of punishment, we have a comparative dominion over
our selves, a man may cast his goods in the sea to redeem his life. So for to
redeem peace, we may suffer buffets, but because death is the greatest ill of
punishment, God has not made it eligible to us, when lawful self defense is
at hand; But in defending our own life against Tyrannical power, though we do
it by offending and killing, we resist no ordinance of God, only I judge
killing of the King in self-defence not lawful, because self-defence must be
national, on just causes. Let here the reader judge, Barcley l. 3. c. 8. page
159. con. Monar. If the King (says he) shall vex the Commonwealth or one part
thereof, with great and intolerable cruelty; what shall the people do? they
have (says he) in that case a power to resist and defend themselves from
injury, but only to defend themselves, not to invade the Prince, nor to Populo
quidem hoc casu resistendi actuendi se ab inju^ia potestas competir: sed
tuendise tantum* non autem ^^in^ipem in^di, and resis^end^ injuriae illa^ae,
n^n re^^dendi a de^^ra reveren^ia -- non vim p^am u^^is^ (...) ^^^.
resist the injury, or to recede from reverence due to the Prince. I answer 1.
Let Barclay or the prelate (if he may carry Barclayes books) or any, difference
these two, the people may resist a Tyrant, but they may not resist the injuries
inflicted by a Tyrants officers and cutthroats. I cannot imagine how to
conciliate these two: for to resist the cruelty of a King, is but to hold off
the injury by resistance. 2. If this Nero waste the Commonwealth unsufferably
with his cruelty, and remain a lawful King, to be honored as a King, who may
resist him, according to Royalists way? but from Romans 13. they resist the
Ordinance of God. 3. Resisting is not a mere suffering, nor is it a moral
resisting by alleging laws to be broken by him. We had never a question with
Royalists about such resisting. 2. Nor is this resisting non-obedience to
unjust commandments; that resisting was never yet in question, by any, except
the Papists, who in good earnest, by consequent, say, It is better to obey men,
then God. 3. I^ is then resisting by bodily violence; but if the King have such
an absolute power given him by God, as Royalists fancy from Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Samuel 8. 9, 11. I know not how Subjects have any power given them of God, to
resist the power from God, and Gods Ordinance. And if this resisting extend not
it self to defensive wars, Defen^^ve wars cannot be without offending.
how shall the people defend themselves from injuries and the greatest injuries
imaginable, from an Army of Cutthroats and Idolaters in war coming to
destroy Religion, set up Idolatry, and root out the name of Gods people, and
lay waste the mountain of the Lords house? And if they may defend themselves
by defensive wars, how can wars be without offending? 3. The law of Nature
teaches to repel violence with violence, when one man is oppressed, no less
then when the Commonwealth is oppressed. Barclay should have given either
Scripture, or the law of Nature for his warrant here. 4. Let us suppose a King
can be perjured, how are the Estates of the Kingdom, who are his Subjects, by
Barclays way, not to challenge such a Tyrant of his perjurie? He did swear, he
should be meek and clement, and he is now become a furious Lion, shall the
flock of God be committed to the keeping of a furious Lion?

D. Fern, p. 3. sect. 2. page 9. adds, Personal defense is lawful against
sudden and illegal invasion, such as Elisha practiced, even if it were against
the Prince to ward blows, and to hold the Princes hand, D. Fern acknowledges
violent resisting to be lawful, but not defensive wars.
but not to return blows, but general resistance by Arms, cannot be without
many unjust violences, and does immediately strike at the order, which is the
life of the Commonwealth.

Answ. If it be natural to one man to defend himself against the personal
invasion of a Prince, then is it natural and warrantable to ten thousand, and
to a whole Kingdom; and what reason to defraud a Kingdom of the benefit of
self-defence, more then one man? Neither grace nor policy destroys nature:
and how shall ten or twenty thousand be defended against Cannons and Muskets
that kills afar off, except they keep Towns against the King, which D.
Fern and others say had been treason in David, if he had kept Keilah against
King Saul, except they be armed to offend, with weapons of the like nature to
kill rather then be killed, as the Law of nature teaches. 3. To hold the hands
of the Prince is no less resisting violence, then to cut the lap of his
garment, which Royalists think unlawful, and is an opposing of external force
to Defensive wars are offensive only by accid^nt.
the Kings person. 4. It is true, wars merely defensive cannot be but they
must be offensive, but they are offensive by accident, and intended for mere
defense, and they cannot be without wars sinfully offensive, nor can any
wars be in rerum natura now, (I except the wars commanded by God, who only
must have been sinful in the manner of doing) but some innocent must be
killed; but war^es cannot for that be condemned. 5. Neither are offensive
wars against these who are no powers and no ordinances of God, such as are
cut-throate Irish, condemned Prelates and Papists now in Arms, more
destructive to the order established by God, then acts of lawful war are, or
the punishing of robbers; and by all this Protestants in Scotland and England,
should remain in their houses unarmed, while the Papists and Irish come on
them armed and cut their throats, and spoil and plunder at will.

Nor can we think that resistance to a King in holding his hands There is ^o
holding of an ar^ies hands, or warding of strokes, ^ut by ^ffensive wars
conjoined by accid^nt with defensive wars.
can be natural, if he be stronger, it is not a natural mean of
selfepreservation: Nature has appointed innocent and offending violence,
against unjust violence, as a means of selfe-preservation. Goliahs sword is no
natural means to hold Saul's hands, for a sword has no fingers; and if Saul,
1. suddenly, 2. without color of Law or reason, 3. inevitably should make
personal invasion on David to kill him; Dr. Fern says he may resist, but
resisting is essentially a reaction of violence; show us Scripture or reason
for violent holding a Kings hands in an unjust personal invasion, without any
other reaction of offense: Walter Torrils killed King W. Rufus, as he was
shooting at a Dear; the Earl of Suffolk killed Henry the 8. at Tilting;
there is no treasonable intention here, and so no homicide: Defensive wars are
offensive, ex eventu and effectu, not ex causa, or ex intention.

But it may be asked, if no passive subjection at all be commanded as due to
Superiors? Romans 13. Answ. None properly so called, that is, purely passive,
only wear for fear of the sword to do our duty. 2. We are to suffer ill of
punishment of Tyrants, ex hypothesi, that they inflict that ill on us, some
other way, and in some other notion then we are to suffer ill of equals, for we
are to suffer of equals not for any paternall authority that they have over us,
as certainly we are to suffer ill inflicted by Superiors. I demand of
Royalists, if Tyrants inflicting evil of punishment upon Subjects unjustly, be
powers ordained of God. 2. If to resist a power in Tyrannical acts be to
resist God. 3. Since we are not to yield active obedience to all the
commandments of Superiors, whether they be good, or ill, by virtue of this
place, Romans 13. how is it that we may not deny passive subjection to all the
Acts of violence exercised whether of injustice, whether in these Acts of
violence, wherein the Prince in actu ex cito, and formally punishes not in
Gods stead, or in these wherein he punish^th Tyrannically in no formal or
actual subordination to God we owe passive subjection: I desire an answer to
these.

Assert. 5. Flying from the tyranny of abused Authority, is a Flying is
resistance.
plain resisting of Rulers in their unlawful oppression and perverting of
judgment.

All Royalists grant it lawful, and ground it upon the Law of Nature, that
those that are persecuted by tyrannous Princes may flee, and it is evident from
Christ's Commandment, If they persecute you in one City, flee to another, Mat.
10. 23. and by Mat. 23. 34. Christ fled from the fury of the Jews, till his
hour was come; Elias, Vriah, Ier. 26. 20. Joseph and Mary fled; the Martyrs
did hide themselves in caves and dens of the earth, Heb. 11. 37, 38. Paul was
let down through a window in a basket at Damascus; this certainly is
resistance: For look what legal power God has given to a tyrannous Ruler,
remaining a power ordained of God, to summon legally, and set before his
tribunal the servants of God, that he may kill them and murder them unjustly,
that same legal power he has to murder them: For if it be a legal power to
kill the innocent, and such a power as they are obliged in conscience to submit
unto, they are obliged in conscience to submit to the legal power of citing;
for it is one and the same power: Now if resistance to the one power be
unlawful, resistance to the other must be unlawful also, and if the law of
self-defence, or command of Christ warrant me to disobey a tyrannous power,
commanding me to compeir to receive the sentence of death, that same Law far
more shall warrant me to resist and deny passive subjection, in submitting to
the un-unj^st sentence of death. 2. When a murderer self-convicted flees from
the just power of a Judge lawfully citing him, he resists the just power
ordained of God, Romans 3. Ergo, by the same reason if we flee from a tyrannous
power, we resist that tyrannous power, and so by Royalists ground we resist the
ordinance of God by flying. Now to be disobedient to a just power summoning a
malefactor, is to hinder that lawful power, to be put forth in lawful Acts,
for the Judge cannot purge the land of blood, if the murderer flee. 3. When
the King of Israel sends a Captain, and fifty Lictors to fetch Elisha, these
come instructed with legal power from the King, if I may lay fetters on their
power by flight upon the ground of self-preservation, the same warrant shall
allow me to oppose harmless violence, for my own safety. 4. Royalists hold
it unlawful to keep a strong hold against the King, though the Fort be not
the Kings house; and though that David should not have offended, if he had kept
Keilah against Saul, Dr. Fern and Royalists say, it had been unlawful
resistance. What more resistance is made to Royal power by walls interposed,
then by Seas and miles of earth interposed? Both are physical resistance, and
violent in their kind.

QUEST. XXXI. Whether or no self-defence against any unjust violence offered to
the life, be warranted by Gods Law, and the Law of Nature and Nations?
SElfe-preservation in all creatures in which is nature, is in the creatures
suitable to their nature: The Bull defends it self Self-defence natural.
by its horns, the Eagle by her claws and bill, it will not follow that a
Lamb will defend it self against a Wolf any other way, then by flying. So
men, and Christian men do naturally defend themselves; but the manner of
self-defence in a rational creature, is rational, and not always merely
natural: therefore a politic community, being a combination of many
natures, as neither grace, far less can policy destroy nature, then must
these many natures be allowed of God to use a natural self-defence. If the
King bring in an Army of forraigners, then a politic community must defend it
self in a rational way; Why? Self-defence is natural to Man, and na^urall to
a Lamb, but not the same way; A Lamb or a Dove naturally defend themselves
against beasts of another kind, only by flight, not by re-action and
re-offending: But it follows not that a man defends himself from his enemy
only by flight; If a robber invade me, to take away my life and my purse, I may
defend my self by re-action; for reason and grace both may determine the way
of self-preservation: Hence Royalists say, a private man against his Prince,
has no way to defend himself, but by flight; Ergo, a community has no other
way to defend themselves, but by flight. 1. The antecedent is false. Dr. Fern
allows D. Fern allows the resistance of denying of Tribute to a tyranous
Prince.
to a private man supplications, and denying of Subsidies, and Tribute to the
Prince, when he imployeth Tribute to the destruction of the Commonwealth;
which by the way, is a clear resistance, and an active resistance made against
the King, Romans 13. 6, 7. and against a Commandment of God, except Royalists
grant tyrannous powers may be resisted. 2. The consequence is naught, for a
private man may defend himself against unjust violence, but not any way he
pleases; The first way is by supplications and apologies, he may not presently
use violence to the Kings servants before he supplicate, nor may he use
re-offending, if flight may Apologies, Supplications* Flight, taking of Arms
lawful in selfdefence.
save. David used all the three in order; 1. He made his defense by words, by
the mediation of Jonathan; when that prevailed not, he took himself to
flight, as the next; but because he knew flight was not safe every way, and
nature taught him self-preservation, and reason and light of grace taught him
the means, and the religious order of these means for self-preservation.
Therefore he adds a third, He took Goliahs sword, and gathered six hundred
armed men, and after that made use of an host. Now a sword and armor are not
horsing and shipping for flight, but contrary to flight; so re-offending, is
Policies last refuge. A godly magistrate takes not away the life of a subject,
if other means can compass the end of the Law; Violent re-offending in
selfdefence the last remedy.
and so he is compelled and necessitated to take away the life: so the private
man, in his natural self-defence, not to use re-action, or violent
re-offending, in his self-defence against any man, far less against the
servants of a King, but in the exigence of the last and most inexorable
necessity. And it is true that M. Symmons faith, Simmons Loy^ll Subjects belees.
Sect. 11. page 35. Self-defence is not to be used, where it cannot be without
sin. It is certain, Necessity is but a hungry plea for sin, Luke 14. 18.
but it is also true, re-offending comparatively, that I Re-offending
comparatively that I kill ere I be killed, in the court of necessity law^ull
kill rather then I be killed, in the sinlesse Court of Natures spotless and
harmless necessity, is lawful and necessary, except I be guilty of
self-murder, in the culpable omission of self-defence. Now a private man may
fly, and that is his second necessity, and violent re-offending is the third
mean of self-preservation. But with leave, violent re-offending is necessary
to a private man, when his second mean, to wit, ^light, is not possible, and
cannot attain the end, as in the case of David: if ^light do not prevail,
Goliahs sword and an host of armed men are lawful: So to a Church and a
community of Protestants, men, women, aged, sucking children, sick, and
diseased, who are pressed either to be killed, or forsake Religion and Jesus
Christ, ^light is not the second mean, nor a mean at all, because 1. not
possible, and therefore not a natural mean of preservation: For 1. the aged,
the sick, the sucking infants, and sound The ^leeing of a Church or nation not
a mean of selfdefence always possible, and so not required of God.
Religion in the posterity cannot flee, ^light here is physically and by
natures necessity unpossible, and therefore no lawful mean. What is to nature
physically unpossible, is no lawful mean. 2. If Christ have a promise that the
ends of the earth, Psalm. 2. 8. and the Isles shall be his possession, Esa. 49.
1. I see not how natural defense can put us to flee, even all Protestants, and
their seed, and the weak and sick, whom we are obliged to defend as our selves,
both by the Law of nature and grace. I read that seven wicked nations and
idolatrous were cast out of their land to give place to the Church of God, to
dwell there, but show me a warrant in natures Law and in Gods word that three
Kingdoms of Protestant^, their seed, aged, sick, sucking children, should flee
out of England, Scotland, Ireland, and leave Religion and the Land to a King
and to Papists, Prelates and bloody Irish, and Atheists: and therefore to a
Church and community having Gods right and man's law to the land, violent
re-offending is their second mean (next to supplications and declarations,
etc.) and flight is not required of them, as of a private man. Yea flight is
not necessarily required of a private man, but where it is a possible mean of
self-preservation, violent and unjust invasion of a private man, which is
unavoidable may be obviated with violent re-offending. Now the unjust invasion
made on Scotland in 1640. for refusing the Service Book, or rather the idolatry
of the Mass, therein intended, was unavoidable, it was unpossible for the
Protestants, their old and sick, their women and sucking children to flee over
sea, or to have shipping betwixt the Kings bringing an army on them at
Duns-law, and the Prelates charging of the Ministers to receive the massebook;
Althusius says well, Pol. c. 38. n. 78. Though private men may flee; but the
estates if they flee, they do not their duty to commit a country, religion and
all to a Lion. Let not any o^ject, we may not devise a way to fulfill the
prophecy, Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Isa. 49. 1. it is true, if the way be our own sinful
way; nor let any object, a Colony went to New England and fled the persecution.
Answer, True, but if fleeing be the only mean after supplication, there was no
more reason that one Colony should go to New England, then it is necessary and
by a divine law obligatory, that the whol^ Protestants in the three kingdoms
according to Royalists Doctrine, are to leave their native country, and
religion to one man and to popish Idolators and Atheists willing to worship
idols with them, and whethere then shall the Gospel be, which we are obliged to
defend with our lives?

2. There is Tutela vitae proxima, and remota. A mere and immediate A self
defense remote, and a self-defence n^ere*hand*
defense of our life, and a remote or mediat defense; when there is no actual
invasion made by a man seeking our life, we are not to use violent
re-offending. David might have killed Saul, when he was sleeping, and when he
cut off the lap of his garment, but it was unlawful for him to kill the Lords
Anointed, because he is the Lords Annoited, as it is unlawful to kill a man,
because he is the Image of God, Genesis 96. except in case of necessity; The
magistrate in case of necessity may kill the malefector, thought his malefices
do When David had Saul in his hand, he was in a case of actual self-defence,
Saul being in a habitual unjust pursuit*
not put him in that case, that he has not now the image of God; now prudency
and light of grace determines, When we are to use violent re-offending for
self-preservation, it is not left to our pleasure. In a remote posture of
self-defence, we are not to ^se violet re-offending, David having Saul in his
hand was in a remote posture of defense, the unjust invasion then was not
actual, not inavoidable, not a necessary mean in human prudence for
self-preservation, for King Saul was then in a habitual, not in an actual
pursuit of the whole Princes, Elders and judges of Israel, or of a whole
community and Church; Saul did but seek the life of one man, David, and that
not for religion, or a national pretended offense, and therefore he could not
in conscience put hands on the Lords anointed; but if Saul had actually invaded
David for his life, David might in that case make use of Goliahs sword, (for he
took not that weapon with him as a Cipher to boast Saul, it is no less
unlawful to threatten a King then to put hands on him) and rather kill or be
killed by Saul's emissaries: Because then he should have been in an immediate
and nearest posture of actual self-defence. Now the case is far otherwise
between the King, and the two Parliaments of England, and Scotland, for the
King is not 1. Sleeping in his emissaries, for he has armies in two kingdoms,
and now in three kingdoms, by sea and land, night and day in actual pursuit,
The Protestants of the three kingdoms, not in the case that David was in, when
he came armed upon King Saul sleeping.
not of one David, but of the estates, and a Christian community in England and
Scotland, and that for Religious, Laws and Liberties, for the question is now
between Papist and Protestant, between Arbitrary or Tyranicall government, and
law-government, and Therefore by both the Laws of the politic societies of
both Kingdoms, and by the Law of God and nature, we are to use violent
re-offending for self-preservation, and put to this necessity when armies are
in actual pursuit of all the Protestant Churches of the three Kingdoms, to
actual killing, rather then we be killed, and suffer Laws, and Religion to be
undone. But says the Royalist, David's argument, God forbid that I stretch out
my hand against the Lords Anointed, my Master the King, concludes
universally, that the King in his most Tyrannous acts, still remaining the
Lords Anointed, cannot be resisted. Ans. 1. David speaks of stretching out
his hand against the person of King Saul: no man in the three Kingdoms, did so
much as attempt to do violence to the Kings So D. Fern.
person. But this argument 2. is inconsequent, for a King invading in his own
Royal person, the innocent subject, 1. Suddenly. 2. Without color of Law and
reason. 3. Unavoidably, may be personally resisted, and that with opposing a
violence bodily, yet in that invasion he remains the Lords Anointed. 2. By
this argument the life of a murderer cannot be taken away by a Judge, for he
remains one endued with Gods image, and keeps still the nature of a man
under all the murders that he does, but it follows no ways, that because
God has endowed his person with a sort of Royalty, of a Divine image, that his
life cannot be taken; and certainly, if to be a man endued with Gods image,
Genesis 6. 9, 10. and to be an ill doer worthy of evil punishment are different;
to be a King, and an ill doer may be distinguished.

The grounds of self-defence are these; A woman or a young man may violently
oppose a King, if he force the one to adultery and incest, and the other to
Sodomy; Though Court-flatterers should say, the King in regard of his
absoluteness is Lord of life and death; yet no man ever said, that the King is
Lord of chastity, faith, and oath that the wife has made to her husband.

2. Particular nature yields to the good of universal nature, for The law of
universal and particular nature warranteth self-defence.
which cause heavy bodies ascend, aerie and light bodies descend; If then a
wild Bull or a goaring Ox, may not be let loose, in a great market-confluence
of people; and if any man turn so distracted, as he smite himself with stones
and kill all that pass by him, or come at him; in that case the man is to be
bound, and his hands fettered, and all whom he invadeth may resist him, were
they his own sons, and may save their own lives with weapons; much more a
King turning a Nero: King Saul vexed with an evil spirit from the Lord, may be
resisted; and far more i^ a King endued with use of reason, shall put violent
hands on all his subjects, kill his son and heir; yea, any violently invaded,
by natures law, may defend themselves, and the violent restraining of such an
one is but the hurtingof one man, who cannot be virtually the Commonwealth;
but his destroying* of the community of men sent out in wars, as his bloody
emissaries, to the dissolution of the Commonwealth.

3. The cutting off of a contagious member, that by a Gangrene, would corrupt
the whole body, is well warranted by nature, because the safety of the whole is
to be preferred to the safety of a part: Nor is it much that Royalists say the
King being the head, destroy him, and the whole body the Comon-wealth is
dissolved; as cut off a man's head, and the life of the whole man is taken away;
Because, 1. God cutteth off the spirits of tyrannous Kings, and yet the
Commonwealth This or that King not the adequat head of the community*
is not dissolved, no more then when a Leopard or a wild Boar, running
through children is killed, it can be the destruction of all the children in
the land. 2. A king indefinitely is referred to the Commonwealth as an adequat
head to a Monarchical Kingdom, and remove all Kings and the politic body as
Monarchical, in its frame, is not Monarchical, but it leaves not off to be a
politic body, seeing it has other Judges, but the natural body without the
head cannot live. 2. This or that tyrannous King, being a transient mortal
thing, cannot be referred to the immortal Commonwealth, as it is adequat
correlate. They say, the King ^ever dies, yet this King can dye; an immortal
politic body, such as the Commonwealth, must have an immortal head, and
that is a King as a King; not this or that man, possibly a tyrant, who is for
the time (and eternal things abstract from time) only a King.

4. The reason of Fortunius Garcias a skillful Lawyer in Spain is
considerable, Coment. in l. ut vim vi ff. de justit. and jure. God has
impl^nted in every creature natural inclinations, and motions to preserve it
self, and we are to love our self for God, and have a love to preserve our
selves rather then our neighbor, and Natures law teaches every man to love
God best of all, and next our selves more then our neighbor; for the Law
says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; then (says Malderus com. in
12. q. 26. tom. 2. c. 10. concl. 2.) The love of our self, is the measure of
the love of our neighbor. But the rule and the measure is more perfect,
simple, and more principal then the thing that is measured: It is true, I am
to love the salvation of the Church, it coming nearer to Gods glory, more then
my own salvation, as the wishes of Moses and Paul do Fxod. 32. Romans 9.
prove; and I am to love the salvation of my brother, more then my own
temporal life; but I am to love my own temporal life, more then the life of
any other, and therefore I am rather to kill, then to be killed, the exigence
of necessity so requiring; Nature The love of our self the rule and measure of
our love to our neighbor. We are to love our brethrens salvation aobve our
l^fe, not their life above our own.
without sin aims this as a truth, in the case of loss of life; Proximus sum
egomet mihi. Ephesians. 5. 28, 29. He that loves his wife, loves him self; for
no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes it, and cherishes it,
even as the Lord the Church. As then nature tyeth the dam to defend the young
birds, and the Lion her whelps, and the husband the wife, and that by a
comparative re-offending, rather then the wife or children should be killed;
yea, he that is wanting to his brother, (if a robber unjustly invade his
brother) and helps him not, is a murderer of his brother so far, Gods
spiritual law requiring both conservation of it in our person, and
preservation in others. The forced Damsel was commanded to cry for help, and
not the Magistrate only, but the nearest private man or woman was to come, by
an obligation of a divine Law of the seventh Commandment, to rescue the
Damsel with violence; even as a man is to save his enemies Ox or his Ass out
of a pit: And if a private man may inflict bodily punishment of two degrees, to
preserve the life and chastity of his neighbor, far rather then suffer his
life and chastity to be taken away, then he may inflict violence of four
degrees even to killing, for his life, and much more for his own life. So when
a Robber, with deadly weapons invadeth an innocent traveller to kill him, for
his goods, upon the supposition that if the Robber be not killed, the innocent
shall be killed; Now the question is, which of the two, by Gods moral Law and
revealed will in point of conscience, ought to be killed by his fellow; for we
speak not now of Gods eternal decree of permitting evil, according to the
which murderers may crucisie the innocent Lord of glory: by no moral Law of
God, should the ^^ just robber kill the innocent traveller, therefore in this
exigence of providence, the traveller should rather kill the robber. If any
say, by Gods moral Law not one should kill his fellow; and it is a sin against
the moral Law in either to kill other; I answer: If a third shall come in when
the robber and the innocent are invading each other for his life, all
acknowledge by the sixth Commandment, the third may cut off the robbers arm to
save the innocent; but by what Law of God he may cut off his arm, he may take
his life also to save the other; for it is murder to wound unjustly, and to
dismember a man by private authority, as it is to take away his life: If
therefore the third may take away the robbers member, then also his life, so
he do it without malice or appetite of revenge, and if he may do it out of
this principle, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; because a man is
obliged more to love his own flesh, then his neighbors, Ephesians. 5. 28. and so
more to How many ways a man may prefer the safety of his own life to the
safety of his brother.
defend himself, then to defend his neighbor, then may he oppose violence to
the robber; As two men drowning in a water, the one is not obliged by Gods Law,
to expose himself to drowning to save his neighbor; but by the contrary, he
is obliged rather to save himself, though it were with the loss of his
neighbors life: As in war, if soldiers in a strait passage be pursued on
their life, nature teaches them to flee; if one fall, his fellow in that
exigence is not only not obliged to lift him up, but he and the rest flying,
though they trample on him and kill him, they are not guilty of murder, seeing
they hated him not before. Deuteronomy. 19. 4. 6. so Chemnit. loc. com. de vindic. q.
3. allows private defense. 1. When the violence is sudden, And the 2.
Violence manifestly inevitable. 3. When the Magistrate is absent and cannot
help. 4. When moderation is kept as Lawyers require. 1. That it be done
incontinent, if it be done after the injury, it is revenge, not defense. 2. Not
of Desire of revenge. 3. With proportion of armor. If the violent invader
invade not with deadly weapons, you must not invade him with deadly weapons,
and certainly the law, Exodus 22. of a man's defending his house is clear. 1. If
he come in the night, it is presumed he is a robber. 2. If he be taken with a
weapon breaking the house, he comes to kill, a man may defend himself, wife,
and children, but he is 3. but to wound him, and if he die of the wound, the
defender is free, so the defender is not to intend his death, but to save
himself.

5. It were a mighty defect in providence to man, if dogs by nature may defend
themselves against Wolves, Bulls against Lions, Self defense common to man with
beasts.
Doves, against Hawks, if man in the absence of the lawful Magistrate, should
not defend himself against unjust violence, but one man might raise armies of
Papists sick for blood to destroy innocent men. They object, When the King is
present in his person, and his invaders, he is not absent, and so though you
may rather kill a private man, then suffer your self to be killed, yet, because
prudence determines the means of self-defence, you are to expose your life to
hazard for justice of your King, and therefore not to do violence to the life
of your King, nor can the body in any self-defence, fight against the head,
that must be the destruction of the whole. Ans. Though the King be present as
an unjust invader in Wars against his innocent subjects, he is absent as a
King, and a father and defender, and present as an unjust grassator, and
therefore the innocent may defend themselves, when the King neither can, nor
will defend him. Nature makes a man ( says the law. l. Gener. c. de decur. l.
10. l. sialius.. Bellissime ubique Gloss. in verse. ex magn. not. per. illum.
text. ff. quod vi aut clam. l. ait praetor.. si debitorem meum. ff. de hisque
in fraud. credito.) even a private man his own judge, magistrate and defender,
quando copiam judicis, qui sibijus reddat, non habet. When he has no judge, to
give him justice and law. 2. The subjects are to give their lives, for the
King, ad the King, because the safety of the King as King is the safety of the
commonwealth. But the King as offering unjust violence to his innocent
subjects is not King. Zoannet. part. 3. defens. n. 44. transgrediens notorie
officium suum judex, agit velut privatus aliquis, non ut magistratus. ff. de
injur. est bonus in simili in. l. qui fundum.. si. tutor. ff. pro emptore. 3.
If the politic body fight against this head in particular, not as head, but as
an oppressor of the people. There is no fear of dissolution, if the body rise
against all magistracy, as magistracy and laws: dissolution of all must
follow, Parliaments and inferior jadges are heads. Number. 1. 16. Number. 10. 4.
Deuteronomy. 1. 15. Josh. 22. 21. Mic. 3. 1. ver. 9. 11. 1 King. 8. 1. 1 Chronicles. 5. 25.
2 Chro. 5. 2. No lesle then the King, and it is unlawful to offer violence to
them, though I shall rather think a private man is to suffer the King to kill
him, rather then he kill the King; because he is to prefer the life of a
private man, to the life of a public man.

6. By the law of nature a ruler is appointed to defend the innocent. Now by
nature an infant in the womb d^fendeth it self first, before the parents can
defend it, then when parents and magistrates are not, (and violent invading
magistrates are not in that magistrates) nature has commended every man to
self-defence.

7. The Law of nature excepteth no violence, whether inflicted by a magistrate,
or any other unjust violence from a ruler is twice injustice. 1. He does
unjustly as a man. 2. As a member of the commonwealth. 3. He commits a
special kind of sin of injustice, against his office, but it is absurd to say
we may lawfully d^fend our selves from smaller injuries, by the law of nature;
and not from the greater. If the Pope (says Fer. Vasquez. illust. quest. l. 1.
c. 24. n. 24, 25.) command to take away benefices from the just owner, these
who are to execute his commandment, are not to obey, but to write back that
that mandat came not from his holiness, but from the avarice of his Officers;
but if the Pope still continue and press the same unjust Mandat, the same
should be written again to him: and though there be none above the Pope, yet
there is natural self-defence patent for all. Defensio vitae nece^aria est,
and a jure naturali profluit: L. ut vim. ff. de just. and jure 16. Nam quod
quisque ob tutelam corporis sui fecerit, jure fecisse videatur. C^jus natural.
1. distinc. l. 1. ff. de vi and vi armata. l. injuriarum. ff. de injuria. C.
significasti. 2. de hom. l. scientiam. sect. qui non aliter ff. ad leg. Aquil.
C. si vero 1. de sent. excom. and l. sed etsi ff. ad leg. Aquil. etiamsi
sequatur homicidium. Vasquez. l. 1. c. 17. n. 5. etiam occidere licet ob
defensionem rerum. Vim vi repellere omnia jura permittunt in C. significasti.
Garcias Fortunius Comment. in l. ut vim. ff. de instit* and jur. n. 3.
defendere se est juris naturae and gentium. A jure civili fuit additum
moderamen inculpatae tutelae. lac. Novel. defens. n. 101. Occidens Principem
vel alium Tyrannidem exercentem, a paena homicidii excusatur. Grotius de jure
belli and pacis, l. 2. c. 1. n. 3. Si corpus impetatur vi present, cum
periculo vitae non aliter vitabili, tune bellum est licitum etiam cum
intersectione periculum inf^rentis, ratio, natura quemque sibicommendat. Barcl.
advers. Monar. l. 3. c. 8* est jus cuilibet se tenendi adversus immanem
sevitiam.

But what ground (says the Royalist) is there to take Arms against a King?
Ielousies and suspicions are not enough.

Ans. The King sent first an Army to Scotland, and blocked us up by sea,
before we took Arms. 2. Papists were armed in England, they have professed
themselves in their Religion of Trent to be so much the holyer, that they root
out Prottstants. 3. The King Taking of arms in the law is a sovereign ground
of a d^fensive postu^e.
declared we had broken loyalty to him, since the last Parliament. 4. He
d^clared both Kingdoms Rebels. 5. Attempted in his Emissaries to destroy the
Parliament. 6. And to bring in a foreign enemy. And the Law says, An
imminent danger, which is a sufficient warrant to take up Arms, is not
strokes, but either the terror of Armor, or threatening. Glossator. in d. l.
1. C. Vinde vi. ait non esse verbera expectanda, sed vel terrorem armorum
sufficere, vel minas, and hoc esse immin^ns periculum. L. Sed and si quemcunque
in princ. ff. ad leg. Aquil. l. 3. quod qui armati ff. de vi and vi armata is
qui aggressorem. C. adlegem C. adlegem Corneli.

In most heinous sins, conatus, the endeavor and aim (etiamsi effectus non
sequatur, puniridebet) is punishable. Bartoln. in l. Si quis non dicam rapere.

The King has aimed at the destruction of his Subjects, through the power of
wicked counselors, and we are to consider not the intenton of the works, but
the nature and intention of the work; Papists are in arms, their religion, the
Conspiracy of Trent, their conscience (if they have any) their malice against
the convenant of Scotland which abjureth their Religion to the full, their
ceremonies, their Prelates lead, and necessitate them to root out the name of
Protestant, Religion, yea and to stab a King who is a Protestant. Nor is our
King remaining a Protestant, and adhering to his oath made at his Coronation in
both kingdoms, Lord of his own person, master of himself, nor able as King to
be a King over Protestant subjects, if the Papists now in arms under his
standard, shall prevail.

The King has been compelled to go against his own oath and the Laws which he
did swear to maintain: The Pope sends to his popish armies both
dispensations, bulls, mandats, encouragements: The King has made a cessation
with the bloody Irish, and has put arms in the hands of Papists. Now he being
under the oath of God, tied to maintain the Protestant Religion, he has a
metaphysically subtle, pearcing faith of miracles, who believes armed Papists,
and Prelates shall defend Protestants, their Religion, and these who have
abjured Prelates as the lawful sons of the Pope, that (...), and as the law
says, Quilibet in dubio praesumitur bonus. L. merito praesumi. L. non omnes a
Barbaris de re milit. Charity believes not ill: So Charity is not a fool to
believe all things. So says the Law, Semel malus, semper praesumitur malus, in
eodem genere. C. semel malus de jure gentium in 6. Once wicked is always
wicked in that kind. Marius Salamonius I. C. in L. ut vim at que injuriam ff.
de just. and jure. We are not to wait on strokes, the terror of armor, omnium
consensu, by consent of all is sufficient. n. 3. If I see (says he) the enemy
take an arrow out of the Quiver, before he bend the bow, it is lawful to
prevent him with a blow -- cunctatio est periculosa. The Kings coming with
armed men, to demand the Five Members, into the House of Commons, is very
symbolicall, and War was printed on that fact, he that runs may read. His
coming to Hull with an Army, says not he had no errand there, but ask what
it was in the clock. See Novellus that learned Venetian Lawyer, in a Treatise
for defense, he makes continuatam rixam, a continued upbraiding a sufficient
ground of violent defense. He cites Doctores Comniter. in L. ut vim. ff. de
just. and jure. Yea he says, Drunkenness, defens. n. 44. Error, n. 46.
Madness, n. 49, 50. Ignorance, n. 51. 52. Impudence, n. 54. Necessity, n. 56.
Lasciviousness, 58. Continual reproaches, 59. The fervor of anger, 64.
Threatening, 66. Fear of imminent danger, 67. Just grief do excuse a man from
homicide, and that in these he ought to be more mildly punished, Quia
obnubilatum and mancum est consilium, Reason in these being lame and clogged.
Ambros. l. 1. offic. Quinon repellit injuriam a socio, cum potest, tam est in
vitio, quam ille qui facit. And as Nature, so the Law says, When the losses
are such as can never be repaired, as Death, Mutilation, less of Chastity,
Quoniam facta infecta fieri nequeunt, things of that kind once done, can never
be undone, we are to prevent the enemy, l. Zonat. tract. defens. par. 3. l. in
bello. factae de capit. notat. Gloss. in l. si quis provocatione. If the King
send an Irish Rebel to cast me over a bridge, and drown me in a water, I am
not to do nothing, while the Kings emissary first cast me over, and then in the
next room I am to defend my self; but nature and the law of self-defence
warranteth me (if I know certainly his aim) to horse him first over the
bridge, and then consult how to defend my self at my own leisure.

Royalists object that David in his defense never invaded and persecuted Saul;
yea, when he came upon Saul and his men sleeping, he would not kill any; but
the Scottish and Parliaments Forces not only defend, but invade, offend, kill
and plunder; and this is clearly an offensive, not a defensive war.

Answ. There is no defensive war different in spece and nature Offensive and
defensive wars differ in the event and intentions of men, but not physically.
from an offensive war, if we speak physically, they differ only in the
event and intention of the heart, and it is most clear that the affection and
intention does make one and the same action of taking away the life, either
homicide, or no homicide: If a man out of hatred deliberately take away his
brothers life, he is a murderer eatenus, but if that same man had taken away
that same brothers life, by the flying off of an Axe head off the staff, while
he was hewing timber, he neither hating him before, nor intending to hurt his
brother, he is no murderer, by Gods express Law, Deuteronomy. 4. 42. Deuteronomy. 19 4.
Joshua 20. 5. 2. The cause between the King and the two Parliaments, and
between Saul and David, are so different in this, as it is much for us:
Royalists say, David might if he had seen offending to conduce for
selfe-preservation, have invaded Saul's men, and say they, the case was
extraordinary, and binds not us to selfedefence; and thus they must say; for
offensive weapons, such as Goliahs sword, and an host of armed men, cannot by
any rational men be assumed (and David had the wisdom of God) but to offend,
if providence should so dispose; and so what was lawful to David, is lawful
to us in self-defence, he might offend lawfully, and so may we.

2. If Saul and the Philistims aiming (as under an oath) to set up Dagon in the
land of Israel, should invade David, and the Princes and Elders of Israel who
made him King; and if David with an host of armed men, he and the Princes of
Israel, should come in that case upon Saul and the Philistims sleeping, if in
that case David might not lawfully have cut off the Philistims, and as he
defended in that case Gods Church, and true Religion, if he might not then have
lawfully killed (I say) the Philistims, I remit to the conscience of the
Reader. Now to us Papists and Prelates under the Kings banner, are Philistims,
introducing the Idolatry of Breadworship and Popery, as hateful to God, as
Dagon-worship.

3. Saul intended no arbitrary government, nor to make Israel a conquered
people, nor yet to cut off all that professed the true worship of God; nor came
Saul against these Princes, Elders and people who made him King, only David's
head would have made Saul lay down Arms; but Prelates, and Papists, and
Malignants under the King, intend to make the Kings sole will a Law, to destroy
the Court of Parliament, which puts Laws in execution against their
Idolatry; and their aim is that Protestants be a conquered people, and their
attempt has been hitherto to blow up King and Parliament, to cut off all
Protestants, and they are in Arms in diverse parts of the Kingdom, against the
Princes of the Land, who are no less Judges and deputies of the Lord, then the
King himself; and would kill, and do kill, plunder and spoil us, if we kill
not them. And the case is every way now between Armies and Armies, as between
a single man unjustly invaded for his life, and an unjust invader: neither in a
natural action, such as is self-defence, is that of policy to be urged; none
can be Judge in his own cause, when oppression is manifest; one may be both
agent A where may not sell her own body for hire. Covar* to. 1. par. 2. ^. 1.
de furti and rapi restituti. 2. n. 1.
and patient, as the fire and water conflicting; there is no need of a judge, a
community casts not off nature; when the judge is wanting, nature is judge,
actor, accused and all.

Lastly, no man is Lord of his own members, of his body, m. l. liber homo ff.
ad leg. Aqui. nor Lord of his own life, but is to be accountable to God for it.

QUEST. XXXII. Whether or no the lawfulness of defensive wars has its
warrant in Gods word, from the example of David, Elisha, the eighty Priests who
resisted Uzziah, etc?
DAvid defended himself against King Saul, 1. by taking Goliahs The lawfulness
of violent resistance of Kings clear from Scripture proofs.
sword with him, 2. by being Captain to six hundred men, yea, it is more then
clear, 1 Chronicles. 12. that there came to David a host like the host of God, v.
22. to help against Saul, exceeding four thousand, v. 36. Now that this host
came warrantably to help him against Saul, I prove, 1. because it is said, ver.
1. Now these are they that came to David to Ziglag, while he kept himself
close, because of Saul the son of Kish; and they were amongst the mighty men,
helpers of the war: and then so many mighty Captains are reckoned out, v. 16.
There came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the hold of David, v. 19.
And there fell some of Manasseh to David. 20. As he went to Ziglag there fell
to him of Manasseh; Ke^^h, and Jozabad, Jedi^l and Michael, and Elihu, and
Zilthai Captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh. 21. And they helped
David against the band (of the rovers.) 22. At that time day by day there came
to David, until it was a great host, like the host of God. Now the same
expression that is ver. 1. where it is said, they came to help David against
Saul, which ver. 1. is repeated, ver. 16. ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 2. That they
wartantably came, is evident; because, 1. the Spirit of God commends them for
their valor and skill in war, ver. 2. ver. 8. ver. 15. ver. 21. which the
Spirit of God does not in unlawful wars. 2. Because Amasai, v. 18. The Spirit
of the Lord coming on him, says, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou
son of Jesse; peace, peace unto thee, and peace to thy helpers, for thy God
helps thee. The Spirit of God inspireth no man to pray peace, to those who
are in an unlawful war. 3. That they came to David's side only to be
sufferers, and to flee with David, and not to pursue and offend, is ridiculous.
1. It is said, ver. 1. They came to David to Ziglag, while he kept himself
close, because of Saul the son of Kish. And they were amongst the mighty men,
helpers of the war. It is a scorn to say, that their might, and their
helping in war, consisted in being mere patients with David, and such as
fled from Saul: for they had been on Saul's side before; and to come with
armor to flee, is a mocking of the word of God. 2. It is clear, the scope of
the Spirit of God is to show how God helped his innocent servant David against
his persecuting Prince and Master King Saul, in moving so many mighty men of
war to come in such multitudes, all in Arms, to help him in war. Now to
what end would the Lord commend them, as fit for War, men of might, fit to
handle shield and buckler, whose faces are as the faces of Lions, as swift as
the Roes on the Mountains, ver. 8. and commend them as helpers of David, if it
were unlawful for David, and all those mighty men, to carry Arms to pursue
Saul and his followers, and to do nothing with their armor but flee? Judge if
the Spirit of God in reason could say, All these men came armed with bows,
ver. 2. and could handle both the right hand and the left in slinging stones,
and shooting of arrows, and that ver. 22. all these came to David, being
mighty men of valor, and they came as Captains over hundreds and thousands,
and they put to flight all them of the valleys, both toward the East, and
toward the West, ver. 14, 15. and that David received them, and made them
Captains of the band, if they did not come in a posture of war, and for
hostile invasion, if need were? For if they came only to suffer and to slay,
not to pursue, Bows, Captains, and Captains of Bands made by David and
David's helpers in the war, came not to help David by flying, that was a hurt
to David, not a help. It is true, M. Symmons says, 1 Samuel 22. 2. Those that
came out to David, strengthened him, but Symmons Loyal subject. * 10. page* 31.
he strengthened not them; and David might easily have revenged himself on the
Ziphites, who did good will to betray him to the hands of Saul, if his
conscience had served him.

Answ. 1. This would infer that these armed men came to help David against
his conscience, and that David was a patient in the business, the contrary is
in the Text, 1 Samuel 26. 2. David became a Captain over them: and 1 Chronicles. 12.
17. If ye come peaceably to help me, my heart shall be knit to you. ver. 18.
Then David received them, and made them Captains of the band. 2. David might
have revenged himself upon the Ziphites: True, but that Conscience hindered
him, cannot be proved. To pursue an enemy is an act of a Council of War;
and he saw it would create more enemies, not help his Cause. 3. To David to
kill Saul sleeping, and the people who out of a misinformed conscience came
out, many of them to help their lawful Prince against a Traitor (as was
supposed) seeking to kill their King, and to usurp the throne, had not been
wisdom nor justice, because to kill the enemy in a just self-defence, must
be, when the enemy actually does invade, and the life of the defendant cannot
be otherwise saved. A sleeping enemy is not in the act of unjust pursuit of
the innocent; but if an Army of Papists, Philistims were in the fields
sleeping, pursuing not one single David only for a supposed personal wrong to
the King, but lying in the fields and camp against the whole Kingdom and
Religion, and David's not invading Saul and his men, a case far contrary to the
condition of England and Scotland now.
laboring to introduce arbitary Government, Popery, Idolatry, and to destroy
Laws and Liberties, and Parliaments, then David were obliged to kill these
murderers in their sleep.

If any say, The case is all one in a natural self-defence, what ever be the
cause, and who ever be the enemy, because the self-defender is not to offend,
except the unjust Invader be in actual pursuit, now Armies in their sleep are
not in actual pursuit.

Answ. When one man with a multitude invadeth one man, that one man may pursue,
as he sees most conducible for self-defence. Now the Law says, Threatenings
and terror of Armor makes imminent danger, and the case of pursuit in
self-defence lawful; if therefore an Army of Irish Rebels and Spaniards were
sleeping in their Camp, and our King in a deep sleep in the midst of them, and
these Rebels actually in the Camp besieging the Parliament, and the City of
London, most unjustly to take away Parliament, Laws, and Liberties of Religion,
it should follow that General Essex ought not to kill the Kings Majesty in his
sleep, for he is the Lords Anointed, but 1. will it follow that General Essex
may not kill the Irish Rebels sleeping about the King? and that he may not
rescue the Kings Person out of the hands of the Papists and Rebels, ensnaring
the King, and leading him on to Popery, and to employ his Authority to defend
Popery, and trample upon Protestant Parliaments, and Laws? Certainly from this
example this cannot be concluded. For Armies in actual pursuit of a whole
Parliament, Kingdom, Laws, and Religion, (though sleeping in the Camp)
because in actual pursuit, may be invaded, and killed, though sleeping. And
David uses no argument from conscience, why he might not kill Saul's Army, (I
conceive he had not Arms to do that) and should have created more enemies to
himself, and hazard his own life, and the life of all his men, if he had of
purpose killed so many sleeping men; yea the inexpedience of that, for a
private wrong to kill Gods misled people, should have made all Israel enemies
to David. But David uses an Argument from Conscience only, to prove it was
not lawful for him to stretch forth his hand It is not lawful to kill the
King as Jesuits teach.
against the King; and for my part, so long as he remains King, and is not
dethroned by those who made him King at Hebron, to put hands on his person, I
judge utterly unlawful: one man sleeping cannot be in actual pursuit of
another man; so that the selfdefender may lawfully kill him in his sleep; but
the case is far otherwise in lawful wars, the Israelites might lawfully kill
the Philistims encamping about Jerusalem to destroy it, and Religion, and the
Church of God, though they were all sleeping; even though we suppose King Saul
had brought them in by his Authority, and though he were sleeping in the midst
of the uncircumcised Armies; and it is evident, that an host of armed enemies,
though sleeping, by the law of self-defence may be killed, left they awake and
kill us; whereas one single man, and that a King, cannot be killed. 2. I think
certainly, David had not done unwisely, but hazarded his own life, and all his
men's, if he, and Ahimel^ch, and Abishai should have killed an host of their
enemies sleeping, that had been a work, as impossible to three, so hazard some
to all his men.

D. Fern, as Arnisaeus did before him, says, The example of David D. Fern
his resolving of conscience. Sect. 2. Arnisaeus de authorit. prin^* c. 2. n.
15. David's example not extraordinary*
was extraordinary, because he was anointed and designed by God as successor to
Saul, and so he must use an extraordinary way of guarding himself. Arnisaeus
cites Alberic. Gentilis, that David was now exempted from amongst the number
of Subjects.

Answ. There were not two Kings in Israel now, both David and Saul. 2. David
acknowledges his subjection in naming Saul the Lords Anointed, and his Master,
Lord and King; and therefore David was yet a subject. 3. If David would have
proved his title to the Crown by extraordinary ways, he who killed Goliath
extraordinarily, might have killed Saul by a miracle; but David goes a most
ordinary way to work, for self-defence, and his coming to the Kingdom was
through persecution, want, eating shewbread in case of necessity, defending
himself with Goliahs sword. 4. How was any thing extraordinary, and above a
Law, seeing David might have killed his enemy Saul, and according to Gods Law
he spared him? and he argues from a moral duty, he is the Lords anointed,
therefore I will not kill him? was this extraoardinary above a law? then
according to Gods law he might have killed him. Royalists cannot say so, what
ground to say one of David's acts in his deportment toward Saul was
extraordinary, and not all? was it extraordinary that David fl^d? no: or that
David consulted the oracle of God, what to do when Saul was coming against him?
5. in an ordinary fact something may be extraordinary, as the dead sleep from
the Lord upon Saul, and his men. 1. Sam. 26. and yet the fact according to its
substance ordinary. 6. Nor is this extraordinary, that a distressed man, being
an excellent warrior as David was, may use the help of six hundred men, who by
the law of charity are to help to deliver the innocent from death; yea, all
Israel were obliged to defend him, who killed Goliath. 7. Royalists make David's
act of not putting hands on the Lords anointed an ordinary moral reason
against resistance, but his putting on of armor, they will have extraordinary,
and this is (I confess) a short way to an adversary to cull out something that
is for his cause, and make it ordinary, and something that is against his
cause, must be extraordinary. 8. These men by the law of nature were obliged to
join in arms with David, ergo the non-helping of an oppressed man, must be
Gods ordinary law: a blasphemous tenet. 9. If David by an extraordinary spirit
killed not King Saul, then the Jesuits way of killing must be Gods ordinary Law.

2. David certainly intended to keep Keilah against King Saul, for the Lord
would not have answered David in an unlawful fact, for that were all one, as
if God should teach David how to play the Traitor to his King; for if God had
answered, They will not deliver thee up, but they shall save thee from the hand
of Saul, As David believed he might say this, as well as its contradicent, then
David behoved to keep the city, for certainly David's question pre-supposeth he
was to keep the city.

The example of Elisha the Prophet is considerable, 2 Kings Elisha's fact
proves the lawfulness of defensive wars.
6. 32. But Elisha sat in his house, and the Elders with him: And the King
sent a man before him; but ere the messengers came to him, he said to the
Elders, See now the son of a murderer, has sent to take away mine head.
Here is unjust violence offered by King Ioram to an innocent man. Elisha
keeps the house violently against the Kings Messenger, as we did keep Castles
against King Charles his unlawful messengers. Look (says he) when the
messenger comes, shut the door. 2. There is violence also commanded, and
resistance to be made, Hold him fast at the door. In the Hebrew it is, (...)
Arias Montan. Claudite ^stium, and opprimetis eum in ostio: Violently press
him at the door: And so the Chaldee Paraphrase, Ierom. Ne sinatis eum
introire. The LXX. Interpreters, (...), illidite eum in ostio, Press him
betwixt the door and the wall. It is a word of bodily violence, according to
Vatablus. Yea Theodoret will have King Ioram himself holden at the door. And
3. It is no Answer that D. Fern and other Royalists give, that Elisha made no
personal resistance to the King himself, but only to the Kings cutthroat,
sent to take away his head. Yea they say, It is lawful to resist the Kings
cutthroats. But the text is clear, that the violent resistance is made to the
King himself also, for he adds, Is not the sound of his Masters feet behind
him? And by this answer, it is lawful to keep Towns with iron gates and
bars, and violently to oppose the Kings cutthroats, coming to take away the
heads of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and of Protestants in the three
Kingdoms.

Some Royalists are so impudent, as to say that there was no violence here, and
that Elisha was an extraordinary man, and that it is not lawful for us to call
a King the son of a murderer, as the Prophet Elisha did: but Fern sect. 2.
page 9. forgetting himself, says from hence, It is lawful to resist the
Prince himself, thus far, as to ward his blows, and hold his hands: But let
Fern answer, if the violent binding of the Princes hands, that he shall not be
able to kill, be a greater violence done to his Royal person, then David's
cutting off the lap of Saul's garment; for certainly, the Royal body of a
Prince is of more worth then his clothes. Now it was a sin, I judge, that
smote David's conscience, that he being a subject, and not in the act of
natural self-defence, did cut the garment of the Lords Anointed. Let Fern
see then how he will save his own principles, for certainly he yields the
cause for me; I judge that the person of the King, or any Judge, who is the
Lords Deputy, as is the King, is sacred, and that remaining in that honorable
case, no subject can without guiltiness before God, put hands in his person,
the case of natural self-defence being excepted: for because the Royal
dignity does not advance a King above the common condition of men, and the
Throne makes him not leave off to be a man, and a man that can do wrong; and
therefore as one that does manifest violence to the life of a man, though his
subject, he may be resisted with bodily resistance in the case of unjust and
violent invasion. It is a vain thing to say, Who shall be judge between the
King and his subjects? The subject cannot judge the King, because none can be
judge in his own cause, and an inferior or equal cannot judge a superior or
equal. But I answer, 1. This is the Kings own cause also, and he does unjust
violence as a man, and not as a King, and so he cannot be judge more then the
subject. 2. Every one that does unjust violence as he is such, is inferior to
the innocent, and so ought to be judged by some. 3. There is no need of the
formality of a judge in things evident to natures eye, such as are manifestly
unjust violences: Nature in acts natural of self-defence, is judge, party,
accuser, witness, and all; for it is supposed the Judge is absent, when the
Judge does wrong. And for the plea of Elisha's extraordinary spirit; it is no
thing extraordinary to Elisha by no extraordinary spirit resisted Joram.
the Prophet to call the King the son of a murderer, when he complains to
the Elders for justice of his oppression, no more then it is for a plaintiff
to libell a true crime against a wicked person; and if Elisha's resistance came
from an extraordinary spirit, then it is not natural for an oppressed man to
close the door upon a murderer, then the taking away of the innocent Prophets
head must be extraordinary, for this was but an ordinary and most natural
remedy against this oppression; and though to name the King the son of a
murderer, be extraordinary, (and I should grant it without any hurt to this
cause) it follows no ways that the self-defence was extraordinary. 3. 2.
Chron. 26. 17. Four score of Priests, with Azariah are commended as valiant
men. LXX. (...). Heb. (...) Arias Montan* filii virtutis, Men of courage and
valor, for that they resisted Vzziah the King, who would take on him to burn
Incense to the Lord, against the Law. M. Symmons page 34. sect. 10. They
withstood Loyal subjects belief.
him not with swords and weapons, but only by speaking, and one but spoke. I
answer; It was a bodily resistance: for beside that, Resistance made to King
Vzziah proves the same.
Jerome turns it, Viri fortissimi, Most valiant men; And it is a speech in
the Scripture, taken for men valorous for war; As 1 Samuel 14. 25. 2 Samuel 17.
10. 1 Chronicles. 5. 18. And so does the phrase (...) Potent in valor. And the
phrase, (...) 2 Samuel 24. 9. 2 Samuel 11. 16. 1 Samuel 31. 12. and therefore all the
80. not only by words, but violently expelled the King out of the Temple. 2.
(...) Arias Mont. and ^s^^t^runt contra Huzzi-Iahu. the LXX. say, (...) They
resisted the King, so Va^ib. Deturba ^nt eum ex illo l^co, compulsusque ut
eg^^de etur. in ^^. F^^^inanter eg ^d^ eum coe^e^unt, hoc est, extruserunt eum.
Dan. 11. 17. The armies of the south shall not stand. Dan. 8. 25. It is a word
of violence. 3. The text says ver. 20. and, they thrust him out. (...) Ar.
Mont. and fecerunt eum festinare. Hyerony. festinato expulerunt eum. The LXX.
say, The Priest (...), so Vatablus, they cast him out. And 4. it is said ver.
21. he was cut off from the house of the Lord. Doctor Fern says sect. 4. page
50. They are valiant men who dare withstand a King in an evil way, by a home
reproof, and by withdrawing the holy things from him, especially since by the
law the leper was to be put out of the congregation.

Ans. 1. He contradicts the text, it was not a resistance by words, for the
text says they withstood him, and they thrust him out violently. 2. He
yields the cause, for to withdraw the holy things of God, by corporal
violence, and violently to pull the censer out of his hand, that he should not
provoke Gods wrath, by offering incense to the Lord is resistance, and the like
violence may, by this example, be used, when the King uses the sword and the
Militia to bring in an enemy to destroy the kingdom: it is no less injustice
against the second table, that the King uses the sword to destroy the
innocent, then to usurp the c^nsor against the first table. But Doctor Fern
yields that the censor may be pulled out of his hand, lest he provoke God to
wrath. Ergo, by the same very reason, a fortiore, the Sword, the Castles, the
Seaports, the Militia may be violently pulled out of his hand, for if there
was an express Law that the leper should be put out of the congregation, and
therefore the King also should be subject to his Church-censor, then he
subjecteth the King to a punishment to be inflicted by the subjects, upon the
King, Ergo the King is obnoxious to the coactive power of the law. 2. Ergo,
subjects may judge him and punish him. 3. Ergo he is to be subject to all
Church-censors, no less then the people. 4. There is an express law that the
leper should be put out of the congregation. What then? flattering court
Divines say the King is above all these laws, for there is an express law of
God as express as that ceremonial on touching lepers, and a more binding law,
that the murderer should die the death. Will Royalists put no exception upon a
ceremonial law of expelling the leper, and yet put an exception upon a Divine
moral law, concerning the punishing of murderers given before the law on
Mount Sinai. Genesis 6. 9. They so declare that they accept the persons of men. 5.
If a leper King could not actually sit upon the throne, but must be cut off
from the house of the Lord, because of an express law of God, these being
inconsistent, that a King remaining amongst Gods people, ruling and reigning,
should keep company with the Church of God, and yet be a leper who was to be
cut off, by a Divine law from the Church, now I persuade my self that far less
can he actually reign in the full use of the power of the sword, if he use the
sword to cut off thousands of innocent people, because murdering the innocent
and fatherles, and Royal governing in Righteousness and Godliness are more
inconsistent, by Gods law, being morally opposite, then remaining a governor
of the people, and the disease of leprosy, are incompatible. 6. I think not
much that Barcley says cont. Monar. l 5. c. 11. Vzziah remained King, after he
was removed from the congregation for leprosy. 1. Because that touches the
question of dethroning Kings, this is an argument brought for violent resisting
of Kings, and that the people did resume all power from Vzziah, and put it in
the hand of Iotham his son, who was over the Kings house, judging the people of
the land. ver. 21. And by this same reason the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
may resume the power once given to the King, when he has proved more unfit to
govern morally, then Vzziah was ceremonially, that he ought not to judge the
people of the land in this case. 2. If the priests did execute a ceremonial
law upon King Vzziah. Far more may the three estates of Scotland, and the two
houses of Parliament 1 Samuel 14. The peoples resisting of Saul in rescuing
Jonathan unjustly condemned to die, says, that the Estates of the two
Kingdoms may swear and covenant to rescue thousands of innocents from the
unjust sword of cu^throats of Ireland, and Papists in England.
of England execute the moral law of God on their King.

If the people may covenant by oath to rescue the innocent and unjustly
condemned, from the sentence of death notoriously known be to tyranous and
cruel, then may the people resist the King in his unlawful practices. But this
the people did in the matter of Jonathan. M. Symmons says page 32. and Doctor
Fern. 9. 49. That with no violence, but by prayers and tears the people saved
Jonathan, as Peter was rescued out of prison by the prayers of the Church, King
Saul might easily be entreated to break a rash vow to save the life of his
eldest son. Ans 1. I say not the common people did it, but the people including
proceres regni, the Princes of the land, and captains of thousands. 2. The
text has not one word or syllable of either prayers, supplications or tears,
but by the contrary* They bound themselves by an oath, contrary to the oath of
Saul* 1 Samuel 14. 44. and swear. ver. 45. God forbid, as the Lord lives, there
shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, so the people rescued Chald.
Par. Manifestum est quod Jonathan peccavit perignorantiam. P. Mart. says with
a doubt, Si ista seditiose fecerunt -- nullo modo excusari possun^. Yea he
says, they might suffragiis, with their suffrages free him. Jun. The people
opposed a just oath to Saul's hypocritical oath. Osiander and Borhaius justify
the people. P. Mar. Com. in 2 Reg. c. 8. says, Libnah revoltrd, Quia subditos
nitebatur cogere ad Idololatriam, quod ipsi libnenses pati noluerunt and
merito: principibus enim parendum est, verum usque ad aras: The King would
compel them to Idolatry, and they justly r^volt. d. Vatab. in no^. Impulit
Judaeos ad Idololatriam, alioqui ^am pronos ad cultum Idololorum.
Jonathan. The Church prayed not to God for Peter's deliverance with an oath,
that they must have Peter saved whether God will or no.

2. Though we read of no violence used by the people, yet an oath upon so
reasonable a ground. 1. without the Kings consent. 2. contrary to a standing
law, that they had agreed unto, ver. 24. 3. contradictory to the Kings sentence
and unjust oath. 4. spoken to the King in his face, all these prove that the
people meaned, and that the oath ex condition operis, tended to a violent
resisting of the King in a manifestly unjust sentence. Chrysostom. hom. 14. ad
Pop. Antioch. accuses Saul as a murderer in this sentence, and praises the
people. So Iunius, Peter Martyr, (whom Royalists impudently cite) so Cor. a
lap. Zanch. Lyra, and Hug. Cardinalis say it was Tyranny in Saul, and laudable
that the people resisted Saul, and the same is asserted by Josephus l. 6.
antiquit. c. 7. so Althus. Polyt. c. 38. n. 109.

We see also 2 Chronicles. 21. 10. That Libnah revolted from under Iehoram, because
he had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers. It has no ground in the text that
Royalists say, that the defection of Lybnah is not justified in the text, but
the cause is from the demerit of wicked Iehoram, because he made defection from
God, Libnah made defection from him, as the ten tribes revolted from Rehoboam
for Solomon's idolatry, which before the Lord procured this defection, yet the
ten tribes make defection for oppression. I answer, where the literal meaning
is simple and obvious, we are not to go from it. The text shows what cause
moved Libnah to revolt, it was a town of the Levites, and we know they were
longer sound in the truth then the ten tribes, 2. Chron. 13. 8 9, 10. Hos. 11.
12. Lavater says Iehoram has pressed them to idolatry, and therefore they
revolted. Zanch. Cor. a Lap. says, this was the cause that moved them to
revolt, and it is clear ver. 13. he caused Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to go a whoring from God, and no doubt tempted Libnah to the like.

Yea the city of Abel 2 Samuel 20. did well to resist Ioab, David's General, for
he came to destroy a whole city for a traitors sake, for Sheba, they resisted
and defended themselves, the wise woman calls the city a mother in Israel,
and the inheritance of the Lord. ver. 19. and Ioab professes ver. 20. far be
it from him to swallow up and destroy Abel. The woman says ver. 18. They said
of old, they shall surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter,
that is, The City of Abels revolting, a proof for the lawfulness of
resistance.
the city of Abel was a place of Prophets and Oracles of old where they asked
responses of their doubts, and therefore peace should be first offered to the
City before Ioab should destroy it; as the law says, Deuteronomy. 20. 10. from all
which it is evident, that the city, in defending it self did nothing against
peace, so they should deliver Sheba the traitor to Ioabs hand, which
accordingly they did: and Ioab pursued them not as traitors for keeping the
city against the King, but professes in that they did no wrong.

QUEST. XXXIII. Whether or no the place Romans 13. 1. prove that in no case it is
lawful to resist the King?
THe special ground of Royalists from Romans 13. against the lawfulness The
place Romans 13. discussed.
of defensive Wars, is to make Paul, Romans 13. speak only of Kings. Hugo
Grotius de jure belli and pac. l. 1. c. 4. number. 6. Barclay cont. Monarch. l. 3.
c. 9. says, Though Ambrose expound the place Romans 13. de solis Regibus, of
Kings only, (this is false of Kings only, he does not, but of Kings
principally) Y^a it follows not that all Magistrates, by this place, are
freed from all laws, because (says he) there is no Judge above a King on
earth, and therefore he cannot be punished; but there is a Judge above all
inferior Judges, and therefore they must be subject to Laws. So D. Ferno
follows him, sect. 2. page 10. and our poor Prelate must be an accident to
them, Sacr. San. Maj. cap. 2. page 29. for his learning cannot subsist per se.

1. Assert. In a free Monarchy (such as Scotland is known to be) The King
only is not understood in the Text.
by the higher power Romans 13. is the King principally in respect of dignity
understood; but not solely and only, as if inferior Judges were not higher
powers. 1. I say in a free Monarchy: For no man can say, that where there is
not a King, but only Aristocracie, and government by States, as in Holland,
that there the people are obliged to obey the King; and yet this Text, I hope,
can reach the consciences of all Holland, that there every soul must be
subject to the higher powers, and yet not a subject in Holland is ^o be subject
to any King: for non ^ntis nulla ^unt accidentia. 2. I said the King in a free
Monarchy is here principally understood in regard of dignity, but not in
regard of the essence of a magistrate, because the essence of a Magistrate does
equally belong to all inferior Magistrates, as to the King, as is already
proved, (let the Prelate answer The King is principally understood in the Text,
Romans 13. in regard of dignity, but not only in regard of ^ssance.
if he can) for though some Judges be sent by the King, and have from him
authority to judge, yet this does no more prove that inferior Judges are
unproperly Judges, and only such by analogy, and not essentially; Then it
will prove a Citizen is not essentially a Citizen, nor a Church Officer
essentially a Church Officer, nor a son not essentially a living creature,
because the former have authority from the Incorporation of Citizens, and of
Church Officers, and the latter has his life by generation from his father, as
Gods instrument. For though the Citizen and the Church Officers may be judged
by their several Incorporations that made them, yet are they also essentially
Citizens and Church Officers, as those who made them such.

2. Assert. There is no reason to restrain the higher powers to Only Nero
cannot be understood, Romans 13. ^,
Monarchs only, or yet principally, as if they only were essentially powers
ordained of God, 1. Because he calls them (...), higher powers. Now this will
include all higher powers, as Piscator observes on the place. And certainly
Rome had never two or three Kings to which every soul should be subject, if
Paul had intended that they should have given obedience to one Nero, as the
only essential Judge he would have designed him by the nowne in the singular
number. 2. All the reasons that the Apostle brings to prove that subjection
is due, agrees to inferior Judges, as well as to Emperors, for they are
powers ordained of God, and they bear the sword, and we must obey them for
conscience sake, and they are Gods deputies, and their judgment is not the
judgment of men, but of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 1. 16. Numb. 11.
16, 17. Tribute and wages be no less due to them, as ministers and servants,
for their work, then to the King, etc. 3. The Apostle could not omit obedience
to the good Civil Laws enacted by the Senate, nor could he omit to command
subjection to Rulers, if the Romans should change the Government, and abolish
Monarchy, and erect their ancient form of Government before they had Kings.
5. This is Canonical Scripture, and a clear exposition of the first
Commandment, and so must reach the consciences of all Christian Republics,
where there is no Monarchy. 5. Parallel places of Scripture prove this. Paul,
1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. will have prayers made to God, for Kings, and for all that are
in authority, and the intrinsecall end of all is, a godly, honest, and
peaceable life. And 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake. Tit. 3. 1. It is true, subjection to Nero, of whom Tertullian said,
Apol. 5. Nihil nisi grande bonum a Nerone damnatum, is commanded here, but to
Nero as such an one as he is obliged, de jure, to be, (whether you speak of the
office, in abstracto, or of the Emperor, in concreto, in this notion, to me it
is all one) but that Paul commands subjection to Nero, and that principally
and solely, as he was such a man, defacto, I shall then believe, when
Antichristian Prelates turn Paul's Bishops, 1 Timothy 2. which is a miracle. 6.
Inferior Judges are not necessarily sent by the King, by any divine Law, but
chosen by the people, as the King is; and defacto, is the practice of creating
all Vatab. Homines intelligit publica authoritatep^aeditus.
Magistrates of Cities in both Kingdoms. 7. Augustine. expos, Prop. 72. on
Epist. Romans lrenaeus l. 5. c. 24. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 148. and on the place,
Hieron. Epist. 53. advers. vigilant. expound it of Masters, Magistrates; so do
Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Piscator, Rollocu. Marlorat. So do Popish Writers,
Aquinas, Lyra, Hugo Cardinal. Carthus. Pirerius, Toletus, Cornel. a Lapide, The
P. Prelates poor reasons restraining the Text to Kings, answered. Prelat. Sac.
Sanct. maj. c. 2. page 29. P. Martyr. Varia sunt potestatum g^nera -- regna,
Aristoc^atica, Politica, Tyrannica, Oliga^chica -- Deus etiam illorum author.
Willet says the same, and so Beza, so Tolet. Haymo.
Salmeron, Estius, expound the place; And therefore there is no argument, that
Royalists hence draw against resisting of the King by the Parliaments; but they
do strongly conclude against the Cavalliers unlawful wars against the
Parliaments and Estates of two Kingdoms: Here what P. P. says to the
contrary. 1. They are called eminent powers. Ergo, Kings only. Answ. It
follows not, for these can be no other then (...), 1 Timothy 2. 2. But these are
not Kings, but in the Text contradivided from (...), Kings, and they can be no
other then (...), Principalities and powers. 2. The reason of the Apostle
proves clearly, that (...)* cannot mean Kings only, for Paul adds of that
same (...), For there is no power but of God: It must be there is no
supereminent Royal power, but it is of God, and the powers Royal only (so he
must mean) that are, are ordained of God. Now this latter is manifestly false,
for inferior powers are of God; The power of the Roman Senate, of a Master, of
a Father, are of God. P. Prelate. Peter must expound Paul, and Paul's higher
powers must be, 1 Pet. 2. (...). More reason that Paul expound Paul: Now 1 Timothy
2. 2. (...), All in authority are not Kings. P. Prelate. (Are of God) or
(ordained of God) cannot so properly be understood of subordinate powers, for
that is not by immediate derivation from God, but immediately from the higher
power the King, and mediately from God.

Answ. It is most false that King David is so immediately a King from God, as
that he is not also by the mediation of the people, who made him King at
Hebron. 2. The inferior Magistrates are also immediate vicars and ministers of
God as the King, for their throne and judgment is not the Kings, but the
Lords, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 3. Though they were mediatly from man, it
follows not that they are not so properly from God, for Wisdom Prove. 8.
says as properly, ver. 16. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges
of the earth, as ver. 15. By me Kings reign; and promotion is as properly from
God, and not from the East, and the West, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. Though God promote
Joseph by the than^full munificence of Pharaoh, and Mordecai by Ahasuerus,
Daniel by Darius, as if he gave them power and honor immediately from Heaven.

Prelat. Learned Interpreters expound it so. Answ. It is an untruth, for none
expound it only and principally of Kings. Produce one Interpreter for that
conceit. Prelat. Paul wrote this when Nero was Monarch. Answ. Then must the
Text be expounded of Nero only. 2. He wrote this when Nero played the Tyrant,
and persecuted Christians: Ergo, We are not to disobey Nero's now. 3. He wrote
it when the Senate of Rome had power to declare Nero an enemy, not a Father; as
they did. P. Prelat. (...) must be referred to the Antecedent (...)* and this,
There is no power, (...) but of God; must undeniably infer, there is no
supreme power but of God; and so Sovereignty relates to God as his immediate
author; so Sectaries reason, Gal. 2. 16. Not justified by works, ((...)) but by
says only. Then (...), must be a perfect exclusive, else their strong hold
for Justification is overthrown. Answ. (...), has a nearer Antecedent, which
is (...), it is alone without (...), And this Grammar is not so good as Beza's,
which he rejected. 2. (...), will refer to God alone, as the only cause, In
genere causae primae. God alone gives rain: but not for that immediately, but
by the mediation of vapors and clouds. God alone kills and makes alive,
Deuteronomy. 32. 39. That is, excluding all strange gods, but not immediately; for by
his peoples fighting, he slew Og King of Bashan, and cast out seven Nations,
yet they used bow and sword, as it is in the book^ of Joshua; and therefore God
killed not Og immediately. God has an infinite, eminent, transeendent way of
working, so that in his kind he only works his alone: Deus solus operatur
solitudine primae causae, non solus solitudine omnis causae, God only gives
learning and wisdom, yet not immediately always; often he does it by teaching,
and industry. God only makes rich, yet the Prelates make themselves rich also
with the fat of the flock, and God only makes poor; yet the P. Prelates
Courts mediately also under God, made many men poor. 3. (...), is not such an
exclusive Particle when we ascribe it to God, as when we ascribe it to two
created causes, works, and faith; and the Protestants form of arguing* Gal.
2. to prove we are justified by faith, he calls our strong hold: Ergo, It is
not his strong hold. In this point then he must be a Papist, and so he refuses
to own Protestant strong holds, for justification by faith alone.

D. Fern sect. 2. page 10. As many as have souls must be subject to the
higher powers spoken of here; but all inferior Judges have souls. Answ. If
the word ( souls) be thus pressed, none shall be understood by higher powers,
but the King only* 2. Certainly, he that commands as he commands, must be
excepted, except, because the King has a soul, you must subject the King to
himself, and to his own commandments Royal; and so to penal Laws.

3. Inferior Judges, as Judges by this text, must either be subject to
themselves as Judges, and by the same reason, the King must be subject to
himself, as he is a Judge: Or Judges as men, or as erring men are to be
subject; which I would grant, but they are not subject as Judges, no more then
one as he commands, can also obey as he commands. These are contradictory;
I am not put off that opinion since I was at Schools, Species subjicibilis qua
subjicibilis non est praedicabilis.

4. If Nero make fathers rulers over their mothers and children, and command
them, by his public sword of justice, to kill their own children and
mothers; if a Senate of such fathers disobey, and if with the sword they de^end
their own children and mothers, which some other Doegs as Judges are to kill,
in the name and commandment of Nero: Then they resisting Neroes
bastard-commandment, by this doctrine resist the ordinance of God, and resist
the Minister of God. I have not a faith stretched out so far to the Prelates
Court-divinity. Yet Fern says, there was never more cause to resist higher
powers, for their wicked Nero was Emperor, when he now forbideth resistance
Romans 13. under the pain of damnation.

I desire to be informed, whether to resist the Kings servants be to resist the
King. Doctor Forne p. 3.. 2. p. 10. and par. 3.. 9. p. 59. allow us in
unavoidable assaults, where death is imminent, personal defense without
offending, as lawful, whether the King or his emissaries invade, without law
or reason. Well then, the resisting then of the Kings cutthroats, though they
have a personal command of the King to kill the innocent, yet if they want a
legal, is no resisting of the King, not as King, and the servant has no more
then the Master gives, but the King in lawless commandments gave nothing
royal to his cut-throates, and so nothing legal.

QUEST. XXXIIII. Whether Royalists by cogent reasons do prove the unlawfulness
of defensive wars?
What reasons have already been discussed, I touch not. Reasons against the
lawfulness of resistance made to unjust violence, answered.
Obj. 1. Arnisaeus de authorit princip. c. 2. number. 2. If we are to obey our
parents, not if they be good, but simply whether they be good or ill (so Just*
says of the King, Quamvis legum contemptor, quamvis impius, tamen pater. si
vero in ff. vos. 12.) then must we submit to wicked Kings.

Ans. Valeat totum, we are to submit to wicked Kings, and wicked parents,
because Kings, and parents: but when it comes to actual submission, we are to
submit to neither but in the Lord; the question is not touching subjection to a
Prince, let him be Nero, but if in acts of Tyranny we may not deny subjection:
there be great odds betwixt wicked rulers, and rulers commanding or punishing
unjustly.

Obj. 2. Arnisaeus c. 3. n. 9. We may resist an inferior magistrate. Ergo, we
may resist the supreme, it follows not, for an inferior judge has a
Majesty infiction only, not properly: treason is, or can only be committed
against the King, the obligation to inferior judges is only for the prince,
the person of none is sacred and inviolable but the Kings.

Ans. We obey parents, masters, kings, upon this formal ground, because they
are Gods deputies, and set over us, not by man, but by God: So that not only
are we to obey them because what they command is good and just (such a sort of
obedience an equal owes to the counsel of either equal or inferior) but
also by virtue of the fifth commandment, because of their place of dignity: now
this Majesty which is the formal reason of subjection is one and the same in
spece and nature in King and Constable, and only different gradually in the
King and in other judges, and it is denied that there is any incommunicable
sanctity in the Kings person which is not in some degree in the inferior
judge, all proceeds from this false ground, that the King and inferior
judges differ in nature, which is denied: and treason inferior may be
committed against an inferior judge, and it is a fiction that the inferior
judge does not resemble God, as the King does, yea there is a sacred Majesty in
all inferior judges, in the aged, in every superior, wherefore they deserve
honor, fear and reverence. Suppose there were no King on earth, as is clear
in Scripture. Exodus 20. 12. Levit. 19. 32. Esther 1. 20. Psalm. 149. 9. Prove. 3.
16. Math. 13. 57. Heb. 5. 4. Isa. 3. 3. Lam. 5. 12. Mal. 1. 6. Psalm. 8. 5. and
this honor is but united in a special manner in the King, because of his high
place.

Obj. 3. A King elected upon conditions may be resisted.

Ans. He is as ^ssentially a King, as a hereditary, yea as an absolute Prince,
and no less the Lords anointed then another prince, if then one, also another
may be resisted.

Obj. 4. The oath of God binds the subjects. Ergo, they must obey, not resist.

Ans. Obedience and resistance are very consistent. 2. No doubt the people gave
their oath to Athaliah, but to her as the only heir of the crown, they not
knowing, that Ioash the lawful heir was liveing, so may conditional oaths
(all of this kind are conditional) in which there is interpretative and
virtuall ignorance, be broken, as the people swear loyalty to such a man
conceived to be a father, he after that turns Tyrant, may they not resist his
Tyranny? they may. Also no doubt Israel g^ve their oath of loyalty to Iabin,
(for when Nebuchadnezer subdued Judah he took an oath of loyalty of their
King.) Yet many of Zabulon, Nepthali, and Isachar, Barack leading them,
conspired against Iabin.

Obj. 5. There is no law to take a Kings life, if he turn a Nero, we never
read that Subjects didit.

Ans. The treatise of unlimited prerogative says, p. 7. We read not that a
father killing his children, was killed by them, the fact being abominable. 2.
The law Genesis 6. 9. Levit. 24. 16. excepteth none. Se^ Deuteronomy. 13. 6. the dearest
that nature knows, are not excepted.

Obj. 6. Vengeance pursued Core, Dathan and Abiram who resisted Moses.

Ans. From resisting of a lawful magistrate, in a thing lawful, it follows
not, it must be unlawful to resist Kings, in Tyrannous acts.

Obj. 7. Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of
the people. Exodus 10* 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nor the
rich in thy bedchamber.

Ans. 1. The word Elohim signifies all judges, and (...), nasifignifieth one
lifted up above the people, says Rivetus in loc. whether a monarch, or many
rulers. All cursing of any is unlawful, even of a private man, Romans 12. 14.
Ergo we may not resist a private man by this: the other text reads, contemn
not the King. (...) in scientia tua. Aria. Mon. or in thy conscience or
thought: and it may prove resisting any rich man to be unlawful. Nothing in
word or deed tending to the dishonor of the King may be done, now to resist
him in self-defence, being a commandment of God in the law of nature cannot
fight with another commandment to honor the King, no more then the fifth
commandment can figh^ with the sixth, for all resistance is against the judge,
as a man exceeding the limits of his office, in that, wherein he is resisted,
not as a judge.

Obj. 8. Eccles. 8. 3. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who
may say to him, what do thou? Ergo, the King cannot be resisted.

Ans. 1. Tremel. says well, that the scope is that a man go not from the Kings
lawful command in passion and rebellion. Vatab. If thou go from the King in
disgrace, strive to be reconciled to him quickly. Cajetan. Use not Kings too
familiarly, by coming too quickly to them, or going too hastily from them.
Plutarch, Cum rege agendum ut cum rogo, neither too near this fire, nor too
far off. Those have smarted who have been too great in their favor,
Ahasuerus slew Haman, Alexander so served Clitus, and Tiberius Sejanus, and
Nero Seneca. But the sense is clear, rebellion is forbidden, not resistance,
so the hebrew, (...) stand not in an evil matter, or in a rebellion. And he
dehorteth from rebellion against the King, by an argument taken from his power.
3. For he does whatsoever pleases him. 4. Where the word of a King is, there
is power, And who may say unto him, What do thou? The meaning is in way of
justice, he is armed with power that cannot be resisted, other ways Samuel
said to King Saul, 1 Samuel 13. 13. Thou have done foolishly. Eliah said more to
Ahab then What have thou done? And the Prophets were to rebuke sin in Kings,
2 King. 3. 14. Ier. 1. 28. Chap. 22. 3. Hos. 5. 1, 2. And though Solomon here
give them a power, he speaks of Kings as they are de facto; but de jure they
are under a Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 18.

If the meaning be, as Royalists dream, he does whatsoever he (...)
will or desires, as a Prince, by his royal, that is, his legal will, by
which he is lex animata, a breathing law; we shall own that as truth, and it
is nothing against us. But if the meaning be, that De jure, as King, he does
whatsoever he will, by the absolute supremacy of Royal will above all law and
reason; then Ioram should by law as King, take Elisha's head away, and Elisha
resisted God, in saying, What does the King? and he sinned in commanding to
deal rougbly with the Kings messenger, and hold him at the door: then the
fourscore valiant Priests, who said to King Vzziah, What do thou? resisted
him, in burning incense, which he desired to do, sinned; Then Pharaoh, who
said, Ezech. 29. 3. The river Nilus is mine, I have made it for my self: and
the King of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28. 2. I am God, I sit in the seat of God, should not
be controlled by the Prophets, and no man should say to them, What say thou?
Did Cyrus as a King, with a Royal power from God, and jure regio, be angry at
the river Gyndes, because it drowned one of his horses, and punish it, by
dividing it in 130. Channels? Sen. l. 3. de ira, c. 21. And did Xerxes, jure
regio, by a Royal power given of Herod. l. 7. de Xerxe.
God, when Hellespontus had cast down his bridges, command that three hundred
whips should be inflicted on that little sea, and that it should be cast in
fetters? And our Royalists will have these mad fools, doing these acts of
blasphemous insolency against heaven, to be honored as Kings, and to act
those acts by a regal power. But hear, flatterers, a Royal power is the good
gift of God, a lawful and just power. A King acting and speaking as a King,
speaks and acts Law and Justice. A power to blaspheme is not a lawful
power; they did and spoke these things with a humane and a sinful will, if
therefore this be the Royalists meaning, as Kings, 1. They are absolute, and so
the limited and elected King is no King. 2. The King as King is above Gods Law,
put on him by God, Deuteronomy. 17. 3. His will is the measure of good and ill. 4. It
were unlawful to say to the King of Cyrus, What say thou? Thou are not God,
according to this vain sense of Royalists.

Obj. 9. Elihu says, Job 34. 18. Is it (fit) to say to a King, (Thou art)
^icked, and to Princes, (Ye are) ungodly? Ergo, You may not resi^. Kings.

Ans. 1. This Text no more proves that Kings should not be resisted, then it
proves that rich men, or liberal men, or other Judges inferior, should not
be resisted, for (...) signifies all that, and it signifies liber all, Isa.
32. 5. And ver. 8. the same word is. 2. Deodat. and Calvin say, the meaning is,
Learn from the respect that is due to earthly princes, the reverence due to
the Sovereign Lord, Mal. 1. 8. for it is not convenient to reproach earthly
Kings, and and to say to a Prince, (...) Beliel, a word of reproach, signifying
extreme wickedness. And you may not say to a man of place, (...) an extremely
wicked man, so are the words taken, as signifying most vile and wicked men, 1 Samuel 2. 12. 1 Samuel 10. 27. 2 Samuel 24. 6. Psalm. 1. 1, 6. Psalm. 11. 5. Psalm. 12.
8. Prove. 16. 4. Psa. 146. 9. and in infinite places. For (...) is a word of
extreme reproach, coming from (...) sine, non, and (...) profuit, Iud. 19. 22.
a most naughty and a lewd man, or from (...) jugum, a lawless man, who has
cast off all yokes of Gods or Man's Law. So then Vulgar version and Lyra turn
(...) an Apostate.
the meaning is, It is unlawful to reproach earthly Princes and men of place,
far more is it unlawful to reproach the Judge of the whole earth with
injustice. And what then? We may not reproach the King, as Shimei cursed King
David. Ergo, it is unlawful to resist the King in any tyrannous act: I shall
deny the consequence. Nay, as Pineda observes, if the Royalist press the
words literally, it shall not be lawful for Prophets to reprove Kings of their
sins. Christ called Herod a Fox, Elias Ahab, one that troubled Luke 15. 32.
Israel.

Obj. 10. Act. 23. Paul excuses himself that he called Ananias the
High Priest a whited wall.

Answ. Rivetus, Exo. 22. learnedly discussing the place, thinks Paul,
professing he knew him not to be the High Priest, speaks ironically, that he
could not acknowledge such a man for a Judge. Piscator answers, he could not
then cite Scripture, It is written, Exodus etc. Ans. But they may well consist,
in that act of smiting Paul unjustly, he might be reproached, otherwise it is
not lawful to reproach him; and surely it is not like that Paul was ignorant
that he was a Judge. Yea it is certain he knew him to be a Judge. 1. He
appeared before him as a Judge, to answer for himself. 2. Paul says expressly
he was a Judge, ver. 3. Sit thou to judge me after the Law? etc. and
therefore the place is for us, for even according to the mind of all, the fault
was (if there were any) in calling him a whited wall: and he resisted him in
judgment, when he said, Command thou me to be smitten against the Law? 2.
Though Royalists rather put a fault on the Apostle Paul now in the act of
prophesying judgment against Ananias, which after fell out, then upon their
God the King; yet the consequence amounts but to this, We may not revile the
High Priest, Ergo we may not resist the King in his illegal commandments. It
follows not. Yea it should prove, if a Prelate come in open war to kill the
innocent Apostle Paul, the Apostle might fly or hold his hands, but might not
re-offend: Now the Prelate is the High Priests successor, and his base person
so is as sacred as the person of the Lords Anointed, the King. Hence the
Cavalliers had in one of their Colors which was taken by the Scots at the
battle of Marston, lul. 2. An. 1644. the Crown and the Prelates Mitre painted
with these words, Nolite tangere Christos meos, as if the Antichristian Mitre
were as sacred as the lawful Crown of the King of Britain.

Obj. 11. Fern, sect. 9. 56. If the Senate and people of Rome, who a little
before had the supreme Government over the then Emperors, that of Subjects had
made them Lords, might not resist their Emperors, much less can the people of
England have power of resistance, against the succession of this Crown,
descending from the Conqueror, who by force of Arms, but in justice, conquered
the Kingdom.

Answ. 1. Though the Roman Emperors were absolute (of which I much doubt) and
though the Senate had made them absolute, I deny that therefore they cannot be
resisted. The unlawful resistance condemned by Paul, Romans 13. is not upon the
ground of Absoluteness, which is in the Court of God nothing, being never
ordained of God, but upon reasons of conscience, because the powers are of God,
and ordained of God. But some may say, Volenti non fit injuria, If a people
totally resign their power, and swear nonresistance to a Conqueror, by
compact, they cannot resist. I answer, neither does this follow, because it is
an unlawful compact, and none is obliged to what is unlawful. For 1. it is no
more lawful for me to resign to another my power of natural self-defence,
then I can resign my power to defend the innocent drawn to ^eath, and the
wives, children and posterity that God has tied me unto. 2. The people can no
more resign power of self-defence, which Nature has given them, then they can
be guilty of self-murder, and be wanting in the lawful defense of Kingdom
and Religion. 3. Though you make one their King with absoluteness of power,
yet when he use that transcendent power, not for the safety, but for the
destruction of the State, it is known they could not resign to another that
power which neither God nor nature gave them, to wit, a power to destroy
themselves. 2. I much doubt if the Roman Emperor was absolute, when Paul wrote
this* Justinian says so, Digest. l. 2. tit. 2. but he is partial in this
cause. Bodine de repub. l. 2. c. 5. page 221. proves that the Roman Emperors
were but Princes of the Commonwealth, and that the Sovereignty remained still
in the Senate and people. Marius Salamon. writes six Books, De Principatu, on
the contrary. How could they make the^r Emperors absolute? Livie says, The
name of a King was contrary to a Senate liberty. Florus, Nomen Regis
invidiosum, They instituted a yearly Feast, February 23. called Regifugium.
Ciccro, as Augustine observes, Regem Romae post haec nec Dii* nec homines esse
patiantur. The Emperors might do something de facto, but Lex Regia was not
before Vespasians time. Augustus took on him to be Tribune of the people, from
ten years to t^n. Suetonius and Tacitus say, The succeeding Kings encroached
by degrees upon the peoples liberty. For speedier execution of Law, the Kings
in time of War were forced to do many things without the Senate, and after
the reign of Emperors, though there were no Plebescita, yet there were
Senatusconsulta, and one great one is, that the Senate declard Nero to be an
enemy to the State. It is thought, Julius Caesar in the war against Pompey,
subdued the Romans, and the Senate, and they were subdued again in the
battle of Octavius, against Cassius and Brutus. But Tacitus says, that was
de facto, not de jure, Anal. l. 1. s. 2. Rome ruere in servitium, Consules,
Patres, Eques. Caligula intended to assume Diadema, the Ensign of a King, but
his friends dissuaded him. 3. England is obliged to D. Fern, who makes them a
subdued Nation. The contrary of which is known to the world.

Obj. M. Simmons Loyal Subj. Belief, sect. 6. page 19. God is not honored by
being resisted, no more is the King.

Answ. I deny the consequence. Those who resist the Kings personal will, and
will not suffer him to ruin his Crown and posterity in following Papists,
against his Oath at the Coronation, do honor him and his Throne and Race as a
King, though for the time they displease him. 2. Vzziah was not dishonored in
that he was resisted. 3. Nor do we honor the King, when we flee from him and
his Law. Yet that resistance is lawful, according to the way of Royalists; and
in truth also.

Object. 12. Supreme power is not to be resisted by subordinate powers, because
they are inferior to the supreme.

Answ. The bloody Irish Rebels then being inferior to the Parliament, cannot
resist the Parliament. 2. Inferior Judges as Judges are immediately
subordinate to God as the King, and must be guilty of blood before God, if they
use nor the sword against bloody Cavalliers, and Irish cutthroats, except you
say, inferior Judges are not obliged to execute judgment, but at the Kings
commandment.

Object. As the Irish Rebels are armed with the Kings power, they are superior
to the Parliament.

Answ. So an Army of Turks and Spaniards, armed with the Kings power, and
coming against the two Kingdoms, at the Kings commandment, though they be
but Lictors in a lawl^sse cause, are superior to the highest Courts of
Parliament in the two Kingdoms. But the King and the Law gave power to the
Parliament, first to resist Rebels; now he gives power to Rebels to resist the
Parliament: here must be contradictory wills, and contradictory powers in the
King; Which of them is the Kings will, and his power? the former is legal and
Parliamentary; Then, because Law is not contrary to Law, the latter cannot be
legal also, nor can it be from God; and to resist it then is not to resist God.

Object. 13. If resistance be restrained to legal commandments, What shall
we say to these arguments, that Paul forbids resistance under these
tyrannous governors, and that from the end of their government, which is for
good, and which their subjects did in some sort enjoy under them?

Answ. 1. This proves nothing, but that we are to cooperate with these
governors, though tyrannous, by subjecting to their Laws, so far, as they
come up to this end, the moral good and peace of their government; but Paul no
where commands absolute subjection to tyrannous governors in tyrannous acts;
which is still the question.

Object. 14. He that has the supreme trust next to God, should have the
greatest security to his person and power; but if resistance be lawful, he
has a poor security.

Answ. He that has the greatest trust, should have the greatest security to
his person and power, in the keeping his power, and using it according to his
trust, for its own native end, for justice, peace, and godliness. God
allows security to no man, nor that his Angel^ shall guard them, but only
when they are in their ways, and the service of God; else, There is no peace
to the wicked.

2. It is denied that one man having the greatest trust should have the
greatest security; the Church and people of God, for whose safety he has the
trust, as a means for the end, should have a greater security; the City ought
to have greater security then the watchers, the Army then the leaders; The
good Shepherd gives his life for his sheep.

3. A power to do ill, without resistance, is not security.

Object. 15. If God appoint Ministers to preach, then the sheep cannot seek
safety elsewhere. Ergo.

Answ. The wife is obliged to bed and board with her husband, but not if she
fear he will kill her in the bed. The obedience of positive duties that
subjects owe to Princes, cannot loose them from Natures law of
self-preservation, nor from Gods Law, of defending Religion against Papists in
Arms; nor are the sheep obliged to entrust themselves, but to a saving
shepherd.

Object. 16. If self-defence, and that by taking up Arms against the King, be
an unlawful duty, how is it that you have no practice, no precept, no promise
for it in all the word of God? 1. You have no practice; Ahab sold himself to
do evil, he was an Idolater, and killed the Prophets; and his Queen a bloody
Idolatresse, stirred him up to great wickedness: Elias had as great power with
the people as you have, yet he never stirred up the people to take Arms
against the King. Why did God at this time rather use an extraordinary means
of saving his Church? Arnisaeus de autho. Princ. c. 8. but Elias only fled.
Nebuchadnezer, Ahab, Manassah, Julian were Tyrants and Idolaters, the people
never raised an Army against them. B. Williams of Osserie, p. 21. Deuteronomy. 14. If
brother, son, daughter, wife or friend entice thee to follow strange gods, kill
them, not a word of the father* Children Prelat. Sac. sanc. maj. c. 5. n. 6.
are to love Fathers, not to kill them. Christ (says John P. P.) in the
cradle, taught by practice to flee from Herod; and all Christ's acts and
sufferings are full of mysteries, and our instructions: He might have had
legions of Angels to defend him, but would rather work a miracle, in curing
Malchus ear, as use the sword against Caesar. If Sectaries give us a new
Creed, it will concern them near with expunging Christ's descent into hell,
and the communion of Saints, to raze out this, He suffered under Pontius Pilate
-- My resolution is (for this sin of yours) to dissolve in tears and Prayers,
and with my Master say daily and hourly, Father forgive them, etc. Christ
thought it an uncouth spirit, to call for fire from heaven to burn the
Samaritans, because they refused him lodging. 2. The Prophets cried out against
Idolatry, blasphemy, murder, adultery, etc. and all sins; never against the
sin of neglect, and murtherous omission to defend Church and Religion against a
tyrannous King. 3. No promise is made to such a rebellious insurrection in Gods
word.

Answ. It is a great non-consequence; this duty is not practiced by any
examples in Gods word. Ergo. It is no duty. Practice in Scripture is a narrow
rule of faith: Show a practice when a husband The objection that Go^s Prophets
never rebuked nonresistance as a murtherous omission, and that Gods people in*
Scripture never pract^s^d resistanc^, and God n^v^r commanded it, f^lly
^nsw^red.
stoned his wife, because she enticed him to follow strange Gods. Yet it is
commanded, Deuteronomy. 13 6. when a man lying with a beast is put to death: Yet it is
a Law, Exodus 22. 19. infinite more Laws are, the practice of which we find
not in Scripture. 2. Iehu and the Elders of Israel rooted out Ahabs posterity
for their Idolatry; and if Iehu out of sincerity, and for the zeal of God, had
done what God commanded, he should have been rewarded: for say that it was
extraordinary to Iehu, that he should kill Ahab, yet there was an express Law
for it, that he that stirs up others to Idolatry should die the death, Deuteronomy.
13. 6. and there is no exception of King, or Father in the Law, and to except
father or mother in Gods matters, is expressly against the zeal of God, Deuteronomy.
33. 9. And many grave Divines think the people to be commended in making Iehu
King, and in killing King Nabad, and smiting all the house of Jeroboam for his
Idolatry; they did that which was a part of their ordinary duty, according to
Gods express Law, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. though the facts of these men be
extraordinary. 3. Ahab and Iezabel raised not an Army of Idolaters;
Malignants, such as are Papists, Prelates, and Cavalliers, against the three
Estates, to destroy Parliaments, Laws and Religion, and the people conspired
with Ahab in the persecution and Idolatry, to forsake the Covenant, throw down
the Altars of God, and slay his Prophets, so as in the estimation of Elias, 1
King. 19. 9, 10, 11. there was not one man, but they were Malignant Cavalliers,
and has any Elias now power with the Cavalliers, to exhort them to rise in
Arms against themselves, and to show them it is their duty to make war
against the King and themselves, in the defense of Religion? when the Prophets
had much ado to convince the people, that they sinned in joining with the
King, what place was there to show them their sin, in not using their own
lawful defense? And in reason any may judge it unreasonable, for Elias to
exhort, of thousand thousands in Israel; poor seven thousand (of which many no
doubt were women, aged, weak, young) to rise in Arms against Ahab and all
Israel, except God had given a positive and extraordinary Commandment, and
with all miraculous courage and strength in war against the whole Nota.
Land; and God works not always by miracles to save his Church, and
therefore the natural mandate of self-preservation in that case does no more
oblige a few weak ones to lawful resistance, then it obliged one Martyr to
rise against a persecuting Nero and all his forces. Arnisaeus should remember
we are not to tie our Lord to miracles.

2. Elias did not only flee, but denounced wrath against the King, and
Cavalliers, who joined with them in Idolatry, and when God gave opportunity, he
showed himself, and stirred the people up to kill Baals Jesuits and seduceing
idolatours, when the Idolatrous King refused to do it, and Eliah with his own
hand took them not, but all Israel being gathered together, 1 King. 18. 19. The
Princes and Judges did apprehend them, ver. 40. which is a warrant, when the
King refuses to draw the sword of justice against armed Papists, that other
judges are to do it. 2. For Nebuchadnezzer, Jeremiah from the Lord, expressly
forbad to fight against him, show us the like for no defending our selves
against bloody Papists and Irish cutthroats: for that example may as well prove
(if it be a binding law to us) that our King should not raise his Subjects, to
fight against a Spanish Armado, and a foreign Prince; for before ever
Nebuchadnezzer subdued the Kingdom of Judah Ier. 27. 1. In the beginning of the
reign of Iehoiakim, ver. 12, 13, 14. chap. 36. chap. 37. the King of Judah is
from the Lord commanded, not to draw a sword against the King of Babylon; I
hope this will not tie us, and our King, not to fight against foreign
Princes, or against the great Turk, if they shall unjustly invade us and our
King, and this example is against the Kings resisting of a foreign Prince
unjustly invading him, as much, as against us, for Nebuchadnezzar was a
Tyrannous invader, and the King of Judah the Lords Anointed. 3. The people
also conspired with Manasseh, as with Ahab, Ier. 15. 4. 4. Of Emperors
persecuting Christians we shall hear anon. 5. Deuteronomy. 13. None are excepted, by
a synecdoche, the dearest are expressed, son, daughter, brother, the friend
that is as thine own soul. Ergo, fathers also. And husbands are to love their
lives. Ephesians. 5. 25. Yet to execute judgment on them, without pity, Deuteronomy. 13.
8. 9. The father is to love the son, yet if the son prophecy falsely in the
name of the Lord, to kill him. Zach. 13. 3. Hence love, fear, reverence toward
the King may be commanded, and defensive wars also. 6. Christ fled from
Herod, and all his actions and sufferings are mysteries and instructions, says
the poor Prelate. 1. Christ kissed the man that to his knowledge came to betray
him, Christ fled not, but knowing where, and when his enemy should apprehend
him, came willingly Rivet. in D^cal. in mand. 6. page 234. Shows the reasons,
why Christ condemned Peter, not because he thought self defense unlawful, but
1. it had a kind of revenge in it* for so, few could not repel such an army as
ca^^^ to take Christ. 2. He waited not on Christ's answer. 3. He could have
defended himself another way. 4. It was contrary to Gods will revealed to Peter.
to the place. Ergo, we should not flee. 2. His actions are so mysterious that
John P. P. in imitation of Christ's forty days fast, will fast from flesh in
lent, and the Prelate must walk on the sea, and work miracles, if all Christ's
actions be our instructions. 7. He might with more then twelve Legions of
Angels defend himself, but he would not, not because resistance was unlawful,
no shadow for that in the text, but because it was Gods will, that he should
drink the cup his Father gave him, and because to take the sword without Gods
warrant, subjecteth the usurper of Gods place to perish with the sword. Peter
had Gods revealed will, that Christ behoved to suffer, Math. 26. 52, 53. Math.
16. 21, 22, 23. and Gods positive command that Christ should die for sinners,
John 10. 24. may well restrain an act of lawful self-preservation, hic and
nunc, and such an act as Christ lawfully used, at another time, Luke 4. 29* 30.
Ioh. 11. 7, 8. we give no new creed, but this apostate has forsaken his old
creed, and the religion of the Church of Scotland, in which he was Baptized. 9.
Nor do we expunge out of the Creed Christ's descension into hell, and the
communion of Saints, as the apostate says, but the Popish local descension of
Christ, and the Popish advancing of the Churches power above the Scriptures,
and the intercession and prayers to the saints, or of the saints for us, we
deny, and this Prelate, though he did swear the doctrine of the Church of
Scotland, preached expressly all these and many other points of Popery in the
Pulpits of Edinburgh. 10. We believe that Christ suffered under Pontius Pilat,
but that Pilat had any legal power to condemn Christ, (but only a power by a
permissive Decree, Act. 4. 27, 28. Such as Devils had by Gods permission, Luke.
22. 53.) we utterly deny. 11. The Prelat says it is his resolution, for our
sin of natural self defense, to dissolve in tears, because his Bishopric (I
conceive) by which he was wont to dissolve in cups, (being drunk on the Lords
day, after he (with other Prelates) had been at the Lords Supper, while the
Chamber* wherein they were, was dissolved in vomitting,) was taken from him.
12. The prophets cry against all sins, but never against the sin of
non-resistance, and yet they had very Tyrannous and Idolatrous Kings. 1. This
is but a weak argument. 1. The Prophets cry not out against all sins, they cry
not out against men-stealers, and killers of father and mother in express
terms, yet do they by consequence condemn all these sins, and so do they
condemn non-resistance in wars, by consequence, when they cry out Ier. 5. 31.
The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and
my people love to have it so. And when they complain, Ezekiel. 22. 26, 27, 28.
That the Prophets and Priests violate the Law, her Princes are like wolves
ravening the prey, to shed blood, and the people use oppression, and exercise
robbery, and vex the poor. And when they say, Ier. 22. 2. not to the King
only, but also to his servants, and the people that enter in by the gates, 3.
Execute judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand
of the oppressor. I pray you, who are the oppressors? I answer, The murdering
Judges, Esa. 1. 21. And Esa. 3. 12. As for my The Prophets cry against the sin
of non-resistance, when they cry against the peoples not executeing judgment
for the oppressed, and not relieving those that were crushed in the gate.
people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them: And ver. 14,
15. The ancients of the people grind the faces of the poor: and when they are
not valiant for the truth upon the earth. And Prove. 24. 11. the Lord shall
render to th^se men according to their works, which forbear to help men that
are drawn to death, and those that be ready to be slain, if they shift the
business, and say, Behold, we know not, does not he that pondereth the heart,
consider it? When therefore the Lords Prophets complain that the people
execute not judgment, relieve not the oppressed, help not and rescue not those
that are drawn to death unjustly by the King, or his murdering Judges, they
expressly cry out against the sin of non-resistance. 2. The Prophets cannot
expressly and formally cry out against the Judges for nonresisting the King,
when they join as ravening wolves with the King in these same acts of
oppression, even as the Judge cannot formally impannell 24^ men sent out to
guard the travelers from an arch robber, if these men join with the robber,
and rob the travelers, and become cutthroats as the arch robber is, he cannot
accuse them for their omission in not guarding the innocent travelers, but for
a more heinous crime, that not only they omitted what was their duty, in that
they did not rescue the oppressed out of the hands of the wicked, but because
they did rob and murder, and so the lesser sin is swallowed up in the
greater. The under-Judges are watchmen, and a guard to the Church of God; if
the King turn a bosom robb^r, their part is, Ier. 22. 3. to deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, to watch against domestic and
foreign enemies, and to defend the flock from wolves, Ezekiel. 23. 2, 3, 4. Ier.
50. 6. to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke, Esaias 58. 6. to
break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his ^e^th, Job 29.
17. Now if these Judges turn Lions, and ravening Wolves, to prey upon the
flock, and join with the King, as always they did when the King was an
oppressor, his Princes made him glad with their lies, and joined with him, and
the people with both. Ier. 1. 18. Ier. 5. 1. Ier. 9. 1. Mic. 7. 1. Ezekiel. 22.
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Ier. 15. 1, 2, 3. It is no wonder if the
Prophets condemn and cry out against the hugest and most bloody crime of
positive oppression formally and expressly, and in that their negative murders
in not releeving the oppressed must also be cried out against. 13. The whole
Land cannot formally be accused for nonresistance, when the whole Land are
oppressors, for then they should be accused for not resisting themselves. 14.
The King ought to resist the inferior judges in their oppression of the
people, by the confession of Royalists, then this argument comes with the like
force of strength on themselves, let them show us practice, precept or There is
no warrant in the word, by precept, or practice, that the King and Cavalliers
should rise, and oppose Princes and States, in a hostile way, for their
conscience.
promise in the Word, where the King raised an Army for defense of Religion,
against Princes and people who were subverting Religion, and we shall make use
of that same place of Scripture, to prove that the Estates and people who are
above the King, (as I have proved) and made the King, may and ought to resist
the King, with the like force of Scripturall truth, in the like case. 16.
Royalists desire the like president of practice and precept for defensive
wars: but I answer, let them show us a practice where any King of Israel or
Judah raised* an Army of Malignants, of Phylistims, Sydonians, Ammonites,
against the Princes of Israel and Judah, conveened in an Assembly, to take
course for bringing home the captived Ark of God, and vindicating the Laws of
the Land, and raised an Army contrary to the knowledge of the Elders, Princes,
and Judges, to set up Dagon, or tolerate the worship of the Sydonian gods, and
yet Princes, Elders, Judges and the whole people were obliged, all to flee out
of Gods land, or then only to weep and request that the King would not destroy
souls and bodies of them and their innocent posterities, because they could not
in conscience, embrace the worship of Dagon and the Sydonian gods: when the
Royalist can parallel this with a precedent, we can answer, there was as small
apparency of precedence in Scripture, (except you flee to the law of nature)
that 80 Priests the Subjects of King Vzziah should put in execution a penal
Law against the Lords Anointed, and that the inferiors, and subjects should
resist the Superior, and that these Priests with the Princes of the land
should remove the King from actual government, all his days, and crown his
son, at least make the father their Prince and superior (as Royalists say) as
good as a Cipher? Is not this a punishment inflicted by inferiors upon a
superior, according to the way of Royalists? Now it is clear a worshipping of
bread and the Mass commanded, and against law obtruded upon Scotland, by
influence of the counsel of known Papists, is to us, and in it self as
abominable as the worshipping of Dagon or the Sydonian Gods, and when the
Kingdom of Scotland did but conveen, supplicat, and protest against that
obtruded Idolatry, they were first declared rebels by the King, and then an
army raised against them, by Prelates and Malignants, inspired with the spirit
of Antichrist, to destroy the whole land, if they should not submit soul and
conscience to that wicked service.

QUEST. XXXV. Whether or no the suffering of the Martyrs in the Primitive
Church militate against the lawfulness of defensive wars?
ROyalists think they burden our Cause much with hatred, when they bring the
Fathers and ancient Martyrs against us. So the P. Prelate extracted out of
other Authors, testimonies for this, and Sacr. san^^. 6. page 74, 75, 76. The
Doctors of Aberdeene in their Duplyes.
from I. Armagh, in a Sermon on Romans 1. 3. page 20, 21. So the Do. of
Aberdeene. The Prelat proves from Clem. Alexand. l. 7. c. 17. That the King is
constituted by the Lord. So Ignatius.

Answ. 1. Except he prove from these Fathers that the King is from God only
and immediately, he proves nothing.

Obj. 2. Iren. l. 5. adv. haer. c. 20. proves that God gives Kingdoms, and
that the devil lied, Luke 4. and we make the people to make Kings, and so to
be the children of the Devil.

Answ. If we denied God to dispose of Kingdoms, this man might allege the
Church of God in England and Scotland, to be the sons of Satan. But Gods Word,
Deuteronomy. 17. 18. and many other places make the people to make Kings, and yet not
devils. But to say that Prelates should crown Kings, and with their foul
fingers anoint him; and that as the Popes substitutes, is to make him that is
the son of perdition, a Donor of Kingdoms, also to make a man with his
bloody sword to ascend to a throne, is to deny God to be the disposer of
Kingdoms, and Prelates teach both these.

Obj. 3. Tertul. Apol. c. 30. Inde est Imperator, unde and homo, antequam
imperator, inde potestas illi, unde and spiritus: God is no less the Creator
of Soveraigntie, then of the soul of man.

Answ. God only makes Kings, by his absolute sovereignty, as he only makes
high and low, and so only he makes Mayors, Provosts, Bailiffes, for there is
no power but of him, Romans 13. Ergo* Provosts and Bailiffes are not from men.
The Reader shall not be troubled with the rest of the testimonies of this poor
Plagiarie, for they prove what never man denied, but Prelates and Royalists, to
wit, that Kings are not from Gods approving and regulating will; which they
oppose, when they say, Sole Conquest is a just title to the Crown.

But they deserve rather an answer which Grotius, Barclay, Arnisaeus, and
Spalato allege, as

Obj. 1. Cyprian Epist. 1. Non est fas Christianis, armis, ac vituori se
adversus impetum persecutorum, Christians cannot by violence defend themselves
against persecutors.

Answ. If these words be pressed literally, it were not lawful to defend our
self against murderers; but Cyprian is expressly condemning in that place, the
seditious tumults of people against the lawful Magistrate.

Obj. 2. The Ancients say he was justly punished who did rend and tear the
Edict of Dioclesian and Maximinus, Eusebius. l. 7. Hist. Eccles. c. 5.

Answ. To rend an Edict is no act of natural self-defence, but a breach of a
positive commandment of the Emperors, and could not be lawfully done,
especially by a private man.

Object. 3. Cyprian Epist. 56. Incumbamus gemitibus assiduis and
deprecationibus crebris, haec enim sunt munimenta spiritualia and tela divina
quae protegunt: And Russinus, l. 2. c. 6. Ambrosius adversus reginae (Iustinae
Arianae) furorem non se manu defensabat aut telo, sed jejuniis continuatisque
vigiliis sub altari positus.

Answ. It is true, Cyprian reputed prayers his armor, but not his only
armor. Though Ambrose, de facto, used no other against Iustina; the places say
nothing against the lawfulness of selfe-defence. Ambrose speaks of that
armor and these means of defense, that are proper to Pastors, and these are
prayers and tears, not the sword; because Pastors carry the Arc, that is
their charge, not the sword, that is the Magistrates place.

Object. 4. Tertullian Apolog. c. 37. says expressly, that the Christians might
for strength and number have defended themselves against their persecutors, but
thought it unlawful. Quando vel una nox pauculis faculis largitatem ul^ionis
po et operari, si malum malo dispungi penes nos liceret, sed absit ut igni
humano vindicetur divina secta, aut doleat pati, in quo probetur. Si enim
hosts extraneos, non tantum vindices occultos agere vellemus, deesset nobis
vis numerorum and copiarum?

Answ. I will not go about to say that Tertullian thought it lawful to raise
Arms against the Emperor; I ingeniously confess Tertullian was in that
error. But, 1. something of the man. 2. Of Tertullian in an error.
the Christians. Of the man. Tertullian after this turned a Montanist. 2.
Pamelius says of him, in vit. Tertul. inter Apocrypha numeratur --
excommunicatus. 3. It was Tertullians error in a fact, not in a question, that
he believed Christians were so numerous, as that they might have fought with
the Emperors. 4. M. Pryn does judiciously observe, 3. part. sovereign power
of Parl. page 139, 140. He not only thought it unlawful to resist, but also
to flee, and therefore wrote a book de fuga, and therefore as some men are
excessive in doing for Christ, so also in suffering for Christ; Hence I
infer, that Tertullian is neither ours, nor theirs in this point; and we can
cite Tertullian against them also, I am sumus ergo pares. Yea Fox in his Monum.
says, Christians ran to the stakes to be burnt, when they were neither
condemned, nor cited. 4. What if we cite Theodoret, fol. 98. De provid. Who
about that time say that evil men reign, (...) through the cowardlinesse of
the subjects; as the Prelate says of Tertullian, I turn it, If Theodoret were
The ancient Christians did rise in Arms against persecuting Emperors.
now living, he would go for a Rebel. About that time Christians sought help
from Constantine the Great, against Lycinius their Emperor, and overthrew him
in battle. And the Christians being oppressed by the King of Persia their
own King, sent to Theodosius to help them against him. 2. For the man.
Tertullian in the place cited, says, The Christians were strangers under the
Emperor. Externi sumus, and therefore they had no Laws of their own, but were
under the Civil Laws of Heathen, till Constantines time; and they had sworn
to Julian as his soldiers, and therefore might have, and no doubt had,
scruples of conscience to resist the Emperor. 2. It is known Julian had huge
numbers of Heathen in his Army, and to resist had been great danger. 3.
Wanting Leaders and Commanders, (many prime men doubting of the lawfulness
thereof) though they had been equal in number, yet number is not all in
war, skill in valorous Commanders is required. 4. What if all Christians were
not of Tertullians mind. 5. If I would go to humane testimonies, which I judge
not satisfactory to the conscience, I might cite many; The practice of France,
of Holland: The Divines in Luthers time, as Sleidan. 8. c. 8. 22. resolved
resistance to be lawful. Calvin, Beza, Pareus; the German Divines, Bucanus,
and an host might be produced.

QUEST. XXXVI. Whether the power of War be only in the King?
IT is not hard to determine this question: The Sword in a constitute
Commonwealth is given to the Judge supreme, or subordinate, Romans 13. 4. He
bears not the sword in vain, in the Empire; the use of Armor is restricted
to the Emperor by a positive Law; so the Law says, Armorum officia nisi jussu
Principis sunt interdicta, lib. de Cod. de Lege. 1. Imperat Valentinian. nulli,
nobis inconsultis, usus armorum tribuatur, ad 1. Jul. May. l. 3. War is a
species, and a particular, the sword is a general.

Assert. 1. The power of the sword by Gods Law is not proper and Inferior
Judges have the power of the sword as well as the King.
peculiar to the King only, but given by God, to the inferior Judges. 1.
Because the inferior Judge is essentially a Judge no less then the King, as
is proved, and therefore he must bear the sword, Romans 13. 4. 2. Not Moses
only, but the Congregation of Israel had power of life and death, and so of
the sword, Numb. 35. 12. The manslayer shall not die, until he stand before
the Congregation in judgment, ver. 24. Then the Congregation shall judge
between the slayer and the avenger of blood, Deuteronomy. 22. 18. The Elders of the
City shall take that man and chastise him. 21. The men of the City shall stone
her with stones, Deu. 17. 5. Deu. 19. 12, 13. v. 18, 19, 20, 21. Deu. 21. 19.
Then shall his father and his mother bring him to the Elders of his City. 21.
And the men of the City shall stone him with stones. 1 King. 21. 11. The Elders
and Nobles that were inhabitants in his City stoned Naboth. 3. Inferior Judges
are condemned as murderers, who have shed innocent blood, Esaias 1. 21. Psalm.
94. 5. 6. Ier. 22. 3. Ezekiel. 22. 12. ver. 27. Hosea 6. 8. Zephan. 3. 1, 2, 3.
Ergo, they must have the power of the sword, hence upon the same grounds.

Assert. 2. That the King only has the power of war, and raising Armies
must be but a positive civil Law. For, 1. by divine right, if the inferior
Judges have the sword given to them of God, then have they also power of War,
and raising Armies. 2. All power of war that the King has is cumulative, not
privative, and not distructive, but given for the safety of the Kingdom, as
therefore the King cannot take from one particular man the power of the sword
for natural self-preservation, because it is the birthright of life; neither
can the King take from a community and Kingdom a power of rising in Arms for
their own defense: If an Army of Turks shall suddenly invade the Land, and
the Kings consent express cannot be had (for it is essentially involved in the
office of the King as King, that all the power of the sword that he has, be
for their safety) or if the King should as a man refuse his consent, and
interdict and discharge the Land to rise in Arms, yet they have his Royal
consent, though they want his personal consent, in respect that his office
obliges him to command them to rise in Arms. 2. Because no King, no Civil
power can take away Natures birthright The people tied to acts of Charity, and
to defend themselves, the Church, and their posterity against a foreign Army,
though the King forbid.
of self-defence from any man, or a community of men. 2. Because if a King
should sell his Kingdom, and invite a bloody Conqueror to come in with an
Army of men to destroy his people, impose upon their conscience an Idolatrous
Religion, they may lawfully rise against that Army, without the Kings consent,
for though Royalists say, they need not come in asinine patience, and offer
their throats to cutthroats but may flee, yet two things hinders a flight.
1. They are obliged by virtue of the first Commandment to re-man, and with
their sword defend the Cities of the Lord, and the King. 2 Samuel 10. 12. 1 Chronicles. 19. 13. for if to defend our Country and children, and the Church of God
from unjust invaders and cutthroats by the sword, be an act of charity, that
God and the Law of Nature requires of a people, as is evident, Prove. 24. 11.
and if the fifth Commandment oblige the Land to defend their aged Parents and
young children from these invaders, and if the sixth Commandment lay on us the
like bond, all the Land are to act works of mercy and charity, though the King
unjustly command the contrary; except Royalists say, that we are not to
perform the duties of the second Table commanded by God, if an earthly King
forbid us; and if we exercise not acts of mercy toward our brethren, when their
life is in hazard, to save them, we are murderers, and so men may murder
their neighbor, if the We must defend with the sword the Church of God,
whether the King will or no, except it be said the King may command murder,
and discharge us of the duties of the second Table.
King command them so to do; this is like the Court-faith. 2. The Kings power
of wars is for the safety of his people; if he deny his consent to their
raising of Arms till they be destroyed, he plays the Tyrant, not the King,
and the law of Nature will necessitate them, either to defend themselves
(seeing flight of all in that case is harder then death) else they must be
guilty of self-murder. Now the Kings commandment of not rising in Arms, at
best is positive and against the nature of his Office, and it flows then from
him as from a man, and so must be far inferior to the natural Commandment
of God, which commands self-preservation, if we would not be guilty of
self-murder, and of obeying men, rather then God. So Althusius Polit. c. 25.
n. 9. Halicarnas. l. 4. Antiq. Romans Aristo. Pol. l. 3. c. 3. 3. David took
Goliahs sword, and became a Captain, a Captain to an host of armed men in
the battle, and fought the battles of the Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 28. (and this
Abigal by the spirit of prophecy, as I take it, says, ver. 29, 30, 31.) 1 Samuel
22. 2. 1 Chronicles. 12. 1. 2. 3. 17. 18. 21. 22. not only without Saul's consent,
but against King Saul as he was a man, but not against him as he was King of
Israel. 4. If there be no King, or the King be minor, or an usurper, as Athalia
be on the Throne, the Kingdom may lawfully Examples of lawful wars without
the King.
make war without the King, as Judges cap. 20. The children of Israel, four
hundred thousand footmen that drew sword went out to war against the
children of Benjamin. Judah had the power of the sword when Josiah was but
eight years old, in the beginning of his reign, 2 King. 22. 1, 2. and before
Iehoash was crowned King, and while he was minor, 2 King. 11. there were
Captains of hundreds in arms raised by Iehoiada and the people of Judah to
defend the young King. It cannot be said, that this is more extraordinary, then
that it is extraordinary for Kings to die, and in the interregnum, wars, in
an ordinary providence, may fall out in these Kingdoms, where Kings go by
election; and for Kings to fall to be Minors, Captives, Tyrannous. And I shall
be of that opinion that Mr Symmons, who holds, That Royal birth is
equivalent to divine unction, must also hold, that election is not equivalent
to divine unction; for both election and birth cannot be of the same validity,
the one being natural, the other a matter of free choice, which shall infer
that Kings by election are less properly, and analogically only Kings; and so
Saul was not properly a King, for he was King by election; but I conceive that
rather Kings by birth must be less properly Kings, because the first King by
Gods institution, being the mould of all the rest, was by election. Deuteronomy. 17.
18. 19. 20.

5. If the estates create the King, and make this man King, not this If the
Parliament make the King and give to him the sword, the King cannot make the
Parliament nor use the sword to their destruction.
man, as is clear Deuteronomy. 17. 18. and 2 Chronicles. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. they give to him
the power of the Sword, and the power of War, and the Militia, and I shall
judge it strange and reasonlesse, that the power given to the King, by the
Parliament or estates of a free Kingdom, (such as Scotland is acknowledged to
be, by all) should create, regulate, limit, abridge, yea and anull that power
that created it self, has God ordained a Parliamentary power to create a Royal
power of the sword and war to be placed in the King, the Parliaments creature,
for the safety of Parliament and Kingdom, which yet is destructive of it
self? D. Fern says that the King summoneth a Parliament, and gives them
power to be a Parliament, and to advise and counsel him; and in the mean time
Scripture says, Deuteronomy* 17. 18, 19, 20. 1 Samuel 10 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 2 Samuel
5. 1, 2, 3, 4. that the Parliament creates the King, heir's admirable
reciprocation of creation in policy, and shall God make the mother to destroy
the daughter? The Parliamentarie power that gives Crown, Militia, sword and
all to the King, must give power to the King to use sword and war for the
destruction of the Kingdom, and to annull all the power of Parliaments, to
make, unmake Parliaments, and all Parliamentary power; what more absurd?

Obj. 1. Symmons Loyal Subj. Page 57. These phrases, 2 Samuel 9. 1. When Kings
go forth to war, and Luke 14. 31. What King going forth to war? speak to
my conscience, that both offensive and defensive war are in the Kings hand.

Answ. It is not much to other men what is spoken to any man's conscience by
Phrase and customs; for by this no States where there be no Kings, but
government by the best, or the people, as in Holland, or in other Nations, can
have power of war, for what time of year shall Kings go to war who are not
Kings? and because Christ says, A certain householder delivered talents to his
servants, will this infer to any conscience, that none but a householder may
take usurie? And when he says, If the good man of the house knew at what hour
the thief would come, he would watch; shall it follow, the son or servant
may not watch the house, but only the good man?

Obj. 2. Fern, page 95. The natural Body cannot move, but upon natural
Principles; and so neither can the Politic Body move in War, but upon
Politic reasons from the Prince, which must direct by Law.

Answ. This may well be retorted, the Politic Head cannot then move, but upon
politic reasons; and so the King cannot move to wars, but by the Law, and
that is by consent of Parliament, and no Law can principle the head to destroy
the members. 2. If an Army of cutthroats rise to destroy the Kingdom,
because the King is in lacking, in his place, to do his duty, how can the
other Judges, the States and Parliament, be accessorie to murder committed by
them, in not raising armies to suppress such robbers? Shall the inferior
Judges be guilty of innocent blood, because the King will not do his duty? 3.
The politic body cease no more to renounce the principles of sinlesse
nature, in self-defence, because it is a politic body, and subject to a King,
then it can leave off to sleep, eat and drink; and there is more need of
politic principles to the one, then the other. 4. The Parliaments and Estates
of both Kingdoms move in these wars by the Kings Laws, and are a formal
politic body in themselves.

Obj. 2. The ground of the present wars against the King (says D. Fern, sect.
4. page 13.) is false, to wit, that the Parliament is coordinate with the King,
but so the King shall not be supreme, the Parliaments consent is required to an
act of supremacy, but not to a denial of that act. And there can no more (
says Arnisaeus de jure majestatis, c. 3. in quo consistat essen. majest. c. 3.
n. 1. and c. 2. anjur. majest. separ. etc. n. 2.) be two equal and coordinate
supreme powers, then there can be two supreme Gods, and multitudo deorum est
nullitas deorum, many gods infer no gods.

Ans. 1. If we consider the fountaine-power, the King is subordinate
Parliamentary power a fountain power above the King.
to the Parliament, and not coordinate; for the constituent is above that which
is constituted. If we regard the derived and executive power in Parliamentarie
acts, they make but a total and complete sovereign power, yet so as the
sovereign power of the Parliament being habitually and underived, a prime and
fountain power, (for I do not here separate people and Parliament) is perfect
without the King, for all Parliamentarie acts, as is clear, in that the
Parliament make Kings. 2. Make Laws, raise Armies, when either the King is
minor, captived, tyrannous, or dead, but Royal power Parliamentarie without
the Parliament is null, because it is essentially but a part of the Parliament,
and can work nothing separated from the Parliament, no more then a hand cut off
from the body, can write; and so here we see two supremes coordinate* Amongst
infinite things there cannot be two, because it involveth a contradiction, that
an infinite thing can be created, for then should it be finite; but a royal
power is essentially a derived and created power and supreme, secundum quid,
only in relation to single men, but not in relation to the Community; it is
always a creature of the community with leave of the Royalist. 2. It is
false, that to an act of Parliamentarie supremacy the consent of the King is
required, for it is repugnant that there can be any Parliamentarie judicial
act without the Parliament, but there may be without the King. 3. More false it
is, that the King has a negative voice in Parliament, then he shall be sole
Judge* and the Parliament, the Kings Creator and Constituent, shall be a cipher.

Obj. 3. Arnesaeus de jur. Maj. de potest. armorum, c. 5. n. 4. The People is
mad and furious, therefore supreme Majesty cannot be secured, and Rebels
suppressed, and public Peace kept, if the power of Armor be not in the Kings
hand only.

Answ. To denude the people of Armor, because they may abuse the Prince, is to
expose them to violence and oppression, unjustly; for one King may easilier
abuse armor, then all the people; one man may more easily fail, then a
Community. 2. The safety of the people is far to be preferred before the safety
of one man, though he were two Emperors, one in the East, another in the West,
because the Emperor is ordained of God, for the good and safety of the people,
1 Timothy 2. 2. 3. There can be no inferior Judges to bear the sword, as God
requires, Romans 13 4. Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. and the King must be
sole Judge, if he only have the sword, and all armor monopolized to himself.

Obj. 4. The causes of War (says M. Simmons, sect. 4. page 9.) Loyal S^aj.
Belief^.
should not be made known to the Subjects, who are to look more to the lawful
call to War from the Prince, then to the cause of the War.

Answ. The Parliament and all the Judges and Nobles are Subjects Causes o^ w^r
make lawful war, not the sole pleasure of the King.
to Royalists, if they should make war and shed blood upon blind obedience to
the King, not inquiring either in causes of Law, or fact, they must resign
their consciences to the King. 2. The King cannot make unlawful war to be
lawful by any authority Royal, except he could raze out the sixth
Commandment: therefore Subjects must look more to the causes of War, then to
the authority of the King; and this were a fair way to make Parliaments of
both Kingdoms ^et up Popery by the sword, and root out the Ref^rmed Religion
upon the Kings Authority, as the lawful call to war, not looking to the
causes of war.

QUEST. XXXVII. Whether or no it be lawful that the Estates of Scotland help
their oppressed brethren the Parliament and Protestants in England against
Papists and Prelates now in Arms against them, and killing them, and
^ndevouring the establishment of Popery, though the King of Scotland should
inhibit them?
MArianus says, one is obliged to help his brother, non vincul^ De ^^i^cip. 6.
^. 18.
essicace, not with any efficacious band, because in these (says he) non est
actio a^t poena, one may not have action of law against his brother, who
refuses to help him; yet (says he) as man he is obliged to man nexu civilis
societatis, by the bond of humane society. Others say, one nation may
indirectly defend a neighbor nation It is necessary and lawful for the States
of Scotland to help their brethren in England.
against a common enemy, because it is a self-defence; and it is presumed that
a foreign enemy having overcome the neighbor nation, shall invade that
nation it self who denies help and succor to the neighbor nation, this is a
self-opinion, and to me it looks not like the spirit^all Law of God.

3. Some say it is lawful, but not always expedient, in which opinion there
is this much truth, that if the neighbor nation have an evil cause, neque
licet, neque expedit, it is neither lawful, nor expedient. But what is lawful
in the case of necessity so extreme, as is the loss Cases ^n which we are to
help our brethren according to diverse opinions.
of a brothers life or of a nation, must be expedient, because necessity of
non-sinning makes any lawful thing expedient. As to help my brother in fire
or water, requiring my present and speedy help though to the loss of my goods
must be as expedient, as a negative commandment ( Thou shall not murder.)

4. Others think it lawful in the case that my brother seek my help only,
other ways I have no calling thereunto: to which opinion, I cannot universally
subscribe, it is holden both by reason, and the soundest divines, that to
rebuke my brother of sin is ( actus misericordiae, and charitatis,) an act of
mercy and charity to his soul, We are to help our brethren, though they desire
us ^^^.
yet I hold I am obliged to rebuke him by Gods law. Levit. 19. 17. otherwise I
hate him. 1 These. 5. 14. Col. 4. 17. Math. 18. 15. Nor can I think in reason,
that my duty of love to my brother, does not oblige me but upon dependency on
his free consent, but as I am to help my neighbors ox out of a ditch, though
my neighbor know not, and so I have only his implicit and virtuall consent,
so is the case here. I go not farther in this case of conscience, if a
neighbor nation be jealous of our help, and in an hostile way should oppose us
in helping, (which blessed be the Lord, the honorable houses of the Parliament
of England has not done, though Malignant spirits tempted them to such a
course,) what in that case we should owe to the afflicted members of Christ's
body, is a case may be determined easily.

The fifth and last opinion is of those who think if the King command Papists
and Prelates to rise against the Parliament and our dear brethren in England in
wars, that we are obliged in conscience, and by our oath and covenant, to
help our native Prince against them, to which opinion with hands and feet I
should accord, if our Kings cause were just and lawful, but from this it
follows that we must thus far judge of the cause, as concerns our
consciences in the matter of our necessary duty, leaving the judicial
cognizance to the honorable Parliament of England. But because I cannot
return to all these opinions particularly, I see no reason but the Civil Law
of a Kingdom does oblige any Citizen to help an innocent man against a
murdering robber, and that he may be judicially accused as a murderer who
fails in his duty, and that Solon said well, beatam remp. esse illam, in qua
quisque injuriam alterius suam estimet. Solons testimony.
It is a blessed society in which every man is to repute an injury done against
a brother, (...) injury done against himself. As the Egyptians had a good law,
by which, he was accused upon his head, who helped not one that suffered wrong;
and if he was not able to help, he was holden to accuse the injurer, if not,
his punishment was whips, or Law of the Egyptians against those that helped not
the oppressed.
three days hunger, it may be upon this ground it was that Moses flew the
Egyptian. Ambrose commends him for so doing.

Assert. We are obliged, by many bands, to expose our lives, goods, children,
etc. in this cause of religion and of the unjust oppression of enemies, for the
safety and defense of our dear brethren and true religion in England. 1. Prove.
24. 11. If thou forbear to deliver them, that are drawn to death, (...) taken
as captives to be killed, and those that are ready to be slain. 12. If thou
say, behold we know it not, does not he that pondereth the heart consider it?
and he that keeps thy soul, does he not know it? and shall he not render to
every man, according to his work? Master Iermin on the place, is too narrow,
who commenting on the place, restricteth all to these two, that the priest
should deliver, by interceding for the innocent, (...) Erne captos ad mortem.
and the King by pardoning only. But 1. to deliver is a word of violence, as 1 Samuel 30. 18. David by the sword rescued his wives, Hos. 5 14. I will take away,
and none shall rescue. 1 Samuel 17. 35. I rescued the lambs out of his mouth, out
of the Lions mouth, which behoved to be done with great violence. 2 King. 18.
34. They have not delivered (...) Samaria out of my hand. So Cornel. a Lapide,
Charitas suad^^, ut vi and armis eruamus injuste ductos ad mortem. Ambros. lib.
1. offic. c. 36. cites this same text, and commends Moses who killed the
Egyptian in defending a Hebrew man. 2. It is an act of Charity and so to be
done, though the judge forbid it, when the innocent is unjustly put to death.

Object. But in so doing private men may offer violence to the lawful Acts of
charity as helping our brethren against unjust oppressions, oblige us, whether
the King command them or forbid them.
magistrate, when he unjustly puts an innocent man to death, and rescue him
out of the hands of the magistrate, and this were to bring in anarchy and
confusion, for if it be an act of charity to deliver the innocent out of the
hand of the Magistrate, it is homicide to a private man not to do it, for our
obedience to the law of nature tyeth us absolutely, though the Magistrate
forbid these acts, for it is known, that I must obey God rather then man.

Answ. The law of nature tyeth us to obedience in acts of charity, yet not to
perform these acts after any way and manner, in a mere natural way, impetu
naturae, but I am to perform acts of natural charity in a rational and
prudent way, and in looking to Gods law, else if my brother or father were
justly condemned to die, I might violently deliver him out of the Magistrates
hand, but by the contrary, my hand should be first on him, without natural
compassion. As if my brother or my wife have been a blasphemer of God, Deuteronomy.
13. 6, 7, 8. and therefore am I to do acts natural, as a wise man observing
(as Solomon says Eccles. 8. 5.) both time and judgment. Now it were no wisdom
for one private man to hazard his own life, by attempting to rescue an innocent
brother, because he has not strength to do it, and the law of nature obliges
me not to acts of charity, when I in all reason, see them unpossible, but a
multitude who had strength did well to rescue innocent Jonathan out of the
hands of the King, that he should not be put to death: yet one man was not tied
by the law of nature to rescue Jonathan, if the King and Prince had condemned
him, though unjustly.

2. The host of men that helped David against King Saul, 1 Samuel 22. 2. entered
in a lawful war, and 1 Chronicles. 12. 18. Amasa by the spirit of the Lord blesses
his helpers, peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thy helpers, for thy
God helps the. Ergo, Peace must be to the Parliament of England, and to their
helpers their brethren of Scotland.

3. Numb. 32. 1. 2. 3. 16. 17. 18. 19. Josh. 1. 12. 13. 14. The children of
Gad, and of Reuben, and the half tribe of Manasseh, though their inheritance
fell to be in this side of Jordan, yet they were to go over the river armed to
fight for their brethren, while they had also possession of the land, at the
commandment of Moses and Joshua.

4. So Saul and Israel helped the men of Iabesh Gilead conjoined in blood with
them, against Nahash the Ammonite, and his unjust conditions in plucking out
their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11.

5. Iephtha Judge. 12. 2. justly rebukes the men of Ephraim because they would
not help him and his people, against the Ammonites.

6. If the communion of Saints be any bound, that England and we have one Lord,
one faith, one Baptism, one head and Savior Jesus Christ, then are we obliged
to help our bleeding sister Church, against these same common enemies Papists
and Prelates, but the former is undenyably true, for 1. We send help to the
Rotchel, if there had not been a secret betraying of our brethren, we send help
to the recovery of the Palatinate, and the aid of the confederat Princes
against Babels strength and power, and that lawfully, but we did it at great
leisure and coldly. Q. Elizabeth helped Holland against the King of Spain. And
beside the union in Religion. 1. We sail in one ship together, being in one
Island, under one King; and now by the mercy of God, have sworn one Covenant,
and so must stand or fall together.

7. We are obliged by the union betwixt the Kingdoms concluded to be by the
Convention of the Estates of Scotland, An. 1585. at the desire of the General
Assembly, 1583. to join forces together at home, and enter in League with
Protestant Princes, and Estates abroad, to maintain the Protestant Religion,
against the bloody confederacy of Trent; and accordingly this League between
the two Crowns was subscribed at Berwick, An. 1586. and the same renewed, An.
1587, 1588. as also the confession of Faith subscribed, when the Spanish Armado
was on our coasts.

8. The Law of God, commanding that we love our neighbor as our self, and
therefore to defend one another against unjust violence. l. ut vim. ff. de
just. and jur. obliges us to the same, except we think God can be pleased
with lippe-love in word only, which the Spirit of God condemns, 1 Ioh. 2. 9,
10. cap. 3. 16. and the sum of Law and Prophets, is that as we would nor men
should refuse to help us, when we are unjustly oppressed, so neither would we
so serve our afflicted brethren. l. in facto ff. de cond. and demonstr. Siuxor.
Iustit. de nupt.

9. Every man is a keeper of his brothers life, there is a voluntary homicide,
when a man refuses food or physic necessary for his own life, and refuses
food to his dying brother; and men are not borne for themselves. And when the
King defends not subjects against their enemies, all fellow subjects, by the
law of Nature, of Nations, the Civil, and cannon Law, have a natural
privilege to defend one another, and are mutual Magistrates to one another,
when there be no other Magistrates. If an Army of Turks or Pagans would come
upon Britain, if the King were dead, as he is civilly dead in this juncture of
time, when he refuses to help his subjects, one part of Britain would help
another: As Iehoshaphat King of Judah did right in helping Ahab and Israel, so
the Lord had approved of the war. If the left hand be wounded, and the left
eye put out, nature teaches that the whole burden of natural acts is devolved
on the other hand and eye, and; so are they obliged to help one another.

10. As we are to bear one another burdens, and to help our enemies, to
compassionate strangers; so far more these, who make one body of Christ with us.

11. Meroz is under a curse, who helps not the Lord, one part of a Church
another. A woe lies on them that are at ease in Zion, and helps not
afflicted Joseph, so far as they are able.

12. The law of Gratitude obliges us to this: England sent an Army to free
both our souls and bodies from the bondage of Popery, and the fury of the
French, upon which occasion a Parliament at Leith, Anno 1560. established Peace
and Religion, and then after they helped us against a faction of Papists, in
our own bosom; for which we take Gods name in a prayer, seeking grace never
to forget that kindness.

13. When Papists in Arms, had undone England (if God give them victory) they
should next fall on us, and it should not be in the Kings power to resist them.
When our enemies within two days journey are in Arms, and have the person of
our King, and his judgment, and so the breathing Law of the two Kingdoms
under their power, we should but sleep to be killed in our nest, if we did not
arise and fight for King, Church, Country, and Brethren.

Object. By these and the like grounds, when the Kings Royal Person and life
is in danger, he may use Papists as subjects, not as Papists in his own
natural self-defence.

Answ. Hell and the Devil cannot say, that a thought was in any heart, against
the Kings person: He sleeped in Scotland safe, and at Westminster in his own
Palace, when the Estates of both Kingdoms, would not so much as take the
water-pot from his bedside, and his Spear; and Satan instilled this
traitorous lie, first in Prelates, then in Papists. 2. The King professes his
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, in his Declarations, since he
took Arms; but if Saul had put Arms in the hands of Baals Priests, and in an
Army of Sidonians, Philistims, Ammonites, professing their quarrel against
Israel was not to defend the King, but their Dagon and false gods; clear it
were, Saul's Army should not stand in relation of helpers of the Kings, but of
advancers of their own Religion. Now Irish Papists and English in Arms,
press the King to cancel all Laws against Popery, and make Laws for the free
liberty of Mass, and the full power of Papists, then the King must use Papists
as Papists in these wars.

QUEST. XXXVIII. Whether Monarchy be the best of governments?
NOthing more unwillingly do I write then one word of this question. It is a
dark way; circumstances in fallen nature may make things best to be, hic and
nunc, evil: Though to me it is probable, that Monarchy in it self, 2.
Monarchy, de jure, that is, lawful and limited Monarchy is best; even now in a
Kingdom, under the fall of sin, if other circumstances be considered.

But observe I pray you, 1. That M. Symmons, and this poor Prelate, Loyal
subjects belief. sect. 4. page 7. Sacr. sanct. Reg. maj. c. 2. page 26. 27.
do so extol Monarchy, that there is not a government save Monarchy only, all
other governments are deviations; and therefore M. Symmons says, page 8. If I
should affect another government then Monarchy, I should neither fear God, nor
the King, but associate my self with the seditious: and so the question of
Monarchy is, 1. Which is the choicest government in it self; or, which is the
choicest government in policy, and in the condition of man fallen in the state
of sin. 2. Which is the best government, that is, the most profitable, or the
The question concerning the excellency of Monarchy above other forms, various
according to diverse considerations.
most pleasant, or the most honest? For we know that there be these three
kinds of good things; things useful and profitable, bona, utilia; things
pleasant, jucunda; things honest, honesta; and the question may be of every one
of the three. 3. The question may be, which of these governments be most
agreeable to nature? that is, either to nature in it self, as it agrees.
communiter, to all natures of elements, birds, beasts, A^gels, Men, to lead
them, as a governor does, to their last end, or which government is most
agreeable to men, to sinful men, to sinful men of this, or this Nation; for
some Nations are more ambitious, some more factious; some are better ruled by
one, some better ruled by many, some by most and by the people. 4. The question
may be in regard of the facility or difficulty of loving, fearing, obeying and
serving; and so it may be thought easier to love, fear and obey one Monarch
then many Rulers, in respect that our Lord says, it is difficult to serve two
Masters, and possibly more difficult to serve twenty or an hundred. 5. The
question may be in regard of the power of commanding, or of the justice and
equity of commanding; hence from this last I shall set down the first Thesis.

Assert. 1. An absolute and unlimited Monarchy is not only not An absolute
Monarchy the baddest of governments
the best form of Government, but it is the worst, and this is against our
Petty Prelat, and all Royalists. My reasons be these, 1. Because it is an
unlawful Ordinance, and God never ordained it; and I cannot ascribe the
superlative degree to any thing, of which I deny the positive: Absolute
government in a sinful and peccable man is a wicked government, and not a
power from God, for God never gave a power to sin. Plenitudo potestatis ad
malum and injuriam non extenditur. Sozenus Junior cons. 65. in causa
occurrenti, l. 2. Ferdinand. Loazes in suo cons. pro March. de Velez. page 54.
n. 65. And so that learned Senator Ferdin. Vasquez. page 1. lib. 1. cap. 5. n.
17. 2. It was better for the State that Epiminondas could not Epiminondas his
watchfulness.
sleep, then that he could sleep, when the people was dancing, because, said
he, I wake that you may have leave to sleep and be secure; for he was upon
deep cogitations, how to do good to the Commonwealth, when the people were
upon their pleasures. Because all Kings since the fall of the Father- King
Adam, are inclined to sin and injustice, and so had need to be guided by a Law,
even because they are Kings, so they remain men. Omnipotency in one that can
sin, is a cursed power. With reason all our Divines say, the state of saving
grace in the second Adam, where there is non posse deficere, they cannot fall
away from God, is better then the A power to sin worse then a power of
nonsinning.
state of the first Adam, where there was posse non deficere, a power not to
fall away; and that our free will is better in our country in Heaven, where we
cannot sin, then in the way to our country on earth, where we have a power to
sin, and so Gods people is in a better case, Hos. 2. 6, 7. Where her power to
overtake her lovers is closed up with an hedge of thorns that she cannot find
her paths; then the condition of Ephraim, of whom God says, Hos. 4. 17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. So cannot that be a good government
when the supreme power is in a sinful man, as inclinable to injustice by
nature as any man, and more inclinable to injustice by the condition of his
place then any: and yet by office he is one that can do no injustice against
his subjects; he is a King, and so may destroy Vriah, kill his subjects, but
cannot sin; and this is to flattering Royalists the best government in the
world. As if an unchained Lion were the best governor, because unchained, to
all the beasts, sheep and lambs and all others, which with his teeth and paws
he may reach, and that by virtue of an ordinance of God. 3. What is on man
under no restraint, but made a God on earth, and so drunk with the graunder of
a sinning-God, here under the Moon and Clouds? who may hear good counsel,
from men of his own choosing, yet is under no restraint of Law to follow it,
being the supreme power absolute, high, mighty, and an impeccable god on earth:
Certainly this man may more easily err, and break out in violent acts of
injustice, then a number of Rulers, grave, wise, under a Law. One being a
sinful man, shall sooner sin and turn a Nero (when he may go to hell, and
lead thousands to hell with him gratis) then a multitude of sinful men, who
have less power to do against Law: and a tyrannous killing of innocents, and
a subversion of Laws, Liberties and Religion, by one who may by office, and
without resistance of mortal men, do all ill, is more dangerous and hurtful,
then division and fraction incident to Aristocracy. 4. Caesar is great, but Law
and reason is greater: by an absolute Monarchy all things are ruled by will and
pleasure above Law; then this government cannot be so good, as Law and Reason
in a government by the best, or by many. 5. Under absolute Monarchy a free
people is, actu primo, and in themselves inslaved, because though the Monarch
so absolute should kill all, he cannot be controlled; there is no more but
flight, prayers and tears remaining, and what greater power has a Tyrant?
none at all, so may we say. An absolute Monarch is, actu primo, a sleeping
Lion, and a Tyrant is a waking and a devouring Lion, and they differ in
accidents only. 6. This is the Papists way, Bellarmine de Pontif. l. 1. c. 1.
and Sanderus de visibili Monarchia, l. 3. c. 3. Turrere in sum. de Eccles. l.
2. c. 2. prove that the government of the Church is by an absolute Monarch and
Pope, because that is the best government, which yet is in question. So
Royalists prove Commonwealths must be best governed by absolute Monarchs,
because that is the best government, but the Law says, it is contrary to
nature, even though people should paction to make a King absolute: Conventio
procuratoria ad dilapidandum and dissipandum juri naturali contraria nulla est,
l. filius 15. de cond. lust. l. Nepos. procul 125. de verb. signif. l. 188.
Monarchy in it self considered is the best government.
ubi. de jure Regni l. 85. d. tit.

Assert. 2. Monarchy in its latitude as heaven and earth and all the host
therein are Citizens, is the best government absolutely, because Gods immediate
government must be best, but that other governments are good or best so far
as they come near to this, must prove that there is a Monarchy in Angels, if
there be a government, and a Monarchy amongst Fishes, Beasts, Birds, etc. and
that, if Adam had never sinned there should be one Monarchy amongst all
mankind. I profess I have no eye to see what Government could be in that
State, but paternall, or maritall; and by this reason there should be one
Catholic Emperor over all the Kings of the earth; A position holden by some
Papists, and Interpreters of the cannon Law, which makes all the Princes of
the earth to be usurpers, except these who acknowledge a Catholic dominion of
the whole earth in the Emperor, to whom they submit themselves as Vassals. If
Kings were Gods and could not sin, and just as Solomon in the beginning of his
reign, and as David, I could say Monarchy so limited must be better then
Aristocracy, or Democracy. 1. Because it is farthest from injustice, nearest to
peace and godliness; m. l. 3.. aparet. ff. de administrat. tutor. l. 2..
novissime. ff. de Orig. jur. Aristot. pol. l. 8. c. 10. Bodin. de Rep. l. 6. c.
4. 2. Because God ordained this government in his people. 3. By experience it
is known to be less obnoxious to change, except that some think the Venetian
Commonwealth best; but with reverence, I see small difference between a King,
and the Duke of Venice.

Assert. 3. Every government has some thing wherein it is best. Every form in
some construction, best.
1. Monarchy is honorable and glorious-like before men. Aristocracie for
counsel is surest. Democracie for liberty, and possibly for riches and gain,
best. Monarchy obtains its end with more convenience. 1. Because the ship is
easilier brought to land, when one sits at the helm, then when ten move the
helm. 2. We more easily fear, love, obey, and serve one, then many. 3. He
can more easily execute the Laws.

Assert. 4. A limited and mixed Monarchy, such as is in Scotland A mixed
Monarchy, b^st.
and England, seem to me the best government, when Parliaments with the King,
have the good of all the three. This government has, 1. glory, order, unity
from a Monarch, from the government of the most and wisest it has safety of
counsel, stability, strength; from the influence of the Commons, it has
liberty, privileges. promptitude of obedience.

Object. 1. There is more power, terror, and love in one, then in many.

Answ. Not more power, 2. terror comes from sin, and so to nature fallen in
sin, in circumstances a Monarchy is best.

Object. 2. It is more convenient to nature, that one should be Lord then many.

Answ. To sinlesse nature, true, as in a father to many children.

Object. 3 Monarchies for invention of counsels, execution, concealing
Tolossan. de Rep. l. 13. c. 12.
of secrets, is above any other government.

Answ. That is in some particulars, because sin has brought darkness on us;
so are we all dull of invention, slow in execution, and by reason of the
falsnesse of men, silence is needless, but this is the accidentary state of
nature, and otherways there is safety in a multitude of counselors: one
commanding all without following counsel trusts in his own heart, and is a
fool.

Object. 4. A Monarch is above envy, because he has no equal.

Answ. Grant all; in many things a Monarchy is more excellent, but that is
nothing to an absolute Monarchy, for whom Royalists contend.

Object. 5. In a multitude there be more fools then wise men, and Bar^l. cont.
Monarch. l. 1. c. 39.
a multitude of vices, and little virtue is in many.

Answ. Mere multitude cannot govern in either Democracy or Aristocracy, for
then all should be rulers, and none ruled, but many eyes see more th^n one, by
accident one may see more then hundreds, but accidents are not rules.

Object. 6. Monarchy is most perfect, because most opposite to Anarchy, Symmons
Loyal Subj. unbelief.. 4. page 7.
and most agreeable to nature, as is evident in Plants, Birds, Bees.

Answ. Government of sinlesse nature void of reason, as in birds, bees, is weak
to conclude politic civil government amongst men in sin, and especially
absolute government, a King-Bee is not absolute, nor a King-Eagle, if either
destroy its fellows, by nature all rise and destroy their King. 2. A King-Bee
does not act by counsel borrowed from fellow Bees as a King must do, and
communication of counsels lesseneth absoluteness of a man. 2. I see not how a
Monarchy is more opposite to Anarchy and confusion, then other governments, a
Monarch as one, is more opposite to a multitude, as many; but there is no less
order in Aristocracy then in Monarchy: for a government essentially includes
order of commanding and subjection. Now one is not, for absoluteness, more
contrary to Anarchy then many, for that one now who can easily slip from a King
to a Tyrant, cannot have a negative voice in acts of justice, for then should
he have a legal power to oppose justice, and so for his absoluteness he
should be most contrary to order of justice, and a Monarch because absolute,
should be a door-neighbor to disorder and confusion.

Object. But the Parliament has no power to deny their voices to things just,
or to cross the law of God, more then the King.

Answ. It is true, neither of them has a negative voice against law and
reason, but if the Monarch by his exorbitant power may deny justice, he may by
that same legal power do all injustice; and so there is no absoluteness in
either.

Object. Who should then punish and coerce the Parliament in the case of
exorbitance?

Answ. Posterior Parliaments.

Object. Posterior Parliaments and people both may err.

Answ. All is true, God must remedy that only.

QUEST. XXXIX. Whether or no any Prerogative at all above the law be due to the
King? or if jura Majestatis be any such Prerogative Royal?
I Conceive Kings are conceived to have a threefold supreme power. A threefold
supreme power.
1. Strictly absolute, to do what they please, their will being simply a law;
this is Tyranicall, some Kings have it, de facto, ex consuetudine, but by a
divine law none have it; I doubt if any have it by a human positive law, except
the great Turk, and the King of Spain over his conquest without the borders of
Europe, and some few other conquerours. There is another 2. power limited to
Gods law, the due proper right of Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. 20. There is 3. a
potest as intermedia, a middle power, not so vast as that which is absolute and
tyrannical, which yet is some way humane: this I take Iurists call jus regium,
lex regia, jura Regalia regis, Cicero What be jura regalia or jura majestatis.
jura Majestatis, Livius, jura imperii, and these Royal privileges are such
common and high dignities, as no one particular magistrate can have, seeing
they are common to all the kingdom, as that Caesar only should coin money in
his own name. Hence the penny given to Christ, because it had Cesars image and
superscription. Math. 22. 20, 21. Infer by way of argumentation, (...), etc.
give therefore tribute to Caesar, as his due, so the Magazine and Armory for the
safety of the Kingdom is in the Kings hand, the King has the like of these
privileges, because he is the common, supreme, public officer and Minister
of God for the good of the whole Kingdom, and amongst these Royal privileges,
I reckon that power that is given to the King, when he is made King, to do many
things without warrant of the letter of the law, without the express consent
of his counsel, which he cannot always carry about with him, as the law
says. The King shall not raise arms without consent of the Parliament, but if
an army of Irish, or Danes, or Spaniards should suddenly land in Scotland, he
has power without a formally conveened Parliament, to command them all to rise
in arms against these invaders, and defend themselves, this power no inferior
Magistrate has as he is, but such a Magistrate. And in many such exigences,
when the necessity of justice or grace requires an extemporall exposition of
Laws, Prorenat^, for present necessary execution, some say only the Emperor,
others all Kings have these privileges. I am of the mind of Arnisaeus, that
these privileges are not rewards Arnisaeus de (...) 6. man. ^. 1. ^ 3. page
15^. 158.
given to Princes for their great pains. For the King is not obliged to
govern the Commonwealth, because he receives these Royal Privileges as his
reward, but because by office he is obliged to govern the commonwealth,
therefore these privileges are given to him, and without them he could not so
easily govern. But I am utterly against Arnisaeus, who says, these are not
essential to a King, Because (says he) he creates Marquesses, Dukes, etc.
and Nobles, constituteth Magistrates, not because of His Royal Dignity, but by
reason of his absolute power, for many Princes have supreme power, and cannot
make Nobles, and therefore to him they are jura majestatis, non jura
potestatis. But 1. The King, suppose a limited King, may and ought to make
nobles, for he may confer honors as a reward of Kings con^^r honors, as
rewards of virtue as they punish ildoers, not because they are absolute, but
according to law.
virtue; none can say Pharaoh by his absolute authority, and not as a King
advanced Joseph to be a noble Ruler, we cannot say that, for there was merit
and worth in him deserving that honor, and Darius not by absolute authority,
but on the ground of well-deserving (the rule by which Kings are obliged in
justice to confer honors) promoted Daniel, to be the first president of all
his kingdoms, because Dan. 6. 3. An excellent spirit was in him: and in
Justice the King could nobilitate none, rather then Daniel, except he should
fail against the rule of conferring honors. It is acknowledged by all, that
honos est proemium virtutis, honor is founded upon virtue, and therefore
Darius did not this out of his absolute Majesty, but as King.

2. All Kings as Kings, and by a Divine Law of God, and so by no absoluteness
of Majesty, are to make men of wisdom, fearing God, hating covetousness,
Judges under them, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. 2 Chro. 19. 6, 7. Psalm. 101. 6, 7, 8.

3. If we suppose a King to be limited as Gods King is Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20.
Yet is it his part to confer honors upon the worthiest. Now if he have no
absoluteness of Majesty, he cannot confer honors out of a principle that is
none at all, unum quodque sicut est, ita operatur, and if the people confer
honors, then must Royalists grant that there is an absolute Majesty in the
people, why then may they not derive Majesty to a King? and why then do
Royalists talk to us of Gods immediate creating of Kings, without any
interveening action of the people?

4. By this absolutnesse of Majesty, Kings may play the Tyrant as Samuel 1 Samuel
8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. foretells Saul would do. But I cannot believe that
Kngs have the same very official absolute power, from whence they do both acts
of grace, goodness and justice, such as are to expone Laws extemporally in
extraordinary cases, to confer honors upon good and excellent men of grace to
pardon offenders upon good grounds, and also-doe acts of extreme Tyranny: For
out of the same fountain does not proceed both sweet water and bitter. Then by
this absoluteness, Kings cannot do acts of goodness, justice and grace, and
so they must do good as Kings, and they must do acts of tyranny, as men, not
from absoluteness of majesty.

5. Inferior Magistrates, in whom there is no absoluteness of Majesty,
according to Royalists, way, may expound laws also extemporally, and do acts
of justice, without formalities of civil or municipall laws, so they keep the
genuine intent of the Law, as they may pardon one that goes up to the wall of
a City, and discovers the approach of the enemy, when the watchmen are
sleeping, though the Law be, That any ascending to the wall of the City shall
die. Also the inferior Judge may make Judges and Deputies under himself.

6. This Distinction is neither grounded upon Reason or Laws, nor on any Word
of God. Not the former, as is proved before, for there is no absolute power in
a King to do above, or against law; all the official power that a King has,
is a Royal power to do good, for the safety and good of his subjects, and that
according to law and reason, and there is no other power given to a King as a
King, and for Scripture Arnisaeus, ibid. alleges 1 Samuel 8. The manner or law
of the King. ver. 9. 11. And he says, it cannot be the custom and manner of
the King, but must be the law of absolute Majesty. 1. Because it was the manner
of inferior judges, as Tyberius said of his judges, to flea the people, when
they were commanded to shear them only. 2. Samuels sons who wrested judgment
and perverted the law, had this manner and custom to oppress the people, as
did the sons of Eli: and therefore without reason is it called the law of
Kings, jus regum, if it was the law of the judges, for if all this law be
Tyrannical and but an abuse The law of the King 1 Samuel 8. 9. 11.
of Kingly power, the same law may agree to all other Magistrates, who by the
same unjust power may abuse their power, but Samuel ( as Brentius observes
homi. 27. in 1 Samuel in princ.) does mean here a greater license then Kings can
challenge, if at any time they would make use of their plenitude of absolute
power, and therefore, nomine juris, by the word [law] here he understands a
power granted by law, jure, or right to the King, but pernicious to the people,
which Gregory calls jus regium Tyrannorum, the Royal law of Tyrants. -- So
Seneca 1 de clem. c. 11. hoc interest inter regem and Tyrannum, Species ipsa
fortunae ac licentiae par est, nisi quod Tyranni ex volutate saeviunt, Reges
non nisi ex causa and necessitate? quid ergo? non Reges quoque accidere solent?
sed quoties fieri publica utilitas persuadet, Tirannis saevitia cordi est. A
Tyran (says Arnisaeus) in this differs from a King, Qui ne ea quidem vult,
quae sibi licent, that a King will not do these things which are lawful; a
Tyran does quae libet, what he pleases to do.

Answ. Arnisaeus bewrays his ignorance in the Scriptures, for the word (...)
signifies a custom, and a wicked custom, as by (...) A Farther consideration
of the place 1. Sam. 8. 9. 11.
many Scriptures I have proved already, his reason are poor. It is the manner
of inferior judges, as we see in the sons of Eli, and Samuel, to pervert
judgment, as well as King Saul did, but the King may more oppress, and his
Tyranny has more color, and is more catholic then the oppression of
inferior judges, it is not Samuels purpose thus to distinguish the judges of
Israel and the kings, in that the judges had no power granted them of God to
oppress, because the people might judge their judges and resist them, and
there was power given of God to the king, so far to play the Tyrant, that no
man could resist him, or say, what do thou? the text will not bear any such
difference, for it was as unlawful to resist Moses, Joshua, Samuel, as
Royalists prove from the judgment of God that came upon Core, Dathan and
Abiram, as to resist King Saul and King David, Royalists doubt not to make
Moses a King. It was also no less sin to resist Samuels sons, or to do
violence to their persons, as judging for the Lord, and sent by the supreme
judge their father Samuel, then it was sin to resist many inferior Judges that
were Lions, and even Wolves under the Kings of Israel and Judah, so they judged
for the Lord, and as sent by the Supreme Magistrate; But the difference was in
this, that judges were extraordinarily raised up of God out of any tribe, as he
pleased, and were believers, Heb. 11. 32. Saved by faith, and so used not their
power to oppress the people, though inferior judges, as the sons of Eli and
of Samuel perverted judgment, Difference of Kings and Judges.
and therefore in the time of the judges, God who gave them saviors and
judges, was their King, but Kings were tied to a certain tribe, especially the
line of David to the Kingdom of Judah.

2. They were hereditary, judges not so.

3. They were made and chosen by the people, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. 15. 1 Samuel 10. 17,
18, 19, 20. 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. as were the Kings of the nations, and the first
King (though a King be the lawful ordinance of God) was sought from God in a
sinful imitation of the nations, 1 Samuel 8. 19, 20. and therefore were not of
Gods peculiar election, as the judges, and so they were wicked men, and many of
them, yea all for the most part, did evil in the sight of the Lord, and their
law, (...) their manner and custom was to oppress the people, and so were
their inferior judges little Tyrants, and lesser Lions, Leopards, evening
Wolves. Ezech. 22. 27. Mic. 3. 1, 2, 3. Esa. 3. 14, 15. And the Kings and
inferior judges are only distinguished, de facto, that the King was a more
Catholic oppressor, and the old Lion, and so had more art and power to catch
the prey then the inferior judges who were but whelps, and had less power,
but all were oppressors (some few excepted, and Samuel speaks of that which
Saul was to be, de facto, not de jure, and the most part of the Kings after
him) and this Tyranny is well called jus regis, the manner of the King, and not
the manner of the judges, because it had not been the practice, custom and
(...) of the believing judges, before Saul's Reign, and while God was his
peoples King, 1 Samuel 8. 7. to oppress. 3. We grant that all other inferior
judges after the people cast off Gods government, and in imitation of the
nations, would have a King, were also lesser Tyrants, as the King was a greater
Tyrant, and that was a punishment of their rejecting God and Samuel to be their
King and judge. 4. How shall Arnisaeus prove that this manner or (...) of the
King was potestas concessa, a power granted, I hope, granted of God; and not an
abuse of Kingly power, for then he and Royalists must say, that all the acts of
Tyranny ascribed to King Saul, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, 13, 14. by reason of which
they did cry out, and complain to God because of their oppression, was no
abuse of power given to Saul. Ergo, it was an use and a lawful use of power
given of God to their King, for there is no medium or mids betwixt a lawful
power used in moral acts, and a lawful power abused, and indeed Arnisaeus so
distinguishes a King and a Tyrant, that he makes them all one in nature and
spece. He says, a Tyrant does quod licet, that which by Law he may do, and a
King does not these things, quae licent, which by Law he may do, but so to me
it is clear, a Tyrant acting as a Tyrant, must act according to this (...) law
of the King, and that which is lawful, and a King acting as a King and not
doing these things that are lawful, must sin against his office, and the power
that God has given to him, which were to commend and praise the Tyrant, and to
condemn and dispraise the King. 3. If this Law of the King be a permissive Law
of God, which the king may out of his absolute enesse, put inexecution to
oppress^ the people, such as the law of a bill of divorcement, as Arnisaeus,
Barcklay, and other Royalists say, then must God have given a Law to every King
to play the Tyrant, because of the hardness of The law or manner of the King 1 Samuel 8. 9. no permissive law of God as was the law of a bill of divorcement.
the Kings heart, but we would gladly see some word of God for this. The Law of
a bill of Divorcement is a mere positive Law permitted in a particular
exigent, when a husband out of levity of heart and affection cannot love his
wife, therefore God by a Law permitted him out of indulgence to put her away,
that both he might have a seed (the want whereof, because of the blessed seed,
to be borne of woman, was a reproach in Israel) and though this was an
affliction to some particular women, yet the intent of the Law, and the soul
thereof was a public benefit to the Commonwealth of Israel, of which sort of
Laws I judge the hard usage permitted by God to his people, in the Master
toward the servant, and the people of God toward the stranger of whom they
might ex^ct usury, not toward their brethren to be; But that God should make a
permissive Law that Jeroboam might press all Israel to ^i^ne and worship the
Golden Calves, and that a King by Law may kill, as a bloody Nero, all the
people of God, by a Divine permissive Law, has no warrant in Gods word: Judge
reader, if Royalists make God to confer a benefit on a land, when he gives
them a King, if by a Law of God, such as the Law for a bill of Divorcement, the
King may kill and devour as a lawful absolute Lion, six kingdoms of nations
that profess Christ and believe in his name. For if the King have a divine law
to kill an innocent Jonathan, so as it be unlawful to resist him, he may by
that same law turn bloodier then either Nero, Julian, or any that ever sucked
the paps of a Liones, or of any of whom it may be said, Quaeque dedit nutrix
ubera, Tigris erat.
and he shall be given as a plague of God, ex condition doni, to the people,
and the people, inasmuch as they are gifted of God with a King, to feed them in
a peaceable and godly life, must be made slaves; now it wants reason that God
will have a permissive Law of murdering the Church of Christ, a Law so
contrary to the public good and intrinsecall intention of a King, and to the
immutable and eternal law of Nature, that one man because of his power, may by
Gods permissive Law murder millions of innocents: Some may say, It is against
the duty of love, that by Nature and Gods Law the husband owes to the wife,
Ephesians. 5. 25. that the husband should put away his wife; for God hates putting
away, and yet God made a Law, that a husband might give his wife a bill of
divorce, and so put her away; and by the same reason, God may make a Law,
though against nature, that a King should kill and murder, without all
resistance.

Answ. The question is not if God may make permissive Laws to oppress the
innocent; I grant he may do it, as he may command Abraham to kill his son
Isaac; and Abraham by Law is obliged to kill him, except God retract his
Commandment, and whether God retract it, or no, he may intend to kill his son,
which is an act of love and obedience to God; but this were more then a
permissive Law. 2. We have a clear Scripture for a permissive Law of divorce,
God cannot make a permissive law tending to the destruction of a whole national
Church and Kingdom*
and it was not a Law tending to the universal destruction of a whole
Kingdom, or many Kingdoms, but only to the grievance of some particular
wives: but the Law of divorce gave not power to all husbands to put away their
wives, but only to the husband, who could not command his affection to love
his wife. But this law of the King, is a Catholic law to all Kings, (for
Royalists will have all Kings so absolute, as it is sin and disobedience to God
to resist any) that all Kings have a divine law to kill all their subjects;
surely, then it were better for the Church to want such nurse-fathers, as have
absolute power to suck their blood: and for such a perpetual permissive Law
continuing to the end of the world, there is no word of God. Nor can we think
that the hardness of one Princes heart, can be a ground for God to make a Law
so destructive to his Church and all mankind: such a permissive Law, being a
positive Law of God, must have a word of Christ for it, else we are not to
receive it. 2. Arnisaeus cap. 4. distru. Tyran. and princ. n. 16. thinks a
Tyrant, in excercito, becoming a notorious Tyrant, when there is no other
remedy may be removed from government, sine magno scelere, without great sin.
But I ask how men can annull any divine Law of God, though but a permissive
Law. For if Gods permissive Law warrant a Tyrant to kill two innocent men, it
is tyranny more or less, and the Law distinguishes not. 3. This permissive
Law is expressly contrary to Gods Law, limiting all Kings Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17,
18. How then are we to believe, that God would make an universal Law contray
to the Law that he established before Israel had a King? 4. What Brentius says
is much for us, for he calls this (...) Law a license, and so to use it must
be licentiousness. 5. Arnisaeus desires that Kings may use sparingly the
plenitude of their power, for public good; there must be (says he) necessity
to make it lawful to use the plenitude of this power justly; therefore Ahab
sinned, in that he unjustly possessed Naboths vineyard, though he sinned
specially in this, that he came to the possession by murder, and it was
peculiar to the Jews, that they could not transfer their possessions from one
tribe to another. But if it be so, then this power of absoluteness is not
given, by permissive Law, by which God permitted putting away of wives, for the
object of a permissive Law is sin, but this plenitude of power may be justly
put forth in act (says he) if the public good may be regarded: I would know
what public good can legittimate Tyranny and killing of the innocent, the
intentions of men can make nothing intrinsecally evil to become good. And 6.
How can that be a permissive Law of God, and not his approveing Law by which
Kings create inferior judges? for this is done by Gods approving will. 7. It
is evident that Arnisaeus his mind is, that Kings may take their subjects
vineyards, and their goods, so they err not in the manner, and way of the act,
so be like, if there had not been a peculiar Law that Naboth should not sell
his vineyard, and if the King had had any public use for it, he might have
taken Naboths vineyard from him, but he specially sinned (says he) in eo
maxim culpatur, etc. that he took away the man's vineyard by murdering of him,
therefore says Arnisaeus c. 1. de potest. maj. in bona privato. 2. that by the
Kings Law 1 Samuel 8. There is given to the King, a dominion over the peoples
sons, daughters, fields, vineyards, olive-yards, servants and ^lockes. So he
cites that that Daniel puts all places, the Rocks of the Mountains, the
birds of the heaven Dan. 2. under the Kings power. So all is the Kings in
dominion, and the subjects in use only.

But 1. This law of the King then can be no ground for the Kings absoluteness
above Law, and there can be no permissive Law of God here, for that which
asserteth the Kings Royal Dominion over persons and things, that must be the
Law of Gods approving, not his permiting evil, but this is such a Law as
Arnisaeus says.

2. The text speaks of no Law or lawful power, or of any absoluteness of
King Saul; but of his wicked custom, and his rapine and Tyranny, He will take
your sons, your daughters, your fields, and your vineyards from you. Saul took
not these through any power of dominion by Law, but by mere Tyranny.

3. I have before cleared that the subjects have a propriety, and an use also,
else how could we be obliged by virtue of the fifth commandment to pay tribute
to the King, Romans 13. 7. for that which we pay, was as much the Kings before we
paid, as when we have paid it.

4. Arnisaeus says all are the Kings in respect of the universal
jurisdiction, that the King has in governing and ordering all to the
universal end, the good of the Commonwealth, for as universal nature cares
for the conservation of the spece and kind, so does particular nature care for
the conservation of individuals, so do men care for their private good, and the
King is to refer every man's private goods, to the good of the public, but the
truth is, this takes not away propriety of goods from private men, retaining
only the use to private men, and giving the dominion to the King, because this
power that the King bath of men's goods, is not power of dominion, that the King
has over the goods of men, as if the King were Dominus, Lord and owner of the
fields and monyes of the private subject, but it is a power to regulate the
goods for a public use, and supposes the abuse of goods, when they are
Monopolized to, and for private ends. 2. The power that the King has over my
bread is What dominion the King has over the goods of the subject.
not a power of dominion, so as he may eat my bread, as if it were his own
bread, and he be Lord of my bread as I was sometimes my self, before I abused
it, but it is a dominion unproperly, and abusively so called, and is a mere
fiduciary, and dispensatory power, because he is set over my bread not to eat
it, nor over my houses to dwell in them, but only with a ministerial power as
a public, though a honorable servant and watchman appointed by the
community, as a mean for an end to regulate my bread, houses, moneys, fields
for the good of the public. Dominion is defined a faculty to use a thing as
you please, except you be hindered by force, or by Law. Justin. tit. c. de
legibus in l. digna vox. etc. So have I a dominion over my own garments, house,
money, to use them for uses not forbidden by the Law of God, and man, but I may
not lay my corn field wast that it shall neither bear grass^ nor corn, the
King may hinder that, because it is a hurt to the public: but the King as
Lord and Sovereign has no such dominion over Naboths vi^eyard. How the King
is lord of all goods, ratione jurisdictionis, and tuitionis se. Anton. de
paudrill. in l. Altius. n. 5. c. de servit. Hottom. illust. quest. q. 1. ad
fin. Conc. 2. Lod. Molin. de just. and jur. dis. 25. Soto. de justitia and jur.
l. 4. q. 4. art. 1.

QUEST. XL. Whether or no the people have any power over the King, either by
his oath, covenant, or any other way?
ARistotle says, Ethic. 8. c. 12. (...). A Tyrant seeks his own, a King the
good of the Subjects, for he is no King who is not content, and excels in
goodness. The former part of these words distinguish The peoples power over
the King by reason of the Coronation* covenant.
essentially the King by his office, from the Tyrant. Now every office
requires essentially a duty to be performed by him that is in office; and
where there is a duty required, there is some obligation; if it be a politic
duty, it is a politic obligation. Now amongst politic duties betwixt equal
and equal, superior and inferior, that is not, de facto, required coaction
for the performance thereof, but de jure, there is, for two neighbor Kings and
two neighbor Nations, both being equal and independent, the one toward the
other, the one owe a duty to the other, and if the Ammonites do ^ wrong to
David and Israel, as they are equal de facto, the one cannot punish the other,
though the Ammonites do a disgrace to David's messengers, yet de jure, David and
Israel may compel them to politic duties of politic consociation; (for
betwixt independent kingdoms there must be some politic government, and some
politic and civil Laws, for two or three making a society, cannot dwell
together without some policy) and David and Israel as by Mutual punishments
may be, where there be no mutual relations of superiority and inferiority.
the Law of nature they may repel violence with violence, so if the laws of
neighborhood and nations be broken, the one may punish the other, though
there be no relation of superiority and inferiority betwixt them. 2. Where ever
there is a covenant and oath betwixt equals, yea or superiors and inferiors,
the one has some coactive power over the other; if the father give his bond to
pay to his son ten thousand pounds, as his patrimony to him, though before the
giving of the bond the father was not obliged, but only by the Law of nature
to give a patrimony to his son, yet now by a politic obligation of promise,
covenant and writ he is obliged so to his son to pay ten thousand pounds, that
by the Law of Nations and the civil Law, the son has now a coactive power by
Law to compel his father, though his superior, to pay him no less then ten
thousand pounds of patrimony. Though therefore the King should stand simply
superior to his kingdom and estates (which I shall never grant) ^t if the King
come under covenant with his kingdom, as I have proved at length c. 13. he
must, by that same, come under some coactive power to fulfill his covenant, for
omne promissum (says the Law) cadit in debitum. What any does promise falls
under debt, if the covenant be politic and civil, as is the covenant between
King David and all Israel, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. and between A promise lays a
politic obligation on the promiser, and gives law to him to whom the promise
is made, to press performance, or punish violation, when the promises are
betwixt man and man.
King Iehoash and the people, 2 King. 11. 17, 18. Then the King must come under
a civil obligation to perform the covenant, and though their be none superior
to King, and the people on earth to compel them both to perform what they
have promised, yet de jure, by the Law of Nations, each may compel the other
to mutual performance* This is evident,

1 By the Law of nations, if one nation break covenant to another, ^^^ugh both
be independent, yet has the wronged nation a coactive power, de jure (by
accident, because they are weaker, they want stength to compel, yet they have
right, and jus to compel them) to force the other to keep covenant, or then to
punish them, because nature teaches to repel violence by violence, so it be
done without desire of revenge and malice.

2. This is proved from the nature of a promise or covenant, for Solomon says,
Prove. 6. 1. My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy
hand with a stranger, 2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, and art
taken with the words of thy mouth. But whence is it that a man free is now
snared as a beast in a gin or trap? Certainly Solomon says it is by a word and
striking of hands, by a word of promise and covenant. Now the Creditor has
coactive power, though he be an equal or an inferior to the man who is
surety, even by Law to force him to pay, and the Judge is obliged to give his
coactive power to the Creditor, that he may force the surety to pay. Hence it
is clear that a Covenant makes a free man under the coactive power of law to
an equal and to weaker, and the stronger is by the law of fraternity to help
the weaker, with his coactive power, to cause the superior fulfill his
covenant. If then the King (giving, and not granting, he were superior to his
whole Kingdom) come under a covenant to them, to seek their good, not his
own, to defend true Protestant Religion, they have power to compel him to
keep his covenant, and Scotland (if the King be stronger then England, and
break his covenant to them) is obliged by Gods law, Prove. 24. 11. to add their
forces and coactive power to help their brethren of England.

3. The Law shall warrant to loose the vassal from the Lord, when the Lord has
broken his covenant. Hippolitus in l. Si quis viduam col. 5. and dixit de
quest. l. Si quis major. 41. and 161. Bartol. n. 41. The Magdeburgens. in
libel. de offic. magistrate. Imperatores and reges esse primarios vasallos
imperii, and regni, and proinde si feloniam contra imperium aut regnum
committant, fewdo privari, proinde ut alios vasallos.

Arnisaeus q. 6. An princeps qui jurat subditis, etc. n. 2. says, This
occasioneth confusion and sedition. The Egyptians (says he) cast off
P^olomeus, because he affected too much the name of a King of the Romans his
own friend, Dion. l. 9. The States punished Archidanius because he married a
wife of a low stature, Plutarch. in Ages. in pris. The ancient Burgundions
thought it cause enough to expel their King, if matters went not well in the
State, Marcel. l. 27. The Goths in Spain gave no other cause of expelling their
King, nisi quod sibi displiceret, because he displeased them. Aimon. l. 2. c.
20. l. 4. c. 35.

Ans. All these are not to be excused in people, but neither every abuse of
power in a King exautorateth a King, nor every abuse in people, can make null
their power.

Arnisaeus makes three kinds of oaths: the first is, when the King Three
kinds of oaths or covenants ^^de by Kings as Arnisaeus thinks.
swears to defend true Religion, and the Pope, and he denies that this is an
oath of fidelity, or by paction or covenant made to the Pope or Clergy, he
says it is only on oath of protection, nor does the King receive the Crown
from the Pope or Clergy.

Answ. 1. Arnisaeus divides oaths that are to be conjoined, we read not that
Kings swear to defend Religion in one oath, and to administrate judgment and
justice in another: for David made not two Covenants, but only one with all
Israel. 2. The King was not King while he did swear this oath, and therefore it
must be a pactionall oath between him and the Kingdom, and it is true the King
receives not a Crown from the Church, yet David received a Crown from the
Church, for this end, to feed the Lords people, and so conditionally. Papir
Mass l. 3. Chron. Gal. says, The king The King not King (...) ^^ first ^wear
the o^^h.
was not king before the oath. 2. That he did swear to be a keeper not only
of the first, but also of the second Table of the Law. Ego N. Dei gratia, mox
futur as rex Francorum, in die ordinationis meae coram Deo, and sanctis ejus
polliceor, quod servabo privilegia canonica, justitiamque and jus unicuique
Praelato debitum, vosque defendam, Deo juvante, quantum potero, quemadmodum Rex
ex officio in suo regno defendere debet, unumquemque Episcopum ac Ecclesiam,
and administrabo populo justitiam and leges, uti jus postulat. And so is it
ordained in the Council of Tolet 6. c. 6. Quisquis deinceps regni sortitus
fuerit apicem, non ante conscendat Regiam sedem, quam inter reliquas
conditiones sacramento policitus fuerit, quod non sinet in regno suo degere ^um
qui non sit Catholicus. All these by Scripture are oaths of Covenant, Deuteronomy.
17. ver. 17, 18. 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Kings 11. 17, 18.

Arnisaeus makes a second oath of absolute Kings, who swear they shall reign
according to equity and justice; and he says, There is no need of this oath,
a promise is enough, for an oath increases not the obligation. L. fin. de non
number. pec. Only it adds the bound of Religion, for there is no use of an
oath, where there is no paction of law against him that swears, if he violate
his oath. There follows only the punishment of Perjurie. And the word of a
Prince is as good as his oath, only he condescendeth to swear to please the
people, out of indulgence, not out of necessity. And the King does not
therefore swear because he is made King, but because he is made King he
swears. And he is not King because he is crowned, but he is crowned because
he is King. Where the Crown goes by succession, the King never dies; and he
is King by nature before he be crowned.

Answ. 1. This oath is the very first oath spoken of before, included in the
covenant that the King makes with the people, 2 Samuel* 5. 2, 3, 4. For absolute
Princes, by Arnisaeus his grant, does swear to do the duties of a King, as
Bodinus makes the oath of France, de Rep. l. 1. c. 8. Iuro ego, per deum, ac
promitto me just regnaturum judicium, equitatem, ac misericordiam facturum.
And papir. Mass. l. 3. Chron. has the same expressly in the particulars. And by
this a King swears he shall not be absolute, and if he swear this oath, he
binds himself not to govern by the Law of the King, whereby he may play the
Tyrant as Saul did, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. As all Royalists expound the
place.

2. It is but a poor evasion to distinguish betwixt the Kings promise It is an
evasion only to distingu^sh between the Kings promis^s and his oath.
and his oath, for the promise and covenant of any man, and so of the King does
no less bring him under a civil obligation and politic coaction, to keep his
promise, then an oath, for he that becomes surety for his friend does by no
civil Law, swear he shall be good for the son, or perform in liew and place
of the friend, what he is to perform, he does only covenant and promise, and
in law and politic obligation he is taken and snared by that promise, no
less then if he had sworn. Reuben offers to be caution to bring Benjamin
safe home to his old father, Genesis 42. 37. and Judah also, Genesis 43. 9. but they
do not swear anyoath, and i^ is true that an oath adeth nothing to a contract
and promise, but only it lays on a religious tie before God, yet so as
consequently, if the contractor violate both promise and oath, he comes under
the guilt of perjury, which a law of men may punish. Now that a covenant
brings the King under a politic obligation, as well as an oath is already
proved, and farther confirmed by Gal. 3. 15. Though it be a man's testament or
covenant, no man disanulleth and adds thereunto; No man even by man's law can
anull a confirmed covenant, and therefore the man that made the covenant
brings himself under law to fulfill his own covenant; and so must the King
put himself under men's law, by a covenant at his Coronation. Yea and David is
reputed by Royallists, an absolute Prince, yet he comes under a covenant
before he be made King. 3. It is but a weak reason to say, that an oath is
needless, where no action of law can be against the King who swears, if it
have any strength of reason. I retort it, a legal and solemn promise then is
needless also, for there is no action of law against a King (as Royalists
teach) if he violate his promise. So then King David needlessly made a Covenant
with the people at his Coronation; for though David should turn as bloody an
enemy to the Church as Nero or Julian, the people have no Law-action against
David; and why then did Jeremiah seek an oath of the King of Judah, that he
would not kill him, nor deliver him into the hands of his enemies? and why did
David seek an oath of Jonathan? It is not like Jeremiah and David could have
law-action against a King and a Kings son, if they should violate the oath of
God. And farther, it is a begging of the question, to say that the States can
have no action against the king, if he should violate his oath. Hugo Grotius
puts seven cases in Grotius de jur* bell. and pat. l. 1. c. 4.
which the people may have most real action against the King to accuse and
punish him.

1. They may punish the King to death, for matters capital, if so it Barclai.
l. 4. c. 6.
be agreed on betwixt the King and the people, as in Lacedemonia.

2. He may be punished as a private man.

3. If the King make away a Kingdom given to him by succession, his act is
null, and he may be resisted, because the Kingdom is a liferent only to him.
Yea says Barclay, He loses the Crown.

4. He loses his Kingdom, if with a hostile mind he se^k the destruction of
the Kingdom.

5. If such a clause be put in, that if he commit felony, or do such
oppressions, the Subjects shall be loosed from the bonds of subjection; then
the King failing thus, turns a private man.

6. If the King have the one half or part of the Kingdom, and the people or
Senate the other half; if the King prey upon that half which is not his own,
he may violently be resisted, for in so far he has not the Empire.

7. If when the Crown was given, this be declared, that in some cases he may
be resisted; then some natural liberty is free from the Kings power, and
reserved in the peoples hand.

It is then reason that the King swear an oath. 4. That the Kings oath is but
a ceremony to please the people, and that because he is king, and king by
birth; therefore he swears, and is crowned, is in question, and denied. No
man is borne a king, as no man is borne a subject, and because the people
makes him King, therefore he is to swear. The council of Toledo says, non
antea conscendat regiam sedem quam iuret. 2 An oath is a religious obligation,
no arbitrary ceremony. 3. He may swear in his cabinet chamber, not covenanting
with the people, as David and Iehoash did. 4. So he A King cannot swear to be a
just King, because he is already King.
makes promises that he may be King, not because he is King, it were
ridiculous, he should promise or swear to be a just King, because he is a just
King, and by the same reason the estates swear the oath of loyalty to the new
King, not that they may be loyal in all time coming, but because they are
loyal Subjects already, for if the one half of the covenant on the Kings part
be a ceremony of indulgence, not of necessity, by the same reason, the other
half of the covenant must be a ceremony of indulgence also to the people.

Object. Arnisaeus says, a contract cannot be dissolved in law, but by consent
of two parties contracting, because both are obliged. l. ab emptione 58. in pr.
de pact. l. 3. de rescind. vend. l. 80. de solu. Therefore if the subjects go
from the covenant, that they have made to be loyal to the King, they ought to
be punished.

Answ. A contract, the conditions whereof are violated, by neither side, cannot
be dissolved, but by the joint consent of both; and in buying and selling, and
in all contracts unviolated, the sole will of neither side can violate the
contract, of this speaks the law. But I ask the Royalist, if the contract
betwixt the spies sent to view Jericho and Rahab the harlot, had not been null,
and the spies free from any obligation, if Rahab had neglected to keep within
doors, when Jericho was taken, though Rahab and the spies had never consented
expressly to break the covenant? We h^ld that the law says with us, that
vassals lose their farm, if they pay not what is due: Now what are Kings but
vassals to the State, who if they turn Tyrants, fall Bartol. in. l. 1. n. 4.
de his qui not. infam. Arnisae. cap. 6. An princeps qui iura^ subditis, etc.
from their Right?

Arnisaeus says in the council of Toledo 4. c. 74. The subjects ask from the
King, that Kings would be meek and just, not upon the ground of a voluntary
Contract and Paction, but because God shall rejoice in King and People, by so
doing.

Answ. These two do no more fight one with another, then that two Merchants
should keep faith one to another, both because God has said he shall dwell in
Gods mountain who swears and covenanteth, and stands to his oath and
covenant, though to his loss and hurt, Psa. 15. and also, because they made
their covenant and contract thus and thus.

Arnisaeus. 16. Every Prince is subject to God, but not as a vassal: for a
Master may commit felony, and lose the propriety of his farm; can God do so?
The Master cannot take the farm from the vassal without an express cause
legally deduced, but cannot God take what he has given, but by a law-Processe?
a vassal can entitle to himself a farm against the Masters will, as some
jurists say, but can a Prince entitle a kingdom to himself, against the God of
heavens will? though we grant the comparison, yet the subjects have no law over
the Kings, because the coercive power of the vassal is in the Lord of the
manor, the punishing of Kings belongs to God.

Answ. We compare not the lord of a manor and the Lord of Heaven together, all
these dissimilitudes we grant, but as the King is Gods vassal, so is he a noble
and Princely vassal to the Estates of a kingdom, because they make him. 2. They
make him rather then another their noble* servant. 3. They make him for
themselves, and their own Godly, quiet, and honest life. 4. They, in their
first election, limit him to such a way, to govern by law, and give to him so
much power for their good, no more, in these four acts they are above the
Prince, and so have a coercive power over him.

Arnisaeus n. 9. It is to make the Princes* fidelity doubtful to put him to an
oath. Lawyers say there is no need of an oath, when a person is of approved
fidelity.

Answ. Then we are not to seek an oath of an inferior Magistrate, of a
Commander in wars, of a pastor, it is presumed these are of approved fidelity,
and it makes their integrity obnoxious to slanders, to put them to an oath.
2. David was of more approved fidelity then any King now adays, and to put him
to a covenant seemed to call his fidelity in question; Jonathan sought an oath
of David to deal kindly with his seed, when he came to the throne, Jeremiah
sought an oath of the King of Judah, did they put any note of false-hood on
them therefore?

Arnisaeus. You cannot prove that ever any King gave an oath to their subjects
in Scriptures.

Answ. What more unbeseeming Kings is it to swear to do their duty, then to
promise covenant ways to do the same? and a covenant you cannot deny. 2. In a
covenant for religious duties there was always an oath. 2 Chro. 15. 12, 13,
14. hence the right of cuting a calf, and swearing in a covenant Ier. 34. 18.
3. There is an oath that the people gives to the King to obey him, Eccles. 8.
2. and a covenant 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. mutual between the king and people, I
leave it to the juditious, if the people swear to the king obedience in a
covenant mutual, and he swear not to them.

Arnisaeus shows to us a third sort of oath that limited Princes do swear,
this oath in Denmark, Suecia, Polonia, Hungaria, is sworn by the kings, who
may do nothing without consent of the Senate, and according to order of Law,
this is but the other two oaths specified, and a Prince cannot contraveen his
own contract, the law says in that the Prince is but as a private man, in l.
digna vox C* de ll. Romans cons. 426. n. 17. And it is known that the Emperor is
constituted and created by the Princes Electors, subject to them, and by Law
may be dethroned by them.

The B. of Rochester says from Barclay, none can denude a King of ^o. Ro^^. de
potest. pa. lib. 2. c. 20.
his power, but he that gave him the power, or has an express commandment so
to do, from him that gave the power.

But God only and the people gave the King his power. Ergo, God with the
people having an express commandment from God, must denude the King of power.

Answ. 1. This shall prove that God only by an immediate action, or some having
an express commandment from him, can deprive a preacher for scandals, Christ
only, or those who have an express commandment from him can excommunicate,
God only or the magistrate with him can take away the life of man; and Numb,
11. 14, 15, 16. No inferior Magistrates, who also have their power from God
immediately, Romans 13. 1. If we speak of the immediation of the office, can
devide inferior judges of their power. God only by the husbandmans pains
makes a fruitful vineyard, Ergo, the husbandman cannot make his vineyard grow
over with nettles and briars.

2. The argument must run thus, else the assumption shall be false. God only
by the action of the people, as his instrument, and by no other action make a
lawful King. God only by the action of the people as his instrument can make
a King, God only by the action of the people as his instrument can dethrone a
King, for as the people making a King, are in that doing what God does before
them, and what God does by them in that very act, so the people unmaking a
King, does that which God does before the people, both the one and the other
according to Gods rule obliges, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.

The Prelate, whose tribe seldom says truth, adds, As a fatherly B.
Rochester. 16
power, by God and natures law, over a family, was in the father of a family,
before the children could either transfer their power, or consent to the
translation of that power to him, so a Kingly power (which succeeds to a
paternal or fatherly power) to govern many families, (yea and a Kingdom) was
in that same father, in relation to many families, before these many families
can transfer their power. The Kingly power flows immediately from God, and
the people does not transfer that power, but does only consent to the person
of the King, or does only choose his person at some time. And though this
power were principally given to the people, it is not so given to the people as
if it were the peoples power, and not Gods for it is Gods power, neither is it
any other ways given to the people, but as to a stream, a beam, and an
instrument which may confer it to another. M. Anton. de domini. l. 6. c. 2. n
23. 23. does more subtly illustrate the matter, if the King should confer
honor on a subject, by the hand of a servant, who had not power or freedom to
confer that honor, or not to confer it, but by necessity of the Kings
commandment must confer it, nothing should hinder us to say, that such a
subject had his honor immediately from the King: so the earth is immediately
illuminated by the sun, although light be received in the earth, but by the
interveening mediation of many inferior bodies and elements, because by no
other thing, but by the sun only, is the light as an efficient cause in a
nearest capacity to give light, so the Royal power in whomsoever it be is
immediately from God only, though it be applied by men to this, or this person,
because from God only, and from no other the Kingly power is formally and
effectively that which it is, and works that which it works, and if you ask
by what cause is the tree immediately turned in fire, none sound in reason would
say, it is made fire, not by the fire, but by him that laid the tree on the
fire. John P. P. would have stolen this argument also, if he had been capable
thereof.

Ans. 1. A fatherly power is in a father, not before he have a child, but
indeed before his children by an act of their free will consent that he be their
father, yea and whether the children consent or no, from a physical act of
generation he must be the father; and let the father be the most wicked man and
lethim be made by no moral requisite, is he made a father, nor can heever leave
off physically to be a father, he may leave off morally to do the duty of a
father, and so be non pater officio, but he cannot but be pater naturae
generantis vi. So there never is nor can be any need, that childrens fre
consent interveen* to make Kish the Father of Saul because he is by nature a
father, to make Saul a King and a moral father by analogy and improperly, a
father by ruling, governing, A difference betwixt a father and a King.
guiding, defending Israel, by good laws, in peace and godliness, I hope there
is some act of the peoples free will required even by Spalatoes way, the people
must approve him to be King, yea they must King him, or constitute him King,
say we, no such act is required of natural sons to make a physical father,
and so here is a great halt in the comparison, and it is most false that there
is a Kingly power to govern many families in the same father, before these
many families can transfer their power to make him King. Put Royallists to
their Logic, they have not found out a medium to make good, that there is a
formal Kingly power, whereby Saul is King and father morally over all Israel
before Israel chose him and made him, as Kish was Saul's father formally, and
had a fatherly power to be his father, before Saul had the use of free will to
consent, that he should be his father. Royalists are here at a stand; The man
may have Royal gifts before the people make him King, but this is not ( regia
potestas) a Royal power, by which the man is formally King. Many have more
Royal gifts then the man that bears the Crown, yet are never Kings, nor is
there formally, ( regia potestas) kingly power in them. In this meaning
Petrarcha said, Plures sunt reges quam regna.

3. He says, The people does not confer royal power, but only consent to the
person of the man, or choice of his person. This is nonsense, for the peoples
choosing of David at Hebron to be King, and their refusing of Saul's seed to be
King, what was it but an act of God, by the free suffrages of the people,
conferring royal power on David, and making him King? whereas in former times,
David even anointed by Samuel at Bethleem, 1 Samuel 16. was only a private man,
the subject of King Saul, and never termed by the Spirit of God, a King; nor
was he King, till God, by the peoples consent, made him King at Hebron; for
Samuel neither honored him as King, nor bowed to him as King, nor did the
people say, God save King David, but after this David acknowledged Saul as his
Master, and King. Let Royalists show us any act of God making David King, save
this act of the people making him formally King at Hebron, and therefore the
people as Gods instrument transferred the power, and God by them in the same
act transferred the power, and in the same they chose the person; the Royalists
affirm these to be different actions; affirmanti incumbit probatio.

4. This power is the peoples radically, naturally, as the Bees (as some think)
have a power natural to choose a King-Bee, so has a community a power
naturally, to defend and protect themselves; and God has revealed in Deuteronomy. 17.
14, 15. the way of regulating the act of choosing Governors and Kings, which
is a special mean of defending and protecting themselves; and the people is as
principally the subject and fountain of Royal power, as a fountain is of
water. I shall not contend, if you call a Fountain Gods Instrument to give
water, as all creatures are his Instruments. 5. For Spalato's comparison, he is
far out, for the people choosing one of ten to be their King, have freewill to
choose any, and are under a Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15. In the manner of their
choosing, and thought, they err and make a sinful choice; yet the man is
King, and Gods King, whom they make King; but if the King command a servant to
make A. B. a Knight, if the servant make C. D. a Knight, I shall not think C.
D. is a valid Knight at all; and indeed, the honor is immediately here from
the King, because the Kings servant by no innate power makes the Knight, but
Nations by a radical and natural and innate power makes this man a King, not
this man: and I conceive, the man chosen by the people, owes thanks, and
grateful service to the people, who rejected others, that they had power to
choose, and made him King. 6. The light immediately and formally, is light from
the Sun, and so is the Office of a King, immediately instituted of God, Deuteronomy.
17. 14. Whether the institution be natural, or positive, it is no matter. 2.
The man is not King, because of Royal indowments, though we should say these
were immediately from God, to which instruction and education may also confer
not a little; but he is formally King, ratione (...), in regard of the formal
essence of a King, not immediately from God, as the light is from the Sun, but
by the mediation of the free consent of the people, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. nor is
the people in making a King, as the man who only casts Wood in the fire; the
Wood is not made fire formally, but by the fire, not by the approach of fire to
Wood, or of Wood to fire; for the people do not apply the Royalty, which is
immediately in, and from God to the person: explicate such an application; for
to me it is a Fiction unconceiveable, because the people has the Royalty
radically in themselves, as in the Fountain and Cause, and conferreth it on the
man who is made King; yea, the people by making David King, confer the Royal
power on the King: this is so true, that Royalists forgetting themselves,
inculcate frequently in asserting their absolute Monarch from Vlpian, but
misunderstood, that the people have resigned all their power, liberty, right
of life, death, goods, chastity, a potency of rapine, homicides, unjust wars,
etc. upon a creature called an absolute Prince, even, says Grotius, as a man
may make himself a slave, by selling his liberty to a master. Now if the people
make away this power to the King, and this be A people may give Royal power to
the King by limitation and measure: but people can give no gift which is solely
and immediately from God, by measure: they cannot measure God.
nothing but the transcendent absoluteness of a King: certainly, this power
was in the people; for how can they give to a King, that which they have not
themselves? As a man cannot make away his liberty, to a master, by becoming a
slave to him, if his liberty were immediately in God, as Royalists say,
Soveraigntie is immediately in God, and people can exercise no Act about
Sovereignty, to make it over to one man, rather then to another. People only
have an after-approbation, that this man to whom God has given it immediately,
shall have it. Furthermore, they say, people in making a King, may make such
conditions, as in seven cases a King may be dethroned, at least resisted, says
Hu. Grotius. Ergo, people may give more, or less, half or whole, limited or
absolute Royal power to the Prince; but if this power were immediately in God,
and from God; how could the people have the husbanding of it, at their need to
expend it out in ounce weights, or pound weights, as they please? And that the
people may be Taverners of it, to sell, or give it, is taught by Grotius de
jur. bell and pac. l. 1. c. 4. Barclai. advers. Monarch. l. 4. c. 6. Arnisae.
cap. 6. de majest. an princeps qui jurat subditis, etc. n. 10. n. se Aventiun.
Anal. l. 3. Chytreus, l. 23. l. 28. Saxon Sleid. lib. 1. in fi; yet Arnisaeus
is not ashamed to cite Arist. po. c. 12. l. 3. That he is not a true and
absolute King, who rules by Laws: The point black contrary of which Aristotle
says.

QUEST. XLI. Whether does the P. Prelate upon good grounds, ascribe to us the
doctrine of Jesuits in these Questions of lawful defensive Wars?
THe P. Prelate without all ground, will have us all Jesuits in this point;
but if we make good, that this Truth was in Scripture before a Jesuit was in
the earth, he falls from his Cause.

P. Prelate. The Begardi says, There was no Government, no Law Sacr. san. reg.
maj. c. 1. page 1, 2.
given to the just. It fears me, this age fancieth to it self, some such
thing, and have learned of Core, Dathan, etc.

Ans. This Calumniator in the next words belieth himself, when he says, We
presuppose, that these with whom we are to enter in Lists, do willingly grant,
That Government is not only lawful and just, but necessary both for Church
and Commonwealth: then we fancy no such thing as he imputes to us.

P. Prelate. Some said, that the right of Dominion is founded on grace; whether
the Waldenses and Hus, held any such Tenet, I cannot now insist to prove, or
disprove. Gerson and others held, that there must be a new Title and Right to
what men possess: Too many too confidently hold these, or the like.

Answ. 1. That Dominion is founded upon Grace, as its essential Pillar; so as
wicked men be no Magistrates, because they are in mortal sin, was falsely
imputed to ancient Protestants, the Waldenses, Wickcliff, and Hus, by Papists;
and this day by Jesuits, Suarez, Bellarmine, Becan. The P. Prelate will leave
them under this Calumny, that he may offend Papists and Jesuits as little as
he can, but he would lay it on us; but if the P. Prelate think, that Dominion
is not founded on Grace, de jure, that Rulers should have that spirit that God
put on the seventy Elders for their Calling, and that they ought not to be men
fearing God, and hating covetousness, as Gerson and others did, he belieth the
Scripture.

2. It is no error of Gerson, that believers have a spiritual Right to their
civil possessions, but by Scripture, 1 Cor. 4. 21. Revel. 21. 7.

P. Prelate. The Jesuits are ashamed of the error of Casuists, who hold that,
directum imperium, the direct and primary power, Supreme, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical, is in the Pope; and therefore, they give an indirect
directive, and coercive power to him, over Kings and States, in ordine ad
spiritualia: So may he King and un-King Princes at his pleasure. Our
Presbyterians, if they run not fully this way, are very near to it.

Answ. The Windy man would seem versed in Schoolmen, he should have named some
Gasuists, who hold any like thing.

2. The Presbyterians must be Popes, because they subject Kings to the Gospel,
and Christ's Scepter in Church Censures, and think Christian Kings may be
rebuked for blasphemy, bloodshed, etc. Whereas Prelates, in ordine ad
diabolica, murder souls of Kings. 2. Prelates do King Princes. An P.
Arch-Prelate, when An. 1633. Coronation of King Charles in Scotland.
our King was crowned, put the Crown on King Charles Head, the Sword and Scepter
in his hand, anointed him in his hands, Crown, shoulders, arms, with sacred
Oil: The King must kiss the Archbishop, and Bishops; is not this to King
Princes, in ordine ad spiritualia: And these that Kingeth may unking, and judge
what relation the P. Archbishop Spotwood had, when he proffered to the King,
the Oath that the Popish Kings swears to maintain, the professed Religion
(not one word of the true Protestant Religion) and will carefully root out all
Heretics, and enemies (that is Protestants as they expone it,) to the true
Worship of God, that shall be convicted by the true Church of God of the
foresaid crimes. And when the Prelates professed, they held not their Prelacies
of the King, but of the Pope indeed: Who are then nearest to the Popes power,
in ordine ad spiritualia? 3. How will this black mouthed Calumniator, make
Presbyterians to dethrone Kings? He has written a Pamphlet of the
inconsistency of Monarchy and Presbyterian Government, consisting of lies,
invented Calumnies of his Church, in which he was baptized. But the truth is,
all his Arguments prove the inconsistencie of Monarchs and Parliaments, and
transform any King in a most absolute Tyrant; for which Treason he deserves to
suffer as a Traitor.

P. Prelate. Q. 1. c. 1. The Puritan says, That all power Civil, is radically
and originally seated in the Community; he here joyneth hands with the Jesuit.

Answ. In six pages he repeateth the same things. 1. Is this such an Heresy,
that a Colonie casted into America by the Tyranny of P. Prelates, have power to
choose their own Governors; all Israel was Heretical in this, for David could
not be their King, though designed and anointed by God, 1 Samuel 16. till the
people, ^ Sam. 5. put forth in act, this power, and made David King in Hebron.
2. Let the Prelate make a Syllogism, it is but ex utraque affirmante in
secunda figura, Logic like the bellies of the Court, in which men of their own
way is disgraced and cast out of Grace and Court, because in this controversy
of the King with his two Parlia^ents, they are like Erasmus in Gods matters,
who said, Lutherum nec accuso, nec defendo. 1. He is discourted who ever he be,
who is in shape like a Puritan, and not fire and sword against Religion and his
Country, and Oath and Covenant with God, and so it is this. The Jesuit
teaches, that power of Government is in the Community originally. The Puritan
teaches, that power of Government is in the Community originally. Ergo, The
Puritan is a Jesuit. But so the Puritan is a Jesuit, because he and the
Jesuit teaches, that there is on God, and three persons; And if the Prelate
like this reasoning, we shall make himself and the Prelates, and Court-Divines,
Jesuits upon surer grounds.

Jesuits teach, The Pope is not the Antichrist. 2. Christ locally descended to
Hell, to free some out of that prison. 3. It was sin to separate from
Babylonish Rome. 4. We are justified by works. 5. The merit of fasting is not
to be condemned. 6. The Mass is no idolatry. 7. The Church is the judge of
controversies. 8. All the Arminian points are safer to be believed, then the
contrary; yea, and all the substantials of Popery are true, and Catholic
doctrine to be preached and Printed: The Prelates and Court-Divines, and this
Prelate conspireth, in all these with the Jesuits, as is learnedly and
invincibly proved in the Treatise, called (...) the Canterburian
self-conviction: to which no man of the Prelaticall and Romish Faction durst
ever make answer for their hearts: and see then who are Jesuits. 3. This
doctrine was taught by Lawyers, Protestants, yielded to by Papists before any
Jesuit was whelped in rerum natura. Never learned man wrote of policy, till of
late; but he held power of Government, by the light of nature must be radically
and originally, in a Community: the P. Prelate says, Jesuits are not the
father of this opinion, Cap. 1. page 12. How then can the Liar say, that the
Puritan conspireth with the Jesuit? Suarez the Jesuit de primat. sum.
pontifi. l. 3. c. 2. n. 10. Non est novum, aut a Cardinali Bellarmino inventum.
The Jesuit Tannerus will not have their Family the mother of this opinion,
Tom. 2. disp. 5. de leg. q. 5. in 12. q. 95, 96. Dubi. 1. n. 7. Sine dubio
communis omnium Theologorum and Iurisperitorum sententia, etc. The Jesuit
Tolet, in Romans 13. takes it for a ground, That the Civil powers are from God,
by the natural mediation of men, and Civil Societies. 4. Jesuits teach, That
there is no lawful Christian society truly politic that has a near and
formal power, to choose and ordain their own Magistrates, but that which
acknowledges subjection, and the due regulation of their creating of
Magistrates, to be due and proper to the Pope of Rome. We acknowledge no ways
the Bishop of Rome, for a lawful Bishop and Pastor at all: But this Popish
Prelate does acknowledge him, for he has these words, Cap. 5. page 58. It is
high presumption in the Pope, to challenge to himself, the Title or Right of
Christ's universal Vicar on earth, by Divine right. The Pope, the Bishop of
Rome, has no more by Divine right, (what he may have by positive
Ecclesiastical right, is not pertinent for us now to examine and discuss) no
higher privilege (except it be in extent) then the meanest Bishop of the world
in his Diocese. And amongst all proofs, he passing by Scriptures, which
should prove, or improve a Divine right, he will content himself with one
proof of Cyprian, de unitat. Eccles. And ends with these words: Would God,
both sides, in this, and other controversies, would submit to the judgment of
the holy Fathers.

Hence the P. Prelate, in his 4. Article, (the other two I shall touch anon)
makes Puritans grosser then Jesuits, in dethroning Kings; because, if the
King be deficient, the People may resume their power, and govern for him, and
so dethrone the King. But Bellarmine, l. 3. q. de laic. holds, the people
cannot dethrone the King, L. 3. defens. fid. Orth. c. 3. n. 2, 3.
but, in certis casibus, in some cases, that is, (as Suarez says) si Rex sua
potestate iu manifestam (Civitatis ceu Regni) perniciem abutatur. But I will
demonstrate, that if Papists hold that the Pope may dethrone Kings, this
Prelate is of their mind: for, 1. the words I cited, make good that he is for
the Popes Supremacy; (now it is a joint or lith of his supremacy, to King and
un-King Princes.) 2. They make good that he is a Papist: for, 1. It is
presumption in the Pope to challenge to himself, that he is Christ's Universal
Vicar on The P. Prelate is a Papist.
Earth by Divine right. Why says he not, by no right at all, but only he is
not Christ's Vicar by Divine right: for it is evident that Papists make him
Christ's Vicar, only by Ecclesiastical right; for they profess, succession of
Popes to this day, cannot be proved but by Tradition, not by Scripture.

2. The Popes supremacy, by Papists, is expressly reckoned amongst unwritten
Traditions, and so there is no necessity that the right of it be proved from
Scripture.

3. The Prelate expressly says, He will not discuss the Ecclesiastical right
that the Pope has to be Christ's Vicar. And by that he clearly insinuates,
that he has a right to be Christ's Vicar, beside a Scripturall and Divine
right: only, for offending Papists, he will not discuss it.

4. He has no higher privilege (says he) then other Bishops, except in
extent, by Divine right. Now other Bishops, as officers in nature different
from Presbyters, (for of such the P. Prelate must speak in his own dialect)
have their office by Divine right: and this the Prelates words must include,
else he says nonsense to the matter in hand. And in extent the Pope has by
Divine right more then other Bishops have. Now what is the Pope of Rome his
extent? All knows it is the whole Catholic visible Church on earth. If then
all Bishops be particular Ambassadors in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and so
Legates and Deputies of Christ; He who by Divine right is a Bishop in extent
over the whole world, is as like one that calls himself the universal Vicar
of Christ, as one egg is like another. 2. The doctrine taught by this Prelate,
so Popish, and hints, yea are more then evidences of gross Popery in this
book, and his other Pamphlet against Presbyteries; And his desire that the
Controversy concerning the Popes supremacy, and others, were determined with
submission to the judgment of the Fathers: do cry, that he is but a rotten
Papist. For why will he submit all other controversies to the judgment of the
Fathers? Why not to the Prophets and Apostles? Can Fathers decide Controversies
better then the Word of God? A reason cannot be dreamed of, why the Fathers
should be Judges, and not the Scriptures, except that Scriptures are obscure.
2. Their authority and light cannot determine and judge controversies, except
in so far as they have authority from Fathers and the Church: and we know this
to be proprium 4to modo, proper to Jesuits and Papists, to cry Fathers,
Fathers, in all controversies, though the Fathers be more for us, then for
them, except two things; 1. What Fathers speak for us, are corrupted by them:
2. What were but errors in Fathers, when children add contumacie to error,
becomes the heresies of the sons.

And it is most false, that we join with Jesuits. 1. We teach no Jesuits
tenants concerning Kings.
more against Tyrants, in e^ercitio, then Grotius, Barclay, Winzetus, in the
matter of deposing Kings. And in this, Royalists conspire with Jesuits. 2. We
deny that the Pope may loose Subjects from the oath of Fidelity, when a King
turns Heretical; 3. That People at the Popes commandment, are to dethrone
Kings, for Heresy. So do the Prelates, and their fellows the Papists teach.
So Gregory the 7. practiced: so Aquinas taught, 22 q. 12. ar. 2. Antonin. sum,
par. 3. t. 22. c. 3.. 7. Thou have put all things under the Popes feet* oves,
id est, Christianos; boves, Iudaeos and Hereticos; pecora, Paganos. So Navar.
l. 1. c. 13. Pagans have no jurisdiction. Iaco. Symanca, de Catho. Instit. tit.
45. n. 25. Catholica uxor heretico viro debitum reddere non tenetur. Item.
Constat Haeretieum privatum esse omni dominio, naturali, civili, politico,
naturali quod habet in filios, nam propter haeresin patris efficiuntur filii
sui iuris, civili, quod habet in servos, ab eo enim servi liberantur, politico,
quod rerum domini habent in subditos, ita Bannes 22. q. 12. art. 10. Gregor. de
valent. 22. dis. 1. q. 12. p. 2. lod. Mol. to. 1. De just. and jur. tract. 2.
dis. 29. v. 3. 2. Papists hold that Generatio clerici est corruption subditi,
Churchmen are not subjects under the Kings Law. It is a Canonical privilege
of the Clergy, that they are not subject to the Kings Civil Laws. Now this
Prelate and his fellows made the King swear, at his Coronation, to maintain
all Canonical Privileges of the Prelaticall Clergy, the very Oath and words
sworn by all the Popish Kings.

P. Prelate. Power is given by the multitude to the King immediately, and by God
mediately, not so much by collation, as by approbation, how the Jesuit and
Puritan walk all along in equal pace. See Bellarmine l. 1. de liac. c. 6.
Zuarez cont. sect. Angl. l. 3. c. 3.

Ans. It is a Calumny, that we teach that the power of the King is from God
mediatly, by mere approbation; indeed a fellow of his, a Papist writing
against the Kings Supremacy, Anthony Capell Cont. 1. c. 5. says, Saul was made
King, and others also by Gods Tract. contra primatum Regis Angliae.
permission, and Deo invito and irato, God being angry, that is not our
Doctrine; but with what real efficiencie God has made men, and communities,
rational and sociall men, with the same has he made them by instinct of
nature, by the mediation of reason, to create a King; and Bellarmine and Suarez
say, Not God makes Kings by approbation only.

P. Prelate. The people may change Monarchy into Aristocracy or Democracy, or
Aristocracy into Monarchy; for ought I know, they differ not in this neither.

Ans. The P. Prelate knows not all things, the two Jesuits, Bellarmine and
Suarez are produced only, as if they were all Jesuits; and Suarez says, De
prim. po. l. 3. n. 4. Donationem absolutam semel valide factam revocari non
posse, neque in totum, neque ex parce, maxim quando onerosa fuit. If the
people once give their power to the King, they cannot resume it without cause,
and laying down the grounds of Suarez and other Jesuits, that our Religion is
Heresy, they do soundly collect this consequence, That no King can be Lord of
the consciences of their subjects, to compel them to an Heretical Religion.
We teach that the King of Spain has no power over the consciences of
Protestant Subjects, to force them to Idolatry, and that their souls are not
his subjects, but only their persons, and in the Lord. 2. It is no great crime,
that if a King degenerate in a Tyranny, or if the Royal Line fail, that we
think the people have liberty to change Monarchy into Aristocracy, aut contra.
Jesuits deny that the people can make this change without the Popes consent.
We judge neither the great Bishop the Pope, nor the little Popes ought to have
hand in making Kings.

P. Prelate. They say the power is derived to the King from the people,
Cumulative, or Communicative, non Privative by way of communication, not by way
of privation, so as the people denude not themselves of this sovereignty. As
the King makes a Lieutenant in Ireland, not to denude himself of his Royal
power, but to put him in trust for his service. If this be their mind, the King
is in a poor case. The principal authority is in the Deligate, and so the
people is still Judge, and the King their Deputy.

Ans. The P. Prelate takes on him to write he knows not what, this is not
our opinion. The King is King, and has the peoples power not as their Deputy.

1. Because the people is not principal Judge, and the King subordinate. The
King in the executive power of Laws, is really a Sovereign above the people,
a Deputy is not so.

2. The people have irrevocably made over to the King, their power of
governing, defending, and protecting themselves, I except the power of self
preservation, which people can no more make away, it being sinlesse natures
birthright then the liberty of eating, drinking, sleeping; and this the people
cannot resume, except in case of the Kings Tyranny, there is no power by the
King so irrevocably resigned to his Servant or Deputy, but he may use it
himself.

3. A Delegate is comptable for all he does to those that put him in trust,
whether he do ill or well. The King in acts of Justice is not comptable to
any, for if his acts be not liable to high suspicions of Tyranny, no man may
say to him What do thou? only in acts of unjustice, and those so tyrannous,
that they be inconsistent with the habitual fiduciary repose and trust put on
him, he is to render accounts to the Parliament, which represents the people.

4. A Delegate in esse, in fieri, both that he may be a Delegate, and that he
may continue a Delegate, whether he do ill or well, depends on his pleasure
who delegateth him; but though a King depend in fieri, in regard of his call to
the Crown, upon the suffrages of his people, yet that he may be continued
King, he depends not on the people simply, but only in case of Tyrannical
administration, and in this sense Suarez and Bellarmine spoke with no more
honesty, then we do, but with more then Prelates do, for they profess any
Emissary of Hell may stab a Protestant King. We know the Prelates profess the
contrary, but their judgment is the same with Jesuits in all points; and
since they will have the Pope Christ's Vicar, by such a Divine right as they
themselves are Bishops, and have the King under Oath to maintain the Clergy,
Bishops, and all their Canonical privileges, amongst which the Bishops of
Rome his indirect power in ordine ad spiritualia, and to dethrone Kings who
turn Heritickes, is one principal right. I see not how Prelates are not as
deep in treason against Kings as the Pope himself, and therefore P. Prelate,
take the beam out of your own eye.

The P. Prelate takes unlearned pains, to prove that Gerson, Occam, Iac. de
almaine, Parisian Doctors maintained these same grounds anent the peoples power
over Kings in the case of Tyranny, and that before Luther and Calvine was in
the world, and this is to give himself the lie, that Luther, Calvin, and we
have not this Doctrine from Jesuits, and what is Calvines mind, is evident,
Instit, l. 4. c. all that the estates may coerce, and reduce in order a Calvin
Just. l. 4. c. 4.
Tyrant, else they are deficient in their trust that God has given them over
the Commonwealth and Church; and this is the Doctrine for which Royalists cry
out against Master Knox of blessed memory, Buchanan, Iunius Brutus, B^uchier,
Rossaeus, Althusius, and Luther, in scripto ad pastorem, to 7. German. fol.
386. brings two examples for resistance; the people resisted Saul, when he
was willing to kill Jonathan his son, and Ahikam and other Princes rescued
Jeremiah out of the hands of the King of Judah: and Gerardus cites many
Divines, who second Luther in this, as Bugenliagius, Iustus Jonas, Nicholas
Ambsderffius, George Spalatinus, Iustus Menius, Christopher Hofmanus. It is
known what is the mind of Protestant Divines, as Beza, Pareus, Melancthon,
Bucanus, Polanus Chamer, all the Divines of France, of Germany, of Holland. No
wonder then Prelates were upon the plot of betraying the City of Rochel, and of
the Protestant Church there, when they then will have the Protestants of
France, for their defensive wars to be Rebels, and siders with Jesuits, when
in these wars Jesuits sought their blood and ruin.

The P. Prelate having shown his mind concerning the deposing of Childericke by
the Pope (of which I say nothing, but the Pope was an Antichristian Usurper,
and the poor man never fit to bear a Crown) he goes on to set down an
opinion of some mute Authors, he might devise a thousand opinions that way, to
make men believe he had been in a wood of learned men's secrets, and that never
man saw the bottom of the controversy, while he, seeing the escapes of many
Pens (as supercilious Bubo praises) was forced to appear a Star new risen in
the firmament of Pursevants, and reveal all dreams, and teach all the
New-Statists, the Gam^liels, Buchanan, Iunius Brutus, and a world who were all
sleeping, while this Lucifer the son of the night did appear, this new way
of Laws, Divinity and casuists Theology.

They hold (says P. P.) Sovereign power is primarily and naturally Sac. sanc.
May. c. 1. p. 17, 18.
in the multitude, from it derived to the King, immediately from God. The reason
of which order is, because we cannot reap the fruits of government, unless
by compact we submit to some possible and accidental inconveniences.

Ans. 1. Who speaks so the P. Prelate cannot name. That Sovereign power is
primarily and naturally in the multitude. Vertually (it may be) Sovereignty is
in the multitude, but primarily and naturally, as heat is in the fire, light in
the Sun; I think the P. Prelate dreamed it, no man said it but himself: for
what attribute is naturally in a Subject, I conceive may directly and naturally
be predicated thereof. Now the P. Prelate has taught us of a very natural
predication. ( Our Dreadful and Sovereign Lord the multitude commands this
and this.)

2. This is no more a reason for a Monarchy, then for a Democracy, for we can
reap the fruits of no government, except we submit to it.

3. We must submit in Monarchy (says he) to some possible and accidental
inconveniences. Here be soft words, but is subversion of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties of Church and State, introducing of Popery, Arminianisme, of
Idolatry, Altar-worship, the Mass proved by a learned Treatise, The
Canterburian self conviction, printed the 3. edit. an 1641. never answered,
couched under the name of inconveniency? The pardoning of the innocent blood of
hundreds of thousand Protestants in Ireland, the killing of many thousands,
Nobles, Barons, Commons, by the hands of Papists in Arms against the Law of
the Land, the making of England a field of blood, the obtruding of an
Idolatrous Service-Booke, with Armies of men, by Sea and Land, to block up the
Kingdom of Scotland. are all these inconveniences only?

4. Are they only possible and accidental? but make a Monarch absolute, as the
P. Prelate does, and tyranny is as necessary and as much intended by a sinful
man, inclined to make a God of himself, as it is natural to men to sin,
when they are tempted, and to be drunken and giddy with honor and greatness;
witness the Kings of Israel and Judah, though de jure they were not absolute.
Is it accidental to Nero, Julian, to the ten horns that grew out of the
woman's head, who sat upon the scarlet colloured beast, to make war against
the Lamb, and his followers, especially the spirit of Satan being in them?

P. Prelate, They infer, 1. They cannot without violation of a Divine
ordinance, and breach of faith resume the authority, they have placed in the
King. 2. It* were high sin to rob authority of its essentials. 3. This
ordinance is not (...) but (...), and has urgent reasons.

Ans. 1. These namelesse Authors cannot infer that an Oath is broken, which
is made conditionally; all authority given by the people to the King is
conditional, that he use it for the safety of the people, if it be used for
their destruction, they break no faith to resume it, for they never made faith
to give up their power to the King upon such terms, and so they cannot be
said to resume what they never gave.

2. So the P. Prelate makes power to act all the former mischiefs, the
essentialls of a King* Balaam he is not worthy his wages, for Prophesying thus,
that* the Kings essentialls is a power of blood, and destructive to people,
Law, Religion and liberties of Church and State, for otherwise we teach not,
that people may resume from the King Authority and power to disarme Papists, to
root out the bloody Irish, and in justice serve them, as they have served us.

3. This ordinance of the people giving lawful power to a King, for the
governing of the people in peace and godliness, is Gods good pleasure, and
has just reasons and causes. But that the people make over a power to one man,
to act all the inconveniences above named, I mean the bloody and destructive
inconveniences, has nothing of God, or reason in it.

P. Prelate. The reasons of this opinion are, 1. If Power sovereign were not
in one, he could not have strength enough to act all necessary parts and acts
of government. 2. Nor to prevent divisions which attend multitudes, or many
endowed with equal power; and the Authors say, They must part with their
native right entirely, for a greater good, and to prevent greater evils. 3. To
resume any part of this power, of which the people have totally divested
themselves, or to limit it, is to disable Sovereignty from government, loose
the sinews of all society, etc*

Ans. 1. I know none for this opinion, but the P. Prelate himself. Sovereign
power in the King, but not power of Tyranny.
The first Reason may be made rhyme, but never reason: for though there be not
absolute power to good and ill, there may be strength of limited power in
abundance in the King, and sufficient for all acts of just Government, and the
adequate end of Government, which is, salus populi, the safety of the people.
But the Royalist will have strength to be a Tyrant, and act all the Tyrannical
and bloody inconveniences of which we spoke, an essential part of the power of
a King; As if weakness were essential to strength; and a King could not be
powerful as a King, to do good, and save and protect, except he had power
also as a Tyrant to do evil, and to destroy and waste his people. This power
is weakness, and no part of the image of the greatness of the King of Kings,
whom a King represents.

2. The second Reason condemns Democracie and Aristocracie; as unlawful, and
makes Monarchy the only Physic to cure these; as if there were no Government
an ordinance of God, save only absolute Monarchy, which indeed is no ordinance
of God at all, but contrary to the nature of a lawful King, Deuteronomy. 17. 3.

3. That people must part with their native right totally, to make an absolute
Monarch; is, as if the whole members of the Body would part with their whole
nutritive power, to cause the Milt to swell; which would be the destruction of
the Body.

4. The people cannot divest themselves of power of defensive Wars, more then
they can part with Nature, and put themselves in a condition inferior to a
slave, who, if his master, who has power to sell him, invade him unjustly, to
take away his life, may oppose violence to unjust violence. And the other
Consequences are null.

QUEST. XLII. Whether all Christian Kings are dependent from Christ, and may be
called his Vicegerents?
THe P. Prelate takes on him to prove the truth of this: but the The King not
the Vicegerent of Christ, as mediator.
question is not pertinent: it belongs to another head, to the Kings power in
Church matters. I therefore only examine what he says, and follow him.

P. Prelate. Sectaries have found a Quere of late, that Kings are Gods, not
Christ's Lieutenants on earth. Romanists and Puritans erect two Sovereigns in
every State; The Jesuit, in the Pope; the Puritan, in the Presbytery.

Ans. We give a reason why God has a Lieutenant, as God; Because Kings are
Gods, bearing the sword of vengeance against seditious and bloody Prelates, and
other ill-doers. But Christ, God-Man, the Mediator and Head of the body the
Church, has neither Pope nor King to be head under him. The sword is
communicable to men; but the Headship of Christ is communicable to no King, nor
to any created shoulders. 2. The Jesuit makes the Pope a King: and so this P.
Prelate makes him, in extent, the Bishop of Bishops, and so King, as I have
proved. But we place no Soveraigntie in Presbyteries, but a mere ministerial
power of servants, who do not take on them to make Laws and Religious
Ceremonies, as Prelates do, who indeed make themselves Kings and Lawgivers in
Gods house.

P. Prelate. We speak of Christ as Head of the Church. Some think that Christ
was King by his Resurrection, jure acquisito, by a new title, Right of merit. I
think he was a King from his conception.

Ans. You declare hereby, that the King is a ministerial Head of The King not
the head of the Church.
the Church, under the head Christ. All our Divines disputing against the Popes
headship, say, No mortal man has shoulders for so glorious a head. You give
the King such shoulders. But why are not the Kings, even Nero, Julian,
Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazer, Vicegerents of Christ, as Mediator, as Priest, as
Redeemer, as Prophet, as Advocate, presenting our prayers to God his Father?
What action, I pray you, have Christian Kings, by office, under Christ, in
dying, and rising from the dead for us, in sending down the Holy Ghost,
preparing mansions for us? Now it is as proper and incommunicably reciprocal
with the Mediator, to be the only Head of the body the Church, Col. 1. 18. as
to be the only Redeemer and Advocate of his Church.

2. That Christ was King from his conception, as Man borne of the Virgin Mary,
suteth well with Papists, who will have Christ, as Man, the visible Head of the
Church; that so as Christ-man, is now in heaven, he may have a visible Pope to
be Head in all Ecclesiastical matters. And that is the reason why this P.
Prelate makes him head of the Church by an Ecclesiastical right, as we heard*
and so he follows Becanus the Jesuit, in this, and others his fellows.

P. Prelate. 1. Proof. If Kings reign by (...) per, in and through Christ, as
the Wisdom of God, and the Mediator: then are Kings the Vicegerents of Christ,
as Mediator. But the former is said, Prove. 8. 15, 16. as D. Andrews, of
blessed memory.

Ans. 1. Denies the major: All believers living the life of God The prelates
reason proves all creatures to be the vicegerents of Christ, as Mediator.
ingrafted in Christ as branches in the tree, Job. 15. 1. 2* should by the same
reason be Vicegerents of the Mediator: so should the Angels, to whom Christ is
a head, Col. 2. 10. be his Vicegerents; and all the Judges and Constables on
earth, should be under-Mediators, for they live and act in Christ: yea, all the
Creatures, in the Mediator, are made new, Rev. 21. 5. Romans 8. 20, 21, 22.

2. D. Andrews name is a curse on the earth, his writings prove him to be a
Popish Apostate.

P. Prelate. 2. Christ is not only King of his Church; but in order to his
Church, King over the Kings and Kingdoms of the earth, Ps. 2. 5. 8.

3. Math. 21. 18. To him is given all power in heaven and earth; ergo, all
Soveraigntie over Kings.

Ans. 1. If all these be Christ's vicegerents, over whom he has obtained power;
then, because the Father has given him power over all flesh, to give them life
eternal, Ioh. 17. 1. 2. then are all believers his Vicegerents, yea and all
the damned men and Devils, and Death and Hell are his Vicegerents: for Christ,
as Mediator, has all power given to him, as King of the Church, and so power
Kingly over all his enemies, to reign while he make them his footstool, Ps. 1
10. 1. 2. to break them with a rod of iron, Ps. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26,
27. Revel. 1. 18. 20. v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And by that same reason, the
P. Prelates 4. and 5. Argument fall to the ground, He is heir of all things,
ergo, all things are his Vicegerents. What more vain? He is Prince of the
Kings of the earth, and King of Oggs, of Kings, of his Enemies; ergo, Sea and
Land are his Vicegerents.

P. Prelate. Kings are nurse-fathers of the Church, ergo, they hold 2 Reas. p.
58.
their crowns of Christ: 3. Divines say, that by men in sacred Orders Christ
does rule his Church mediately, in those things which primely concern
salvation; and that by Kings their scepter and power, he does protect his
Church, and what concerns external pomp, order and decency. Then, in this
latter sense, Kings are no less the immediate Vicegerents of Christ, than
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, in the former.

Ans. Because Kings hold their Crowns of Christ, as Mediator and Redeemer, it
follows by as good consequence, Kings are submediators and under-Priests, and
Redeemers, as Vicegerents. Christ, as King, has no visible Royal Vicegerents
under him.

2. Men in holy Orders sprinkled with one of the Papists five The King no mixed
person, or half Clergy man, in the externail government of the Church, as the
P. P. dreameth.
blessed Sacraments, such as Antichristian Prelates, unwashed Priests to offer
sacrifices, and Popish Deacons, are no more admitted by Christ to enter into
his sanctuary as governors, then the Leaper into the Camp of old, and the
Moabite and Ammonite were to enter into the congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.
3. therefore we have excommunicated this P. Prelate, and such Moabites out of
the Lords house. 2. What be the things that do not primely concern salvation,
the P. Prelate knows, to wit, Images in the Church, Altar worship,
Antichristian Ceremonies, which primely concern damnation.

3. I understand not what the P. Prelate means, that the King 1 Parl. King
Charles, a^. 1633.
preserves external Government in order and decency, in Scotland, in our
Parliament, 1633. the prescribed Surplice, and he commanded the Service-booke,
and the Masse-worship. The Prelate degradeth the King here, to make him only
keep, or preserve the Prelates Masse-Clothes: they intended indeed to make the
King but the Popes servant, for all they say and do for him now.

4. If the King be vicegerent of Christ in prescribing Laws for the external
ordering of the worship, and all their decent symbolicall Ceremonies: What more
does the Pope, and the Prelate in that kind? He may, with as good warrant
Preach and Administrate the Sacraments.

P. Prelate. Kings have the sign of the Cross on their Crowns.

Answ. Ergo, Baculus est in angulo. Prelates have put a cross in the Kings
heart, and crossed Crown and Throne to, Really. Some Knights, some Ships, some
Cities and Burroughes, do carry a cross; are they made Christ's vicegerents of
late? By what antiquity does the Cross signify Christ? Of old it was a badge
of Christians, no Religious Ceremony; and is this all. The King is the
vicegerent of Christians. The Prelates we know, adore the Cross with Religious
worship: so must they adore the Crown.

P. Prelate. Grant that the Pope were the Vicar of Christ in spiritual things,
it follows not: Ergo, Kings Crowns are subject to the Pope; for Papists
teach, that all power that was in Christ, as man, as power to work miracles, to
institute Sacraments, was not transmitted to Peter and his successors.

Answ. This is a base consequence, Make the Pope head of the Church: the King,
if he be a mixed person, that is, half a Churchman, and Christ's Vicegerent;
both he and Prelates must be members of the head. Papists teach, that all in
Christ as man, cannot be transmitted to Peter, but a Ministerial Catholic
Headship (say Bucanus and his fellows) was transmitted from Christ as man, and
visible head, to Peter and the Pope.

P. Prelate. I wish the Pope, who claims so near alliance with The P. Prelate
prays for the Pope.
Christ, would learn of him to be meek and humble in heart; so should he find
rest to his own soul, to Church and State.

Answ. The same was the wish of Gerson, Occam, the Doctors of Paris, the
fathers of the Councels of Constance and Basil; yet all make him head of the
Church.

2. The Excommunicate Prelate is turned Chaplain to Preach to the Pope: the
Soul-rest that Protestants wish to the Pope is, That the Lord would destroy him
by the Spirit of his mouth, 2 These. 2. 8. But P. Prelates, This wish is a
Reformation of accidents, with the safety of the subject, the Pope, and is as
good as a wish, That the Devil remaining a Devil, may find rest for his
soul, all we are to pray for; as having place in the Church, are supposed
members of the Church. The Prelate would not pray so for the Presbytery, by
which he was ordained a Pastor, 1 Timothy 4. 14. though he be now an Apostate: It
is gratitude to pray for his lucky father the Pope. What ever the Prelate wish,
we pray for, and believe, that desolation shall be his Soul-rest, and that the
vengeance of the Lord, and of his Temple, shall fall upon him, and the Prelates
his sons.

P. Prelate. That which they purpose, by denying Kings to be Christ's
Vicegerents, is to set up a Sovereignty Ecclesiastical in Presbyteries, to
constrain Kings, repeal his Laws, correct his Satutes, reverse his Judgments,
to cite, convent, and censure Kings; and if there be not power to execute, what
Presbyteries decrees, they may call and command the help of the people, in whom
is the underived Majesty; and promise, and swear, and covenant to defend their
fancies, against all mortal men, with their Goods, Lands, Fortunes, to admit
no divisive motion; and this Sovereign Association makes every private man an
armed Magistrate.

Answ. You see the Excommunicate Apostats tusles against the The Power of
Presbyteries Ministerial.
Presbytery of a Reformed Church, from which he had his baptism, fiath,
ministry.

1. We deny the King to be the head of the Church.

2. We assert, that in the Pastors, Doctors, and Elders of the Church, there is
a Ministerial power, as servants under Christ, in his authority, and name, to
rebuke and censure Kings; that there is revenge in the Gospel against all
disobedience, 2 Cor. 2. 6. and 10. 6. The rod of God, 1 Cor. 4. 21. The rod of
Christ's lips, Isai. 11. 4. The Scepter and Sword of Christ, Revel. 1. 16. and
19. 15. The Keys of his Kingdom, to bind and loose, open and shut, Matthew. 18.
17. 18. and 16. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3. 2 These. 3. 14, 15. 1 Timothy 1. 19. and 5.
22. and 5. 17. And that this power is committed to the Officers of Christ's
house, call them as you will.

3. For reversing of Laws made for the establishing of Popery, P. Prelates deny
Kings to be subject to the Gospel and Discipline of Christ.
we think the Church of Christ did well to declare all these unjust grievous
decrees; and that woe is due to the Judges, even the Queen, if they should not
repent, as Isai. 10. 1. And this P. must show his teeth in this, against our
Reformation in Scotland, which he once commended in Pulpit, as a glorious work
of Gods right arm. And the Assemble of Glaskow, 1637. declared, That Bishops
though established by Acts of Parliament, procured by Prelates only,
Commissioners, and Agents, for the Church, who betrayed their trust, were
unlawful, and did supplicate, That the ensuing Parliament would annull these
wicked Acts. They think God priviledgeth neither King, nor others from
Church Censures: the P. Prelates imprisoned, and silenced the Ministers of
Christ, who preached against the public sins, the blood, oppressions,
unjustice, open swearing, and blasphemy of the holy Name of God, the
countenancing of Idolaters, etc. in King and Court.

4. They never sought the help of the people, against the most unjust standing
Law of authority.

5. They did never swear and covenant, to defend their own fancies, For the
Confession and Covenant of the Protestant Religion, translated in Latin to all
the Protestants in Europe and America, being termed a fancy, is a clear
evidence, That this P. Prelate was justly excommunicated for Popery.

6. This Covenant was sworm by King James, and his house, by the whole Land, by
the Prelates themselves. And to this fancy, this P. Prelate by the Law of our
Land was obliged to swear, when he received degrees in the Universitie.

7. There is reason our Covenant should provide against divisive motions. The
Prelates moved the King to command all the Land to swear our Covenant, in the
Prelaticall sense, against the intent thereof, and only to devide, and so
command. Judge what Religion Prelates are of, who will have the Name of God
profaned by a whole Nation, by swearing fancies.

8. Of making private men Magistrates, in defending themselves against
cutthroats. Enough already: Let the P. Prelate answer if he can.

P. Prelate. Let no man imagine me to privilege a King from the Page 65.
direction, and just power of the Church, or that like Uzzah he should intrude
upon sacred actions, exviordinis, in foro interno conscientiae, to Preach or
Administrate Sacraments, etc.

Answ. Uzzah did not burn Incense, ex vi ordinis, as if he had been a Priest,
but because he was a King, and Gods anointed. Prelates sit not in Council and
Parliament, ex vi ordinis, as temporal Lords. The Pope is no temporal
Monarch, ex vi ordinis; yet all are intruders. So the P. P. will license Kings
to administer Sacraments, so they do it not Ex vi ordinis.

P. P. Men in sacred Orders in things intrinsecally spiritual, have immediately
a directive and authoritative power, in order, to all whatsoever, although
ministerial only, as related to Christ; but that gives them no coercive
civil power over the Prince, perse, or per accidens, directly or indirectly,
that either the one way or the other, any or many in sacred Order, Pope, or
Presbytery, can cite and censure Kings, associate, Covenant or swear to resist
him, and force him to submit to the Scepter of Christ. This power over man God
Almighty uses not, much less has he given it to man, Ps. 110. His people are
a willing people, Suadenda non cogenda religio.

Ans. 1. Pastors have a ministerial power (says he) in spiritual The
Ministerial power of Pastors what.
things, but in order to Christ, ergo in order to others it is not
ministerial, but Lordly. So here a Lordly power Pastors have over Kings, by
the P. P. way. We teach it is ministerial in relation to all, because
Ministers can make no Laws as Kings can do, but only as Heralds, declare
Christ's Laws.

2. None of us give any coercive Civil power to the Church, over either Kings,
or any other, it is Ecclesiastical; a power to rebuke and censure was never
civil.

3. A religious Covenant to swear to resist, that is, to defend our selves is
one thing, and a lawful Oath, as is clear in those of Israel, that did swear
Asa's Covenant, without the authority of their own King, 2 Chronicles. 15. 9, 10,
11, 12. and to swear to force the King to submit to Christ's Scepter is another
thing; the Presbytery never did swear or covenant any such thing: nor do we
take Sacrament upon it, to force the King. Prelates have made the King swear,
and take his Sacrament upon it, that he shall root out Puritanes, that is
Protestants, whereas he did swear athis Coronation to root out Heretics;
that is, (if Prelates were not traitorous in administering the Oath) Arminians
and Papists, such as this P. P. is known to be; but I hold that the Estates of
Scotland have power to punish the King, if he labor to subvert Religion and
Laws.

4. If this Argument, that Religion is to be persuaded, not forced, which. P.
P. uses, be good, it will make much against the King for the King then can
force no man to the external profession, and use of the ordinances of God, and
not only Kings, but all the people should be willing.

P. Prelate. Though the King may not preach, etc. yet the exercise Page 65.
of these things freely within his Kingdom, what concerns the decent and
orderly doing of all, and the external man, in the external government of the
Church, in appointing things arbitrary and indifferent, and what else is of
this strain, are so due to the prerogative of the Crown, as that the Priests
without highest Rebellion may not usurp upon him; a King in the State and
Church is a mixed person, not simply civil, but sacred too. They are not only
professors of truth, that they have in the capacity of Christians, but they are
defenders of the faith as Kings, they are not sons only, but Nurse-fathers,
they serve God, as Augustine says, as men, and as Kings also.

Ans. If ye give the King power of the exercises of Word and The P. Prelate
makes the King a Churchman.
Sacraments in his Kingdom, this is deprivation of Ministers in his Kingdom
(for sure he cannot hinder them in another Kingdom) you may make him to give a
Ministerial calling, if he may take it away. By what word of God can the King
close the mouth of the man of God, whom Christ has commanded to speak in his
name? 2. If the King may externally govern the Church, why may he not
excommunicate, for this is one of the special acts of Church Government,
especially seeing he is a mixed person, that is half a Churchman, and if he
may prescribe Arbitrary teaching Ceremonies, Surplice to instruct men in the
duties of holiness required of Pastors, I see not, but he may teach the Word.
3. Dr. Fern and other The P. Prelate gives an Arbitrary power of government,
in Christs-Church to the King.
Royalists deny Arbitrary Government to the King in the State, and with reason,
because it is Tyranny over the people, but Prelates are not ashamed of
commanding a thing Arbitrary and indifferent in Gods Worship, shall not
Arbitrary Government in the Church be tyranny over the conscience? But (say
they,) Churchmen teaches the King what is decent and orderly in Gods Worship,
and he commands it.

Ans. Solomon by no teaching of Churchmen deposed Abiathar* David by no
teaching of Churchmen appointed the form of the Temple. 2. Has God given a
Prerogative Royal to Kings, whereby they may govern the Church, and as Kings
they shall not know how to use it, but in so far, as they are taught by
Church* men? 3. Certainly we shall once be informed by Gods Word, what is this
Prerogative, if according to it, all the external worship of God may be
ordered. Lawyers and Royalists teach, that it is an absoluteness of power, to
do above, or against a Law, as they say from 1 Samuel 8. v. 9. 11. and whereby
the King may oppress, and no man Prelates extend a lawless prerogative to the
government of the Church.
may say, What do thou? Now, Good P. Prelate, if by a plenitude of tyranny
the King prescribe what he will in the external worship and government of Gods
House, who can rebuke the King, though he command all the Antichristian
Ceremonies of Rome, and of Turkey, yea and the sacrificing of children to
Molech? (for absoluteness Royal will amount to shedding of innocent blood)
for if any oppose the King, or say, Sir, What do you? he opposes the
Prerogative Royal, and that is highest Rebellion, says our P. Prelate.

5. I see not how the King is a mixed person, because he is Defender of the
Faith, as the Pope named the King of England, Henry the eighth: he defends it
by his Sword, as he is a Nurse-father, not by the sword that comes out of his
mouth.

6. I would know how Julian, Nebuchadnezzar, Og, and Sihon, were mixed persons,
and did all in the external government of the Church; and that by their
office, as they were Kings.

7. All the instances that Augustine brings to prove that the King is a mixed
person, proves nothing but Civil acts in Kings; as Hezekiah cast down the
high places, the King of Nineve compelled to obey the Prophet Jonah; Darius
cast Daniels enemies to the Lions.

P. Prelate. If you make two Sovereigns, and two Independents, there is no
more peace in the State, then in Rebeckahs womb, while Jacob and Esau strove
for the prerogative.

Ans. 1. What need Israel strive, when Moses and Aaron are two Independents? If
Aaron make a golden Calfe, may not Moses punish him? If Moses turn an Achab,
and sell himself to do wickedly, ought not 80 valiant Priests and Aarons both
rebuke, censure, and resist?

2. p. 65. The P. P. said, Let no man imagine we privilege the King from the
direction and power of the Church, so he be no intruding Vzzah. I pray, P. P.
what is this Church power? Is it not supreme in its kind of Church power? or
is it subordinate to the King? If it be supreme, see how P. P. makes two
Supremes, and two Sovereigns. Two Supremes under Christ; one in the Church,
another in the State, are not absurd.
If it be subordinate to the King, as he is a mixed person, the King is
privileged from this power, and he may intrude as Vzzah; and by his
prerogative, as a mixed person, he may say Mass, and offer a sacrifice, if
there be no power above his prerogative to curb him. If there be none, the P.
P. his imagination is real, The King is privileged from all Church power. Let
the P. P. see to it; I see no inconvenience for reciprocations of subjections
in two Supremes; and that they may mutually censure and judge one another.

Object. Not in the same cause; that is impossible. If the King say Mass,
shall the Church judge and censure the King for intrusion? and because the King
is also Sovereign and Supreme in his kind, he may judge and punish the Church
for their act of judging and censuring the King; it being an intrusion on his
prerogative, that any should judge the highest Judge.

Ans. The one is not subject to the other, but in the case of
maleadministration: the innocent, as innocent, is subject to no higher
punishing; he may be subject to a higher, as accusing, citing, etc. Now the
Royalist must give instance in the same cause, where the Church fails against
the King and his Civil law; and the King in the same cause fails against the
Church-canon; and then it shall be easy to answer.

P. Prelate. Religion is the bottom of all happiness, if you make the P. 66,
67, 68.
King only to execute what a Presbytery commands, he is in a hard case, and
you take from him the chiefest in Government. Ecclesiastical power has the
soul in subjection; the Civil Soveraigntie holds a dead dominion ever the
body. Then the Pope and Presbytery shall be in better condition then the King.
Cic. in Ver. Omnes Religione moventur: Superstition is furious, and maddeth
people, that they spare neither Crown nor Mitre.

Ans. Cold and dry is the P. P. when he spends four pages in declamation for
the excellency of Religion; The madness of Superstition, nothing to the
purpose.

1. The King has a chief hand in Church affairs, when he is a Nurse-father,
and bears the Royal sword to defend both the Tables of the Law, though he
do not spin and weave Surplices, and other base Masse-cloaths, to Prelates,
and such Priests of Baal: They dishonor his Majesty, who bring his
Prerogative so low.

2. The King does not execute with blind obedience, with us, The King not the
servant of the Church.
what the Pope commands, and the Prelates; but with light of knowledge what
Synods discernes: and he is no more made the servant of the Church by this,
then the King of Judah, and Nebuchadnezzar are servants to Jeremiah and Daniel,
because they are to obey the Word of the Lord in their mouth. Let them show a
reason of this, why they are servants in executing Gods will in Discipline, and
in punishing what the Holy Ghost by his Apostles and Elders decree, when any
contemn the Decree concerning the abstinence from blood, things strangled,
etc. Act. 15. rather then when they punish murder, idolatry, blasphemy,
which are condemned in the Word preached by Pastors of Christ: and farther,
this objection would have some more color (realitie it has not) if Kings were
only to execute what the Church ministerially in Christ's name, commands to be
done in Synods: but Kings may, and do command Synods to conveen, and do their
duty, and command many duties never Synodically decreed; as they are to cast
out of their Court apostare Prelates, sleeping many years in the Devils arms,
and are to command Trencher-Divines, neglecting their flock, and lying at
Court, attending the falling of a dead Bishop, as Ravens do an old dying
horse; To go and attend the flock, and not the Court, as this P. P. did.

3. A King has greater outward glory, and may do much more service to Christ
in respect of extension, and is excellenter then the Pastor, who yet, in regard
of intension, is busied about nobler things, to wit, the Soul, the Gospel,
Eternity, than the King.

4. Superstition maddeth men; but it follows not, that true Religion may not
set them on work to defend soul and body against Tyranny of the Crown, and
Antichristian Mitres.

P. Prelate. The Kingdom had peace, and plenty in Prelates time.

Ans. A belly-argument. We had plenty, when we sacrificed to the Queen of
Heaven. 2. If the Traveller contend to have his purse again, shall the Robber
say, Robbery was blessed with peace? The rest, to the end, are lies, and
answered already. Only his invectives against ruling Elders, falsely called
Lay Elders, are not to purpose. Parliament-Priests, and Lay and Court-Pastors,
are Lay-Prophets.

2. That Presbyteries* meddle with Civil business, is a slander; Ruling
Elders not Laymen.
They meddle with public scandals that offends in Christ's Kingdom. But the
Prelate, by office, was more in two elements, in Church and State, then any
Frogs even in the Kings Leaven-tubs ordinarily.

3. Something he says of Popes usurping over Kings; but only of one of his
fathers, a great unclean spirit, Gregory the Great: But if he had refuted him
by Gods Word, he should have thrown stones at his own Tribe; for Prelates, like
him, do, ex officio, trample upon the neck of Kings.

4. His testimonies of one Council, and one Father, for all Antiquity,
proves nothing. Athanasius said, God has given David's Throne to Kings: What,
to be Head of the Church? No, to be the Minister of God, without (...) to
tutour the Church. And because Kings reign by Christ, as the Council of
Arimin says; therefore it may follow, a Baily is also Head of the Church. It
is taken from Prove. 8. and answered.

5. That Presbyteries have usurped upon Kings, more then Popes, since
Hildebrand, is a lie: all stories are full of the usurpation of Prelates, his
own tribe; The Pope is but a swelled fat Prelate; and what he says of Popes,
he says of his own house.

6. The Ministers of Christ in Scotland, had never a contest with King James,
but for his sins, and his conniving with Papists, and his introducing
Bishops, the usher of the Pope.

QUEST. XLIII. Whether the King of Scotland be an absolute Prince, having
Prerogatives above Parliament and Laws? The Negative is asserted by the Laws
of Scotland, the Kings Oath of Coronation, the Confession of Faith etc.
THe negative part of this, I hold, in these Assertions.

Assert. 1. The Kings of Scotland have not any Prerogative The King of Scotland
not above Laws and Parliaments, proved from our acts of Parliament.
distinct from Supremacy above the Laws. 1. If the People must be governed by
no Laws, but by the Kings own Laws, that is, the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm acted in Parliament, under pain of disobedience; then must the King
govern by no other Laws, and so by no Prerogative above Law. But the former
is an evident truth, by our Acts of Parliament; ergo, so is the latter. The
Proposition is confirmed; 1. Because what ever Law enjoyneth passive obedience
no way but by Laws; that must injoyne also the King actively to command no
other way but by Law: for to be governed by Law, essentially includes, to be
governed by the Supreme Governor, only by Law. 2. An act of Regal governing,
is an act of Law, and essentially an act of Law; an act of absolute Prerogative
is no act of Law, but an act above Law, or of pleasure loosed from Law; and so
they are opposed as acts of Law, and non-acts of Law. If the Subjects, by
command of the King and Parliament, cannot be governed but by Law; How can the
King but be under his own, and the Parliaments Law, to govern only by Law? I
prove the Assumption from Parl. 3. of K. James the 1. Act 48. Ordaines, That
all and sundry the Kings Lieges be governed under the Kings Laws and Statutes
of the Realm allanerly, and under no particular Laws, or special
Privileges, nor by any Laws of other Countries or Realms. Privileges do
exclude Laws: Absolute pleasure of the King, as a Man, and the Law of the King
as King, are opposed by way of contradiction: and so in Parl. 6. K. James 4.
Act. 79. and ratified Parl. 8. K. James 6. Act. 131.

2. The King, at his Coronation, 1 Par. K. James 6. Act. 8. swears The King
of Scotland's oath at his Coronation.
to maintain the true Kirk of God, and Religion now presently professed, in
purity; And to rule the People according to the Laws and Constitutions
received in the Realm; causing Justice and equity to be ministered without
partiality. This did King Charles swear at his Coronation, and ratified Parl.
7. K. Iam. 6. Act. 99. Hence he who by the Oath of God is limited to govern by
Law, can have no Prerogative above the Law. If then the King change the
Religion, Confession of Faith, authorized by many Parliaments, especially by
Parliament, 1 K. Charles, An. 1633. He goes against his Oath 3. The Kings
Royal Prerogative, or rather Supremacy, enacted Parl. 8. K. James 6. Act.
129. and Parl. 18. Act. 1. and Parl. 21. Act. 1. K. James, and 1 Parl. K.
Charles, Act. 3. cannot, 1. be contrary to the Oath that K. Charles did swear
at his Coronation, which brings down the Prerogative, to governing according
to the standing Laws of the Realm. 2. It cannot be contrary to these former
Parliaments and Acts, declaring that the Lieges are to be governed by the Laws
of the Realm, and by no particular Laws and special Privileges: (but
absolute Prerogative is a special Privilege above, or without Law) which Acts
stand unrepealed to this day: and these Acts of Parliaments stand ratified, An.
1633. the 1 Parl. K. Charles.

3. Parl. 8. K. James 6. in the first three Acts thereof, the Kings Supremacy,
and the power and authority of Parliaments, are equally ratified, under the
same pain: Their jurisdictions, power and judgments in Spiritual or
Temporal causes, not ratified by His Majesty, and the three Estates conveened
in Parliament, are discharged. But the Absolute Prerogative of the King above
Law, Equity, and Justice, was never ratified in any Parliament of Scotland to
this day.

4. Parliam. 12. K. James 6. Act. 114. All former Acts in favor of the true
Church and Religion, being ratified, Their power of making Constitutions
concerning (...) Order and Decency; the Privileges that God has given to
spiritual Office-bearers, as well of Doctrine and Discipline, in matters of
Heresy, Excommunication, Collation, Deprivation, and such like, warranted by
the Word of God, and also to Assembles and Presbyteries, are ratified. Now in
that Parliament, in Acts so contiguous, we are not to think, That the King and
three Estates, would make Acts for establishing the Churches power in all the
former heads of Government; in which, Royalists say, The soul of the Kings
Absolute Prerogative does consist: And therefore it must be the true intent of
our Parliament, to give the King a Supremacy and a Prerogative Royal (which we
also give) but without any Absoluteness of boundless and transcendent power
above Law; and not to obtrude a Service Book, and all the Superstitious Rites
of the Church of Rome, without Gods Word, upon us.

5. The former Act of Parliament ratifieth the true Religion, according to the
Word of God, then could it never have been the intent of our Parliament, to
ratify an Absolute supremacy, according to which, a King might govern his
people, as a Tyrannous Lion, contrary to Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. And it is true:
The 18. P. of King James 6. Act. 1. and Act. 2. upon personal qualifications,
gives a Royal Prerogative to King James over all causes, persons, and
estates, within His Majesty's Dominion; whom they humbly acknowledge, to be
Sovereign Monarch, Absolute Prince, Judge, and Governor over all Estates,
Persons, and Causes.

These two Acts, for my part I acknowledge, spoken rather in Court-expressions,
then in Law-termes.

1. Because personal virtues cannot advance a limited Prince (such as the
Kings of Scotland, Post hominum memoriam, ever were) to be an Absolute Prince:
Personal graces make not David absolutely supreme Judge over all persons and
causes; nor can King James, advanced to be King of England, be for that, made
more King of Scotland, and more supreme Judge, then he was, while he was only
King of Scotland. A wicked Prince is as essentially supreme Judge, as a godly
King.

2. If this Parliamentary figure of speech which is to be imputed to the times,
exalted King James to be Absolute in Scotland, for his personal indowments,
there was no ground to put the same on King Charles. Personal virtues are not
always Hereditary, though to me the present King be the best.

3. There is not any Absoluteness above Law in the Act. 1. The Parliament must
be more absolute themselves. King James 6. had been diverse years before this
18. Parl. King of Scotland; then if they gave him by Law an Absoluteness,
which he had not before, then they were more Absolute. These who can add
Absoluteness, must have it in themselves, Nemo dat quod non habet, if it be
said, King James had that before the Act, the Parliament legally declared it to
be his power, which before the Declaration, was his power. I answer, All he had
before this Declaration was, to govern the people according to Law and
Conscience, and no more; and if they declare no other Prerogative Royal to be
due to him, there is an end, we grant all. But then this which they call
Prerogative Royal is no more, then, a power to govern according to Law, and so
you add nothing to King James, upon the ground of his personal virtues, only
you make an oration to his praise in the Acts of Parliament.

4. If this Absoluteness of Prerogative, be given to the King, the subjects
swearing obedience, swear, That he has power from themselves, to destroy
themselves: this is neither a lawful oath, nor though they should swear it,
does it oblige them.

6. A Supreme Judge, is a supreme father of all his children, and all their
causes; and to be a supreme Father, cannot be contrary to a supreme Judge: but
contrary it must be, if this supremacy make over to the Prince, a power of
devouring as a Lion, and that by a regal privilege, and by office, whereas he
should be a father to save; or if a Judge kill an ill-doer, though that be an
act destructive to one man, yet is it an act of a father to the Commonwealth.
An act of supreme and absolute Royalty is often an act of destruction to one
particular man, and to the whole Commonwealth. For example, when the King out
of his Absolute Prerogative, pardons a murderer, and he kills another
innocent man, and out of the same ground, the King pardons him again, and so
till he kill twenty (for by what reason the Prerogative gives one pardon, he
may give twenty, there is a like reason above Law for all.) This act of
Absolute Royalty, is such an act of murder, as if a shepherd would keep a
Woolf in the fold with the sheep, he were guilty of the loss of these sheep.
Now an act of destroying, cannot be an act of judging, far less of a supreme
Judge, but of a supreme Murderer; 7. Whereas he is called Absolute Prince, and
Supreme Judge, in all Causes, Ecclesiastical and Civil. It is to be
considered, 1. That the Estates profess in these acts, not to give any How the
King is supreme Judge in all Causes.
new Prerogative, but only to continue the old power, and that only with that
amplitude, and freedom, which the King and his Predecessors did enjoy and
exerce of before: the extent whereof, is best known from the Acts of
Parliament, Histories of the time, and the Oaths of the Kings of Scotland. 2.
That he is called Absolute Prince, not in any relation of freedom, from Law, or
Prerogative above Law; whereunto as unto the norma, regula, ac mensura
potestatis suae, ac subjectionis meae, He is tied by the Fundamental Law, and
his own Oath, but in opposition to all foreign Jurisdiction or principality
above him, as is evident, by the Oath of Supremacy set down, for acknowledging
of his power in the first Act of Parliament 21. K. Iam. 6. 3. They are but the
same expressions, giving only the same power before acknowledged in the 129.
Act. Parl. 8. K. Iam. 6. And that only over Persons or Estates, considered
Separatim, and over Causes; but neither at all over the Laws, nor over the
Estates, taken Conjunctim, and as convened in Parliament, as is clear, both by
the two immediately subsequent Acts of that Parliament 8. K. Iam. 6.
Establishing the Authority of Parliaments, equally with the Kings, and
discharging all Jurisdictions (albeit granted by the King) without their
Warrant; as also by the Narrative Depositive words, and certification of the
Act it self: otherwise, the Estates convened in Parliament, might by virtue of
that Act, be summoned before, and censured by the Kings Majesty or His
Council a Iudicatory substitute be, subordinate to, and censurable by
themselves, which were contrary to sense and reason. 4. The very terms of
Supreme Judge, and in all Causes, according to the nature of Correlates,
presupposes Courts, and judicial Proceedings and Laws, as the ground work and
rule of all, not a freedom from them. 5. The sixth Act of the twenty
Parliament, K. Iac. 6. Clearly interprets what is meant by the Kings
Jurisdiction in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastic Causes: to wit, to be only in
the Consistoriall Causes of Matrimony, Testaments, Bastardy* Adulteries,
abusively called Spiritual Causes, because handled in Commissary Courts,
wherein the King appoints the Commissary, his Deputies, and makes the Lords of
the Session his great Consistory in all Ecclesiastical Causes, with
reservation of his Supremacy and Prerogative therein.

7. Supreme Judge in all causes, cannot be taken Quoad actus elicitos, as if
the King were to judge between two Seamen, or two Husbandmen, or two
Tradesmen, in that which is proper to their Art; or between two Painters:
certainly the King is not to Judge which of the two draws the fairest
Picture, but which of the two wastes most gold on his Picture, and so does
interest most of the Commonwealth. So the King cannot judge in all
Ecclesiastical Causes, that is, he cannot, Quoad actos elicitos, prescribe
this Worship: for example, the Mass, not the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Therefore the King has but Actus imperatos, some Royal Political Acts about
the Worship of God to command God to be Worshipped according to his Word, to
punish the superstitions or neglectors of Divine Worship; therefore cannot the
King be sole Judge in matters that belong to the College of Judges by the
Laws of Scotland, the Lords of Session only may judge these matters. K. James,
1. Parl. 2. Act. 45. K. James 3. Par. 8. Act. 62. K. James 3. Par. 4. Act. 105.
K. I. 1. Parl. 6. Act. 83. K. I. 1. Par. 6 Act. 86. K. I. 5. Par. 7. Act. 104.
and that only according to Law, without any remedy of appellation to King or
the Parliament, Act 62, and 63. Par. 14. K. I. 2. And the King is by Act of
Parliament inhibited to send any private letter to stay the Acts of Justice; or
if any such letter be procured, the Judges are not to acknowledge it, as the
Kings Will, for they are to proceed unpartially according to Justice, and are
to make the Law, which is the King and Parliaments public revealed will, their
rule, King I. 5. Parl. 5. Act. 68. K. Ia. 6. Part. 8. Act. 139. and K. I. 6.
Par. 6. Act. 92. most lawful. Nor may the Lords suspend the course of Justice,
or the sentence or execution of Decrees upon the Kings private letter. King I.
6. Parl. 11. Act 79. and K. Iam. 6. Par. 11. Act 47. and so if the Kings Will
or desire, as he is a man, be opposite to his Law, and his Will as King, it is
not to be regarded. This is a strong Argument, that the Parliaments never made
the King supreme Judge, Quoad actus elicitos, in all causes, nay not if the
King have a Cause of his own that concerns Lands of the Crown; far less
can the King have a will of Prerogative above the Law by our Laws of Scotland:
And therefore, when in the eighth Parliament King Ia. 6. the Kings Royal Power
is established in the first Act, the very next act immediately subjoyned
thereunto declares the authority of thesupreame Court of Parliament continued
past all memory of man unto this day, and constitute of the free voices of the
three estates of this ancient Kingdom, which in the Parliament 1606. is
called, The ancient and fundamental policy of this Kingdom; and so
fundamental, as if it should be innovate, such confusion would ensue, as it
could no more be a free Monarchy, as is expressed in the Parliaments printed
Commission, 1604. by whom the same under God has been upholden, rebellious and
traitorous subjects punished, the good and faithful preserved and maintained,
and the Laws and Acts of Parliament (by which all men are governed) made and
established, and appoints the Honor, Authority, and Dignity of the Estates
of Parliament to stand in their own integrity, according to the ancient and
laudable custom by past, without alteration or diminution, and therefore
discharges any to presume or take in hand, To impugn the dignity, and the
authority of the said Estates, or to seek, or procure the innovation, or
diminution of their power or authority under the pain of Treason: and
therefore in the next Act, they discharge all Jurisdictions, or Judicatories
(albeit appointed by the Kings Majesty, as the High Commission was,) without
their Warrant and approbation; and that as contrary to the fundamental Laws,
above titled, 48. Act. Parl. 3. K. Ia. 1. and Act. 79. Parl. 6. King Ia. 4.
whereby the Lieges should only be ruled by the Laws or Acts, past in the
Parliament of this Kingdom. Now what was the ancient Dignity, Authority, and
power of the Parliaments of Scotland, which is to stand without diminution,
that will be easily and best known from the subsequent passages, or Historians,
which can also be very easily verified, by the old Registers, whenever they
should be produced; In the mean time remember that in Parliament and by Act of
Parl. K. Ia. 6. for observing the due order of Parliament, promises, never to
do, or command any thing, which may directly or indirectly prejudge the
liberty of free reasoning or voting of Parliament. K. Ia. 6. Parl. 11. Act.
40. And withal, to evidence the freedom of the Parliament of Scotland, from
that absolute unlimited Prerogative of the Prince; and their liberty to resist
his breaking of Covenant with them, or Treaties with foreign Nations; Ye
shall consider, 1. That the Kings of Scotland are obliged, before they be
inaugurate, to swear and make their faithful Covenant to the true Kirk of
God, that they shall maintain, defend, and set forward the true Religion
confessed and established within this Realm; even as they are obliged and
astricted by the Law of God, as well in Deuteronomie, as in the 11 chap. of the
2. book of the Kings; and as they crave obedience of their subjects. So that
the bond and contract shall be mutual and reciprocal, in all time coming,
between the Prince and the People, according to the Word of God; as is fully
expressed in the Register of the convention of Estates, July 1567.

2. That important Acts and Sentences at home, (whereof one is printed, 112
Act. Parl. 14. K. Ia. 3.) and in Treaties with Foreign Princes, the Estates
of Parliament did append their several Seals The Estates of Parliament do
append their collateral Seals with the Great Seal, in Treaties with foreign
Princes.
with the Kings Great Seal, (which to Grotius, Barclaius, and A^nisaeus, is an
undeniable argument of a limited Prince, as well as the style of our
Parliament, that the Estates with the King, ordain, ratify, rescind, etc.) as
also they were obliged, in case of the Kings breaking these Treaties, to resist
him therein, even by arms, and that without any breach of their allegiance, or
of his Prerogative; as is yet extant in the records of our old Treaties with
England and France, etc. But to go on, and leave some high mysteries unto a
rejoinder.

And to the end I may make good, that nothing is here taught, in this Treatise,
but the very Doctrine of the Church of Scotland, I desire that the Reader may
take notice of the larger Confession of the Church of Scotland, printed with
the Syntagme and body of the Confessions, at Geneva, anno MDCXII. and
authorized by King James the 6. and the three Estates in Parliament; and
printed in our Acts of Parliament, Parl. 15. K. James 6. An. 1567. Amongst good
works of the Second Table, says our Confession, art. 14. are these: To honor
Father, Mother, Princes, Rulers, and superior Powers: To love them, to support
them, yea to obey their Charge, (not repugning to the commandment of God) to
save the lives of innocents, to repress Tyranny, to defend the oppressed, to
keep our bodies clean and holy, etc. The contrary whereof is, To disobey or
resist any that God has placed in Authority, (while they pass not over the
bounds of their office) to murder, or to consent thereunto, to bear hatred,
or to let innocent blood be shed, if we may withstand it, etc. Now the
Confession cites in the margin, Ephesians. 6. 1. 7. and Ezekiel. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
where it is evident, by the name of Father and Mother, all inferious Judges as
well as the King, and especially the Princes, Rulers, and Lords of Parliament
are understood. 2. Ezekiel. 22. The bloody City is to be judged, because they
releeved not the oppressed out of the hand of bloody Princes, v. 6. who every
one of them were to their power to shed innocent blood. 3. To resist superior
powers, and so the Estates of Parliament, as the Cavalters of Scotland do, is
resistance forbidden, Romans 1^. 1. the place is also cited in the confession.
And the Confession exponeth the place, Romans 13. according to the
interpretation of all sound Expositers; as is evident in these words, Art. 24.
And therefore we confess and avouch, that such as resist the supreme power,
doing that thing which appertains to his charge, do resist Gods ordinance,
and therefore cannot be guiltless. And further we affirm, that whosoever
denies unto them aid, their counsel and comfort, while as the Princes and
Rulers vigilantly travel in execution of their Office, that the same men deny
their help, support and counsel to God, who by the presence of his Lieutenant
craves it of them. From which words we have clear:

1. That to resist the King or Parliament, is to resist them, while as they are
doing the thing that appertains to their charge, and while they vigilantly
travel in the execution of their office. But while King and Parliament do
acts of Tyranny against Gods Law, and all good Laws of men, they do not the
things that appertain to their charge and the execution of their Office; ergo
by our confession, to resist them in Tyrannical acts is, not to resist the
ordinance of God.

2. To resist Princes and Rulers, and so inferious Judges, and to deny them
counsel and comfort, is to deny help, counsel, and comfort to God. Let then
Cavaliers, and such as refuse to help the Princes of the Land against Papists,
Prelates, and Malignants know, that they resist Gods ordinance, which rebellion
they unjustly impute to us.

3. Whereas it is added in our Confession, that God by the presence of his
Lieutenant craveth support and counsel of the people. It is not so to be
taken, as if then only we are to aid and help inferior Judges and
Parliaments, when the King personally requires it, and not other ways.

1. Because the King requires help, when by his Office he is obliged to
require our help and counsel against Papists and Malignants, though as
misled, he should command the contrary: so if the Law require our help, the
King requires it ex officio.

2. This should expressly contradict our confession, if none were obliged to
give help and counsel to the Parliament and Estates, except the King in his
own person should require it, because Art. 14. it is expressly said, That to
save the lives of innocents, or repress Tyranny, to defend the oppressed, --
not to suffer innocent blood to be shed; or works pleasing to God, which he
rewards. Now we are not to think in reason, if the King shall be induced by
wicked Counsel, to do tyrannical works, and to raise Papists in Arms
against Protestants, that God does by him as by his Lieutenant, require our
help, comfort and counsel, in assisting the King in acts of Tyranny, and in
oppression, and in shedding innocent blood; yea our confession tyeth us to deny
help and comfort to the King in these wicked acts, and therefore our help
must be in the things that pertains to his Royal Office, and duty only;
otherwise we are to repress all tyranny, art 14.

4 To save the lives of innocents, to repress Tyranny, to defend the
oppressed, are by our confession good works, well pleasing to God, and so is
this a good work, not to suffer innocent blood to be shed, if we ^ay withstand
it. Hence it is clear as the Sun, that our confession according to the Word
of God, to which King Charles did swear at his Coronation, does oblige and tie
us in the presence of God, and his holy Angels to rise in Arms, to save the
innocent, to repress Tyranny, to defend the oppressed. When the King induced
by ill counsel sent Armies by Sea and Land, to kill and destroy the whole
Kingdom who should refuse such a Service-booke, as they could not in
conscience receive, except they would disobey God, renounce the confession of
Faith, which the King and they had sworn unto, and prove perfidious Apostates
to Christ and his Church, what could we do, and that the same Confession,
considering our bonds to our dear Brethren in England, lays bonds on us, to
this as a good work also, not to suffer their innocent blood to be shed, but
to defend them; when they against all Law of God, of men, of State, of Nations,
are destroyed and killed. For my part, I judge, it had been a guiltiness of
blood upon Scotland, if we had not helped them, and risen in Arms to defend
our selves, and our innocent brethren against bloody Cavaliers. Add to this
what is in the 24. Article of the same Confession.

We confess -- whosoever goes about to take away, or to confound the whole
state of Civil Polity* now lon^ established; we affirm the same men, not only
to be enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fight against Gods Will. But
these who have taken Arms against the Estates of Scotland, and the Princes and
Rulers of the Land, have labored to take away Parliaments, and the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, ergo etc.

The Confession adds, 16. We farther confess and acknowledge, that such
persons as are placed in authority, are to be loved, honored, feared, and
holden in most reverent estimation; because that they are Lieutenants of God,
in whose Sessions God himself does sit and Judge: yea even the Judges and
Princes themselves, to whom by God is given the sword, to the praise and
defense of good men, and to revenge and punish all open malefactors. Ergo the
Parliament, and Princes, and Rulers of the Land are Gods Lieutenants on earth,
no less then the King by our Confession of Faith, and those who resist them,
resist the ordinance of God. Royalists say, They are but the Deputies of the
King, and when they do contrary to his Royal Will, they may be resisted, yea
and killed, for in so far they are private men, though they are to be
honored as Judges, when they act according to the Kings Will whose Deputies
they are* But I answer*

1. It is a wonder that inferior Judges should be formally Judges, in so far
as they act conform to the will of a mortal King, and not in so far as they
act conform to the will of the King of Kings, seeing the judgment they
execute is the King of Kings, and not the Judgment of a mortal King, 2 Chro.
19. 6.

2. Royalists cannot endure the former distinction as it is applied to the
King, but they receive it with both hands, as it is applied to inferior
Judges; and yet certain it is, that it is as ordinary for a King being a
sinful man, to act sometimes as the Lieutenant of God, and sometimes as an
erring and misinformed man, no less then the inferior Judge acts sometimes
according to the Kings will and Law, and sometimes according to his own
private way; and if we are to obey the inferior Judge as the Deputy of the
King, what shall become of his Person, when Cavaliers may kill him at some
Edgehill? for so they mock this distinction, as applied to the King in regard
of his Person, and of his Royal Office; and for this point our Confession
cites in the Margin. Romans 13. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Psalm. 82. 1. which places do
clearly prove: 1. That inferior Magistrates are: 1. Gods ordinances. 2. Gods
on earth, Psalm. 82. 3. Such as bear the Lords sword. 4. That they are not only
(as the Confession says) appointed for Civil policy, but also for
maintenance of true Religion, and for suppressing of idolatry and
superstition. Then it is evident, to resist inferior Magistrates, is to resist
God himself, and to labor to throw the sword out of Gods hands. 5, Our
Confession uses the same Scriptures cited by Junius Brutus, to wit, Ezekiel. 22.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and Ier. 22. 3. where we are, no less then the Jews,
commanded to execute judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out
of the hands of the oppressor. For both the Law of God, and the Civil Law
says, Qui non impedit homicidium, quum potest, is homicidii reus est. I will
cast in a word of other Confessions, lest we seem to be Jesuits alone.

The Confession of Helvetia says, c. 30. de Magistratu. -- Viduas, pupillos,
afflictos asserat: Every Magistrate is to defend the widow, the orphan, and the
oppressed. The French Confession says, art. 40. Affirmamus ergo parendumesse
Legibus and Statutis, solvenda Tributa, subjectionis denique jugum voluntary
tolerandum, etiamsi infideles fuerint Magistratus, dummodo Dei summum imperium
integrum and illibatum maneat. So clear it is, that all active obedience, is
due to all Magistrates, and that that yoke of passive obedience is to be
tolerated, but conditionally, with a dummodo, so as the Magistrate violate not
the supreme commandment of the King of Kings. And Angl. Conf. art. 37. Sed eam
tantum Prerogativam aequam in sacris Scripturis a Deo ipso omnibus piis
Princibus semper fuisse tributam, hoc est, ut omnes status atque ordines fidei,
sive commlssos, six illi ecclesiastiei sint, sive civiles, in officio
^ontineant, and ^ontumaces ac delinquente^ gladio civili ^oerceant.
we know accordingly, Protestants of that Church have taken defensive arms
against their King. But our P. Prelate can say, The Confessions of Scotland,
Helvetia, France, and all the Reformed Churches, are Jesuiticall: when as it
was the doctrine of the Waldenses, Protestants, and Luther, Calvin and others,
while as there was no Jesuit on earth.

The 37. Art. of the Church of Englands Confession, is so far from erecting an
absolute power in the King, that they expressly bring down the Royal
Prerogative from the high seat and transcendent superlative power above the
Law; and expone the Prerogative to be nothing but mere Law-power. We only (say
they) ascribe that Prerogative to the King, which the Scripture does ascribe to
all Godly Princes, that is, that they cause all committed to their trust,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil persons, do their duty; and punish with the
Civil sword, all disobedient offenders. In syntag. Confess. And this they say
in answer to some, who believed, the Church of England made the King the Head
of the Church. The Prelates Convocation must be Jesuits to this P. P. also.

So the 36. Article of the Belgic Confession, says of all Magistrates, no
less then of a King, (We know, for Tyranny of Soul and Body, they justly
revolted from their King.) Idcirco Magistratus ipsos gladio armavit, ut malos
quidem plectant paenis, probos vero tueantur. Horum porro est, non modo de
Civili politia conservanda esse solioit^s, verum etiam dare operam ut sacrum
Ministerium conservetur, omnis Idololatria and adulterinus Dei cultus e medio
tollatur, regnum Antichristi diruatur, etc. Then all Magistrates, though
inferior, must do their duty, that the Law of God has laid on them, though
the King forbid them. But by the Belgic Confession, and the Scripture, it is
their duty to relieve the oppressed, to use the sword against murdering
Papists, and Irish Rebels, and destroying Cavaliers. For, shall it be a good
plea in the day of Christ, to say, Lord Jesus, we would have used thy sword
against bloody Murderers, if thy Anointed, the King, had not commanded us to
obey a mortal King rather than the King of ages; and to execute no judgment
for the oppressed, because he judged them faithful Catholic subjects. Let all
Oxford, and Cavalier Doctors in the three Kingdoms, satisfy the consciences
of men in this, that inferior Judges are to obey a Diviue Law, with a proviso,
that the King command them so to do; and otherwise they are to obey Men rather
then God. This is evidently holden forth in the Argentine Confession, exhibited
by four Cities to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, An. M. D. XXX. in the same
very cause of innocent Defense, that we are now in, in the three Kingdoms of
Scotland, England, and Ireland.

The Saxonick Confession, exhibited to the Council of Trent, An. M. D. LI.
art. 23* makes the Magistrates office essentially to consist in keeping of the
two Tables of Gods Law: and so what can follow hence, but in so far as he
defends Murderers: or if he be a King, and shall with the sword, or Armies,
impede inferior Magistrates (for the Confession speaks of all) to defend Gods
law, and true Religion, against Papists, Murderers, and bloody Cavaliers; and
hinder them to execute the judgment of the Lord against evil doers: He is
not, in that, a Magistrate; and the denying of obedience active or passive to
him, in that, is no resistance to the Ordinance of God: but by the contrary,
the King himself must resist the ordinance of God.

The Confession of Bohemia is clear, art. 16. Qui publico munere magistratuque
funguntur, quemcunque gradu^ teneant, se non suum, sed Dei opus agere sciant.
Hence all inferior, or the supreme Magistrate, what ever be their place, they
do not their own work, nor the work of the King, but the work of God, in the
use of the sword, Ergo, they are to use the sword against bloody Cavaliers, as
doing Gods work: suppose the King should forbid them to do Gods work. And it
says of all Magistrates: Sunt autem Magistratuum parts ac munus, omnibus ex
aequo jus dicere, in communem omnium usum, sine personarum acceptatione, pacem
ac tranquilitatem publicam tueri ac procurare de malis ac facinorosis, hanc
inter turbantibus poenas sumere, aliosque omnes ab eorum vi and injuria
vindicare. Now this Confession was the faith of the Barons and Nobles of
Bohemia, who were Magistrates, and exhibited to the Emperor, An. 1535. in the
cause not unlike unto ours now: and the Emperor was their Sovereign: yet they
profess they are obliged in conscience to defend all under them from all
violence and injuries, that the Emperor, or any other could bring on them; and
that this is their office before God, which they are obliged to perform as a
work of God: and the Christian Magistrate is not to do that work, which is
not his own, but Gods, upon condition that the King shall not inhibite him.
What if the King shall inhibite Parliaments, Princes and Rulers, to relieve the
oppressed, to defend the Orphan, the Widow, the Stranger, from unjust violence?
Shall they obey man rather than God?

To say no more of this: Prelates, in Scotland, did what they could to hinder
his Majesty to indict a Parliament. 2. When it was indicted, to have its
freedom destroyed by prelimitations. 3. When it was sitting, their care was to
divide, impede, and anull the course of Justice. 4. All in the P. Prelates
book tends to abolish Parliaments, and to enervate their power. 5. There
were many ways used to break up Parliaments in England; And to command Judges
not to judge at all, but to interrupt the course of Justice, is all one as to
command unrighteous judgment, Ier. 22. v. 3. 6. Many ways have been used by
Cavaliers, to cut off Parliaments, and the present Parliament in England.

The paper found in William Lauds Study, touching fears and W. Laud and other
Prelates enemies to Parliaments.
hopes of the Parliament of England, evidenceth that Cavaliers hate the Supreme
seat of Justice, and would it were not in the World; which is the highest
rebellion and resistance made against superior Powers.

1. He fears, this Parliament shall begin where the last left.

Ans. What ever ungrate Courtier had hand in the death of King James, deserved
to come under Trial.

2. He fears they sacrifice some man.

Ans. If Parliaments have not power to cut off Rebels, and corrupt Judges, the
root of their being is undone. 2. If they be lawful Courts, none needs fear
them, but the guilty.

3. He fears their Consultations be long, and the supply must be present.

Ans. Then Cavaliers intend Parliaments for Subsidies to the King, to foment,
and promote the war against Scotland, not for Justice. 2. He that fears
long and serious consultations, to rip up and lance the wounds of Church and
State, is afraid that the wounds be cured.

4. He fears they deny Subsidies, which are due by the Law of God, Nature,
and Nations, whereas Parliaments have but their deliberation and consent for
the manner of giving, otherwise this is to sell Subsidies, not to give them.

Ans. Tribute, and the standing Revenues of the King, are due by the Law of God
and Nations; but Subsidies are occasional Rents, given upon occasion of War,
or some extraordinary necessity; and they are not given to the King as Tribute,
and standing Revenues, which the King may bestow for his House, Family, and
Royal Honor, but they are given by the Kingdom, rather to the Kingdom, then
to the King for the present war, or some other necessity of the Kingdom, and
therefore are not due to the King as King, by any Law of Nature or Nations, and
so should not be given but by deliberation and judicial sentence of the
States; and they are not sold to the King, but given out by the Kingdom, by
Statute of Parliament, to be bestowed on the Kingdom, and the King should sell
no Acts of Justice for Subsidies.

5. He dare not speak of the consequences, if the King grant Bills of Grace,
and part with the flowers of the Crown. Ans. He dare not say, The people shall
vindicate their liberty by selling Subsidies, to buy branches of the
Prerogative Royal, and diminishing the Kings fancied absoluteness: so would
Prelates have the King absolute, that they may ride over the souls, purses,
persons, estates, and Religion of men upon the horse of pretended absoluteness.

6. He fears the Parliament sall upon Church business; but 1. The Church is
too weak already* if it had more power, the King might have more, both
obedience and service. 2. The Houses can be no competent Judges in point of
Doctrine. 3. For the King, Clergy, and Convocation are Judges in all causes
Ecclesiastical.

Ans. 1. This strikes at the root of all Parliamentary power, 1. The P. P.
gives them but a poor deliberative power in Subsides, and that is, to make
the Kings Will a Law, in taking all the subjects goods from them, to foment
war against the subjects. 2. He takes all jurisdiction from them over
Persons, though they were as black Traitors as breathe. 3. And spoileth them of
all power in Church matters, to make all Judges, yea and the King himself
yield blind obedience to the Pope and Prelate, and their illuminated Clergy.
Sure I am, P. Maxwell imputes this, but most unjustly, to Presbyteries. What
essential and fundamental privileges are left to Parliaments? David, and the
Parliament of Israel are impertinent Judges in the matter of bringing home the
Ark of God. And for the Churches weakness, that is, the weakness of the
damned Prelates, shall this be the Kings weakness? Yes, the P. P. must make it
true, No Bishop, no King.

7. He fears, factious spirits will take heart to themselves, if the King
yield to them without any submission of theirs.

Ans. The Princes and Judges of the Land are a company of factious men, and so
no Parliament, no Court, but at best some good advisers of a King to break up
the Parliament, because they refuse Subsidies, that he may by a lawless way
extort Subsidies.

8. He desires the Parliament may sit a short time, that they may not well
understand one another.

Ans. He loves short, or no justice from the Parliament, he fears they
reform Gods house, and execute justice on men like himself. But I return to
the Scottish Parliament.

Assert. 2. The Parliament is to regulate the power of the King. The
Parliaments of Scotland do regulate, limit, and set bounds to the Kings power.
The heritable Sheriffs complain, that the King grants Commissions to
others, in cases perteining to their office. Whereupon, the Estates, Par. 6. K.
Iam. 5. Act. 82. discharges all such Commissions, as also appoints that all
Murderers be judged by the Justice general only. And in several Acts the
King is inhibited to grant pardons to malefactors. K. Ia. 6. Act. 75. P. 11.

It is to be considered, that King James in his Baslicon Doron, lays down an
unsound ground, that Fergus the first father of 107 Kings of Scotland,
conquered this Kingdom. The contrary whereof is asserted by Fordome, Major,
Boethius, Buchannan, Hollanshed; who run all upon this Principle, That the
Estates of the Kingdom did 1. Choose a Monarchy, and freely, and no other
Government. 2. That they freely elected Fergus to be their King. 3. King Fergus
Fergus the first King of Scotland no Conqueror, but a freely elected Prince. A
fundamental Law of elective Kings in Scotland.
frequently conveened the Parliament, called, Insulanorum Duces, Tribuum
Rectores, Majorum consessus, Conventus Ordinum, conventus Statuum, Communitatum
Regni, Phylarchi, Primores, Principes, patres, and as Hollanshed says, they
made Fergus King, therefore a Parliament must be before the King; yea and after
the death of King Fergus, Philarchi coeunt conci^ne advocata, the Estates
convened without any King, and made that fundamental Law Regni electivi, That
when the Kings Children were minores, any of the Fergusian Race might be chosen
to Reign: and this endured to the days of Kennethus: and Redotha, Re^. 7.
resigneth and makes over the The Parliaments of Scotland chosed Kings.
Government into the hands of the Parliament, and Philarchi and Tribuum
Gubernatores ordained Therius the 8. King. Buchanan, l. 4. Rer. Scot. calls
him Reutha, and said he did this, Populo egre permittente, then the Royal
Power recurred to the fountain. Therius the 8. a wicked man, filled the
Kingdom with Roberies fearing that the Parliament should punish him, fled to
the Britains, and thereupon the Parliament choose Connanus to be Protex, and
protector of the Kingdom.

Finnanus R. 10. Decreed; Ne quid Reges, quod majoris esset momenti, nisi de
publici consilii authoritate juberent, and ne domestico consilio remp.
administrarent, regia publicaque negotia non sine patrum consultatione ductuque
tractarentur, nec bellum pacem aut faedera reges per se patrum, Tribuumve,
Rectorum injussu facerent, demerentue. Then it is clear, that Parliaments were
consortes imperii, and had Authority with, and above the King. When a Law is
made that the Kings should do nothing, Injussu rectorum tribuum, without
commandment of the Parliament, a Cabinet Counsel was not lawful to the Kings
of Scotland. So Durstus Rex XI. swears to the Parliament, Se nihil nisi de
primorum consilio acturum. That he shall do nothing but by counsel of the
Rulers and Heads of the Kingdom.

The Parliament rejecting the lawful son of Corbredus the 20, King, because
he was young, created Dardanus the son of Metellanus King, which is a great
argument of the power of the Scottish Parliament of old for elective, rather
then hereditary Kings.

Corbredus secundus, called Galdus, the 21, King, at his Coronation The Oath of
Galdus the 21. King of Scotland.
renouncing all negative voices, did swear, Se majorum consiliis acquieturum,
That he should be ruled by the Parliament; and it is said, Leges quasdam
tollere non potuit, adversante multitudine.

Lactatus R. 22. is censured by a Parliament, Quod spreto majorum Kings of
Scotland censured and punished by the Parliament.
consilio, He appointed base men to public Offices.

Mogaldus R. 23. Ad consilia seniorum omnia ex prisco more rev^cavit, did all
by the Parliament, as the ancient custom was.

Conarus 24. K. was cast in Prison by the Parliament, Quod non expectato
decreto patrum, quod summae erat potestatis, privatis consiliis administrasset,
Because he did the weightiest business that concerned the Kingdom, by private
advice, without the judicial Ordinance of Parliament, that was of greatest
authority. Where is the negative voice of the King here?

Ethodius 2. the son of Ethodius the 1. the 28. King. (The Parliament passing
by his son of the first Bed, because he was a child, had Kings of Scotland of
old had no negative voice.
created Satrael his Brother King before) a simple ignorant man, yet for
reverence to the race of Fergus, kept the name of a King, but the Estates
appointed Tutors to him, he was the 28. King.

Nathalocus the 30. K. corrupting the Nobles with buds and fair promises,
obtained the Crown.

Romachus, Fethelmachus, and Angusianus, or as Buchanan calls him Aenneannus,
contended for the Crown, the Parliament convened to judge the matter, was
dissolved by tumult, and Rommachus chosen King, doing all, Non adhibito, de
more, consilio majorum, was censured by the Parliament.

Fergus the 2. was created King by the States, De more.

Constantine 43. K. a most wicked man, was punished by the States.

Aidanus 49. K. by the counsel of Sanctus Columba, governed all in peace, by
three Parliaments every year.

Ferchardus 52. K. and Ferchardus 2. the 54. King, were both censured by
Parliaments.

Eugenius 62. K. a wicked Prince, was put to death by the Parliament, Omnibus
in ejus exitium, consentientibus.

Eugenius 7. the 59. K. was judicially accused, and absolved by the States, of
killing his Wife Spondana.

Donaldus the 70. K. is censured by a Parliament which convened Pro salute
Reipublicae, for the good of the Land. So Ethus the 72. K. Ne unius culpa,
regnum periret.

Gregorius the 73. K. swears to maintain Kirk and State in their liberties;
the Oath is ordained to be sworn by all Kings at their Coronation.

The Estates complain of Duffus 78. K. because contemning the counsel of the
Nobles, Sacrificulorum consiliis abduceretur, and that neither the Nobility
must depart the Kingdom, or another King must be made.

Culenus the 79. King, was summoned before the Estates, so before him
Constantine the 3. the 75. K. did by Oath resign the Kingdom to the States,
and entered in a Monastery at Saint Andrews.

Kenethus the 70. K. procured almost, per vim, says Buchanan, Buchan Rer.
Scot. l. 7.
that the Parliament should change the elective Kings in hereditary; observe
the Power of Parliaments.

After this Grimus, and then Macbethus, R. 85. is rebuked for Coronation Oath.
governing by private counsel, in his time the King is ordained by the States,
to swear to maintain the community of the Kingdom.

When Maccolumbus the 92. King would have admitted a Treaty to the hurt of the
Kingdom; the Nobles said, Non jus esse Regi, the King had no right to take any
thing from the Kingdom, Nisi omnibus Ordinibus consentientibus. In the time of
Alexander the 94. K. is ordained, Acta regis oporteri confirmari decreto
ordinum regni, quia ordinibus regni non consultis, aut adversantibus, nihil
quod ad totius regnistatum attinet, Regi agere liceret. So all our Historians
observe, by which it is clear, that the Parliament, not the King has a
negative voice.

The States answer to K. Edwards Legates concerning Balzees conditions in his
contest with Bruce is, That these conditions were made a solo Rege, by the King
only, without the estates of the Kingdom, and therefore they did not oblige
the Kingdom.

In Robert the Bruce his Reign, the K. 97. the succession to the Parliaments
of Scotland by Law are to decide who should reign.
Crown is appointed by Act of Parliament, and twice changed; and in the League
with France, Quod quando de successuro rege ambigeretur apud Scotos, ea
controversia ab Ordinum de creto decideretur.

Robert the 100. K. in a Parliament at Scoone moved the States, to appoint the
Earl of Carick his eldest son, of the second Marriage to the Crown, passing
his children of the first Marriage; and when he would have made a Treaty, he
was told, That he could not inducias facere nisi ex sententia conventus
publici; he could not make Truces but with the consent of the Estates of
Parliament.

K. James the 1. could not do any thing in his Oath in England. The
Parliaments approbation of the Battle at Stirling against King James the 3. is
set down in the printed Acts, because he had not the consent of the States.

To come to our first Reformation, Queen Regent breaking her promise to the
States, said, Faith of promise should not be sought from Princes; the States
answered, That they then were not obliged to obey, and suspended her government
as inconsistent with the duty of Princes, by the Articles of pacification at
Leith, Anno 1560. Iunii 16. No peace or war can be without the States.

In the Parliament thereafter, Anno 1560. the Nobility say frequently to the
Queen, Regum Scotorum limitatum esse imperium, nec unquam adunius libidinem,
sed ad legum praescriptum and nobilitatis consensum regisolitum.

So it is declared, Parliament at Stirling, 1578. and Parl. 1567, concerning
Queen Mary, I need not insist here. K. James the 6. Anno 1567. Iul. 21. was
Crowned, the Earl of Morton and Humne, jurarunt pro co, and ejus nomine, in
leges, eum doctrinam and ritus religionis, quae tum docebantur, public quoad
posset, servaturum, and contrarios oppugnaturum. Buch. Rer. Scot. Hist. l. 18.
The three Estates revoke all alienations made by the King without consent of
the Parliament. Parliam. K. James, 2. cap. 2. K. James, 4, 5, 6.

Three Parliaments of K. James the 2. are holden without any mention of the
King, as Anno 1437. Anno 1438. Anno 1440. and the 5. and 6. Act of Parl. 1440.
the Estates ordain the King to do such and such things, to ride through the
country for doing of Justice. And Parl. 1. K. James 1. Act. 23. the Estates
ordained the King to mend his money. But show any Parliament where ever the
King does prescribe Laws to the States, or censure the States.

In the 1. Parl. of K. James the 6. the Confession of Faith being ratified, in
Acts made by the three Estates, that the Kings must swear at their Coronation.
In the presence of the eternal God, that they shall maintain the true
Religion, right Preaching, and administration of the Sacraments now received
and preached within this Realm: and shall abolish and gain-stand all false
Religions contrary to the same: and shall rule the people committed to their
charge, according to the will of God, laudable Laws and Constitutions of the
Realm, etc.

The 1. Parl. of K. James the 6. 1567. approves the Acts, Parl. 1560.
conceived only in name of the States, without the King and Queen, who had
deserted the same. So says the Act, 2. 5. 4. 20. 28. And so this Parliament,
wanting the King and Queens authority, is confirmed, Parl. 1572. Act. 51. K.
Ia. 6. and Parl. 1581. Act. 1. and Parl. 1581. Act. 115. in which it is
declared, That they have been Common laws from their first Date: and all are
ratified, Parl. 1587. and Parl. 1592. Act. 1. and stand ratified to this day,
by K. Charles his Parliament, An. 1633. The Act of the Assembly, 1566.
commends that Parliament, 1560. as the most lawful and free Parliament that
ever was in the Kingdom.

Yea, even Parl. 1641. King Charles himself being present, an Act was passed
upon the occasion of the Kings illegal imprisoning of the Lord of Langtoune,
That the King has no power to imprison any Member of the Parliament, without
consent of the Parliament: Which Act, to the great prejudice of the liberty of
the Subject, should not have been left unprinted: for, by what Law the King may
imprison one Member of the Parliament, by that same reason he may imprison two,
and twenty, and a hundredth: and so may he clap up the whole Free Estates; and
where shall then the highest Court of the Kingdom be?

All Politicians say, The King is a limited Prince, not absolute; where the
King gives out Laws, not in his own name, but in the name of himself, and
the Estates judicially conveened.

Page 33. of the old Acts of Parliament, Members are summoned to treat and
conclude.

The duty of Parliaments, and their power, according to the Laws of Scotland,
may be seen in the History of Knox, now printed at London, An. 1643. in the
Nobles proceeding with the Queen, who killed her Husband, and married Bodwell,
and was arraigned in Parliament, and by a great part condemned to death, by
many, to perpetual imprisonment.

King Charles received not Crown, Sword, and Scepter, while first he did swear
the Oath, that King James his Father did swear. 2. He was not crowned, till
one of every one of the three Estates came and offered to him the Crown. 3.
With an express condition of his duty, before he be crowned.

After, King Charles said, I will by Gods assistance bestow my life for your
defense, wishing to live no longer, then that I may see this Kingdom flourish
in happiness. Thereafter the King showing himself on a Stage to the people,
the P. Archbishop said; Sir, I do present unto you, King Charles, the right
descended inheritor, the Crown, and dignity of this Realm; appointed by the
Peers of the Kingdom: And, Are ye not willing to have him for your King, and
become subject to him? The King turning himself on the stage, to be seen of
the People, They declare their willingness, by crying, God save King Charles!
Let the King live!

QUEST. XLIV. General results of the former Doctrine, in some few Corollaries,
or straying Questions, fallen off the Road-way: answered briefly.
QUest. 1. Whether all Governments be but broken Governments, and deviations
from Monarchy?] Answ. It is denied; There is no less somewhat of Gods
authority in Government, by many, or some of the choicest of the People, than
in Monarchy: nor can we judge any Ordinance of Man unlawful: for we are to be
subject to all, for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
2. Though Monarchy should seem the rule of all other Governments, in regard
of resemblance of the supreme Monarch of all: Yet is it not the moral rule,
from which, if other Governments shall err, they are to be judged sinful
deviations.

Quest. 2. Whether is Royalty an immediate issue and spring of Nature?] How
Royalty is the first and natural Government.
Answ. No; For man, fallen in sin, knowing naturally he has need of a Law
and a Government, could have, by reason, devised Governors, one or more; and the
supervenient institution of God, coming upon this Ordinance, does more fully
assure us, that God, for man's good, has appointed Governors: but if we
consult with Nature, many Judges and Governors, to fallen Nature, seem nearer
of blood, to Nature, then one only: for two, because of man's weakness, are
better then one. Now Nature seems, to me, not to teach, that one only
sinful man should be the sole and only Ruler of a whole Kingdom. God, in his
Word, ever joined with the Supreme Many Rulers over a great multitude, more
natural than one.
Ruler, many Rulers, who, as touching the essence of a Judge, (which is, to
rule for God) were all equally Judges: some reserved Acts, or a longer cubite
of power, in regard of extent, being due to the King.

Quest. 3. Whether Magistrates, as Magistrates, be natural?] Answ. Nature is
considered, as whole and sinlesse, or as fallen and broken. In the former
consideration, that either man should stand in need of any, to compel him with
the sword to do his duty, and not oppress; was no more natural to man, than
to stand in need of Lictors and Hangmen, or Physicians for the body, which in
this state was not in a capacity of sickness or death: And so Government by
Parents and Husbands was only natural, in the latter consideration.
Magistrates as Magistrates, are two ways considered; 1. According to the
knowledge of such an Ordinance; 2. According to the actual erection of the
practice of the office of Magistrates. In the former notion, I humbly conceive,
that by Natures light, Man, now fallen and broken, even under all the fractions
of the powers and faculties of the soul, does know, that promises of reward,
fear of punishment, and the coactive power of the Sword, as Plato said, are
natural means to move us, and wings to promote obedience, and to do our
duty. And that Government by Magistrates is natural: But, in the second
relation, it is hard to determine, that Kings, rather then other Governors,
are more natural.

Quest. 4. Whether Nature has determined, that there should be one supreme
Ruler a King, or many Rulers in a free Commnitie? Answ. It is denied.

Quest. 6. Whether every free Commonwealth has not in it a supremacy of
Majesty, which it may formally place in one, or many?] Answ. It is affirmed.

Quest. 6. Whether absolute and unlimited power of Royalty, be a ray and beam
of Divine Majesty, immediately derived from God?] Answ. Not at all: Such a
creature is not in the world of Gods creation: Royalists, and flatterers of
Kings, are parents to this prodigious birth. There is no shadow of power, to
do ill, in God: An absolute power is, essentially, a power to do without or
above Law, and a power to do ill, to destroy: and so it cannot come from God,
as a Moral power, by institution; though it come from God by a flux of
permissive providence: but so things unlawful and sinful come from God.

Quest. 7. Whether the King may, in his actions, intend his own Prerogative
and Absolutenes?] Answ. He can neither intend it as his nearest end, nor as his
remote end. Not the former: for if he fight, and destroy his People for a
Prerogative, he destroys his People, that he may have a power to destroy
them, which must be mere Tyranny, nor can it be his remote end; for granting
that his supposed absolute Prerogative were lawful, he is to refer all
lawful Power, and all his actions to a more noble end, to wit, to the safety
and good of the People. To resist the Will, is not to resist the Power.


Quest. 8. Do not they that resist the Parliaments power, resist the
Parliament? And they that resist the Kings power, resist the King? God has
joined King and Power: who dare separate them?] Answ. If the Parliament abuse
their power, we may resist their Page 9.
abused power, and not their power Parliamentarie. Mr. Bridges does well
distinguish, in his Annot. on the [ Loyal Convert] betwixt the Kings power,
and the Kings will. 2. The Resisters do not separate King and Power; but the
King himself does separate his lawful Power from his Will, if he work and
act Tyranny, out of this principle, Will, Passion, Lust; not out of the Royal
principle of Kingly power: So far we may resist the one, and not the other.

Quest. 9. Why, if God might work a miracle in the three Childrens resistance
active; why does he evidence omnipotency in the passive obedience of these
Witnesses? The Kingdom of Judah was Christ's birthright, as man, and David's
son: why did he not, by legions of Men and Angels, rather vindicate his own
flesh and blood, than triumph by non-resistance, and the omnipotency of glory
to shine in his mere suffering?] Ans. Who art thou that disputest with God? He
that kills with the jaw bone of an Ass, thousands; It is no good
consequence: Christ and the Apostles used not violent resistance to spread the
Gospel, ergo, such resistance is unlawful.
and he that destroyed the numberless Midianites by only three hundred, should
no more put the three Children to an unlawful fact in the one, if they had by
three men killed Nebuchadnezzar and all his Subjects, than in the other. But
nothing is said against us in a Sophisme a non-causa pro causa; except it be
proved, God would neither deliver his three Children, nor Christ from death,
and the Jews from bondage, by miraculous resistance, because resistance is
unlawful. What? patient suffering is lawful; Ergo resistance is unlawful. It
is a poor consequent, and a begging of the question, both must be lawful to
us. And so we hold, of ten lawful means fit to compass Gods blessed end, he
may choose one, and let go nine: shall any infer, ergo, These other nine
means are unlawful, because God chose a mean, d^fferent from those nine, and
refused them, So may I answer by retortion. The three hundred sinned in
resisting Midian, and defeating them: Why? Because it should be more honor to
God, if they had, by suffering patiently the sword of Midian, glorified God in
Martyrdom. So Christ and the Apostles, who could have wrought miracles, might
have wrought Reformation by the sword, and destroyed Kings and Emperors, the
opposers of the Lamb: and they did reform by suffering; Ergo, the sword is
unlawful in Reformation. It follows not. The mean Christ used, is lawful;
Ergo, all other means that he used not, are unlawful, It is vain Logic.

Quest. 10. Whether is the Coronation of a King any other thing but a
Ceremony?] Ans. In the Coronation there is, and may be, the The Coronation of
the King, in concreto, is more then a Ceremony.
Ceremony of a shout and an Acclamation, and the reaching of a Scepter in his
right hand who is made King; and the like: But the Coronation in concreto,
according to the substance of the act, is no Ceremony, nor any accidental
ingredient in the constitution of a King; 1. Because Israel should have
performed a mere ceremonial action on Saul, when they made him King, which we
cannot say: for as the Peoples act of Coronation is distinctive, so is it
constitutive; it distinguished Saul from all Israel, and did constitute him in
a new relation, that he was changed from no King, to be a King. 2. The people
cannot by a Ceremony make a King; they must really put some honor on him,
that was not on him before. Now this Ceremony which Royalists do fancy
Coronation to be, is only fymbolicall and declarative, not really dative, it
places nothing in the King.

Quest. 11. Whether may Subjects limit the power that they gave not to the
King, it being the immediate result (without intervening of Law, or any act of
man) issuing from God only?] Ans. Though we Men may limit the Power that they
gave not.
should give (which in reason we cannot grant) that Royal power were a result
of the immediate bounty of God, without any act of man; Yet it may be limited
by men that it over-swell not its banks, though God immediately make Peter an
Apostle, without any act of men, yet Paul by a sharp rebuke, Gal. 2. curbeth
and limiteth his power, that he abuse it not to Iudaizing; Royalists deny not,
but they teach, That the 80. Priests that restrained Vzziah his power, from
burning incense to the Lord, gave no Royal power to Vzziah* Do not subjects
by flight lay restraint upon a Kings power, that he kill not the subjects
without cause? yet they teach, That subjects gave no power to the King;
certainly this is a proof of the immense power of the King of Kings, that none
can fly from his pursuing hand, Ps. 139. 1, 2, 3. Amos 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. whereas
men may fly from earthly Kings. Nebuchadnezzar, (as Royalists teach) might
justly conquer some Kingdoms, for conquest is a just title to the Crown, (say
they) now the Conqueror then justly not only limiteth the Royal Power of the
conquered King, but wholly removes his Royalty and unkingeth him, yet we know,
the conqueror gave no Royal power to the conquered King. Joshua and David
took away Royal power which they never gave, and therefore this is no good
reason, The people gave not to the King Royal Power, ergo, they could not
lawfully limit it, and take it away.

2. We cannot admit that God gives Royal power immediately, without the
intervention of any Act of Law, for it is an Act of Law, that Deuteronomy. 17. the
people chooses such a King, not such a King, that the people by a legal
covenant make Saul, David, and Joash Kings, and that God exercises any
political action of making a King, over such subjects, upon such a condition,
is absurd, and inconceivable; for how can God make Saul and David Kings of
Jsrael, upon this political and legal condition, that they rule in Justice
and Judgment, but there must intervene a political action, and so they are
not made Kings immediately. If God feed Moses, by bread, and Manna, the Lords
act of feeding is mediate, by the mediation of second causes; if he feed Moses
40. days without eating any thing, the act of feeding is immediate. If God
made David King, as he made him a Prophet, I should think God immediately made
him King; for God asked consent of no man, of no people, no not of David
himself, before he infused on him the Spirit of Prophecy; but he made him
formally King, by the political and legal Covenant betwixt him and the
people. I shall not think that a Covenant and Oath of God is a Ceremony,
especially a Lawcovenant, or a political paction between David and the people,
the contents whereof behoved to be De materia gravi and onerosa, concerning a
great part of obedience to the fifth Commandment of Gods Moral Law, the
duties Moral concerning Religion, and Mercy, and Justice, to be performed
reciprocally, between King and people. Oaths (I hope) are more then Ceremonies.

Quest. 12. Whether or no is not the Commonwealth ever a Pupil, never growing
to age, as a minor under nonage does come not to need a Tutor, but the
Commonwealth being still in need of a Tutor, a Governor, or King, must
always be a Tutor, and so the Kingdom can never come to that condition, as to
accuse the King, it always being minor?] Ans. 1. Then can they never accuse
inferior Judges, for a Kingdom is perpetually in such a nonage, as it cannot
want them, when sometime it wants a King. 2. Can the Commonwealth under
Democracy and Aristocracy being perpetually under nonage, ever then quarrel at
these Governments, and never seek a King? by this reason they cannot. 3. The
King in all respects is not a Tutor, every comparison in something bears a
Leg; for the Commonwealth, in their own persons do choose a King. 2.
Complain of a King. 3. Resist an Vzziah. 4. Tie their elective Prince to a
Law; a Pupil cannot choose his Tutor, either his dying Father, or the living
Law does that service for him; he cannot resist his Tutor, he cannot tie his
Tutor to a Law, nor limit him, when first he chooses him. Pupillo non licet
postulare Tutorem suspecti, quamdiu sub tutela est, and manet impubes. l.
Pietatis 6. in fin. C. de susp. Tutor. l. impuberem. 7. and. Impuberes. Just.
eod.

Quest. 13. Whether or no are subjects more obnoxious to a King Arnisaeus de
authorit. princi. c. 3. n. 6.
then Clients to Patrons, and servants to Masters, because the Patron cannot be
the Clients Judge? but some superior Magistrate must judge both, and the slave
had no refuge against his Master, but only flight. And the King does confer
infinite greater benefits on the subjects, then the Master does on the slave,
because he exposes his life, Subjects not more obnoxious to a King then
Clients, Vassals, Children.
pleasure, ease, credit, and all for the safety of his subjects?] Ans. Its
denied; for to draw the case to Fathers, and Lords in respect of Children and
Vassals; the reason why Sons, Clients, Vassals can neither formally judge, nor
judicially punish Fathers, Patrons, Lords and Masters, though never so
Tyrannous, is a Moral impotency, or a political incongruity, because these
relations of Patron and Client, Fathers and Children are supposed to be in a
Community, in which are Rulers and Judges, above the Father and Son, the
Patron and the Client; but there is no Physical incongruity that the politic
inferior punish the superior, if we suppone there were no Judges on the
earth, and no relation, but Patron and Client; and because, for the father to
destroy the children, is a troubling of the harmony of Nature, and the highest
degree of violence, therefore one violence of self defense, and that most
just, though contrary to nature, must be a remedy against another violence: but
in a Kingdom there is no political Ruler above both King and People; and
therefore though Nature have not formally appointed the political relation of
a King, rather then many Governors, and subjects, yet has Nature appointed a
Court and Tribunal of nec^ssity, in which the people may by innocent violence,
repress the unjust violence of an injuring Prince; so as the people injured in
the matter of self defense, may be their own Judge. 2. I wonder that any
should teach, That oppressed slaves had of old no refuge against the tyranny of
Masters, but only flight: for 1. The Law expressly says, That they might not
only fly, but also change Masters, which we all know was a great damage to the
Master, to whom the servant was as good as money in his purse. 2. I have
demonstrated Servi indigne habiti confugiendi ad statuas, and dominum mutandi
copiam habent, l. 2. De his qui sunt sui. Item, C. De lat. Hered. toll.
before by the Law of Nature, and out of diverse learned Iurists, that all
inferiors may defend themselves by opposing violence against unjust violence;
to say nothing, that unanswerably I have proved, that the Kingdom is superior
to the King. 3. It is true, Qui plus dat, plus obligat, as the Scripture says,
Luke 7. He that gives a greater benefit, lays a foundation of a greater
obligation. But 1. If benefit be compared with benefit, it is disputable; if a
King give a greater benefit then an earthly father, to whom under God the son
is debtor for life and being, if we regard the compensation of eminency of
honor and riches, that the People puteth upon the King; but I utterly deny
that a power to act Tyrannous acts, is any benefit or obligation, that the
People in reason can lay upon their Prince, as a compensation or hire for his
great pains, he takes in his Royal Watchtower: I Judge it no benefit, but a
great hurt, damage, and an ill of nature, both to King and people, that the
people should give to their Prince any power to destroy themselves, and
therefore that people does reverence and honor the Prince most, who lay
strongest chains and Iron fetters on him, that he cannot tyrannize.

Quest. 14. But are not Subjects more subject to their Prince (seeing Arnisaeus
De authori. principum^in popul. c. 3. n. 7.
the subjection is natural, as we see Bees and Cranes) to obey him, then
servants to their Lord. C. in Apib. 7. 9. 1. ex Hiero. 4. ad Rustic. Monach.
Plin. n. 17. For Jurists teach, that servitude is beside or against nature. l.
5. de stat. homi.. 2. just, and jur. pers. c. 3.. and sicut Nov. 89. quib. med.
not. off. sui.

Ans. There is no question, in active subjection to Princes and Subjects in
active obedience must subject to a Kings lawful commandment: but in things
unlawful, they are not naturally subject, in passive subjection.
Fathers commanding in the Lord, we shall grant as high a measure as you
desire. But the question is, if either active subjection to ill and unjust
mandates, or passive subjection to penal inflictions of Tyranny and abused
power, be natural, or most natural? or if Subjects do renounce natural
subjection to their Prince, when they oppose violence to unjust violence. This
is to beg the question. And for the Commonwealth of B^es and Cranes, and Crown
and Scepter amongst them, Give me leave to doubt of it. To be subject to Kings,
is a Divine moral Law of God; but not properly natural to be subject to
coaction of the Sword. Government and subjection to Parents, is natural: But
that a King is juris naturae strictim, I must crave leave to doubt. I hold him
to be a Divine moral Ordinance, to which, in conscience, we are to submit in
the Lord.

Quest. 15. Whether was King Uzzah dethroned by the People?] Whether King Vzzah
was dethroned.
Ans. Though we should say, he was not formally unkinged and dethroned; yet if
the Royal power consist in an indivisible point, as some Royalists say: and if
Vzzah was removed to a private house, and could not reign, being a Leper;
Certainly, much Royal power was taken from him. It Is true, Arnisaeus says, he
neither Arnisaeus de jure Pontif. Romans in Regna and Princ. c. 5. n. 30.
could be compelled to resign his power, nor was he compelled to resign his
Royal authority; but he willingly resigned actual government, and remained
King, as Tutors and Curators are put upon Kings that are mad, stupid, and
Children, who yet govern all by the authority of lawful Kings. But that
Vzzah did not denude himself of the Royal power voluntarily, is clear. The
reason, 2 Chro. 26. 21. why he dwelt in an house apart, and did not actually
reign; is, because he was a Leper; for, He was cut off (says the Text) from
the house of the Lord; and Jotham his son was over the Kings house, judging
the people of the Land. Whereby it is clear by the express law of God, he
being a Leper, and so not, by Law, to enter into the Congregation, he was cut
off from the house of the Lord: and he being a patient, is said to be cut off
from the Lords house. Whether then Vzzah turned necessity to a virtue, I know
not: It is evident that Gods Law removed the actual exercise of his power. If
we obtain this, which Gods Word does give us, we have enough for our purpose,
though Vzzah kept the naked title of a King, as indeed he took but up room in
the Catalogue of Kings. Now if, by Law, he was cut off from actual governing;
Whether he was willing, or not willing to denude himself of Reigning, it is
all one. And to say, that furious men, idiots, stupid men, and Children, who
must do all Royal acts by Curators and Tutors, are Kings jure, with
correction, is petitio principii: for then has God infused immediately from
heaven, (as Royalists teach us) a Royal power to govern a Kingdom, on those,
who are as capable of Royalty, as blocks. I conceive that the Lord, Deuteronomy. 17.
14, 15, 16, 17. commands the people, to make no blocks Kings: and, that the
Lord has not done that himself in a binding Law to us, which we have no
commandment from him to do. I conceive that God made Josiah and Joash Kings
typical, and in destination, for his promise sake to David, while they were
Children, as well as he made them Kings; but not actu completo ratione officii,
to be a rule to us now, to make a Child of six years of age, a King by
office. I conceive, Children are to us, only Kings in destination and
appointment: And for Idiots and Fools, I shall not believe, (let Royalists
break their faith upon so rocky and stony a point, at their pleasure) that God
has made them Governors of others, by Royal office, who can scarce number
their own fingers; Or that God tyeth a people to acknowledge stupid blocks for
Royal Governors of a Kingdom, who cannot govern themselves. But far be it
from me to argue with Bellarmine; From Bellarm. de p^nit. l. 3. c. 2.
Vzziah his bodily leprosy, to infer, that any Prince spiritually Leprous,
and turned Heretical, is presently to be dethroned. Nothing can dethrone a
King, but such Tyranny as is inconsistent with his Royal office. Nor durst I
infer, that Kings, now adays, may be removed from actual Government, for
one single transgression. It is true, 80 Priests, and the whole Kingdom so
serving King Vzzah, (their motives, I know, were Divine) proves well that the
Subjects may punish the transgression of Gods express law, in the King, in
some cases, even to remove him from the Throne: but as from Gods commanding to
stone the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, we cannot infer, that
Sabbath Breakers are now to be punished with death; yet we may well argue,
Sabbath Breakers may be punished, and Sabbath Breakers are not unpunishable,
and above all Law; So may we argue here: Vzzah, though a King, was punished;
Ergo, Kings are punishable by Subjects.

Quest. 16. Whether or no, as the denial of active obedience in things
unlawful, is not dishonorable to the King as King, he being obliged to
command in the Lord only, so the denial of passive subjection to the King
using unjust violence, be also no dishonouring of the King?] Ans. As the King
is under Gods Law both in commanding, or in exacting active obedience, so is he
under the same regulating Law of God, in punishing or demanding of us, passive
subjection, and as he Denial of passive obedience in things unjust not
dishonorable to the King, more then denial of active obedience in these same
things.
may not command what he will, but what the King of Kings warranteth him to
command, so may he not punish as he will, but by warrant also of the supreme
Judge of all the earth; and therefore it is not dishonorable to the Majesty of
the Ruler, that we deny passive subjection to him, when he punishes beside his
warrant, more then its against his Majesty and honor, that we deny active
obedience, when he commands illegally; else I see not how it is lawful to
fly from a tyrannous King, as Elias, Christ, and other of the witnesses of our
Lord have done; and therefore what Royalists say here is a great untruth,
namely, That in things lawful we must be subject actively, in things
unlawful, passively. For as we are in Loyal Conv^rt, page 10.
things lawful to be subject actively, so there is no duty in point of
conscience, laying on us to be subject passively, because I may lawfully fly,
and so lawfully deny passive subjection to the Kings will, punishing unjustly.

Quest. 17. Whether may the Prince make away any part of his Dominions, as an
Island, or a Kingdom, for the safety of the whole kingdoms he bath: as if
goods be like to sink an over* burdened Ship, the Seamen cast away a part of
the Goods in the Sea, to save the lives of the whole Passengers: and if three
thousand Passengers being in one Ship, and the Ship in a storm like to be
loosed, it would seem that a thousand may be cast overboard, to save the
lives of the whole Passengers?] Ans. The Kingdom being not the Kings proper
Heritage, The King may not make away a part of his own Dominions.
it would seem he cannot make away any part of his Kingdom to save the whole,
without the express consent of that part, though they be made away to save the
whole* In things of this kind, men are not as the commodities of Merchants, nor
is the case alike: as when one thousand of three thousand are to be cast into
the Sea to save all the rest, and that either by common consent, or by Lots, or
some other way; for it is one thing, when destruction is evidently inevitable,
as in the casting so many men into the Sea to save the whole and many
Passengers, and when a King for peace, or for help from another King, makes
away part of his Dominion. The Ferdinan. Vasquius illustr. quest. l. 1. c. 3.
n. 8. juri alieno quisquam n^c in minima part obesse potest. l. id quod
nostru. F. de reg. jur. l. jur. natu. cod. titul. l.
Lord is here to be waited on in his good Providence, and events are to be
committed to him; but far less can it be imaginably lawful for a King, to
make away a part of his Dominions, without their consent, that he may have help
from a foreign Prince to destroy the rest: This were to make merchandise of
the lives of men.

Quest. 18. Whether or no, the convening of the subjects without the Kings
will, be unlawful?] Answ. The convention of men of it self, is an indifferent
thing, and takes its specification from its causes, and manner of convening,
though some convention of the Subjects without the King, be forbidden; yet
Ratio Legis est anima Legis, The reason and intent of the Law, is the soul of
the Law. Convention of the Subjects in a tumultuary way, for a seditious end,
to make war without warrant of Law, is forbidden; but not when Religion, Laws,
Liberties, Invasion of foreign Enemies, necessitateth the Subjects to conveen,
though the King and ordinary Iudicatures, going a corrupt way to pervert
Judgment, shall refuse to consent to their conventions: Upon which ground, no
convention of Tables at Edinburgh, or any other place, An. 1637. 1638. 1639.
can be judged there unlawful; for if these be unlawful, because they are
convention of the Leagues, without express Act of Parliament, then the
convention of the Leagues to quench a house on fire, and the convention of a
Country, to pursue a Wolf entered in the Land, to destroy women and children,
which are warranted by the Law of nature, should be lawless, or against Acts
of Parliament.

Quest. 19. Whether the Subjects be obliged to pay the debts of the King?]
Answ. These debts which the King contracteth as King, in Throno Regali, the
people are to pay; For the Law of nature, and the divine Law does prove, That
to every servant and Minister, wages is due, Romans 13. 5, 6. compared with Verse.
4. and 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 5. 18. If the Prince be taken in a war,
for the defense of the people, it is just that he be redeemed by them: So the
Law says, Tit. F. and C. de negotiis gestis, and F. and C. Manda. But when
Fer. Vasquius illust. quest. l. 1. c. 7. n. 6. Vicesimo tertio apparet, etc. --
says, If the Prince was not doing the business of the public, and did make
war without advice, and consent of the people, then are they not to redeem him.
Now certain it is, when the King raises war, not only against his Oath, and
says, God do so ^o me and mine, if I intend any thing but peace, yet makes
war, and also raises war without consent of the Parliament, and a Parliament
at that time convocated by his own Royal Writ, and not raised, and dissolved
at all, but still sitting formally a Parliament; if he borrow money from his
own Subjects, and from foreign Princ^s, to raise war against his Subjects and
Parliament, then the How subjects are obliged to pay the Kings debts.
people are not obliged to pay his debts, 1. Because they are obliged to the
King only as a King, and not as an enemy: But in so raising war, he cannot be
considered as a King. 2. Though, if the people agree with him, and still
acknowledge him King; it is unpossible, Physice, he can be their King, and they
not pay his debts, yet they sin not, but may, ex decentia, non ex debito
legali, pay his debts, yet are they not obliged by any Law of God, or man to
pay his debts; but though it be true, by all Law the King be obliged to pay his
debt, (except we say, that all the peoples goods, are the Kings, a compendious
way, I confess, to pay all that any voluptuous Heliogabolus shall contract)
yet it may easily be proved, That what his subjects and foreign Princes lent
him to the raising of an unjust war, are not properly debts, but expenses
unjustly given out under the reduplication of formal enemies to the Country,
and so not payable by the Subjects; and this is evident by Law, because one may
give most unjustly moneys to his neighbor, under the notion of loan, which yet
has nothing of the essence of loan and debt, but is mere delapidation, and
cannot properly be debt by Gods Law; for the Law regulateth a man in borrowing
and lending, as in other politic actions: if I, out of desire of revenge,
should lend moneys to a robber, to buy powder and fuel to burn an innocent
City, or to buy armor to kill innocent men, I deny that that is legally debt.
I dispute not, whether A. B. borrowing money formally, that thereby he may buy
a Whore, shall be obliged to repay it to C. D. under the reduplication of debt;
or if the borrower be obliged to pay what the lender has unjustly lent. I dare
not pray to God, That all our Kings debts may be paid; I have scarce faith so
to do.

Quest. 20. Whether Subsidies be due to the King as King?] Answ. Subsidies the
Kingdoms due rather then the Kings.
There is a twofold Subsidy; one Debitum, of deb^, another Charitativum, By
way of charity: a Subsidy of debt, is rather the Kingdoms due for their
necessity, then the Kings due, as a part of his rent; we read of Custom due
to the King as King, and for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5, 6. never of a
Subsidy or taxation to the Kings of Israel and Judah, at any convention of the
States. Augustus Caesar his taxing of all the World, Luke 2. for the
maintenance of Wars, cannot be the proper rent of Augustus, as Emperor, but
the rent of the Roman Empire: and it is but the fact of a man. Charitative
subsidies to the King, of indulgence; because, through bad husbanding of the
Kings rents, he has contracted debts: I judge no better than Royal and
Princely begging. Yet lawful they are, as I owe charity to my brother, so to
my father, so to my Politic father the King. See Ferd. Vasq. illust. quest.
l. 1. c. 8. who desires that Superiors, under the name of Charity, hid not
rapine: and cites Cieer, gravely saying, offic. l. 1. Nulla generi humano and
justitiae major pestis est, quam eorum, qui dum maxim fallunt, id agunt, ut
boni viri esse videantur, etc.

Quest. 21. Whether the Seas, Floods, Road-wayes, Castles, Ports public
Magazine, Militia, Armor, Forts and Strengths be the Kings?] Ans. All these
may be understood to be the Kings, in diverse In how many diverse notions the
Seas, Forts, Castles, Militia, Roadwayes, are the Kings: and how more properly
they are the Kingdoms.
notions. 1. They are the Kings, quoad custodiam, and publicam possessionem, as
a pawn is the man's in whose hand the pawn is laid down. 2. They are the Kings,
quoad jurisdictionem cumulativam, non privativam; The King is to direct, and
Royally to command, that the Castles, Forts, Ports, Strengths, Armor,
Magazine, Militia, be employed for the safety of the Kingdom. All the Ways,
Bridges, the public Road-wayes, are the Kings, in so far as he, as a public
and Royal watchman, is to secure the Subjects from Robbers, and to cognosce of
unknown Murders, by himself and the inferior Judges: yet may not the King
employ any of these against the Kingdom. 3. They are the Kings, as he is King,
quoad officialem, and Regalem, and publicam proprietatem: for he has a Royal
and Princely propriety to all these, as his own, in so far as he uses them
according to Law: And thus they are, 4. The Kings also, quoad usum, in regard
of official use. But they are the Kingdoms, quoad fructum, in regard of the
effect and fruit. 2. They are the Kingdoms, sinaliter, being destinated for
the safety and security of the Kingdom. 3. They are the Kingdoms, quoad
proprietatem propriam, and legalem stricte sumptam; according to the proper and
legal propriety; And are not the Kings proper heritage, as he is a Man: 1.
Because he may not sell these Forts, Strengths, Ports, Magazine, Bridges, etc.
to a stranger, or a Foreign Prince. 2. When the King is dead, and his Heirs
and Royal line interrupted, these all re^aine proper to the Kingdom; yet so,
as the State cannot, as they are Men, make them away, or sell them, more then
the King: for no Public persons, yea the Multitude cannot make away the
security, safety, and that which necessarily conduces to the security of
the Posterity. The Lord build his own Zion, and appoint Salvation for walls
and bulwarks.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Preface, p. 4. l. 5. for who is, r. which is.

PAge 14. Line 9. for he read they. ib. l. 39. for is r. its. p. 24. l. 19.
add not. ib. l. 27. r. Satan. p. 28. l. penult. for Ant. r. for. p. 47. l. 38.
for yet as, r. as yet. p. 52. l. 28. for rest, r. right. p. 91. l. 36. r.
nature. p. 96. l. 33. for is, r. in. p. 97. l. 21. for him, r. her. p. 98. l.
10. for 2. r. 3. ib. l. 13. for 3. r. 4. l. 17. for 4. r. 5. for fol. 92, 93.
r. 108, 109 p. 121. l. 8 for far, r. for. p. 158. l. 31. for or, r. is a. p.
171. l. 22. for re-joyned, r. are joined. p. 179 l. 31. for nor, r. were. p.
186. l. 28. for are, r. or. p. 195. l. 10. for dispute, r. dispense* p. 201 l.
37. for is, r. in. p. 203. l. 13. dele by. p. 224. l. 9 r. in so far as it is.
p. 228. l. 37. for it, r. its. p. 234. l. 8. r. Malderus. p. 235. l. 37. dele
come. p. 271. l. 2. for them, r. then. p. 280 l. 16. for traddit, r. tradidit.
for fol. 313. r. 290. and sequent. p. 325. l. 23. for excito, r. exercito. p.
332. l. 29. for aims, r. owneth. p. 336. l. 33. for work^, r. worker. p. 343
l. 16. dele not. p. 351. l. 35. for first, r. fifth. p. 373. l. penult. for
first* r. fifth. ib. l. ult. for re-man, r. remain. p. 388. l. 10. for
needless, r. needful. p. 392. l. 22. for accidere, r. occidere. p. 405. l.
antepenult. for right, r. rite. p. 406. l. 26. for devide, r. denude. p. 433 l.
23. for from, r. or. p. 438. l. 30. for most lawful, r. fully. p. 440. l. 28.
for Parl. 15. r. Pa^l. 1. p. 444. in, marg. for five, r. suae. p. 451. l. 8.
for neither, r. either. p. 452. l. 6. after England, r. because he had not the
consent of the States: The Parliament^ approbation, etc. ib. l. 36. for being,
r. was.


