PROPOSALS in behalf of the Poor of this NATION. With some brief
Considerations propounded to the Honorable Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, now sitting at Westminster.
BLessed is he that considers the poor and needy Psalm. 41.1. The merciful
shall find mercy, Mat. 5. He shall have judgment without mercy that shows
none, Jam. 2.13. He that oppresses the poor reproacheth his maker; but he that
honors him, has mercy on the poor, Prove. 14.31. The poor you shall have
always with you. Hide not thy self from thine own flesh, Isa. 58.7.

To give flattering Titles is contrary to that of Elihu, Job 32.21. Yet give
honor to whom honor is due Romans 13.7. They that rule well are worthy of double
honor, To be subject to powers, and pray for them in Authority, is the duty of
the people protected by them, 1 Timothy 2.2. Seeing it has pleased him who is
higher then the highest; to change the Governors of this Nation four times in
less then sixty years, 1 Queen Elizabeth, 2. King James, 3. late King Charles.
4. The late Parliament. The 5. now entered. Which by the blessing of him that
rules the Nations, may proceed to the establishing of righteousness, and
judgment (having the eyes of the former to see withal, and their shoulders to
stand upon, may see further) it would be a reproach if they should not: It
appears by their late Declaration, their fight is more like the Eagle, and
soareth higher toward the new Jerusalem (in expressions.) To whom much is
given, much is required. There are two baskets of Figs spoken of by Jeremiah,
Jer. 24.3. one very good, the other very ill (so it is expected from this
Commonwealth) the Harvest is nigh ripe, the Lord of the Vineyard will come, and
will not tarry, to take an account of the talents he has given forth. Let it
not be offensive, he that has but one talent, do with the widow, who had but
one mite, cast it into the treasury (that it may be improved) these are times
of Proposals; let one take place for the poor, the rather because Wealth makes
many friends, but the poor is separated from his neighbor, Prove. 19.4
Oppression of the poor, is a crying sin in holy Writ all along, the Lord will
arise for it, Psalm. 12.5. So is neglect of the poor, it was one of the sins of
Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. to multiply places, were not suitable to those who are wise
to understand these things already; a word is enough to the wise, howsoever it
may be useful to mind them as Peter did, 2 Pet. 1.13.

It was the honor of Israel there was no beggar in it, it seems not many
Harlots, the hire thereof was abominable; the number of Thieves, and Cheaters
did not so abound as in this Nation (with grief it may be said) to the shame of
it; the ground of these would be inquired into. A little view into Salomons
Proverbs will unmaske the fruits of idleness and evil company, Prove. 1.10.
Prove. 2.10. It is suspected these times has a generation of people make much
gain of them (as Harlots in Salomons time did) it is to be feared the Cities
of London and Westminster, with the adjacent parts have justified Jerusalem, as
it did Sodom, the iniquity of it was pride, fullness of bread, idleness,
neglect of the poor; two of the four have relation to the poor. These Cities
are lifted up to heaven with Corazin and Bethsaida in the means of the light of
the Gospel (pray it be not brought down to hell.) The poor of this Nation are
of several sorts. The first such as are Beggars borne, and so live and dye,
never laboring in any calling else. A godly Minister once said (Dr. Siba by
name) of them, married under hedges, children born in Barns and under hedges,
there baptized, so continue to the shame of the Nation, and of the Gospel. The
second sort are Vagabonds, and counterfeit Rogues; some dissembling lame, some
one disease, or soar, some another: Will not be cured if they might; if any
Officer come, they can run, or by a Coach side to beg, what their conversation
is when they meet together, by drunkenness and swearing, has vexed many a
godly soul passing by them (as Lot was) the patience of God is to be admired
that they are not swallowed up with Korah and his company. These are such Job
speaks of, viler then the earth in his account, Job. 30.8. These should be
provided for by employment, it is not sufficient to pass them from place to
place, and correct them as the law requires (this were cruelty) unless
employment be provided for them, if they will not work, then let a rod be for
the fools back. There are a third sort, that labor and get a little money, then
will be drunk, rail, and quarrel one with another, pawn their clothes to vex
one another by law, and when all is gone, burden the place where they live;
Their manner of revenging one upon another, was formerly by resting with
Marshals men, and setting Parators on their backs, for words; these Courts
being down, they rest one another with Bailiffs (a Bill of Middlesex, which is
one of the grievances of the Commonwealth) with writs of the like kind, it is
expected the Regulators of the Law will mend such abuses (if it hinder not
their Mill from grinding.) Another way these unquiet poor punish one another,
they (trouble Constables, disquiet their neighbors that would live quietly) run
to a Justice for a Warrant, there is one shilling gone, bind one another over
to the Sessions, there 2 s. 4 d. a piece, when they have drunk themselves
friends, withdraw their Recognizance, then as much more to be paid, sometimes
committed to prison, and a Sessions business is made of it; and their
Neighbors must hinder their business, to attend to give evidence (then more
Fees to be paid) and all for railing and fighting when drunk. (Never look for
amendment, so long as so many Officers gain by it, dangerous to name them;) how
can these people be but poor, where they are permitted such pleadings, fitter
to be rebuked and sent home to their labor. (But how shall so many Officers
live then?) Is there never a wise man in a Parish to order such people? time
was, when Certificates from honest Neighbors would have duckt them, without
traversing (that is costly) time has been, a whole street of filthy suspicious
houses, has been removed by a Certificate of honest Neighbors; now they
swarm, none dare meddle with them, if they have but money, or a companion that
is crafty, and well acquainted with some unworthy Soliciter of the Law, a whole
Parish shall be vexed from Court to Court by the worst of people, such as are
not worthy to sit with the dogs of the flock, as Job says, Job 30.1. (as
before; these make work, and bring gain to many, little hope of amendment so
long.) If any Neighbor reprove them he is reviled, or rested if he can take
hold of any word, scold and provoke them on purpose sometimes. These are but
the gleanings of the abuses of the skirts of these Cities (which are like the
common-shoare) it is hoped to be better in the Country) one poor man to
oppress another is like a sweeping rain. Jer. 5.4. The sin of the poor and
foolish is a crying sin, as well as the rich. These have grieved many a
righteous soul, whose eyes have seen it, and ears have heard it.

But to come to the oppression of those that bear the burden of the Nation by
their industry, and labor, the blessing of the Almighty being with them, the
laborious Husbandman, the Handicrafts-man, and all kind of honest Tradesmen,
who would be glad to live quietly, but many times disturbed by unquiet
Neighbors, and proling Officers, The corrupt Courtier, with his Purveyor, and
Harbinger, the Prelates with their Courts and Parators, their perjured
Articlers, the Star Chamber, with the like, Court of Request, Marshal Court
with their Crew; York and Ludlow, with their perjured informers and all the
rabble; all these are (by the mercy of God) spewed out of the Land; it were
well some of the old Brood were not remaining still to bring sacks to Mill, to
the Chequer and Sessions, and other Courts, dangerous to be named, these are
the tail of the Beast, and sting the poor laboring man (the name of K. is
down but the Game remains still.)

An Excise-man is added to a Customer (but their honesty is not to be
questioned, their fat and wel-liking, clears them all) if well considered by
that time every Officer has his share, it is doubted little comes to the
Treasury.

There is another secret worm, like the Ivy winds about the body of the Oak,
and feeds with the Viper upon the Bowels of the body politic, secretly many
times consumes a man, his name not known to the party consumed, (if he be) the
Statute bears him out, no remedy to be had (though unjustly undone;) the upper
part of the body he dares not meddle with, they are too great; the lower part
have nothing to feed upon. Will you know their names, they are called amongst
some of their friends, such as bring work to many Officers; but by the common
people Promoters (nay Knaves, what not.) Some will say a Commonwealth cannot be
without them. Must evil men be tolerated, nay, rewarded, by a Statute to take
oaths? right or wrong, his oath must stand. By the mouth of two or three
witnesses all things ought to be confirmed, but reward them, and give them
half the Fine imposed upon any man by a corrupt Statute made in the times of
Tyranny, and Popery. Compare the time they were made in, and the present; then
consider the equity of them (with the Mass Book, much at one) and so
intermingled one with another, it requires a Council at Law to find which are
repealed, which not.

It is hoped they that sit at the Stern will blush for time to come to get any
Treasure by such ways, either to the Chequer, or any other Office: but these
Informers have a way to cosen them, and the people both (so long as the
Statute stands unrepealed) compound with people, borrow money of them
quarterly; no man almost deals in any thing, but comes under some Statute, a
Husbandman if he breed not so many Calves, many ways more; Handicrafts men,
Market people, Shopkeepers, one old worm-eaten Statute will take hold of them,
revived by Jack and his Mate, they go by twoes, the Informer and his
Pettifogger, all are kind to them, as to the Parators, formerly (as they) so
these awe a whole Country, the worst people comply with them: Now and then an
Ignoramus or a man out of honesty, will not feed them, then sub-penae him into
some Office; if fined then half is the Informers (this is to hire men to go
to hell) to do evil that good may come of it. Wherefore are the Clerks of
Markets, Officers in every Corporation, to look to disorders? Must there needs
be an unclean spirit to vex all the rest, and to bring treasure to the coffers.

It were happy if those that have power would consider the customary taking of
Oaths in this Nation, that they may not be so frequently urged upon persons,
incapable by their ignorance or prophannes; can it be supposed he makes scruple
of kissing a book, who takes the name of God in vain ordinarily, and swears to
get money? Do these men ever punish Swearers, Drunkards or any others, where
there is to them no reward? these are to ungodly men snares, experience tells;
Ahab and Jezabell hire sons of Beliall to take Naboths Vineyard, the Jews did
the like out of malice to Christ. An oath is a serious thing, to call God to
witness, and to call a curse upon himself, it ought to be in truth, in
righteousness and judgment, Jer. 4.2. A gift blinds the wise, much more the
foolish and ungodly, when given by a Law, Consider what they are, for the most
part, idle fellows that go up and down, eat and drink of other men's cost, who
feed them for fear, not for love (would be glad they were rid of them;) It were
well the givers of oaths, and takers would consider the flying Role in
Zechariah against Swearers and Stealers, Zech. 5.3.

There is another oppression of poor Handicrafts men, English and strangers,
since the late Parliaments dissolving, hotly followed by Informers, set on by
some Monopolizing Companies, who to keep all Trade in their own hand, cannot
be contented with their Privilege of the City, but in former time got Patents
by friends and money, extending some miles from the City to bring all men of the
same Craft under their jurisdiction, and pay to their Hals, though they dwell
out of their Liberties: some Companies suffer no man to be a Master, though a
better Workman then themselves, but whom they please; under pretense of seeing
no bad Ware made; but never look after any thing but for their Quarteridge to
feast themselves withal. It were considerable to cause their several Pattents
to be brought to the view, that they might not tyrannise over their Brethren by
their unknown laws.

They are very hot in persecuting of many Alien friends, who have lived many
years, married Englishwomen, Children borne here, paid all taxes all the time
of the late War here. Protestants in times of trouble in Germany necessitated
to travel: Now most unnaturally they must be gone, or be their Servants; what
shall their wives and children do? Ingenious men, no exception, but an old
Statute, it is considerable what is said in the 7th. part of Cooks Reports, in
Calvin's case of Aliens, leaf 4. and 7. and what is said in holy Writ touching
oppressing Strangers, Exodus 23.9. Levit. 19.23. Deuteronomy. 24 17. and 28. Matthew. 7.
Do as ye would be done unto: It is supposed the Laws of this Nation, are not
like the Decrees of the Medes and Persians unalterable. Neither so perfect as
that perfect law of liberty James speaks of: But oppressing of strangers is a
crying sin, ranked with Fatherless Children, and Widows, shedding of innocent
blood and Idolatry, Jer. 7.6. would they that are so envious would consider
what they do, charity says they do it ignorantly, not knowing what they do.

The result of all here is propounded, a double object of pity, to the bodies
and to the souls of the (ungodly) poor, a company of poor creatures hastening
to destruction, none say why do thou so? Corrupt men, and Officers encouraged
in their wicked ways by corrupt laws (if compared with present time) all these
together, Idle and ungodly poor, with sons of Belial by Trade perishing, except
the Lord Christ by his grace, take pity upon them. When he was upon earth he
wept to see a company of poor creatures without a guide; Jeremiah wished his
head a fountain of tears to weep for the sins of the people. Isaiah bewailed
himself, David wept because the laws of God were broke, his example of
governing is a good pattern for Rulers now. Psalm. 101.8 I will early destroy
the wicked of the Land. He resolved to sing a song of mercy and judgment, and
to behave himself wisely at his entrance. If any bowels of compassion with
Christ to poor souls, endeavor that of Jude to pluck some poor souls out of
the fire, if by any means. Imitate God, Genesis 18.21. go down, see whether these
things be so; it is meant, condescend to men of low estate, be not high minded.
Romans 12.16. These petty businesses, accounted by some, may bring judgment as
formerly they have. Better is hoped.

Secondly, an object of protection, to rescue the honest laborious man, from
the tyranny of unreasonable men, and unseasonable laws. Pardon the plainness
of language to those in high places. Amos a man of low breeding, was plain
with the Rulers of Damascus and Edom; with the Rulers of Moab and Israel, no
doubt his message was acceptable to the godly as the former Prophets, who were
more elegant, and no doubt as testimonial, against the wicked Rulers. It is
true, the poor Author is no Clerk, but reading so much of the language of
Canaan in a Declaration of late, has presumed to bring a little Goats hair to
the building of this tottering Commonwealth. And shall pray that this great
work in hand may prosper: too great for men, except the great reconciler of
all things in heaven and earth, come in and make peace betwixt brethren by his
spirit. The Lord give to those it concerns the courage of Joshua, the Justice
of Samuel, the uprightness of David, the wisdom of Solomon, the zeal and
tender-heartednes of Josias, and some measure of the love of the Lord Jesus,
who laid down his life for his flock; the work is great, the people full of
muttering, as in Moses time; the Lord Christ supply by his spirit to heap coals
of fire on their head, by overcoming them with good.

J. R.
From my Chamber in London this first of August, 1653.
FINIS.

