An Elegy upon the Death of the thrice Noble General, RICHARD DEAN, Who
departed this life the 2d. of June, 1653.


MOURN drooping eyes with pearly trickling tears,
Flow streams of sadness to the Hemispheres:
Flow like the tumbling waves of the River Nile,
Make the World hear thy Plaint, let not a smile
Appear, let not an eye be seen to sleep
Nor slumber, only let them serve to weep,
For Noble Deane, who lives above the Pole,
Where Angels sing sweet Requiems to his soul.
And now if angry storms and waves be rough,
Thy Haven and thy Harbour's safe enough.
Sleep, sleep awhile until the flowing Tide
Of blessed Eliziums streams that sweetly glide,
Shall palliate thy wounded side; O fate to see!
That last sad stroke of thy hard Destiny.
When winds shall serve thee, then hoyst up top sail,
And bravely pass before a prosperous gale,
That all the Coasters may to thee resort,
And bid thee welcome to thy desired Port;
Thee to attend, from Sea to Shore, to be
Interred, deserving thy magnanimity.
Oh, could we to thy Name erect a Stone,
Should equal the Philosophers; each groan,
Should breath thy praise, brave Deane, and every Verse
Draw doleful sighs over thy fatal Hearse.
No fitter subject, where strong lines should meet,
Then such a noble center; could the feet
Of able Verse but trace the Victories,
They need not fear to fly unto the Skies,
To ask Great Deane who taught him so to dye,
Death yielding him the day and Victory.
Therefore farewell, let Truth this Story say,
He lived and died the glory of that day.
And now thou sleepst, blessed Soul, freed from all cares,
Whilst we do read thy Elegy with tears;
And stand amazed, to see thou did not cease,
By Land nor Sea to purchase to us Peace:
Wherein thy boldness still did interpose
Betwixt us and the raging of our Foes,
In England, Scotland, and likewise at Sea,
Where thou did Hogen Mogens, Haunsmen pay
Home to the full for their ingratefulnesse,
In fighting us, who helped them in distress:
It Is not unknown, they gave this Epithet,
Of Poor distressed States, but now forget
Those favors erst received, which must them style,
Unworthy actors against our English Isle.
But whither run I? O see, observe the Spheres,
How they bewail our Valiant Dean in tears.
But he is dead, from which it is observed,
Honor and Valor from Death is not preserved:
Nor is it seen that greatest Princes lives,
Can saved be by their Prerogatives.
Then need I not the World thus to acquaint,
He died a Soldier, Martyr, and a Saint:
But Mars of late has struck this Cedar tall,
And Neptune mourns for our great Hero's fall;
At which his Billows drive from shore to shore,
To tell proud Mars this loss will cost him more
Of his Amboyna Sons, which now do quake,
When they do hear of the most Valiant Blake.
Weel now return to mind Deans fatal fall,
And sound sad summons to his Funeral;
Caused by a bloody hand, that could not get
The Gem, therefore would spoil the Caskanet:
So fair without, so free from spot within,
That Earth seems here to be exempt from sin:
Where we thy virtues see, and they become
So many Statues sleeping on thy Tomb.
But is it so, that Virtue draws faint breath,
And subject to the dire effects of death;
Then rest thee where thou art, I Will seek no glory,
By the relation of so sad a story.
But tell the World that thou have paid the debt
That Is due to sin, and nere a Libell yet,
Bespattering thy chaste Urne, whose sacrifice
Has stopped the mouths of thy great'st Enemies:
They stand amazed to read and hear of thee,
Whose Name is shrined in this Elegy.
Who might have lived, had not the life that gave
Life to thy life, sent thee now to thy Grave.
Therefore it is sad to write thy Pedigree,
Death discomposing all, displacing thee:
Whose Greatness did consist in being Good,
His Goodness adding Titles to his Blood.
Only unhappy in thy life's last doom,
Who lived too early, for to dye so soon:
Alas! whereto shall men oppressed trust,
When Piety cannot protect the Just?
Yet to add some Memento's to thy life,
Thou have behind thee left a loving Wife:
Who has (since that sad time thou did depart)
O reflow'd her cheeks with tears from a sad heart;
And like a chaste and virtuous Widow, She
Has set apart her self to mourn for thee;
For thee, most Noble Deane, she does lament,
And sad sighs, for thee, to Heaven has sent;
Her sorrows are augmented on this score,
Weeping because that she can weep no more,
For him, whose worth does unto mourning call
CROMWELL, the Great and Noble General:
The glory of our Age, whose Valiant hand
Has wrought deliverance for this sinful Land:
I say, Great, Valiant, Noble, excelling far
Caesar, Pompey, or great Alexander,
Whose splendid Virtues radiantly display
Themselves to all, more clearer then the day.
Thy humble Self-denying does express
Thee far above the height of any Verse,
That can be writ of thee, in Love or Fear:
Go on therefore blessed Soul, and persevere
TO expel from place of profit, and of trust,
Such Vermin, who with Coin their Bags do thrust.
The next in order to Deanes Obsequies,
We do invite to breath sad Elegies:
Whose Lines may far surpass the height of mine,
Whom I must fitly style the Worthies nine.
And first the Valiant Fleetwood I do take,
With Noble Lambert, and Victorious Blake,
And prudent Harrison I Will not omit,
Nor the most Pious Desborough; or yet
The sixth renowned Worthy, Whaley, and
The brave Hero Rich may most justly stand;
With Gallant Monk, who may be ranked with you,
Heroic Lilborne may well be added too:
With many more, whose worth I Will now not name,
But wish them pattern take by Deans Great Fame:
Who had he lived the curled Waves to have tear'd,
Rome had ere long this Noble Hero heard
At her proud Gates, them to account to call,
For the Saints blood they spilt, and Martyrs all;
That they did drink full deep in that sad Cup,
Of which brave Blake will give them for to sup.
When Dean the truly Noble, and the brave
Heroic Soul shall be laid in the Grave,
Where he may rest, and be interred hard by
The worthy Ireton, and old Essex; lie
Near unto Popham: and make room,
For Pious Sparrow in your five-fold Tomb:
And thence let your own Echoes multiply
Blessed Hymas, and Muses write continually;
Whilst you do rest in your black Obsequies,
With greater Glory set, then others rise.
R Remorselesse Death! What have thou done? Excelled
I In conquering him, who valiantly had erst
C Curbd the proud curled Waves, and often quelled
H High Hogens ins'lence, their Ships and men dispersed.
A All the brave acts thou did on Sea or Shore,
R Report thee famous, and declare thee more
D Direly lamented, with tears running ore.
D Dean's dead, why do I say he is dead? He lives
E Eternally; and has received that Crown
A Attended his great Conquests, wher' he receives
N New joys in Heaven, repleated with renown.
By J: R: Merchant.
LONDON, Printed by Tho: Rycroft, and are to be sold by Tho: Ienner, at the
Royal Exchange, 1653*


