Jacobs Ladder, OR THE Protectorship of SION, LAID ON The Shoulders of the
Almighty; In a Description of the sufficiency of Providence, Suitable in these
times of Tentation. WITH JACOBS WRESTLING.

By Francis Raworth of Shoreditch.

Watchman what of the night? the Watchman said, the morning comes, and also
the night: if ye will enquire, inquire ye: return, come,

Isa. 21.11, 12. (...).

T^ismeg. l. de Provid. London Printed by R. I. for L. Chapman, and are to be
sold at his shop at the Crown in Popes head-Alley, 1655.

To the Professors of the glorious Gospel.
My Friends,
IF ever there were an hour of tentation, it is surely at this day, when so few
follow Christ, when so many stand still, and most go backward: When those that
once would not have been hired to neglect a duty, now think it their duty not
to pray at all; When those that have tasted much sweetness in Gospel Truths,
should now cry out (as those ungrateful Israelites of old) what, have we
nothing but this Manna? that have suffered much reproach for Christ, should at
present in their lives, be a reproach to Christ; that formerly avoided the
appearance of evil, and now condemn those as ignorant of their liberty, who are
afraid of profaneness; that those that seemed to mortify the flesh should now
after all their Profession and visible repentance, even deny the resurrection
of the flesh. Our Nazarites were purer than the Snow, whiter than Milk in their
Profession, for their heavenly zeal more ruddy than Rubies; and as for their
Conversations they were not only Saphires, but polished Saphires, the very
carved workmanship (to us) of the Spirit, shining and sparkling in every angle
and corner of their lives, with Wisdom, Patience, Holiness, and Sincerity. But
O Lord! How is their visage blacker than a coal? How do those that of old were
brought up in Scarlet, and did wear Christ (like the Courtiers of Heaven) in
their conversations, embrace the stinking Dunghills of the Pleasures and
Profits of this world? thy Professors that were even marked out for thy Glory
among men, and concerning whom, not long since it was familiarly said, There
goes a Saint, there walks an Heir of salvation, now are not known in the
streets, that there is little difference between a Professor and an Apostate,
between a Professor and a profane man nay, between a Professor and a
persecutor. It is in this age too remarkable, that some Professors of the
Gospel, are the great if not the greatest hindrances of the profession of the
Gospel.

How plainly does the Providence of God comment on that Text, The first shall
be last, and the last shall be first? What loud alarms by the falls of those
that once seemed to stand, does God make in your ears that stand, to take heed
lest you fall? In the seventh of Matthew, the foolish build as well as the
wise, the difference lay not in their Buildings, but in their Foundations, the
one built on the Sands, the other on the Rock: The house of the foolish builder
might possibly glister as gloriously when the Sun shone, as the house of the
wise builder, and have as many Stories, and as great Window-lights; but all
that glisters is not gold, though all that is gold does glister. It is not he
that professes, but he that possesses Christ is happy; not he that is a
gided, but he that is a golden Christian, in this brazen and iron age. The lord
is a coming, not so much with a pair of Scales to weigh, as with a Touchstone
to try the truth and sincerity of your Graces. Jerusalem is a lighting with
candles; Providence will light up candles in France, in Holland, in Denmark,
and though now it seem midnight with us, yet ere many glasses of Providence are
run out, I am persuaded it will be Candlemas day in England. Now most care, not
to be living Saints, so they may but be imbalmed with a name to live, and
covered over (as a dead corpse) with Roses, and Lillies, and Flowers of a
Profession; care not to have Religion at their fingers ends (ad unguem) to be
indeed Christians, or Christians indeed, so they may but have Religion at their
tongues end, and talk of the Spirit, the Gospel, the new Jerusalem. But how
shortly will many that want the Power and Life, wish they had not the Form and
vizard of Grace; and cease to appear to be what they really are not; the paint
of Profession will neither endure the water or the Sun. How monstrous is it,
that our Tongues should be bigger than our hands?

For these twelve years our Lord Jesus has been burying the Designs of his
more public Adversaries under ground, now God is coming to Jerusalem to purge
his gold, to prune his Vine. Professors, look within you, and look about you;
Ah Lord! what blushing will there ere long be in England? when thou will wash
off the paint of our profession, and that thy followers shall wear their hearts
in their faces? How much better will a dram of grace be, than a talent of
gifts? when as the greater our lights and Links of Knowledge are, the more
unawares we discover our darkness. If we cannot endure the Spirit going up and
down with a Candle and Lanthorn to search our hearts, how can we abide the day
of Christ's coming, and stand when that Sun of Righteousness shall appear, for
he is like Refiners fire, and like Fullers soape? Justice, Humility,
Mortification, Repentance, though now they be but poor and low things with man,
yet when the Judge shall take the Bench more visibly, how high will they be
with God? Sincerity, though it be a silent Grace at this time, and dwells in
obscurity, ere long I hope will carry the day, and bear away the bell. Though
we sin at a greater rate, yet we cannot sin at so cheap a rate as our
Forefathers; it were better that God did forthwith lay down his Basket, and
take up his Ax, than that we should be further unfruitful; better that God
should remove his Candlestick (which he can do without breaking it) and say to
us sinners, if you will play, play in the dark; if you will break Vows and
Covenants, break them in the dark, etc. than suffer us to sin against
Gospel Light. For his silence increases our guilt. The Almighty is more
displeased with sin than ever, his hand is as just to revenge, and his eyes are
(q d.) wider to epsy it.

There are some that having assurance that Christ reigns in their Consciences,
desire the enlargement of his Kingdom, long to see the Crown of Glory shine on
his head, and his Subjects to multiply in the world: And notwithstanding the
many false Pretenders to that Noble Interest, yet there are some Followers of
the Lamb indeed, that follow him not for his Fleece but for his blood, who
having past the work of Regeneration humbly, and patiently desire to do the
work of their Generation, and probably the reckoning of Sion is well nigh at an
end, and the Glass of Antichrist almost run, and certainly the King of Sion
shall be as public in his glory, as ever he was in his shame; his Deriders
little considering, that while they willingly add to his shame, they really,
though unwilling, add to his glory, for as he was not crucified in a corner,
but at Jerusalem, the eye and center of the world, so he shall descend from
Heaven in Majesty with shouts, riding on the Clouds, as in his Chariot,
attended by millions of Angels, and Saints, his royal Favorites, all eyes
beholding of him, and every knee bowing to him, Jude 14, 15.

Woe be to the great ones of this world then, when Pilat that sat on the Bench,
shall stand at the Bar; and our Lord Jesus that once stood at the Bar shall sit
on the Bench (when we shall see not Persons but Causes heard) the Judges being
judged, and the judged being Judges; when Emperors and Kings shall be brought
not in Chains of Gold about their necks, but in Fetters of Iron about their
heels; When the Peers, and Powers, and Potentates of the World shall hold down
their heads, and hold up their hands, and cry guilty; When most of all the
Mighty, and all the almost All mighty of the Earth that have disrobed Christ of
his Title, and robbed him of his honor, shall be led up and down this Court,
(q.d.) as Tamberlain led Bajaret in an iron Cage, (through Asia) to be gazed
on, and howted at by all the Saints, Psalm. 149.6 7, 8 9. 1 Cor. ^.2.) as the
Prisoners of the Law, and Prizes of Justice; what then will become of all those
Politicians that make Covenants in Conscience, and break Covenants out of
necessity? That like children stand on the earth with their heads, and boldly
shake their heels toward Heaven? That set up the Kingdom of Christ no faster
than they can rear their own Kingdoms? of all those that had rather themselves
should reign in a corner, than that our Lord and Master should rule in the
whole World? Never thinking, how those Crowns that now sit light on their
Heads, will ere long lie heavy on their Consciences. For God though he suspends
the execution, yet he has not altered the method of his Justice on such
offenders. It is a maxim of the Law, Right sometimes sleeps, but it never dies.
The reconciling Sion and Babylon, Pride, Oppression, the intolerable
tolleration of all kinds of Religions, Bribery and Intemperancy, are now acted
on another Stage, by other persons, but they are the same sins, (aliena scena
eadem fabula) if that Headship that flattering Prelates in former ages took
from Jesus Christ, be yet taken from Christ, and given to men in the Nations,
if Christ's Crown be pulled off his head, no matter whose head it warm in the
world, Mal. 3.15. Mal. 4.1. And as for this Nation in special, my prayers to
the Lord are, that Holiness may not only have a tolleration but an Authority
amongst us, against Licenciousness both of Judgment and Conversation, that the
Rulers of England may not say, The time is not come that the Lords house should
be built, but rather hear God say, is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your
sciled houses, and this house lie waste? Hag. 1. That they would expeditiously
do the work of this age. Because, to every purpose there is a time and
judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him, Eccles. 8. That our
Officers may not only be Peace, but that our Exactors Righteousness, that we
may be made an eternal excellency, and the joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.
That saying in your hearts, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be our strength
in the Lord of Hosts; they may be like an Hearth of fire among the wood, and
like a Torch of fire in a sheaf, devouring Sions enemies round about on the
right hand, and on the left. Zech. 12.

For shame therefore let Virgins arise, and either get oil, or cast away their
Lamps. Security makes you incapable both of seeing your reward, or doing your
work.

First, Think not because you can properly be but once regenerated, that you
need but once to repent. Converted David (q d.) must repent of his Adultery
before he be saved; Repentance is not only as life to the dead, but as salve
to the wounded sinner; Repentance is as the Vowels in the Alphabet, which we
have not only need of to spell with while we are Babes, but to read with all
when we are men in Christ, Mortification and Humility are not accidents or
things by the by, but of the very substance, the very Materials and Pillars of
the New Jerusalem. The Gospel it self, I suspect will, ere long, be but an old
Almanac to them, to whom Repentance and confessing of, and mourning over sin
is now (upon what glorious pretenses soever) out of date.

Secondly, Plead for Opinions as Opinions, and for Graces as for Graces. I fear
those that plead for disputable Opinions, as infallible Truths, will ere long
hold vital and indisputable Truths, as conformity to the Gospel, sincere Faith
in, and repentance toward Christ, but as failable and fallible Opinions; This
is intolerable folly, to see men slaves to Opinions and Masters over Graces,
if the Lord extinguish not this fond zeal, the carnal world hence forward will
take advantage to think that Religion lies only in thinking and conceiving,
and in the next age conclude they are not to seek Religion in their Bibles, but
in the brains of men. O Lord! How many are true to false Principles, and false
to true Principles; and will rather die Martyrs for Error, than bow as Servants
to Truth. These are some of them that have been over wise (in their own eyes)
and yet as the wiseman speaks have not known the way to the City, that call
this or that way, Christ, and not Christ, the way; that set up an Image in
their own Opinions, and censure all the world as Idolaters that will not do
homage to it, proclaiming subjection with Lutes and Cymbals of peace, and
though on the first entertainment of such Opinions men have had a calmness in
their Consciences, yet afterward have found themselves burning in a Furnace of
discontents and doubts, as then remembering that neither this or that Opinion
availed any thing to peace in Christ, but a new creature.

Thirdly, While you cry out against the old Superstition, beware of being
tainted with the new disease of this age, not the plague of the guts, but of
the heart; not the Rickets in the head, but the pride of life, alias
Hypocrisy, alias apparent Profaneness. Fly as far from Licentiousness as you
do from the formality of Rome. Woe be to the profession of Religion if your
Profession should stand or fall to the verdict of the world. Oh! let not those
whom you must one day judge, justly judge you now. Some possibly may say, The
world are dogs, and their mouths must be stopped; Christ is a mystery, our
principles are above their cognizance, they are not competent Judges of our
conversations. I answer, We must then endeavor to silence them as much in our
lives, as they condemn us with their lips; otherwise pretense of assurance and
participation of the Divine creature will make them abhor profession as a mere
design, and say, Lo, there is so much difference between that Religion that is
in our Bibles, and that which is in your Conversations, that we profess either
you are not Evangelical, or this is not Gospel. Take heed of putting out the
eyes of Conscience, and then to make apology for your blindness; Conscience is
Gods Vicegerent, but it is not our Lawgiver; Conscience is out guide, but the
Word is our way, and there is no excuse in following our Guide out of our way,

Fourthly, Call not that poison which is your Milk, and strike not those
Breasts which once you stroaked; say not the preaching down of sin is the
preaching up of the Law. Trample not those Ambassadors under your feet, who
have rejoiced to carry your souls in their arms to Christ; have not low
thoughts of them, that have low thoughts of themselves and high thoughts of
Christ; that care not though they be accounted nothing (who yet are something
in your eyes) that Christ, who is little esteemed in the world, may be All in
All. But if the Bridemen be despised, oh that the Bridegroom might the more be
honored: Oh that that love which is denied to the Servants, might abundantly be
given to their Master. I confess it were better for some to have an hundred a
year to be silent, they so instead of preaching Christ crucified, crucify
Christ in preaching, they so wound and kill Religion in the Pulpit where they
should give it life. While you endeavor their downfall, forget not to pray for
their conversion, Paul was a Saul. Let not therefore your virtue be only in
speaking against the Vices of others. It is an easy matter to trample on those
that are on the ground already.

Fifthly, Take heed of the Corinthian disease, I am for Paul, no, I am for
Apollo, no, I am for Christ, as if we might not love Christ, and Paul, and
Apollo too; In the primitive times, they (as in the Acts) kept together in
singleness of heart, and there was no controversy at all amongst them, one
copy adds; but oh that those now that have but one Head had but one heart. It
is sad to consider, how that the nigher any come to an agreement in matters of
Religion, and yet differ in some things, that the greater should be their
difference; as there is a greater difference between the Protestant, and
Papist, than between the Protestant and the Jew; was it not so in Germany, is
it not so in England, between those that are called Independents and
Presbyterians? Oh that we did consider, that though Paul and Peter be in
Heaven, yet that there are neither Paulians nor Petrians in Heaven, that Christ
is not a Calvenist in the Calvinists, or a Lutheran in the Lutherans, but in
those that are Christians amongst both, All in All. God must scourge this folly
from us; his children are a wrangling, and we may expect that either he should
separate, or correct us. O Lord! if man's Apostate were thy Apostate, and man's
Heretic thy Heretic, and man's Reprobate, always thy Reprobate, Election to
Eternal life would prove but a Fable, and all the world would be damned. We are
so censorious of others, often, and that but in things disputable, possibly, in
many things indifferent, as if Heaven and Hell did hang at our Girdles, as if
those were in a damnable estate whom our passions condemn, and those only
saved indeed, that have our (good) opinion or word. The yoke of Christ which he
said was easy, may it justly be made heavier by the Governors of the Church,
nay, by private partial Christians in after ages? The Apostles profess, They
revealed to the Church the whole Counsel of God, keeping back nothing needful
for our Salvation; what tyranny is it then to impose any new, certainly
doubtful matters on the Faith of Christians, (especially as some Popelings
daily do) under that Cananding form. He that believes not shall be damned. In
the Apostles time, or a little after (as is judged) There were twelve Articles
of the Creed, but now we have more Creeds than they had Articles; so many men
so many minds, nay, so many opinions (which yet are far from the life of
Christ) so many Faiths, and though our Lord Jesus says, he that believes in
him shall be saved, we now cannot be saved but by believing more, and as the
world continues, so we increase in our Belief, and upon this giddy account poor
ignorant, destracted sinners know not when they shall believe enough to
salvation. But when our Redeemer shall appear, he will not prefer one Opinion
and reject another, so much as prefer all the upright, and reject all the
Hypocrites, he being not the Lord of Opinions but of Souls, not one sheep that
has his mark shall be left out of his Fold, nor one Child that bears his image
shall either be kept or thrust out of his Family; now, they are Faith and Love,
Singleness and sincerity of heart.

Sixthly, Remember that the Ordinances of Christ are not his Grave, wherein he
lies, but the Throne whereon he sits as King of his Church. That you shall
never be above Ordinances until you are above tentations; and that they lose
not their Authority, because sometimes we miss their Influence; and that they
are appointed not only to bring men into, but also to bring men up in Christ.
The Bible is not the Word of God, because it is imprinted in the hearts of men,
but because it was written by the inspiration and finger of God. These are
Breasts though sometimes we cannot suck, or milk out consolation from them; for
otherwise, every time we have new affections, there should be a new Gospel,
and in the end there should be as many distinct Bibles, as there are new
Experiences in the world. It is true, they are the Conduit-Pipes, and we have
no comfort from them unless Christ convey his blood through them: Yet shall
they be nothing (in respect of Gods Authority) because they (quoad hic and
nunc) do nothing upon us? The Ordinances are dead creatures only to those that
are dead in their Consciences, and are not alive in Christ. The Ordinances
cannot work without the Spirit, and the Spirit (ordinarily) will not work
without the Ordinances. Wherefore Christians prefer not the Letter before the
Spirit, neither oppose the Spirit to the Letter (as the manner of some is) lest
in the end you prove neither for the Letter nor the Spirit, but the Flesh. As
ever you would be comforted by, take heed of scoffing at the Spirit. Quench not
the Spirit in your selves, grieve it not in others.

Seventhly, Let us take heed of Lukewarmness; Let us not spend that time in
examining the Lamps of others, while we neglect to get oil into our own
Vessels. Christians, look about you! you live in an infectious Air, therefore
take cordials; where ever he has a poison, have you an Antidote; take down the
antidote of Humility, against the poison of Pride; of Sincerity, against
Hypocrisy; of Zeal, against Apostasy. It is easier to keep sin out of the
conscience, than to cast it out when in. The Devil is a fiery Serpent, and if
he can but get in his head, he will get in his whole body, and if he do not,
yet the sting is in his head. How many virgin Professors have lost their
spiritual chastity in an hour, that they have been procuring many years? and
that dear peace of Conscience in a moment, that they have not embraced again
till eternity? But alas! while we should give cordials to others, we faint our
selves; we should awaken others, and we sleep our selves; we should uphold
others, and we fall our selves; we should help to revive others, and we are
dead. Many that have time to reprove and advise others, have not hearts, many
that have hearts, have not time, their own hearts are so out of frame and tune.
Like dying men we take hold of one another, and we love to perish in company.
But Christians,

Arise, and prepare for the coming of your Master, for as it is certain, so it
will be sudden. If it were the last hour in Paul's time, sure now it is the last
minute of that last hour. Oh Lord! never was the Judge nigher to come* and
never less preparation for his coming. Christians, have we not Closets to mourn
in, or rather do not we want hearts to mourn with all? Has Christ cast his
Cloak of love over you* and said, live, and will you not pity those that yet
lie as it were dead in their blood? if you have any Knowledge, advise; any
Faith, pray; any Zeal, endeavor; any Wisdom, soberly wait; for the coming of
the Lord draws nigh. How can Christ wipe tears from our eyes, if we never wept
for his absence? or come to answer our prayers, if we never pray for his
coming. Awake, awake, the night is far spent; arise, the Day star is risen in
the world, we have slept too long already; Endeavor that when the Father comes,
he may not find you, like Prodigals, out of his house; that when the Captain of
your Salvation comes, he may not find you in the Trenches of the Devil, or of
the World, a Lying, a Swearing, a beating your fellow Brethren, for even to
these monstrous sins our natures are inclineable. Pray, Pray, That when the
Judge comes, who is even at the door, that you may not have your Accounts to be
cast up, when they are to be given up; Judge your selves that you may not be
judged. The noise and news of the Bridegrooms approach is at hand; Awake,
arise, go ye out to meet him. If these following Discourses may any way
advantage you in your spiritual Watch against the Devil, they are yours, read
them in love, apply them to experience, let them not swim in your heads, but
sink into your hearts; And in your prayers to the Throne of Grace, let him have
a room, who subscribes himself in our Lord Jesus,

A Friend to Sion, FRA. RAWORTH.

LEt Angels now descend from thee
O Lord! and with this Ladder flee
Abroad, and in their glorious arms
Guard and safeguard it from all harms,
That Jacobs Sleep and Dream may those awake
Who without Jacobs Dream, his Sleep yet take.
JACOBS LADDER OR The Protectorship of SYON.
GENESIS 28.12 And Jacob dreamed, and behold a Ladder set upon the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven, and behold the angels of God ascending, and
descending on it, and behold the Lord stood above it.


THere is a threefold sense of this Vision, literal, allegorical and
providentiall.

First literal The History of Jacob consists of three general parts,

First, Jacobs going to Padan Aran.

Secondly, his stay there,

Thirdly, his return from thence.

In his going to Padan Aran, the motives which induced him to go thither are
recorded; which were, to take a wife of his own kindred, and that he might
withdraw himself from the fury of his enraged brother.

Secondly, the accidents that fell out by the providence of God in his journey,
and these were, the Vision of the ladder, his consecration of Bethel, and his
vow, all contained in this chapter; my purpose is only to paraphrase and apply
the Vision of Jacobs Ladder. The Lord open this Vision to our eyes to see it,
and open our eyes to see it.

Four things might perplex Jacob in this journey, That he should leave his
Country, that he should forsake his friends, that he might fall into poverty,
lastly, solitariness and want of company; wherefore the Lord seasonably
appears to Jacob in this Vision; though thou leavest thy country, yet be
content, I will not leave thee, and as for thy friends, be not troubled, I am
thy friend, can you mend your self Jacob? and for shame fear not poverty, if
the word of thy God may be taken, east and west shall be at thy command. Let
Jacob say, certainly I shall never see God want, and wherefore should I be
dismayed, seeing the Lord says, I will never see Jacob want; and let not Jacob
fear to be alone, for Angels shall travel with him, and that which is
security enough, Jacob shall have in company not only the Angels of God, but
the God of Angels. The Ladder is the journey of Jacob, the Angels ascending
and descending, his royal attendants, going to and returning with him from
Padan Aran; the Lord stands on the top of the Ladder as guiding and governing
all. Jacob I am persuaded never had a sweeter nights lodging than at this time,
when the stones were his pillow, and the Heavens his canopy, when Providence
made his bed, and Angels rockt the cradle. How pleasant is it to consider!
Angels guard Jacob, God guards the Angels, and God guards Jacob with Angels;
what ground then has Jacob to fear either men or Devils to disturb him, when
he has a guard of God and of his Angels?

Secondly an Allegorical sense; and so Christ is this Ladder (John I. ult.) by
his Divine nature he reached to Heaven, by his humane to the earth, his
incarnation being a commerce between Divinity and humanity; the steps of this
Ladder are either the genealogy of Christ, or the successive works of his
redemption. John the tenth, He that climbs up, or thinks to climb up, any
other way to heaven than by this Ladder, is a thief; for John the 14. he is
the only way for satisfaction, for justification, for sanctification, the only
way from God to man, and from Man to God; every poor sinner has liberty to
ascend these stairs, Toll scalas Aetii, and tu solus Coelum introibis.
and the righteous Pharisee shall never enter the star chamber of heaven at a
backdore.

Every man by nature sees the necessity of some Ladder or other to climb up to
salvation by; the Mahumetan makes the Alcoran his Ladder; the Jew makes the
Temple of the Lord his Ladder; the carnal Protestant makes his char^ty his
Ladder, and the Papist has his Ladder also; there is a Red Ladder by the blood
of Christ, but they will have a White Ladder by Marys obedience; this they
account the easier way; me thinks these men mistake Jacobs Ladder, yet
something like it is, for they are in a dream as Jacob was; these are all
rotten Ladders, and the climbers have rotten hearts,

Thirdly, A Providentiall sense, and thus I shall handle this Vision. The
Ladder signifies the Divine Providence, and in this Ladder, we have many
things observable.

First, The variety of Providence in the many steps. The Providence of God has
indeed but one end, yet it has diverse ways to that one end; every living
creature has four faces and four wings, to signify the several appearances and
swift execution of Providence. Eze. 1.6. It is a difficult thing to take the
picture of Providence at this time in the world, it makes and has so many
faces, let our eyes be never so exact in observing, and our hands ready in
describing its ways. The locks of the Spouse in the Canticles are black and
curled, black for their obscurity, and curled for their various intricacy.
There are not so many several countenances of men, as there are dispensations
of God, and its as rare a thing to find dispensations, as men, of the same
complexion.

In heaven God will appear to the Saints in one glorious form, but now, as it
was said of an Emperor, that every day he put on a new suit, so it is the Lords
honor to apparel himself in changeable robes; the imbroidery of Providence is
made up of diverse colors; Sion is not allwaies in one condition, nor the soul
allwaies in one posture; sometimes Christ frowns, and sometimes he smiles,
sometimes he casts down, sometimes he lifts up, sometimes the Church of
God is in the wilderness, sometimes in Canaan, sometimes on the raging sea,
sometimes in her harbor. The Lord keeps his people from infection by leading
them into diverse aires; black and bloody Providence set off the wisdom and
faithfulness of our God the better. Standing waters corrupt and breed noisome
creatures, but running waters are pure and preservative. Every new day brings
with it a new tentation, and we shall never be experienced Soldiers till we
are tried at all sorts of weapons. Credend a plura sunt de Deo quam scienda.
We must not look on the scattered lines of Providence, but tarry till God has
made a conclusion; never say Providence scribles, til you have seen the whole
copy. Princes letters we say, ought to be read thrice; Let us consider the
ways of God, and we shall never censure them.

Secondly, In this Ladder we have the seeming uncertainty of Providence; The
Ladder is partly above the Clouds, and partly visible in the Air; as the
Spirit, Joh. 3. blows where it lists, so God in his works, works how he
lists. It is observable, that usually of old, when God appeared in the
Tabernacle, a Cloud ushered in his presence. All the world is in the light to
God, but God is in the dark to all the world. Sometimes the Lord walks so
plainly in his works, that he that runs may read; that the dim-sighted'st
Christian may say, this is the Lords walk, and this is the Lords work; at other
times, he wraps himself in a cloud, Si vides, ubi fides
and overcasteth Syon with darkness, that the poor children of God cannot tell
where to find their Father, that they can but guess at his footsteps, knowing
not which way to march, for their Leader has hid himself.

Pompey the Great said, when the scales weighed down on Caesar's side, that
there was a mist on the eyes of Providence; but indeed, the Sun shone clearly,
and the mist was on his eye that he could not see it. I confess, in this age it
is easier to know what particular things in Providence God will pull down, than
what he will set up. We often imagine there is a disorder in Gods works, when,
if we mind it, the disorder is in our imagination; We know not how to believe,
and we fancy the Lord to be at a stand, as not knowing what to do: But we must
take heed of charging the Lord to be out of his way when only he is out of our
sight.

Thirdly, In this Ladder we have the seeming contradictions of Providence; The
Angels ascend and descend the Ladder, One Providence seems to go one way, and
another Providence seems to go another way. Sometime the Cloud in the
wilderness seemed to carry Israel immediately to Canaan; now for Canaan might
Moses and Aaron say; and on a sudden the Lord wheels about, and Israel turns
faces toward the Red Sea, as if he intended they should never see Canaan more.

How plainly has the Lord led England for some years toward a Reformation? The
Saints have encouragingly said one to another, Certainly we are within two or
three years journey of the New Jerusalem; Have at the scarlet Whore of Babylon;
Now for the building of ruinate Sion; But the Lord has seemed to cry, face
about, and follow me yet longer in the wilderness, and some of the Saints
conclude, we are never like to go forward, we shall return to our Leeks and
Onyons; The conversion of souls visibly goes backward and not forward. About
twelve years ago hundreds came out of the Devils Kingdom, into the Kingdom of
the Gospel, but now many fly from the colors of the Gospel visibly, Miremur
non rimemur Providentiae reconditam vi^.
and run into the Devils quarters again. The Lord seems to seal up the hardness
of men's hearts, and to say to the womb of Grace, Give forth no more, let no
more sinners be changed from darkness to light in England.

Well might Solomon, Prove. 30.19. compare the Church to a ship in the midst of
the Sea; which as the Prophet speaks, Now even mounts up to the Heavens, and
anon descends, as it were, to Hell. God sees our works in our wills, but we
cannot many times spell out the Lords Will by his Works; who can trace the Lord
in his travel, or find out the work or walk of the Almighty in the world? The
Texts of Providence are as difficult as the Texts of the Scriptures; there are
as high contests about Providence, as about Predestination, and it is as hard
to reconcile the Works of God, as to reconcile his Word, though there is a real
concordance and harmony in both.

Be not over righteous, says the Preacher, Eccles. 7.16. Can a man be too
righteous? rather, we think, he should have said, be not too profane; but as
one Diamond cuts another, so one Scripture opens another, ver. 15. I have seen
a just man, as just as Abel, perish in his righteousness, and to lose his life
because he would keep his conscience; and on the contrary, I have seen a wicked
man, as wicked as Cain, to prolong his life, and to have the world at command:
but yet carp not at providence, let the Lord be down before you think to lift
him up; enter not into the Chair to offer knowledge to God about his Works.

There is no reason that the Lord should give man a reason of all his ways; he
often wills a change, but never changes his will. God may retreat in his
Providence, as to us, and undo all he has been doing in England these fifteen
years, and make Sion put on her mourning apparel, and yet not be either
unconstant or unfaithful; though I hope better things.

For it is observeable, that Providence in the main is never Excentrical, and
in the main is never Retrograde, The Lord often looks backward, but never goes
backward. He led Israel forty years about in the wilderness, and yet never
carried them back to Egypt. Abraham is promised a Son, and a numerous
offspring; but as if Providence had forgot it self (to us) Abraham is
commanded to offer up Isaac; and whereas he might have objected, Lord, thou
art wont to call for Oxen to be sacrificed, and do thou require me to
sacrifice my son? Thy word says, I must not kill, Certum est quia impossible
est.
and thy mouth says, I must kill: and Lord, thou have promised to multiply my
seed, and now thou call for my Isaac? How can the branches grow if the
stock be cut down? and yet Abraham obeyed, winking, and putting his hand into
the Lords hand, following him, though Providence, as it were, crossed the
Promise. We now have, as the Prophet speaks, a wheel in a wheel: So I trust,
ere God has done with England, we shall have, as the Rabbi speaks, a miracle
in a miracle.

Fourthly, In this Ladder, we have The independency of Providence. The Ladder,
we see, is only reared and supported by God; it is not a crooked Ladder, but
stands upright toward Heaven. It Leans not on the mountains of men, nor Palaces
of Kings. Many quarrel and find fault with the Ladder of Providence, but this
Ladder shall never fall down before man, or to man. The Prophet undertakes the
challenge, Isa. 40.15. Who has been the Counselor of God, or has taught the
Almighty? The wise King of Aragon was so foolish, as to think he could have
made the Creation better if he had been of Gods Counsel; and some men think
there are Erratae's in the volume of Providence, by their murmurings, and would
fain be a correcting the Lords Copy, and amending the Lines of his Government
in the world; methinks false-hearted man is like flattering Absalom who would
insinuate to the people neglects in his Fathers Government; There is no man
deputed of the King to do Justice, and that he was able to guide Israel in a
better order.

But John the 15. The Church is compared to a Vine, and God will have it lean
on himself, and not to be supported by the poles and policy of men. It is
observed that the weakest women have often the strongest children, and that the
Lord hangs the heaviest weights on the smallest wyars. The stone in Daniel is
cut out of the mountains without hands: The Gospel and Sion are neither framed
nor forged by man, both are the handy-works of God; as there was no concurrence
of man's power to the generation of Christ personal; so there is no concurrence
of the wisdom of man, to the generation of Christ mystical. Cicero fell in with
Caesar when Pompey was defeated; and it is no dishonor for man, routed in his
way, to fall down to God. Man must lean on God, but God will never lean on man;
man must go to God, God will never come to man. If the mountain will not come
to Mahumet, Mahumet will go to the Mountain, said that bold Impostor, when he
could not work a miracle, which he promised to his followers. Oecolampadius had
a good cause, as they said, but he wanted Soldiers to bear it up; but let Sion
remember that her cause is not so good, but the strength of her Protector is as
great to maintain it: Quod est causa causae, est causa causati.
There is nothing that God does by the creature, but he can do without the
creature; rather than Sion shall fall, the God of Sion will not stand on
miracles.

Fifthly, In this Ladder we have the extent of Providence. The Ladder is set
upon the earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven, Providence extends,

1 To all senseless and irrational creatures, both in their Preservation and
Government. First, Virtus est maxima pertingere quam remotissimae.
In their Preservation. The Epicures confine God to the Palace of Heaven, as if
it were below his Majesty to take notice of the lower world; The Stoics limit
him to the middle Region: But the Lord deals not like a Carpenter or Artizan,
who have done all their work when a house is built, and a Clock put together.
There is as much need of a Divine wisdom to preserve, as there was of a Divine
power to make the world. There is a necessity not only of a privative influx
from God, that is, not only that he does not destroy his creatures, but of a
positive influence to maintain the creatures in being, Job 6.9. If the Lord
take away his hand, Job would fall; not only to the ground, but also to his
first principles of nothing.

Mithridates a General knew all the names of all the Soldiers in his Army; The
Heavens are the Lords Hosts, and they in all their rancks and orbs are known
and kept by the Lord of Hosts. Cincinnatus his honor was, at the same time to
hold the Plow, and the Helm of State. The Lord made as well the least worm on
earth, as the most glorious Angel in Heaven, Deus nec laborat in maximis, nec
fastidit in minimis.
and it costeth the Lord as many words to make a worm, as to make an Angel, for
all was done with a word. It is no disgrace for the Lord to walk up and down by
his Providence, and overlook all his creatures; the baseness of any creature,
no more defiles God, than a dunghill vapor infects the Sun beams. The lesser a
clock is, as if it can lie under the wings of a Fly, the greater is the skill
of the Clock-maker. The Smith was commended for beating iron into chains and
nets that they could hardly see them, being thinner than the smallest thread,
or the web of a Spider. God is great in the greatest creatures, and he is great
in the smallest creatures.

It is to be feared, that those that at present question Providence, Deus est
in culice and in pulice. Saeculum est speculum.
upon the same accounts may ere long deny the Creation. A King is confined to
his proper Ubi and Palace, and he orders things in his Dominions by Deputies
and Viceroys; but the Lord can no more be absent from his creatures, than cease
to be their Creator, nay than cease to be, Psalm. 147.9. According to the old
observation, God is present in Heaven by his Glory, in his Church by his
Spirit, in Hell by his Justice, in earth by his Providence, though it be not
full, for God is every where in his Essence.

If any, from Genesis 2.3. object, That God rested from all his work; The answer
is, He rested from his works of Creation, not of Providence, or from creating
any new kind of creatures, for otherwise Providence is a continual creation,
Joh. 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work. The Rabbis have a saying,
There is not a plant on Earth, but it has a star in Heaven; and the flowers
you see below on earth, are begotten by the flowers of light, the Stars you see
in heaven.

God is in small things great, not small in any;
His even praise can neither rise nor fall;
He is in all things one, in each thing many;
For he is infinite in one and all.
The least Creature has something of God in it, and the best Creature,
something of nothing.

Secondly, In their Government. In God, as the Apostle says, we have our
being, we are his Creatures; in him we live, by him all things are preserved;
in him we move, all things are at his beck and command. Every Creature, as it
has a being from God, as its Maker, so it has an order from God, as its
Governor, and that order is warlike, Ut in aqua solemn, sic Deum in operibus
contemplamur.
whereby all Creatures are mustered, and trained, and serve under the colors
of the Almighty. Look into Egypt, and you find a Band of Frog march into
Pharaohs Bedchamber Look on Herod, and God sets his Vermin on him; and all the
Kings Guard cannot Master the Lice. God has Hornets for the Hivites, and 23
Mice for the Philistims, I Sam. 6. Rats for the Prelate, and a Fly for the Pope.

When God has service to do, he ca^ never want an Army to do it; all the
Creatures stand ready pressed to receive the word of Command; If he bids the^ go,
they go, if he bids them come, the^ come. God fed the Prophet by Ravens I know
not which most to admire, whether preservation without food? or for by such
messengers, were greatest; those ravenous creatures which took food from
others, brought it to Elisha. The Philosopher says, Deus sic singula curat
quasi universa, sic universa quasi singula.
God is the first Agent, that is true, but not all: God leaves not the world to
be governed by Fortune, after he made the World. God is the first Agent, as the
first mover, which sets all the inferior Spears in motion, and so continues
them.

It is the custom of the Jews, to let the Book of Hester fall on the ground
before they read in it, because they say, there is no name of God in that book;
But every Creature has a letter of Gods Name in it, and therefore not to be
trampled on. All the World is Gods work in Folio, the History of the Almighty:
Here the Acts of our Father are to be seen and read of all; the Heavens declare
his glory, they are the Regii Professores, the Divinity Readers of God to the
World.

The World's a School, where in a general Story
God always reads dumb Lectures of his Glory.
The World's a Book in Folio, printed all
With Gods great works in Letters Capital.
Each Creature is a Page, and each Effect
A fair character, void of all defect.
But as young Truants, toying in the Schools,
Instead of learning, learn to play the Fools;
We gaze but on the Babies, and the cover,
The gaudy flowers, and edges gilded over.
Secondly, Providence extends toward all rational and intellectual Creatures,
Men and Angels, good and bad, generally and specially; of which last I shall
discourse, as it is exercised for the good of Sion.

1 This Ladder of Providence is exercised on man for good. The answer of the
tongue. (Prove. 16.1.) is from the Lord; we cannot speak a good word without the
influence of God, much less, can we do a good work. I dare not say, that the
Graces, as Faith, Hope, flow formally from God, yet certainly they flow
efficiently from God; that is, though it be not God that believes, but man, yet
man would not believe without God.

It is the Tree that brings forth fruit, yet the Tree would not bring forth
fruit were it not for the light of the Sun, and the dew of Heaven. It is
certain, that man may repent when he will, but it is the Lord must give him
that will to repent. A man must needs repent when he will; for repentance is
seated in the Will of man, for man cannot repent without his Will; but not in
the power of man. It is a truth, man cannot repent, because he will not repent,
and also, Requiritur opera hominis, sed operatio Dei.
that man will not repent, because he cannot.

The conversion of the Soul is supposed to be as considerable a work, if not a
greater, than the Creation; for in the Creation God had no Adversary; The Light
did not say, I will not be created, the Earth did not say, I will not be
formed; but in the new Creation, sinners labor to prevent the conception of
Grace, take down antidotes against Salvation, and study how to defeat the
Spirit of God, and make its works abortive. Deus amavit nos non existentes imo
resistentes.
God when he comes, finds the house, not only empty of Grace, but filled with
Lusts, and the strong man up in arms, not a rasa tabula, a milk white Paper,
but he finds the Devil to have been scribbling, and the World to have been
scribbling. Angels may knock at the door of a sinners heart, but God only can
open it. The Body is not so much at the command of the Soul, as the Soul is at
the command of God. Without me, Joh. 14. ye can do nothing. The Lord opened the
heart of Lydia. Gratiam non a nobis praesumpsimus, sed a Deo sumpsimus.
Man's heart is Gods Lock, and not man's wisdom, but the Spirit of the Lord is
the Key that must unlock it.

Not that Providence offers violence to natural principles, it works
necessarily, but not coactively. It is a true Rule, those things which are
contingent in respect of second causes, are necessary in respect of the First,
by a necessity of immutability, not of compulsion. How many Lions in this age
has our God made to lie down with Lambs? How many Lions has he effectually
turned into Lambs? It is Gods Prerogative to make, and it is the royal flower
of his Crown to mend the heart, under the praises of Nature lurk the enemies of
Grace.

Secondly, This Ladder of Providence reaches as fr as wicked men, and Devils.
And that four ways.

1 In this Ladder, there is a preventing Providence. Pharaoh, Exodus 14.
resolves on Isreal's ruin, he will destroy them, I that he will; But whence was
it that he did not destroy them? Ezekiel. 29.4. The Lord put an hook on his
Nostrils, and a bridle on his Jaws. The Dark Lanthorn of Faux is famous, the
Match was ready to give fire, to have blown up all, Uno actis tactis.
but God wet the Powder. The dark side of the Lanthorn was to man, the light
side toward God.

Afflictions are Gods blood-letting, and by them* he not only cures, but
prevents diseases, David had gone astray, if he had not stumbled. As distracted
a Nation as England is, we had perished, if we had not (even) perished. It was
a good man's contemplation on this Ladder, Lord thou have pardoned those sins I
have committed, and those sins which by thy Grace I have not committed. How
many Souls had never gone into Heaven, if God had not carried them by the gates
of Hell? How many sinners had been undone indeed, if they had not been undone
in their own sense? Let Gods Jacobs lie at the foot of the Ladder and admire,
what hardness of heart has God prevented! what an hard heart has God
softened! how miserable in sin had I been, if God had not had mercy on me? and
how miserable, notwithstanding all my sense of his love and power over my
corruptions, should I be, if yet God should not have mercy on me! God is not
only to be admired for bringing good out of evil, but for preventing evil,
and doing good.

Great God! no sooner born but we begin,
Babels accursed Foundation, by our sin;
Our thoughts, our words, our deeds, are ever yielding
The sad Materials of our sinful building;
Should not thy Grace prevent it, it would even
Rise, and rise up, until it reached to Heaven.
Lord, ere our building shall begin to show,
Confound our language, and our building too.
And so in a public sense, when the overthrow of Religion is determined at
man's Council Table, it is not determined at Gods Council Table; men's designs
are not so deep, but the Lords designs are deeper: And though Satan's
enterprises are in the Dark to us, yet they are in the light to God. God often
blows up and undermines the malice of men, for his Children, who sometimes
neither feel nor hear the blow. O Lord, how often are we delivered from visible
dangers, but, how oftener from invisible dangers? Remember for ever, that the
Devil and Men may often level their Ordnance against Sion, but they shall never
do Execution, till God say, Give fire.

Deus just patitur quod nos non just agimus.
2 In this Ladder, there is a permitting Providence. The Devils are kept in
chains, as Jude speaks, In chains, not only of Justice, but also of
Providence, that they can neither torment the Body, or torment the Soul,
without commission or permission from God. God did not allow, yet he suffered,
the treachery of Judas, and the cruelty of Pilat toward Christ, Act. 2.23. The
Apostle charge Christ's death on them, and yet brings in the foreknowledge
and counsel of God; The Father delivered the Son, the Son delivered himself,
out of love; Judas delivered Christ for money, the Jews crucified Christ out of
malice; so that, in the same tradition, God is to be magnified, and man
condemned; because, in the same thing which they did, the cause was not the
same for which they did it. God permits weeds in his Garden, and tares in his
Field, Why may some say, does not God prevent the sprouting and growing of such
blasphemies and errors as range up and down, and rage in England? How, says
unbelief, can the Lord be tender of his Flowers, his Saints, and Truths, and
yet be content to see such thorns and weeds to grow about them? Remember, That
God is not bound to do all he can (and how could God be Almighty if he did all
he could?) and that when the Wheat is ripe, as Luther speaks, the Husbandman
will burn the Tares. If a man should find fault with the shadowing of a picture
in a Table, it would be answered, Let not the Cobbler go beyond his Last, for
the dimming sets off the bright, and the art of the Painter could not be
perceived, without diversity of colors.

A Father holds a Lion in chains, Rugiat Leo quantum vult, tantum non fugiat
Ovis Christi.
the child trembles for fear lest the Lion should devour him; but the Father
suffers the child to tremble, but will not suffer the Lion to devour: the
Saints in England are afraid, for the Lion of Hell roars (indeed our sins have
both lengthened his chain, and opened his month) but let them consider, the
Lion is not so powerful, but their Father is as pitiful, and that God that
suffers the Lion to roar, will not suffer the Lion to tear.

Satan, though politic, cannot slip his collar, though powerful, cannot break
his prison. The Devil has men to be his prisoners, but the Devil himself is
Gods prisoner; Providence binds Satan over to the Peace, to his quiet behavior;
Christ has the keys of Hell at his girdle, Hell is under his conquest, and
therefore under his command, Rev. 20.2. an allusion to Conquerors, who having
taken a Fort, the keys are presently surrendered to them.

Diabolus contra sanctos tempestatem movet sedipse naufragium patitur.
This Ladder of Providence reaches as far as Hell, and extends to the utmost
line of the Devils Kingdom. Satan cannot enkindle one fire in Sion, if
Providence did not suffer him to go up and down to gather sticks. The whole
Creation, Men and Devils, though they are not all under the protection, yet
they are within the Precincts of Providence; and let us not murmur at Gods
permissive Providence, but consider, God judges it more for his glory, to
bring good out of evil, than not to suffer evil to be at all; and God would
never suffer evil to be, if he could not bring good out of it. The Almighty
does not approve of all he permits; and therefore let none undertake to reprove
him for what he permits, there being nothing that is permitted, which shall not
in the end prove for Sions comfort, and his glory.

For either thy command or thy permission
Lay hands on all; they are the right and left;
The first puts on with speed and expedition,
The other curbs sins stealing-pace and thest;
Nothing escapes them both; all must appear,
And be disposed. and dressed, and tuned by thee,
Who sweetly temperst all: If we could hear
The skill and art, what music would it be?
Plures sunt gratiae privativae quam positivae.
3 In this Ladder there is a restraining Providence. Thus far shall the Designs
of men and Devils go, and no further; That Is the authoritative Dialect of the
Almighty. God will shake the World, Nahum 3. as a Fig Tree; men shall neither
have leaves to cover their nakedness, nor fruit to satisfy their hunger; the
Lord can make the Saints, in believing, not to care (as we say, a fig for the
Towers or Powers of the World against Christ. The Egyptians like ravenous
Wolves would fain have been worrying the Lambs of God when they came out of
their bondage, but the Lord held them in, and they did neither rend their
Fleeces, nor suck their blood. The Lord (according to the Proverb) here truly
held the Woolf by the ears.

The Saints, Zech. 2.8. are the apple of Gods eye; now we know the eye is the
tendrest part of the Body, and the apple is the tendrest part of the eye. It is
remarkable, how the eye is secured by a trinity of Providence: by Tunicles,
that sweat annoy it not; by the Eie-lids, that the dust hurt it not; by the
Eie-brows, that it may be kept from blows or strokes. There was care on care,
Providence on Providence, Tunicle on Tunicle, for Sions good. Oh that the glory
of the Lord were as tender to us, as our Salvation is both tender to, and
tendered by the Lord!

It is prettily observable, Genesis 11.4. In the building of Babel; Go to say the
Babylonians, go to says God; Divinum consilium dum devitatur impletur, humanum
consilium dum reluctatur comprehenditur.
Let us build a Tower, say they, let us go down and see it, says God; That we
may get a name, say they, that we may scatter them, says God. Thus God words it
with them, and confutes their folly from point to point. I believe there are
such Babels a building in the world, and I am persuaded the Lord will shortly
come down and see them; The pride of man shall flow to such a Tide, and then it
shall Ebb, Errors and Blasphemies shall even lay the neck of the Gospel on the
block, but shall not cut it off.

Let the Devils raise storms, and bluster with their winds round about the
house of God, ( Job 1.) Let the men of the World bow down their backs, and set
to their shoulders, they shall never overthrow it; They shall neither prove
themselves Sampsons, nor the Saints Philistims. Sion, like a bottle may be
dipped, but it shall never be drowned: God will never suffer such an Enemy to
invade Sion, that either he could not keep out, or will not conquer. Satan may
be the Executioner but God is the Judge, and the Executioner, cannot lay on a
stroke more than the Judge appoints.

Fierce Lions roaring for their Prey, and then
Daniel thrown in, and Daniel yet remains
Alive! there was a Lion in the Den
Was Daniels friend, or Daniel had been slain.
Among a thousand Lions I Would not fear,
Had I but only Daniels Lion there.
4 In this Ladder there is an ordering Providence. The Ladder of Providence
extends from Heaven to Hell; Let men climb never so high, and dig never so low,
Policy goes not so far, but Providence goes further. If the Lord suffers a
poison, he knows how to bring a cordial out of it; The Devil can turn cordials
into poisons, God can turn poisons into cordials; nay, make poisons cordials.
He suffers his Children to burn their finger in the candle, to keep them from
burning their whole body in the fire. He, like a Nurse, suffers his children to
reel and fall, that they may cry for his arm to hold them up, and learn to walk
by his strength, and under his Elbow.

There is nothing so firm, Deus saepe facit opus non suum ut faciat opus suum.
but Providence sustains it; nothing so small, but he regards it; nothing so
evil, but he can overcome it; nothing so vile, which serves not for his glory;
nothing so wrongful, which executes not his Justice; nothing so enemy-like,
which fights not for him; nothing so much against him, but hits the mark at
which he aims. It was a g^od speech, if well understood, of a good man, once,
That he was as much beholding to God for his Infirmities, as for his Graces. If
Peter had not fallen, Lapsus Petri sit omnium Petra
he had fallen. The Saints sometimes fall, that when they rise they may stand
the faster.

David cut off Goliahs head with Goliahs sword. Our Lord Jesus has often beat
the Devil in his own Kingdom, and with his own weapons. Many have shot with the
Devil in his own bow (as Eve Genesis 3. by disputing with him) but never any
except Christ ever out shot the Devil in his own Bow; As appears in two famous
Instances.

The first of the first Adam, Genesis 3. The Devil was a fallen Angel, and he
envied that Man should stand; Adam was the Representative of all mankind; If
Adam had stood, we had stood; now also says the Devil, all the world falls
before me, if I can but make Adam fall; he makes the onset, gives the bait,
Adam swallows it, and is poisoned, the Devil laughs, as we say, in his sleeve,
exults, as if all the world was his; Adam is arraigned by God, the Devil is a
ready witness against him, but before the sentence was pronounced, the sin is
pardoned; the Messiah puts in bail. The seed of the woman shall break the
serpents head, ^rodest peccavisse, nocet peccare.
though the serpent bit the woman's heel (but the serpent had but one head, and
the woman had two heels:) I cannot tell which most to admire, the disease, or
the remedy. Christ is the glory of the Church, the King of Saints. Sure I am,
we had never heard of Free Grace, if man had not fallen.

The second Instance is of the second Adem. Diabolus dum irruit ruit, dum
quaerit hominem, incidit in salvatorem.
The Devil sets on the Captain of our Salvation; Oh thinks the Devil, if I can
but destroy the Shepherd, the Sheep are mine; Judas betrays his Master, the
Jews crucify their King, Christ is laid in the grave, Satan danceth and
triumphs, as if he had got the victory; But Satan, stay the bells, Thou have won
the Field, but Christ has won the Day: Christ ascends from the Grave, marches
through the Devils Kingdom, and receives a Crown from the Father, Christi fell,
nostri mel.
as Victor over Men and Devils, who could neither prevent his Resurrection, nor
Reign. Oh the wisdom of Providence! If Christ had not been b^und, we had not
been freed; if he had not died, we had died for ever: This was Satan's
Masterpiece, and yet it was his overthrow.

Providence brings the wheel over all designs against Sion. Prove. ^0.26. Satan
was the first fool, though not the only fool in the world. Providence is
usually exercised in contraries. Opposita juxta se posita magis clucescunt.
It is the Divine method to humble, that he may exalt; to kill, that he may
make alive; to bring light out of darkness, and Hell out of Heaven. We wonder
often, why God suffers those to reign, who make Christ to suffer, and will not
suffer Christ to reign; little considering, that the Lord often makes the Earth
to help the woman, and loves to strike strait strokes with crooked sticks. He
makes wicked men, though they be as Chaff, yet to cover his Wheat; and though
they be as Straw, to bear up his Ears. If Paul had not been such a Persecutor,
Paul had not been such a Professor. Joseph's Breth^en aimed at his ruin, but God
Genesis ult. aimed at his advancement. All things work together for Sions good,
Romans 8.28. Before Sion is built, here lies a piece of Timber, there lies the
Brick, and there lies the Mortar, all things seem to be in a confusion; but
tarry till the Lord has done, and you will see no d^sorder but order, no
confusion but beauty. All things you see, not only work, but work together
(the word in the Greek is compounded) Look not only on Gods way, but on his
end; what God has joined together, let no man separate. The child, could blame
his Father, when he sees him tread the grapes, the Father, he thinks, will mash
and mar all; but when he comes to years of discretion, he knows that the best
way to keep the Grapes from withering, is to turn them into wine.

Let man use what means he will against the Church. God has still the security
of the end. If his Wisdom prevent not disorders, his Power can order disorders.
Men may bend their Bows, and shoot their Arrows, against God; but all in vain,
for it is impossible that ever this glorious Archer should once shoot over or
short, the Archer and the Mark being one and the same: Man too often puts
darkness for light, but the Lord only can and will bring light out of darkness.

Thirdly, This Ladder is conversant about all evils and actions, all evil
actions personally and publicly.

1 This Ladder of Providence reaches as far as sin. Providence, by which
generally I understand the execution of Gods Decrees in time; sometimes
possibly the Decrees of God, and God decreeing, is conversant about sin four
ways.

Scivit non sanxit, praedixit non praescripsit.
1 Providence foresees sin. The Lord foresaw the treachery of Judas, and yet
simply did not fore-ordain it, and yet the prevision of God is infallible. Did
not Judas, may some say then, sin necessarily? I Answer, God foresaw he would
sin, as he foresaw, but God foresaw that he would sin freely, therefore in
that sense he sinned freely. Because we sin, therefore our sin is fore-known,
not therefore we sin, because it is fore-known. God foretold the infidelity of
the Jews to Christ, he foresaw their sins, not his own; The Jews committed a
sin which God compelled them not to, who is displeased with sin, but only
foretold that they would do it, because nothing is hid from his foreknowledge.
Foreknowledge in God is as Memory in us; Memory presents us with things that
are past; so Prescience presents to God things that are to come; Now as Memory
is not the cause why things past were done, so Gods Prescience is not the cause
why future things shall be done; God fore-sees and fore-ordains those things
that are good, but only foresees, but fore-ordains not those that are evil.

2 Providence extends further, Non fit praeter quod fit contra Dei voluntatem.
In withdrawing the Influence of Grace, Psalm. 105.25. Deuteronomy. 2.30. Romans 14.22,
23. Deuteronomy. 29.4. God gave them not an heart to understand; now when Providence
withdraws its aid, the creature falls necessarily and yet freely. The Sun is
not the cause of darkness, for it does not positively infect the Air with
darkness, but only removes its Beams: So when the Spirit of God, who blows
where he lists, and is arbitrary in its influence, withdraws its influence of
light and life, the Soul is presently possessed with darkness, and sin; or as
the staff falls to the ground, not because it is thrown down by the hand, but
because its forsaken by the hand. God is the Author of man's condemnation, for
as a Judge he punishes transgressions against his Law, Multi ne laberentur
detenti, nulli ut laberentur impulsi.
but he is not the Author of man's corruption. The Nurse lends not her hand, the
Child presently falls; now the cause of falling, is not the hand of the Nurse,
but impotency and weakness in the Child. God throws down none, but raises up
many fallen; he heals many, wounds none. The principle of our falling (James
1.13.) is in our selves, but the principle of our standing is in God.

3 Providence extends further, In moving the natural Faculties of man. He
preserves in man, what he has given to man, both Nature, which is the
principle of natural Actions, and the Will, which is the principle of voluntary
Actions; Vulneramur in naturalibus, spoliamur spiritualibus.
by his power determining their motions, and freely inclining them to any
indeterminate actions: Wherefore one and the same Action may be both good and
bad, according to the difference of principles; good in the kind, as from God
and common Nature, but evil in particular, as from the inbred Corruption of
man, for the immediate cause of every sin is the Will of the sinner. In every
sinful action there are two things, the act and the defect; God is the Author
of the act, but not of the defect: As in the striking an untuned Harp, the
fingering is from us, but the jarring is from the Instrument. In God we move;
without the aid of Providence, Cain could not have stretched out his arm; but
to turn so good a gift of God, to so ill a purpose, as to kill his Brother,
that was the proper sin of Cain. God may remove impediments of sinning, he may
propose objects in themselves indifferent, as threatenings, preaching of the
Law, Romans 7.8. and how easily does man fall when God goes from him, and
Temptations come to him?

4 Providence extends further about sin. God wills that sin be; God wills not
the nature, yet he wills the being of evil: To affirm that God is the Author
of sin, impairs the Justice and Goodness of God; for he can no more be the
Author of sin, than one contrary is the Author of another, than light is of
darkness, or good of evil^; It is not the God of the world, but the God of this
world, is the Author of sin; and to affirm that God only permits sin, seems to
impair the Government and Providence of God; Deo sciente and sinente fit
peccatum non utique nolens sinit sed volens.
for God does not suffer sin to be without his will (Permissio est quoddam
genus voluntatis.) Judas has a Will to betray his Master, I will not, says
God, stop his design, but I will draw a preservative for man's salvation out of
that poison. The world shall know, that out of the unnaturalest Treason that
ever the Sun beheld, I can work the most glorious effect. God found the will of
Judas earnestly running to sin, he run of himself, God staid not behind, but
ran with him, but to another end; Judas and God run, as it were, in the same
Race, Judas to satisfy his Lust, God to declare his Glory.

If God did not willingly suffer sin to be, of necessity sin could not be; The
Lord fulfils his own good purposes, by the wicked purposes of others; man
practices sin, and God punishes sin with sin, so as God is neither to be
blamed, or man excused; Deus non vult malum, vult hoc ipsum fieri malum
God hard^ned Pharaohs heart, but says the Text, Pharaoh first hardened his own
heart; When man hardens his own heart morally, it is just with God to harden it
judicially. Let Pharaoh alone, says God, let him take his pleasure and pastime,
and when he has hardened his heart by Malice, I will harden it in Justice, I
will set a seal to his ruin.

They shall be given over to believe l^es, 2 These. 2.11. A dreadful woe against
sinners in these days of Gospel light; as if the Lord should have said,
Sinners, I have proffered you my Love, I have proffered you my Sons blood, I
have proffered you the Truths of Salvation, I have said, this is my way, De iis
qui faciunt quae non vul^ Deus, facit ipse quae vult.
and it is your wisdom to walk in it; now because you have refused to bear my
yoke, and to entertain the Gospel, there shall come false Prophe^s, and say,
Heaven is but a fable, and Helfire was but a politic invention to keep men in
awe, and you shall believe them; There shall come some like Angels of light,
though they are Devils incarnate, and they shall with a seeming Mortification,
cry down real Mortification; and with a plausible conver^ation preach down
preaching, and tell you, that a strict life, and repentance, are out of date,
and required only to scare men from their freedom, and you shall believe all
this, Jer. 4 10. Romans 11.8. God now sends us as the Jews of old, a spirit of
slumber. And,

Because we will not be given up to Truth, God gives us over to Error. It is
one thing to have Error, and it is another thing to be given over to Error,
which is not only to have and hold, but to be had and held of Error. He that
will be un^ust, let him be unjust still. As the Judge at Athens gave condemned
Malefactors poisonous Hemlock to drink, for punishment of their misdeeds; so
God as a just Judge punishes our former barrenness and impenitency under the
means of Grace, with giving of hundreds over to the noysom Opinions, and
monstrous Blasphemies of this age. It is well for Gods Jacobs that the God of
Jacob stands at the top of the Ladder, Toll maliciam fratrum Josephi simul
p^ri^et dispensationem Dei.
or else the Gospel would no longer stand but fall. God knows how to bring
Glory out of all this Disgrace; What more heinous act than the treachery of
Judas? and yet take away the treachery of Judas, and you take away the Cross of
Christ; take away the Cross of Christ, and you take away our Salvation.

Secondly, The Ladder of Providence. God is visible in all Afflictions,
Personal and public.

First, In Personal Afflictions, and that

1 In Death, Job 14.5. Thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. That
hand that stirs up our feathers, casts us down on our Bed. The Laws of Nature
say to Death, Death, go to the wrinkled face, to the dry bones, to the dry
Breasts, meddle not with this young Man, touch not this beautiful woman; But
Death is in Commission from Providence, and must observe its commands. It is
appointed for all men once to die, that is, once: Gods Decrees for the
mortality of man are not made at random, but in particular, and they are
irreversible. Zenacherib shall not be slain in the field, nor by the Angel of
the Lord which smote a great part of his Army, but at home in his own City, and
in the Temple of his Idol, and by the hands of his Sons that sprang from his
loins; Sisera shall not die in an Army, nor by the hands of a man, a Bow shall
not be bent, nor a Sword drawn against him, the Lord has reserved him to a
tent, Tulisti Domine patrem quem ipse dederas non con^ristor quod recipisti ago
gratias quod dedisti
to a ten-penny-nail, to be driven into his head by the hands of a feeble
woman. The Tyrants of the world have their names already in the immortal Bill
of mortality, and their days are determined by the fatal line of Providence. So
long shall Pharaoh oppress the Israelites, and no longer; So high shall Nimrod
build his Babel, and no higher; So far shall Nero and his moral Successors
prosper in their persecutions, and no further.

Death knocks as often at the door of the young man, as of the old; there are
as many young skuls (as it is observed) in Golgotha, as old. The Sith of
mortality mows down the Lillies of the Crowns, as well as the grass of the
field; our last day stands, the rest run ^stat sua cuique dies. The bullets
fly in the wars at the direction, not of Chance, but of Providence; Providence
says to the Cannon, strike such an Officer, such a Soldier, wound him only,
kill him outright.

Some men, I confess, are accessory to their ruin, and as we say, die before
their time, that is, their time indeed, which according to the visible face of
Nature they might have lived, but not before Gods time. God has the four keys,
of the Clouds, the Womb, the Heart, and of Death hanging only at his own
girdle. Man's spirit is the candle of the Lord, Pro. 21.27. He puts out some
candles as soon as they are lighted, others when they are half wasted, and he
suffers others to consume, by old age, to a snuff. Providence has turned up a
Glass for every man, and man can neither stay the sands of his Glass a minute
from running, nor turn it up when it is once out. When Gods servants have done
their work, Providence lets them go to bed. Oh how sweet it is to behold Christ
in every Cross, and God on every Ladder!

2 Providence is visible in Afflictions. Saints are appointed to afflictions,
as a mark is appointed to be shot at by the Arrow, on purpose, 1 These. 1.3. God
shoots not at random, but at a mark, he does not draw his Bow at a venture, as
he who slew Ahab, 1 King. 22.34. or shoot at the whole host of mankind, let the
arrow light where it will; but he singles out the particular person, and sends
every Arrow on a special Errand. The wicked man's sight is bounded by second
causes, and he cannot see beyond the Horizon of the creatures. We, Jonah the
fourth, quarrel with the worm that smites the goard, but see not how God sends
the worm: Such a man owed me a spite, and now he is even with me; as if God
were a Cipher; and either were nothing, or did nothing. Job saw God on this
Ladder, Job 1. who says not, the Lord has given, and the Chaldeans have taken
away; the Lord has enriched me, and the Devil has robbed me; but as if he
never heard mention made, either of the Devil, or the Chaldeans, The Lord gave,
and the Lord has taken away; He is not angry with Chance and Fortune, and
falls not out with Stars and Constellations. David saw God on this Ladder,
Psalm. 44.12, 13, 14. like a good child, he fathers the rod on God his Father;
Thou have cast off, Thou have cast down; when Gods rod was on his back, he puts
his hand on his mouth, and his mouth in the dust. Luther saw God on this
Ladder, when he observed, though the Christs-cross be no letter, yet he learned
more by it than all the Letters of the Alphabet; and that God never sent him on
any special Errant or business, but he first sent his mind by some special
affliction. And Alfred, saw God on this Ladder, who always prayed that God
would bestow some trial on him, to keep down his love to the World, and draw up
his love to Heaven. Lorinus reports of Grasshoppers formerly in England, which
depopulated England, that on one wing they had written Ira, in black letters,
upon the other Dei, in golden: The Saints are afflicted, that is anger, but by
their God, that is golden.

Hear the rod, says God, and who has appointed it; Is that proper language?
buts its one thing to feel the rod, and another thing to hear it. God preaches
to man a Lesson, not only by his Word, but by his Rod; and as the Word must be
felt before it can be heard, so the Rod must be heard before it can be felt to
purpose. Repent, prov^de for Eternity, now do it, or it may be you may never,
is the dialect of the rod, as well as the word. God appoints this man a cup of
consolation, and that man a cup of sorrow, and he appoints how many drops shall
be in their cups, and all the world cannot put in a drop beyond the Lords
measure; Afflictions are a rod, Schela crucis Schola lucis, quae nocent docent,
(...)
but they have honey at the end of them: How sweet is it while the rod softens
the heart, and the honey opens the eyes? Afflictions are called darkness in
Scripture, but they have enlightened the eyes of many, who else might have
walked in everlasting darkness.

How many may read legibly their sins in their punishments, and need enquire
for the cause of no other physician. God lays some sick in their own beds of
wantonness, and so hangs them at their own doors. Lord says one Christian,
lying like Jacob at the foot of the Ladder, I am thy vine, and let me rather
bleed than wither; I am thy Apple Tree, let me rather be lopt to grow, than cut
up to burn: Lord, says another, frown on me, rather than not to look on me; let
the Lord take me into h s hands and correct me, rather than that I should have
nothing to do with God, or he should have nothing to do with me. How many souls
have occasion to say, If the Lord had not plowed me with Afflictions, and
dunged me with Reproaches, what barren ground had I been? how had I wandered, if
the Lord had not sent his dogs to fetch me to his Fold? I had certainly been
cast away, if I had not been cast down. How had I surfeited on Pleasures and
Friends, if the Lord had not called me from the Banquet? Adversity has whipped
many a Soul to Heaven, which otherwise, Prosperity had coached to Hell. How
glorious is it to see God in Riches, in Friends, in Honor, in Persecutions, in
Crosses, in Sicknesses, God casts down, and my God lifts up? The Lord often
writes angry Epistles to his children; yet observe, still at the bottom of the
Letter, he subscribes, Your loving Father. Hippocrates called the Pestilence
the divine disease, (...), as we call the spots thereof Gods mark; the
Falling Sickness of old was called morbus sacer, because it was the immediate
hand of God. O Lord, may every Soul say, It matters not what my condition be,
So it but lead, or whip me home to thee


Secondly, Providence is visible in public Afflictions and Affairs of the
world.

1 In the public troubles and distractions of Nations. I create light, and I
form darkness, Isa. 45.7. Sin is man's creature, and Afflictions are Gods
creatures; every Affliction bears the image of its Maker, and God is not
ashamed of his own handiwork. Sinful man is the meritorious, but Providence is
the efficient cause of Evils; Man is the cause of moral evils, God of penal
evils in the City, Amos 3 6.

Afflictions are Gods Thunder, and Lightning. Famine and Pestilence are the
Kings evils, only caused and cured by God; the Lords dreadful Ambassadors to a
Nation, they have their message to deliver, and they will have audience; Let
God but fire our fields, and blast our Corn, as Absalom did by Joab, we come
presently. Wars, and Judgments, are Gods Troops, he is their Generalissimo,
they move according to his Orders, he sounds his Trumpet, and beats his Drum,
and all the Plagues, and Punishments of Providence are in Arms; when God says
charge, they charge; when retreat, they retreat. O Sword of the Lord, how long
before you are quiet? here was a cry to the Sword, but the Sword of the Lord
answered, you must speak to the General himself, I am at his command, Jer.
47.6. Not many years since we cried out, Oh the Sufferings, and Alarms, and
Field-fights, when will you cease in England? but they never ceased till God
bid them cease.

It is the honor of a King to discharge the first piece of Ordnance against the
Enemy; The Lord, I am sure, had the honor of beating the first Alarm, and
sounding the first Retreat in England. Man may speak of Peace in, but God only
can speak Peace to a Nation. In Revel. 6.10. they cry, How long Lord? they knew
God had the time in his hand, and he only could tell how long. They cried not
to the Tyrants, how long will ye persecute? how long will ye oppress the
Saints? But to the Lord, How long before thou come to revenge? Oh say many, if
it had not been for such and such men, we had never had wars; and if it had
not been for their ends and designs, we had had an end of our Troubles ere now;
as if Providence were but a stander by, or a looker on, while men played their
Games, or acted their parts.

But Jacob sees that Assure is the rod of Gods anger, and that when his children
are purified, the rod shall be thrown into the fire and burned; Sees, that when
God has scoured his Plate, he will throw the wisp on the dunghill, that when
he has built his house, the scaffold shall be pulled down. England would be as
full of Judgments as it is of Sin, if men were the Makers and Masters of
Judgments. Men alone, though never so wise or powerful, cannot make either
staves of comfort, or rods of afflictions. God says in Scripture, he will give
peace. If all the Angels in Heaven should have said so, we should soon have
replied, as Corah and his company to Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. Ye take too
much on you. It is observed, that God in Scripture is called a man of War, and
yet nothing so much discovers him to be a God as war.

2 This Ladder of Providence reaches the public Honors and Governments of the
World. God, 1 Samuel 2.8.9, raises the poor from the dust, and lifts up the
Beggar from the dunghill, though too often they forget the ground from whence
they came, and the hand that lifted them up. Promotion, Psalm. 75.6. comes
neither from the East, nor West, nor South; That is, from the Power and Policy
of men. Euthymius thinks, there is an allusion to the Southsayers, who promised
good success according to the Stars of Nativity; as if a man be born under
Jupiter, he should be honorable, if under Mercury, he should be witty; no,
says God, Promotion comes neither from this or that Star, from this or that
quarter of the Heavens, but from the Lord.

It was accounted by a great man (mentioned in our Chronicles) a greater honor
to make Kings, than to be a King himself. The Lord is a King, and Kingdoms are
his donatives, and he Crowns and Uncrowns at his pleasure. Nebuchadnezzar was
cast down on purpose, that he might see that God set him up, Dan. 4.17.
Kingdoms are not bound to Princes in chains of Adamant, as one said his was.
Kings are faster bound to their Kingdoms, than their Kingdoms are bound to
them; All Kingdoms on earth are Regna transcuntia, movables, going and coming,
at Gods order, from one man to another: The Earth is the Lords, and all the
Kingdoms of the Earth are but Copy-holds belonging to his Kingdom, as the
Capital Manor, and Hold from him. The Heathen well fancied a golden chain, to
reach from the divine Chair in Heaven, to all the Crowns in the world. Here we
must shun two main Rocks against which the judgments of men are apt to split.

1 What if some have exchanged a Prison for a Throne, and Fetters of iron for
chains of gold? What if it has been observed in the Journal of Providence,
Eccles. 10.7. That Servants have been seen on horses, and Princes walking as
servants on the earth? Subjects to prove Kings, Tota ratio facti saepe pendet a
ratione facientis.
and Kings to prove scarce Subjects? Take heed of Atheism, say not these things
are fortuitous, or unjust in God; these are the chances (q. d.) and changes of
Providence, whose ways are sometimes secret, but never unrighteous. All Nations
were made of one blood, all blood is of one color, and if men take their
descent from Adam, they all stand on even ground.

When meanness is exalted, do not bate
The place its honor, for the persons sake.
The Shrine is that which thou do venerate,
And not the beast that bears it on his back.
I care not though the Cloth of State should be,
Not of rich Arras, but of mean Tapestry.
2 What if some rise on this Ladder of Providence (as many have done) and leave
a good conscience at the bottom? The Devil is visible in the best Governor,
(...) qui conatur excipere, conatur decipere.
and something of God invisible in the worst Governor on earth. All the ways
and kinds of Government are from God, though the means and manner of getting
those Governments are not always from God. Magistracy is a civil Ordinance of
God, and so in it self good; now the well or ill management of that Power is
consequent to, and not constitutive of the Power, so that though Magistrates
are bound to do well, they may possibly do ill through their own corruption,
yet the Power is as much of God when they do ill, as when they do well, for
though often they want a Will to do good, yet they have no Commission nor Power
from God to do evil. Good Magistrates, are the garment in which God apparrels
himself; and he that shoots at the Clothes, cannot say he means not the man.

The objection of the Devils Power, is inconsiderable, because his power is not
civil but moral, and in it self evil, and we are commanded to submit to the
Civil Magistrate, though evil; but never to the Devil, nor to pray for his
Government, that under it we may lead a quiet and godly life, 1 Pet. 2.13. 1 Timothy 2.2. Ephesians. 6, 12. Every Power, Romans 13.1. is of God (speaking of worldly
Powers, for there was not then a Christian Magistracy in the world) point
blank. The power of Nero was from God, Secundum merita subditorum Deus disponit
corda praepositorum.
as well as that of Constantine. The Apostle argues from the Author of that
Authority. It is certain, all Higher Powers are from the Highest Power. Let
Subjects remember, that Magistrates are Gods with Men; and let Magistrates
remember, they are but Men with God; I said, ye are Gods, there is their
Coronation; But, ye shall dye like men, there is there Funeral. The Name and
Title of God is never in Scripture (as I know) attributed to any one single or
individual person, but with a certain limitation, as God said to Moses, I have
made thee a god; thou art a made god, in my place, thou art a god to Pharaoh.

What if Governors (as there have been such) should as the Proverb is, more
mind the beautifying their own houses, than the building of Italy? If when they
put on a public Gown, they should not put off a private person? that they
should obtain their Crowns as Alexander the sixth did, by giving his soul to
the Devil, and afterward may prove Nebuchadnezzars, the Lamentation of their
Generations, as the word signifies? That when their single words should be as
good as Oaths, that they should play with Oaths as children do with Rattles?
What if when they enter into Office, they should put Conscience out of Office?
That they should buy places of Judicature, and sell Justice, and that not at a
cheap rate, because they bought dear? What if they should be men not compounded
of flesh and blood as other men are, but as it is said of Richard the Third,
made up all of blood? If they lastly, should not write their Laws in Milk, with
Edward the Sixth, but as Draco, in Blood? Yet every Prince is the Minister of
Providence, and if men were wise, for their good; if a good Prince, for their
temporal good, if a bad Prince, Si bonus nutrit^r tuus, sin malus tentator tuus.
for their eternal good, by their temporal evil.

If it be questioned, whether Inferiors ought to honor Superiors that are evil;
I answer yes, for the wickedness of man cannot make void Gods Ordinance, no
more than man's unbeleef can frustrate Gods promise: We must honor Magistrates
that are evil, but not in evil. Hos. 8.4. They have set up Kings, but not by
me, but I knew not of it; Honorandus genitor sed praeponendus Creator
as if the Lord had said, they never asked my advice, they would not be
Headless, but in this they were heedless; for though in some sense, they ran on
Gods Errand, yet they, as we say, went on their own heads; for Hos. 13.11. God
gave them a King, though in his anger: The Gods on Earth must be obeyed, but in
nothing that crosses obedience to the God of Heaven and Earth.

And this distinction must be added, that what honor is done to wicked
Magistrates, is to be done to God himself, not to Man, not (...), to the
person, but (...), to the vizard that God has put on him; as the Heathen
Emblem was, (...), An Ass laden with the Image of the goddess Isis, and the
people falling down, and worshipping, but with this inscription, Not to the Ass,
but to the Goddess.

All Civil Power is of God, is a Truth in these apostate, as well as it was a
Truth in the primitive times; and though it be another hour of the day, then
was when the Apostles lived, yet the same Sun shines still. If that Maxim be
cancelled, as if there were some Civil Powers in being that are not of God, let
the Hand be produced that cancelled it, and the Annus Domini, the year of the
Lord when it was done. All Government is from God originally, yet by
designation, it is laid on the shoulders of the Messiah, Matthew. 28. and though
the Providence of God has already, and will yet righteously justle many Rulers
out of their Authorities, yet it is the only Prerogative of our Lord Jesus to
put down all Authority and Rule, 1 Cor. 15.

It lies not in the power of the children of God to repeal the Constitutions of
their Father. Governments were only founded by God in essence, and shall only
be dissolved by God in person, by God-man. Ejusdem est instituere and
destituere, ligare and solvere.

Yet let Powers remember, that God is not bound to maintain them in their
Kingdoms, if their design be to cast Christ out of his Kingdom, and that God
will in due time make the Scepters of all such Persecutors and Oppressors, to
shake in their hands, and their Crowns to tumble off their heads, and justly
bring them to the dunghill, that unjustly keep Christ from his Throne. Those
that will not entertain Christ as their King, shall, whether they will or no,
submit to him as their Conqueror,

Thirdly, This Ladder of Providence extends to, and is visible, in the ruins
and periods of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Dan. 2. Dan. 4.32. Some think
Kingdoms arise to a certain greatness, by the uncertain course of the world,
and then decline and decay, being not able longer to maintain their glory. But
as we say of Marriages, so I may say of Kingdoms, they are made in Heaven
before they are made on Earth, and dissolved in Heaven, before they are
dissolved on Earth. The unchangeable God in Heaven has an hand in all the
changes on Earth.

The Epicure ascribes the periods of Kingdoms to Fortune; the Stoic, to
destiny; the Platonist and Pythagorist, to number; Aristotle, to Asymmetry, and
disproportion of members; Copernicus, to the motion of the Center of the
Excentrick Circle; Cardanus, and most of the Astrologers, to Stars and Planets:
But these wise men of the world never yet observed with Jacob, God on the top
of the Ladder; who makes Kingdoms Ludibria Fortunae, mocking-stocks of
Fortune, who tosseth Kingdoms like a Tennis Ball, and hurleth whole Countries
into ruin.

When a General of an Army after much success grew proud, and boastingly said,
In this, Fortune had no hand, he never prospered after; What man in the world
can say, and in this Honor, in this Preferment, Providence had no hand? men may
gather sticks, but it is Providence sets on fire; Providence is the first
Founder and Dissolver of Kingdoms. Man deserves and God inflicts ruin.

The Sixth remarkable in this Ladder is, The unchangeableness of Providence.
You may see in this Vision of Jacob, the Ladder to stand firm, neither moved,
nor removed. The Laws of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 6.8. are unchangeable,
right or wrong they stand; I will not say so of the Divine Decrees, yet they
are unchangeable, and like himself. Gods eternal purposes are unalterable; He
sets not his love on sinners to day, and takes it off to morrow; Divine love is
neither fickle, nor fantastical. The threatenings of the revealed Word are
unchangeable; has God said, that no unbeleever shall be saved? that is
irrevocable, and be it to the peril of that man that dies in unbeleef. So in
Providence. The Sun runs round and round the Dyal, the pin notwithstanding,
stands immovable; Many are the imaginations of our hearts, but (says the wise
man) the Counsel of the Lord shall stand, that is certain, whatever fall. Proud
man, in this age, shall neither put God out of his way, nor off from his end.
Man must bow to God, the Ladder will not bow to man.

In the Primitive times, the persecuting Emperors would have hewn down the
Lords Ladder; In the Marian days, I mean in Queen Mary's days, they would have
burned down the Lords Ladder; In Eighty eight, they would have blown up the
Lords Ladder; and Politicians in the world, would in their Policies, with their
shoulders throw down the Lords Ladder; But though the wind and storms blow too
and fro, and round about, yet the Ladder stands where it did, and Christ is in
the Road-way to his Kingdom.

Shall the Rock (Job 18.4.) be removed out of his place, for thee Job? says
Bildad; for shame give over, Gods Projects are rockie, and men in opposing God,
do but blow a feather against a Rock. Shall God alter the method of Providence
for man? Shall the Lord write a new model of governing the world, to humor man?
Shall it be said of an Heathen, that it was as possible to turn the Sun out of
his Ecliptic line, as to put him out of the course of righteousness; and shall
Providence comply with unconstant man? A man may easily break his brains in
studying the Providence of God, and that man will certainly break his head,
that will knock heads with God. In Providence there are shallows wherein the
Lamb may wade, and Seas wherein Elephants may swim; and it is a thousand times
easier to lose our way, than to find Gods way, to drown our selves, than to
sound the depth of Providence. It is impossible to sail against the wind, and
dangerous to swim against the stream of Scriptures, and Providence, as in
external things, it breaks over, and bears down all before it.

The style of man is, I will if God will: but as the Name of God is, I Am that
I Am; So the style of God is, I will do what I will. Let proud man wrestle and
wrangle never so long with God, in saying this way or that way God shall go in,
the Lord at length will both have his Will and the Wall of man.

The Seventh remarkable in this Ladder is, Deus quiescens agit and agens
quiescit.
The Activity and negotiation of Providence: The Angels stand not still on the
Ladder, but are always in motion, ascending or descending. Many may say, I
have lost this day; Man may lose his day of Grace, but God can never lose his
day of Glory. Providence is as seldom without success, as without action. The
Governors of Israel, (Psa. 121.3.) may sleep, but the Governor of the Governors
of Israel can never sleep.

Providence, as the Apostle says, often winkes at the sins of men, but it never
yet slumbered, much less slept an hour since the Creation of the world. If God
should give over his watch over Israel, but for a moment, in that moment,
Israel would give up her hope.

Let the Saints remember, Zech. 4. The eyes of the Lord run through the world.
The Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics, pourtrayed an Eye on a Scepter, to
signify the vigilance and regency of Providence. A wise man, says the wisest
of men, Eccles. 2.14. has his eyes in his head; but God is all eye, and th t
not only for vision, but for motion. God at this day has an eye on France, and
an eye in England. There are, Zech. 3.9. Seven eyes in one stone; And in the
Revelation, there are seven Spirits before the Throne. By the Stone we are to
understand Christ mystical; The seven Eyes, and seven Spirits, are of one
importance, and signify the several Influences, the Wisdom, Power, Patience,
etc. of Providence. Providence has the hands of Briareus, and the eyes of
Argus. It is supposed by some, that the seven Spirits bear allusion to the
seven Chamberlains, or royal Officers ( Ester 1.) of the King of Persia. God
has his Secretaries of State, his chi^f Council as well as others.

Some Heathens phancied Providence, as the Great King of Persia, keeping
himself in his Palace in Heaven, from the view of his Subjects, or as sitting
aloft in a stately Tower, only beholding the passages of the world below; But
Providence is not idle, but active, (...), has reference (as Calvin observes)
not only to the eye of God, Multicum Epicuro verbis relinquunt Deos retollunt.
Cice. de not. Deorum, l. 1.
but also to the hand of God; Providence, does not only observe, but order the
world. There are no Ciphers in Gods Arithmetic, no rests in his Music, no
pauses, nor stops in Providence. Away with the blasphemy of those that say, Let
God rule in Heaven, and man rule on Earth.

David, Psalm. 23. sweetly describes the active, and pearly influence of this
Ladder of Providence, Thou Lord art my Shepherd, thou preparest me a table,
thou annointest my head, how humbly does David, Thou God! Thou, Thou, Thou.
Many men go out of Gods vineyard, but Providence is never idle in the Lords
vineyard; God is always either a pruning or a ripening his Vine, always either
a clothing or correcting his children; Always a providing for them as a Sun,
or a protecting them as a Shield. It is reputed a shame for a man to see by
another eyes, but it is our wisdom in this dark age, to see by the Lords eyes,
Whose eyes run through the world.

Providence never stands still, or goes backward; it wearies man, but is never
it self weary. The Sun posteth thousands of miles in a day, and yet tires not:
Spiritual beings, much more the being of Spirits, are incapable of tyring or
delassation. In the description of a circle in paper, though the circle be
brought within one inch of finishing, yet, if the compass be removed, a man can
never make a perfect circle, but must begin all again to find out the same
center. If the Lord should cease a moment from his works of Providence, Sion
would run to ruin, and God would be put to the labor of working a new.

The Eighth remarkable in this Ladder is, The gradation of Providence: Here is
a climax of Providence, one step above another in the Ladder.

As first, In a spiritual sense; As in the natural birth there be many
preparations, but the birth is in a moment; so in Grace, there are many
dispositions to Grace, as sense of sin, mourning, and desires, which yet I dare
not call formally Grace, though the former always, and the last mostly go
before Grace, and by some to their ruin, are taken or mistaken for Grace: but
Regeneration it self, is in a moment, Psalm. 84.7. The Saints go from strength
to strength; from one virtue to another: There is an allusion to the Israelites
journying yearly to the Temple, they went from City to City before they came to
Jerusalem; or to Schools of learning, where there is going from one form to
another, from one Science to another. The martyr it seems numbered his steps,
one style more, and I am at my Fathers house, that is, at the top of Jacobs
Ladder. The Lord formerly in the wilderness carried, and now carrys Sion from
one Mile-post to another, from one Stage to another. Ebenezra, Legimus de
Angelorum ascensu and descensu sed non de alis, ascensusigitur hic nobis
injungitur non volatus.
hitherto has the Lord helped us; So Ebenezra, hitherto have we climbed by the
Lords help. Angels fetch long strides on the Ladder, but Saints cannot fly but
creep up to Heaven, Romans 5.3.

So in a more public sense, Rome was not built in a day, neither will Rome be
pulled down in a day; indeed in Rev. 18.17. it is said, in one hour so great
riches are come to naught; but that is as the Husbandman chalks a line about a
sere Tree which he intends to have for firing, he fetches many a blow, and yet
the Tree stands still, but at last one sound blow fell the Tree; Providence
has fetched many a blow at the Scarlet Whore, but her climacterical day is at
hand, her critical day is at hand and then she shall fall, fully, finally,
fatally. Providence hitherto has mostly been but a lopping the branches, but
now the Axe is laid to the very root of Antichrist.

If any wonder why the ruin of Antichrist in the Letter goes on no faster. I
Answer, The Devil and Pope must in some sense fall together, for they have
supported one another Cause; now and then Providence fetches a blow at the
Pope, and seems as if he gave over the work, because in the respite he is
striking at the Devil; So the downfall of the Spirit and Body of Antichrist keep
pace together, and therefore the work seems to be so long a doing. There are
various steps in one Ladder, and we must neither appoint the Lord which way to
walk, nor what steps to fetch; be not discouraged, God works gradually, and
also he works certainly. What course soever Providence steers, he will not miss
a point of his Divine Compass; but at length, notwithstanding all winds and
waves of men and Devils, the Church shall arrive at her harbor.

The Ninth remarkable in Jacobs Ladder is, The security of Providence, and that
both mediately and immediately.

1 Immediately. God sits on the top of the Ladder, not Angels nor men. One
Translation renders it, Deus stat ut vindex sedet ut ^judex.
God leans on the Ladder, but the Ladder rather leans on God, than God on the
Ladder. The Chalde, The glory of the Lord stands on the Ladder. Oh say some if
we had but such Judges as Sampson, as Gideon were! these words are bad, though
proceeding from good men, if proceeding from distrust, and are all one, as if
they should desire, not that God, but man stood on the top of the Ladder;
Remember, God is better than a thousand Gideons, than a thousand Sampsons. The
best of men, as experience has taught, are but men at the best, and all men
are but men at the most

It is well for Sion that God stands on the top; He does not reside in his
Palace, but comes to the door and Porch, visibly to his people, ready to
receive the Petitions of his Jacobs, by outstretched arms. Revel. 4.3. God is
presented there as sitting on a Throne, as a King in his Chair of State (cura
secura) to note, how easily he rules the world. The eye of God in Scripture is
said to be against a Nation, and that is able to discountenance any design; God
blew on Pharaoh and his Host, and when breath comes out of Gods mouth, then
breath goes out of man's nostrils, and he dies. He is said to turn his hand on
his Enemies; and indeed, with the turning of an hand, he turns man into Hell.
Quod Deus loquitui rid^ns tu lege lugens.
And lastly, Psalm. 2. the Lord is said to laugh at wicked men, and woe be to
those men at whose fooleries the Lords laughs. Arise Lord, says David, and let
thine enemies be scattered; There needs no more, the very arising of God is the
downfall of the ungodly.

There is nothing God does by man or means, but he can do without man or means;
Can God destroy Babylon with Armies, then God can destroy Babylon without
Armies; Armies cannot destoy Antichrist without God, but God can (if he please)
destroy Babylon without Armies. What a sweet order is in Divine Providence?
Jacob lies at the foot of the Ladder, the Angels go up and down the Ladder, and
the Lord gloriously stands on the top of the Ladder.

2 Mediately. Providence secures his Church by Angels; For in the Ladder you
have mention of Gods standing, and the Angels motion on the Ladder. Though God
did not create the world by Angels, as some phancie from Elohim barah, yet he
Governs the world, Melius est nescire fine crimine quam scire cum discrimine.
and especially his Church, by Angels. Angels ascended, and Angels descended:
one Jacob, but many Angels; there were as we say, questionless a number of
Angels, though we are at as great a loss to find out the number of Angels on
this Ladder, as in the world; Now to let pass the curious and vain enquiry of
the Schoolmen about the nature, number, order of Angels. I shall only
discourse of Angels, according to the revealed word, with just consequence, in
order to their influence on or about Sion. Of which Discourse, I wish you as
much profit in reading, as I have had in the penning of it, by the assistance
of the Lord. Angels are conversant about the Church in relation to the Head and
Members.

First, In relation to the Head, our Lord Jesus. I confess, I believe not that
Christ is the Redeemer of Angels; they were never Captives, and how can they be
ransomed? they never were obnoxious to guilt, and so are not capable of a
pardon; yet that Jesus that raised up man that was fallen, caused that the
Angels should not fall; Qui urtique redemptio solvens illum and servans istum.
delivering man out of, and defending Angels from captivity; and so in some
sense may be said to be redemption to both, curing man, and keeping Angels;
Angels had not stood, and man had never risen being fallen from his standing,
but for Christ. He reconciled man to Angels, and Angels to men, and by virtue
of his mediation, he is the Redeemer of man, but the Governor of Angels. God
gathered together in one, all things in Christ, in Heaven and on Earth, Ephesians.
1.10.

Hence Angels in Scripture express their homage to Christ, as their Lord, Exodus
26.30. The veil of the Tabernacle which covered the most holy, which signifies
the incarnation of Christ, was made of broidered work with Cherubims, which
shadowed out the service of Angels to the Mediator. Hence Matthew. 16.27. they
are called not only the Angels of God for man, but the Angels of God man. It
is observable, in that space of time, which was from his Incarnation to his
Ascension they served him ten times.

1 They carried the message of his miraculous Conception to the Virgin. Ad Evam
malus Angelus accessit and bomo separaretur a Deo, ad Mariam bonus Angelus
venit ut in ea Deus uniretur homini. Fulge.


2 They advertised Joseph, whom the ignorance of this Mystery had perplexed.

3 They published his birth unto the Shepherds.

4 They gave order to carry him into Egypt, to avoid the fury of Herod

5 They had care to cause him to be brought back into Judea after the death of
the Tyrant.

6 They accompanied him, and ministered to him after his temptation in the
wilderness.

7 They comforted him in his Agony in the Garden.

8 They roled back the stone, from the door of the Sepulcher wherein he had
been enclosed.

9 They declared his Resurrection.

10 They instructed his Disciples, who looked up after him ascending into
Heaven, that one day he would return.

Filius Dei caput Angelorum est non redemtionis sed creationis, Wollebii
Epitome.
Never did the Angels serve any person so often, nor in so great a number of
occurrences, nor in so high charges, nor through such diversity of means as
they served the Son of God. Christ had not a guard of men, as the Kings and the
Nobles of the World have; but a Guard of Nobles and Princes, and not only of
Princes but of Principalities and Powers. Some, Psalm. 91.11. say, the Angels
keep not Christ, but Christ keeps Angels, and that that promise of keeping thee
in all thy ways belongs to Christ Mystical, or Christ in his members, not to
Christ personal; or thus, that Angels ministered to Christ, but did not keep
Christ: But this we are sure of, Joh. 1. ult, The Angels ascended and descended
on the Son of Man; not that they minister to Christ alone, but that they, for
his sake and honor, do minister to, and are careful for, the whole Body of the
Elect. Wherefore,

Secondly, The Angels attend on Sion, on the Saints,

First, While in the world they serve the Church in general, and the members in
particular. The Angels that are good of which I speak,

1 Are beholders of the Affairs of the Church, Ephesians. 3.10. That unto the
Principalities in heavenly places might be made known by the Church, the
manifold wisdom of God. The highest Angel in Heaven may go to School and learn
of the lowest Saint on Earth. For as the Angels teach the Church, so the Church
teaches Angels: The Disciple here, in some sense, is greater than the Master.
The visible Church is the Stage whereon Jesus Christ displaies the fruits of
his Redemption, 1 Pet. 1.12. And Angels are spectators of the free Grace and
wisdom of the Gospel, which things the Angels desire to look into, Angelis
maxim in publico coetu circumsistuntur pii, ideo tabernaculi aul^a Cherubinis
in^v^ and foris referta.
(...), not only to look on, but to look into, an allusion to the Cherubims
which were so placed that they did look down on the Mercy Seat: They stretch
out their necks, they stoop down and pry into the Mysteries of the Gospel.

It is an honor for the Preachers of the Gospel to hold a multitude of men by
the ears; but what an honor is it to hold the Angels (q. d.) by the ears? to
have those Divine Beings like Doves to flock to the windows, to have an
Auditory of Angels? I dare say, that (how basely soever the Atheists and
Worldlings of this age, esteem of the Preachers of the Gospel) many of their
Congregations are fuller, than their purses are, of Angels. An Evangelical
Orator has an Auditory of Angels.

2 Angels are affected with the conversation of sinners and Saints; as the
Devils rejoice in the Prophanness and Apostasy, so the Angels rejoice in the
Conversion and Perseverance of men. The regeneration of a Soul makes the Angels
to sing, and the Devils to roar. Luke 15.10. There is joy in the presence of
Angels over every sinner that repents. Angels may say, as the angelical Apostle
(Doctor Angelicus) to professors, If you persevere, you are the Crown and Glory
of our Ministration; but licentious professors are a grief to Angels, not only
to Ministers that are Angels, but to Angels that are Ministers, 1 Cor. 11.10.
When poor sinners run to Christ on earth, the glorious Angels spiritually dance
in heaven; Lachrymae paenit entium sunt vinum Angelorum.
according to the old observation, That the tears of repenting sinners are the
wine of Angels.

As an Army that is broken, and has lost many Ranks and Files of Soldiers,
long to be recruited, and to have their number filled up again: So the Angels
that stand, are glad to see sinners list themselves under Christ, to fill up in
Heaven the void places of the fallen Angels. As Turtle Doves cannot endure
filthy stenches, nor Bees smoke, no more can the good Angels abide to converse
with noysom and profane sinners.

3 Angels descend on the Ladder to comfort and support the Saints in times of
tentation and trouble. Luke 22.43. They strengthened Christ in his Agony, and
without controversy, they exercise the same influence on the Body, that they
did to the Head, in proportion. The good Angels are ever removing our
hindrances from good, and our occasions of evil; mitigating our tentations,
helping us against our enemies, delivering us from dangers, comforting us in
sorrows, furthering our good purposes; they comforted deserted Hagar, Genesis 21.
Jacob fearing, Genesis 32. Paul fainting, Act. 27. the distressed women at the
Sepulcher, Mat. 28.

The good Angels suffer with the Saints suffering; rejoice, with them
rejoicing; encourage them contending, and triumph, with them crowned, against
Satan, and over his evil Angels. Where ever the love of God goes, there their
love goes; they keep those whom God keeps, and forsake them whom God forsakes.
The good Angels are not more terrible to evil men, than the evil Angels are
terrible to good men; and the good Angels are not more terrible to evil men,
than they are comfortable to good men. Angels are Fellow Soldiers with the
Saints, and fight under the same colors, and hearten them in their conflict
with Devils, only they march invisibly and upon the higher ground. Though
Jacob be asleep, his Angels are awake.

4 Angels descend the Ladder to instruct the Saints. As the Angels learn by the
Church, so the Church learns by Angels. God sent his Angel to teach Daniel the
mystery of the visions, Dan. 8.9. an Angel was sent to instruct John, Revel.
1.11. The Law was revealed, and the Gospel foretold and proclaimed by Angels,
Gal. 1.8. Luke 1.31. I dare not say Angels are properly in the ministerial
Function to preach salvation to the world, much less have they power to change
the heart; Conversion is the joy, but not the work of Angels. They are called
Heb. 1. Ministering spirits, Preachers of the Hierarchy indeed. Ministers of the
Gospel Liturgy (so the word signifies) commissioned for the good of the heirs
of salvation, to promote their spiritual good, doubtless, as well as their
temporal good. A Saint exceeds an Angel in experimental, but an Angel exceeds a
Saint in natural Knowledge.

How sweet to consider in these times of temptation! if God should suffer
(which he will not suffer) the world to pull down the Gospel Ministry by man,
yet they cannot assault, much less overthrow, Angelorum induistis nomen,
induite and naturam.
the Ministry of Angels. If Sion should be deprived of her Evangelical
Teachers, yet none can banish from her the Angels her Teachers.

5 The Angels descend the Ladder, to suggest holy and good thoughts unto us.
Notwithstanding it be peculiar to God to enlighten the mind, and enliven the
heart, yet why may not God use the invisible ministry of Angels, as well as the
visible ministry of man? Or rather, Secondly, What hinders to deny, but that as
evil Angels have liberty to suggest evil; so why may not good Angels have
liberty to suggest good thoughts? For first, The Devil is said to put it into
the heart of Judas to betray Christ, Joh. 13. And to fill the heart of Ananias
to lie to the Holy Spirit. Secondly, If Satan, 2 Cor. 11.4. be called an Angel
of light, because he suggesteth good things, for evil ends, or evil things,
for good ends, certainly then Angels of light, good Angels (as is observed)
suggest good, Distinctio Angelorum inter assistente; and ministrantes est vana,
quod omnes sunt assistentes and ministrantes imo ideo assistunt ut ministrent,
Heb. 1.14. Rivetus.
for good ends; how else could Satan be their Ape?

Not that it is supposeable that good Angels can change the heart; for though
it be granted, that they do stir up good affections, by removing impediments,
and in driving away the evil spirits, and wicked illusions, by exciting and
stirring up the phantasmes, and presenting or representing good thoughts to the
mind; and lastly, by moving the passions in the sensitive appetite, inclining
the Will to discharge her duty, yet it is the only Royalty and Prerogative of
God, so to offer Grace, as that man shall neither prove a dissenter, or stand
Neuter; for on the contrary, the Devil may flatter, but he cannot force man to
sin. He is but the father begetting, the evil heart is the Mother conceiving,
and the Father can do nothing in this moral sense, without the Mother. It is
remarkable in Scripture, that ordinarily when there is mention made of man's
sinning, there is mention likewise made of the tentations of the Devil; but
there is seldom or rarely mention made of the good Angels, moving men to
holiness, and the reason probably is, God, who is the effectual worker of
Grace, will have the glory of every gracious work himself.

I intend not the least to disparage the Ministry of the Gospel, thus in
exalting the Ministration of Angels; for the Gospel Ministry is more suitable,
if not in some sense more excellent. Well may Angels be dry Nurses to preserve,
and watch, and wait on, and protect the children of God; but to be Fathers to
beget them, to be wet Nurses to suckle them with the immortal seed, and sincere
milk of the word, belongs to the Gospel ministry. Yet the Angels suggest good
thoughts. The Sadduces imagined, that thoughts were Angels. I confess it is
honorable for human nature to be filled with Divine and Angelical thoughts; and
it is comfortable to believe thoughts are suggested by Angels, but we must in
no wise think that thoughts are Angels.

6 Angels descend the Ladder, for the preservation of the Saints. Eccl. 5.8. If
thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment and
Justice (which things are yet to be seen, felt and understood plain enough)
marvel not at the matter (as though there were no Providence to Govern the
World, or Justice to punish disorders) for he that is higher than the highest
regards, and there be higher than they. Here be three degrees of comparison,
High, Higher, Highest; and three degrees of Powers, There are Kings highest on
Earth, there are Angels higher than Kings, and there is God Father, Son, and
Spirit, higher than Angels, to whom yet, as Executioners of Gods Justice, and
Ministers of his Providence, is committed the care of the Empires of the world,
and chiefly of the Church, Dan. 4.17. Men are not Lords of the World, nor of
the Church of God. Oppression cannot sit so high, but Justice will sit above
her: If oppressors be above the reach of Man, yet they are not above the reach
of Angels, yet if they were, there is an higher than the highest, and there are
higher than they. The Devil had learned so much Divinity our of the Psalms,
Angeli custodiunt bonos non in praecipit is sed in v^is, cum non habemus
perfectionem Angeli non habeamus praesumtionem Diaboli.
Matthew. 4.6. he spoke not without book when he said, He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to carry thee in their Arms, he could not away with the
clause following, -- in his ways. The Angels are the Lifeguard of Saints, as
Officers of State, they attend on, and journey with them, they hold them in
their Arms that they fall not, and take them up in their Arms when they are
down; or as in a Family the greater children delight to carry the Sucklings in
their Arms; The Church Militant and Triumphant make but one Family, and the
Angels, our Fathers eldest children, delight to carry the weak Saints, Saints
in their minority, in their Arms, Gods Jacobs on their shoulders; and they do
not this at their liberty, when they please, or whether they will or no, for
they have a strict command for it, he has charged them; yet let us not be
secure. It is a custom for Princes, during their infancy, to have Guardians, to
keep and rule for them till they come of age. Angels are the Guardians, the
Protectors of Sion.

Gods children never go unattended, Angeli descendunt a Deo referentes divina
nobis, ascendunt a nobis referentes nostra Deo, Cajet i^ loc.
but like great persons they are always in the midst of their Guard; they
possibly, may be contemned and contemptible in the eyes of the world; but the
Angels of God scorn not to observe, no, not to serve them. We may keep the Sun
out of our houses, but we cannot keep the Air, much less these immaterial and
immortal spirits. They watch over us, when we sleep; they attend on us, when we
awake; they are our Companions in Prison, and in Exile. No walls nor bolts can
sever them from our sides; Tyrants may forbid men, but cannot forbid Angels
from out Society.

That of Theodoret is famous, That found so much sweetness on the wrack,
complained that his Persecutors increased his torment when they took him down;
for said he, all the while I was on the wrack, and you venting your malice
against me, methought there was a youngman in white, an Angel, stood by me,
which wiped off the sweat, which comfort now I have lost.

Every Saint is in Joshua the Highpriests case, with Satan on one hand, and an
Angel on the other; without this, our danger were greater than our defense; and
we could neither stand nor rise; We sin too often, and should catch more falls
if these Guardians did not uphold us.

A^geli ministrabant Christo, non tanquam misericordes indigenti sed tanquam
subditi omnis potenti.
7 Angels descend the Ladder to provide for the Saints. After Christ had fasted,
Matthew. 4. The Angels ministered unto him; questionless, to nourish and refresh
his outward man, being wearyed with fasting; some say, brought him food; they
ministered to Christ, not as the rich to the poor, but as Servants to their
Master. While we continue within the Precincts of God, we are under the
protection of Angels. Manna in Scripture, is called Angels food; not only
(...), by way of excellency, because it was rare and dainty food; but
Instrumentally, because it was (says a Critic) ministered by the hands of
Angels. Rather than the Church shall starve, God will send Angels to Market, to
cater for them.

Jacobs Ladder is the Stage, the Angels are Sions footposts (q d.) that daily
run from Heaven to Earth, from Earth to Heaven back again; They carry news to
Heaven, and bring intelligence from Heaven. When Sion lies under Burdens and
Oppressions, the Angels presently fly and ride post to Heaven, and tell God the
Father, what his children stand in need of, and will not depart or descend from
the Palace of Heaven on the Ladder, without supply and provision. If the
covetous man could, when he was reproached abroad, comfort himself in his
Counting House when he came home, to see his many lovely Angels to smile on
him; how may Gods Jacobs refresh themselves in the midst of the scorns and
scoffings of the World, when they remember and review the Vision of the Angels?

8 Angels descend armed, to fight for Sion. Good Magistrates are visible
Protectors, and good Angels are invisible Protectors of Sion, under God. The
King of Glory can never want forces, for he has a Militia of Angels; thousands
and ten thousands of Angels are his Chariots to ride in: These heavenly Hosts
are the horsemen and Chariots of Israel. It is desperate to provoke a General
marching in the head of a puissant and numerous Army. The Angels observe their
Rank and File, they wait but for the word, Nec boni Angeli nisi quantum Deus
jubet, nec mali Angeli injusta faciunt nisi quantum just ipse permittit. Aug.
de Trinit. l 3. c. 8.
and they immediately take wing, either for the comfort of Sion, or confusion
of her Enemies. God sent one Brigade of Angels to help Elisha, 2 King. 6.17.
another Brigade, to aid Lot against the Sodomites; one Squadron to help Jacob
against Esau, another, to help Hezekiah against Zenacherib, Genesis 32.24. Isa.
37.36. Gods heavenly Forces quarter up and down about all the afflicted
Churches in the World. An Army of Angels, Gen, 32.2. was sent to convoy Jacob,
and therefore he called the place Mahanaim, that is, two Hosts or Camps; either
because the Angels appeared in two Bands, and so made, as it were, a guard for
Jacob to pass between them; or because the great Angelical and Royal Army
quartered and marched with Jacobs little Army, and so two confederate Armies
appeared in the field together, so say Rivet and Caryl. Our strongest Militia
is either of Angels that are Spirits, or of Angelical Spirits, Psalm 88.17.

Angels, Ezekiel 1. have the face of a Man, to signify their knowledge; Wings, to
signify their swiftness; they cannot pass from one place to another in a
moment, because all motion is from one term to another term by a middle,
Angelus est nomen officii no^ naturae, ex eo quod est spiritus est, ex eo quod
agit Angelus est. Idem, in Psa 111
yet Psalm. 10.4. they are compared to a flame of fire. The Cherubims have wings
on their feet, which is strange; they cannot foot it fast enough, and therefore
must speed their Race with flight. Thirdly, They represent an Ox, to signify
their obedience to God; Hence we pray, Let thy will be done on Earth, as it is
in Heaven, that is, freely, as the Angels obey God without reluctance. And
fourthly, they are compared to a Lion for their strength. One Angel killed an
hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night, 2 King. 19.35. One Angel
wants neither hands nor weapons to rout and ruin an whole Army. The good Angels
stopped the Lions mouths when Daniel was shut up in the Den; restrained by Gods
allowance the force of the fire, when the three children were cast into the
furnace; The Angel of the Lord encamps about Sion, Psalm. 34.7. That is, the
Angels; for he speaks of an Host; and the Critics observe, that in the Hebrew,
one is put for a multitude, as the inhabitant for the inhabitants, 2 Chronicles.
11.4. Quail, for Quails, Psa. 105.33, 40.

When Christ is set forth by the name of an Angel, it is in Scripture with some
additions, as the Angel of the Covenant, and when you read of the Angel of the
Lord, it is meant of Christ, unless there be some contradictions of that
interpretation in the context, as is apprehended. Angels are Sions Sentinels at
home, and File-leaders abroad. As there are good men against evil, so there
are for Sion, Angels against Angels, Rev. 12.7. The Ethiopians supposed that
Angels attended on Judicatories, and therefore were accustomed to leave twelve
Chairs empty in the Judgment place, which they say, were the Seats of Angels.

When Sion is in distress, Faith and Prayer is able to press the Angels, and to
bring them into the batlet; but they are Volunteers, not Mercenaries* The Stars
fought against Sisera; that is, say some, the Angels in the Stars, as in their
War-Chariots; as if the Angels (according to the odd old proverb of
Intelligences) did inform the Stars; but they are heavenly wide, as one says,
In the first of Zechary verse. 8. the Myrtle trees in the bottom, signify the
low estate of the Church, or the Church in a low estate: The diverse colored
Horses, were Angels appointed for diverse Offices (says Junius) the red Horses
for Judgment, the white, for Mercy, the speckled, for mixed actions, being sent
out at once to help Sion, Non tribuere Angelis audeo quod forte non possunt,
nec debeo derogare quod possunt.
and oppose her Enemies. An Angel smote bloody Herod; two Angels defeated
Zenacheribs Host; and Angels by name, if not by nature, says Mr. Caryl, pour
out the seven Vials of Gods wrath in the Revelation. In Luke they are called
the Host of Heaven: These Armies are all of one mind, no difference of Colors,
though possibly different Orders, yet no difference in their Orders. They on
the Ladder, ascend and descend, they give place one to another, there is no
justling between them. The Rabbis suppose (on what ground I am careless of
inquiring) four Angels to be the Presidents of the four quarters of the World;
Michael of the East, Raphael of the West, Gabriel of the North, and Uriel of
the South. The Barbarians had once taken Constantinople, but that in the night
season they were frighted by the appearance of armed Angels, Socrat. l. 6. c. 6.

Wherefore as Alexander the Great slept soundly, though the enemy was at hand;
and being asked the reason of such security, replied, that Antipater his
Captain was awake; so may the Saints sleep in peace in these stormy times,
because they have, Dan. 4. Guirin vigilantes, the watchful ones about them.
Solomon, Cant. 3.7. had sixty valiant men, all with swords, to defend him, for
fear of the night; but the Saints are encompassed with Guards of Angels, and as
Elisha said, 2 King. 6. to his fearful Servant, there are more with us, than
against us; we need not regard the Malicia of Devils, for we have the Militia
of Angels. This is spoken in subordination to Gods presence, who uses them,
not as Princes, that need their Guards, but for the glory of his Majesty, and
for the support of our weakness, but to testify his great love to us, in
employing such honorable creatures for our service, and to maintain amity and
correspondency between Saints and Angels, until they both walk arm in arm in
Heaven.

9 Angels attend on the Saints at their deaths. Angels are the Protectors of
Sion while they live, and their Porters when they die. They are as careful of
the Saints, as Nurses of their Babes; God puts his children, when they are
born, out to them to tender and tutor, and at their death, they bring them home
to him again. Lazarus, Luke 16. was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom.

It is probable, the Devils attend on dying men, if possibly to tempt them to
despair; the less time they have to reign, the more they rage, and therefore
good Angels attend too, to facilitate the death of the Saints, ready with their
arms to receive the souls of Gods Jacobs, En fratres quamrerum lamentanda
mutatio, fu^^s divitis antecedit lugubris tu ba Servorum, feretrum pauperis
antecedit Angelorum psallentium multitudo Chrysol.
and carry them up the Ladder to Heaven. Lazarus was carried, not by one Angel,
but in the plural number, by Angels. At the funeral of a Prince or Emperor, it
is accounted an honor to help bear his Hearse to the Grave; so the glorious
Angels willingly condescend to carry the souls of the Saints to Heaven. Many
Angels carry one Lazarus, as if they had been ambitious to carry him, every
Angel striving which should carry a limb; This was greater state than the King
of Egypts Chariot drawn by four Princes. We are a delightful and lightsome
armful to the Angels while we live, and at death they do the last and best
office, as we say, for us. Lazarus who living was licked by Dogs, is now dead
guarded by Angels; thus they condescend to handle such filthy creatures as sin
has made us; while they remember our necessity, they do as it were forget
their own honor.

Whereas some plead for topical Angels, and personal Angels, that is, for the
presidency of one Angel over a Country, and over a particular man (according to
the conceit of the good and bad Genius) I judge it more for a Saints honor and
safety to have a Guard of Angels, then a Guardian Angel.

To conclude, Angel vocantur quod funguntur munere ordinario, Arch-Angeli quod
extra ordinario.
we have always with us invisible Friends and Enemies; let the consideration of
our Enemies keep us from security, and the consideration of our Friends keep us
from distrust. Had wicked men their eyes open as Balaam once had, they would at
every turn see an Angel to stand in their way, ready to resist what they go
about, as he did, for this is one of those noble employments, of those noble
Spirits, to give a strong, though invisible, opposition to wicked Enterprises.

True, they appear not ordinarily, what then? no more do the evil Angels; had
we but spiritual eyes we should see with Moses, the invisible God; and not that
only, but with Jacob, the invisible Angels. Many a treacherous act have they
hindered, without the knowledge of the Traitor; yea, many are the dangers we
see and fear, innumerable those we neither see nor fear, from which Providence
makes Angels instruments to deliver us. Good Angels support the Ministers of
God in the Throne, and in the Pulpit. As Jacob in the Vision said, The Lord was
in this place, and I knew not of it: So how often are the Angels with us, and
we do not consider it? Angeli sunt media sed non mediatores.
though we see not Angels, yet we must believe them, we are not Jacobs, not
Christians, if our faith be not as sure as our sense.

Wherefore let us honor Angels, not adore them, much less invocate them, they
are not the Ladder, but go on the Ladder.

From the explication of Jacobs Ladder, and having showed the sufficiency of
Providence, take these Conclusions.

First, Lean on Gods Ladder, Trust his All Sufficiency for your selves, and for
the Church.

1 In particular, for your selves. Quid haesitas super possessionibus, caelum
and Dominum cum habeas?
When we see a child carping and caring for himself, surely, say we, either
this child has no Father, or his Father cares not for him; either it is
Fatherless or Loveless. Cast your care on God, Heb 13. Why? for God cares for
you. What need you care, and God care too? Is God sufficient for the journeys
end, and shall we distrust him for the way? Shall we trust man upon a piece of
Parchment, with two or three hands and seals, and not the Lord, who daily
proves himself Debtor to us in volumes of love? Distrust slanders God to his
face. Some are all for Faith, I believe, I believe; but nobody is for Holiness;
and on the contrary, some Christians are very careful against Profaneness,
they will not part with a good Conscience for all the goods in the world, and
yet nourish doubtings and distrusts of Gods Love to them, as if Unbeleef were
no such great matter, as if God would easily dispense with that. The Lord
says, he that provides not for his own, Si Deus sic custodit superstua tua
quomodo animam tuam?
is worse than an Infidel; and shall man ever be able to write Infidel on Gods
door?

How many, say they, trust God for their Souls, and yet dare not trust God with
their Bodies? Whereas Nature has often said, God never sends mouths, but he
will also send meat and grace; If God take away my food, he will also take away
my appetite: How reasonable is it to trust God when we have so often tried him?
and yet how happy were many a man if he could but trust God as far he can see
him? God is not bound to give us necessarys, and yet we are not content with
abundance. We cannot be merry without cates and delicates, when Providence
might make us to be without bread. The Saints may be without many things, but
they want nothing; if they should want any thing, yet they want no good thing:
They may want the favor of man, but shall not want the smiles of their Father,
Psalm. 34.10.

How sweetly may a Believer view the Heavens, and say, this is my Fathers
Palace; and say of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, These are the lights that my
Father hangs up; and say of the Beasts of the Field, and Fowls of the Air,
These my Father feeds and fills, to maintain his Household. Worthy Mr. Hern,
lying on his Deathbed, his wife made much womanish lamentation, what should
hereafter become of her little ones; Peace Sweetheart, said he, That God who
feeds the Ravens, will not starve the Herns. Omnia famulantur famulanti Deo.
Meat and drink, and the Gospel, are good Cheer, said the Martyr. Let them
distrust that have not a God to live on, said Luther. Having food and raiment;
says the Apostle; not dainties, but food; not Velvets, but Raiment, Let us
therewith be content. The young Ravens are fed of God, Non licet de fortuna
quaeri, salvo Caesare. Senec.
Psa. 147. being forsaken of their Dam; for out of their dung arises a worm,
which creeps into their mouths and feeds them. Oh that we could depend on
Providence for our subsistence; if we could but find Faith to believe it, God
would find Means to effect it. The Mariner never murmurs though his Cabin be
not gilded, if it carry him but safe to his Port. When we have not strength to
work, we have liberty to lie down with Jacob at the foot of the Ladder, and
sleep.

Vides sed non invides
Secondly, Trust God, and fear not man. Wicked men, Psalm. 129.6. sit as it were
in a golden Chair, on the ridge of an house, the least breath of Providence
throws them down, and the higher they were lifted up from the ground, the
greater will be their fall. They are Gods Plowers, ver. 3. It seems when Sion
is in many tribulations, God has many Plows agoing, and when the back of Sion
is furrowed and dunged with persecutions and reproaches, the Lord will loosen
the Cords, and cut the Traces. In a good sense, God speed the Plow. Though they
build, Amos 9.2. their nest in the Stars, yet God will set his Ladder up and
fetch them down, and before their designs are fledged, he will destroy both
young and old, and all; though man cannot reach those Nests, yet God can. Fear
not, Numb 14.9. the people of the Land, for they are bread to you; They shall
not eat us, but we shall eat them; they shall not eat our bread, but be our
bread. Has God built his House, and will he suffer it to fall down for want of
repair? has the Lord formed Children by his Spirit, and will he grudge to be
at charges to bring them up?

Some would have all Gods Enemies branded on the Forehead with his broad Arrow,
as if God could not know them again: But let his Enemies flee as far as they
will, he has them in safe custody, and sure guard; Let men shift Apparel and
Forms never so often, God knows their faces and hearts. It is not always Faith
to believe (quoad hic et nunc) the ruin of such and such of Gods Enemies; for
often, we may more justly conclude, they may prosper in this world, because here
is all the Heaven they are like to have. God will take his time. Oppression is
man's work, and punishment is Gods work, and shall we think God will not be as
perfect in his work as man in his? He hangs up many men in Gibbets in this
World, lest his Providence should be doubted of; Deo confisi nunquam confusi.
but not all, lest the Judgement-Day should be denied. As man hunts one Beast
with another, and catches one Bird with another, so God uses one Man for the
ruin of another. Richard the Third used the Instrument of his bloody Plots, as
men do Candles, burn the first out to a snuff, and then having lighted another,
tread that under foot. God makes men, while they think to grind the faces of
his people, to bring grice, beyond their own intentions, to his own Mill. Cease
therefore from man, that is Gods Alarm, Isa. 2. whose breath is in his
nostrils, and whereof is he to be accounted? How weak is Man, how strong is
God? Take heed of idolizing man, either in fearing or loving man above God.
That man fears God but as Man, that fears Man as God. When the prayers of
Saints are crossed, and the Enterprises of their Enemies succeed, Remember
Jacobs Ladder, and the Vision of Angels.

Gods Trials are like bellows Satan's the Blower,
Blows out false Faiths, makes true ones blaze the more:
Fear not then little Flock, the greatest ill
Your Foe can does to scratch, he cannot kill.
The second Conclusion from Jacobs Ladder, Climb not, but Climb.

First, Climb not in the world. The days are evil, says the Apostle. The days
particularly are now ambitious. Oh that men did but creep up to Heaven as fast
as they run up the stairs of honor on Earth; that men were as greedy to be Gods
people, as they are of being gods over the people! How few are there that had
rather lie in the dust, than rise by wickedness; that had rather rum with
Christ, than reign with Caesar. Nebuchadnezzar would needs be climbing, Is not
this great Babylon that I have built? but the Lord tumbled him down headlong
from his Throne, to learn humility. Haman would get above his Sphere and
Element, not high enough, still aspiring, till he was too high for his honor,
on that Ladder he made to hang poor Mordecai, and some say he made it so high,
that he might the more highly and visibly disgrace Mordecai.

Who plants the Tree, deserves the fruit, it is fit
That he that bought the purchase handsell it.
The Angels were not high enough, they would be above God (as some think) and
out-grow their own skin, Jude 6. but pride tript up their heels, the steps
brake, and they fell to Hell, they left their station. The world was like a
well ordered Army; Angels once kept Rank and File, the Devil first marred the
Camp, went out of his place, and was cut off. Aspiring Spirits march under
Satan's Colors, and dance after his Pipe. Satan would needs also lead mother
Eve up these stairs, Genesis 3. you shall be as God; a tempting proffer, she
sought after the Tree of Knowledge, Fortuna dum splendet frangitur.
and lost the Tree of Life. Many have been one day high in honor, and another
day high on the Gallows; and as they say of metal of which they make Glass, it
is nighest melting, even when it shines brightest. Shifting spirits are so used
to climbing, that they seldom find their legs till they break their necks.

The Spider, Prove. 30.28. is made an Emblem of ambitious man, they love the top
of the Cieling; So ambitious men weave their webs of honor and preferment; but
we know Spiders are poisonous creatures, and weave their designs out of their
own bowels; and Providence has a Besome with which he can easily sweep them
down; and especially, Araneae telam ^exere.
it is notorious folly for Spiders to climb in that age wherein Providence is a
cleansing the World. Canutus promised to make him that would dispatch his
Competitor for the Crown, one of the highest men in England; The Competitor was
murdered, and when the Attempter demanded the reward promised, the King bad
his head to be cut off, and put on a pinnacle in the Tower of London, and so,
according to his promise made him one of the highest men in England; so Satan
serves his servants in the end. Great men in high places seldom have been wise
til after the blow (as in the Roman storys) and though they have had means to
come down at their ease, yet they have staid till Providence has thrust them
down headlong. That exchange of verse between Q. E. and Sir W. R. is famous.

I fear to climb, for fear left I should fall.
Either climb higher, or climb not at all.
Not but that the Crown of honor is the gift of God, and may be happily worn
when the hand of Providence puts it on. Magistracy is a Diadem, and there is a
luster that God usually casts on its Jewels, especially, when Religion and
Righteousness bind it to the head. Were it not for Magistracy, Cheapside would
be as notorious a place for robbery, as Salisbury Plain, Ubi nunc est Resp. ibi
fimus potius quam dum illam veterem sequimur fimus in nulla Dolabella Cice. in
Ep. l. 9
and the distinction between mine and thine would fall to the ground, and we
should more ordinarily have cutting of Throats than now we have cutting of
Purses: Which deserves consideration with some malcontents, who while they
seek to establish the old Government, may unawares run into confusion and blood
and at length have no Government at all. Without Magistracy robbery would be a
Law, and men like Dogs, would try all right (as is noted) by their teeth.

How excellent were it, Ut imbecillis scala eum qui ascendit, Dejicit sic
superbiae scala eum qui eam ascendit. Nilus in loc.
while others are hugging the world, for the Saints to be trampling on the
world? How few are there that climb this Ladder of honor, but they leave a good
Conscience at the bottom? That man that will be great by any means, must needs
leave off to be good by all means. But alas, it is not a Velvet pantofle can
remove the Gout; nor a golden Diadem, the headache; nor a purple robe, the
Cholick.

How many deal with Religion, as a Mason deals with a Laddder, Religio peperit
divitias and filia devoravit matrem.
when he has work to do, and to climb, oh then he hugs and imbraceth the
Ladder and carrys it in his arms, and on his shoulders, but when he has done
climbing, presently the Ladder is hung on the wall, or thrown into a corner:
So, many set the Ass on Christ, and not Christ on the Ass, making Religion a
stalking-horse for preferment, and when men have got their ends by religion,
then there is an end of their Religion. Mundus est cadaver and perentes eum
sunt canes.
How many that were poor enough in the world, have grown rich in the profession
of poor Jesus, and have followed the chase only, with Jonathan, till they have
met with honey?

It is damage for a man to win the whole world and lose his Soul, but what a
poor bargain make they, that lose their souls, and win not the thousandth part
of the world? That Scholar paid a great price, that made this Contract with the
Devil, Give me learning, and I Will give you my soul. The ambitious Pope made but
a foolish Bargain, that sold his Salvation, and bought his Damnation, for the
Popedom. How far is two or three hundred a year below the worth of a Soul? and
yet how many such Chapmen are there in the world? But let ambitious men
consider, The Stairs of Honor are steep, the standing slippery, and the regress
a downfall. Praepositioni quot accidunt? Unum; Quid? Caesus tantum; Quot casus?
Duo; Qui? Accusativus and Ablativus: Haec enim Pilatum oportet timere, accusari
a crimine, and auferri a Regimine, and ignominiose cadere. Clem. Oct.

Secondly, Climb above the world; from this glorious Ladder of Contemplation,
you may have many glorious sights, upward and downward, forward and backward.

1 You may have a sight upward and downward. As our Lord and Master said
strive, so I may say climb. You have a long journey to go, before you come to
heaven, little time to go it in, and less time than strength; Wherefore, pass
the world as through a Fair, stand not gazing on every Pedlars shop, or silly
gue gaw, till you come to your home. These are not the Jerusalem, said the
Traveller concerning Lions and Paris, though they were beautiful Cities; Faelix
cui invisibilium scientia fit scala ad invisibilia cognoscenda, cui scientia
fit scala ascensionis non ruina dejectionis. Victor.
Riches and Honors are not Heaven; Heaven is of another color and complexion.
Be Star-gazers in a spiritual sense, climb to the top of Jacobs Ladder. How
little would the world seem to us, if the great God were not little in us? who
ever took a prospect of Heaven, and did not fall in love with it? and who ever
loved Heaven, that never took a prospect of it? Either Heaven will take us off
from viewing the World, or the World will take us off from viewing Heaven. The
World would seem no such piece of glory, if the Glory that shines on the top of
the Ladder were but unfolded to us. They say, Naples is a City to be seen only
on Holy Days, because of its beauty and formosity; Heaven is a Non-such, that
day is a high day indeed, when the soul sets Heaven; an holy heart is only fit
to see that holy place. If those that live under the Line have all the
influences of Heaven, and see (as they say the motions of the Stars and Orbs,
how more glorious is it to be above them, and to see the Stars and Orbs to
move below us?

Jacobs Ladder is as sweet a repast, as Moses his Pisgah, Zacheus his
Sycamore-tree, and Peter's Mount We miss many a brave show of Providence for
want of climbing. It is glorious to think of Glory, but more glorious to
possess Glory. Some Mountains in the World are above the Clouds, and Storms,
and Winds; what a glorious thing is it to contemplate Eternity, and every day
with Enoch to fetch a turn or two in the Royal Exchange of Glory, to be above
the passions and persecutions of this lower world, to look downward and behold
the eclipses of Honors and Crowns, to be clothed with the beams of the Sun of
righteousness, and to have the world out of our heart, and under our feet?
There are no storms of Passions, no thunders of Wars, no winds of Temptations,
no proing and conning about Opinions; not one party for Luther, and another for
Calvin; no clashing and clamoring about Presbytery, Independency, and
Anabaptism; no dissenting brethren in Heaven. When the Apostle Paul had a
window opened in Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4 and heard such unspeakable things; he had
nothing but Heaven in his mouth, Deus res creatas ad modum scalae adoptavit ut
per eam sui amantibus ascensum ad se extruxit. Basil.
and Christ Jesus, ever after, whom he names many hundred times in his
Epistles; Like as children, when they have been in a famous City, their eyes
and thoughts are so filled with the rich Shops, rare Buildings, that their
tongues always run on them, and run over with them, and have nothing else to
speak of. If one thought so highly of the study of Astronomy, because it was
occupied about the Spears and Stars, and celestial Bodies, that he pronounced
the first Authors happy; How happy are those souls that are busied in the
contemplation of God himself? Jacobs Ladder of Piety, is better than Jacobs
Staff of Astronomy.

Second Prospect from this Ladder; we may look backward and forward, and
notwithstanding all our unworthiness, and unthankfulness, see what God has
done for England, and will do for Sion.

First, We may look backward, and admire four things.

1 That we are not made a Sodom. If the preaching of the Gospel lift a Nation
up to Heaven, then certainly England is not upon the Earth, Matthew. 11.23. The
sin of Sodom was fullness of bread; Their sin was not plenty of bread, but
emptiness of obedience. England, I fear, is guilty of a Gospel Surfeit; And
might not the Lord justly take us down, and make us know the worth of the
Gospel, by the want of it? Since we have played with the light of Truth, might
he not make us feel the fire? Might not God lay down his Basket, and take up
his Ax, and because we are not fit for fruit, and building, make us fit fuel
for burning? Have not the Ambassadors of the everlasting Gospel had as hard lot
in England, as they had in Sodom?

Who cannot but admire, that when England is as chaffy as Sodom, that we ave
not the same flames as Sodom had? Is not this salvation, that when we have
been weary of God, that yet God is not weary of us? That when we have refused
to be a holy Nation, that yet we are a Nation? That when our sins are the sins
of Sodom, that our sufferings are not the sufferings of Sodom? God has lighted
up a flaming Candle of Justice in Sodom, the Lord grant that lukewarm England
may yet see to read her salvation by it? Mercy always swims in Justice; but
with us, Justice seems to be drowned in Mercy.

2 From this Ladder admire, that we are not made an Egypt. God lately turned
our waters into blood, our Sea was then a red Sea indeed. What a mercy is it,
that English darkness is not a proverb as well as Egyptian darkness. England,
of old, was called Albion, from the white Rocks, and Scotland (as some Critics
fancy) signifies a Land of darkness; But how quickly can the Lord turn Albion
into Scotia, England into Scotland, and Scotland into England? we are their
neighbors already.

We have much liberty to bless God, Oh that there we not so much liberty to
blaspheme God! We have more liberty than either we have deserved or been
thankful for. There was a time when the Saints in England had Conscience
without liberty, we have now much liberty of Conscience, the Lord grant the
time may never come that we should have liberty without Conscience; Liberty,
and nothing else but Licentiousness and Atheism. We had once hearts to bless
God, but wanted opportunity, Oh that now we have opportunities we did not want
hearts! As when a doubting Christian complained that he had no interest in God,
he was such a stranger to God, a Preacher of the Gospel replied, But what will
you take for that interest, though as you think little, you have in God? not a
thousand worlds, said the doubting Christian: Saints in England, what will you
take for that liberty you have? Now your eyes see your Teachers, what if they
were all shut up in corners? now the doors of the Congregations (q.d.) are
open, what if it were past Sermon-time, and past Repentance-time? what if the
silver bell of the Gospel should no more sound in England? Oh that we had as
much conscience of liberty, as we have liberty of conscience! That of Omnium
Deorum, among the Romans; of Omnium Sanctorum, amongst the Papists: of Omnium
Sectarum, here in England, are monstrous. Every variation from unity is a step
to nullity. If ever England should come from one Religion to all (and we are in
the high way) we shall quickly go from all Religion to none.

3 From this Ladder admire, that we are not made a Germany; Instead of the
sword of War, you have the Scepter of Peace; instead of Garments rolled in
blood, and the noise of Arms, you have the blood of Christ sprinkled on your
Garments, Oh trample it not under feet; Instead of the roaring Cannons, you
have the sweet sound of Gospel Ordinances. God has but shaken his rod over us,
while he has broken their backs; while we have been let blood, he has even
let them bleed to death. God bid David choose which of the three plagues, of
War, Famine, Pestilence, he would have; but God puts it to our choice which of
those three plagues we will not have inflicted on us; Though God has sheathed
up his sword, yet he holds it still in his hand, therefore fear; What salvation
is this, that parents are not drinking the blood of their ch ldren, to quench
their thirst; and eat the flesh of their children, to satisfy their hunger?

4 From hence admire, that we are not made a Babylon. Pray, pray that the
Bibles may be opened in Spain, and yet bless God that there are not Pad-locks
hung on them in England. Pray mightily that Antichrist may fall abroad, and
forget not to bless God, that though there be much of Rome in England, that yet
England is not Rome, that none can go to Market that none can buy or sell,
without the mark of the Beast, Revel. 13.17. either in their right hands, or on
their foreheads.

It is the opinion of some good men, that the Protestant Profession shall be
overspread with Antichristianism again, and that then the Lord will
extraordinarily awaken them from their sleep, and actively engage them against
Babylon. But I wish, though we have looked on Babylon, that we may not so lust
after Babylon; Spiritual longings in this kind are dangerous, but I hope God
will prevent Sions miscarriage in the birth of Reformation. The Lord grant, if
we go to Rome, it may not be to dote on her, but to destroy her. There is an
old Prophecy, that Antichrist shall never overcome Paris, nor Venice, nor
London; Let us not be secure, for if his Soul have entertainment here, his Body
will not tarry long after.

But some may say, What Salvation has the Lord wrought for us? what fruit is
there of all the blood shed in England? is not our condition as bad as ever,
nay, in some sense worse? the Saints were united, are they not now divided? how
many Professors are turned Apostates, nay Persecutors and Profane? This is sad
indeed, and to be lamented; yet, as the Disciples did not wish the blood in
Christ's veins again, though they were distressed by his death; So I dare not
say, though in our Distractions, and among the Blasphemies of this age, Man
has lost his way, that God has lost his end. This is the support, That as God
has laid the Foundation, so he will carry on the Building; that as the Great
Turk makes a Bridge of the Bodies of his Soldiers to scale the walls of a
Garrison; So the Lord knows how to make his glory to rise, by the fall of ours,
and to give life to his Cause, by the death of his followers.

Secondly, From this Ladder we may take many sweet Prospects forward, on what
God will do more apparently for Sion in the world. There are eight famous
Prospects.

The first Prospect from Jacobs Ladder is, Gods Jacobs may foresee the
abundance of knowledge yet to be poured out, Isa. 36 26. Isa. 52.8. Isa. 11.
Knowledge shall abound as waters do upon the Sea. Knowledge is now but at a low
Ebb, in comparison of that high Tide that shall flow hereafter. Knowledge shall
abound as the Sea intensively and extensively, it shall more increase, and be
more clear. As a Dwarf standing on the shoulders of a tall man sees further
than the tall man, on whose shoulders he stands: So I am persuaded, in some
things, that the men of knowledge in this age will be but children in
understanding in the next. Jer. 31.34. They shall not teach one another saying,
know the Lord. Then farewell preaching. No, the Saints shall need to be built
up, but they shall not so much need to be taught the Principles of Religion
saying, Exprimere non valet experimento opus est. Cathedram in coelo habet qui
corda docet.
Know the Lord, What is God; the new nature shall teach them that, which is not
the impression of Man, but of God; They shall say, Our Father, and I Believe,
by roat.

It is observable, that under the Law the Girdle was about the Loins, Ezekiel
23.15. But in Gospel times it is about the Paps, Rev. 1.^3. to signify, how
knowledge shall rise h gher in the last ages of the world, than in former ages.
Young men shall see visions, and old men shall dream dreams. The old world did
but dream, the knowledge of the Jews is more dark, but in Gospel-daies there
shall be Visions, a clearer knowledge and Revelation of the mind of God.
Antichrist has brought a cloud into the Temple, and the Gospel Sunshine must
expel it. Providence is picking quarrels with the painted windows of Antichrist
and the Lord will set up clear glass windows that shall not keep out the light.
Not that we are to expect new Truths, but new Understandings; not the printing
of a new Gospel,
or making any more additions; but new eyesight, and the downfall of old error.

How is it possible that amongst us any should plead for Revelations, when we
have the revealed Word? Revelations were more suitable to the days of the Law,
we have a complete copy of the Lords mind for the Government of his Church in
the Word; but it is as with man, the older he grows the more inclinable he is
to dreams: Mundus senescens patitur phantasiam.
the old world begins to dote, and we are ready to neglect our watch in this
dreaming age.

Second Prospect from this Ladder, we may foresee the increase of holiness. Now
many can profess and be drunk, profess and swear, and lie; now men are more
careful for new Lights than new Lives: new Notions, Gnostici simal and
Borboritae.
than new Motions of the Spirit, Care more to have a Library of Divinity in
their brains, than a Catechism of Divinity in their hearts: Have the light of
the Sun for Knowledge, whereas they have not the heat of a candle for Holiness;
like the Toad, that has a precious pearl in the Head, but poison in the Bowels;
or like the Lapwing, that has a Coronet on her head, but always feeds on
dunghils.

But there is a time a coming when men shall more visibly honor God, -- All the
pots in the Lords house shall be holy, and holiness shall be wrote on the bells
of the horses, Zech. ult. Counterfeit holiness vanishes, the more real
holiness appears. At Rome there was a Pantheon or Temple for all gods, but the
Heathen would not suffer Jehovah to be worshipped there, for he is a jealous
God, and if he had been honored, then down with Mars and Jupiter.

The Kingdom of Christ shall prosper (I wish none have Kingly thoughts of that
Kingdom) the Kingdom of Christ, and holiness, and humility, and Mortification.
It is not the throwing down of profane Ministers, and oppressing Magistrates
only, will be this Kingdom; for they may be thrown down, and yet Christ never
be set up; the new Creature, Self-denial, will after all this be necessary, for
otherwise we should have rather Plato's Commonwealth, or Tully's Offices, than
Christ's Kingdom. Moral Profaneness indeed lays the Gospel on the dunghill, but
Moral Holiness simply will never set Christ in his Throne. There shall be an
highway, and it shall be called the way of holiness, and no unclean thing
shall pass therein, Isa. 53. If any demand how this can be? I answer, no
disease is incurable to an omnipotent Physician.

Third Prospect from this Ladder; we may see Hypocrisy defeated, and many
Apostates recovered. Now many desire rather to appear than to be holy; they
account the form necessary, but the power of Religion burthensom; Now many like
Rowers in a Boat, look one way and row another; Now many have no greater ends
by Religion, than in the end to be great in Religion; But Providence is a
pulling off the vizard, and making the hearts of men to appear in their faces:
Many shall not only not dance in a net unseen of heaven, but not in a net unseen
of men. Their folly shall be made known to all men. God will light up candles
in Jerusalem, and enkindle a fire in Sion, and Hypocrisy shall not endure
either the light or heat; and God will also make professors, like Moses, Act.
7.22. Not only mighty in words, Crassiani non Christiani.
that are no bodies in deeds, but also mighty in word and in deeds; like Aarons
rod, not only to bring forth blossoms of profession, but Almonds, fruits of
holiness; Like the High Priest, not only to have Bells, but Pomegranates, not
only to bear away the bell for knowledge, but to give a sweet scent of the
Spirit in their conversations.

Many poor sinners of late have left their Fathers house, and because of their
guilty consciences, would, for the present, if they could, run out of their
Fathers eye, as well as his house; and who shall return the Prodigal to his
Father, Hagar to her Mistress, Jonah to his God again? how do many Professors
fly like spiritual malefactors from one form to another, (...).
and disguize themselves with Opinions, and all to avoid the Hue and Cry of
Conscience that God is raising? and if it were possible to tear the Records of
the Gospel in pieces, and burn down the Tribunal Bar, they have run into such
arrearages in sin; Now who shall set up the broken Professor, or awaken the
sleepy Virgin? Though Might and Power cannot do it, yet an Almighty Power can
do it, Zech. 4.6. The remnant of Jacob shall be as a dew from the Lord, as the
showers on the grass, that wait not for the Sons of men, Mic. 5.7. It is true,
says God, Gardeners dig, and delve, and water their ground, and so have herbs;
but I Will turn the Wilderness into a Pool, i will work without workmen, sinners
shall not be watered by man, but by God, with the dew of Heaven. When the day
dawns the dew falls thick on the ground; and till the Lords power dawn, all the
world cannot make dew, nor thaw the hearts of men.

Fourth Prospect from this Ladder; hence we may see the reconciliation of
Divisions. Now Ephraim is against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and
both against Judah; now divisions are not only between Wolves and Wolves, but
between sheep and sheep, Saint and Saint; Formerly we had more fire than light,
but the Lord knows, now we have more light than fire; more Knowledge than Love.
Every man pretends to be of the household of Faith, Si essemus inseparabiles,
essemus insuperabiles.
but few are of the Family of Love; while we contend for an ounce of Truth, we
lose a pound of Love; Not only for the Profaneness and Errors, but for the
Divisions of England, there are great thoughts of heart. How far are those from
one another, that yet I hope, are nigh to God? How many that once lay in one
another Bosoms, now can hardly endure to stand in one another sight? those
that are Members of the same Body, do carry themselves as if they were of
different worlds? How sad is it to see that many that prayed formerly one with,
and one for another, now should pray one against another? How is it, said
Zanchy, that those (speaking of the Lutherans) that profess to eat the very
body of Christ, that mild and meek Jesus, should be so bitter against the
Members of the same body? O that we should agree in so much, and differ for so
little, as in some things we do! Maxima pars studiorum est studium partium.
Oh that though we cannot conclude all our Controversies, yet we could bury up
all our Contentions; how long shall the greatest part of our studies, be the
study of parts? How shall I Believe, and Our Father be reconciled? How shall
those that are of different Creeds, be of one Pater Noster? if the division of
tongues hindered the building of Babel, how shall not the division of hearts
hinder the building of the New Jerusalem! While we have been contending about
the windows, we have almost lost the foundation of the Church; while we have
controverted for the well-being, In vest fit varietas non scissura.
we have even lost the being of Religion in England. Many of our differences
are petty, as that between one that was for Martin, and another that was for
Luther, as if two should quarrel, who should first enter in at the gate of
Venice, when neither possibly may ever come thither: But further now our
differences are so great, that unless the Lord prevent, while we contend who
shall go up against Babylon, we are like to go back to Babel; and while we
think to pull down a litteral, we shall set up unaware a spiritual Antichrist.

But the time is a coming, when those that have but one Heaven, shall have one
heart, when they that have but one work shall have but one shoulder, Zech. 3.9.
(...). Chrysostom.
The falling out of lovers shall then indeed prove the renewing of love. The
Lion shall ly down with the Lamb, and a little child shall lead them, Isa.
11.6. Not that ever there shall be a composition made between Christ and
Belial, for that quarrel is of Five thousand years standing, and shall be
maintained to the end of the world. Even now amongst most of the Saints there
is a shadow of this future concordance; as when a King is coming to Town, one
cries he comes this way, another cries he comes that way, at this time, at that
time, they all go out to meet him, and though they differ about the
particulars, yet they all expect the coming of the King, Quae convenient in
aliquo tertio convenient inter se.
and resolve to entertain him. As at Athens, when a Governor was to be chosen,
in the several Votes of the City, one cried up this man, another that man, but
the second man still was Themistocles, for such a man and Themistocles; So now
one cries, O I am for Presbytery, another I am for Independency, another, I am
for dipping, and for Christ, all amongst these that are faithful, center in
Christ: But how glorious will it be to see all Gods children of one mind,
Uniones oriuntur ex mari sed magis pendent e coelo.
which will be when the Father comes into the Family; to hear it said at last
as it was said at first, see how the Christians love one another.

Fifthly, From this Ladder we may forsee the increase of righteousness. Many
hitherto in the world, that should have been the Peace, are the Troublers of a
Nation; those that should be Shepherds, are Wolves against Sion: How do the
public Enemies of Sion make the tears of the poor their wine, the groans of the
needy their music, Vt rei innocents pereant siaut nocentes judices.
that paint the walls of the House, and pluck up the foundation; that beautify
their Kingdoms with Peace, but never think of building of them with Religion;
That turn Judgment into Wormwood, by delay, and Righteousness into Hemlock, by
severity.

When a man fails in his Estate, we say he breaks; there are many broken men,
some broken in their Credit, others broken in their Consciences; but there are
others that do not only break by carelessness, (...)
but are broken by cruelty. It is a great sin to take away the clothes from a
poor man, but a greater to flea off his skin; but there are some that rend the
flesh, and chop the bones, for the sweetness and marrow they think to find in
them. Si libet licet.
Mic, 3.2. Job 19.20. Some rob under pretense of Law, others rob in the open
field, and think that what is got by might, is got by right, according to the
ancient Problem.

Jus and vis apices parvo discrimine distant,
Jus nunc mundus habet, vim quia semper habet.
Great Thieves have formerly worn chains of gold, while little Thieves have
lain stockt in chains of iron. Robbin Hood was called an honest Thief, because
he would never rob the poor; but there are few such honest Thieves, instead of
taking off, have laid on oppression; and instead of breaking yoaks, have broken
backs. Oppressors, Genesis 10.8. are called Hunters, the poor are their Game,
Oppressions their toils and nets, mighty Oppressors, are mighty Hunters. In
Zephanies time, Oppressors were called Wolves, Justitia non datur nisi vendatur.
Zeph. 3.3. but then they were evening Wolves, but now those that are
Oppressors are day Wolves, Oppressors under the light of the Gospel. They eat
my people says God, as bread, Psalm. 14.4. These are Man-eaters; nay worse; for
among the Man eaters, the living eat the dead, but among Oppressors, the dead
eat the living.

But Jacob from this Ladder may see the new Heavens and new Earth a building,
wherein righteousness shall dwell; If new Heavens, then certainly new Suns and
new Stars, in a political sense, new Magistrates, or if you will, Justitia non
venit nisi provenit.
Magistrates with new hearts, Isa. 5.17. If any deridingly ask, with the
Epicure, When shall we see this Structure? where are the Carpenters? whence
shall come the Timber? Let such remember, there is no work since the Creation
of the World, greater than the Creation of the World; and therefore the Lord
speaks of New Heavens, to intimate, the possibility of their accomplishment,
from the consideration of the old Creation: Cannot I, says God, create a new
world, as well as I did the old?

In the first of Isay, verse. 27. God will send Judges as at the first; which
promise is not performed in any external form of Government, but in the
administration of Righteousness and Justice; and the work of this Generation,
is not to pull down Governments, but to pull down Tyranny, whether in Judges
or in Kings; For the Government of one man is, in se, no more inconsistent with
the Government of Christ, than the Government of a plurality of men; the sweet
flower of Justice may grow in a Crown, as well as on a Scepter of State; in a
Kingdom, as well as in a Commonwealth. All civil Forms of Government, are
equally of God, Romans 13.1. And though Kings have been Enemies to Sion, and
setters up of Antichrist; yet there are promises that Kings shall be nursing
Fathers to Sion, and Kings shall help to destroy Antichrist, Rev. 17.16. which
promises are yet in the greatest measure to be performed now at last. Sol
Justitiae qui quondam erat in signo Leonis, and nunc est in signo Virginis erit
in signo Librae.
Whether Judges be as at the first, let the world judge: There shall be such
Governors as Sampson was, as Jephtha and Deborah were, Zech. 12.5. Psalm. 16.17.
For my part, let all the Kings in Europe keep their Crowns, so they kick not
Christ's Crown off his head; Let Emperors yet hold their Scepters in their
hands, so they hold not up their hands against Christ's Scepter; Otherwise, I
pray and believe, that the time may and will come, when those that have not
affection in their hearts to do Sion good, shall not have power in their hands
to do Sion hurt, Rev. 19.

Sixthly, From this Ladder we may see a more full advancement of an Evangelical
Ministry. How many hitherto have been bred up at Gamaliels feet, that never
yet with Mary sat at Christ's feet? That sit in Moses his Chair, that have
(little in them, or) nothing, of Moses, but his Chair? Non Doctores, sed
Seductores; non Pastores, sed Impostores.
Arts and Sciences are the gifts of God, and how honorable is it when Scholars
lay their Crowns down before the feet of the Lamb? and many speak against them
because they have them not; they cannot abide to be condemned for ignorant of
the learned, and therefore they are ambitious to be commended by the ignorant
for learned. Lord! How few Preachers feel what they speak, and then speak what
they feel? How few speak to the heart, because so few speak from the heart, but
from the teeth outward? how many seek a Lordly living, and a lazy life? Many
are Swine for profaneness, but more are Serpentine Preachers, that subtlely
with their gilded poison, kill souls, discouraging the godly, and encouraging
the wicked. Like Sign-posts, showing others the way to Heaven, and not stirring
thither a foot themselves? Does God call for a reasonable Sacrifice, and holy
beast, and will he accept of an unreasonable, unholy Sacrificer? Would the Lord
have the vessels of the Sanctuary holy, and the Garments holy, and he on whose
vesture should be written Holiness to the Lord, unholy? God will have those
that shall have not only a mission from the Church, but a Commission from
himself. Loyterers must be sent out, Christum habent in codice sed non in cord
and Laborers must be sent into the Vineyard, and the Spirit will also be sent
into the Laborers. God will never suffer those dead Amasaes to lie in the way
of the souls of men, to hinder them from coming to Christ: God is not bound to
maintain those Lamps with the oil of maintenance, whose preaching is not
maintained by the oil of the Spirit.

Men hitherto have heaped to themselves Teachers according to their hearts,
Multo minus nocet ignavus fur quam segnis minister.
and so itching ears have had tickling Preachers; men that have been often at
Placentia, but never at Verona. But the Lord will send Pastors according to his
own heart, that shall not preach to gratify Opinions, but to save Souls, Jer.
3.15. Though Christ can ride on an Ass to Jerusalem; yet the time is a coming,
that the Lord will have no need of them. The Snuffers of the Temple must be
pure gold, Chrysostomi etiam and Polycarpi. Non Aposcopi sed Episcopi
or else their Clergy cannot save them, Exodus 37.23. If we cannot abide dead
Idols in the windows, God much less will abide dumb Idols in the Pulpit. The
Ministers of the last age, shall stand in the Sun, and preach the Everlasting
Gospel, they shall be Brightmans indeed. They shall be Load-stones in their
conversations, but Adamants in their principles; they shall thunder in the
Pulpit, and lighten in their lives. They shall pity them who are not able to
pity themselves; shed tears over them for whom Christ shed his blood; They
shall be endued with an Eagles Eye, a Ladies hand, and a Lions heart, as
Physicians of Souls. Indeed some knowing men (in their own eyes) never think
the Sun will shine clearly till the Stars, Rev. 1. ult. are pulled down; I
speak only in the behalf of those that are Evangelical Preachers in their
Doctrine, and Angelical Preachers in their lives; but first our Lord and Master
has secured the use of the Ministry, till the perfection of all things, Mat.
28. Ephesians. 4. And secondly, I hope those that are true Stars will stoop
themselves, when our Lord Jesus, the true Sun of Righteousness, shall appear in
the glory of his person, or personal glory.

Seventhly, From this Ladder, we may foresee the ruin of Babylon. Babylon has
three times; a time of ascending, a time of triumphing in, and a time of
descending the Throne. Now the Tide of the Sea of Rome is falling, and she is
well nigh in the last descension. Providence has arraigned and condemned the
Scarlet Whore; she is at present naked, and ere long she shall be burnt for an
Whore: She shall have fire for fire, and blood for blood. The Lord is gathering
Faggots, I mean his Instruments, in all Nations, and will certainly and
suddenly set fire to the Papal glory, and all her Lovers shall not be able to
quench it, Rev. 18. She shall be as visible in her shame, as ever she was in
her glory; God will not take man's advantage for her ruin, her overthrow shall
be fair. God will not, as the General said, pilfer the Victory; The pangs of a
traveling woman shall overtake her, God will wipe pity from his heart, and
will not be interceded for a Reprieve, his work shall not prove abortive. It
shall be more truly, the Lords veni vici (than Queen Elizabeth) coming against
her, and overcoming her. She shall fall as a mil-stone, that of it self rowles
down the hill, faster if tumbled down; especially, if by a strong hand, the
hand of an Angel. Rev. 18.21. God will make bare his arm; which fears neither
blows nor blood, for it has a bone in it, whereas man's arm is but the arm of
flesh; and likewise he will overthrow her compleately.

Vide totum and lauda totum.
God never rested in the Creation till he has finished all; know that God will
be as perfect in the works of Providence, as in the works of Creation. Her ruin
shall as certainly be effected, as it is determined. The Decrees of God know no
futurity, time to come is the tense of man's Grammar; Babylon is fallen, Babylon
is fallen. Sion is more than a Conqueror, Romans 8. She overcomes by Faith
before she comes into the field; she conquers before she conquers. The day of
Antichrist is almost at an evening, the glass of Babylon is well nigh run, the
number of her Months are even expired. Let all the Physicians in the world
apply their Plasters, and afford their Cordials, it is in vain; her disease is
mortal, and her blood is now cold in her veins. If Providence have not Armies on
Earth, it will have Armies in Heaven against her; there is no halt to be made,
or if there be an halt in our sense, there is no retreat to be beaten; one
Alarm after another shall be given till she be taken. Mended or ended is here
an useless Proverb. But may some say, who shall do this? Deus si non legate emet
milites; si non inveniat faciet viam.
the Kings of the Earth are yet her Liege Subjects, generally, and will Satan
cast out Satan? and the sight of Rome is infectious; and some think opposing
Babylon, in this age, is much like Saul's sending Messengers to take David, who
in the way fell a prophesying, 1 Samuel 19.20. How many have gone up to oppose
Babylon, and have returned her brats? It is not setting Rome on fire will burn
down Babylon, yet the Lord will use military means; Antichrist reigns properly
in the Understandings and Consciences of men; and it is far easier to kill the
body, than wound the soul of Antichrist; therefore God will destroy her
especially, How? with what Artillery? with what Ammunition? Even by the Spirit
of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. The darkness of
Popery cannot abide the Gospel Sunshine. Antichrist has played his part on the
Stage; the Vizards are now a pulling off, and the Stage it self a pulling down,
Rev. 18.21. Must is, as we say, for the King; now Christ is King, and he must
reign, 1 Cor. 15.24.

Caesar non patitur priorem nec Pompeius patrem.
When Darius would have shared his Kingdom with Alexander, no said the
Conqueror, The Heavens cannot hold two Suns: The Devil at length, possibly,
when he sees the Kingdom of Christ in holiness to be cried up, and his own
Kingdom to be cried down, will gladly divide, and part stakes with Christ, but
Christ will be King over all, or not King at all. The Throne of the Gospel, and
the Spouses bed, cannot endure a Competitor, an Equal, much less a Superior.
Babylon now in the dark, may for a while play the Rex, but Christ certainly,
the Sun shining more clearly, will be King. It is reported, that Nero viewed
the flames of Rome on his Tower through an Emerauld: The Saints through Faith
may take a delightsome prospect of the ruin of Babylon. Let the Saints of the
most high lift up their heads, for ere many glasses of Providence are run out,
though the Sun shall be clothed with sackcloth, and the Moon turned into
blood, and the Stars fall from the Heavens, yet their redemption draws nigh.

The Eighth Prospect from this Ladder, is, The large extent and duration of
Christ's Kingdom in the World.

1 The large extent of his Kingdom. The Kingdom of Christ now, is not much
larger than a while after the Apostles days (as Mr. Mede observes) for the
West Indians are under force and constraint; The World, says Brerewood, may be
divided into Thirty parts, whereof Heathenism contains Nineteen, Turcism Six,
and Christianity but Five; So that yet Christ is far from being universal Lord
and Sovereign, or having a Name above all Names, which not only relates to
the excellency of his Name above other names, and so Jesus Christ is a more
glorious Name, than Grand Seigneur, or Augustus Caesar; but also in respect of
visible honor, above other names; hitherto, who but the Beast? The Titles and
Arms of Kings, and Emperors, have carried the day, Most Excellent, Most
Illustrious; but hereafter, who shall be like unto Christ? The constant style
of Universality of all Kingdoms, all Tongues, and Nations, imply, that yet
Christ has not the complete possession of what he has purchased, Psa. 22.27.
Isa. 1. Mal. 1.11. It is desperate ambition for any man to call himself Rex
Catholicus, Universal King, Christ and not any man, but Christ rather, and the
Devil divide the whole World. They say, the Spanyard, has for his Arms, the
Sun rising and setting, on his Shield; but Christ's glory must eclipse his
glory, Christ will then only be Canonical and Catholic King. First, Christ
shall be above all Kingdoms, and then he shall put down all Kingdoms, 1 Cor.
15.24.

Some think what is done in England, is done all the world over, when we are
but a spot of Christ's Kingdom, though I hope, a Garden-spot; the Gospel was
calculated for a larger Meridian, Rev. 19.16. he shall be King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in
Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and his Christ, Rev. 11.15. Now when had Christ this glory? First, It has no
relation to the Kingdom of his divine Nature, for that he had coequally always
with the Father. Secondly, Neither has it relation to the Purchase or Title
simply, that Christ had to these Kingdoms in his Ascension and Intercession,
when, I confess he first had seizen of them. But Thirdly, It must have relation
to the actual subjection of the Kingdoms of the world to Christ, and his actual
Exaltation above them; for it is spoken Prophetically, and for the time to
come: Now this shall be accomplished when the Prince of the Air is conquered,
and bound up, and cast down to the earth, Rev. 12.9. Now Satan rules
principally and more visibly, then Christ shall appear in the Clouds, and he
shall uncrown Satan, and sit down in his Throne, and then the Kingdom of Christ
shall be more visible and observable in the world, than the Kingdom of Satan.
Satan indeed was legally cast out of his Kingdom in the Resurrection of Christ,
Joh. 16.11. but he must also actually, and more fully be cast out, when Christ
shall appear the second time for salvation.

As two Buckets in a Well, while the one comes up, the other goes down; So, as
while Christ has been down visibly, the Devil has been up in the world; so
the rise of Christ, shall be the fall and downfall of Satan.

2 From hence we may see the perpetuity of this Kingdom. We are not now to
expect a Kingdom de novo, but the progress and prosperity of Christ's Kingdom
already in being; for the Kingdom of Christ takes date from his Resurrection
and Intercession, Psa. 2.6. I have set my King an the holy hill of Sion; and
all power in Heaven and Earth was given to him, Matthew. 28. So that Christ has
been in h^s Throne (not as a private person, but) as a King, these sixteen
hundred years, and has acted as a King, not only over the Consciences of
Believers, but also in giving Laws for to govern his Church by; And it is
supposed by some, lastly, That Kings even now reign by Christ as King of Kings,
as well as Christians are ruled by Jesus, the King of Saints. Further Dan.
2.44. In the days of the four Monarchies, that is, before they were all
expired, the God of Heaven sets up a Kingdom, Gradus and gradus non variant
speciem.
not when they are all expired, though this Kingdom shall stand when they shall
lie by the walls. The difference then between his reigning now, and hereafter,
as at present I apprehend, is not specifical but gradual; now Christ reigns, as
it were, in a corner, and then he shall reign over the whole world; His Kingdom
then, though it shall be in, yet it will not be of the world; the meaning of
which is, not only, that his Kingdom shall not be of a wicked complexion, void
of Injustice, and Oppression, but also not of a worldly constitution: Saints
shall have heavenly, not golden, carnal Thrones; for their Thrones shall be in
Heaven, in Heaven upon Earth; in a word, they shall neither have worldly
troubles, nor worldly joys. We read of two different States of Christ's Kingdom,
but never of two different Kingdoms of Christ on Earth, as he is (...), God
Man. The Stone and the Mountain, in Daniel the second, comprehend in a
Synopsis, the whole Sphere of the Dominions of Christ, intensively,
extensively, and protensively, all the Kingdom which he hitherto has had, now
has, or ever shall have in this world. The Stone which at first lay but in a
corner, was kicked up and down by Persecutors, and rolled since by Providence
from one Nation to another, gathering greatness like a ball of snow, and will
be so still, till it swells and grows into a Mountain, filling the whole Earth;
The Stone in order of time being long before the Mountain, for it has been
growing these Sixteen hundred years already, and yet is nothing nigh arrived to
its stature and glory: The Stone then is of the same nature with the Mountain,
though not of the same magnitude. I understand not yet how the Stone, which was
cut out when our Lord Jesus first entered on his Throne, and the Mountain, which
must fill the Earth in his more glorious Coronation, differ in specie;
wherefore if they differ, as of necessity they do, it must be chiefly in
degree. For to deny that Christ has not ruled yet visibly in the world, is to
affirm, that because the sun (in a summers day) is not in its meridian, it does
not shine at all.

Lastly, This Kingdom of Christ shall stand for ever; Which implies first, That
it shall not be destroyed by any foreign power of Men or Devils. Secondly, That
it shall not be left to another people: Christ shall not have a Successor
either by an Heir, or by a Conqueror, Dan. 2.44. Other Kingdoms are transient
Kingdoms, handed from one man to another; but the Kingdom of Christ is a
durable, a permanent Kingdom. The Babylonish Kingdom first appeared in the
world; The Babylonians delivered over their Kingdom to the Persians, the
Persians delivered up their Kingdom to the Grecians, the Grcians delivered up
their Kingdom to the Romans, the Roman Power must surrender, and Christ our
Lord must enter the Stage of the world, and his Kingdom shall be everlasting,
that is, no other Kingdom shall succeed him; His Kingdom shall be the greatest,
and the last. Virgil speaks of Rome, the Lady of the World, Imperium sine fine;
but that Empires glass shall run out, and have an end.

These Promises being not already fulfilled, are yet to be fulfilled, and that
in this world; has Christ now a name visibly above every name, does he
actually rule over all the Kingdoms of the world? And Secondly, we must
understand this glorious and universal Kingdom of Christ (of which the
Scriptures so much speak) not to be in the Heavens, but on the Earth.

The weak Christian is desired to overlook what follows, as not penned to
puzzle Babes, but to exercise the understanding.

Whether the Kingdom of Christ, as Mediator, shall not at length give place to
the Essential Kingdom of the Godhead, is disputable. I shall not positively
affirm, but rather propose it (as probable) to the Intelligent, and humbly
leave the determination of this Quaere to the experience of the Saints in
glory. Thus, since our first Apostasy, all our communion with God, is by the
mediation of Christ; we by our fall, are but as dry stubble, and dare not think
of immediate converse with God, for (as the Apostle says) he is a consuming
fire; now, whether when the formal and proper end of the mediation of Christ is
accomplished (which will be not only in the satisfaction of the Law, the
conquest legally of the Devil ad extra, but in the perfect evacuation of the
guilt and filth of sin, even as to its moral inherency in the Saints) we shall
not have immediate communion with God (being presented at the last day spotless
by Christ) as in the state of innocence? and that more gloriously; That God, 1
Cor. 15.28. may be all in all; that God, not Personally (...), but Essentially
(...), the Divine being, Father, Son, and Spirit, may be all in all, that is,
communicate himself to the glorified Church, without the intervention of
Ordinances and Creatures, and also (to our purpose) without the proper and
immediate exercise of the Kingly Office of the Mediator. (Quae res simil.
Illustretur, Finge plures esse globos, ex pellucida materia, eo situ ut sint
inter se paralleli; finge etiam animo alium quendam esse globum interjectum
inter istos globos and corpus solis, ita ut radii solares ad reliquos globos,
nisi per eum solum nequaquam pertingant; eodem plane modo Deus nunc se
hominibus communicate, mediate nempe per Christum: at finge tandem ita accidisse
ut sol omnes istos globos irradiet, non amplius per primum illum qui medius
interjectus erat, sed immediate, ita ut recta radii solares ad unumquemque
eorum pertingant, nullo interposito medio; sic plane videtur futurum esse
aliquando ut Deus nos omnes immediate irradiet and impleat, Spiritu suo sine
opera Mediatoris.) For Christ at the last is solemnly to make a surrender of
the Kingdom to God and the Father, (...), that is, to God the Father, when he
has put down all Authority, Power, and Rule, both Civil and Ecclesiastical,
both Angelical and Diabolical; Which to say is meant of the Kingdom of the
Godhead, is blasphemy, for the Kingdom of the Son in that sense is coeternal
and coessential with the Fathers. Wherefore it must be meant of the Vicarious,
Personal, or Oeconomical Kingdom of the Mediator. When the difference between
God and the Creature is completely made up, and God and the Creature made one,
what formal need will there be of a Mediator? for we cannot make a Mediator of
one, nor of those that are made one; It is an Apostolical maxim, (...), Gal.
3.20. Not that either our Lord Jesus shall depose his humane Nature, and so the
Hypostatical Union cease, or that he shall ever have the glory of his Head-ship
over his body eclipsed, but only that Christ mystical entirely be subject, and
so from God receive immediate and direct beams of Glory.

It is true, The Kingdom of Christ is everlasting, but that does not hinder the
supposition, for that is salved by his victory over all the Kingdoms in the
world, and in its not being subverted by any Foreign Power whatsoever; and thus
his Kingdom is everlasting in opposition to the Four Monarchies, Dan 7. which
succeeding one another, and at length were all conquered by our Lord Jesus. And
Secondly, his Kingdom is everlasting, as the Gospel of his Kingdom is
everlasting, Rev. 14.6. which is to be understood, not formally but vertually,
and the Saints shall by virtue of that purchase possess everlasting glory.

Secondly, The relation of his Headship in Heaven does not oppose; for though
he shall remain Head of his Body to all eternity, yet in a different manner,
than he is Head now. His Headship in the Church Triumphant is rather for
precedence, than Principality, rather for priority and dignity, than for
guidance and government; And this must be confessed, that the relation between
the Head and the Members, in heaven, shall still be relatio disquiparantiae non
aequiparantiae.

Thirdly, Neither does this resignation of the Kingdom, as (...), redound to
the disparagement of the Mediator; no more than the first designation or
donation of this Kingdom to Christ, was diminution to the glory of God, and the
Father. The Lord Jesus shall suffer no loss of Glory, but only undergo a
change of State: As suppose a Captain General, Commissioned by a Prince, with
the accommodation of Armies, to subdue a Colony of Rebels, the Rebels are
defeated, the Captain General returns home from that field and foreign Service,
surrenders his commission to his Prince; he is honored further by his Master
for his noble Service; he is applauded by the Soldiers for his valor and
prowess, and ever after by way of honor is called Captain; yet we cannot say,
he is Captain in act; His Colors are lodged, his Sword is sheathed, both the
Captain and the Soldiers are under the immediate presidency of the Prince, but
in a different degree of favor and glory: So the Saints shall make it their
business in Heaven to extol the Lord and the Lamb, to sing Halelujah's, and
Hosanna's for ever; All Honor and Dignity be to our dear Mediator, who redeemed
us when we were captives, washed and cleansed us with his blood, comforted our
souls by his Spirit, that while others were apostatized, we by his grace were
kept to this great Salvation. The consideration of Redemption-work shall be the
Theme of Praises, for the redeemed throughout all ages. And I heard the voice
of many Angels round about the Throne, and (the beasts, in the Greek (...)) the
living Creatures, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; Saying with a loud voice, worthy is
the Lamb that is slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength,
and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, etc. Revel. 5.11, 12. there will be no more
need, as I apprehend of Christ's Kingly Office, than of his Priestly or
Prophetical Office: Glorified Saints are in the highest Form of Divine
knowledge, and have no need of Intercession; for they are above fears and
falls, above fear of falling in the way, or away; and all their lusts are
conquered of old by Christ's Scepter; they are in their harbor, and therefore
out of all storms; they have their Crown shining on their heads, and have no
stumbling blocks more in their race; the Devil then shall never be seen to
devour, nor heard to roar; farewell hardness of heart, perplexities of
conscience, fear of grieving the precious Spirit any more. Jacob is ascended to
the top of the Ladder, and never needs more to fear his feet or hands should
slip in climbing; and therefore it is said he shall reign (...) until he shall
have put down all his Enemies.

Fourthly, Neither is it necessary there should be an immediate power from
Christ, as Mediator, to preserve and persevere the Saints in glory. For
everlasting glory is the purchase of his death as well as glory. And Secondly,
Though their glory is not natural, yet the first seizure of glory is
confirmation in glory; Glory, and eternal glory, differing not in kind,
possibly not in real degree; There being properly no posterius in Heaven, or
succession of hours. Heaven is an eternal (...). Thirdly, The immediate
presence of God is a a sufficient ground of their preservation. Fourthly, Why
is the mediation of Christ made eternal a part post, by any, rather than
eternal a part ante? or rather thus, why may not the merit of our Redeemer be
as effectual after the solemn resignation of his mediation, as it was to the
Jews, before ever actually he entered his Throne? (...), Regnando id jam
acquisivit quod aeternum est, regnum ergo aeternum merito habere dici potest;
quod attinet ad regnandi actum, Christus regno sese abdicaturus est, quod vero
ad regnum attinet, regni ejus nullus erit finis.

Fifthly, Whereas it is objected, why may not the Kingdom of the Mediator
(actually) in glory be consistent with the government of God, as well as now
the Kingdom of God is consistent with the Government of the Mediator? To this I
could answer, Our enquiry is not de re possibili vel impossibili, in the first
place; but de re vera vel falsa. But Secondly, If we speak of the Government of
the Mediator, as God, it is true, and if I mistake not, some Commentators mean
so, That as the Father rules as well as the Son now, so then the Son shall rule
as well as the Father; for though he surrender the Kingdom to the Father, yet
so, as that God that is the Son also, with the Spirit, may be all in all.
Thirdly, None dare say, That as God now rules by the Mediator, so then the
Mediator shall rule by God; for the Mediator, as such, is subordinate to God,
and to say, the Mediator may rule as well as God, is the (...). There is a
necessity as to us, that God rule us by a Mediator in the Church Militant, but
it is no way inconsistent either with the wisdom or glory of God to communicate
himself immediately to the Church Triumphant.

Lastly, Christ gives up the Kingdom (not only not as God, but) not absolutely
considered as Mediator, Christus ut Deus nos cum illo subjectos habet, sed ut
Sacerdos nobiscum illi subjectus est. Aug.
for Christ even now as Mediator is subject to God really (For though Christ
reigns, yet so still, as that God reigns by Christ, though there be an
immediate exercise of the Mediators Kingdom in the world, yet God keeps in the
Essential Throne of his glory.) But then further, he shall be subject
relatively and respectively, as to his Church or Body, now Christ rules his
Church as Mediator, and not as God only, and the very Mediator is King in actu
over Sion; but then this administration shall cease, and the Head with the
Body, or Christ as part of his Church, or Christ mystical, shall be subject to
God; and thus he is not at present but shall be hereafter, the Mediator being
yet in the Throne; but there is a time a coming, (...), when he shall give up
the Kingdom, to wit, that Kingdom which God gave over to him, and cease to
reign as Mediator; and it is observable, that for Christ to surrender up the
Kingdom, and be subject to God, are of all one importance, verse. 28. By the
surrender of the Kingdom therefore we cannot understand such or such an
administration of the Kingdom, and not the Kingdom it self; for all that
Kingdom he receives, he surrenders. And secondly, Christ must so surrender as
he must be subject; the (...) and (...) must go together. And I am much pleased
with the Apostles sweet Criticism, that as now Christ, Col. 3. is (...) (...),
all and in all; So God hereafter shall be (...), all in all: the Messiah has
two times, especially, the time of his sorrows, and the time of glory. In the
sixth of John, verse. 15. they had royal blood in their veins, and they would
force Jesus to be a King, surely, that they might have preferment under him,
but Christ departed, and flew from the Crown; few men would have done as Christ
did ( Satis pro imperio quisquis est, says the Comic) Men will wade up to the
chin in blood for a Kingdom, and stretch fair and far for a Crown, it shines so
amiably in their eyes. Says the Devil, if Jesus will but accept of the Title
and Place of a King, he will be so taken up with the Affairs and Offices of the
world, that he will not have such liberty to look after the conversion of
souls, the Revenues of the Devils Crown would have come in the more by such a
worldly Negotiation; but there is a day a coming, when Jesus will not fly from
a Crown, nor refuse a Scepter; his glory shall be as eminent as ever was his
shame. The Daughters of Sion shall go forth, and Crown King Jesus in the day of
his solemn Espousals, and such a day shall be the gladness of his heart. Jesus
has born all the wrath of the world, and he is able in a spiritual visible
sense to bear all the glory of the world on his shoulders. Can. 3.11. The
children of Judah and of Israel shall be gathered together, at a place of their
general Randezvouz, and by a (...), an Election by lifting up their hands and
voices, appoint themselves one head, and they shall (one and all, as we say)
come up out of the Land, for great and glorious shall be the day of Jezreel.
Jesus Christ is a righteous King, and he has a right to his Kingdom: It is
utterly impossible that ever he should prove either an Usurper or a Tyrant. He
thinks it no robbery to be equal with God; then certainly it is no robbery for
him to be preheminent above men, Phil. 2.6. It is no robbery for King Jesus to
pull Saint Peter out of his Chair, and there in Majesty to rule the Nations
with a Rod of iron (if he please;) No robbery for him to melt all the Crowns in
Europe, to make a Diadem of glory for his own Temples. If any think they have
gone deeper in a purchase for the Government of the world than our Lord Jesus,
let them stand up if they dare, and lay their claim; let them now speak or ever
after hold their peace.

In the expectation therefore of these things let the Saints rejoice; Universal
Redemption will then prove a Truth, when all yoaks shall be taken off the
necks, and all burdens off the backs of the children of God. It is observable,
that the substance of all the Revelation is contained in these two words,
Hosanna, and Halelujah; God bless us, and we bless God; hitherto we have been a
singing Hosanna, but Halelujah is a coming; Praise, and Honor, and Glory to the
Lamb that sits on the Throne. If any object, That any of the abovementioned
Promises concern the Jews, I answer, True, but not the Jews only, and though
Promises are not to be confounded and applied to one people, if they should
only belong to another, yet it will be found according to the Promises, that
the glory of the Jews will be the glory of the Gentiles; and though now we are
divided, yet then we shall be one fold, Romans 11.12. What God has joined
together let no man separate.

To conclude, The Saints must pray for, and endeavor to promote the more
glorious part of this Kingdom (of which we speak) in which there shall be
neither such covetousness nor complaint. But all endeavors will fall short of
setting of it up on Earth, till our Lord Jesus the King shall come down from
Heaven in the Clouds; We shall never have such a Kingdom until we have such a
King. The Feet of the Saints shall not all be out of their Fetters, till the
King of Saints comes into his Throne, Dan. 7.13, 27. Princes will never so rule
in Judgment, till this King shall reign in Righteousness, Is. 32.1. The New
Jerusalem will be Gods Creature; The Stone is cut out without hands; there may
be something of the heart of the Saints in this glorious Structure, but it
shall neither be the work of their Head nor Hands. This model of Government is
beyond the invention of Saints, as it is beyond the belief of man. Many shall
welcome it in the world, but none are able to rear it, the King himself will
bring it with him. Not many know how to set up Christ in their Consciences;
Many know how rather to pull down Antichrist, than to set up Christ; And too
many know how rather to set up themselves than the Kingdom of Christ in the
world. Governors must reform (if the Providence of God speak truth in
explaining the Promises, it is high time) and Governors must be reformed. But I
am yet persuaded, that some of Nebuchadnezzars Image will stand in all Nations,
till it have an immediate blow from Heaven, Dan. 2.34. Though men do trample
under foot the Toes of Clay, and break the Legs of Iron, and smite on the Belly
of Brass, yet I am persuaded, they will more or less, either embrace the Silver
Arms, or wear the Golden Head; and the Gold, the best Government of this old
world, is part of the Image as well as the Clay. Israel was Gods people, and
though they pulled down the brazen Serpent, yet they helped to set up the
golden Calf; but when we once come to Canaan we shall neither bow down to the
Image of brass, nor low after the Calf of gold: In the mean time, Sion is to
travel with Prayers and Tears, and all regular and righteous endeavors toward a
perfect Reformation, but I do not yet believe that ever we shall see that
Man-child, until the appearance of Christ does Midwive it into the world.

Omnis Christi anus est crucianus.
If it should be objected, How can the expectation of such glory consist with
the Prophecies in Scripture, of the tribulations and errors in the last days?
I answer, 1 Timothy 3.1. In the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, and
shall speak lies in hypocrisy, Sceptici in intellectu, Epicurei in affectu.
etc. 2 Timothy 3.1. In the last days shall come perilous times, men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, unholy, Traitors, heady, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God.

I answer, By the last days in the Prophets and Apostles, we are to understand
the days of the Gospel, the time of the messiah, from his first to his second
coming indifferently; and have not all these symptoms of Apostasy been already
in the world, nay, in the primitive times?

Secondly, If by the last days, we sometime understand the days, a little
while, or immediately preceding the second coming of Christ in person, the
coming of such prophanenesses are no argument against the comfortable
appearance of Christ, but are made in Scripture forerunners (not formally) of
his Kingdom;
and how seasonably will the Physician appear when the world will be so
diseased? how sweetly and refreshingly will the light of the Sun of
Righteousness be at such a midnight? Zech. 14 7. 2 Pet. 2.14. Christ, though he
brings day with him, comes at midnight. Matthew. 25.6.

And if by the latter days we are to understand, as we may, the last days,
are not the last days, and the last of days in the world? did ever men love
others less, and themselves more? Judas his plague was, his bowels gushed out;
But O Lord! our curse is, we have no bowels of love at all. Is not this a
covetous age? Many have rich Arras to hang the walls of their Chambers with,
and have not Canvas to cloth a naked member of Christ withal; how many
Lazaruses are daily laid at our doors? and how few have money in their purses
to relieve? nay, not compassion, or honey in their hearts to pity them? what
iron hearts have we in this golden and in this gilded age? (...).
golden, I mean, not in a moral, but natural sense; as for the love of God,
whereas we should be lovers of God more than lovers of pleasure; we are lovers
of pleasure more than lovers of God; nay, lovers of pleasure and not lovers of
God, unless that by our God we mean our pleasure; And as for the rest of the
gang of Vices, I shall say no more, but that we need not go up and down with a
Candle and Lanthorn to find proud, unholy, heady, Traitors in the world. How
long Lord? how long ere thou appearest, the Judge of thine Enemies, the Father
of thy Children, and the King of thy Subjects? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
and blessed are all they that love his appearance; his appearance in his
Spirit, in his Cause, and in his Person.

In this prospect of what God will do in the world, take these three or four
Cautions.

1 Limit not God to your means. Some indeed have power to help Sion, but no
heart; some have an heart, but no power; others have power in their hands, but
no hearts to help Sion. Powers, Armies cannot work without God, but God can
work without them. Gods work cannot be done by the mighty, for ordinarily it is
opposed by the Mighty; the mighty Pharisee derides Christ, the mighty Pilat
condemns Christ; for the most part all the mighty in the world, are against the
Almighty of the world. What say Monarchs that are profane? If Christ come to
reign over us, what will become of our honors? Say the unrighteous Judges, what
will become of our Fees? and the lazy Shepherds, what will become of our
Livings? Remember, Creaturae potius sunt media deferentia: quam operantia.
if all men were willing for God, yet the best of men, are but men at the most;
the most of men, or all men, are but men at the best: Men are but Vials, and
they have no more of Virtue in them than Providence infuseth, not a drop more.
All the Tribute that God requires, is to attribute all to him, and he is
resolved on the glory of all. Means are not used by God, because they are
effectual, but means are therefore effectual because God uses them: A straw in
the hands of Omnipotency, proves a Spear, and a Spear without an Omnipotent
influence, turns in a man's hand to a Straw.

It is not improbable that the nigher Christ comes to his Throne, the meaner
the instruments of his advancement may be.
Who art thou O Mountain? before Zerubbabel, thou shall become a plain. There
are many Mountains against Sion, visible and invisible Mountains, but Jacob the
worm shall thresh Mountains; Parturiunt montes and generatur ridiculus mus.
strange! as we say, a Cat may look on a King; so a worm may crawle on a
Mountain; one Mountain is able to crush a million of Worms, but if Sion be
trampled on in Christ's day, she will turn again, and one worm shall thresh a
million of Mountains. Providence can turn Mountains into Mole-hils, and the
proud, politic Hills of the World into Hell. God does such things by such
inconsiderable means, That no flesh might glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.31.
If any creature will glory (as if the Apostle had said) let it glory behind the
Lords back, which it cannot do; God will face down all the glory and glorying
of the world. Remember, that God may show his Honor by another, but he will
never give his Honor to another.

Shall the Ax lift up it self against him that heweth therewith? there is a
jest indeed! As Nebuchadnezzar said, Is this not great Babylon that I have
built for the glory of my Majesty? more truly may the Lord say, Is not there
the stony heart that I have softened? is not this dead and decayed England that
my Arm has revived, for the glory of my free Grace and Power?

Moses led Israel out of Egypt, but Joshua led Israel into Canaan. The Lord
changes Instruments at his pleasure, and for his Glory. This man, says God,
shall begin a work, and that man shall perfect it; this is the man we cry up,
and all others must not be named the same day with him, now Essex, then Waller,
Quod fluctus insurgunt potest navicula turbari, sed quod Christus stat non
potest mergi.
now Massey* then Fairfax, then Cromwell. Hence it is that God often suffers
Instruments to break and fall, when we lean too much on them. God will make us
know before he has done with us, that he will neither do the work of peevish
man, nor go in man's crooked way.

Never fear, let the Lord choose his own weapons to fight his own battles; As
long as he has a Cause in the world, he can never want shoulders to maintain
it; Man's day is not the Lords day, and Man's man, though godly, is not Gods man:
Till the Saints meet with a Pharaoh, that God can neither conquer nor overcome;
with a red Sea, that he can neither dry up, nor divide; with a wall, that he
can neither throw down nor climb over, never distrust.

Secondly, Limit not God to our time; It is true, we must give God no rest,
until he perform his Promises, that is, we must be importunate in the means,
but we must in the mean time rest on God, and leave him to his own time. The
Vision is for an appointed season, and therefore we must wait for it: The Seers
often may lie, but the Vision shall speak, though it seem dumb, and not lie.
The glass of Providence runs in the dark, and it is a comfort for the Saints,
to believe it does not stand still: but as no man can number the Sands, so no
man can jog the glass to make it run faster, or tell when it shall run out.
That Babylon in the Letter shall fall, it is certain; It has been accounted
difficult to tell the age, it is impossible (as most judge) yet to tell the
year, and unlawful to search out the day or hour of her ruin. If the Son of man
knew not the day of the last Judgment, as in the Gospel, much less may the
Sons of men presume to know the day of a particular, though special Judgment,
as that of Babylon: And Christ was well versed in Daniels numbers, from whence
collections chiefly are fetched for the time of Babylons downfall. It is a good
observation, that Providence is the best interpreter of Prophecy. Yet no
question herein, but we may employ our Reason as well as our Faith; She shall
be set (q.d.) on fire, and usually smoke goes before the flame; there shall be
signs of her ruin in the world, and they are to be viewed. Here we may guess,
but can hardly determine; her day hastens, and by many symptoms of Providence
she lies upon her Deathbed, and probably Six hundred sixty six (as we say
Eighty eight, for One thousand five hundred eighty eight, so by a Synecdoche,
Six hundred sixty six, for One thousand six hundred sixty six) may ring her
Passing bell. Many good Archers have been shooting, but none, as I know, yet
have hit the mark; some have fallen short, and some may fly over.

The Lords furthest way about is often the nighest way home. There are two
famous Proverbs to this purpose with the Jews; God will be seen in the Mount;
and, when the tale of bricks is doubled, Cum duplicantur lateres venie^ Moses.
Moses will come. Nullum tempus occurrit regi, is here a good maxim: All time
is a like to an eternal God; what work God will not do to day, he can do to
morrow. He often defers our expectation, but never misses his own opportunity.
Christ suffers Lazarus to lie long in the Grave, Si amatur quomodo infirmatur,
si infirmatur quomodo amatur?
and did not raise him so soon as he was buried, though Christ loved him
dearly; whence we may observe, That oftentimes those whom God loves most, he
seems to make least haste to help; The Cause of Christ sometimes seems to
sleep; but never dies.

When wicked men have played their Game (which possibly many think long) God
will shuffle the Cards together, and tumble them under the Table. Oh now or
never! now if ever! say we, The Saints might be united, profaneness might be
suppressed, Non quarto die pati permittetur qui scitur ultra non posse quam
triduo tolerare 1 Cor. 10.10.
and all burdens might be taken off: Like children, as it is well observed, we
love green fruit, yet that breeds worms; We love to have the Apple out of the
fire before it be half roasted, mercies before we are ripe for them; but it is
better to have Judgments in Mercy, than Mercies in Judgment. God had almost
forfeited his Bond to the Israelites, but he faithfully came before the Sun was
down, and paid his debt, at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even
the self same day they went (according to his promise) out of Egypt, Quaedam
non negantur sed ut congruo tempore dentur differuntur.
Exo. 12.41. And if, says God, Psalm. 89.35. I perform not my promise, let my
word never be taken more. Saints, consider, Your Fathers Goodness makes the
Promise, his Faithfulness will perform it; and his Wisdom alone will find out
the fittest time.

Thirdly, You that are Jacobs, take heed of repining at Providence. Stand
still, said Moses, and see the salvation of God, Exodus 14.13. The greatest work
of man oftentimes is to stand still and see God to work. There is a time for
Joshua to fight in the field, and a time for Moses to pray in the Mount; O
vitam miseram iam diu timere, quam est illud ipsum quod timetur! Orat. At.
Epist. l. 10.
when there is not an opportunity to fight down Babylon, there is a time to
pray her down. Christians, in turns of Providence, have need not only of zeal
but of wisdom. We must go when God calls, but a man had need to have good
ground to go on, when he says God calls him out of his Calling.

While a Court sits there is a confused noise, but when the Judge takes the
Bench. the Officers cry, Peace, Peace; my friends, the passions and opinions in
this age make a din in the world, every man must have something to say for its
Government, what proing and conning? The Lord now takes the Chair, and craves
audience. God has long seen what man can do, oh that men would hearken to what
God can say! Foolish man has been speaking great words, this is the way for
our establishment or none, no that is the way says another; But the wise God
will speak great things; what God will speak will be worth the hearing, and it
is manners to give God leave to speak in his Providence. Men love to hear
themselves speak, and to see themselves act, though neither be to any purpose.

They say there is a sweet music in the Spears of the Heavens: Sure I am,
though Providence seem cross, and to clash, yet there is a sweet order among,
and melody in them, but that we cannot perceive them, because, our eyes and
ears are filled with the noise and news of the world. Jicere misere non potest
qui spem in Deum jacit.
Man goes about often to mend one rent and makes two. Every one will be trying
conclusions on the body of poor Sion; but as he said, Many Phisicians have
killed the King; So I may say, many Empericks have almost destroyed Sion.

Most are getting great Lands and Livings, but how few possess their souls in
patience? Oh that we could in this stormy age enter into our Chambers? let God
bolt the door, and rock the Cradle, and we shall sleep sweetly; The Attributes
and Promises of God are our Chambers. I have heard of an Emperor, that when he
was disturbed with passion was wont to lock himself in his Closet, and never to
come out till his spirit was composed; Disturbances in our minds are quickly
raised, like evil spirits, but hardly quelled. There are two difficult, but
needful dutys in this dirty and distracting age, To sweep our own doors, and
to shut our doors about us. Oh that we could look to our Duty, Ego in hac
fabula parts meas peraga^n, viderit, de exitu ipse choragus Christus. Eras.
Epi.
and leave the event to God! If we did look to our Tackling, the Pilot would
look to the Helm. God has a greater venture of glory in the Churches welfare,
than man can have, only let the Jonahses be cast overboard, and then let the
Mariners fear no storm. Be still, and know that I am God. If you will not
believe, you shall not be established, was good Divinity of old. Remember,
Until the World can shake God off the top of the Ladder, the Jacobs of God
shall not be disturbed in their rest at the bottom.

And that, as there is a necessity to yield to Gods will, because it cannot be
resisted, so there is great equity therein,, because it cannot be bettered.

The Bed was Earth, the raised Pillow stones,
Whereon poor Jacob rests his head, his bones.
Heaven was his Canopy, the shades of night
Were his drawn Curtains to exclude the light.
Poor state for Jacobs Heir, it seems to me,
His Cattle found as soft a Bed as he:
Yet God appeared, there is his joy, his Crown;
God is not always seen in Beds of Down.
Oh! if that God* shall please to make my Bed,
I care not where I rest my bones, and head.
With thee my wants can never prove extreme;
With Jacobs Pillow, give me Jacobs Dream.
Fourthly, and lastly, While others climb in the world, climb you Jacobs
Ladder; and there are three artificial ways in a spiritual sense for climbing.

The first way, is with Jacob, to lie flat at the foot of the Ladder. God
usually cast his Prophets into asleep, and then revealed his Oracles to them.
Non nisi iu culmine humilitatis constituitur cognitio veritatis. Bern. in loc.
Jacob was a plain man, and he saw God, says the Text; mark it, he saw God in
his goods, in his Wives, these goods the Lords gave me; he saw God in Esau, and
yet there was as little of God in Esau as could be, I saw thy face as the face
of God, he saw his Father in his Brother. They say, Astrologers, when they
would take a view of the Planets and Orbs of the Heavens, they lay themselves
flat on their backs, that nothing may hinder their contemplation; lay your
selves flat on your backs, and you cannot choose but have a sight of Heaven.
Only they that are like Jacob see the Ladder as Jacob did; Gospel simplicity
has the sweetest view of Gospel Mysteries: Jacob had many Visions before, but
did not see it, at last he dreamed and behold a Ladder.

Secondly, Descend, if you would ascend Jacobs Ladder. A Paradox you will say;
but the truth is, he that exalts himself, God will debase; he that lifts
himself up goes further from God, and he that humbles himself comes nigher to
God. The Apostle, Phil. 3.20. ascends gloriously; Our conversation is in
Heaven, we are men of another will, men of another world: But how came the
Apostle so high? He had it seems been climbing a wrong Ladder before in
Pharisaism; Circumcised the eighth day, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, he reckons
seven steps, but comes down from them all to meet with Christ, verse. 7. Those
things that were gain to me, I account loss for Christ. Christ for my money,
says Paul, there he descends; And Romans 7. we have the Apostle descending again,
O wretched man that I am; I an Apostle! Descend in infernum vivens, ne
descendas moriens.
I a Professor! none so proud, none so profane as Paul; he goes even to Hell
gates, Who shall deliver me? but presently he ascends, and mounts up as it were
on the top of Jacobs Ladder; Blessed be God, through Jesus Christ, who has
given us the victory. So David, What am I, or my Fathers house? my sins are
continually before me; and immediately, like a ransomed prisoner, sings and
warbles out in the Psalms, Praise the Lord, all that is within me praise the
Lord. Some say, that when the Apostle Act. 9. was cast down and lay in
blindness for a time, that then he had the sight of Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.1^ Oh how
high is God in an humble heart? and how high is an humble man in the the Lords
thoughts?

They say, water ascends no higher than it descends; and surely, In experience
to many souls, the gate of Hell is the nighest way to the Palace of Heaven.
Pride goes before destruction, (...).
but the humble the Lord will teach* and prefer. Self-abasement, is the next
step to Joy and Assurance. We can sooner see Stars in the water, than water in
the Stars. Many descend by ascending, but the best way is to ascend by
descending. The best way to see the glory of the Lord, is to fall down before
God on our faces; We can never see our own glory and Gods glory together. The
best way to improve some talents, is to lay them up; Moses had more glory by
his veil, than by his face.

Thirdly, Stand not still on Gods Ladder. Not to go forward, is to go backward;
better never to have begun to climb, than not to climb to the top; Many run
that never obtain the prize; Many shoot but few hit the mark. Gaze not on the
Lords Ladder, mind your journey to Heaven, these are giddy and dizzy times; If
ever you would not be falling Stars, be not Planets, not wandering Stars; not
one in a thousand that is a wandering Star, but a thousand to one he proves a
falling Star. Neither come down Gods Ladder with Demas, nor fall off Gods
Ladder with Judas; in a moral sense, or spiritual rather, be Angels ascending,
not descending; the falling sickness is much abroad, we fall not forward, but
backward, as Ely did, and many break their necks: The Lord grant you may not be
blazing stars for they are portentous, nor fallen Angels. How soon (as the
Apostle said) are we removed into another Gospel? How sad to consider? the last
year visibly an Angel, and this year a Devil; yesterdaies Professor, is to
days Ranter.

The Well is deep, said the Samaritan, and there is need of a Bucket; So the
Ladder is high, and the ascent is great, we need Faith. Faith and Love are the
two hands by which you must climb, take good hold; Patience and Perseverance
your feet. Think not to climb with your hands full of dust, beware of
Covetousness. Dream not on Gods Ladder, if you would dream, come down to the
foot of the Ladder; you no sooner begin to sleep, but you begin to fall. Those
that stand high, had need to stand fast, for there is more fear of their
falling, and danger if they fall. Eutichus was asleep, Act. 20.9: in an upper
Loft, and he fell down dead; David was high on this Ladder, but when he
committed folly with Bathsheba, he almost brake his neck; and so Peter, a
glorious Professor, when he denied his Master. Many Graces run in the Race, but
only Perseverance obtains the Crown. Despise not Providence, yet be ruled
only by the Word; Observe, but serve not the time; Providence by many, (...).
I confess, is made a stalking horse to all designs, and most lay more on its
back than it does willingly bear. Providence and Conscience are the greatest
Martyrs this day in the world. The sufficiency of Providence is no warrant for
us to neglect our Callings, or the use of means; God feeds us, but eating; God
clothes us, but, by our industry; for though man lives not by bread alone;
Necessitas decretorum ^^ei non tollit libertatem in creaturis rationalibus nec
contingentiam in causis secundis. Wollebii Epit.
but by every word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, yet that mouth that
blesses the bread, bids us to labor for it; so our labor is to be joined with
the Providence of God, and yet nothing is to be attributed to our labor, but
all to Divine Providence; neither is Providence an Apology for the use of
unlawful means; We are not to walk acc^rding to the secret but revealed Will
of God: He that uses lawful means to bring about an unjust end, puts God into
the Devils service; but he that uses an unlawful means to bring about a just
end, puts the Devil into Gods service: though indeed no man sins without Gods
Providence, yet no man sins without his own proper inclination. Man is guilty
in practicing, but God is not guilty in permitting evil. And yet God, as he is
gracious in his Word, so he is glorious in his Providence; In the agreement of
which I shall conclude. It is the greatest folly in the world to follow the
dark cloud of Providence, without the pillar of fire of the Scriptures. It is
ignorance (the least that can be spoken of it) to follow Providence without a
Scripture; arrant Atheism to follow Providence against Scripture. No things can
be Orthodox or sound in the Volumes of Providence, that are erratas in the
Volumes of Scriptures: Those that undervalue the Authority of the revealed
Word, it is to be feared they either have, or will manifest they have, no other
Old Testament but Lucian, and no other New, but Machiavil.

Methinks His works are like rich Tapistry
Unfolded all unto a Jacobs eye.
Our Fathers Image hangs in this story
Embroydered all with Power, Wisdom, Glory:
But Providence is neither the first figure
In Gods Arithmetic, nor yet a cipher.
They represent the mind of God above
In golden Characters, but not his love.
They do not prove a Cause good for to be,
Yet make a Cause, if good, shine gloriously.
Scriptures declare the Lords approving Will,
Events his peremptory Will fulfill.
His Word shows us what he would have us crave,
His works show what he would have us to have.
The royal and unchanged Word's our Text,
Whereunto as a Commentary annexed
Gods Providence be; These glosses are,
But that is the Copy and Original fair.
There is a God, these Works do plainly tell,
And out of them Reason his Name may spell;
Yet read them curiously, you cannot smell
In them the Rose of Sharon, that is Gospel,
Indicted by the Spirit from on high,
Engraven in the Scriptures, not the Sky*
The Sun and Stars do not make a dumb show
yet by them
A God, but not a Father we may know.
How many Vows in perils do we make?
And yet from Providence excuses take
Against Performances. How many now
See Jacobs Ladder, but forget his Vow?
To conclude.
Let Jacob now awake, and preach, and pray,
And sleep no longer; for he clearly may,
Without a Dream, see, by the Gospel light,
The Ladder which before he saw by night.
Let Us draw the Curtains, shadows fly* away,
Visions and Dreams be gone, it is break of day.
FINIS.
MONOMAXIA: JACOB wrestling with the ANGEL, OR A sacred Duel, fought between
God and Man, at Peniel; with the issue of the Combat.

Represented as a lively example of Faith and Prayer, to all the Israel of God.

By J.R. of Shoreditch.

Ask of me things to come concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my
hands, command ye me, Isa. 45.11.

(...). Isid. Pel. l. 4. Ep. 27.

London Printed for L. Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1655.

To his endeared Aunt Mris. Dorothie Marsh, Widow, Living at Dover.
Endeared Aunt,
I Have much desired an opportunity to express my thankfulness to you, for
those real Kindnesses you have so long and often expressed to me; and though it
lay not in my Power to requite, yet I would not want Affection to acknowledge
your love. It is an old observation, that they that do a good turn must
instantly forget it, and they that receive it must constantly remember it; you
have done the former; as for my self, I will not deny but my memory has long
been asleep, but I would now only testify (by this public remembrance of my
duty) that it is not dead. The Lord made you an instrument, though not of my
natural, yet of my spiritual birth; you gave me not suck indeed from the Breast,
but you fed me with the sincere milk of the Word, you first taught me the first
rudiments of Christianity; not so much how to spell the Name of God or Christ,
as how to spel out the Name of God in Christ. What cause have I to bless the
Lord, that you instructed me how to believe, before I was tempted to doubt?
you knew that I came so full of poison into the world, and therefore you could
not too soon administer physic, to expel it; you looked on Original sin (as
like a common fire in a Town) in my soul, and you searched, not so much how it
came, as how to quench it; you did not prevent but prepare a way for the
workings of the Spirit. How happy was I, that you did not (with some) judge it
prejudicial to the guidance of the Spirit to be indoctrinated in a form of
Divine Knowledge? I remember, I have read somewhere, that Luther, when he heard
how that little children prayed against the Turk, said, In the name of the Lord
let them go on; for as they want the knowledge of men, so they want the malice
of men, and God may hear them. I must acknowledge I lived long in the world
before I knew what it was to die to the world, and many years had the
profession of Religion, before I was acquainted with the experience; yet I
bless God, even then when I had not Saving Grace for my own Salvation, that I
had any Restraining Grace for the good of others. How did you pray for me, when
I was not able to pray for my self? your heart was tender, when mine was hard;
my prayers now are to the Lord, that though I yet carry a body of sin about me,
and in my own sense have been often a sinking, that yet you would praise God
with me, that a Nephew of so many prayers has not perished indeed.

Your condition now calls for my counsel, but I will not undertake to teach my
Teacher, only humbly telling you, what once with delight you taught me out of
that School of Wisdom, Pro. 3.11. Despise not the chastening of the Lord,
neither be weary of his correction.

What though you have been cast down, will you conclude that you are cast away,
when your God has on purpose cast you down, that he might not cast you away?
You know that Gods fish thrive best in salt waters; that the Walnut-tree is
most fruitful when it is most beaten; that David was never so tender as when he
was hunted as a Partridge, and Jonah never so watchful as when he was (alive in
his Sepulcher) in the Whales belly. It is true, you are Husbandless, but yet
not Fatherless; my once dear Uncle is now singing out the praises of the Lamb
in the new Jerusalem; the singleness and sincerity of his Light, Love, and
Life, did tell his acquaintance he was a Traveller thither; now you dare not
mourn because he rejoices; and can you mourn while he rejoices? Oh! that you
would rather consider what a comfort you once had, than what a comfort you now
want; rather to meditate of your going to him, than grievingly to think of his
going from you. My dear Aunt, let me use that phrase (that was spoken to a
friend on such an occasion) You know well that you have need of his joy, but he
has no need of your tears. Your Husband was also your Brother, and if that
maxim be true, that the union of Grace is stronger than the union of Nature,
then I am persuaded, you mourn not so much for the loss of an Husband, as of a
Brother in Christ; yet though the stream be cut off, you have the Fountain. I
would speak more of this, but I shall forbear, lest while I go about quite to
extinguish, I should unawares revive the grief; chew not this Pill, but swallow
it whole; and it will not prove so bitter.

I believe you are more perplexed with the public evils of Sion; But in this
you may consider, the Lord wounds that he may not kill, and overcasteth the
face of his Church with a cloud, that the Sun of Righteousness may at length
shine out the more clearly; and that those storms and waves are happy that
shall drive the Ark nigher to her Harbor. It is certain, All things shall work
together for their good that love God. It is your happiness, your comfort lies
not in the lives of others, but in your own experience, that while others tack
about after every wind of Doctrine, you still steer your course according to
the compass of the Scriptures; that while some think it zeal to fall in love
with every fond opinion that presents it self on the Stage of the world, that
you have chosen your Love, and love your choice, in the Practice of Piety,
mortification, and conformity unto God; That while others talk much of God,
that your study is rather how to speak with God himself, than of God to others;
That while they love to gaze on the Infirmities of others only, that you love
rather to weep over your own sins in your Closset, than to cry out against the
sins of others in the Market place: but herein you know you are not justified,
and I trust you would much rejoice that you had something more you might
account nothing for Christ.

Go on, dear Aunt; Put on the whole Armor of God, that when you have withstood
you may stand, and when you have stood it out on earth, you may sit down in a
Throne in Glory. Perseverance is the Crown of Grace, and Heaven is the Crown of
Perseverance. You could not mourn (as the Martyr said) for the absence of the
Bridegroom, if you did not belong to the Bridegrooms Chamber. Ride on in Faith,
though the way may be the dirtier the nigher you come to your journeys end; The
Sun shines most amiably toward its descent; eye not the stream through which
you wade, but the firm Land to which you go; Look not on your Race so much as
on your Crown; your storms and Tempests, Doubts and Fears, as your Port and
Harbor. Here is your Seed-time, hereafter is your Harvest; Here is your Hell of
Difficulties and Desertion, hereafter is your Heaven of Light and Peace.

You shall not always climb with the Angel, but one day stand on the top of
the Ladder with the Lord; You shall not always wrestle with Jacob, the Day
will ere long break, and then farewell hardness of Heart, and temptations to
Despair, and mourning for Sin, and doubting of Gods Love for ever. When you
shall lodge in the Arms of your Physician, then no more complaint of your
wounds; When you shall walk in white with a Crown on your head in Heaven, you
shall not want the gracious company of an Husband, as a fellow Member of Christ
to comfort, or as a Preacher to instruct you; There are no tears falling down
the Spouses Cheeks in glory. Comfort your self with these things, that while
you wait with Hannah for the Consolation of Israel, you may at length (when
death shall knock at your door, which cannot probably be long) by Faith, with
old Simeon embrace the King of Saints in your arms, singing his sweet and
Swan-like Song, Now let thou thine Handmaid, O Lord, depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

As for this Discourse of Jacobs wrestling (I here present you withal, as a
Testimony of my Love and Obligation) I hope you will see your face in it as in a
Glass; not teaching you so much from me, how you may be Israel prevailing with
God, as to show you how you have been as Jacob, a Wrestler with God. Accept of
it my dear Aunt, and farewell in the Lord, in whom I subscribe

Your most obliged Nephew, Fra. Raworth.
From my Study at Shoreditch, Janu. 20. 1654:
Jacob wrestling with the Angel, or a sacred Duel between God and Man.
Genesis 32.24, 25, 26, 27 28 etc. And Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled a
man with him until the breaking of the day. And when he saw that he prevailed
not against him, he touched the hollow of his Thigh: And the hollow of Jacobs
Thigh was out of joint as he wrestled with him. And he said, Let me go for the
day breaks; and he said I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me. And he
said unto him, What is thy name? and he said, Jacob; and he said, Thy name
shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for as a Prince have thou power with
God and with men, and have prevailed etc.


HAving in the precedent Discourse treated of Jacobs Ladder, I shall now (by
the assistance of the God of Jacob) discourse somewhat of Jacobs wrestling.
Christians, if ever you would have Jacobs Vision, get Jacobs Faith. In this
Scripture we have an elegant description of a Monomachie or Duel, fought
between the Almighty and Jacob. And in it,

First, We have the Combatants or Duellists, Tenet in lucta Jacobus hominem,
sed ille h^mo Deus erat.
Jacob, and God, who in Genesis is called a Man, because he appeared in the
shape of a man; And in Hosea (chap. 12.4.) an Angel, representing Christ the
Messenger of the Covenant. The Hebrews say, this wrestler was Sammael, Esaus
evil Angel, who now contends with Jacob for the Blessing; but that this Angel
was God, appears, considering that Jacob was blessed by him; now it is the
Prerogative of God to bless, and not of Angels. Secondly, He says, Thou have
had Power with God; and Jacob says, I have seen God face to face. Thirdly,
Because this was the God of Bethel, Genesis 35.7. Hos. 12.4. What a prospect were
this! we have not here one man wrestling with another man, we have not a MAN
wrestling with an Angel only, but the Immortal God wrestling with a Mortal
man. Erat verbum cum Jacob Aliptes, and Inunctor ac Paedagogus humanae naturae.
Cl. Alex.
All in the letter that were interested in this Quarrel were in the field
together: Jacob had no Second, and the Angel needed none: How inferior a Match
was Jacob for the Angel? how superior a Match was the Angel for Jacob? will a
man contend with God? Job 13.8. Shall the Ax lift up it self against him that
heweth therewith? is there a woe pronounced against him that strives with his
Maker, and dare Jacob strive with his Maker? Isa. 45.9. how ungracious is it
for the child to quarrel with the Father? and does it not seem dishonorable for
the Father to quarrel with the Child? but let Jacob remember, That though it be
presumption in him to challenge the Angel to fight, yet it is but obedience in
him to fight with, when he is challenged by the Angel; That Angel that knows
how to gain glory by being conquered, Eul ne Herculesquidem contra duos, at hic
Jacobus contra Deum and hominem.
knows how to retain his glory by fighting with Jacob. That it was not so
visible a disparagement for God to wrestle with man, as it was for God (for so
Christ is) to die for man. Ephesians. 2 7.

Secondly, We have the field, and the time of the Combat. The place where they
combated was beside the Foord Jabbock, verse. 22. at Peniel, Hos. 12.4. Jacob,
verse. 24. was left alone; not that Jacobs company had left him, but that he for
a time had left his company. The words by some are rendered actively, and not
passively, He remained alone behind, not only to see all his Household and
Stuff safe over the Foord, but also to retire to Prayer. How sweetly did Jacob
enjoy the presence of God, when he left the company of man? Amat secessum
ardens oration.
Jacob (I am persuaded) was never less alone, when at this time he was so
alone. It may be more truly said of Jacob, than of any other man, he speaks
more with God than with men. Christ loves to embrace his Spouse, not in the
open streets, but in a Closet, and the soul never has sweeter views of glory,
than when it is (q.d.) out of the view of the world.

We have likewise the Time of the Duel, the Night. The Text tells us when the
Duel ended, but not when exactly it began; Si vincat minimum summus, laus
vincere non est, Atque decus minimo fiet ab host minus. De precio victi prudet
victoria, victor Tantus erit victi gloria quanta fuit Acc: (...): xix.v. 9.12.
it brake off at the breaking of the day, verse. 24. but how many hours of the
night it lasted, we cannot tell, but so long it lasted, till Jacob had the
better of the Angel; possibly it began at midnight. It is no matter how far a
man runs, if he come not nigh the Garland, nor how long the Soul wrestles with
God so much, if he wants Faith to get the victory. The Angel seems not to
wrestle fairly, he should have given, and he takes advantages of Jacob. For an
Angel to fight with a man, with a single man, with a traveling and tired man,
was too much: Jacob was rather fit to fly than to fight; nay, rather fit to
sleep than either to fight or fly. The night was made for man to rest in, but
when we cannot sleep; Oh that we might entertain our waking in wrestling (as
Jacob did) with God.

Thirdly, We have the Duel it self; wherein we have the ground of the Quarrel,
and the manner of the Fight.

First, The ground of the Quarrel; Jacob was afraid of Esau, and he would have
a Blessing; he flies to God, that he might not fly from Man. Go would have left
off, but Jacob would not without Gods consent to bless him; it seems that Jacob
now was on the offensive, and God on the defensive side; Lord says Jacob, thou
art my Prisoner, and before thou art released, bless me. God is taken captive
by Prayer, and become a prisoner to man, and stands at his courtesy, who says,
I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me. We say, those that have the
longest Sword, may command Peace when they will; Jacob here is resolved to make
his own terms, for he has the vantage-ground of the Angel, he has the Angel
at his mercy. I will not let thee go unless thou bless me. It is not belike
now, as God will, but as man will; Jacob prays to God, and then God prays to
Jacob, or rather prays Jacob. Let man be a Suter to God, and God will be a
Suter to man. The Saints are Gods Favorites, and they may have any thing of
him. It is a greater trouble sometimes to God, not to be asked, than to give
(Molestius est Deo nihil peti, quam dare.) Oh the power of Prayer

Pray not for this people, says God as if God were afraid of Prayer. The Prayer
of Gods Jacobs are of such power, that God is fain and forced to forbid them to
pray, because he would not grant, lest he should be overcome: This Christ
shows, when he resembles his Father to the deaf Judge, and his Petitioner to
the impotent woman, which cried to him, and made him hearken to her, as if s^e
had compelled him, Luke 18. Prayer is compared to Sampsons hair; for as all the
strength of Sampson lay in his hair, In hoc quod oculi Domini super justos
sunt, effectus asp^cientis ostenditur; in hoc autem quod aures D. sunt in
precibus justorum, exaudientis largitas demonstratur, and non tantum audientia
D. sed quasi obedientia designetur. Salv. in Psa. 34.
so all our strength lies in our Prayers (in Christ our Head.) The eyes of the
Lord are on the righteous, and his ears are in their cries, Psa. 34. Whereby is
signified, that God does not only give an audience to prayer, but that he is
at the command of prayer; that he yields it, q.d. a kind of obedience. Oh! How
potent is Jacobs prayer with the Omnipotent? How mighty with the Almighty? Let
Prayer be only mighty with God; it is enough that Prayer is as it were
Almighty with man.

Secondly, We have the nature or manner of the Combat, It was both corporeal
and spiritual.

First, It was outward or corporeal. Jacob was real flesh and blood, and the
Angel appeared in the form of flesh and blood. This wrestling was not spiritual
only, because of what the Apostle said, Ephesians. 6.12* We wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers; neither secondly, was
it in a dream, as the Rabby dreams, as if Jacobs Thigh had been hurt, not by
wrestling but by traveling; But the continuance of Jacobs wrestling till the
morning, the real and sensible hurt of his Thigh, the imposition of a new name,
the testimony of the Prophet, Hos. 12.4. show that his wrestling was real. The
Angel would try a fall with Jacob, and Jacob, se defendendo, would try a fall
with the Angel. Hoesit pede pes, densusque viro vir, ut Poeta.
Jacob played, q.d. at hug with the Angel. Methinks I see them to lay Arm on
Arm, to set Shoulder to Shoulder, put Foot to Foot they fought hand to hand, as
one man fights with another. Epalaien, says the Septuagint, Ekulieto, say
Symmachus and Aquila, Jeabak, says the Hebrew, a peculiar word, not used as I
know of but in this history; they did raise the dust about one another with
their feet, if possible to hinder each others circumspection by it, as the
notation of the word is; or according to the custom of wrestlers of old (who
contended naked, anointing themselves that they might be the more active and
nimble) cast dust or sand one upon another, In arenam descendere, operam and
oleum perdere, apalestros ineruditus. Prove.
that so they might take surer hold one of another. Some say (from Abak) the
Angel and Jacob did tug and turn each other till they sweat at it, that a vapor
or exhalation did arise from the struggling of their Bodies, which is common
both to runners and wrestlers; they did not beat the Air (as the Apostle has
it elegantly) they did not wrestle in jest, but they strove to bring under
each others body, contending for victory as for life. We may not think that
this was muta lucta, blows without words, though in Combats there is more need
of blows than words; yet this wrestling of Jacob was not only, no not
principally corporeal, but secondly, spiritual; Jacob contended as well by the
strength of his Faith, as by the force of his body. Tears and Prayers were the
Ambassadors of Jacobs heart to treat, and the weapons of his hands to contend
with the Angel. Proprium erat Athletarum and pugilum clamor and gemitus quo se
in lucta confirmarent. Pincd.
So says Hosea, He wept and made supplication; who wept? the Angel or Jacob?
the Conqueror or the conquered? If the Angel wept (which seems most agreeable
to sense, for humane passions and actions are attributed to Angels in
Scripture) then it was because he was conquered; if Jacob wept, (as the usual
interpretation is, which I here follow) then it was either violently by the
distorting or unjoynting of his Thigh, which might provoke tears; or naturally,
even for vexation that he could not yet prevail; and also morally, he shed
tears of blood in his heart; he assaulted the Angel with Arguments that he
might prevail. Jacobus vincit invincibilem non praeliaudo sed precando.
Jacob wrestled by Tears, and prevailed by Prayers; he not only prayed but
cried, his weeping was a loud cry, and though he had spoken never a word, yet
every tear had a voice in it. Jacob had more hold and power of the Angel with
his tears than with his hands; Perque sinus lachrymae flumiais instat eunt.
he holds fast and cries out, If I fall, the Angel shall fall too. Right Jacob
still! he had formerly cheated his Brother, and now he would supplant the
Angel: in a nobler sense might Jacob here be said to fight, not against flesh
and blood, but against Principalities and Powers; such as Jacobs Antagonists
was, such were his weapons, both spiritual.

We may say of Jacob, Nunquam lachrymae inita redduntur imperio sed magis
irretantur. Seu.
as was said of Hezekiah, I have heard (says the Lord) thy prayers and tears;
a a strange speech! I have heard thy Prayers, that we understand well enough;
but I have heard thy Tears, have tears tongues? or can tears speak that they
may be heard? I dare adventure to say, that the thunder that cleaves the
clouds, makes not such a rattling sound and roaring noise in the ears of man, as
the tears of the true Jacobs do in the ears of God. ((...)) God like a tender
Mother picks out the necessities of his children by their tears; and does as
well, if not better, understand their mind by their weeping than by their words.
Many have fervently uttered their will to God, that have spoken never a word.
Why cryest thou to me? says God to Moses, Ex. 14. I read of Gods crying to
Moses, but not of Moses his crying to God, Moses egit vocis silentium ut cord
clamaret.
no not a word. Hezekiah chatters like a Crane, and mourns as a Dove, Isa.
38.14. Yet God hears sense, though he cannot speak sense; words are but like
smoke, Faith is the fire, and though smoke is a sign of fire, yet often there
is least smoke, where there is most fire.

Christ receives sighs in his Censor for Prayers: Though others mock at groans,
yet he that made them knows what they mean. The Spirit first makes the sigh as
an Intercessor, and then as God hears it; He is within praying, and without
hearing; a dumb beggar gets an Alms at Christ's gate even by making signs, when
his tongue cannot plead for him, and the rather, because he is dumb. The Lord
regards not the Grammar of prayers, how men word it in prayer; nor the
Arithmetic of prayers, how often they pray; nor the Rhetoric of Prayers, how
finely they pray; Cum Spiritus Jacobi suspirat Spiritus Dei inspirat.
nor the Music of prayers, what sweetness of tone men have in prayer; but the
Divinity of prayer. Christians, the Spirit of God makes intercession in us with
sighs and groans which cannot be uttered, (...), for their greatness; that as
there is joy unspeakable, so there is sorrow unutterable; rather for their
littleness, their feebleness, and faintness: yet God hears them when we scarce
feel them; he knows the meaning of those groans, which never as yet knew their
own meaning, and understands the sense of those sighs, Oration licet tacens est
Deus clamor.
which never understood themselves. But may the soul say, If my groans are
unutterable, are they not then unaudible, can they be heard when they are not
uttered? Oh! consider, that as God can hear without an ear, so thou may speak
without a tongue. And on the contrary. What a sweet thing is it, for a broken
heart to shed tears in the bosom, and drop tears on the Bible when it is a
reading in private, to weep and read, and read and weep again, not to be able
to see letters for tears? Mary Magdalen was famous for tears, and Christ was
never so near her, as when she could not see him for weeping. When we wrestle
with God, we must mingle more Faith with our Prayers, we must pray more
beleevingly; we must mingle more fire with our Prayers, we must pray more
fervently; we must, as Jacob, mingle more water with our prayers, pray more
humbly and weepingly. Though we read not of his weeping plainly in the History,
Plerumque hoc negotium plus gemitibus quam ser^^nibus, plus fletu quam affatu
geritur.
yet we do in the Prophecy; probably Hosea (some may think) had that carriage
by relation or Revelation. Prayers and Patience are the Armor, Prayers and
Tears are the weapons of a Christian: If we would conquer as Jacob did, we must
weep or sigh as Jacob did. As music on the water sounds more harmoniously than
on the land; so prayers joined with tears with God. Sinners wrestle with God
for the pardon of their sins, and as they never obtain it without a bleeding
heart, so seldom can they read it with dry eyes.

Jacobs Faith is employed. For Prayer without Faith, is as a Gun discharged
without a bullet, that may make a great noise, but does little execution.
Jacobs reasoning was Jacobs wrestling with God in prayer. Deliver me, says he,
from the hand of my brother Esau, there is the ground of his engagement, v. 11.
which he maintains with ten strong charges or assaults one after another.

The first Charge Jacob gives the Angel, is, He urges God from the Covenant
made with his forefathers; O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father
Isaak, q.d. remember those Names with whom thou did make solemn Covenants,
for the Protection of them and their posterity; will the Lord forget his
Favorites and friends? but if the Lord will not yield at one assault, Si Deus
semper exaudiret omnes non jam ex voluntate libera sed ex quadam velut
^ecessitate facere videretur.
he shall have another. Jacob comes not to God as if he came to fetch fire, a
spurt and away, like a Messenger which is gone before he have his answer; Jacob
is resolved to have no other answer but to be answered, Therefore, he gives a

Second charge from Gods special command to undertake the journey; Lord! says
Jacob, thou saydst to me return, q.d. am I returning on my own head, or on thy
counsel? and art thou not concerned to bring me out of that trouble, that thy
command has brought me into? have I, O Lord, obeyed thy command, and will not
God perform his Promise? brave Jacob! He says not Prayers as children say
Grace, or as men like children say a Pater Noster, if God will hear them so it
is, they never troubled God before, and they will never trouble him after, in
all their lives. Jacob fights rather for the Blessing than for the Victory, and
he will rather dye at the Angels feet, than give over fighting, till the Angel
give out fighting, and give in a blessing; I had rather, says Jacob, die a
Conqueror, than live a Coward.

And therefore gives a third Charge in putting God in mind of his promise. Thou
toldest me, O Lord, thou would deal well with me; will the Lord say and
unsay? if the Lord had not promised to be with me, I had resolved not to have
adventured on this journey; wherefore, O Lord, if thy promise stand, I cannot
fall. Fight still Jacob, cries the Lord, still! I cries Jacob, and will never be
still till thou bless me. If my petition were unlawful, (...). xl. eth.
I would never have presented it, but if it be lawful, why should I desist it?
I had as good never have contended, cries Jacob, if I should be contented
without conquering, I love not to quarrel, The first stroke begins the battle,
but the last only wins it, which Jacob knows, and therefore is resolved to
have the last word of, and give the last blow to the Angel. Victorious Jacob!
And

Fourthly, Assaults, and reasons from his unworthiness. I am not worthy of the
least of all thy mercies; or according to the Hebrew, I am less than all;
though I am bold to urge thy Covenant, yet I am ready to acknowledge my
undesert; Lord, thou art indeed my Debtor, but by thy Promise made to me, not
by any performance of mine to thee. Humble Jacob! The Angels mercy, is all his
merit. Faith is always humble, and though it be most confident in Gods word,
yet it is most distrustful of its own desert. Thou art a Dog says Christ to the
Canaanite, and does childrens bread use to be flung to Dogs? Truth, Lord, says
she, I am a Dog; and though I may not sit at Table with the children, yet I may
lie under the Table, and eat the crumbs with the Dogs. If I be a dog, I am thy
dog; though thou frownest on me, yet feed me; though by thy power thou may
kick me, yet by my relation thou must k ep me: Lord, I am not a child, I
confess, yet I am one of thy household, because a Dog. Oh! that though we are
called children, we might have this one property of a dog, with this woman, to
hold fast, as she did. Yet Jacob gives not out. But

Deus non dat Jacobo nisi petenti, ne det non accipienti.
Fifthly, Reasons, and stands upon his experience he had of God, verse. 10. Thou
have showed mercy and truth unto thy servant, and with my staff I passed over
Jordan, and am become two bands; while Jacob seeks for a further blessing, he
remembers former blessings. Lord, thou wast with me to bring me to this
abundance, and will thou suffer my Brother to b^ast all? am I increased only
to make him abound? Ah Lord! How many of thy Saints think they are not
children, because they are not men in Christ? and though they have more worth
than thousands a year, in unfeigned Faith, yet they walk so mournfully, as if
they were not worth a farthing, nor had not a dram of experience, but should
die as beggars: How many Hypocrites lie in saying, they have that of God in
them they have not? and how many Saints lie (though they think not of it)
denying to have that of God in them which they have? and speak as if they had
received nothing; as if with Jacob they had never come over Jordan, or received
the least Divine favor: But Jacob is a subtle Beggar, and he gives thanks for
what he has, and thinks that the ready way to get more from God: Whom he
assaults with a

Sixth Argument, taken from his relation to God. Lord, says Jacob, I am thy
servant: as if he should say, is the Lord a Father, and will he not care for
his children when they cry? is the Lord my Master, and shall Jacob be put out
of service, when he most needs relief? Lord! I am thine, says David, what then
David? what then? why? Lord then save me. So Jacob cries here, I am thy
servant, I am thine though but a servant. Jacob seems to be a bold Beggar, yet
not praying as Beggars cant. Jacob had learned that modesty in such cases
pleases not God; Thus Jacob says (as Elisha to Elijah) to God, I will not leave
thee; he does not only spread his petition before the Lord, and there leave
it, but strengthens it with all the Arguments he could, pleading upon pleading,
as if God were most at ease, when he gave him no rest. And therefore

Seventhly, Lord, consider my fear from Esau. Has the Lord given the blessing,
and will he not maintain the same? indeed Esau is my Brother, yet he is thine
Enemy. If there be nothing in me for which thou should keep me, yet there is
something in him for which thou may not suffer him to devour me. Lord, says
Jacob, Thy friends are my friends, and are not mine Enemies thy Enemies? Thus
Jacob earnestly pleads a League offensive and defensive made with God, bringing
his Omnipotency into the Engagement, as knowing, that if he join with God, that
Esau cannot hurt him, unless first he strike through the loins of his God. Deus
nobiscum, Cum Jacobo tardius dat Deus benedictionem suam, commendat non negat.
was the watchword of some of the Romans, and our word is Immanuel, that is by
Interpretation, God with us. And indeed, if we be of Immanuel Coledge, of the
Society of Jesus, God Man, if God be for us, we need not care who is against
us. Jacob fears no hurt, if he can get that God on his side that is above all
Gods, and that Power to be with him that is above all Power, and therefore
plucks up his spirits, and gives,

Eighthly, Another Charge, urging God with the greatness of the peril. O Lord
says he, Esau will come and slay the Mother with the Children; that is, he will
have no mercy, according to the Hebrew way of expression, he will destroy root
and branch, that is, all. If thou give me up to his hands, he has no fear of
thee, and how then will he pity me? And yet Jacob has not done, But,

Ninethly, Reinforces the former promise more violently. Lord, thou did not
only say, thou would deal well with me, but also that in doing good, thou
would do me good, Thou will surely do me good, will the Lord deny his own
Promise?

And lastly, Jacob resolves for the blessing, and though he has done, as it
were, praying, yet he has not done doing; As if Jacob to your apprehension did
throw down his Petition, and take up his Sword, and says to the Angel, if one
will not, the other will; Methinks I see the Royal blood of Faith to sparkle in
Jacobs face, and hear him thus resolving, Well, as long as I have an Ey, i will
weep, as long as I have a Mouth, i will cry, as long as I have an Arm, i will fight
and wrestle; I will either fairly conquer, or be conquered. I will not let thee
go unless thou bless me, that's once, cries Jacob. I will not Jacob! God cannot
(to speak with reverence) resist Jacobs will not. only he that does the will
of God, can have his will of God. Philosophy, go play with your nullum
violentum perpetuum, nothing is permanent which is violent; Qui timide rogat
docet negare
the more a man fasts, sometimes the more (we say) he may, So here Jacob, the
more he wrestles the more he may: Oh that with Jacob we could thus put the
Promises in suit by our prayers; and as the Martyr said, burden God with them;
the bolder we make with God, the better welcome. Jacob will not loose the
Blessing for want of b^gging.

Fourthly, We have the issue of the Duel.

First, The Angel seemed to win ground, and to ^hump Jacob under his feet, He
touched the hallow of his thigh, and the hallow of Jacobs thigh was out of
joint, as he wrestled with him; Sanatur vulnus sed manet eicatrix.
of his right thigh probably, wherein lay the greatest strength; the bone for a
time was put out of the place, and driven out of the joint; and though it was
quickly put in again, as some think, yet did it leave pain and weakness behind
it. How now, Jacob! wrestle with God? yet Jacob wrestles with one leg though he
halt with the other. As one swallowed down his Teeth knocked out, and another
covered his Forehead with a Laurel, broken by their Adversaries, that they
might not see, and so not insult over their blows and wounds. So Jacob wrestled
as if he had not halted.

Now the Lord did offer this prejudice to Jacob, that he might not go away
vaporing, because halting; as Paul was pricked with a thorn in the flesh that
he might not be puffed up with pride in his spirit, 2 Cor. 12. As Jacob did
feel the hand of God, so Paul possibly in a proper sense might feel the Devils
fingers; It was good for Paul to be buffeted by Satan, for otherwise (through
temptations to pride because of his revelations) he might have buffetted God.
As one complaining of his lameness, the Philosopher told him, he would remember
virtue the better every step he fetched; God made Jacob halt as he was
wrestling, that he might understand he stood not on his own legs, but was
carried in his Arms. God here did as Wrestlers, that strive to distort the
limbs of their Adversaries to weaken them in their wrestling. Thirdly, By the
hurting of the hollow place wherein the Huckle-bone moves (which being so hard
a place for a man to come unto) Jacob did understand he was no ordinary man
with whom he wrestled. And lastly, Jacob had this sensible hurt, and visible
lameness, that hereafter he might know, Claudus in via melior est quam currens
extra viam.
and others understand from him that he did not wrestle in a dream, or dream of
a wrestling with an Angel; He beheld the testimonies of a divine Power about
him.

Every Jacob has his halting, but there are some that halt that are not
Jacobs. How long will you halt between two Opinions? 1 King. 18. Where almost
is the Christian, of whom it may be said as once it was of Nathaniel, behold an
Israelite indeed in whom is no guile? The Habassines are Jacobites and
Christians from the girdle upward, and Jews downward; admitting both of Baptism
and Circumcision: So many divide their love between Christ and the world; look
on their heads and they are all of gold, they have golden professions, but look
on their feet, and they are of clay, they have worldly affections. Some fancy,
as if Jacob were cured of this halting the next day; but it is believed he kept
his halting as long as he kept (on earth) his blessing, and went not only
Israel, but halting or limping to the grave. Jacob halted, and yet was blessed;
his blessing did neither take away his halting, nor his halting did not remove
his blessing. How many halt with Jacob, that are not blessed with Jacob? which
made an Ancient cry out, Oh that I might halt with Jacob, and that God would
put the hollow of my Thigh out of joint, that I might be humbled, that my sinew
of pride might shrink, that I might with Jacob prevail with God. Jacob halted,
and yet the Jews honored him with a daily remembrance. Neither the blindness of
Isaac, nor lameness of Mephibosheth, nor the halting of Jacob, made them less
beloved of God, nor less noble in the eyes of wise and good men. Such
Infirmities and deformities, that are not contracted by our wilful wickedness,
but cast on us by Providence, are matter not of scorn but of thanks to those
that have them not, and matter not of despair but of humility to those that
have them. The wound of Jacob is not so grievous, as the sign is comfortable:
Well is that part of us lost, which may give assurance of the salvation of the
whole; and our Faith is not yet sound, if it has not taught us to neglect pain
for God; and more to love the seal of his presence than our flesh. It is yet
remembered who had the sense of the following Distincts.

Stigmata maxillis bajulans insignia laudis
Exultam redeo victima grata Deo:
But notwithstanding Jacob halts, Christus pendebat and tamen petebat, hic
Jacobus laxatus est and tamen luctatus est
yet he wrestles. In that Jacob halted, it was a sign of Gods presence, in that
though he halted, yet he wrestled, it was a sign of Gods approbation, Jacob
wrestles though he halts. Valorous Jacob!

Secondly, He wins the Victory in conclusion over the Angel, though he halt:
And that two ways.

1 Jacob prevails Polemically, or (as I may say) by Power, As a Prince he had
power over the Angel, Genesis 32.28. Hos. 12.3. O Lord! How few Jacobs are there
in the world? Either we wrestle not at all, or we get not the victory. Jacob
prevailed with God, that's a wonder indeed; for it had been nothing for God to
have prevailed with Jacob; yet I dare say, it is a hard thing for God to
prevail over man, as it is for man to prevail with God; and the reason is
plain, because even when God prevails with man, man prevails with God; when man
yields to God, then God yields to man. But does Jacob indeed prevail with God?
O the Princedom of Prayer! None so strong as the Lion of Judah, for he overcame
the roaring Lion; yet a believing Tongue, an humble Knee, and a broken Heart,
conquers even our Conqueror. Prayer is omnipotent, for as sin is called
infinite (objectively not formally) because it is practiced against an infinite
God; so Prayer is as it were Omnipotent, because it prevails with an Omnipotent
God. When God saw that he prevailed not; When he saw; God knew the issue of the
Combat before he took the Field; this is spoken, (...), or to our capacity;
the experience of the thing is taken for Gods foreknowledge; the Lord with the
blast of his mouth could have confounded Jacob, the Lord could not, because he
would not; Gods cannot in Scripture, is his will not. He disposes of his Power
according to his own will and purpose; and therefore as long as he can do all
he will, he is Omnipotent. The object of the Omnipotency of God, is whatsoever
is adverse to his Nature, and does not imply a contradiction, and therefore it
is no disparagement of the Power of God not to be able to sin, sin being rather
a defect than an act, rather a sign of Impotency than Power. We say often
concerning those things we will not do, we cannot do; especially, when
though we have Power to do those things, yet we have determined the contrary;
which reason is more considerable with God than with man, because the decrees
of man are changeable, and may be broken off, but the divine Decrees are
immutable, and unalterable; and therefore when it is said, Christ could not do
many mighty works because of unbeleef in his own Country, Mat. 13.58. the
meaning is, Christ would not, in respect of their unbeleef, not because
absolutely he could not; and that the Angel could do nothing till Lot came to
Zoar, Genesis 19.22. it was not in respect of Lots Power, as of the Angels pity.
So here, God would give Jacob the victory. Even as lovers are disposed for the
nonce to take a fall one of another, the stronger of the weaker, so God shall
wrestle a fall with thee, O Christian, as he did with Jacob, and yield so much
in love to thee, as to suffer thee to give him the foil and fall, and to
prevail against him. Deus qui contra se viribus nullis superatur precibus
vincitur
The Lord fell down before Jacob, Jacob did not throw him down; God was as
willing to be conquered, as Jacob for all his heart was willing to conquer.
Jacob prevails over God before he prevails over man.

Let Naturalists recall what they express,
Before you do the greater do the less.
Jacob
Less than the least of all is here, that can
Prevail with God, before he conquers man.
Secondly, Jacob prevailed, When? not before but after he was lame; as the
Apostle says, so might Jacob say, when I am weak then am I strong: It is a
true experience in the wrestling School of Christ, when a man is strongest he
is weakest, and when he is weakest he is strongest; Jacob here made the Angel
fall when he was scarce able to stand, and stood it out; though his Joints were
out of joint, yet still he wrestles, and the more lame he was, the more reason
he had to hold. Oh happy loss of Jacob! he lost a joint, and wone a Blessing;
he was blessed because he would rather halt than leave ere he was blessed. You
see prayer can do more than all the Witches in the world, they can only bridle
the Devil, but this bridles or binds God.

Secondly, Jacob prevails politically; as well as powerfully; he treats with
the Angel, and proffers to give him fair quarter; Articles and Propositions
pass between them; Let me go, who cries so? Jacob or the Angel? the Angel; which
the Lord so speaks, not as though he could not have departed without Jacobs
leave, but shows therein how much he esteemed of his Servant, ascribing so
much to his Prayers, as though they had bound him. Prayer is the Servant of
God; and, be it spoken with reverence, God is sometimes at the service of
prayer, command ye me concerning the works of my hands; as if the Lord should
say, Prayer, I am your Servant, the prayer of the righteous avails much with
God, if it be fervent, it holds Christ in the Galleries, and the Angel on the
ground, and will not let go without a blessing. As he that is a believer has
all because he has God that is all; so he that is a Jacob can do all things,
in a sense, because he has conquered him that can do all things, I, and him
that is all things. Ligatum habent sancti Dominum ut non puniat nisi
permiserint ipsi, Exo. 32.10. No Grace has done so much as Prayer, for all
Graces have had their power from Prayer in Christ, wherefore prayer has done
as many exploits as all the Graces besides.

And that which is more than all this, if more can be, Prayer overcomes God,
not only when he is well pleased, as he was with Jacob, when any child may
deal with him, but also when he was displeased, as he was with the Israelites,
when no man could come near him, when his wrath burned as fire, when he
thundered from Heaven and clove the rocks asunder, when the Sea and Land was
put into a trembling and shaking, yet when Moses entered into the gap, all this
Omnipotent Power came to nothing, God, though never so angry, was not able to
enter on the breach, but prayer got the victory over him, Let me alone, says
God to Moses, Exo. 32.10. that I may consume this Nation, Flectitur iratus voce
rogante Deus.
and I will make of thee a mighty people; God seems to hire Moses to be silent,
as if he should have said, Moses, leave off thy praying (as the Chaldee has
it) though Israel perish, yet thou shall prosper, thou shall not be a loser by
it, I Will make of thee a mighty people. Let me alone! who would look for such a
word from God to man? Let me alone! As yet Moses had said nothing; before he
opens his mouth, God prevents his importunity, as foreseeing that holy violence
that the request of Moses would have offered to him. Moses stood trembling
before the Majesty of his Maker, and yet hears him say, Let me alone. The Mercy
of God, has, as it were, obliged his Power to the Faith of man, and by Pray:
the hands of the Almighty are bound to the Peace, when he has a quarrel with
his people; the Servants prayers hinder the Lords power, Servi preces Domini
potentiam impediebant.
as one sweetly. And if Moses will, the Almighty, though he may be angry with,
yet he cannot strike or do execution on, Israel.

Prayer's like a vapor fumed from the earth, that flies
To th'gates of Heaven, and never rots in the Skies.
If Faith and it be joined, it will obtain
And melt into a first and latter rain.
If Faith forsake her, and they part asunder,
It falls in Thunderbolts, at least in thunder.
Saints! consider the power of Prayer, God forbad Moses to pray, and yet he
obtained what he prayed for, and diverted him from those Judgments he
threatened; If Moses prevailed against a command, how cannot we but prevail when
we have a promise? if Moses prevailed when God bade him not to pray, we shall
certainly prevail, when God bids us to pray. Ask and ye shall have; it is but
ask and have.

Let me go, says God here to Jacob, one would think that should rather be the
speech of Jacob to God. Let me go! is the Angel in earnest? surely, the Angel
was as willing to bless as he was to combat with Jacob; though God did not
directly bid him strive, yet he secretly insinuated, that if he would hold fast
he should have the blessing; Like as a Father being angry, makes as if he would
go from his Son, and says to one, Quid est servo dicere dimitte me nisi
deprecandi ansum prabere.
standing by, let me go, meaning the contrary, that he should not let him go,
but mediate for his Son. Let me alone! the Lord speaks as one in bed, and very
sleepy, as if she should say, do not trouble me, I am desirous to take my rest;
so the Lord seems to say now, Sion, let me alone, pray not for the conversion
of souls, pray no more for the administration of righteousness, trouble me no
more with your prayers, he that is unclean let him be unclean still, and he
that is unjust, let him be unjust still; But O Lord! Shall we indeed give over
praying? shall we cease petitioning? no, as Elijah in an holy sense said cry
aloud; so pray aloud to God; the more willing God seems to take his rest, the
more willing indeed he is to be troubled, and the greater silence he keeps, the
more importunate he is with us, that we should be importunate to awaken him.
Let me go, that is, let me not go; Let me alone, that is, let me not alone: Or
as if God should say, Sinners, will you let me alone? can you be content to let
your God go, before he bless you? (Deus non dat Jacobo nisi petenti, ne det non
accipienti.)

Let me go, for the day breaks; not as though the Angel was to go to the rest
of the blessed company of Angels to sing their morning Hymn to God, as the
Hebrews imagine, for they, not only in the morning, but, constantly praise
God; this is spoken according to the manner or custom of men, having now taken
the form and shape of a man, as though he had haste to other business, and
leaving Jacob to his affairs; as also, because the Angel would not have this
vision descried and discerned by others, seeing it specially was intended for a
private conflict in the night, without spectators, none must be witnesses of it
but Jacob, neither must Jacob himself know fully with whom he wrestled; and
that Jacob might not be too curious in gazing on that shape, wherein the Angel
appeared. Lastly, Some apprehend the Angel to speak like a greater grave man,
as if he had done something below his honor, as to contend with his child, and
did not care to have it known to the rest of the servants, as if the Angel had
been ashamed, and being foiled by his inferior, should have said, be gone,
never let man see that thou have conquered God, the day breaks, and will
discover it. The Hebrews bring Jacob in their tradition, as strictly examining
the Angel, as suspecting that he with whom he wrestled had been a Night-walker,
and had intended either to have robbed or murdered him. What does this man
mean, says Jacob, to desire to be gone because the day breaks? is he an honest
travailer, and yet fears the Sun should discover him? why did he not desire to
be gone before now? are his deeds evil, that he fears the light? But this is
spoken without warrant, though not without wit.

Let thee go, says Jacob, no, I could have been without the blessing if I had
never fought, and I am resolved not to fight so long for nothing. Let me go!
Jacob now sings victoria, Pugna suum finem, cum rogat bostis, habet
and by this request is the more inflamed to fight it out. Let me go Jacob! why
so? the quarrel belike is ended.

Put up thy Weapons Jacob, leave the Field,
Hark Jacob! the Almighty cries, I yield.
Though thou art Israel, yet do not boast,
The Blessing's got, but yet thy joint is lost.
No more wrestling it seems, when the day breaks; As our Lord and Master says,
work while you have the day, for the night comes and no man can work; So he
says on the contrary, Sinners, work, wrestle with God, fight with the world,
while the night lasts, The daybreak of Eternity is a coming, and you shall
wrestle and fight no more. Pharaoh pursued Israel to the red Sea, and there he
left them; the Devil, and Sin, and the World, may follow and haunt the soul to
Heaven gates, but there they shall trouble it no more; fears and frightings are
for the night of this world, but joy and triumph are for the morning of glory.
( Terra est exercitium hominis, coelum corona, Ambr.) Saints, here is your Sea
to be tossed on, there is your harbor; here is your warfare, your place to
fight in, there is your crown. Who would not have Jacob's hard lodging, to have
had his hearty dream? Now you are troubled, because you are in the dark; now
your questions are, which is my nighest way to Heaven? what is the fittest
company to travel withal? how shall I avoid Thieves and Robbers, or conquer
them if I meet them? how shall I know that the Lord is my Father? that Christ
is my Husband? that the Spirit is my guide? the Devil has cast me down, how
shall I rise? the World has wounded my peace, where shall I get balm? my
Ignorance is invincible, my Conscience is feared, my Conversation is
licentious; I shall never be more than a conqueror through Christ; I shall one
day fall by the hands of Saul, of pride, and lust; I shall never see the Lord
give me the victory over sin, let me pray never so powerfully, let me profess
never so long. Ah Christians! never use that word Never, thou have almost done
fighting, almost done wrestling, almost done weeping, almost done bleeding.
Those Egyptian Temptations you see now, you shall see dead on the Sea shore of
eternity; the day is a dawning, and the shadows shall fly away; and you shall
never be foiled by the world more, never cry out against your hard heart more,
David shall no more pray, Lord, take not thy Holy Spirit from me, nor Paul, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? nor the Disciples, Lead us not into
temptation; Such complaints then shall be out of date, and such questions put
out of question, and doubts out of doubt. Farewell Physic was Chaucers Motto;
and farewell Diseases, farewell Afflictions, farewell Sin, nay, farewell Repentance
too, is a dying Saints Motto. Jacob here halts, but there he shall not wrestle;
Jacob then has done both his limping and his fighting; arise and shine, for
the light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen on thee, Nihil crus
sentit in nervo cum animus est in coelo Tertul. ad Mar yr.
Isa. 60. Jacob then lets God go, when the day breaks; his thigh then shall no
more be put out of joint.

As we have the Angels Proposition, Let me go; so we have Jacobs Answer,
negatively, I will not let thee go, that is certain, unless thou bless me. But
will Jacob let the Angel go then? The meaning is not, as if Jacob did not care
for the Angel when he had his blessing, but only, that Jacob would not let him
go at that time without the blessing. God always tarries with his blessing.
Unless thou bless me, that is, say some, unless thou acknowledge me thy
superior in this Duel, that I am thy better; but honor is in the person
honoring, not in the person honored. Others think Jacob only desired that the
Angel would go from him in peace. But thirdly, I apprehend, that Jacob
perceiving his adversary to be a Divine person, acknowledges him his Superior,
and desires that in his departure he would bless him; for the less is blessed
of the greater; and he blessed him, not that the imposition of the new name was
the benediction here spoken of, but the Lord did expressly bless Jacob,
probably, in that form and manner wherein he blessed Abraham, In thy seed
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, confirming likewise the former
blessings given him, Genesis 27.28. and 28.34. and comforting him against the hurt
of his Thigh, ver. 25. God so showing himself the smiter and the healer, Hos.
6.1. Thus the Angel confesses he was conquered, as by the blessing he gave
according to Jacobs demand; So secondly, by the imposition of a new name, which
is solemnly represented, First, by a question, what is thy name? Secondly,
Which question the Angel puts forth, not as ignorant of Jacobs name, but from
hence to take a fresh advantage to give him a more glorious name. God appeared
to Jacob twice before this, and asked not his name before now, That Jacob
(says one) might take occasion to return to him with the same question, not
doubting but that he would give him some peculiar name, whereby he may the
better remember and honor him. What is thy name? Thou art such a fellow, says
the Angel, as I never before met withal. Methinks I see the Lord dubbing Jacob
Knight of the Praying Order, kneel down Jacob, and rise up Israel, for as a
Prince have thou prevailed with God, thou art a conqueror, if ever any were,
and thou shall prevail with men, as formerly thou have with Laban, so now with
Esau, though he seems to out-match thee in number and power of people. Thou
have conquered God, and thou shall conquer man; therefore thou shall conquer
man because thou have conquered God. Jacobus est plurimarum palmarum homo.
Jacob was a man of many prayers, and now a man of many victories; Many Saints,
as David, Peter, etc. have wrestled well, but here is Jacob has out-wrestled
them all.

Thou art Israel. Of old they were wont to say, How gracious is Alexander with
Hephestion (who was his Favorite) but not how gracious is the Angel with Jacob,
but how gracious is Jacob with the Angel? Israel is a more famous warrior than
Hannibal, not only because he fought with God ((...)) but because he knew not
only how to get, but to keep the victory; for as he wrestled till he
conquered, so he triumphed till he was blessed. Jacob was a wrestler in the
womb, and a conqueror in the world; Jacob got the victory, and politickly clipped
her wings that she should not flee from him. Henceforward no more Alexander the
Great, Charlemain, or William the Conqueror, but Jacob the Great, but Jacob the
Conqueror. He is properly Right Honorable, and of him properly may we say, his
Excellency, who, with this Patriarch, is rightly honorable, and as he did,
excells with God.

Thy name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel; the change of names in the
godly is an argument of favor with God, and of honor with men, and a
provocation for them whose names are changed, to change from bad to good, from
good to better. No more Jacob, that is only Jacob, but also Israel; as when
the Lord says, Ier. 7.22. that he required not sacrifices of the people, that
is, only outward sacrifices; for by the name of Israel, Jacobs posterity was
rather honored than himself; he did not leave his old name Jacob; his posterity
being called rather the children of Israel than of Jacob, and familiarly
Israelites, not Jacobites. (Nomen quo tu Israel, appellaris Dei cogniti
argumentum est, ut amplius incredulitatem tuam patefaciat, cur igitur gestas
cognomen quod personae probro sit? factis appellationem tuam impugnas, and
calumnia nomen tuum afficis. Basil. Seleuc. Orat. 19.) As the Apostle had not
the name of Simon abrogated, but only the name of Peter added, as the more
honorable title; So the Patriarch lost not the name of Jacob, but gained the
name of Israel. He is called Israel in opposition to Jacob, which signifies
subtlety, and imports weakness, Genesis 25.26. For the name Jacob he had from
prevailing over man, but the name Israel, from prevailing over God; so the Lod
intimates here, as if he should have said, Thou shall not henceforward be
termed Jacob, as if thou had got the blessing by stealth and fraud from man,
but Israel, for thou have fought hand to hand, thou have with puissance and
power, and in the field, got the victory over God. No more a Supplanter but a
Conqueror. And it is observed, that usually when there is mention made of the
infirmities of the Church in Scripture, she is called Jacob, but when of her
prosperous and prevailing estate, she is called Israel, Isa. 41.14. Gal. 6.16.
but Israel, that is Gods valiant, or valiant with God, not a man seeing God, as
if it were (...), nor one right with directed by God, as if it were (...), from
Jashar, Ishrael, but Israel, that is, thou have prevailed with God, from Sara,
to rule, as the Lord himself gives the Etymon; The Septuagint reads it (...),
thou have had strength with God, The Chalde, Thou art a Prince before the Lord
and with men.

Israel was so called because he prevailed with God, Oh that either our Names
were according to our Natures, or our Natures according to our Names. How many
are called John, that are void of the Grace of God? Timotheus, that fear not
God? Theophilus, that love not God? Samuel, that obey not God? as their names
signify. Nomen inane crimen immane.
It were well that either our Names or our manners were changed. How many have
nothing of God in them but in their names? that are called by the names of God,
that never call on the name of God? is thy name Peter? oh endeavor to be a
pillar in the Church of God; Paul? oh endeavor to be a Paul, little in thine
own eyes. Ne ports sanctum nomen ad poenam tuam.

We have likewise a demand on Jacobs part to the Angel, tell me, I pray thee
thy name; belike he thought he might be as bold with the Angel as the Angel was
with him. He desired to know the Angels name, probably either out of honor, for
usually we are earnest to know the names of great Personages; Nec Dei nomen
quaeras Deus nomen est Minu: Felix:
so Manoah asked what is the name of the Angel of the Lord, that he might do
honor to him? Judge. 13.17. or because he would hereafter call upon him again
when in trouble, hoping the Angel would on such an occasion be as ready to aid
and assist him as now he did. And we have here likewise the Angels reply, ver.
29. Wherefore is it that thou do ask after my name? q. d. who made thee and I
so familiar? the Angel would serve his necessity, but not his curiosity:
insinuating to him likewise, that his name, which is himself, is greater than
could of him then be comprehended, and hereupon the Latin text and the
Septuagint add, (...), which is wonderful, which words are supplied out of
Judge. 13.18. and further the time was not yet come, whereby the Lord would make
himself known by his Name Jehovah, as unto Moses, Ezod. 6.3. and therefore
Jacob should content himself with that revelation the Lord showed to him. Why
ask thou? which is not so much an interrogation, as manner of speaking by a
prohibition, ask not after my name, (So some) but where God has not a tongue to
speak, we must not have an ear to hear; and where God has not an ear, we must
not have a tongue. It was not more curiously done in Jacob to ask the Angels
name, than it was in him, who took on him confidently to tell the causes why
the Angel did conceal it.

There are two circumstances more in this story. The first is, Jacobs nameing
the place where he had this Combat, he called it Peniel or Penuel, according
to the Hebrew, according to the Greek pronunciation, Phanouel; Jacob tells us
the meaning, because I have seen God face to face, that is, not in a dream, but
waking, not that Jacob saw the essence of God, for that is invisible, but he
saw him more clearly than ever he did before. Jacob saw God face to face, Moses
spoke with God mouth to mouth; that is, they saw and spoke with God as one
friend to another. As before, when Jacob had the Vision of the Ladder, he
called, out of thankfulness, the place Bethel; so now, he calls this place
Peniel, that his posterity by that name might call to remembrance this heavenly
Vision in that place showed to their Father Jacob. Wherever the Saints
prevail with God, there is Peniel: Sometimes they may call the Congregation
Peniel, there they hear the voice of God; their Closets Peniel, there they see
the face of God. Oh how comfortable is it to reflect on the times and places of
Gods appearances to his people! For Caleb and Joshua to look back on the Red
Sea, and to say, There we were Israel; for Israel to look back on Ai, and to
say, there was Peniel. How sweet to consider, there was the place where God
softened my Conscience, there was the Bethel where God revealed his love to me!

The second Circumstance, is, the observation of the Jews, They eat not of the
sinew that shrunk, which is upon the hollow of the Thigh; which custom was not
taken up out of any Superstition, which that simple age was given to, but of a
reverent remembrance of this Providence, which befell Jacob, according to the
Pedagogie and Rudiments of that time; who can show in the Bible where the Lord
blamed this custom?

But may some doubting Christians say, what is all this to us? This was Jacobs
Victory, and as there was never such a Victory before, so there is like never
to be such a Victory hereafter. We have not the person of Jacob, we are not
Jacobs, and how then shall we prevail with God, as he did? To which I answer,
This story of Jacobs wrestling is not incredible, but a daily experience. Jacob
has been wrestling with, and prevailing over God these three thousand years.
Jacob also prayed for us, and we prayed in Jacob before we were born; his Vow
was our Vow, and his Victory was our Victory. If I might have assurance of
this, may a Christian say, I should be a Conqueor even while I think I am
conquered; and made, when often in mine own sense I am undone. Whose hand and
seal is that? what ever was writ before time, was writ for our instruction and
comfort. But rather, whose language is that? Hos. 12.4. Jacob found God in
Bethel, and there the Angel spoke with us; with us Hosea! notwithstanding many
centuries of years passed from the death of Jacob to the birth of Hosea, yet
the Prophet speaks as if he had been alive when the Patriarch was alive, as if
he wept when Jacob wept, and prevailed when he prevailed. And there he spoke
with us; (...)
All the Saints are the Offspring of Father Jacob, and he contained them, not
only exemplarily, but also virtually in his Faith, as the root does the
several branches, according to the Hebrew Proverb, That those things which God
wrote to the Fathers are as copies to the Children. And I remember somewhere I
have read, that of old, Praying Christians were termed Jacobines, those that
have the nature may well have the name of Jacob. Those that would be Isreal's to
prevail with God, must first be Jacobs for prayer unto God. How often has God
found his people in prayer lamenting, and left them rejoicing? despairing, and
left them triumphing? How often have they come out of their Closets crying with
Luther, Vicimus, vicimus, and on better ground than the confident did, saying,
Now let Satan do his worst? Oh! that we were so willing to prevail with God, as
God is willing to be prevailed on by us! How does our Father desire to be
desired, and wrestle with his Jacobines till they wrestle with him? Neither
has he his will, unless we have ours. Has God forgotten to be gracious? Psalm.
77. No, If he forget any of his, he has forgot his old wont. Whoever can
nominate one Jacob that ever came with a lawful suit, and received a repulse?
(Deus non negat se petenti quod sponte se obtulit non petenti. Aug.) God sent a
challenge of old to Israel, Amos 4 Prepare to meet thy God; as if the Lord had
said, you have often challenged me, I now challenge you, Israel, meet me in the
field, gird on your Swords, bring forth your Artillery, plead your cause, I
say, you are a rebellious people, not Israel but Jacob, not Jacob but Esau; try
who is righteous, I, or you, if you can prove you are not a proud hypocritical
people, i will never challenge you more; thus God seems ironically to jeer them;
what, you contend with the Almighty? you dwell with everlasting burnings? But I
rather judge the sense thus, q.d. Israel, you have often provoked me, I now
accept of your provocation, I now take the field to vindicate my Glory, yet I
am not so angry but I may be appeased, come, says the Lord, with sackcloath on
your backs, with ropes about your necks, acknowledge your unworthiness, come
with tears in your eyes, supplications in your mouths, sacrifices in your
hands, give me the glory of my Justice, meet your God with righteousness, and
repentance, and I will spare you.

How often does the Lord, as it were, cast his Glove to his Jacobs, and
challenge them to enter the Lists with him? Quid Deus non filiis petentibus cum
hoc ipsum dedit ut filii ipsi essent?
None takes hold of me, cries the Lord, none will wrestle with me, none will
pray to me; Go, says the Lord into your Closets to morrow, there you and I
will wrestle together; you say you want peace of Conscience, a bleeding heart,
sense of my love, now meet me there if you dare, muster up your Faith, produce
the Promises, pray and plead, weep and wrestle with me, prevail with me, and
you have prevailed over all. But alas! may a gracious heart say, how shall I
prevail? I have neither knowledge how to contend, nor strength, if I contend,
to conquer the Lord. Oh! look not on your weakness, but on Gods strength; The
Lord deals with Saints, as some potent people have done to their adversaries,
lends them Arms and Armor, Powder and Shot to fight against himself. Cannot you
pray, says God? come, i will teach you to pray; take unto you words, and say unto
me, Lord, take away iniquity, and receive us graciously, and we will render
unto thee the calves of our lips; Say, Father, pardon my sins, and I will love
thee, speak peace to my distressed Conscience, and I will praise thee. Methinks
I hear the Lord say, Sinners, though you cannot pray with your tongues, yet
have you not hearts to pray withal? though you want words, it is no matter, if
you have tears; though you cannot speak, yet cannot you sigh nor groan? Though
with the Disciples you cannot say, Our Father, nor with Thomas, My Lord; yet
with the Prodigal, cannot you say, Father? cannot you cry, Lord? It is no
matter for babbling, a word is enough to the wise, and more than enough to a
friend, especially such a friend as your God is. ( Coimus in Congregationem ut
ad Deum quasi manufacta precationibus ambiamus orantes, haec vis (gratia Dei
est and) grata Deo, Tert.) Cannot you fight, says the Lord? come, I Will give you
Armor; do you want an Helmet? here is Salvation, do you wish, oh that I had a
Sword? here, take the Spirit; If you want a Breast Plate, here, take
Righteousness; It may be, says the Lord, when you come to my door, En quam
negare nollet qui sibi etiam neganti qualiter extorqueretur ostendit. Chrysostom,
I may be, as it were a sleep, and you may be ready to think, I have not heard
when the Lord called, and now the Lord will not hear when I call; It may be, if
I come not at your first call, you will presently conclude, that I will not
come at all; But says the Lord, Sinners, be not discouraged, if I come not at
your call, i will come at your knock; bring my Sons name with you, if I come not
at your knock, i will come when you bounce at my door of Grace. Oh, how willing is
God that we should hit the mark, when he teaches us how to shoot? and how
willing to answer our prayers, when that God whom we pray to indites our
Petitions? Oh Lord! how desirous art thou we should prevail, when thou tellest
us how we should wrestle? (Aut in respondendo quam facit moram, qui in
dictandis precibus vota supplicum sit praevenit? idem.) God wrestles with man
by tentations, and man wrestles with God by prayers.

Where is the spirit of prayer? generally we had rather sleep than wrestle with
Jacob. O, said the lazy Husbandman, stretching himself on his bed at noon day
in the Summertime, that this were working: So now says the worldly Politician
when he is framing his plots for preferment; O, that this were the setting up
of the Kingdom of Christ! O says the Apostate Professor, that spends his time
in the Alehouse, or in gaming, O that this were repenting, and recovering a
good Conscience! So cries the lazy Christian, folding his arms, like Solomon's
Sluggard, in his bed, yet a little slumber, yet a little sleep; O that this
were wrestling or praying with God, and gaining the blessing! (Sed hoc est opus
pulveris non pulvinaris.) I would wrestle if I had strength, say some Saints;
Never complain for want of power if you have a will; by strength, that is, our
strength, shall no man prevail, the Lord teaches our hands to war, and our
fingers to fight; he that bids us come into the field, resolves to give us
strength to fight, and to give us the day; we are not so impotent, but Christ
is as powerful. The Spirit of God helps our infirmities, (...), even as the
Nurse helps the child, holding it by the sleeve, Quomodo non exauditur
Spiritus a Patre cum exaudit cum Patre?
or as the Staff upholds an old man that else cannot stand; or as the Father
seeing the child lifting at a great weight too heavy for him, runs to assist
him, clasping hands about the burden with him. We have no strength but what is
given us, and if the Lord withdraw the influence of his Grace, either we fight
not, or we are foiled. Christ conquered by dying, and we conquer by yielding.
Prayer prevails with God, not as it is our act, but as it is the Lords
institution. God looks on Prayer, as his image, he knows his children by their
crying, and when they cry he presently runs to help them. As Q. E. gave Sir W.
R. a Ring, as a pledge of her favor, and bid him send that token to her when
ever he was in distress, and she would relieve him; so the Lord tells us we
shall see him, if he hear of us.

It is true, Jacob prevailed over God, but it was with God. That God that
called Jacob to fight, gave him weapons to foil himself. He that fought against
Jacob, fought also in Jacob; it was not Jacob prevailed over the Angel, but the
Angel in Jacob that prevailed over the Angel; he fought not against God without
God; he that provoked him to fight instructed him how to resist, at the same
time both contending against him, and for him, as being both Opponent and
Defendant, assaulting him with the one hand, and assisting him with the other;
supplying him with more strength in resisting, than expressing strength in
opposing him; how sweet to consider! The Angel contends with Jacob with his
left hand, and contends for Jacob with his right hand, otherwise who dares
enter the Lists with the Almighty? by whose breath man is consumed, by whose
looks the Mountains are melted, at whose nod, at whose voice, the whole
Creation trembles. We must distinguish between natural strength, and strength
conferred by Grace, by the former Jacob had been conquered, by this he
overcame. If the Angel that strove with him, had not strove for him, he had
been so far from gaining the name of Israel, that he had lost the name of
Jacob. Wherefore, believers, fall to wrestling, but if you measure your success
by your own power, you are vanquished before you fight; he that would overcome,
must neither look on his own arm, nor on the arm of his Adversary, but the
mouth of that God that has promised and can perform. The Match is too unequal
with the Devil, much more with God; We are like Grass-hoppers to those Giants,
when we compare our selves with them, how can we but despair? but when we
compare our selves with God, how can we despair? He that brings Jacob into the
field gives him the victory. The example of Abraham's contending with the Lord
in prayer, is notable also, and shows what a friend at Court prayer is, when
otherwise man dare not look the Lord in the face. Prayer is the Asylum, the
last refuge we have to fly to, Deus qui certamini praeerat vires etiam ad
vincendum praestat. De la Hay in loc.
and if Justice beat us out of that Hold, we are conquered. That which was an
argument of the Athenians weakness, they fought with King Philip only with
words and writings, is our Fort Royal, and an argument of our strength,
Litieris verbisque solis valemus.

There are Four Duels that every Jacob is to fight in the world, besides that
wherein he contends with God, and unless he be first a Prevailer with God, he
cannot be a Conqueror in the rest. There is an inferior Duel, with man, not so
much with sinful man, as with the Man of Sin; an exterior Duel with the World,
an interior Duel with the Flesh, a superior Duel with the Devil; but if we are
Israel, if God have predestined us, what can man do against us? If God have
called us, what can the World do against us? If God has justified us, what can
the Flesh do against us? If the Lord will glorify us, what can the Devil do
against us?

First, There is a Duel between the Flesh and the Spirit, the old man and the
new man. And here blessed Paul in the strength of the God of Jacob, enters the
Lists, Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.23, etc. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit lusts against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so
that ye cannot do the things which ye would. Here we have first a Duel or
Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, the Law in the mind, and the Law in
the members; the Flesh and its members lust against the Spirit and the mind,
the Spirit and the mind lust against the Flesh and its members. The Flesh and
the Spirit are presented as the two great Houses, the two famous Generals of
the world that combat one against another. The flesh takes the field, and
under its conduct march its works, as so many Soldiers; Adultery, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, lead up the Van; Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, make the main Body;
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, etc. bring up the Rear; All these receive pay
of the Flesh, and observe its command. The Spirit likewise appears, and his
Fruits or Followers are, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, all these are sworn Soldiers to, and
manifestly wear the Colors of the Spirit.

Secondly, Here is the Field, or the person or subject where this Duel is
fought, in the souls of Gods Jacobs, between the regenerate and unregenrate
part of man: Not that the Flesh fights in one part of the Soul, and the Spirit
in the other, as if the Flesh did challenge the Understanding and Conscience,
Contraria possunt esse fimulin eodem subjecto.
and the Spirit did challenge only the Will and Affections, but they are
mingled and combined together in all the faculties of the Soul. The
intellectual part or mind is not one part flesh, and another part spirit, but
the whole mind is flesh, and the whole mind is spirit, that is, the flesh and
spirit are in the whole mind, partly one, and partly the other. The whole Will,
is partly flesh, and partly spirit, they are not distinguished in place, but
only severed in apprehension. As in the dawning of the day, the Air is not
wholly light, or wholly dark, neither in one part of it is it light, and in
another part dark, but throughout the whole Air is partly dark and partly
light. As in a Vessel of lukewarm water, the water it self is not only hot, or
only cold, or in one part hot, and in another part cold, but heat and cold are
mixed together in every quantity of the water. So here this Duel is not at a
distance, but it is an intimate contrariety in the same Soul; like the
struggling of Jacob and Esau in the same womb, there is no room to hold an
Vmpire, no space to contain a Mediator, or to shift off and evade the conflict;
the same soul that requires obedience, does it self resist it. In the same
Mind, the wisdom of the flesh contends against the wisdom of the Spirit; in the
same Will, there is a delight in the Law of God, and a liking to the Law of
sin; in the same Heart, singleness and hypocrisy, sensibleness and hardness;
in the same Affections, dwell the love of Christ and the love of creatures, fear
of God and fear of man, dependence on the Spirit and doubtings of its favor,
(In tota anima and in toto corpore conditorem habeo pacis Deum, quis in me
siminavit hoc bellum? Aug.) A man's enemies here, too truly, are they of his own
house.

Thirdly, Here is the Manner of the Duel or Combat, they fight and conflict
one with another, even as Goliath against David, or the Amalekite against the
Israelite; the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit lusts against
the flesh, the good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not,
that I do. Here Knowledge fights against Ignorance, Faith against Unbelief,
Heavenly-mindedness against Worldly-mindedness; as light against darkness, heat
against cold. As the Spirit in a man wins, so the flesh loses ground.
Sometimes the flesh prevails, and cries victoria, and then Paul exclaims, and
cries, who shall deliver me? Sometimes the Spirit prevails, and sings Halelujah,
Quid hoc est monstrum? imperat animus corpori and paretur, imperat animus sibi
and resistitur. id:
blessed be God through Jesus Christ. Lord I believe, said he, help thou my
unbeleef: So cries the soul, Lord, I will, help thou my unwillingness; Lord, I
hear, help thou my deafness; Lord, I remember, help thou my forgetfulness; Lord
I rejoice in thee, help thou my heaviness; Lord, I desire to have more
fellowship with thee, help thou my backwardness. O Lord, I see my duty is to
glorify thee, and to conquer sin, but I cannot do it; I do it, but I cannot
finish it; I follow after thee, but I fall; I press forward, yet I faint; I
wrestle, and yet I halt; I profess, yet I apostatize; I conquer, and yet I am
carried captive; I crucify my lusts, and yet they revile me. It is true, there
is a Duel or Conflict in a natural man, but not between the flesh and the
spirit, for they are all flesh and no spirit; not between the old and new man,
for they are wholly of the old, and have nothing of the new man in them; that
conflict is not from the mind renewed, but only from the mind enlightened; not
arising from the love of the command, but only from the fear of the
threatening: That contest is between the Conscience and the Heart, between the
Judgment and the Will only; not between Affection and Affection, Love and
Love, Joy and Joy, Fear and Fear, as in the regenerate. The voice of Herod's
conflict was this, The Law says, I must not commit Incest, I, says his
Conscience, if you do so, you are condemned, but says Lust, Herodias pleases
me, and I will enjoy her; here is the Conscience only against the heart, but
the voice of David's conflict was otherwise. Conscience says, David, you must
not commit Adultery, you will sin against the Law, and against your light; Lust
suggesteth the sweetness of that sin, and likewise his Love to God, says, I
dare not wholly give my consent to this Adultery; here is not only Conscience
against Affection, but Affection against Affection; in a word, In a natural man
there is a fight in the flesh, but no fight against the flesh.

Fourthly, The Ground of the Duel. These two are contrary, there are contrary
Laws by which they Govern, the Flesh draws one way, the Spirit draws another;
here is no reconciliation of differences, or taking up the quarrel by
Arbitration; the Flesh gives no quarter to the Spirit, nor the Spirit to the
Flesh; the Quarrel is to last till Death pulls down the Stage, either kill or be
killed. No man can serve these two Masters, the Flesh and the Spirit; he that
has served the Flesh, may list himself under, and serve the Spirit, but at the
same time no man can war for the Flesh and for the Spirit; these are two
contrary Principles, two contrary States, and they can never match together,
though they always meet together in the regenerate. Every age has its peculiar
temptation; Fleshly lusts assail a man most in his Youth, in his middle age,
Ambition and vain glory; in his old age, covetousness: though the Soul kill one
Soldier of the flesh, yet another Soldier takes the field. The Flesh, like
Hagar, will dwell with Grace, with Sarah, till death beat it out of doors; the
flesh is an ill Inmate, that will not out, till the house fall on the head of
it. (Vnum Duellum necessarium quod nobis semper gerendum est, Deus ipse duos
adversarios commisit inter se Vet. videl. hominem and novum, carnem et
spiritum: hoc non unius horae aut mensis aut anni, sed totius vitae est, non
coronabitur hic nisi qui legitime certaverit. Mart. Clas. IV. Loc. com. l. XIIX.

Fifthly, We have the Effect of the Duel, That ye cannot do what you would.
Sometimes we stand, sometimes we fall; sometimes we go forward, sometimes
backward; sometimes we foil, sometimes we are foiled: even as it was between
the two Houses of Saul and David, so it is between these two Landlords, the
Flesh and the Spirit, when the House of Saul grows stronger, then the house of
David grows weaker, and when the house of David grows stronger, the house of
Saul and sin grows weaker; as in a Well, while one Bucket comes up, the other
Bucket goes down; so in the Regenerate, as the Flesh decays, the Spirit gathers
strength; the full Bucket always ascends, and the empty descends. The Apostle
was entered this Conflict, Universa hominum vita palaestra est: ut vivere non
videatur, qui se in virtutum palaestra non exercei. Bas.
Romans 7.15. What I do, I allow not; as if he had said, I am proud, but I would
be humble, I am carnal, my love is carnal, my joy is too much carnal, but I
would be spiritual; I fall in my race to heaven, but says Paul, I dare not
stand in my falling, I dare not justify my falling; And what I would, that do
I not; ah, says the Apostle, I would never dishonor my God, but I do dishonor
him; I would not grieve the Spirit, but I do grieve it; I would always have my
heart where my treasure is, I would always have my conversation and my carriage
in Heaven, but I am sometimes as worldly as others, as sensual as others, But
it is not I, but sin that is in me. Here we have Paul against Saul, nay Paul
against Paul; these are contradictions to Flesh and Blood.

The second Duel is, between the Soul and the Devil; And you have a famous
example of this Warfare, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14.15, etc. where you have the
Combatants, ver. 12. We, the Spiritual man, and the Powers of the Air, and
Principalities. Secondly, We have the Field, and that is in the World, or in
Heavenly places, in the Conscience, as well as in the Air. Thirdly, We have the
Nature of the fight, it is by wrestling, we wrestle against, negatively, Not
against flesh and blood, positively, But against spiritual wickednesses, and
the Rulers of darkness of this world; as far as the Air extends, so far does
Satan's Kingdom extend; the Devil has the hill of us. It is observable here,
that God gives his adversary the Devil his Titles, they have their Dignities,
they are called, not only Powers, but Principalities. Fourthly, We have the
Weapons: the Devil has his weapons, fiery Darts, violent Temptations, furious
and filthy Suggestions, temptations to sins on the right hand, temptations to
sins on the left; temptations to Pride, temptations to Profaneness,
temptations to Presumption, temptations to Despair. Sometimes he appears as an
Angel of darkness, sometimes as an Angel of light, but always a Devil, and
worse when as an Angel of light, than when as an Angel of darkness, (Satan et
si semel videatur verax, millies est mendax, semper fallax.) This enemy is
numerous, powerful, a Lion, Politic, a Fox. Secondly on a Believers side,
there are weapons that are offensive, The Sword of the Spirit, Prayer and
Supplication, which is not mentioned as a piece of Armor, but as that which
assisteth and manageth all; believe and pray, wait and pray, etc. 2. Defensive,
Here is the Girdle of Truth for the Loins; Sincerity, against Lust; the
Breast Plate of Righteousness; Holiness to secure the Heart against
Profaneness; the Shoes of Peace for the feet; peace of Conscience against
doubts; the Shield of Faith against Despair; the Helmet of Salvation; the hope
of Eternal life; Thus the Apostle presents a Christian armed Cap-a-pe, from the
Crown of the head to the soal of the foot. And it is observable, here is Armor
for the Breast, Armor for the Head, etc. but no Armor for the Back; surely, to
show, in this fight there is no place to fly, if we run we are overcome.
Christians are wrestlers, and Warriors, or Soldiers; now we know they wrestled
naked, and fought armed, how can a man be naked and clothed together? the
Apostle will answer, we must not entangle our selves with the affairs of the
world, so we are naked; we must take this Panoplia, put on the whole Armor of
God, so we are clothed. The Devil methinks enters the Lists or Ring as a
Challenger, and throws q. d. over his glove, his temptation, and dares any to
take him up; he ranges and walks round and round, who dares meet me in the
field, or look me in the face? so the Apostle presents him, as walking up and
down like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour: Like Goliath, he views the
Camp of Israel, and sends a Challenge to the Champions of God, come, Diabolus
circumeit non quarens quem mordeat sed quem devoret. Alap.
says this Goliath, who will encounter with me? i will give his flesh to the Fowls
of the Air; come, says this Rabsheka, who will contend against me? how many
thousands have I slain, by my might and my power? Meet me, says the Devil to
David, meet me, said the Devil to Peter; you believe, you repent, you obtain a
pardon! you might, says the Devil, have hoped for Salvation ten or twenty years
ago, your strength to serve God is now gone, your heart is hardened, your glass
is run, your door is shut; now who shall be able to conquer this Adversary, and
repel all his tentations? The Devil is not only a roaring Lion, but a cunning
Wrestler, he wrestled with Job for his Integrity, he threw him on the Dunghill,
but he could not throw him into Hell; He wrestled with Peter, and foiled him,
he cast him on the ground, but could not keep him down; He wrestled with Paul,
but met with his Match, Pride wrestled against Humility, Unbeleef against
Faith, the love of the world against the love of God. The Devil lifts us up
subtlely, to cast and throw us down on our backs; lie but on the ground, for an
humble Christian is on the ground already, and has not far to fall.

Thirdly, There is a Duel to be fought with the world; the world takes the
field, and under its conduct march that Trinity of the world, that Three in
one, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, the Pride of Life. These set
up their Standards in the world, and few or none but wear their Colors. The
Pride of Life, says to Nebuchadnezzar, Absolon, Caesar, and all ambitious men,
who follows my Banner, and he shall have Honors and Preferments? The Lust of
the Flesh beats up her Drum, and makes Proclamation from the Prince of the Air,
to all the Sardanapaluses, Amnons, Adulterers, who will follow my Camp? and he
shall have Pleasures, Pastimes, the Lusts and Loves of the world. Then lastly,
comes the Lust of the Eye, and sounds her silver Trumpet, and says to all the
Judases, Julians, Demases, who will troop after me? and he shall have Lands and
Lordships, Crowns and Kingdoms, the Gold and Riches of the world. (Habet mundus
venator animarum laqueos and jacula, alios telis afflictionum appetit, alios
voluptatibus irretire ambit.) This is but the first Army of the world; Then if
these be beaten or fly, there comes up another Army, and you have them
marshalled, Romans 8. 1 Cor. 15. they are enrolled under the names of the Law,
Persecutions, Reproaches, Death; if the world cannot prevail with its smiles,
it endeavors it by its frowns; if not by its golden profers, yet by its terrors
and Elephants (as he said;) this Enemy assails us by Prosperity, Quid est
mundus nisi Agon plenus certa^ minum? Ambr.
and then by Adversity. What is this world but a race or course full of
troubles? It is a Field, wherein is much Cockle, but little Corn; It is a
Garden, wherein are many weeds, but few flowers; there is not a Rose but it
has a thorn, nor a Gourd but it has a worm. The World is more dangerous,
probably, when it flattereth, than when it forces, when it allures, than when
it rails; As Judas by a kiss betrayed his Master; so the world is a very Judas,
and who can either fly from, or foil the world? O Lord! where shall we walk
but upon snares? there are snares abroad, and snares at home, snares in our
Closets, snares in our Consciences, snares in the World, snares in the
Congregation, snares in Preaching, in Praying, in Writing, in Reading. Who has
courage to fight? who has Power to conquer? If Satan threw Adam in his
strength, how shall we throw Satan in our weakness? What little cause have we
to be proud of our Holiness, when our first Parents who had no natural lust
were foiled. What is our strength to their strength? As Alexander, when the
Milesians boastingly showed him the Statues of their Wrestlers, that were
Victors in the Olympic and Pythick Games, said, Where were those vaste bodies,
when the Barbarians laid waste your City? So has the Devil often said to
Professors, what, you conquer, and overcome? Where was your strength and
confidence, when I threw your Father Adam, and Mother Eve in Paradise? (Non sic
te expectat Deus certantem quomodo te expectat editor, si forte Athleta sis in
Amphitheatro ille tibi praemium dare potest, si viceris: adjuvare te
periclitantem non potest, Aug. in Ps. 30. But yet we must enter the Lists.
Jacob was a man of contention and wrestling from the beginning, contention with
his Brother in the birth, contention for the Birthright, contention with the
Angel for the Blessing, contention for his Wife, and Wages, with Laban; now
Jacob was a typical man, his name was Israel, and he was a pattern to the
Israel of God. Though we are weak yet God is strong; though out of Christ we
can do nothing but undo our selves, yet in Christ we may do al things. In him
we are more than Conquerors and blessed be Christ that gives us the victory.
Though lust in the regenerate, be miserable, because it disquiets the peace of
the Soul, yet it is not damnable, because, though it bring forth sin, yet it
does not bring it up to perfection. Christ is our Captain to lead us; yea, he
is our Second, (...), Our fellow Combatant, that fights against sin in us by
Grace; Look what he did, what contradiction he endured, Bonum Agonem subituri
estis in quo Agono thetes Deus, Xystarches Spiritus sanctus, Corona,
Aeternitatis. Ter. ad v. Marc.
lest you be wearied in your minds; Look what he promised, a victory against
our lusts, and a Crown after our victory. Look when he comes, he is even at
the door; The Duel shall not last for Centuries of years. Jacob was a man of
like passions with us, and let us be men of like patience as he was. As we say,
That man that prostrates the Devil, conquers all his followers his Lusts; So,
be but a Prince with God, as Jacob was, and you conquer the Devil and all. He
that fears God, need not fear the Flesh, nor the Devil, nor the World.
(Diabolus est (...) Christus (...). Hark! how the Apostle Paul, in two places
especially, triumphs over his spiritual Enemies, To. 8. We are more than
Conquerors, (...), through Christ, that is, more than all the Alexanders and
Caesar's in the world could ever say. How, more than Conquerors! Yes, for in
Christ the Saints are persuaded they shall conquer before they combat. And
secondly, They know they shall remain Conquerors, when once they have got the
victory. Then he gives a challenge, verse. 34. Who is he that condemns? why
blessed Paul? the Law condemns thee, and the World condemns thee, and thy
Conscience condemns thee; well, says he, I care not for that, Christ has
died, yea rather, he is risen again, and fits on the right hand of God; why,
might the Devil say, what was Christ's victory to you? his conquest to you?
What? much, his death was my death, his triumph was my triumph; he makes
intercession for us: Mark that Devil! He is fighting for me in Heaven, while I
am fainting on earth. Satan, conquer Christ, and I am your Prisoner, pull his
Crown, if you can, off his head, and never let there be a Crown put on my head.
And so he takes a further survey of his Enemies, and their weakness, ver. 35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Tribulation, Distress, Famine,
or Sword? will they? no, I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able (let them do their worst) to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. (Athletae
sumus legitime certandum est ante ad bravium contenditur, postea ad coronam,
gravis aestus solis, sed speciosa tolerantia, ibi colligitur pulvis, ubi palma
proponitur, nemo nitidus coronatur, pulverulentum decet victoria. Ambr.) The
second place you may read in 1 Cor. 15. the latter end, as the Apostle says,
pray always, so I say, wrestle always, never let us give over wrestling against
pride, till we get humility; never give over wrestling against hardness of
heart, till we get tenderness.

There is a Fourth Combat of Sion against the world, against Antichrist, of
which you may read a famous description, Rev. 19.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. before I
speak of the power of Prayer against the public enemies of the Gospel, I shall
briefly, because of such an opportunity speak of the vanity and madness of
Duels or single Combats between man and man.

It was an old custom, that men, for trial of their Titles, or to purge
themselves of some defamations, would hire their Champions to try it out at
swords point; and a continued practice for men to challenge one another into
the field, and that upon slight or small occasions, they being afraid to be
accounted Cowards with men, and therefore are proudly bold with, and daring to
God. The Romans and Albans did set out each of them three Champions, that by
their adventure, the general cause of both Nations should be swaied, which of
them should have Dominion over the other, and which of them should be in
subjection.

The first challenge of Duel we find, says D.H. in his contemplations, came
out of the mouth of an Uncircumcised Philistim; yet was that in open war, and
tended to the saving of many lives, by adventuring one or two. This Duel
between David and Goliath was doubtless, Occisor lethaliter peccat, and occisus
aeternaliter perit. B. ad milit. Temp. c. 2.
by a singular instinct of God, to glorify his power, and to make David (a
type of Christ) more famous; and whosoever imitateth, nay, surpasses him in
Challenge to private Duel, in the attempt partaketh of his uncircumcision,
though he should overcome, and of his manner of punishment, if in such private
Combats he cast away his life. There are three arguments against this practice
among swaggering Gallants.

1 From the consideration of the Law of God, or of God; for such a trial is to
go from the ordinary lawful way, and to take a way that is unlawful, and so to
do evil; but we must not do the least evil of sin, to avoid the greatest evil
of punishment. The only lawful way for conviction in doubtful cases, being
either from the confession of the Delinquent himself, or the testimony of
Witnesses; for things hidden and unknown, are to be left to him that is, (...),
the searcher of hearts.

Many times these Quarrels proceed only from revenge; now it is the Prerogative
of God to revenge; vengeance is mine. We cannot challenge men but we must
challenge God, who justly challenges to himself both to take vengeance, and to
give success, 1 John 3. 12, 15. No murderer (as Cain) has eternal life. Cain
was the Devils Patriarch, and yet, though he be dead, I wish he did not live in
his Heirs and Executors.

2 From the consideration of the Devil. He is called a murderer from the
beginning, yea, as soon as the Devil (as a Devil) had a beginning, he was a
Murderer. Quam multi sunt qui clavum ejus sanguine rubentem Abelis, ut rem
sacram adhac circumferunt and venerantur. Buch.
This roaring Lion delights in blood, and is the Instigator to these
Monomachies, and thus at his pleasure takes two at once in his net, the
Murderer by his sin of murder, and the Murdered by his sin of hatred,
wherein he dyed. It is here as in a Cockpit; for as there the Master of the
Cockpit, or one that has Cocks, sets two Cocks a fighting, on purpose to make
him sport, and when he has suffered them to fight to the death of one or both
of them, he Sups with their bodies; So the Devil abets such cruel Conflicts,
that he may feast himself with the souls of the Combatants in his Parlor in
hell. They write of Phydias, that he painted the image of Minerva, and his own
image so cunningly together, that none could deface or mar the image of
Minerva, but he must likewise deface and mar the image of Phydias; neither
could any mar the image of Phydias, but he must also mar the image of Minerva:
So the Lord has so cunningly and curiously interwoven or joined his image in
man, that whosoever mars his image defaceth the man, and whosoever kills the
man defaceth his image.

Thirdly, From the consideration of the Combatants, of their folly and guilt;
These sin not only against God in presuming on their strength, but also
against their Brethren in seeking their destruction, and against themselves by
a voluntary thrusting themselves into danger, without any necessity at all. And
it may be very unequal, he that is worthy to be condemned being strongest or
most expert in the use of his weapon, and the innocent, weakest, and most
inexpert. Further, If thou art stain thy self, thou dyest a murderer, and if
thou prevail thou live a murderer; but whether thou live or dye, conquer or
be conquered, it is not good to be a Murderer. And lastly, It is found for the
most part by experience, that the Challengers are worsted, as appears in the
case of Abner and Joab, Asahel and Abner, Abishai and Ishbibenob, Sibbechai and
Saph, 2 Samuel 23.5. etc. (Insaniunt plane illi, qui ut generosi nomen retineant,
homicidae cognomen non reformidant, qui ut falsae infamiae suspitionem fugiant,
in ipsum in Gehennae barathrum insiliunt. Daven. in Col. c. 3. v. 13.)

Christians, prevail with the Almighty, and you are in some sense Almighty, for
so says the Apostle, I can do all things, but, through Christ that strengthens
me. How admirably does the clay-Creature by faith prevail with the great Potter
and Former of all things? Prayer is Sions Messenger, Preces Christum licet
festinantem remorantur. Mat. 20.32
and Post, and flies up to Heaven in a moment and brings supplies for the
Church; it marches through all the Armies in Europe, and over all the quarters
of hell, without let or molestation, and scorns to be retarded by Guards, or
hindered by examination; My cry, says the Prophet, came before God, even into
his ears, Hab. 2.1. The push of Moses prayers did more than all the Pikes of
Israel. Prayer is Sions Orator and Ambassador to plead and prevail with God.
Prayer puts challenges on God, and dares him q. d. to a denial; Why have thou
made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Es.
63.17. chides the Lord; I cry, O my God, in the day time, and thou hear not,
Psa. 22.2. It puts Queries to God, and will have them all answered; How long
will thou forget me, for ever? Psa. 13.1. How are the bowels of our God turned
within him at the weeping and tears of his crying Church? Jer. 31.20. Prayer
awakens and jogs the Almighty, when he seems to sleep; Why sleep thou, O
Lord? Psalm. 44.13. When the wheels of Providence stand still (q. d.) prayer
oils them, and puts them into motion. It engaged God to divide the Red Sea,
and to break open the prison doors for Peter and Paul. (Oration hominis est res
omnipotentissima, Luth. Hyperb. Oration est telum quo vulneratur cor Dei. Ambr.
in Cant.) Prayer, like the wind getting into the bowels of the earth, will make
Earthquakes in the Territories of Babylon, and like a Pioneer undermine and
blow up all the designs and Babels in the world. Prayer will make all the
Devils in Hell, and enemies to Sion on earth, to strike sail, for it has q. d.
Omnipotency it self under its lee. (Edesia totum mundum sanguine and oratione
convertit. Luther.) It were better to have all the Spears, Bows, and Ordnance
in the world against us, than to have an Army of Prayers, or to have prayer in
arms against us. Arms, and Armies, and Armor, cannot pull down Antichrist
without Faith and Prayer, Oration quast quaedam persona ad Deum intrat. Aug.
but faithful Prayer can pull down Antichrist without them. Generals cannot
fight with lame and sick Soldiers, but the prayers of lame, sick men, have
done more in war for the interest of Christ, than an Host of an Hundred
thousand men. Saints, fear not to lose the day, when Christ shall take the
field! While Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed; While Sion cannot lift
up a Spear against Amalek, yet it is sufficient if they can but lift up their
hand, the victory is theirs. Prayer can put a reeling and tottering on the
Kings Courts, Prelates, Pilates of Babylon, and, like white Gunpowder, can
destroy Babylon and make no noise. Prayer can yoke all the Swords in Europe
against the Scarlet whore and her Paramors; and though she hitherto has been
grinding the faces of Sion; yet to bring Grice q. d. to the Lords Mill, the
poorest Boy or Girl, if he be but a Jacobine, can do more to lift the King of
Saints into the Throne, than all the Powers and Potentates on this side
Eternity can do to keep him out of his Throne. Prayer cannot be conquered,
until Christ with whom it is potent and great be conquered. Prayer sets Christ
in the front of the Battle against Hell, and says, Devil, beat Christ, and you
beat me, take Omnipotency captive, and I am your Prisoner. Prayer hastens the
nuptials of the Bride to the Lamb; and though now Hypocrisy, Unbeleef, etc.
forbid the Banes, yet the Match goes on, and they cannot hinder the Marriage.
Our Father, and thy Kingdom come, are the strongest weapons in the world, they
thunder and lighten in Satan's Regions, and his followers cannot but both hear
their report and feel their power. Prayer will pull down that in an hour of the
Devils Kingdom, which he has been building for several ages. (Preces sunt
bombardae and instrumenta bellica Christianorum.) It will ere long enkindle
those fires in the world, that neither can ever be extinguished or repaired.
Prayer, though it made not the world, yet it shall unmake it, and set up a new
Heaven and a new Earth. A Saint may not fear the Devil though he meet him in
the dark, if he be armed with Faith and Prayer.

He that has God on his side need not care whom he meets in the face. Prayer
is Sions scaling Ladder. It is true, an Angel brought Peter out of Prison, Act.
12. but prayer first stirred the wheel in heaven, verse. 5. Prayer was made
without ceasing to God for Peter by the Church. I have heard of a young man
that had bargained with the Devil upon some condition, and he should have his
soul, the Indentures were drawn in his blood, but God disposed the heart of
Luther and other Servants of the Lord to pray together for him, and while they
were earnest with God for the deliverance of the prisoner of Satan, Satan was
so netled and stung with their zeal, that he was forced to come flying by the
window, and threw in the Indenture amongst them, as much as if he had said, I
cannot stand before the power of Faith and Prayer. Prayer we see is not only a
charm to bind, but a whip also to torment this Leviathan. Athanasius by his
prayers hindered the proceedings of the Devil in the Churches Enemies, they took
off his Chariot wheels that he could drive his plot no further. When Devils
and men conspire and consent against Sion, prayer, under Christ, has the
Prerogative, yet, of a negative voice. The keys, q.d. of Heaven and Hell hang
at the girdle of Faith and Prayer. (O admirabilem piarum precum vim! quibus
coelestia cedant, hosts terret manus illa, quae victoriae suae trophaea in
ipsis coeli orbibus figit. Buch.) Du bartus prettily brings in David answering
Goliath his Challenge.

Goliath.
Come ten, come twenty, nay, come all of you,
And in your aid let your great God come too.
David.
The odds is mine, Villain, I scorn thy boasts,
I have for aid, the Almighty Lord of Hosts.
Rev. 19.6. I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice
of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluja, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns.
This is the Hosannah Rabbah, as the Jews call it. It is reported, that the old
Brittons marching under the conduct of one Germanus, who came over from France
to subdue the Pelagian heresy, did obtain a victory against the Saxons, which
victory (because of their singing Hallelujahs in the Battle) they afterward
termed Victoria Hallelujatica, the Halleluja victory. This Victory will ere
long be sung again over Sions enemies; When God shall open a door to burn the
flesh of the Scarlet Whore, there will be a famous occasion to cry out, as some
Soldiers did some years since, Now for the fruit of Prayer. The witnesses have
a flame at their lips, fire proceeds out of their mouths, which devoures their
enemies, Rev. 11.5. which many interpret to be their prayers; In hoc incendio
uruntur Daemones. The Enemy ly and level their designs against Israel, but
Prayer dismounts them, and turns their Artillery against their own breasts. How
confident in God may his Jacobs be? till the Devil and the malignant World can
throw Christ down from his Throne, the^ cannot cast Sion out of the world. It
is the Prophets character of a Jacobine, He dwells in the secret of the most
High; they must conquer God before they conquer him; they may strike at, but
they can never distress Sion till they q.d. strike through God. Sion, though she
be not properly invulnerable, yet she is invincible. Qui Jacobum impetit Deum
petit.

Wherefore now let Jacob wrestle again, and reason with his God. Humbly ask the
Lord, Whether he can see his Sion even a shipwracking, Preces electorum sunt
Deo coctoquia.
and yet not throw over a Plank to her? his children a swouning and fainting
under their temptations, and not give them a Cordial? his Spouse a dying, and
not once labor to visit her with Salvation? Can the Shepherd be content to see
the Wolves to worry his tender Flock? and the Father love to behold his
children to hate one another? Dearest Lord! is not thy Glory dearer to thee
than it can be to thy Spouse, and shall she be sollicitous, and will thou seem
not so to provide against thy dishonor? Is the Crown of the Lord glistering
enough on his head in the eyes of the Wo^ld? Has our Jesus the purchase and
full procurement of his blood? Have thou left thy compassions to, as well as
the infirmities of thy Body behind thee on earth? Is our Joseph in Heaven,
where there are Barn-fulls of Glory, and Provision enough, and shall thy
Brethren starve for want of Crumbs of Comfort from thy Table? Are thine
Affections altered with thy condition? and does the Lord trample under his feet
his children, while he is now in his glory, whom he counted as the apple of his
eye in the days of his sufferings? Shall we give over praying, for the opening
the blind eye, and softning the hard heart? Shall we fall asleep, and urge
thee no more? Shall we pull our hands from thy Plow, and our necks from thy
Yoke? will the Lord dispense with our lukewarmness, and wink at our Apostasy?
Is it not thy grief to see thy Spirit so grieved? to see such noysom weeds and
errors to grow in thy Garden, which thou so much regardest? And so much
backsliding after the profession of so much Reformation? Shall we see Sion
bleed to death, and never ask balm more?

Has not the Lord said, His Mountain shall be set on the top of all Mountains,
and that Jerusalem shall be made the joy of many Generations? Is not this the
hand of the Lord, and his own broad Seal? How long does thy Chariot wheels
stay? Cui magis de Deo, quam Deo credam?
Has our Lord Jesus bled to death for his Saints, and will he now suffer them
to bleed to death? Does he love to see the face of his Church beautiful, and
will he never wipe off the tears of blood that yet are trickling down her
cheeks? Is the Lord angry at the Prayers of his people, and is he not angry at
the Blasphemies of his Enemies? Art thou offended because we pray for Sion, and
will thou not be offended if we should not pray? Is it not yet dark enough,
that yet the day does not dawn? because it is said, at evening time it shall be
light, and at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes. How
many steps more will the Lord fetch, before he turn about and show us his
face? Have we already the first fruits, and shall we never have the Harvest?
Has Sion often made Land, and said, now we are come to our Harbor and Rest,
and shall we be driven into the tempestuous Ocean again? Is not our dross
separated from our gold, that yet we are not taken out of the Furnace? Are we
not yet holy enough, that we are not delivered? or are we not yet ripe enough
in sin, that we are not perfectly destroyed? Will the Lord comfort us mourning,
or enliven us dying, or raise us when buried, and in our graves?

O Lord! Though thou dishonorest thy people, yet will thou disgrace the Throne
of thy glory? Will not the Adversary say, Surely, if God in love had begun thus
to build, he would have gone on to finish? Though we are trampled under feet,
must thy Christ be trampled under feet? Though his Body has deserved to sit on
Dunghils, and lie in fetters of iron, yet our Head has merited to sit on a
Throne, and to have the liberty of his Spirit in the world. Though our prayers
are rejected, yet will thou not fulfill thine own Promises? we humbly confess
thou have a royal Prerogative to save and to destroy; but O Lord! art thou not
bound in Covenant to set up thy Son? and if thou make not have for his glory,
will not the world be ready to say, the Lord is gone back of his word? Is it
only Free Grace and Mercy, and not also Justice, and Righteousness, for our
God to justify condemned sinners, and to sanctify profane Conversations, and
to carry on the building of the New Jerusalem to its desired perfection? Does
the Lord seem to cast us off to see whether we will indeed cast him off? or hide
himself, to see whether we will earnestly seek after him? Preces fundimus,
coelum tundimus, misericordiam extorquemus.
Because his smiles have not caused us to love him, will he now frown on us, to
make us to fear him? are the golden days of his spiritual presence gone, and
not to come, as we hoped they were? that we should rather put mourning on our
backs, than take Harps into our hands. Because England has been perfidious and
perjurious to God, will God now break his Covenant of Faithfulness with
England? Shall the unfaith^ulness of man make God unfaithful? Did the Lord, of
old, wait to be gracious, and will he now wait till we are gracious? Was the
Lord wont to be found of those that sought him not, and will he not be now
found of those that seek him? Will thou not pardon our Hypocrisy, Pride,
Passions, and Profaneness till we repent, and will thou not graciously give us
an heart to repent of those evils? Shall the new Heavens and new Earth never be
built till we are fit Inhabitants? And shall disconsolate Sion never be
ransomed from her spiritual slaveries and distractions till they are worthy to
be ransomed? Is not the price of her Redemption already paid, and will the Lord
seem to require the debt again?

O Lord! are we so far gone from thine house, like Prodigals, that either we
want an heart to return, or an hope, if we return, that our Father will accept
of us? Art not thou the God of Peace? Is not thy Son the Son of Peace? thy
Spirit, the Spirit of Peace? thy Gospel, the Gospel of Peace? and shall not thy
Children be Children of Peace? is Christ in one of his followers, against
Christ in another? is Christ divided? Blessed Father! how shall the world know
we are thy Children? if we have not thy Image? thy Servants, if we wear not thy
Livery? Will the World be convinced by our Divisions, that thou art Love? Thy
people see not so much Profaneness in the world, as the world sees passions
amongst thy people. We censure and condemn them for not agreeing with thy
people, while they see thy people agree not amongst themselves. Ah Lord! If
charity were the only badge of thy Disciples, how few Disciples would our Lord
and Master have in the world? is this a time only to pull down, and not at all
to build up? to cast away stones and to divide, and not to gather stones to
raise thy Temple? is the Providence of God resolved that no more Stories shall
be built in his Sion, till one stone be not left on another in Babylon? are not
our soars searched enough, Deo nihil impossible est nisi quod non vult.
that yet thou pluckest away the Plasters thy poor people apply to their
wounds? Is thy Israel in the midst of the Red Sea, and is Pharaoh at their
heels ready to swallow them up, and cannot Israel be perfectly delivered, till
the Sea be perfectly divided? Has Sion been traveling with Reformation these
many years, and even when thy people are ready to welcome it into the world,
and to name it Glorious, must it enter into the womb again? Is it our
indiscreet importunity, that has hasted to bring it to the birth before the
Lords time and day, and therefore shall there be no strength given to bring
forth? Are the grounds of our fears not only from thy secret or open Enemies,
but also from the vain conversations of the Professors of thy Name; and indeed,
howl ready have we been to censure the persons and condemn the practices of
others? and to say there goes an Oppressor, an Apostate, an Hypocrite; so, as
if there were none of those lusts in our hearts, which are visibly reigning in
others lives. Will the Lord consume their Gold and Silver, as well as the
others Hay and Stubble? pull down many of their works, before he set up his
own? Or will the Lord further suffer worms, and no men, to reason with him?

O Lord! are we partly brought out of Egypt, and shall we want the cloud of thy
presence, because, that either we long to go backward, or fear to go forward.
Must thy children begin to spell their A, B, C, and go again to School to learn
what Mortification, and their first love mean, before they take out further
lessons of experience of Faith. Wretched England! How many sins do we make,
that our God did never call sins? and how many Articles do our passions put
into the Creed, which thou did never enjoin to be believed for Salvation? How
have one form of thy people been trampling and triumphing over another? whiles
mostly they have been tithing Mint, Annice, and Cummin, neglecting the
Salvation of souls, and the advancement of thy Sons Kingdom amongst us? when
will the Candle of the Almighty shine on the heads of thy people, as of old?
when shall the name of thy Son be poured out as a precious ointment, that the
Virgins again may love thee? O Lord! let us be thy Patients, though thou
woundest us; Let us be under thy rod, rather than we should be out of thy
Covenant; rather than we should sleep to death, sound thy Trumpet, beat thine
Alarm; if thou should not administer physic to us, (...). Cle. Alex.
our Disease were desperate. Thrice happy will that storm be that shall drive
us to our Harbor. We will not appoint thee the Rod to lay on our backs, only
we entreat, that when thou purposest to strike, first break our hearts before
thou breakest our backs; rather than we should not have thy presence, let us,
with the three children go into a furnace; thy Son, let us with thy Disciples
have a storm; Rather then we should not be thy children, whip us; thy Servants,
beat us; thy Spouse, chide us; thy Friends, frown on us. Ah Lord! Those that
lost their blood together, cannot now shed tears together, those that fought
together in the field, can scarce now pray together in a family.

Blessed God! If it be thy will, sound a retreat speedily to these disorders;
Let some public Enemy of thy Sons Kingdom abroad come upon the Stage, that thy
Saints may one and all engage together both their prayers and their persons
against him; that Sion may be terrible as as Army with Banners; that the Brats
of Babylon may come and worship before her feet, Hinc Syncre^ismus, and
Synchristianismus.
and know that thou have loved her. If the building of Sion may not go forward
in this age, Lord let it not go backward; if with Solomon, we may not build thy
spiritual Temple, let us at least, lay up stuff for the building of it (with
David) in the next generation. If the Lord had never smiled on us, we could
better have born his frowns; if we had not known what the presence of his
Spirit, Wisdom, Glory had meant, in England, we could better have born his
absence; Our darkness is now the greater, because that our light formerly was
so great. How dolorous is it to consider, that we that have been brought up in
Scarlet, should embrace Dunghils? And that England, that was the terror of the
Lord to the Nations round about us, should so much be a scorn unto them, and a
terror one to another? You that are Gods Jacobs, up and be doing; surely, we
have little love to, if we have not a sigh, a tear or two, for Sion. If ever
you would rejoice in Sions deliverance, pray for it. Faith and Prayer are Sions
Grenades, and truly make her the Thundering Legion; only take heed of
counterfeiting these heavenly Ordnance and Artillery with the wicked Emperor;
these weapons are not artificial but infused. Methinks I hear Faith and Prayer
say, Saints in England, be patient and persevere in the holy and sincere
profession of the Gospel, though your God be long before he come, yet he will
certainly and comfortably come. Endure reproaches, hold on, and hold out,
notwithstanding your doubts and difficulties, your trials and temptations.
Though your way to Paradise be dirty, yet the Tree of Life in the midst
thereof, the Rivers of divine pleasure, and Gates of pearl, will richly make
amends for all. Be believing in prayer, and in this age especially. If once,
with Jacob, you prevail with God, you need not fear all the world. If any thing
in the world can persuade the Lord to preserve a Nation, it is Prayer. Prayer
has often met God, as Abigal did David, and moved him to put up his Sword.
Pharaoh being plagued with Frogs got the man of God to pray for him. and Exodus
8.13. The Lord did according to the word of Moses. And the Lord obeyed the
voice of a man. It is plain that Moses did according to the word of the Lord,
but it is strange that the Lord should do according to the word of Moses; yet
it is so; If Moses will do according to the word of the Lord, the Lord will do
according to the word of Moses; If we keep his precepts, he will fulfill our
prayers. God repenting once that he made man, was resolved to destroy him from
the face of the earth, yet when Noah built an Altar and prayed to God, the
Lord, Genesis 8. smelled a savor of Rest, and said, henceforth I will not any more
curse the earth for man's sake. God was once so displeased with his people, that
he said flatly, I tell you truly, I will deliver you no more; yet when they
asked a Deliverer of him, Judge. 10. His soul was grieved for their misery, and
he gave them Jephtha. Therefore when God has resolved on a Nations ruin, he
shuts his doors against Prayer. The Prophet complains, Lam. 3.8. He shuts
out my prayer, (q.d.) God will not suffer his Favorite, Prayer, to speak with
him. It is a royal way for a Prince to correct the injuries of another Nation
that is inferior, to deny their Ambassadors audience. Psa. 80.4. How long will
God be angry? but with his people? that is not all, with the Prayers of his
people? God is often pleased to be angry with prayer, Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, and entreated for this people, yet i will cast them out of
my sight, (q d.) You think to hinder me now as you were wont to do; you will
send out your old friend Prayer, and if you cannot pray enough your selves, you
will procure aid from my friends Moses and Samuel, but you shall not prevail, I
will destroy you; the best means shall fail you, therefore all means shall fail
you. To resort to other means after prayer, is to fasten an Anchor with a
twined thread, which has broken a Cable, or to think to conquer an Enemy with
a Bulrush, when we could not with a Cannon. In vain is God attempted by Power,
or solicited by Prayer against his own mind. And as God will not sometimes be
entreated, so he ought not at any time to be questioned. But I hope the Lords
door is yet to be opened to our knocking, and his ears to our crying. And
because in this age so many prayers are frustrated, be sure to pray that you
may be heard. I intend not a Commonplace of Prayer. Briefly,

First, be sure to limit your prayers according to the Revealed Word. Let us
pray that Gods Will, not that our Wills may be done, as that Jacobine did; Lord
let my will be done, and mine, because thine. We often ask, and miss, because
we ask amiss. Your Father often gives that in anger, which he would deny to give
if he were pleased. Its better to be without Quails, than to surfeit, to have
either a long delay, or rather a full denial, than an answer in wrath. The
contradictions by God put to the prayers of the Saints in this age, is one of
the greatest wonders of the age. Our hearts are often (as the Spirit of God
says) like crooked, Bows, and no wonder the Arrows we shoot are lost, when
many times we never aim at the mark. We must take heed of praying backward with
Jonah, who, rather than he would be accounted a false Prophet, cared not so
much for the salvation of Nineveh, as for his own reputation. Says he, was not
this my saying? one would have thought that the salt Sea should have washed
away those briny humors. Take heed of the heady prayers of the Disciples,
Cause fire to come down from Heaven (q.d.) these are Rebels to thy interest, we
have preached the word of Life to them, and they scoff at, and scorn us for our
labors; surely, O Lord! if they were thine elected they would have believed ere
now; they have sinned against their own light, and against the revelation of
thy love, they are finally impenitent; Lord consume them; But these were hot
spirits, and Christ cools them, You know not of what spirits you are of; Joh.
15.7. you have not the persons, and therefore it is not convenient you should
have the prayers of Elias. Every one that rides in a fiery Chariot, is not an
Elias. (Non petitur in nomine salvatoris quicquid petitur contra rationem
salutis. Lastly, Let us beware of sinister prayers, not to write after that
copy, Lord, when thou come into thy Kingdom, let one of my Sons fit on thy
right hand another on thy left. At the left hand of Christ! Surely she did not
know for what she prayed, for none but Goats shall stand at Christ's left hand.
The rule of our prayers is not what pleases our apprehensions, but what is
correspondent to, and agreeable with the Revealed Word. ((...). Plato III. de
legibus p. 811.) That which is glorious in the eyes of a man, nay, of a good
man, is often abominable in the eyes of God. Pray for nothing but what God has
promised, if ever you would have God to perform what you pray for. It is better
to believe that the will of God shall be fulfilled, Deus non dando, dat nobis,
and nos non accipiendo, a Deo accipimus.
than to behold our own wills fulfilled. The Saints in this age justly condemn
the former Generation, for doing that which was never commanded; and I believe
the next Generation will as justly condemn the Saints in this age, for
believing some things which were never promised. The Intercession of our Lord
Jesus is a censer of gold, and can we desire him to offer up our drossie
prayers for Incense? they are often filthy in our sight, and how can they be
sweet in his Fathers nostrils? Many of Sions Petitions are now in the Lords
account but waste paper, and at the last day shall never be seen hung on the
file in Heaven; and indeed how can they speed? when (our consciences bearing
witness) they are neither worded by the Scriptures, indicted by the Spirit, nor
subscribed by a bleeding heart. (Eo modo sunt omnia petenda quo modo sunt
promissa. Aut praeter verbum petis, aut non propter verbum petis.

Secondly, Be sure to pray, not only for love but in love. It is true, that
Love is a stately Garment to be worn by the Lords children in their Mansion
house of Glory, but you must not put off this Garment till that day, as the
world does Holiness; Oh say they, holiness is for Heaven. Love, and not Parts;
Love, and not Praying; Love, and not the participation (visibly) of the body
and blood of Jesus Christ, Non debet esse simultas inter eos qui sunt simul.
is the badge of a Disciple of Christ: By this shall all men know ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another, Joh. 13.35. Said he, that was as much for
Faith, and more, than any of his followers. Christians, Love is asleep, (I hope
not in a dead sleep) for shame awaken it; Gardiners speak of an Herb Love lies
a bleeding, and if ever that Herb grew in Sions Garden, it is now; Oh revive
it! Hosius was so in love with Charity, that he thought there was no other Word
of God than this of Love. But oh! that Love were by many (at least in their
carriages) accounted to be a Word of God. I know there is a kind of unity
amongst High-way-men, or else their Trade of Robbery would fall. And that love
is often pretended against Faith, and oftener against Holiness. The Soldiers
that were for the crucifying of Christ, were not (q.d.) for the crucifying of
his coat; they tore his Body, and yet kept his Coat whole; but not out of love
to Christ, but out of love to themselves, every one of them would fain have had
it all. The Soldiers had not Christ, but they had his Coat, and shall
Christians have Christ and not his Coat? the Body and the Garment must go
together. Never expect your Sacrifice of Prayer should be accepted, til it be
salted with Love. Love knows no difference between party and party, but owns
all as fellow members that are partakers of the influence of the Head.
Remember, That the Father will not agree to answer the prayers of his children
that disagree. God will answer the prayers of one child for another, but not
of one child against another. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, (where by brother, in the
lowest kind, you must not (as some do) understand, men of the same Opinion, but
men of the same Faith in, and same Communion with God), Secondly, It is not
said, if thou have ought against thy Brother, (Mark that) leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. This Precept is Religious, and certainly the Practice
is not Superstition.

To expect that God should answer our divided prayers, is to put a jeer on
Omnipotency, and to charge the Almighty with inconsistency; it puts an
absurdity on God, in making him to please man, nay, an impossibility, to please
all men. The divisions of our prayers may possibly cause some Professors to
suspect that God is divided, Deus nequit facere, quod nequit fieri.
to whom we pray, and in time, occasion the world to believe there is no God at
all, for God is but one, and not divided. The Lord, at this time must frustrate
(q.d. in specie) many prayers of some Christians, as he will be true to the
principles of his own Glory. To speak with reverence, God cannot grant all our
Petitions and be God. All the godly of all parties pretend the Kingdom of
Christ; and these Opinions, as rigidly maintained, are apparently inconsistent
together. What a temptation is it then to attempt unlawful means, q.d. to force
the Lord out of his way? and all, that man might not be proved false to his own
interest, and be cried up and down for a liar. God (forsooth) shall not be God
unless he will please man. (Multi been cogitant sed male precantur. Et si
volunt esse felices, Deum orent, ne quid illis ex his quae optantur eveniat,
Sen. L. Benef. c. 37.) Oh! that the Lord would reconcile these divisions that
are betwixt his own people. However, in the interim, let every particular Jacob
wrestle with God, and ly quietly asleep at the bottom of the Ladder. I shall
conclude here with the advice of Divine Mr. S.R. on the woman of Canaan, in 4
Rules.

First, Go not before, but follow God and Providence. Prescription of such and
such means to God, and no other, is to limit Omnipotency, and to stint the holy
one of Israel. It is arrant Idolatry to limit God to means, as well as to bow
down to an Idol. A Rams horn is as near of blood to cause the walls of Jerico
to fall, in Gods hand, as Engines of war; It is easier to see what is inflicted
on us, than to see who inflicteth it; and we look no higher than the creature,
as if the world created it self; so is this, when we dream the creature moves
it self, and is not moved by God. Quietly submit to the Lords ways, believing
can ease us, disputing cannot.

Secondly, The book of Providence is full both Page and Margin. God has been
adding to it sundry new Editions, and like children we are in love with the
golden Covering, the Ribbons, filleting, and the pictures in the Frontispeece,
but understand little of the Argument of Providence. Who is wise and will
observe these things, Degener animus est qui emendare mavult Deum quam se,
carpens Divina and Providentiam, alia illa esse velit magis quam se alium. Sen.
even he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psa. 107.43. God is
worthy to be Chronicled; there is a contexture of Decrees, Actions, Events, in
Providence, from the creation to the conflagration of the world, and not a
thread shall ever be broken; though this web be woven of threads of diverse
colors, black and white, comfortable and sad passages of Providence, yet all
make a fair order to God in the way, and shall be beautiful to us in the end.
As many Herbs and various sorts of Flowers, make up one pleasant and
well-smelling Meadow, many Roses, Lillies, and the like, one sweet smelling
Garden: so there is a sweetness and order in all Gods dispensations.

Thirdly, Let your spirits be kept in aequilibrio, in an indifferency in all
casts of Providence, and so you are above the cross. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. David
puts his soul on Gods two Ifs, if he save it is good, if he destroy it is good.
Make sure this general, Christ is mine, at this Anchor, in this Harbor my
vessel shall ride. What ever wind blow in externals, Christ dyed for me, if I
live its Christ, if I dye its Christ; if I ride with Princes on Horses, its
good, if I go on foot with Servants, it is good; If Christ hide his face and
frown, it is Christ, it is good; if he overlade the soul with rays and beams of
glory, it is also Christ. Faiths speculations to the worst and hardest in point
of resolution is sweet. Suppose the Devil and Hell form the Principles, Faith
can make a conclusion of God and Heaven. Job puts on a conclusion of faith from
bad premises; What if God should kill me? yet i will trust in him, Job 13.15. What
if God throw me into hell, it were well resolved, I would out of the pit of
Devils cry Halelujah, praise the Lord in his justice.

Fourthly, Give not over praying, though God seem to give over answering; God
hears often when he does not answer, and often his not answering, is an answer;
pray, go on. The Father will cause the child to say over again what he once
heard him say, because he delights to hear him speak. I pray for victory to
Gods people in this battle, they lose the day, yet I am heard and answered,
because I prayed for that victory, not under the notion of Victory, but as
linked with Mercy to the Church, and honor to Christ; now God shows mercy and
gains Glory in humbling them, which is the formal object of my prayers. Some
Letters require no answer, but are mere expressions of the desire of the
friend; the general prayers of the Saints, That God would gather in his Elect,
that Christ would come and marry the Bride, and consummate the Nuptials, do
refer to a real answer, when the King himself shall make his second appearance.
In the expectation of, and patience for which appearance, let the Saints
believe and rejoice, for the Marriage of the Lamb is a coming, and his wife
has made her self ready, and to her is granted that she should be arrayed in
fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness
(righteousnesses gr.) of the Saints. And blessed are they which are called to
the marriage Supper of the Lamb. And behold, he comes quickly, and his reward
is with him; therefore let the Spirit and the Bride (or the Spirit in the
Bride, or the Bride in the Spirit) say, Come, and let him that is a thirst,
come; and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. Even so,
come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.12, 17, 20.

Possibly Jacobs Vow may follow.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 17. read, the Lord open this vision to our eyes, and open our
eyes to see it, p. 14. l. 17. r. shoulders, p. 19. l 4. r. Elijah, p 59. l. 2.
r. is visible, p. 36. l. 14. r. rather Heaven out of Hell, p. 103. l. 25.
nobodies. p. 132. l. 1. r. between wolves and sheep, p 146. m. r. parem, p.
158. l. 6. r. were all to be conquered, p. 161. r. (...). p. 163. r (...), p.
186, m. r. (...), p. 213. m. r. pendet, p. 219. m. r. irrita and irritantur, p.
221. m. r. Deo, p. 135. m. r. luxatus and luctatus, p. 237. l. 6. r. not
adverse p. 235. r. Distich, r. Laudis, Exultans, p. 262 m. after non read
dabit, p. 296. l. 4. r. Ecclesia, p. 302; l: 11. for once labor, read once more.


