HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS MESSAGE To the Citizens of LONDON, And His new and
final Propositions for Peace, to be forthwith published, throughout the
several Wards and Parishes, within the Cities of London and Westminster,
Middlesex, Surrey and parts adjacent.

With His Royal Promise and Grant to be by him Enacted, and His further
Concessions and Resolution to both Houses.

Signed CHARLES REX.

Expressed in a Letter from Newport October 25. 1648.

Also, two Letters from the Nobility of Scotland, to the Kings Majesty, and the
Prince of Wales.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon flanked by the
English lion and Scottish unicorn, used a a printer's device

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT WILLIAMSON, 1648.

8ber ye 27th

C R
royal insignia
HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS MESSAGE TO The Right Honorable, the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of LONDON.
Expressed in a Letter from the Isle of Wight, October. 23. 1648.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty being desirous to give all possible satisfaction to the Citizens
of London, in all things by them desired, that may preserve and maintain the
honor and renown of that famous Metropolis, throughout all future Ages,
desires that he may have admittance to his Palace at Westminster, to be
personally amongst them; to the end, he may the better compose and reconcile
all differences both in Church and State, And his Majesty has promised upon
his Royal Word, that for the entire love and affection He bears to the
Magistrates and Inhabitants thereof, He will rather enlarge their Charter and
privileges, then abridge them in the least; And therefore, to clear all
doubts and scruples that may arise amongst any of the Citizens, His Majesty
has given Directions (as is said) to his Secretary, to draw up a satisfactory
Letter to be sent to the Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen, which as near as I
can gather, consists of these particulars, viz.

1 That his Majesty does look upon this City with a most tender eye and
affection, freely forgiving all former acts whatsoever, done or executed by
them, 2 That He has given his Royal assent to the proposition touching the
said city, for the confirming of all their ancient Rights, Charters, and
privileges. And 3. That His Majesty desires a right understanding may be had
of him by all his Subjects whatsoever, even from the highest to the lowest, and
that He desires nothing more then to establish a true and lasting peace
throughout all the Confines and Territories of his Majesty's languishing and
bleeding Kingdoms, which God grant may be speedily faciliated and effected.

These particulars are said to be drawn up into form and then presented to the
view of the Citizens, a Breviate whereof I thought meet to communicate, as the
forerunner and messenger of so gracious tidings.

His Majesty has given in his final answer touching Church Government, (a
copy whereof I have here inserted and upon hi^ delivery thereof to the
Commissioners, laid his hand upon his heart, and vowed He could go no further
in honor and conscience. After reading the same, one of the Parliaments
Commissioners declared to his Majesty that he doubted it would not be
satisfactory, his Majesty replied, that if his two Houses, would concur with
him therein, he knew the worst on it, saying. I must return to Carisbrook
Castle, and my subjects remain involved in a Labyrinth of sorrow. Here has
been little done since Saturday, yet as much as was expected, till the pleasure
of both Houses be known touching this ensuing answer, in relation to Episcopacy.

That albeit, for the reasons expressed in his former paper, he cannot consent
to a Bill for abolishing Bishops, yet he will consent to a Bill for taking away
of all Archbishops, Chancellors, and all other their Officers out of the
Church of England, Dominion of Wales, and out of the church of Ireland.

And his Maj. will consent to suspend the exercise of all Epispocal Government
for the space of 3 years; and has consented, and will consent to confirm the
Form of Church Government now prefented to Him for the said 3 years, and that
no othar shall be used during that time. In which time his Maj. continues his
desire, that a consultation may be had with the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster 20 of his own nomination being added to the end, that his Maj. and
his two Houses may within those 3 years inform themselves of the practice of
the primitive Church in point of Episcopacy, and may accordingly agree in
limiting the Bishops to the council and assistance of Presbyters if it be
thought fit. And his Maj. will consent that in case no settlement shall be
agreed on within the said 3 years, That after the said time, the power of
Ordination shall not be exercised by Bishops without the Council, and
Assistance of presbyters. And that no other Episcopal Jurisdiction shall be
exercised by Bishops, but such and in such manner as shall be agreed on by his
Majesty and both Houses. And his Maj. does profess That, if in that time he be
convinced, that the function of Bishops is not agreeable to the Word of God or
that Christ commanded any other Government, he will most cheerfully embrace
that, and take away Episcopacy.

Subscribed CHARLES R.


This Answer (it is hoped) will give great satisfaction to his two Houses of
Parliament. For, indeed I his Majesty has in effect already granted all that
is desired, only he desires that there may not be too rigorous proceedings
against Delinquents, and that some thing may be altered in the Bill for
abolishing of Episcopacy, yet has he in general consented to Deans, Chapters,
and Chancellors.

And as for the form of Church Government, His Majesty is contented that the
Presbytery Government expressed in the Bill be established for the time
limited, and no other exercised; neither shall any other Government after the
three years be exercised, but such and in such manner, as shall be agreed on
by him and his two Houses.

(...) And therefore his Majesty propounds, that he may forthwith come to
London in honor, freedom, and safety, as also that some mitigation may be
made concerning Delinquents in the first qualification.

And has further consented to these particulars following. 1 That the
nomination of the great Officers of the Kingdom be as is desired in the
proposition, during the term of ten years. 2 His Majesty consents that the City
of London shall enjoy their ancient Rights and privileges, as is desired. 3
That the Court of Wards be taken away; provided that his Majesty may be assured
of 100000 li. per annum, to Him, his Heirs, and Successors. 4 His Majesty does
fully condescend to the Bill for making void all Honors by him confirmed under
the Great Seal, after it was surruptitiously carried away from the Parliament.


Thus having given you the most material passages touching the Treaty, I remain

Your Honor devoted servant, W. RUSWEL.
Newport 25 October. 1648. The Parliaments Votes concerning his Majesty.
REsolved, etc. That they conceive his Majesty's Answer to the Church in part
satisfactory.

Resolved, etc. That 50000. l. per annum, be given to his Majesty, and his
Successors, in lieu of the Court of Wards.



Heads of two Letters to be sent from the Kingdom of Scotland, to the Kings
Majesty, and the Prince of Wales.
THat they humbly beseech his Majesty to hearken to the advice of the
Parliament of England, in consenting to the Propositions of both Kingdoms, and
specially to those concerning the Covenant, and Reformation of Religion, which
they understand to be the point he sticks most at. 2 That they are bound in
honor and interest to maintain the same. And 3. That without which, they tell
him his Throne cannot be established in righteousness and truth. They have
also writ to the Prince, dehorting him from that course of opposition he is in,
and from attempting any act of hostility against their Kingdom and that he
would apply his endeavors to mediate with his Father, that He would consent to
the propositions of both Kingdoms, and sign the Covenant.

These Letters are to be communicated to the Representatives at Westminster, by
Sir John Cheesly, and so transmitted to his Majesty, and the Prince of Wales.


