Englands Thanks: OR, A MESSAGE OF THANKS, (Delivered, by GUILD HALL) from
our Mother ENGLAND to all her true hearted Children that have been any way
assistant to the Parliament in maintaining the honor of the KING, the true
Re^igion, Liberty of the Subject and Privileges of PARLIAMENT.

With A CAVEAT to the VULGARS, that they speak not immodestly of the KING, and
envy not His Person, but leave all things to be controverted by the grave and
wise Parliament, and leave the issue to God.

Oodered to be forthwith Printed and Published.

B. R.

woodcut, a Tudor rose and a fleur-de-lis each crowned

London, Printed for Francis Leach. 1642.

THE MESSAGE As 'twas delivered BY GVILD-HALL.
Gentlemen, or what ere your titles are,
WEre it suitable to your gravities to fancy Raptures from Poetic brains, I
would satisfy your Appetite with golden Ver^e: or had I my self but Tullies
wealth, I would deliver my Arrand in words exactly placed, like Apples of Gold
in Pictures of Silver: but you all know my Gifts, I never had that of
Eloquence, therefore I shall not flatter you in either Strain.

I bring you Thanks attended with all the circumstances of Love, to prove a
grateful Acceptance of your good Affections you have so freely expressed: I come
not from a bare Friend, from whom you might justly challenge that poor reward
of Thanks, but which adds Glory to the Message) am sent by her that may command
what you have done, though (which adds to her Goodness) she promises
Repayment: may no^ ENGLAND your Mother justly claim a maintenance from her
Childrens estates, when as she made them capable of inheritances? surely, it is
justice every one to have the Crop of his own Seed: As, it is more than cruelty
in these that bite the Breasts from which their Infancy at first received
Nourishment, so they are not less unnatural, that suffer an unrevenged Kick
upon the Womb where they first received breath: This is your Mother ENGLANDS
case, and shall not she command her Childrens Aid, to keep her aged Self from
an untimely Grave: Yes, yes, she may, and you like good Children have showed
your selves no less undutifull to her, than she tender to you: and she sends
you Thanks to encourage your farther onset in case of greater necessity.

Shall the Faith the brought you up in, and that purchased at first, not with
the expense of a little Blood, and since maintained against many Oppositions, be
checked now for fear of Bloodshed? Shall the Religion you have hitherto enjoyed
be now basely betrayed, when your Adversaries the Papists have lest
convenience? Shall the Liberties your Ancestors bought so dearly, and
bequeathed to you so freely unviolated, be now captivated with I know not what
oppression? Will you now prove Bastards to your Fathers bloods, and make your
Mother guilty of a general Whoredom? Or can any men be so Degenerate, as if
their Fathers had sold all their Virtues with a general Warranty? have you
enjoyed a Parliament you so long expected, and will you not stand close to them
that endanger their own lives and fortunes to preserve yours? It Is a Rule you
may take now from your dying Mother (unless God be more gracious than
Physicians skillful) that a powerful Parliament makes a glorious Prince, a
weak Enemy, and a rich and quiet Kingdom: and you all, or at least, ye Aged
among you, find, or have found that Rule without exception: Is not the
Parliament a sure Revenger of an injured Cause? and when malignant favorites
bar you of your Appeal to your most gracious and religious meaning Prince,
are not they (being not subject to delusion) impartially ready to hear thy
Conplaints? Surely you have all found them so, and if so, ought not you then to
puze them at too high a rate to be sacrificed to the blood thirsting cruelty
of Papist call and ill affected Cavalliers? Yes, yes, your Mother says you
ought, and therefore she upon her blessing commands those that have been
hitherto backward to let them see how they relish their Mothers affronts: and
for you that have been forward, she blesses those fruits of her Womb.

But something else I am to tell you from your Mother, which as a charge she
laid upon all her Children in general, but especially upon her youngest
Children, I mean the Vulgars: she bid me tell it you all, not as if the
better breeding and greater knowledge of you her eldest Sons were not
sufficient to tell you your duties, but that you might call upon them being
more ignorant to learn theirs: her charge is this.

She says your cause is just and noble, else you should never have had
encouragement from her: But yet she says you must not stand so much for your
Mother Englands right, as to destroy your Fathers, the Kings: She say Gods
command of Obedience to your Parents, does not except against the honor you
owe your Father: Therefore her charge is, that as you are willing to assist the
Parliament, so you be sure your private hopes or inward thoughts be not
beyond the intent of the Parliament, for fear lest their just cause should
fail, notwithstanding your large contributions) by reason of your just
intentions.

If you still give me leave to explain her words, her intent I will take to be
this, she knows the intent of the Parliament to be good and honest, and she
takes notice of the allegiance, respect, and reverence they give his Majesty,
and she desires you to see that your younger brethren, the Vulgars, do not
transgress with immodest language, whereby scandals may be laid upon the King
your Father, and the blame at last be cast upon that guiltless and wisely
innocent Council, the Parliament.

The Law says the King can do no wrong, and the Parliament intimate as much
by laying the fault upon his evil Counselors: and ought those Inferiors then
to be commended or thought Religious, that do their best endeavors to stain
Majesty it self, with that impudence that Superiors blush at? Can undue and
scandalously unlawful Expressions be thought the fruits of a good and zealous
Spirit? Surely if those of authority (I mean the Parliament) should lay no
better a foundation than those Vulgars do, our Church would soon be Ruinated
not Reformed, I cannot judge of Men's hearts Certainly, but am bound to think
Charitably, and therefore I do confess, that many nay all the Multitude may
have honest Hearts, and yet the Zeal of their Houses (I mean their
Conventicles) may eat them up: I mean when the virtue Zeal for want of
Knowledge and Discretion is turned to vicious Passion) and such Men like blind
Horses that are mettlesome may d^sh their brains against the Wall for want of
a careful Rider.

This is that for which your Mother does desire all her knowing and religious
Children to correct their ignorant Brethren: I have no more to say to you his
good Children that have been forward to join with this happy and blessed
parliament to relieve your distressed mother, but only to deliver her blessing
to you all, which comes as heartily from her, as the great testimonies I have
received from you of your good affections.

May all Accidents conspire to bless you with an happy Success: May you all
Flourish, like the Tree planted by the River side, in despite of wicked
Opposers. May you be Crowned with the accomplishment of your Religious aims.
May the reward of you and your Posterity be the enjoyment of the true
Catholic and Apostolical Religion, the worldly Peace and the Liberty of
Subjects here, and may you all be naturallized in Heaven hereafter. May your
mighty arm be stretched out in defense of your just Cause, and may the memory
of your good Affections and of this blessed Parliament, never meet a Grave in
coming Ages.

Thus I have done with you, but let me tell you your Mothers Curse to those her
Children that still perish, not only slighting but increasing her too great
Miseries, for those she prayed that either better Qualities may possess them,
or sudden death destroy them; and after their untimely Dissolution, may their
injured Mothers causlesse sufferings rise up in judgment against them, and may
their unnatural Violence to their murdered brothers and ravished sisters, add
several degrees to their deserved torments.

DIXI.

