A FREE DISPUTATION Against pretended Liberty of Conscience Tending To Resolve
Doubts moved by Mr. John Goodwin, John Baptist, Dr. Jer. Tailor, the Belgic
Arminians, Socinians, and other Authors contending for lawless Liberty, or
licentious Toleration of Sects and Heresies. By SAMUEL RUTHERFURD Professor of
Divinity in the University of St. Andrews.

PSALM. 119. 45. And I will walk at Liberty, for I seek thy precepts. (...)
LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Green Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCIL.

TO THE Godly and unpartiall Reader.
I Offer (Worthy Reader) to your unpartiall and ingenuous censure these my
ensuing thoughts against Liberty of conscience, from which way looking to me
with a face of Atheism, I call the Adversaries, Libertines, not intending to
reach a blow to any godly man, or to wound those who out of weakness are
captived with that error, but to breed in the hearts of the godly a detestation
of that way, which in truth has its rise from Libertinisme, and savoureth
rankly of wide, loose and bold Atheistical thoughts of the Majesty of God, as
if our conscience had a Prerogative Royal beside a rule; yea (which is
prodigious) in its simple apprehensions of God, of the Mediator, of the
revealed will of God, above the Law of God: For 1. This way brings in
Aristotle's (...), and the worlds (...). So I think, and all say so, and our
faith and hope must be resolved in the first principle of Scepticisme. So it
seems to me, for the young daughters of the mind, the simple acts of
apprehending, knowing, believing God and divine truths are innocent, harmless
and ill-lesse foul-works, being from under all dominion of either free will or
a divine Law, and the mind, a free borne absolute Princess, can no more incur
guiltiness in its operations about an infinite Sovereigne God, and his
revealed will, by this lawless way, then the fire can in burning, the Sun it
inlightning, the stone in moving downward, be arraigned of any breach of Law,
if toleration have place.

2. All certainty of believing, all steadfastness, rooting, and unmovable
establishing in the truth, all life of consolations and comforts in the
Scriptures, all peace of heavenly confidence, all joy unspeakable and full of
glory, all lively hope, all patient and submissive waiting for the fruits of
the harvest, all wrestling in prayer, all gloriation in tribulation, and all
triumphing in praising, all rejoicing in Spirit, being bottomed on fallible
opinions, on doubtful disputations of Scepticks, may be the reelings of
wind-mills, fair phansies, and dream^; for who (say they) is infallible: and
who has known the mind of the Lord? so as the truth must be monopolized to
any one Sect, or way? who in faith or fullness of assurance can convince or
rebuke gainsayers, heretics, or such as bring another doctrine, and may not
you the convincers and rebukers, as rather be gainsayers and Heretics, and
such as bring another doctrine, as those whom you so labor to convince and
rebuke?

3. Conscience is hereby made every man's Rule, Umpire, Judge, Bible, and his
God, which if he follow, he is but at the worst, a godly, pious, holy
Heretic, who fears his conscience more then his Creator, and is to be
judged of you a Saint.

4. Hence conscience being deified, all rebuking, exhorting, counter-arguing,
yea all the Ministry of the Gospel must be laid aside; no man must judge
brother Idolater, or brother Familst, or Saints to be Socinians, or men of
corrupt minds, perverse disputers, vain-janglers, wresters, rackers, or
torturers of Scripture, whose words eat as a canker, who subvert whole houses,
who speak the visions of their own head, and see false burdens, for all these
were of old, but are now quite gone out of the world; for who can make a window
in any man's soul, and see there heart-obstinacy which only does essentially
constitute the heretic, the blasphemer, the false Prophet?

But is not brotherly forbearance, Christian indulgence a debt we owe to
brethren, Saints, and the truly godly in errors, and mind-infirmities, which
by a natural emanation or resultance get the fore-start of freewill?

To which I shall speak in these few considerations.

1. It is much to be desired with the prayers and suits of the children of God,
that where there are two opinions, there may be one heart, that the Father of
Spirits would unite the hearts of all the children of one Father, and the heirs
of one house.

2. Papists here have exceeded in boundless domination and tyranny over the
consciences of men: and what ever is contrary to the lawless decrees of their
Counsels and Popes, is an unexpiable heresy, and cannot be purged but by fire
and faggot. 2. Who ever refuse subjection of conscience to that Enemy of Christ,
and to that woman-mistresse of witchcrafts, on whose skirts is found the blood
of the martyrs of Jesus, is presently an heretic, and his arguments answered
with burning-quicke, this tyranny over conscience we disclaim; yet for that
ought, not the other extremity of wild toleration to be embraced.

3. We cannot think but all Saints in this side of glory carry to heaven with
them errors, mistakes, and prophesying in part, and the fairest Stars and
lights in this lower firmament of the Church are clouded, and the benefit of
the Moon serves to enlighten the under garden of Lillies, where Christ feeds,
till the day break, and the shadows flee away. And here brotherly indulgence
and reciporation of the debt of compassionate forbearance of the infirmities
one of another must have place.

4. Yet so, as there can be no conflict of grace against grace; nor can the
taking off the Foxes which destroy the Vines, be contrary to the gentleness
and meekness of Saints in fulfilling the law of love, and bearing one another
burdens, nor can love seated essentially in a newborn child of the second
birth be contrary to the zeal of God in withstanding to the face a Saint
looking awry, and walking not with a straight fo^^ according to the truth of
the Gospel; Gal. 2. 14.
which way if heeded in sincerity, should breed more union of hearts, and be a
greater testimony of faithfulness to a straying sheep, then our cruel
meekness, and bloody gentleness in a pretended bearing with tender
consciences under a color of paying the debt of bastard love, while as we
suffer millions to perish, through silence and merciless condolency with them
in their sinful depraving of the Truth. Farewell.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, S. R.

The Contents.
CHap. 1. Of Conscience and of its nature.
The name Conscience page 2. Conscience the practical knowledge ibid.
Conscience a power, not an act or habit p. 3. What sort of knowledge is
ascribed to the Conscience p. 5. Of the (...) p. 8. Of Conscience in relation
to the Major Assumption and Conclusion of a practical Sylogisme p. 7. The
object of Conscience p. 8. Conscience to be reverenced ibid. Of obligation of
Conscience, and the acts therefrom resulting p. 10. Of witnessing of
Conscience, and self-reflection p. 11. The knowledge of our own state of grace,
may be had by the fruits of the spirit of Sanctification p. 12 Acts of
Conscience in relation to the Conclusion p. 14. A Conscience good or ill p. 15.
A good Conscience ibid Conscience the rarest piece that God made ibid. A tender
Conscience p. 19. Who ingrosse the name of tender Consciences to themselves
ibid. Of a scrupulous Conscience p. 21 The causes of a scrupulous Conscience
ibid.
Chap. 2. Conscience under Synods, and how; and that the Conscience cannot have
absolute liberty in matters of Religion.
How a Synod compels p. 23. The Conditions that Libertines require to be in
a Synod p. 24. Liberty to question every thing is License ib. The Church
though not infallible, may determine infallible points ib. A Confession,
Covenant, or Synodicall decree, a secondarie rule of Faith p. 25 A Ministerial
and public, and a Christian and private judgment and faith how they differ
ibid. Libertines give us Sceptisme and Fluctuation for Faith p. 28 There is
need of Interpretation and decision of Synods. ib. That Confessions ought to be
only in express Scripture words, is ^^^ther false principle of Libertines p.
29 Ancient bonds of Liberty of Conscience p. 32 The end of Synods is not to
remove heresies by any means good or bad, or to crush Heresy so effectually as
these Heresies shall never (...) heard of in the world again ibid. The
necessity of Synods p. 33 Pastors subject the disobedient to wrath, yet are not
Lords over the Conscience; Ergo, neither are Synods Lords ^ver the Conscience
for that. ib. The subject of a Synod not a Sceptick Conjecturall truth as
Libertines suppose p. 34 The sense of Scripture from Synods believed truly to
be infallible, though Synods consist of men who are not infallible, as an (...)
Pitcher does contain gold and precious Rubies and Saphires in it, though there
be no gold in the matter of the Pitcher but only clay, 2 Cor. 4. 7. ibid. How a
true decision of a Synod is ever the same and not retractable p. 36 Though all
truths be peremptorily decided in the word, yet is there need of a Ministerial
and declarative decision of men, because Teachers may deceive, and those that
are taught are ignorant and dull p. 37 Men are to come to Synods not as
Nullifidians but as engaged for truth p. 38. Synods may impose upon others and
how? ibid. Ancient bonds or Liberty of Conscience stated p. 40 The
Conditional imposing of Synods consists well with trying of all things, what
Libertines say on the contrary is naught ibid. Conditional imposing proves
the impose^ to be no Lord of the Conscience. p. 42
Chap. 3. The Church may complain of Heretics p. 43
Pastors are not out of their calling, nor Apparitors, nor tale-bearers, if
they complain to the Magistrate of Heretics p. 44
Chap. 4. The State of the question of compulsion of Conscience and toleration
p. 46.
Opinions cannot be compelled, nor the mind or will in the elicite acts ibid.
The question is, Whether the Magistrate may compulsorily restrain the external
act of the outward man in religion. ibid. Shame and fear of rebukes, by
Pastors and Church Censures have the same compulsorie influences on false
Teachers, that the fear of public punishment by the Synod has p. 47. Church
censures are as compulsorie on the Conscience, as coercing by the Sword p. 48
Some external actions of injustice flowing from mere conscience are punished
justly, without any note of persecution by grant of Libertines, and why not all
others also? p. 49 Ancient bonds of Liberty of Conscience p. 50
Discountenancing of men and negative punishing of them for their Conscience is
punishing of them ibid. Ancient bonds p. 12. ibid. How Religion may be
compelled, how not p. 51 One man's Religion remaining in the mind and will, may
hurt or benefit the man himself, not any others: but true religion, as it comes
forth into acts of teaching may edify and win others, and false religion may
subvert the faith of others. ibid. The Magistrate does not command religious
acts as service to God, but rather forbids their contraries, as disservice to
Christian Societies ibid. How Tertullian and Lactantius are to be expounded of
forcing to Heathen religion ibid. Though we can compel none to Religion it
follows not that the Magistrate may not punish those that seduce others to a
false religion ibid. Lactantius speaks of compulsion without all teaching p.
53 Those that are without the Church are not to be compelled ibid. Because the
Magistrates compulsion makes Hypocrites it follows note he should not punish
Heretics, for so he should not punish murderers. p. 54 The Magistrate may by
the sword curb such impediments, that keep men from embracing the truth,
according to Augustine p. 56 Answer to Doctor Adam Stewart ibid. Impotencie of
free will objected by Master John Goodwin, no reason why the Magistrate ought
not to punish seducing teachers, as of old the Donatists objected. ibid. State
of the question more strictly proposed p. 57 It may as well be said because
there be no express Laws against murderers, Parricides, Sorcerers, Sodomites
in the New Testament, more then against false Teachers, that therefore
Sorcerers are no less then Heretics to be tolerated. p. 57
Chap. 5. Of Fundamentals,
The number of Fundamentalls p. 59 A saving disposition of faith to believe all
truths revealed, though the man be ignorant of many, may consist with the state
of saving grace ibid. Three things among those that are to be believed 1.
Things simply necessary. 2. Simply profitable. 3. By consequence necessary;
how the Papists err in these page 60 Some Consequences necessary ibid.
Builders of Hay and stubble on the foundation may be saved, and those that fall
in murder and Adultery out of infirmity may be also saved yet there is no
consequence; Ergo, the Magistrate should tolerate both p. 61.
Chap. 6. Errors in non-fundamentals obstinatly holden are punishable.
Obstinacy in ceremonies after full information deserves punishment p. 62
Those that err in non-fundamentals, may deserve to be punished ibid. To teach
the necessity of Circumcision, not an error formally and primarily, but by
consequence fundamental; and the contrary truth not necessary, necessitate
medii ibid. The toleration of all who err in non fundamentals examined p. 64.
Queries proposed to M. Joh. Goodwin, who asserteth a Catholic toleration of
all religions, upon the ground of weakness of freewill, and want of grace? p. 61
Most arguments of Libertines infer a Catholic toleration in non-fundamentals,
as well as in fundamentals p. 64 What deductions the Spirit makes in the soul
of an elect knowing but a few fundamentals and going out of this life who
knows? p. 65. To know revealed truths of God is a commanded worship of God?
ibid. One general confession of faith without a particular sense containing
the true and Orthodox meaning of the word not sufficient p. 66 Diverse pious
conferences betwixt us and Lutherans ibid. They hate God and love blasphemies
in the consequence who obstinately hold, them in the Antecedent p. 68 They may
be false Teachers and so punishable who err not in fundamentals p. 73 Diverse
things not fundamentaly believed with certainty of faith, p. 75 Believing of
truths revealed of God with a reserve, blasphemous, and turns believers into
Scepticks and Nullifidians p. 77 Believing with a reserve against the motion of
the Holy Ghost p. 78 Believing with a reserve against the stabilitie of faith
ibid. Against the trying of all things, and spirits, enjoined by the Holy Ghost
p. 79 Faith with a reserve against our prayers for knowledge and growing
therein p. 81 The Holy Ghost bids us not believe with a reserve p. 82 To
believe with a reserve contrary to our doing, and suffering for truth and faith
p. 83 Two distinctions necessary touching controverted points p. 85 Some
things of their own nature not controversall, yet the deductions from them to
our blind nature are controversall ibid. Fundamentalls of faith most
controversall to our blind nature p 86
Chap. 7. What opinions may be tolerated, what not.
Some far off Errors may be tolerated p. 97 Schism and actual gathering of
Churches out of Churches cannot be tolerated p. 98 The place Romans 14. willing
us to receive the weak, no plea for toleration p. 100 Phil. 3. 15. Let us walk
according to the same rule, etc. nothing for toleration. p. 101
Chap. 8. Whether Heresy be a sin or a mere error and innocence, whether an
Heretic be an evil doer?
Libertines make Heresy a mere innocent and unpunishable error of the mind p.
101 Heresy is a sin as well as Idolatry though we could neither define Heresy
nor Idolatry ibid. Heresy proved to be an heinous sin ibid. The Holy Ghost
contrary to Libertines, supposes undeniablie that Heretics are known, and so
they are not known to God only, when he bids us beware of them, avoid them, bid
them not God speed p. 105 Pertinacie may be, and is known to men p. 106 Heresy
a wicked resisting of the truth, and yet not the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost p. 107 Libertines say that an Heretic dying for his Heresy has no
(...) Conscience, but a spiritual and heavenly end. p. 108 The vain glory of
the Devils, Martyrs who die for Heresy p. 111 Spiritual stupidity and malice
both together in Heretics and S^t^^s Martyrs. p. 113 Some ignorance consists
with the sin against the Holy Ghost p. 114
Chap. 9. Of Liberty of prophesying, of erroneous indictm^^^ of Conscience,
that it is not our rule.
Who is an Heretic to Arminians, Tit. 3. 10. p. 115 None to Libertines are
Heretics, but such as profess a religion, which they believe with persuasion
to be false. ibid Liberty of prophesying taken in a threefold sense p. 117 To
desire false Prophets to cease out of the Land is no quenching of the Spirit p.
119
Chap. 10. Of indulgence in fundamental or non-fundamentall errors.
How the Arminian Libertines do define an Heretic p. 122 Heretics to
Libertines only such as deny things knowable by the light of nature p. 123
Diversity of opinions among them ibid. The punishing of men for publishing of
fundamental errors, and the indulgence of a Toleration, yielded to them though
they teach all Errors in non-fundamentals, a vain distinction, and has no
gro^^^ in Scripture. ibid. Some murders non-fundamentall in David which yet
are consist^^ with the state of salvation, should as well be tolerated, assome
errors in non-fundamentals by the distinction of Libertines. p. 124 Some
non-fundamentals clearly in the word revealed, not to be believed with a
reserve, and others non-fundamentals with a reserve p. 126 Queries propounded
to Libertines p. 128 Why may not the Magistrate lawfully spare the life of him,
who (...) of a Libertine Conscience merely sacrifices his child to God? or why
should he punish with the Sword, some acts not des^^^ctive to peace in the
Conscience of the punished, and not all acts of the same kind p. 128 To compel
men to ^oe against their Conscience, that is, to sin, neither in Old or new
Testament lawful, Deuteronomy. 13. and 17. p. 130 There is the same obligation, the
same formal reason ( so says the Lord) of believing non-fundamentall
revealed, and fundamentals, and the same necessity of divine command, not the
same necessity of means, called necessit^s medii p. 132
Chap. 11. Of the obliging power of Conscience.
The State of the Question touching the obligation that Conscience lays on us
p. 134 Ancient bonds of Liberty of Conscience Sect. 2. Chap. 6. p. 26 p. 139
Though the Magistrate punish false Teachers it follows not, that he compells
them to sin against their Conscience ibid. Gods way and manner of calling, is
no ground why the Magistrate should not punish false Teachers. p. 141 Ancient
bonds of Liberty of Conscience cap. 61 p. 26. p. 142 Who is the selfe-condemned
Heretic, Tit. 3. 10. ibid.
Chap. 12. Arguments against pretended Toleration.
Toleration has no warrant in the word p. 145 Toleration infers Sceptisme
p. 146 Want of infallibility in the new Testament, no reason for the toleration
in the new Testament p. 148 Toleration is against faith, hope, comfort in the
Scriptures p. 150 Toleration is against the Ministry of the word p. 151 Rulers
by the fourth Commandment are to see all under them worship God p. 177
Proposals of the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax, 12. p. 10. ib.
Chap. 13. Magistracy and perpetual Laws in the Old Testament warrant the
civil coercing of false Prophets.
Rulers as Rulers, not as typical Rulers, punished false Teachers with the
Sword p. 177 Typicalnesse did not privilege all the Kings of Judah and Israel
to compel the Conscience and punish false Teachers as Libertines say p. 180
How typicalness priviledgeth men to such and such actions, how not p. 181
Seducers punished by bodily death p. 182 Punishing of Idolaters and blasphemers
of the Law of Nature p. 183 How wars that are extraordinary in the manner,
and in some particular acts, may be and are in the substance of the acts,
ordinary ruler obliging us p. 184 The Law of God warranted by the Law teaches
that false Teachers and Heretics are to be punished with the sword p. 185 The
Law of Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3. for punishing of Idolaters p. 187 There was no
consulting with the Oracle who should be put to death for his conscience in the
Old Testament, but an ordinary pay of trying such evil doers by judicial
proceeding and hearing of witnesses ibid. The end of punishing of false
Teachers with the sword is not their conversion to God (ministers of the Gospel
only labor in that field) but the not perverting of souls, and disturbing the
safety of humane societies p. 188 Sacrificing of Children to Molech punished
with death by Gods Law, not as murder, but as spiritual whoredom ibid.
Chap. 14. Cavils against coercive judicial Laws, for punishing false Prophets
in the old Testament removed.
Laws punishing false Teachers were moral, not temporary and pedegogicall p.
189 Power of fathers and masters in the fourth Commandment coercive p. 190
Compelling to hypocrisy for fear of shame and reproaches, as guilty (...)
compelling men with the sword, not to publish heresies, nor sed^^^ others p.
191 A third Answer p. 191 Blasphemers and Idolaters never were judged to die by
consulting with the immediate oracle of God, as John Goodwin imagines,
Hagiomastix sect. 34, 35, 36, 37. ibid. We have as sure a word the Scripture,
as immediate consulting with the oracle of God p. 192 Want of infallibility
should exclude all judges to judge, pastors to preach or write, Synods to
advise, because we cannot do these with Prophetical infallibility p. 194 A
twofold typicalnesse in the old Testament, one merely ceremonial unreducible,
another typical, but of civil and natural use; the use of the latter cease
not, because it was sometime typical, so is punishing of seducers p. 197
Seducers of old denied no other-waies God, then our false Prophets now a-daies
do deny him p. 19^ Not only those who offend against the principles of nature,
but those that publish and hold Errors against the supernatural principles of
the Gospel: are to be punished by the Sword p. 200 Such as sl^w their children
to Molech denied no more the word of God then our Heretics now do p. 201
There be false Prophets now under the new Testament as there were under the old
Testament 202.
Chap. 15. Christ's not rebuking toleration, and the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. vindicated.
Christ's not express rebuking of the Magistrates tolerating of heresies, makes
not for Christ's approving of toleration of Heresies, more then of tolerating
the absolving of a murderer at the time of the feast, or other crimes against
the second Table p. 203 The Laws Deuteronomy. 13. three in number explicated, the
first two were moral, the third Ceremonial for the most part p. 205 Thewars
in the Old Testament warrant wars in the New, according to the natural equity
in them, but they bind not according to the Ceremonial and temporary
typicalness annexed to them page 209
Chap. 16. Prophecies in the Old Testament especially, Zach. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. for punishing false Prophets vindicated.
The prophecies in the Old Testament especially that Zach. 13. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. prove that false Teachers under the New Testament, ought to be punished with
the sword p. 209 So Joh. Goodwin answers in his Appendix to Hagiomastix 210
The prophecy Zach. 13. and the house of David notes not the Jews only
excluding the Gentiles ibid. Master Goodwins answer to Zach. 13. p. 211 Answer
of Mr. Goodwin p. 213 It is not metaphorical thrusting through that is spoken
of Zach. 13. but really inflicted death and bodily punishment ibid.
Chap 17. Places in the New Testament especially Romans 13. for punishing of
false Teachers vindicated.
So John Goodwin Hagiomastix p. 218 The ignorance of the Christian Magistrate
in matters of Religion, no ground why by his office, he ought not to know so
far truth and falsehood, as to punish Heresies, published and spread p. 219
Ordinary professors may know who are Heretics and who false Teachers ibid.
Magistrates as Magistrates, cannot judge all evil doers, for heathen
Magistrates who never heard the Gospel, cannot judge Gospel Heretics p. 220
How Christ takes service of a Christian Magistrate p. 2^^ Master Joh. Goodwin
p. 225 How Master Goodwin would elude the place Romans 13. to (...) that false
Teachers are not evil doers p. 2^^ Paul Romans 13. speaks of Magistrates in
general, what they ought to be, not of Roman Magistrates as they were then
ibid. Roman well-doing and ill-doing not meant in this Text p. 227
Chap. 18. The place 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. for coercive power (...) false Prophets
cleared
The place 1 Timothy 2 1, 2, 3. explained p. 2^9 We are to pray that Magistrates
as Magistrates may not only (...) but procure to us that we may live in
godliness p. 2^^ Rev. The ten Kings as Kings punish the whore, and burn her
(...) for her Idolatry p. 231 Extraordinary punishing of Heretics, no case
of the Magistrates neglect, argues that the Magistrate ought to punish them p.
232
Chap. 19. Exemption of false Prophets from coercive power, is not Christian
Liberty
This Liberty of Conscience is not Christian Liberty p. 233 A Speculative
Conscience no more freed from the Magistrate then ^ practical Conscience p.
235 Ecclesiastical censures as compulsory as the Sword ibid.
Chap. 20. The parable of the Wheat and the Tares discussed and cleared.
The scope of the parable of the Tares, and the vindication thereof, p. 236 The
danger of punishing the innocent, in lieu of the guilty, through ^^^stake, is
no argument that Heretics should not be punished by (...) magistrate p. 237
The Tares are not meant of Heretics, but of all the wicked who shall be burnt
with unquenchable fire p. 238 The Parable of the Tares, and of the sower, most
distinct parables (...) matter and scope p. 239 ( Let them grow) not expounded
by Christ, and what it means p. 240 What is understood by tares p. ^^^
Heresy may be known ibid. What is meant by plucking up p. ^^^ What is meant by
the field, what by the wheat ibid. All the tithes of the parable must not be
expounded, nor the time exactly searched into, when the tares were first (...)
p. 243 How sins are more hai^^^^ under the new Testament, and (...) God is now
no less severe, then under the Law, and a City that will defend and protect a
false Prophet against justice, is to be dealt with the same ways, as under
the Old Testament, except that the typicalnesse is removed p. 244 What (let
them grow) imports p. 245 How we are to bear permissive providence, wherein
evils of sin fall out ibid. Christ must mean by tares and wheat, persons, not
doctrines, good and ill p. 246 Whether false Teachers, if they repent must be
spared, or because they may repent p. 247
Chap. 21. Of the Samaritam, and of the non-compelling of Heathens, how the
Covenant binds us.
The not burning of the Samaritans does prove nothing for the immunitie of
Heretics from the sword p. 249 How far we may compel other Nations, or
Heathens to embrace the true faith p. 250 Of the Covenants obliging of us, to
the religions observance thereof p. 251 The word of God as it is in every man's
Conscience no rule of Reformation in the Covenant p. 252 The equivocation of
Sectaries in swearing the Covenant ibid. The Author of the Ancient bonds an
ignorant provaricator in the Covenant p. 254 All moral compelling of
Heretics, and refuting of false teachers by the word, is as unlawful as
compulsion by the Sword, according to the principles of Libertines p. 255 The
Magistrate as the Magistrate cannot send Ministers but in a compulserie way p.
256 How Independents were insuared by Presbyterians to take the Covenant as the
Author says p. 258 How Independents swore to defend the Presbyterian
government, and with tongue, pen, and sword, cry out at it, as tyrannical
antichristian and Popish p. 261 Libertines make Conscience, not the Word of God
their rule p. 262 How appearing to the Conscience makes not the word of God to
be the obliging rule, but only as touching the right and due manner of (...)
obliged thereby. p. 2^3
Chap. 22. The pretended Liberty of Conscience is against the National League
and Covenant, the Ordinances of the Parliament of England engaged by Oath for a
reformation of Religion 265 Chap. 23. The place Acts 5. 34. to wit, the counsel
of Gamaliel discussed, and found nothing, for Liberty of Conscience
Mr. Goodwins unsound gloss touching the counsel of Gamaliel, Acts 5. p. 2^^
Gamaliels argument proves as strongly, that murderers and adulterers should
not be punished, as that men ought not to be punished for their Conscience p.
28^ The Argument of Gamaliel owned by Adversaries, renders all (...)
fundamentals of the Gospel uncertain, and Topic Sceptism^^ all the most well
settled believers p. 285 Gamaliels Argument does conclude, that we are not to
oppose by arguments and Scripture, any blasphemous way against the gospel 286
Immediate providence is not the rule of our actions 288
Chap. 24. Whether punishing of seducing Teachers, be inconsis^^^ with the
meeknes of Christ, place Luke 9. 54 discussed
The Lords not burning Samaria with fire from heaven, Luke 9. is no color for
pretended Toleration p. 288 The case of Elias calling for fire from heaven, and
of the Apostles, much different p. 289 The meeknes of Christ being extended to
Publicans, Extortioners, and Harlots, does as well conclude, such ought not to
be punished by the magistrate, is that false teachers ought not to be punished
by him 291 By places from the meekness of Christ, Socinians labor to prove
the Magistrate is to shed no blood under the new Testament 292 Christ's not
breaking the bruised reed, would prove that Heretics are gracious persons
though weak in saving grace, and lovingly cherished by Christ, if the place
Isa. 42. Mat. 12. 19, 20 help the adversaries, p. 293 Christ's meeknes not
inconsistent with his justice ibid. Rash judgment condemned, 1 Cor. 4. 5, 6.
is nothing for pretended toleration p. 294 That many through the corruption of
their own heart, render hypocritical obedience because of the sword, proves
nothing against the use of the sword to coerce false teachers p. 29^ Matters of
Religion ^ught to be inacted by the law of Princes and Christian Rulers, that
such as contravene may be punished p. 299 Laws of Rulers in matters of
religion (...) only bind the outward man. ibid. The false teacher is to be sent
to the Church and Pastors thereof, that he may be convinced before he be
punished p. 297
Chap. 25. Whether the Rulers by their office, in ^^der to ^^nce, are to stand
to the laws of Moses, for punishing seducing teachers ibid.
How judicial Laws oblige to punishment 298 Judicial Laws were deduced from
the moral Law p. 299 True cause of War with other Nations p. 300 Two Kingdoms
becoming one body, by a religious Covenant, if it be mutual, the one part may
avenge the quarrel of the Covenant on the other in case of breach p. 302 The
new Altar erected by the two Tribes and the half, beyond Jordan, Josh. 22. how
a just cause of war ibid. Christian Princes Laws against Errors and Heresies p.
305 As Constantine gave out severe Laws against Donatists, so did Julianus the
Apostate restore Temples to heretics, and granted liberty of conscience to
them, that so he might destroy the name and religion of Christians, as is
before observed, so Aug. Ep. 166. ^d Donat. 309 God only determines
punishments for sin ibid. The punishing of a seducing Prophet is moral. 301
The punishing of seducing Teachers is an act of justice, obliging men ever, and
every where p. 311 False Teachers in seducing others apprehend the hand of
divine vengeance pursuing them, as other ill doers do, and so it must be
natural justice in the Magistrate to punish them p. 312 The punishing of false
Prophets is of the Law of nature ibid. Idolatry is to be punished by the
judge, and that by the testimony of Job c. 31. who was obliged to observe no
judicial law, but only the law moral and the law of Nature p. 313 How the
Fathers deny the sword is to be used against men for their Conscience p. 315
Church censures and rebukes for Conscience infer most of all the absurdities
that Libertines impute to us p. 316 That there was an immediate response of
Gods oracle telling who was the false Teacher, is an unwarranted forgerie of
Libertines 318 If Heresy be innocence, seducing heretics ought to be (...)
and rewarded 319 The Magistrate as a Magistrate, according to prophecies in the
Old Testament is to punish Seduc^rs p. (...) What Mr. Williams gives to the
Magistrate in Religion (...) sufficient ibid. Christian Kings are no more
Nurse-fathers, Isai. 49. 23. (...) true Churches of Christ, then to the
Synagogue of Antichrist, according to the way of Libertines p. (...) The mind
of diverse famous Authors touching the parable of the (...) p. (...) The parable
of the Tares considered p. (...) Mr. Williams holds that the Prince owes
protection to all Idol^trous and bloody Churches, if they he his Subjects p.
32^ How the Magistrate is to judge of Heresy p. 329 A Magistrate and a
Christian Magistrate are to be differenced, (...) can or ought, all Magistrates
to judge of, or punish all Heretics p. 330 Whether peace of Civil societies
be sure, where there is toleration of all Religions p. 33^ Peace is commanded
in the New Testament, no word of (...) of diverse Religions, nor precept,
promise, or practice there^^^^ p. (...) No ground for abolishing of judicial
Laws touching that point ibid Libertines give us heathenish not Christian peace
under many ^^ligions p. 3^^
Chap. 26. Whether punishing of Seducing Teachers be persecution for Conscience.
There is a tongue persecution condemned by Libertines themselves p. (...)
Libertines persecute others for Conscience p. (...) Libertines ought not to
suffer death for any truth p. 3^^ The Lords patience toward sinners in the old
Testament no Arg^^^^ of not coercing false Prophets p. 34^ Hope of gaining
Heretics no more a ground of sparing them, then of sparing murderers who also
may be gained p. 345 Whether to be persecuted for Conscience true or false he a
note of (...) true Church ibid. No new Commandments under the New Testament p.
(...) They that suffer for Blasphemy, suffer according to the will of God in
Peter's sense by Libertines way p. 34^.
Chap. 27. Whether our darkness and incapacitie to bele^ve and profess,
together with the darkness and obscurity of Scripture be a sufficient ground
for Tolaration.
Our inabilitie to believe is no plan for Toleration p. 350 Preaching of the
Word without the Spirit as unable to work (...), as the Sword p. 351 Heresies
are knowable p. 353 Forced Conscience as strong an argument against Deuteronomy. 13.
as against us p. 355 The Magistrate commands the outward man, and yet
commands not carnal repentance and hypocritical turning to God p. 356
Because we may abstain from Heresy upon false grounds, it follows not that the
Magistrate has not power (...) punish heresy p. 359 Libertinisme of
toleration is grounded upon the pretended obscurity of Scripture p. 360
Toleration puts a hundred senses on the Scripture, and makes many rules of
faith p. 361 John Goodwin denies that we have Scriptures or any ground of
Faith, but that which is made of men's credit and learning p. 362 The means of
delivering of Scripture to us may be falli^le, yet the Scripture infull^ble
ibid. Reasons to prove that the Scriptures our non have are the very Word of
God p. 364 The knowledge of God is commanded, and the ^ind is under a Law, as
well as the will and affections p. 371 The trying of the Missals of Gregory and
Ambrose was mere foolery 372 Speculative ignorance of things (...) p. 373 The
place 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13. cleared and vindicated. ibid. Doctor Tailors
mistake of Heresy ibid. What vinciblenesse must be in Heresy p. 374 D. Tailor
makes the opinion of Purgatory no Heresy 376 Simple errors of things
revealed in the (...) sins 378 How opinions are judicable and punishable p. 379
Son-sacrificing upon a mere religious ground, is not murder punishable
according to Libertines way p. 380
Chap. 28. Diverse other Arguments for pretended Toleration answered. p. 381
The Magistrates ministry is civil (...) spiritual p. 384 The Laws of
(...), Cyrus, Danius, the ratifying the Law of God by civil punishments, were
the duty of Magistrates ibid. Artaxerxes made laws by the light of nature to
restrain men from idolatry page 385 From punishing of false teachers it
follows no^, that Jews and the Idolatrous Heathens should be killed p. (...)
Differences betwixt punishing of false teachers in the Old and (...) New
Testament p. 387 Circular turnings from Protestanisme to Popery proves
nothing against the punishing of Seducers p. 388 The objection, That the sword
is a carnal way to suppress heresy answered p. 390 Most of the objections
from forcing of Consciences conclude against the Laws of God in the Old
Testament, as well as against us ibid. The Law Deuteronomy. 13. Levit. 24. etc. was
not executed upon such only as sinned against the Law of nature p. 392 No need
of a Law, process, Judge, witness, accuser, or inquiring, in the written Law
of God p. 393 Ecclesiastical and civil coaction do both work alike upon
understanding and will p. 394 Errors against supernatural truth are not
rebukeable, because not punishable, and contra p. 395 Liberty of Conscience
makes false Prophets to be true, and such as shall dwell in the mountain of God
p. (...) Four sundry considerations by which sins are censured p. 397 The
Magistrate is subject to the just power of the Church, (...) Church to the just
power of the Magistrate, neither of them (...) abused power p. 398 How the Jews
suffered heathen Idolaters to dwell amongst (...) Joh. Baptist would have us
less careful of thereticall doctrines, (...) cause we are elected to glory,
then of other vile sins p. 3^9 Joh. Baptist and Libertines teach, that liberty
of Conscience the way to find out truth ibid. When the Holy Ghost forbids us to
believe false Christ's, or to (...) Antichristian teachers, be bids us also
believe and receive them (...) Saints, by the Libertines way 400 Libertines
make the judging of heretics to be heretics, a bold intending into the
counsel of God p. 402 Libertines say God has decreed Heresies to be ibid.
Variety of judgments in Gods matters a grief to the godly p. 403 The punishing
of Heresies investeth not the Magistrate in a bead^^^^ over the Church 404
CHAP. I. Of Conscience and its nature.
ACTS 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have (...) a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward man
THis is a part of Paul's Apology which he brings out before Festur the
Governor, he dare bring out his conscience before his accusers; the subject of
this part is conscience, In which we have, 1. the subject, Conscience. 2. The
quality of it, Free of offense. 2. The int^^^nesse and perfection of it, in
the first, Table, as a religious man toward God; as one of a sound
conversation, in the duties of the second, Table, toward man. 3. And that not
a^starts, when (...) good blood of godliness came on him; but (...), Always,
at all times. 4. This was not a conscience to lie beside him is the wretches
Gold, which for many years feeth neither s^nne nor wind; but it is a
Conscience walking in the streets, and fraction. Herein, that is, in this
religion and hope of the restriction, do (...) or exercise my self, this field
do 1 plow. 5. There is considerable Grammar in the object of this exercise, I
labor to have, to be a Lord, a Master, and anowner of a good conscience; a
conscience is one thing, and to have a conscience another thing, often the
conscience has the (...) and Lords it over him, or rather Tyrannizeth over the
Judas, and the man has not the conscience. And these five do (...) the (...),
the length and breadth of a good conscience.

Therefore of conscience; 2. of the good Conscience.

Of conscience, The name, Con^^^ence.
a little of the Name; 2. Of the thing. The Habrewes express the name by the
name of heart. (...) which I grant does signify the mind, understanding,
will, and by a figure it notes the heart, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And David's heart
smote him. Solomon says to Shimei, 1 King. 2. 44. Thou know all the evil
that thy heart (thy conscience) is privy to.

Conscience is but knowledge with a witness: its observed, that (...),
Conscience, a Word used about 32. times in the New Testament, is but once by
the Translators in the Old Testament, Eccles. 10. 20. Hence it notes that a
Man has a fellow, or (to speak so) a College-observer with him, and that is
God who knows first, and perfectly the ways and thoughts of a man, and his
conscience is an under-witnesse, and an observer with God, but a dim and
blind beholder in comparison of God. 2. It is a knowledge not as large as that
of the whole understanding faculty, but restricted, and in order only to the
man's actions, words, thoughts, the condition or state he is (...), in Christ,
or not in Christ. It so signifies practical knowledge that there is a Verb
Nifhal that signifies to have a heart, Conscience the practical knowledge.
or (...) be practically wise, Joh 11. 12. Vain man (...) would have a heart,
or be hearted and wise; and Cont. 4. 9. Thou have taken away my heart, or,
unheartned me, my sister, my (...). 2. The heart goes also for a word that
signifies a picture, Jo^ 38. 36. Who has given understanding to the heart,
(...) (...) signifies curious ingtaving, wittily devised by the understanding,
and it notes an excellent picture, pleasant to see, from root that signifies
to behold, and to paint; for all the inventions, pictures, engraven works in
the soul is in the conscience. Sinners draw on their conscience and, heart
many fair fancies, pictures, and engraven pieces of devised pleasures. They
use the word (...) spirit for the Conscience also. Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord
saves the broken in spirit. Prove. 18. 4. A wounded spirit who can bear it?
For the word spirit in that language signifies the whole soul (...) and the
whole strength, marrow, courage, and (...) of the foul, Jo^ 6. 8 Josh. 5. 1.
There was no more Spirit in them, because Conscience is all, it is the good or
best, or the evil or worst in the man, does he keep conscience, all is safe;
does he lose conscienes, all is gone: it is the spirits, the rose, the only
precious thing of the soul, the body is clay and ^are, the conscience is the
gold of the man.

Now touching Conscience. I propose these, 1. Its nature. 2. Its object. 3. Its
office. 4. The kinds of Conscience; And 5. the adjuncts of it, the liberty of
Conscience, and that much controverted prerogative to be free in opinions, and
in religions, from bands that men can lay on it.

Conscience is considered by Divines as a principle of our acting in order to
what the Lord commands us in she law and the Gospel; and it comes here to
be considered, in a threefold consideration. 1. As Conscience is in its
abstract nature; yet as it is in man only, I speak nothing of the conscience of
Angels, and Devils. 2. As the Conscience is good or bad; for the conscience in
Adam, before the fall was in a great perfection, and the Glorified spirits
carry a good conscience up to heaven with them, as the damned take to hell a
peace of hell within them, an evil conscience, yet their was neither in Adam,
not can there be in the Glorified, an evil conscience, nor any such
accidental acts of Conscience, as to accuse, smite, tormen^.

3. Conscience is considered as acting well or ill, it has influence on the
affections, to cause a feast of joy, to stir up to faith, hope, sadness etc.

Touching the nature of Conscience. Conscience a power, not an act or habit.
It seems to me to be a power of the practical understanding according to
which the man is oblidged and directed to give judgment of himself, that is of
his state and condition, and of all his actions, inclinations, thoughts, and
words. It is first an understanding power, not an act or an actual judgment.
1. It is nor a distinct faculty from the understanding, but the understanding
as it gives judgment, in court, of the man's state and of all his ways, as
whether he be in favor with God or no, and now whether he be in Christ, or
not, and of all his motions and actions within or without. But it would appear
not to be an act, because to oblidge, to direct to accus^^, are acts of the
Conscience, and therefore do (...) slow from other acts; it is true, the
thoughts, Romans 2. 15. (...) said to ^^cuse, or ^^cuse, but by thoughts there is
mea^^ the Conscience (...) not first thinking, and then accusing, but the
Conscience brething out the bad or good (...) or (...) longing and accusing, or
of exercising and conforming though, and acts. All acts flow from either young
powers, which they call potencie, or from stronger and more aged and indicated
powers, (...) Thomas 12. ^. 19 a^t. 5. Casetan. ibid. Richard. 2. ^. 29. ar 1.
2.
which they call habits: Things produced by motion, and motion It self, are
the effects of the never (says Amesing de (...)) cap. 1. (...). 4. ^^nd
therefore the act of accusing may be from the Conscience which is an act; this
consequence cannot stand; the motion, and the thing produced by motion, is from
the mover, true, but the act of moving is from the mover, as he actuateth his
power, so is directing, accusing from the power in the practical understanding;
not from the act of understanding which is nothing in this case, Grego. de
Valent. 12. q. 14. punct. 4. Vasqu. z. 12. disp. 59 c. 1. Tannet. tom. 2 di^p.
2. q. 4 dub^ 4.
but the act of accusing, and nothing can come from it self as a cause. 2. When
the believer or wicked men go to sleep, and put off their clothes, they do not
put off their Conscience, and though the conscience sleeps not with the man,
yet does it not in sleep, necessarily act by accusing, or excusing, and
therefore remains as a power in man, not ever acting; See Malderus in 12. q.
19. Disp. 82. ar 4. 5.

2. Its an understanding power, and belongs to the judgment and
understanding. Esa. 5. 3. Judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard. Its
true, some make it the inclination of the will, as Henriquez, Quodlih. 1. q.
18. And Durandur may seem not far from it, 2. d. 39. Some say it belongs
to both. But the will is no knowing faculty, the Conscience is a knowing
faculty, Eccles. 7. 22. For oftentimes also thine heart knows that thou also
have cursed others. 2. There is more of reason and sound knowledge in the
conscience, then in the whole understanding soul, it is a Crystal globe of
reason, the beam, the sun, the candle of the soul; for to know God and the
creatures, in out relative obligation to God in Christ, is the rose, the
blossom, the flower of knowledge, Joh. 17. 3. to see God, and his beauty
expressed in Christ, and the comeliness and incomparable glory of his amiable
and lovely Essence as holden forth to us in Christ, is the highest reach of the
conscience.

I^ Conscience be so divine a piece, (...) banke-full with reason and light,
then the more of knowledge, the more of conscience, as the more of fire, the
more he^^^, the more of the sun, the more light. Then when phancie goes for
conscience, as in (...) by siasts, and new Spirits gropling beside the word of
God a new Angel commended only from N^wnesse, a white Angel without, and a
black Angel within, conscience must be turned in a dream. 2. Noveltie can go
for conscience, our nature is quickly taken with novelty, even as a new friend,
a new field, a new house, a new garden, a new garment, so a new Christ, a new
says, (...), delights us. 3. Heresy goes for Conscience; somes Conscience
phancie that to kill their children to Molech, is a doctrine that entered in the
heart of God, to command, Jer. 7. 30, 31.

2. A Conscience void of knowledge is void of goodness; silence and dumbness
is not peace; An innocent toothlesse conscience that cannot see, nor hear, nor
speak, cannot bark, far less can it bite before it have teeth, such a
conscience covenanteth with the sinner, Let me alone, let me sleep till the
smoke of the furnesse of hell waken me. If there be any sense or life, fire
can bring it forth; a worm at the heart can bear witness, if it have any
life. This Conscience is like the service Book, or like the Mass, or the
Popish Image, you but see these things, they cannot speak, nor act upon the
soul.

2. The nature of Conscience is further cleared by its office, and object;
which are the second and third particulare proposed.

That we may the more distinctly speak of these, it would be cleared what sort
of knowledge is ascribed to the Conscience.

Conscience is not the simple judgment and apprehension of things, What sort
of knowledge is ascribed to the Conscience.
as things are knowable; this is the speculative understanding, but it is the
power to know things our self, and actions, in order to obey God and serve
him. 2. But the question is, whether Conscience be a simple practical
apprehension of things, or a compounded and discoursive apprehension. To which
I answer. 1. That as the speculative understanding knows many things without
discourse, as to a pure head the sun, heaven, nature of motion, and many
things in its second operation and work, as to apprehend the Sun to be an
hundredth, sixty and seven times more then the Earth, yet it refers both the
first and second operations of the mind to know things by discourse, so the
Conscience as conscience does apprehend in its first operation, God, Christ,
sin; and in its second operation God to be infinite, Christ to be the alone
choicest of Saviors; So it is consummate and perfected in a discourse or
syllogism by Conscience, totally and completely in order to our practice and
faith.

As He that kills his brother has not life eternal.
But I have killed my brother.
Ergo, I have not life eternal. So Caine.
And He that believes in him who justifies the ungodly, is justified and
saved.
But I believe in him who justifies the ungodly.
Ergo, I am Justified and saved. So David, Paul.
The knowledge of the major by it self is an act of conscience, as to deny and
mis-beleeve the major Proposition is an act of a blinded and evil conscience;
but the compleatenesse of Conscience stands in the knowledge of the whole
syllogism. Hence they say, that the (...), the Magezine and Thesaure-house of
the conscience, the habit or power that judges of the Law of nature is the
major Proposition, or the principles of right or wrong written in the heart by
nature, makes the conscience in regard of the proposition to be called, Lex
the Law. In regard of the assumption, or the second proposition. Conscience is
a witness, a spy sent from heaven to record all the facts, in which
assumption are included both our facts, actions, words, thoughts, inclinations,
habits of sin or grace, and the man's state and condition. In regard of the
conclusion or third proposition. Conscience is a Judge and the deputy of God;
and it is but one and the same conscience acting all the three, the acts of
Law, a Witness, a Judge.

The (...), Of the (...).
the conserving power of the soul, is that faculty or power, in which are
hidden and laid up the moral principles of right and wrong, known by the light
of nature, and so is a part of a natural conscience, and in it are treasured
up the Scripture and Gospel Truths, which are known by the light of a star of
a greater Magnitude, to wit, the candle shining in a divine revelation, and
this is part of the enlightened and supernatural Conscience.

Of this intellectual Treasure-house, Of Conscience in relation to the Major
Assumption and Conclusion of a Practical Syllogism.
we are to know these 1. That in the inner Cabinet, the natural habit of
Moral principles lodges, the Register of the common notions left in us by
nature, the Ancient Records and Chronicles, which were in Adams time, the Law
of Nature of two volumes, one of the first Table, that there is a God, that he
creates and governs all things, that there is but one God, infinitely good,
most just rewarding the Evil and the good; and of the second Table, as to love
our Parents, obey Superiors, to hurt no man, the acts of humanity; All these
are written in the soul, in deep letters, yet the Ink is d^mme and old, and
therefore this light is like the Moon swimming through watery clouds, often
under a shadow, and yet still in the firmament. Caligul^, and others, under a
cloud, denied there was any God, yet when the cloud was over, the light broke
out of prison, and granted, a God there must be; strong winds do blow out a
Torch in the night, and will blow in the same light again; and that there be
other seeds, though come from a far Land, and not growing out of the ground,
as the former, is clear, for Christ scatters some Gospel Truths in this
Chalmer, as Joh. 7. 28. Then cried Jesus in the Temple, as he taught, saying,
Ye both know me, and whence I am. Joh. 25. 24. But now they have both seen,
and hated both me and my Father.

2. This is a part of the Conscience, because by no faculty in man, but by the
conscience are these truths apprehended. 2. And when any in ill blood, deny
such truths, as that there is a God, and Parents are not to be loved, we all
say such do sin, and offer violence to their conscience. 3. Sins against these
fundamentals, cry vengeance with a more hiddeous shout, and cry, than
spiritual sins that are spun with a smaller thread, for such go nearer to put
off humanity.

The knowledge of the assumption is Conscience as a Book or Witness, and it
is either considered as it is in habit, and keeps a record of the man's facts,
or as in act, it brings them forth, and applies the Law to the fact, and is
called di^t^^^^, the enditement, and charge given in, This and this hash than
done.

Now that Conscience brings good or ill out of the (...) that contains
memorial, or Cronicle or the man's (...) clear, as 1. The Conscience can look
back and laug^^^ solace it self at that which is well done, and bring it forth
Psalm. 16. 2. O my soul thou have said unto the Lord, thou art (...) Lord.
Psalm. 140. 6. I said unto the Lord, thou art my God, (...) Ezekiah, like the
man that cheareth himself with the sight of the gold in his treasure, Esai.
37. 3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee, in
truth, and with a perfect heart. Or 2. it can look back and purge it self, as
David, Psalm. 7. O my God, if I have done this. Job 16. 17. Job 29. 12, 13, 14.
chap. 31. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. 3. It can bring out evil deeds, as Joseph's
brethren do; when they are in trouble. This distress is come on us, for that
when we saw the anguish of our brother, and he besought us, we would not
hear, Genesis 42. 21.

The knowledge of the conclusion is judgment, and the sentence of a Judge.

2. The object of Conscience.
For the second point of Conscience which is its object; this can be nothing
but Gods revealed will expressed to us either in the Law of Nature, or in the
Law written, or the Gospel. Doctor Hamond says, Hamond of Conscience. page 3.
Sect. 9.
to abstain from a thing indifferent as Marriage, (...), as from a thing
abominable or unlawful, is by Scripture and Councels condemned as sinful Why?
Because to Marry, or not to Marry, is indifferent. But he may remember, that
Papists forbid Churchmen to Marry, do they forbid it, because Marriage which
to them is a Sacrament, is an abominable and unlawful Sacrament? I think no.
Yet all our Divines say, not only the Manichaans, but also the Papists are
these, who teach a doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 2. while they forbid Marriage,
though not under the notion of a thing abominable; So the Popish Doctor
acquitteth the Papists, and condemns Protestants, who so far agree to have
the adaequate rule of Conscience to be Gods will reve^led in his word, that to
make a religious Law to forbid Marriage and Meats, and other things
indifferent to them is a doctrine of Devils, to all our Divines, though they
forbid them not as things unlawful, and under the notion of things abominable.

Use. Conscience to be revere^ced.
If the conscience have an indictment against you from heaven, and from the
word of God, which is the Law-booke of the Judge of all flesh; Ergo, We are to
stand in awe of Conscience. And look how much goodness and true fear of God
is in a Man, as much fear of himself and reverence to his own conscience is
within him. For 1. to be holden even with the charges and writs of an erring
conscience is obedience to the Law of nature, as we would not be willing that a
scout, or a spy sent from a strange Land should see our nakedness, weakness,
folly, security. When the Conscience returns, to the Father of Spirits, it
can tell tales of men, and can libell many pollutions of the flesh and spirit
acted by the man, while the Conscience lodged with clay and a polluted Spirit.
2. Because Conscience is something of God, a domestic little God, a keeper
sent from heaven, a divine piece which is all eye, all sense, and has the word
with it, in so far it is to be reverenced, and has the reverenceth the King,
reverenceth the Ambassador, in so far as he carries along the Kings will, he
that honors the Lord must honor the servant. 3. Solomon says, Prove. 15. 5.
A fool despises his fathers reproof, but he that regards it is prudent.
Verse. 10. He that hates reproof shall die. To receive Instructions and
rebukes from Conscience, in so far as they come from the Word of truth is
spiritual prudence, and he that turns away his ear from his conscience,
shall die. 4. As to submit to the Word, is to submit to God, so to offer
violence to a divine truth, is to wrestle with God, and by the like proportion
to stoop before Conscience carrying a message from God, is to submit to God,
and to do violence to the domesticke light and truth of God, is all one as to
wrestle with God. 5. We count a tender Conscience, such as was in Joshuah, who
did yield and cede to the Law of God, and its threatenings, a soft heart; then
to stand out as a flint-stone or an Adamant, against the warnings of an inward
Law must argue hardness of heart. 6. There is nothing so strong and divine as
truth, a Conscience that will bargain to buy and sell truth, and will be the
Lord and Conqueror, not the captive and taken prisoner of the Gospel, bearing
it self on upon the soul in power and majesty, has his one foot on the
borders of the sin against the holy Ghost. 7. It is like the man walks not
at random, but by rule, who is not made all of stoutnesse, and ventureth not
inconsiderately on actions and ways which undoubtedly are the seeds or
eternity, but fears (...) Paedagoge and teacher in so far as the law and will
of the Judge of the world goes along with him.

V^e 2. Because the Word of God must be the rule of Conscience, and Conscience
is a servant, and under-Judge only, not a Lord, nor an Absolute and
independent Sovereign, whose voice is a Law, therefore an Iodolatrous and
exorbitent rule of Conscience is here also to be condemned. Conscience is ruled
by Scripture, but it is not Scripture, nor a Canonicke book and rule of faith
and conversation, it often speaks Apocriph^, and is neither God, nor Pope,
but can reele, and totter, and dream, ^^^scribe more to conscience then is
Just, and to make new and hold opinions of God, broad and venturous and daring
affirmations, the very Oracles of heaven, because they are the brood (as ^s
conceived) of an equal and unbyassed Conscience, is presumption, near to
Atheism; the grossest Idolatry is to make your self the Idol: wh^reas tender
consciences suffer most persecution, and are not active in daring, there is
extreme pride in such as lead families and are Christians in new heresies.
Some are extremely sworn and devoted to Conscience as Conscience: humility is
not daringly peremptory. Many weak ones pine away in feavours of sinistrous
thoughts of Christ, as if his love were cold to them, Esa. 49. 14. 15. and
phancie an imaginary and a made-plea with Christ; Oh he leveth any but me, and
because they make an Idol of the weak oracle of Conscience, they make also an
Idol of meek Jesus Christ, as if they would try, if Christ's love can be cold,
and his blood and bowels can act any more mercy to them.

The third is the office of Conscience in one general. (...) of Cons^^^nce,
and the acts (...).
It comes under the name of Obligation. But to come to particulars. There be
two sorts of operations of Conscience, some illicite and imbred, other imperate
or commanded.

These which be Imbred are of two kinds. 1. Such as conscience simply as
conscience actethas in general to oblige; and in particular. 1. To direct; 2.
To discern; 3. To exci^e, Dirigere, Discernere, Impellere* Others are such as
issue from Conscience, as good or ill; as right, or not right; as these in
well-doing. 1. It approves. 2. It excuses. 3. It absolveth, in ill doing it
disalloweth and reproves. 2. It accuses or charge. 3. It condemns. These
imperated operations of Conscience, are such as Conscience acts on the
affections, or commands the affections to act, but are not properly acts of
Conscience, nor of the practical understanding; but acts of the affections
resulting from the Consciences well or ill doing, as to rejoice, to grieve and
check, and the like. But there be other acts that agree to Conscience in order
to the assumption; others in order to the Conclusion.

In order to the Assumption it specially does be^re witness and testify of
its own acts, Of witnessing of Conscience and selfe-reflection.
both that the man has done this fact; And 2. of the quallitie of it, that it
is done against God, the Mediator Christ, free grace, the word of
reconciliation; as a faithful witness must not only depone the fact, but all
the circumstances and quallities, in so far as they come under the senses of
seeing and hearing, and may aggravate the fact, and give light to the Judge;
and what testimony the Conscience gives of the actions of man, the like it is
to give of the state and condition, whether it be good or ill, hence these acts
of recognition. As 1. Conscience does its duty in reflecting on it self: It
tryes the man's actions and state; hence these three words, 2 Cor. 13. 5. try,
or tempt, or pierce, and dig into your selves; (...), many dig holes and
windows in the conscience of others who never dug a hole in their own heart,
2. (...), examine what metal is in your selves and actions, men are unwilling
to find oar or dross in themselves; and we are bidden, 1 Cor. 11. 31. (...),
lead witnesses, sentence and Judge our selves. To these generals there is a
second act, which is called, Psalm. 4. 5. Speak with your heart. You testify
little of the man that you never heard speak. Men are frequently to converse
with their heart by heart-communing, and soul quaerees; so you find out the by
as and the weight that swaies with the heart, Jer. 5. 24. Neither say they in
their hear, let us now fear the Lord our God. Hos. 7. 2. They say not in
their heart, that I consider all their wickedness*

3 There is laying of the Consience in its reflect act, and the actions
together, Hag. 1. 5. Lay your heart upon your wales. It is that which David
says, Psalm. 119. 59. I considered, Heb. I thoughted my ways.

4. There is wandering and estrangement of a man from his own heart, and when he
lays his case to heart, he is said to return to his own heart. 1 King. 8. 47.
If they shall be think themselves, heb. if they shall return to their own
heart, or come home to their own heart, in the land of their captivity and
repent, then hear then. Men are abroad in their thoughts, and seldom at home
with their own heart. The knowledge of our own state of grace may be had by the
fruits of the Spirit of Sanctification.
But of this act of witnessing of the Conscience, it is of moment, to know how
and by what Medium, or way the conscience does witness to man of his state,
that he is a child of God and in Christ, whether God does witness our state
and condition to us, by inherent quallifications in us, Because we love the
brethren, because we have sincere hearts, and aim in all things to obey God.

A^er. 1. God speaks by his own works of Sanctification that we are in
Christ, 1 John 2. 3. And hereby we know that we know him, because we keep his
commandments. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life,
because we love the Brethren. Now as God speaks and reveals his glory,
Godhead, power, and eternity, by his visible works of creation, so as we may
gather by certainty of faith, that God is glorious, wise, omnipotent, eternal,
Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 10. 17, 18, 19, 20 Upon them
grounds, when we find in our souls the works of that spirit that raised the
Lord from the death, as love to the brethren, because brethren, sincere walking
with God, and Christ's life, Gal. 2. 20. we may with the certainty of faith,
collect that we are the children of God; and if the knowledge of our state in
Christ, from the works of Sanctification be but conjecturall, and may deceive
us, and not a sufficient foundation of sound peace, nor enough to make us
unexcusable, that from the sickness of inward heart-love which I feel in my
own soul to Christ, I can have no divine assurance that I am in Christ, and
cannot be made inexcusable in not believing the spirit dwells in me by his
acting and working, then we cannot infer Gods infinite wisdom, omnipotency,
and eternity, from his works of Creation, and I cannot be inexcusable, if I
believe not Gods wisdom and power from the works of creation; is not the
pertinacie of unbeleefe as damnable, when I believe not God acting in his
Spirit as sanctifying, as when I believe not God acting in this first
workmanship of Creation?

2. In all the actings, motions, and walkings of the Holy Ghost in my soul, in
the stirrings of the New birth, when the spirit of Jesus makes a noise with
his feet walking, acting, moving in love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, which are apples and blossoms
which grow on the tree of life, Gal. 5. 22, 23. It were no sin to me to
sleep and believe these were but imaginary dreams, and phancied notions, if I
ware not to believe where these are, the soul that finds them undenyably is
in Christ.

3. The Saints comforting themselves in their godly, sincere, and blameless
walking before God in love, knew what they spoke, and what spirit was in them,
and that they walked not after the flesh, as men speak and phancie in a night
dream, not knowing whether they be in Christ, or not; these were speeches of
waking men, whose wits were in action. Psalm. 26. 8. Lord I have loved thy
habitation, and the place where thine honor dwells. Psalm. 119. 63. I am a
companion of all them that fear thee; and of them that keep thy precepts.
verse. 97. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day. verse. 103. How
sweet are thy words unto my taste! Yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. verse.
111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the
rejoicing of my heart. verse. 162. I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds
(...) great spoil: and the Church, Cant. 2. 3. I sat down under his shadow,
and his fruit was sweet to my taste. ver. 5. Stay me with flagons and comfort
me with apples, for I am sick of love. Esaias 26. 9. With my soul have I
desired thee in the night: yea with my spirit within me, I will seek thee
early. And Ezekiah looking to his good Conscience, says. Ezech. 39 3. Remember
now, O Lord, that I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart.
So Paul, 2 Cor 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God we had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you-wards. Now if the Saints can thus speak with the light and
persuasion of Faith, before God and men, to their own solid peace and
consolation, then may they be persuaded by these fruits of the Spirit, that
they are branches growing in the Vine Christ, else all these speeches are but
delusions and phancies; and they must speak no other thing of themselves as
vessels of the grace of God, then hypocrites (...) reprobates may say of
themselves? ^olion. Sermon. an 1643 page 428. 429 430. etc.
For D. Crispe, and also Libertines of New England, whose doctrine subverts the
Faith, say, there can be no marks of saving grace from whence we can draw
either comfort or peace, be it universal obedience, st^^rity, love to the
Brethren, but it may be in hypocrites, in a Jew following the righteousness of
the Law, Romans 10. 1. and renouncing Christ. Surely if works of saving grace
speak another thing then hypocrites and devils may have: then first, holy
walking is no ground of comfort, and a good conscience has no more to yield
David, Job, Ezechiah, Paul, the Apostles, and Martyrs, when they suffer for
Christ, and his truth, and are in heavy afflictions and chains, then it can
yield to the viledest of men. 2. A man, a Christian shall never finde^ny
grounds of certainety of his adoption in any thing, save in the hidden decrees
of Election, and reprobation, and in some immediate testimony of a Spirit,
which may be a great doubt to many, who walk as many Antinomians do,
according to the flesh. 3. All their rejoicing in simplicity and godly
sincerity, 2 Cor. 1. 12. is empty phancies and delusions, for they rejoice in
that in which hypocrites and reprobates may have is deep a share as they. But
that there is also some immediate testimony of the Spirit, though never
separated from the fruits of the Spirit, I hope to prove elsewhere.

The last act of Conscience is in relation to the Conclusion, which is the
(...), Acts of Conscience in relation to the Conclusion.
or judgment of all; from whence flow the acts of approving, or improving;
excusing, or accusing; condemning, or absolving: from these as the Conscience
does well or ill, arise, 1. Joy, called a feast, in which the soul is
refreshed, not the phancie. 2. Upon a solid ground, a bottom that cannot
sink, from that which is well done. 2. Consolution, which is a joy in
tribulation. 3. Faith, going from what the man does well, to a general; To
these that walk according to this rule, peace. 4. Hope, that the Lord who has
promised will do the soul good in the latter end, these four issue from a
good Conscience; from approving and ^^^cusing, But the affections which flow
from improving, and ^^cusing, and condemning, are 1. Shame, whence the man
(...) displeased with what he has done, this is good when it looks only, or
most to the sin, or ill, when most to the punishment. 2. Sadness. 3.
Distrust, or unbelief. 4. Fear. 5. Despair. 6. Anger, vexation, or the worm
that dies not; it is no wonder that a greater number of troublesome affections
^low from the one, then from the other; evil is fecound and broody.

The 4. A Conscience good or ill.
which I proposed is the second circumstance of the Text, which draws in the
rest, and it is a conscience (...), free of stones or blocks, that neither
actively causes my self nor others to stumble nor passively is under a reatus
or guilt before God, called a good Conscience, to which is opposite an evil
conscience. Now the Conscience is good, either in regard of integrity; a
clean, a good, a pure conscience: or secondly in regard of calmness and
peace; to this latter is opposed a Conscience penally evil or troubled, of
which no more the good Conscience is either good in Judging, or recta, or vera;
the contrary of this, an erring Conscience, which I speak of after the other;
or good in a moral quallity. In this meaning the Conscience is good, which is
first sprinkled with the blood of Christ from dead works, to serve the living
God. Heb. 9. 14. For by Christ must the guilty be purged, that there may be no
more Conscience of sins, A good Conscience.
Hebr. 10. 2. This is the Conscience which is called (...), good, 1 Timothy 1^. 5.
(...). purged and washen, Hebr. 10. 2. in regard the great spot of guiltiness
is taken away, and (...), 1 Timothy 1. 5. clear, pure, terse, like a Crystal
glass, and (...), Hebr. 13. 18. good and honest, or beautiful and fair, a
good Conscience is a comely, resplendent, lovely thing; and it is a Conscience
in the text, (...), void of stumbling; there is a Conscience that wants feet,
and is lame, and halteth; and is always tripping, stumbling, falling; to this
is opposed a Conscience, (...), Heb. 10. 22. let us draw near with a true
heart, with full assurance, (...), being sprinkled in the heart from an evil
Conscience; and to this is opposed a polluted (...), Conscience, Tit.
Conscience the ^arest piece that God made.
1. 15. The wisdom of God in creating the world is much, and most seen in
creating so rare a piece as the soul, and the most curious piece in the soul
is that lump of Divinity the Conscience, it is the likest to a chip, and
(...) of God, though it be not a part of the infinite Majesty, yet it smells
more of God then the heavens, the sun, the stars, or all the glorious
things on earth, Precious stones, Saphires, Rubies, or Herbs, Roses, Lilies,
that the Lord has made, now when the flower and crown of the whole creation,
which is the spirit, is corrupted, it is the fowlest thing that is: when the
Angel^, the sons of the Morning, fell, and their Conscience the Spirit of the
purest and most glorious Spirits was polluted with guilt, though infinite grace
could have cured this rare piece, yet infinite wisdom, as it were, giving over
the cause, and Grace and Mercy standing aloof from the misery of Angels, a
Savior is denied them, and Justice works the farther on this noble piece,
the Conscience of these fallen Spirits, to destroy them; God would not stretch
out one finger to repair their Conscience; but when the Conscience of man was
polluted, because Grace has ever run in this channel to work upon free
choice and arbitration, to save Men, not Angels, and of Men, these, and these,
not others; therefore the Lord fell upon a rarer work than Creation, to
redeem the choicest piece of creation, to wash souls, and to restore
consciences to a higher luster and beauty then they had at the first. Now what
ever God does no man can do it for him, an infinite agent cannot work by a
deputy, and among all his works none required more of God, of the Artifice of
Grace, and mercy, wisdom, deepenesse of love, then to wash a polluted
Conscience, there was more of God required to mend and sodder the Jewel, than
to make and preserve it. The blood of Bulls and Goats cannot be spoken of here;
now to make Conscience again fundamentally good, there was need that the most
curious art of free grace, should be set on work to act a greater miracle on
this choicest piece, then ever was before or after; to make the conscience
good, an act of atonement and expiation to satisfy infinite Justice must
pass, and by shedding of, and sprinkling on the Conscience the blood of God;
the Conscience only, and no other way known to Men or Angels, could be
restored.

Use. We profess that the morrall washing of the outside of the cup has
nothing in it of a good Conscience; morrall honesty alone, can no more
inherit the Kingdom of heaven, then flesh and blood.

2. A good conscience from justification has peace and joy. Prove. 15. 5. A
good conscience; or Heb. he that is good in heart is in a continual feast. Its
an allusion to the Shewbread that was set before God always; or as Exodus 2^.
30. bread of faces, that was to be before the Lord continually; called by them,
(...) perpetual bread; this has no fountain cause, but sense of
reconcilliation with God.

3. A good Conscience is a complent entire thing, as our Text says, both
toward God and man; its not to be a moral man in the duties of the second
Table, and a seepticke in the duties of the first Table, not in some few
fundamentals, as Parrones for Liberty of Conscience do plead, but in the
whole revealed will of God; and therefore the good conscience consists in an
indivisible point, as they say, the number of four does, if you add one, or
take one from it, you vary the essence, and make it three or five, not four;
so Paul takes in compleatnesse in it, I have all good Conscience, either all
or none; and a good Conscience toward God and man; not a conscience for the
streets and the Church, and not for the house, and not for the days Hosanna,
and not for eternity; therefore they require an habit to a good Conscience,
(...), I have exercised my self to have always a good conscience, there is a
difference between one song, and the habit of Music, and a step and a way,
Psalm. 119. 133. order, (not my one single step,) but my steps; (...), in the
plural number; to fall on a good word by hazard, and to salute Christ in the
by, does not quit from having an evil Conscience; as one wrong step, or
extemporary slip, does not render a believer a man of an ill Conscience; the
wicked world quarrel with the Saints before men, because they cannot live as
Angels, but the true and latent cause is because they will not live as Devils,
and go with them to the the same excess of riot.

4. The Formalis rates of all good Conscience, as conscience, Conscience acts
not on by-respects, but for conscience, Romans 13. 5. Wherefore ye must be
subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Conscience then does
all by (...), and fails by compass, and considers the (...) not of the
clouds, but of the stars which (...) regularly; whereas the evil conscience,
Levit. 26. 15. is said to play the reprobate in Gods testimonies. (...) to cast
away, to loath, it is called, jer. 6. 30. reprobate metal which no man would
choose; there is Conscience that walks contrary to God, Levit. 2^. 21. (...)
in occursu, there is a defect of the Letter (...) the word is from a root that
signifies to meet in the way, or to rafter or plank an house, where board is
joined with board, some will join issue with God, as if they had heardned their
heart against him, and were nothing afraid to meet him, and join battle with
him, as if they were good enough and strong enough for God, as one rafter in a
house is apt to join with another, there be some froward ones, who wrestle
with God. Psalm. 18. 27. With the froward, with the wrestler who boweth his
body, thin wilt wrestle. But a good Conscience knows God better then so, and
is a mass of heavenly light, and therefore joined with faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy
1. 5. and verse. 19. Timothy is exhorted to held faith and a good Conscience, as
if they failed both in one vessel: if faith sink, a good Conscience cannot
swim* much more might be added of a good Conscience, but our care would be to
keep Conscience, as we would do a Jewel of gre^^ price, and as we do a watch
of Gold, a meat or straw will interrupt the motion of a watch, it cannot be
violently moved; when Grace and the blood of atonement oyleth the wheels of
Conscience they move sweetly and equally. Some times its secure or dead, or
(which is the extremity of sleep, as death is superlative and deepest sleep)
feared or burnt with a hot iron; when the man has sinned God out of the world,
first as fools do, Psalm. 14. 1. and next out of his own conscience* and such
a Conscience in Pharaoh may awake per intervalla, and go to bed again, and be
buried at other times; it can discourse and argue away heretically the ill day
and judgment, at other times it will crow furiously, and as unseasonably as the
Cock, which they say has much in it of the Planet of the Sun, and therefore
begins to sing when the Sun has passed his declination, and begins to
ascend, when men are in deepest sleep.

There is a second division of Conscience, and it is from the second acts and
good disposition of Conscience, and that is a tender, or a not tender
Conscience.

The tender Conscience is only choicest of Consciences, so ^ Ames makes it
that which is opposed to an hard heart, A tender conscience.
the worst conscience that is; Amesius de consci. l. 1. c. ^5. n. 11.
Conscientiae huic malae, vel cordi diero opponit^^ conscientia tenera, quae
facile afficitur verb Dei. 2 Reg. 22. 19. Ut in Josia.
we have some choice examples of a tender conscience, 2 King. 22. 19. Because
thy heart was tender, and thou wast cast down before the face of the Lord: the
word (...) to grow soft is ascribed to oil, Psalm. 55. 22. His words were
softer then oil; it is Prove. 4. 3. tender and dear; it is ascribed to young
children, or young cattle, its a conscience that easily yeildeth and renders
to God; So in Job chap. 31. who was so tender at the remembrance of Gods rising
up against him to visit him, that verse. 13. he durst not despise the cause of
his manservant, or his maidservant, when they contended with him, and in
David, who when he but cut off the lap of the Man's garment, who sought to cut
off his life, yet his heart smot him: the word (...) is to strike, or kill, or
plague, frequent in the Book of E^codus, God shook every herb of the field.
God struck or plagued the first borne; it is some times to whip or scourge, so
as the mark of the stroke remains; after David's striking of the Lords
anointed, there remained an vibex, an impression and a mark in a soft heart.

Who ever would ingrosse the name of a tender Conscience to themselves, Who
ingrosse the name of tender consciences to themselves.
do challenge the high perfection of David, Josiah, Job, and of that which is
the flower and Garland of all godliness, and these that are not tender in
Conscience in some measure (if any will think they have it in the perfection,
they see little in their own heart,) are deemed profane, irreligious, and men
of bold and daring Consciences; so we shall, and must yield in a question of
personal interest, that these are the only Perfectists, and tender
Consciences who are for tolleration of all religions, and are professed
Antinomians, Arrians, Arminians, Socinians, and such like. But the ^^^y shall
reveal every Man's work what it is. It cannot be denied but the more
tenderness, the more of God, and the more of Conscience; but by tenderness is
meant fear and awsomeness of sin, so no question, there is some Conscience
that is made of glass, and is easily broken, and some of iron and bra^^ lay
hell on it, let Christ say to Juda^ in his face, he shall betrary his Master,
and he has a Devil, yet his conscience does not crow before day light, to
waken him. But give no leave to contend for our righteousness, we believe we
have found a ransom, and yet we hold that tolleration of all religions is not
far from blasphemy, and therefore to any way to Monopolize the title of
tender Consciences to themselves, as a Characteristical note to difference them
from Presbyterians, and such as dare not, out of the fear of God, and
reverence to their own Conscience, in this point awing them, but judge liberty
of Conscience fleshie Liberty, in that title, seem to hold forth no tenderness
of conscience at all, except they allow us to share with them in the Name of
tender Consciences. Which name I durst no more take then to call my self a
Perfectist, or holier then my brethren, whereas its more congruous to think
and call our selves, the chief of sinners. To be bold with the Scriptures,
and to dispense with new dreams touching God, Christ and the mysteries of the
Gospel, in all heresies and blasphemies that they may be tolerated, is
boldness of conscience. 2. Pertinacie after conviction, and then to say, we
cannot come up to the rule, when the truth is, we will not come up to the rule,
is no tenderness. 3. A tender conscience fears an oath, and dare not say,
every man may swear a covenant with God in his own sense, yes, its a Jesuits
conscience. 4. To carry on a design under pretense of Religion, with lies,
breaking of oaths, treaties, promises, is a far other thing then tenderness.

2. How Antinomians, who deny that the regenerate have any conscience of sin,
or that they are to confess, or be grieved in Conscience, for Incests,
Adulteries, Murders, Rapes, Oppressions, or the like, or can crowd in under
the lap of this veil of tender Conscences, is more then the truly godly can
see.

3. To condemn all the godly in the three Kingdoms, and the Churches of New
England, as not tender Consciences, because they profess that liberty of
Conscience is Atheistical licentiousness, seems to be a harder measure then
these godly persons deserve, who out of some tenderness of Conscience dare not
but condemn liberty of sinning against the duties of this Table; and
therefore, if tolleration of all false ways entitle men to tender consciences,
because it is the opinion of same (...) men, why should not these who are also
godly and our ^^ conscience hold the contrary opinion, be also called (...)
consciences? And if this be, we shall not know who they are, who are to be
termed tender consciences, who not.

But I had rather speak a little of a scrupulous consciences; Of a scrupulous
conscience.
the Scripture says, the heart of Josiah was tender, but that, he wept at the
reading of the Law, sure it was not scrupulositie, which is always a fault and
disease of the conscience, as when the conscience doubts and fears for
triffles, where there is no grave and weighty cause. The place 1 Samuel 25. 31.
in which Abigal so speaks to David, is not to be expounded of a scrupulous,
but of a justly greived conscience. This shall be no grief unto thee, nor
offense of heart unto my Lord, either tha^ thou have sh^d blood causeless, or
that thou have avenged thy self. Heb. It shall not be staggering, or stumbling
to thy heart, for (...) is to offend, stumble, fall, to remove out of the
place. Isa. 28. 7. R^^. Abraham reads it (...) they have made others to
stumble, and (...) Nah. 2. 10. knees smite one against another: the one knee,
in affrighted men, offends the other, and makes the other to stumble or fall.
So in a trembling conscience, sin makes the conscience to go out of the way,
and fall; as one knee trembling, makes another knee in a race to fall. Abigal
disswadeth David from s^edding innocent blood, or avenging himself on Nabal,
because so to do should be no grief of conscience. Its a litote. It shall be
a feast and a rejoicing of conscience, that thou have not sinned against God.
And this is to be considered, that a greived conscience, traveling with
remorse, is (...) so far tender, that it either absteineth, if the sin be
to be committed, or it grieveth, if it be committed, and in the truly godly
fo^^citeth for reconciliation. A doubting conscience is ignorant of the thing
done or to be done, and inclimeth to neither ^^des. But a scrupulous conscience
inclines to the one side, but with doubting and a trouble of mind; as the
traveller walks, but with some pain, as if there were a little stone in his
(...). (...) Moral. l. 2. c. 20. 4 ^. Mald^rus in 12. (...). 8^. Amesius de
Conscient. The causes of a scrupulous conscience.
l. 1. c. 6.

The causes of a scrupulous consciences are 1, Gods wish and (...) permission.
2. Satan's working and acting on a cold, (...) ^ad bodily complexion. 3.
Ignorance. We^^nesse of judgments 4. Immoderates fear troubling reason. 5.
Inconstancy of the mind. 6. And withal some tenderness. Gregori^^ said,
^^narum conscientiarum est ibi culpam agnoscere, ubi culp^ non est. It is one
of the most godly errors, and a sin that smalleth of grace. Papists,
miserable comforters, say, a special way (...) be delivered, is to sub^^^ your
self to a superiors blind command. They say, a Priest was freed of his
scruple, when he obeyed Bernards bare word, and trusted in it; hearing that,
V^^ et mea fide confisus sacrifica, go and upon my faith sacrifice confidently.

It were good to use heavenly violence against scruples fantasy will cast in,
I should not pray, because God has decree^ whither I pray, or pray not, the
thing I suit, shall never be, (...) Its good to turn away the mind from
threatenings; he tempted providence, who having a weak head, will walk upon
the house top. In rovings and grinding of a ^^morous mind, unbelief will
break one link of Gods chain, and that broken must break another, and that
a third, till the says of eternal election be broken. As in a wall of four
squared stones not well cemented, loose and break out one stone, that will
break another and that other loose a third, till the whole wall must fall:
weakness can spin out thread after thread, one doubt after another, till the
poor soul be taken off the Gospel-foundation of Consolation.

CHAP. II. Conscience under Synods, and how; and, that the Conscience cannot
have absolute liberty in matters of Religion.
THE Conscience is a tender piece, and either the best friend next to the
Physician who can whole broken consciences, or the saddest enemy: if sick, it
is like an aching tooth, the more you touch it, the more it pains you. The
Conscience of its own nature, is a knowing power of the practical
understanding, a^ therefore no ilicite acts of the foul can be compelled,
nei^^er can Conscience act being muzled and forced; but this (...) but that men
and devils in their conscience (...) believe many things in some (...) against
their will (...) out of the natural efficacy of conscience cannot (...), but
^ee must believe that there is a God, yet where there is a trembling, there
must be some reluctancie in the will and affections. Juda^ must believe his
damnation was approuching, when he hanged himself, but against his heart. The
Balgick Ar^i^ia^s, who contend for liberty of conscience in all ways, Apol.
95. (...). say, By determinations of Synods violence i^ not offered to
conscience, as conscience signifies a mere internal act of the mind,
immanent or byding within the mind, but as conscience signifies an act of the
mind by which any does believe (...) obliged (...) teach others which he per
(...) himself to (...) so the man is compelled by a Synods prescription, to
dissemble what he believes he ought to profess, and which he believes to be
false.

Answ. How a Synod compels. ^.
Say that the decision of the Synod be agreeable to the word, the Lord lays
on the coaction to all; to believe and accordingly profess the truth, and that
by a Synod as Christ says, he that hears you hears me: so the coaction,
such as it is, must come principally from God; instrumentally from the Synod;
but it flows from both by accident, and through men's abuse, who receive not
the truth in love, but for fear of shame, least they should by the godly go
for perverters of souls, Act. 15. that they do hypocritically profess what
they ought sincerely to believe and profess, May we not say many men of
corrupt minds believed Circumcision to be necessary, and yet for fear of the
Apostles censure that they should be judged troublers of souls, liars and false
teachers, as they are judged to be Act. 15. 24. would dissemble? And they are
no other ways by a Synodicall truth compelled to lie and dissemble by shame
and falling out of the hearts of the Apostles and of all the godly the one way
than the other; in that case than in this (...). For there be but two ways of
working on the mind to drive men to be of another opinion, one by fear either
of shame, reproach or censures civil or ecclesiastical, another by mere
teaching and instructing.

Now for the liberty of prophesying that Arminia^s require, and so the
liberty of Synods, Remons^. Apo. c. 25. sect. 2.
let us inquire if it be true liberty.

1. They require a full liberty to every man without scruple or fear of
danger, The conditions that Libertines require to be in a Synod.
to declare his mind in Synods, and to examine what is controverted.

Answ. It is in some respect commendable that heretics be candid and ingenuous
to declare, even, what their heretical judgment and indictment of conscience
leads them to believe, but a full liberty to question, in the Synod, whether
there be a God, or no, or whether Christ dyed for sinners, ought not to be,
Liberty to question every thing is license.
for that is lycense, and heretical lycense: a point controverted any may
question: and these, that Act. 15. held necessity of circumcision, might seek
resolution of their arguments and doubts, but under pretext of liberty free of
fear and danger, they have not liberty to sin; that is, after they are or
may be, (if wilfulness stood not in their way) inwardly convinced, they have
not liberty obstinately to press sophismes against the truth, for this is an
undeniable principle, liberty to sin is fleshly lycense not liberty.

Armin. Remonst. Apo. c. 1. fol. 41.
In controversies of Religion which the Scripture does not evidently decide,
what can certainly be determined by the Church, which ever, and in every thing
which it determines, is believed may err?

Answ. The Church though not infallible may determine infallible points.
There is nothing that the Scripture has left simple, and in it self
controversall. Act^^ primo the Scripture has determined of all things
contained in it, whether fundamentals or not fundamentals; only in regard of
our dullness and sinful blindness some things are controverted, and therefore
the Church may determine from light of the word some thing that was a
controversy to the Fathers ignorant of the original tongues which is now no
controversy. Yea the fallible Church may determine infallible points. This is
a principle that Libertines proceed upon, that men who are not infallible may
err, and therefore can hold forth to others no infallible truth. Which is most
false, for Prophets and Apostles, Nathan, Samuel, David, Peter being deserted
of the immediately inspiring Spirit did err as well as the Church and Pastors
now deserted of the ordinary Spins can and do err. For ^^ll men, Prophets and
Apostles are (...) Romans 3. yet they may and do carry infallible truth to
others (...) blind man may hold a candle to others. 3. By this reason Pastors
can preach nothing certain in fundamentals, Apol. in Pref. et in declar. in
Pref.
though faith come by hearing, and faith is of a certain and determinate fixed
truth of God, A Confession, Covenant or Synodicall de (...) a secondarie rule
of faith.
more permanent than heaven or earth; why, because by this reason Pastors in
preaching fundamentals are not infallible. 4. Nor is this a good reason, it is
believed the Church may err in Synods, ergo, it does err and determines
nothing that is infallible and certain in Synods; no more then this is a good
consequence, David may sin in praying, ergo, he does sin in praying: a
potentia ad actum non valet consequentia.

Armin. A confession is not a rule of faith it has not the lowest place in the
Church.

Answ. The Covenant written and sealed in Nehemiahs time was a secondarie rule
of faith, and a rule e'n so far as it agreed with the Law of Moses, for they
enter in a curse and an oath to walk in Gods Law, not to give their sons and
daughters in marriage to the Heathen, not to buy victuals from the Heathen on
the Sabbath, to charge themselves to give money to maintain the service of God.
Nehe. 9. 38. chap. 10. 1, 2, 3. 29, 30. 31, 32. Which written Covenant was not
Scripture; and Act. 15. the decrees of the Synod was not formally Scripture,
yet to be observed as a secondary rule. For so far Arminians

A Doctor as a Doctor believes not, Remonstr. in vindic. l. 2. c. 6. fol. 126.
a Doctor believes as a sheep, not as a shepherd, and his judgment of
matters of faith is not public but private and common to teachers with every
one of the sheep: and there is a like and equal power in shepherd and every
one of the flock of believing; Note.
and the sheep in matters of faith are no more obleiged to stand to the
judgment of the shepherd than the teachers to the judgment of the sheep; the
teachers have a privilege of order and honor above the sheep, but no
privilege of Law and power. Ibid 133.
Then the Church though she believe and certainly know, that she erreth not in
her decisions, yea though it fall out she err not, yet ought not to take power
to her self to command others to believe that to be true which she believes, A
ministerial and public, and a Christian and private judgment and faith, and
how they differ
or to impose silence upon others, who, cannot in conscience acquiesce to what
they command.

Answ. There is something true in this; there is a twofold judgment, one
saving, and Christian common to all by which both shepherd and sheep believe;
and its true of this, that the sheep are no more to stand to the judgment of
shepherds, th^^ the shepherds to the judgment of the sheep in point of
Christian believing, which (sure) is common to both shepherd and sheep: for
the alone authority of God speaking in his word. And so the Doctor believes
not as a Doctor but as a Christian. But secondly, there is another judgment
that is ministerial, official, and authoritative, and this is terminated not
on Christian believing, but supposes a ministerial believing; that what the
shepherd teaches others God revealed to him first, and is put forth in a
ministerial and official judging either in Synods, or in public Pastoral
Sermons and authoritative, but ministerial publishing the will and mind of
Christ. Mal. 2. 7. They shall seek the Law from his mouth. Heb. 13. 7. 17.
That way the people depends upon the Ministerial judgment of Synods and
Pastors: but its most false that Pastors depends on their Ministerial
judgment who are sheep, and that there is a like and equal power in
shepherds and sheep, and its false, that though the Church believes she erres
not, and does not err, yet the Church may not command and in Synods
Ministerially and with all authority rebuke, such a pervert souls. Act. 15.
22. And that Doctors may not as the Heralds and Ministers of Christ rebuke men
sharply (...) that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1. 12. For Pastors and
Synods teach fundamentals of faith ministerially to the people, and by hearing
of them is faith begotten in the hearers, and they may command, exhort, rebuke
with all long suffering, 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 14. stop their mouths,
Tit. 1. 11. and authoritatively enjoyne them silence. Act. 15. 22, 23, 24, 25.
Act. 6. 4. Though they cannot by reason of an erroneous conscience or a
conscience burnt with an hot iron acquiesce to the determination of a Synod;
Yea though they be unruly, vain talkers and deceivers, they must be commanded
to be silent. Nor must the Church and Angels of the Church of Thyatira,
Ephesus, or Pergamus suffer Jezabell to seduce, not ^avening wolves to devour
the flock, nor their word to eat as a Ca^ker; For this judgment authoritative
as it is in the head of the Church (Christ) as in the fountain and only
Lawgiver, so it is Ministerially only and by way of office in the Elders, as
the will and mind of the King is in the inferior Judge, the Ambassador or
Herald, not in the people. And the people are obleiged to obey those that are
over them in the Lord, who watch for their souls, as those who must give an
account. But there is no ground to say the shepherds are obleiged to stand to
and obey the ministerial and official judgment of the people: and of this it
is said, he that hears you (Ministers of the Gospel, not the people) hears
me, he that dispiseth you dispiseth me. And this is more then a privilege of
order and honor, which one Christian has above another in regard of eminency
of graces, gifts, and of wisdom, experience, and age, it is a privilege of
office to speak in the name of the Lord, and yet it is inferior to a
privilege of law, because the Lord only imposes laws upon the Conscience,
for it is a middle judgment less then Legislative, Supreme and absolute over
the Conscience, this is in none save only in the King and head of the Church,
and is Royal and Princely; Yet is it more (I say not more excellent, it not
being saving of it self as in believers) than a privilege of mere honor and
order, for though it lay no more bands on the Conscience to obtain faith
because it is holden forth by men, it having no influence on the Conscience
because of men, whose word is not the formal object of faith, yet has it an
official authority from Pastors (which is not merely titularie) so as they
may ministerially and officially command obedience to their judgment as far as
it agrees with the mind of Christ, no farther: and when it is disobeyed may
inflict censures, which private Christians cannot do, and puts these who
disobey under another guiltiness, then if private Christians did speak the
same word, to wit not only in a case of disobedience to the second command,
but in a state of disobedience to the fifth command formally, as not honoring
father and mother where as to disobey that same word by way of Counsel in the
mouth of a brother, though it be the breach of the fifth command also, Yet not
in such a manner as when we refuse to hear the messenger of the Lord of
Hoasts; and his judgment as a messenger of God is public and binds as
public to highest obedience to the fifth command, but as it is a judgment of
faith common to the Doctor with other Christians, it binds as the mind of God
holding faith in the second Commandment what we are to believe.

Armmians. The word of God is sufficient for the deciding of controversies,
Remov. 16.
its clear, what need it there of decision, if men acquiesce to the decision
of God as it lies in Scripture -- if the word of God express the sense of God,
or if it have need of interpretation why is there not a free interpretation
left to every man^^ do we think that our words are clearer than the word of
God, we do a ^^nithic injury to the word of God, if we believe that. How much
better were it, if we would nourish peace and concord leaving interpretations
free to every man? (...)
It is most sure to contain our selves within the speaking of the holy
Scripture, and the form of words of the holy Ghost, and that no man be
troubled who shows himself willing to contain himself within these.

Answ. Here is a mere fluctuation and Septicism even in fundamentals and the
faith of them, for all interpretation of Scripture is rejected, there is no
destinction in fundamentals or no fundamentals, for in principles of faith,
that Christ is God and man, and dyed for sinners, the Scripture is most plain,
and what need then of our interpretation? (...)
then let Arrians and Secinnians believe him to be God man and to die for
sinners in their sense, the Familists in a contrary sense, the Georgians in
another contrary sense, the Papists in a third, the Protestants in a fourth,
and so as many heads, as many faiths, every sect, and man must have some sense,
else his faith is nonsense, and if he err from the sense of the Holy Ghost,
the Scripture is no Scripture, if it be believed in a sense contrary to the
Scripture to him who so believes; and so his faith is no faith, but a vain
night-phancie, and seeing the word of God gives us but one faith, and one
truth, and one Gospel, if interpretations be left free to every man, these
Libertines gives us millions of faiths with millions of senses, and so no faith
at all.

Secondly, They give us two decisions, one made by God, and another by the
Church contrary to Gods, that has no rule but every man's private judgment and
free phancie, as if the decision of controversies made by the Church in Synods
which we suppose is not divided from that of Gods, were some other thing then
the decision of the Holy Ghost speaking in the word and declared by the Church
in a ministerial way, and if it be any other than this, it is not to be
received, nor a lawful decision ministerial of a Synod, but to be rejected.

Thirdly, if there be no need of a decision to expone the word, because the
word is clear, and if we wrong the word of God if we think our words are
clearer that Gods, it is true, if we had eyes to see and apprehend the mind of
God in his word, without an interpretation, then all ministry and proaching
of the Gospel is cried down by this, what have any to do to expone the first
principles of the Oracles of God to the Hebrews c. 5 ^ or what need they teach,
exhort, preach in season and out of season? What needs the Eunuch a teacher,
or Cornolius Peter, or Saul Ananias to teach them? had they not the Scriptures?
if Timothy, the preachers that speak the word of the Lord to the Hebrews,
Philip, Peter, Ananias think their words clearer than the word of God, they do
a great injury to the word of God; or if they believed their words were
clearer than the words of Esaiah and the Prophets; and they did that which was
not necessary, if they opened and expounded the Prophets and decided
controversies; for they should have acquiesced to the decision of God as it
lies in the Scripture, and not have preached but read the Prophets, and left
it free to the hearers to put on the words of Scripture, what interpretation
and sense they thought best.

Fourthly, That no Confessions ought to be but in express words of Scripture,
That Confessions ought to be only in express Scriture words is another false
principle of Libertines.
shall free all one and consequently all Churches from obedience to that which
Peter commands. 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with ^^eeknesse and fear.
When Stephen Acts 7. and Paul Acts 26. were accused of heresy and speaking
against Moses and the semple, they made a confession of their faith not in
words of Scripture, but in deductions and necessary consequences drawn from
Scripture and applied to themselves, and these in Nehemiahs time who wrote and
sealed or subscrubed a Covenant, did not write and seal the express Decalogne
and ten Commandments, (...) the words of the Covenant of Grace. I will be thy
God and the God of thy seed, but entered into a curse and into an Oath to walk
in Gods Law which was given by Moses the servant of God and to observe and to
do all the Commandments of the Lord our God and his judgments and his
statutes and that (say they) we would not give our daughters to the people of
the Land, nor take their daughters for our sons, and if the people of the Land
bring ware or victuals on the Sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of
them. and Nehemiah c. 10. v. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. etc. compared with Nehe.
c. 9. v. 38. Which words are not a confession nor Covenant in express
Scripture, save that they are historically insetted in the Cannon of the
Scripture by the Holy Ghost. In which sense the law and decree of
Nebuchadnezzar Daniel 6. And of other heathen Kings as Daniell 3. 29. 30. Ezra.
1. 2, 3. c. 7. 11, 12, 13, 14. etc. Are Scriptures; but they are not the
express words of the Law, for there is nothing in the express Law touching
the Sabbath, of not buying ware and victual from the heathen of the land that
Nehemiah speaks of, which warranteth us to enter in the like Covenant, and
make the like Confession of faith to defend and stand to the Protestant
Religion, and that Christ was God and man, and man in one person, and that we
shall not buy ware or victuals from the Anabaptist and Familists of England who
trample on the Sabbath day though these be not express words of Scripture. It
is true, Libertines say men have made Apologies and confessions of faith for
their own defense as Steven and Paul but they enjoined not these by authority
and command as a rule of faith upon others, and wrote them not as a fixed
standard of the faith of others, and that warrants no Church to impose a faith
upon others.

Answ. 1. This will prove that as one man accused of heresy may publish a
confession of his faith which may clear his innocence and the soundness of
his faith to others and remove the scandal according to that of 1 Pet. 3. 15.
And by the same reason, Independents, Libertines, Familists, Antinomians,
Anabaptists and all the Sects of England, upon the same ground that the
Albigenses went upon, should by some Confession and Covenant give an account of
their faith and hope with meekness and fear. And what particular persons are
obleiged to do that Churches when they are slandered as unsound in the faith
are obliged to do: and so I look at a form or confession of faith as a
necessary Apology for clearing of the good name of a Church defamed with
Heresies, and new sects, but for the imposing of this Confession upon others,
these others are either Neighbour-Churches, or their own Members.

As concerning neighbour-Churches they have no Authority over them. Yet may
they declare that Familists who say Christ is not come in the flesh are the
Spirit of the Antichrist, and for these, of their own Church, if they go out
from them and separate to an Antichristian side, after the example of the
Apostles and Elders they may command them to abstain from such and such
heretical opinions, and after they have convicted them as perverters of souls,
proceed to excommunication against them as refusers to consent to the form of
wholesome words: as may be prooved from Math. 18. 15, 16, 17. etc. Romans 16. 17,
1 These. 2. 13, 14, 15. And other Scriptures as Reve. 2. 1, 2, 3. v. 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Now that it is not sufficient that they be put to subscribe
a confession of faith in only scripture words is clear, 1. because the Jews
will swear and seal the old Testament in their own sense, but their sense
makes the old Testament to be the word of man, not the word of God. The
Sadduces acknowledged the five books of Moses to be the word of God, yet
because they denied the resurrection of the dead, Christ argues them Math. 22.
45. Ignorant both of the power of God asserted in the books of Moses and of the
scriptures, especially of that scripture which God spoke out of the bush to
Moses; I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, etc. Exodus 3. 6. Yet would
the Sadduces have sworn and subscribed all the book of Exodus as the undoubted
word of God, but when they denied the resurrection, sure these words I am the
God of Abraham etc. making the Covenant of grace to dye when Abraham dyed, and
Abraham to have perished in soul and body as they expounded it, was not the
word of God, and Papists will subscribe the old and new Testament and the three
Creeds, the Nicene Creed, the Creed of Athanasius, and that which commonly is
called the Apostles Creed. Yet as they expound the word and these Creeds, we
say they transform the word of God into the doctrine of devils and most
abominable Idolatry, The greatest heretics that were, Arrius, Nestorius,
Appolliuaris, Macedonius, the Treithite acknowledge the scripture to be the
word of God, and will swear and subscribe the word of God and contain
themselves intra sacra scripturae l^cutiones, within the words of scripure. But
their faith is not the says of the scripture, and this makes ten thousand and
millions of faiths where as the word faith there is but one faith. For Arrius
has one faith, Apollin^ris another, Nestorius another, and every heretic a
faith according to the sense that he fallely puts on the scripture, and all may
swear one Confession of says in Scripture-words.

Arminians say, Roman. Vindi. l. 2. c. 6. 135. 13.
no man after he has received a decree of a Synod is longer obliged to it,
nor upon any other condition, but in so far and so long as he judges in his
conscience that it is true. (...) post quam acceptavit decretum, (...) illo
^^^tius quam ea lege, quatenis and quamdia (...) in (...) indicat ill
deff^^^rum.


Answ. This is mere Scepticisme, and to make the conscience whether erroneous,
or not erroneous to be a bible and a rule of faith. For though the erroneous
conscience say, it is service to God to kill the innocent Apostles John 16. 1.
Yet the sixth commandment lies upon these murderers with equal strength, thou
shall not kill, otherwise they are nor guilty of murder. For if a Synod decree
to kill Peter and John, because they preach that the Son of Mary is the
Messiah, is bloody persecution: Then so soon as Scribes and Pharisees in their
erroneous conscience (for Libertimes make exceptions of no consciences, an
erroneous more than another, nor erring in fundamentals more than of another)
shall judge it service to God to kill the Apostles they are loosed from the
sixth commandment and no longer obliged to this (thou shall not murder.) So
the author of the tractate called Armini. Ancient bonds of Liberty of
Conscience. (...) Apol c. 25. 291.
Where men's scope is any way to remove controversies, there is there no care or
little at all of the truth of God, and where the external peace of the
Commonwealth is heeded precisely, there peace of conscience is of none or of
little value, the truth is not there persuaded, but crushed.

Ans. The end of Synods is not to remove heresy, by any means good or bad
(...) to civil heresy so effectually as these heresies shall never be heard of
in the world again.
The learned and renowned professors of Leiden answer the end of Synods is not
by any means good or bad to remove controversies but to bury them by the power
of the word. 2. Only external peace separated from truth should not be
intended, but conjoined with truth and peace of conscience. 3. The end of
Synods is not effectually and actu secundo to silence heretics and gainsayers
of the truth, nor is it Christ's scope in convincing the Sadduces that the dead
must rise Math. 22. to persuade the truth, so as there shall never be on earth
Sadducie again who denies the resurrection, for in Paul's and in the Apostles
time the Sadducies still denied the resurrection, after the Synod of Jerusalem
Acts 15. There arose many that said we must keep the Law of Ceremonies, but the
end of Synods is to do what may actu prime, remoove controversies and silence
Heretics by clearing scripture, and truth, but the end is not to remove
obstinacy that is not the scope of Synods nor of preaching, nor of the
scriptures, but of all these are in the event as God blesses them and
concurreth with them: the end of Synods is not to oppress or deprive
ministers, the end of despised and obstinately refused truth is such.

Armini. Remon. c. 25. Apol. 294.
Synods should not aim at setting up their own authority which in matters of
faith is none at all, such decisions are the heart of Popery, and makes all
religion without Synods to be uncertain.

Ans. The necessity of Synods.
Synods should take care that no man despise their Authority, as Timothy is
exhorted by Paul but their Authority in matters of faith is conditional, and
so not null. 2. Synods are necessary ad been esse, not absolutely, for many are
saved, both persecuted Churches, and believers who never had help of Synods to
clear their faith. 3. But none more contend then Libertines do for a faith as
uncertain as the weather which may change with every new moon. The same also
may be said of preaching and a ministry which the Lord Jesus ascending on
high gave for the edifying his body the Church, that religion is uncertain
without it. For Pastors in public should convince gainsayers and so remove
heresies. Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. 1. Tim. 6. 3, 4 as well as Synods, and Libertines
in their conscience know Protestant Synods Lord over the faith of none as if
they took to themselves in fallibilitie as Popish Synods do.

Armini. Pastors subject the disobedient to wrath yet are not lords over the
conscience, ergo neither are Synods lords over the conscience for that.
Since Synods may err, how then place they religion in security?

Ans. No otherwise then Doctors and Pastors do place religion in security, by
teaching truth and refuting errors and yet they may err.

Obj. But Pastors oblidge not men to receive what they say, under pain of
Censures, as Synods do.

Answ. Under pain of divine if not Ecclesiastical punishment, and the one is
that way as binding to the conscience as the other, yea more, for it is a
greater obligation for Pastors to subject men to divine wrath, if they receive
not what they preach, then for Synods to bind them only to Ecclesiastical
censurers and yet none can say that Pastors exercise tyranny over the
conscience: for the former, Ergo neither can Synods justly he deemed Lords over
the conscience for the latter.

Armin. fol. 2^5.
Very often fewer, and provincial Synods do (...) mine more soundly then many
and Occuminical Synods.

Answ. That is by accident; one Machaiah saw more that four hundred prophets
of Baal. But this objection is against the saftie that is in a multitude of
counselors and in the exc^llencie of two convened in the name of Christ above
one.

Armin. Decision of Synods cannot oblidge men while they know that the decision
was rightly made, it is not enough to oblidge any to consent that that which is
decided be true and agreeable to the word of God, of necessity every man's
private judgment must go before, Error of conscience (...) from ^^igation of
obedience.
otherwise its an implicit faith.

Answ. That any man should duly, and as he ought believe, and receive the
decision of a Synod, it must be both true, and (...) must believe and know that
it is true, but that it may oblidge him and does oblidge him, whether his
conscience be erroneous or no, is as true, for then this Commandment ( Thou
shall not kill) (Honor thy father and thy mother) should lay no (...) on a man
that believes it is service to God to kill the Apost^^, as Joh. 16. some do.
For no man is exempted from an obligation to obey Gods Law, because of his own
sinful and culpable ignorance, for we speak not now of invincible ignorance of
these things which we are not oblidged to know or believe. But if our sinful
and erroneous conscience free us from actual obligation to be tied by a Law,
then our erroneous conscience freeth us from sinning against a Law, and ^o from
punishment, for what ever freeth a man from actual obligation freeth him also
from actual sinning, for all sin is a doing against a Law-obligation, and if
so, then are none to be led by any rule but their own conscience, the written
Law and Gospel is not henceforth our rule any more.

Arminiars. Apo. 25. f. 226.
The last condition of a Synod is, that the subject of a Synodical decision be
ever left to a free examination, and to a farther free discussion and revise.
The learned professors of Leyden answer that which is once true and fixed in
the word of God, is ever true and fixed in the word of God. The Arminians
reply, what is true and fixed in the word of God is ^ver so, and ought to
remain so, for the word is beyond all danger of erring. But what is believed
to be fixed and fixed and Ratified in a Synod is not so, because it is
obnoxious to error.

Answ. They require that before we come to a Synod where fundamental truths
are Synodically determined, The subject of a Synod not a Sceptick conjecturall
truth as Libertines suppose.
we be as a razed table and as clean paper in which no thing is written, and
so must we be after a Synod has determined according to the word of God, that
is be still Scepticks and believe nothing fixedly, and be rooted in no faith,
nay not in the faith of the fundamentals that are most clear in the word of
God; for it is unpossible that we can believe the clearest fundamentals, as
that God created the world, and Christ God-Man redeemed it, but we must believe
them by the intervening and intermediation of ^ur own sense or the Churches
sense; or the sense of some Godly Doctor; The sense of Scripture from Synods
believed truly to be infallible, though Synods consist of men who are not
infallible, as an earthen pitcher does contain gold and precious Rubies and
Saphires in it, though there be no gold in the matter of the pitcher but only
clay. 2. Cor. 4. 7.
now because all these senses are fallible, and we see Familists put one sense
on fundamentals, Papists another sense, and all private men may do the like,
it is not possible that any man can be rooted in any faith at all by this way,
for all senses are fallible, and though the scripture gives clear and evident
senses yet such is the Heretical dullness of men, that reject these infallible
senses as false; and those others that by their own confession are fallible and
so can neither be established by the word, nor by the interpretations of men,
though senses of Scripture rendered by Synods be fallible in the way they come
to us, because men delivering them may err, yet being agreeable to the word,
they are in themselves infallible. And so the old and new Testament in the way
they come to us may be fallible, because Printers are not prophets but may
miscarry and dream; but it follows not they are not the infallible word of
life in themselves, when the Spirit witnesses to us that God, divinity,
transforming glory are in these books: as a spouse knows the hand-writstill,
loveliness of a letter from her husband to be certainly no counterfeit but
true, though the bearer be a rogue and can deceive.

Secondly, this answer still supposes that Synods do give senses contrary to
the word of God, and so we grant they are not only fallible but false and
erroneous; and are to be examined of new again in that case; but we hold, when
lawful Synods convened in the name of Christ do determine according to the
word of God they are to be heard as Ambassadors who in Christ's stead teach us,
and what is once true and ratified in Synods in this manner is ever true and
ratified as the reverend professors say and never subject to any further
examination, and new discussion, How a true decision of a Synod is ever the
same and not retractable.
so as it must be changed and retracted as false. For this is to subject the
very word of God to retractation and change, because a Synod did declare and
truly determine it in a Ministerial way to be the word of God. For what
Synods determine being the undeniable word of God i^ intrinsecally infallible,
and can never become fallible, though fallible and sinful men that are
obnoxious to error and mistakes do hold it forth Ministerially to others: and
it is false that we are to believe that what Synods determine according to the
word of God, we are to believe it is fallible and liable to error, and may an
untruth, because they so determine, for then when a Synod determines, there is
but one true God, the principle of faith is believed to be subject to
Retraction and falsehood, because a Synod has determined it to be a truth. But
the truth is we are to believe truths determined by Synods to be infallible,
and never again liable to retractation or discussion, because they are and
were in themselves and without any Synodicall determination infallible, but not
for this formal medium, because, so says the Synod, but because so says the
Lord, It is true, new heretics pretending new light may arise as Math. 24. 24.
And call in question all Fundamentalls that are determined that are cleared in
former Synods, but it follows not but these truths are still in themselves
fixed and unmovable as the Pole Star, though evil men bring them under a new
Synodicall examination as Familists do now raze the foundations of
Christianity, yet Daniel and Christ are Innocent though wicked men accuse them
judicially as deceivers: nor is it enough that Libertines say it may be the
word of God and the infallible word of God which the Synod determines, but it
is not so to us, we are to believe it with a reserve, because we cannot know it
so to be.

But I answer this concludes not only against a Synodicall determination, but
against all Scripture, and all Prophetical and Apostolical determinations in
the Scripture, for that there is one God not three as the Treithits dream, is
believed by some to be false, by others to be true. Yet undenyably it is in it
self, true that there is but one God, nor is it therefore to be believed with a
reserve, because the Synod has so determined according to the word of God: and
this were some answer if we should teach that men should believe, because so
says a Synod. But all the mystery is, though a Synod should determine a truth
an hundred times according to the word, yet if the conscience say it is no
truth, the determination of a Synod does not obliedge at all (say Libertines)
because the conscience according to the mind of Libertines is the nearest
obleidging rule, but any thing obleidgeth not to obedience and faith as it
appears either true or good to our conscience, for to kill the Apostles appears
lawful, to commit adultery and murder appears good to many, yet are not
men obleidged to kill the Apostles, or to commit adultery.

Armini. Remon.
If a thing be determined out of the word of God by a Synod, then was that
thing before determined in the word of God, and yet that must be examined in a
Synod which is supposed to be decyded in the word, what need is there of a
Synodicall examination of that which is supposed to be liable to no error, for
so must the word of God be examined.

Answ. Though all truths be peremptorily decyded in the word, yet is there need
of a Ministerial and declarative decision of men, because teachers may
deceive, and these that are taught are ignorant and dull.
What the Bereans heard the Apostle Paul preach Act. 17. 11, 12. was the very
Gospel determined in the Scriptures of the Prophets, what then needed they try
the Gospel or examine what is infallible in private among themselves more then
in public Synods? this argument is against the Apostles rule, Try all things,
and try the Spirits whether they be of God or not, for sure these rules
warranted them to examine Paul, Peter and John's doctrine and Spirits and
finding them to be truths decyded in the word to receive them, therefore after
there is a Scripturall decision it does not follow that there should not be a
Declarative or Ministerial decision by Synods and by pastors preaching the
Gospel. For this does close subvert all Ministry and Preaching, and all trying
of the Spirits, nor is it hence concluded that we examine the word of God, as
if it could be false, but that we are both in private and in public to
examine and try whether that which is proposed to us as the word of God be the
word of God or no: But we examine and suspect the credit of men, who may and
can lie.

Secondly, but this supposes that what ever is brought under a Synodicall
discussion is false or at least fallible, which is a most false principle of
Libertines, and that nothing which is the word of God should fall under a
Synodicall discussion, to be tried which is true: thus far the word of God as
it is the word of God is not to be tried, nor determined but in reference to
messengers who are but sinful men and can deceive, and to our dullness and
sinful ignorance, Anabaptist: dim^ed interpretation of Scriptures as (...)
there is need that a Ministry and Synods help us with declarative and
misteriall declarations until we be where they shall not need a Temple. And
what Libertines say, the same said Anabaptists, so Bu^^inger says Anabaptists
taught that the Evangelist should be recited without words casting it (that is
without preaching) and that every man was free to interpret the Scripture as he
will, and that the interpretation of Scripture is not the word of God. (...).
Anabaptist. l 3. c. 11. Da^^aut Anabaptistis Scripturiram ^^terpretati^rem,
recitari evangelium debere (...), verbi a (...), ut cuique liberium sit prosuo
Spritu hoc est prosua voluntate and ^^^dine interpreta^i. (...) non esse verbum
Dei. (...).
So that the peoples conscience and private sense is their Scripture and rule
of faith; we need not then Scripture, every man's sense is his Rule, which yet
is not so good divinity as the heathen Melytus accused Socrates of, and thought
Socrates was worthy to die, for that such as the people believes to be gods,
he believes to be nothing such, but thinks there be some new Dieties: and
was it a crime that Socrates thought the peoples lust was no good rule in
divinity?

Armini. All should be admitted to Synods because Religion concerns the
Conscience of all, or if it be confusion to admit all to come, yet should no
decision be, except first all the Church be acquainted with the business.

Answ. God never appointed all and every one to lay burdene and Directories or
Laws upon themselves as is clear Act. 15. God keeps ever that order in his
Church of some to teach and some to be taught, of some to obey and some to be
over others in the Lord: that before Laws be made that concern the
conscience, there should be a reference of all made to the people, and they
acquainted with reasons from the word of God before a decision: we shall not
condemn, but it is nothing against us.

Armini. (...) 7.
These that come to Synods ought to be engaged to be Church, or to no
Confession. But every way free.

Answ. Men are to come to Synods not as Nullifidians but as engaged for truth.
Then such as convened in a Synod in the Church of Pergamus and Thyatira should
not be principled in the faith of Christ and his truth against the deeds of the
Nicolaitanes, with whom fornication went for a thing indifferent, or against
such as hold the doctrine of Balaam or Jezabel, they must all come as
indifferent to absolve as to condemn the Nicholaitanes, and the false
Prophetess Jezabel. But Paul and Barnabus came to the Council of Jerusalem as
Members thereof, being fore engaged to condemn Circumcision as not necessary to
salvation, and had preached against such a necessity and yet were not biased
Voters in the Assembly and by this reason if Fundamentals be to be established
in a Synod, and the contrary errors to be refuted, when Doctors come to a
Synod they must leave faith and soundness of faith at home, and come to the
Synod with purpose to buy and bargain there for a new faith. And let all men
come thither as Scepticks and Nullifidians, and go so also away believing with
a reserve, that that the Synod has determined, may be a lie. But as Arminians
take true liberty of freewill to be an absolute power to do ill or well,
stand or fall eternally, so they judge that Liberty of prophesying is a
Liberty to teach, and believe Indifferently either lies or truth, heresies or
sound doctrine, whereas liberty to do ill in any sense is licentiousness,
not liberty.

Armini. The question is not, whether a man when he judges right can err, for
who can affirm that but whither either a man or a Church who judges rightly
according to the word of God, have any law or power to command and enjoin
others to receive and believe, Synods may impose upon others and how.
what they have rightly Judged, and that without controversy, for no man is
obleidged to receive and believe a truth, which a Synod unanimously or for the
most part, has truly judged, because the Synod has so judged, or says so.

Answ. But Libertines make such a question, for they affirm that a Synod does
never judge so rightly, but we must believe what they judge with a reserve, and
so that what they determine is false, or may the next day be false.

Secondly, we conceive that God has given to some one single Pastor, and
far more to a Synod of Pastors and Doctors a power to rebuke, teach, exhort
with all authority 2. Tim. 41. 2. To charge Tit. 2. 14. them before the Lord.
1. Tim. 6. 17. to lay on burdens and decrees Act. 15. 28. c. 16. 1. And that
all that hear them believe and receive as true what they speak in the Name of
the Lord, according to that, he th^^ hears you hears me; he that despises
you, despises me. (...) that will not hear an Ambassador as an Ambassador
speaking from his Master and Prince, refuses to hear the Prince that (...)
him, yet we say not that they are to be heard without controversy as they
object, that is, peremptorily, absolutely as if their word were the very Oracle
of God, but they are to be heard, but not but after trying and searching, and
not but conditionally in so far as they carry the mind of God along with
them, so that there may be an appeal to the Scripture; and place left for
examining and trying of their doctrine whether it be so or not.

Another Libertine says, Ancient Bonds or Liberty of Conscience stated. c. 10.
it is in vain said, Try all things, of a Synod may impose: for either the
trial relates to a particular judgment to be made, and that judgment to a
practice to be confirmed, or not, if not, as good not try, if I try only for
trials sake, Sect. 3. p. 74. 45.
and if when I have tried, I am but where I was, to will, I must be concluded
by others vote and imposition; if yea, then to what purpose is the imposition?
The conditional imposing of Synods consists well with trying of all things
what Libertines say on the contrary is naught.
for if I approve it, the imposition is needless, if I reject it is fruitless.

Answ. 1. There is no doubt, but trying all things 1 Thessalonians. 5. relates to
judgment and practice, nor is it more against the Ministerial and
conditional imposition of a Synod, to you to try, then it is against the
imposition and commanding power of the Prophets, Jeremiah, or others, or the
Apostles, Paul Act 17. or John. 1 John 4. 1. For Prophets and Apostles impose
Scripture as Paul did Act. 17. on the Bereans; but conditionally after they
find it agreeable to the Scripture, and the Prophets and Apostles, conclude by
their vote and sentence, yet better you try as not try. For this argument is
more against the Bereans trying of Paul who had Apostolic power to impose and
place the poor Bereans in the place they were in before they tried, and so as
good the Bereans not try Paul's doctrine, as try it; for they are concluded by
Paul's vote, if they miscarry in their trying and find, though mistakingly and
ignorantly (as this Gamali^l argues) that Paul's doctrine is contrary to the
Scriptures, are they not concluded under unbelief in refusing the Gospel and in
stumbling at the stone laid on Sion? sure they are. 2. If you approve Paul's
doctrine, the imposition, or peremptory command of Paul to receive it, else he
will shake the dust off his feet against you and leave death at your door, the
imposition is not needless, but the commanding power in the Ambassador of
Christ, be they one as a single pastor, or many, as a Synod, is not needless
but useful and fruitful, and is the power of God and the savor of life in it
self. Should an ignorant man say the Commanding Ministerial power of the
Gospel which says, except ye believe ye shall die in your sins, needless?
when it brings forth fruit. Suppose Paul say to Elimas (as in effect he did)
if thou will not believe, and cease to pervert others from believing, I will
smite thee with blindness. If this imposing had wrought faith in Elimas, as by
the grace of God it might, had this imposing been needless the man might as
well say: because this tree brings forth fruit being dug and branched, and
pruned, therefore digging was needless. But he supposes vainly that imposing
and commands issuing from Synods under penalties and censures are contrary to
trying all things, because imposing concludes men under censures, though they
try the decrees of Synods to be unjust, but the imposing of Synods is
conditional, not absolute as Libertines suppose, for after Synods impose, if
believers after trying and due examining, shall find that truly and really
the decrees are beside or contrary to the word of truth, the imposing neither
is a just Imposing, not any imposing at all. For neither Prophet, nor Apostle,
nor Angel from heaven, nor Church can lay commands upon men imposing or binding
under pain of censures to that which is unsound and false or unjust or wicked:
and if people shall find their decrees truly to be so after trial they have
power to reject them. And 3. the last part of the Argument if I reject the
imposing command of a Synod, It is fruitless, is a poor one like the wit of
the Author. For if I reject these imposing commands, when just and lawful
they are fruitless to me, and the favor of death as the despised Gospel is:
But not simply fruitless on Gods part, is the argument supposes, except the
Author with Arminians dream that God intends obedience in all lawful
Ordinances, but he comes short of his end in the Reprobate. But Ordinances are
not fruitless to God, for they prosper ever in the errand they are sent for
Esaias. 55. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 16. 17. If they render men unexcusable, they are not
fruitless, for they clear the Justice of God.

2. (...).
They that have Right ( says the Author) and power of imposing, are Lords of
my faith, but so are not any men, the Apostles themselves assumed it not; for
by faith ye stand. Take away a Christians Judicious faith, and you take away
his legs, his standing under him.

Answ. (...)
So do all the ignorant and heady Libertines in England argue, but not one of
them had a head ever to prove this consequence. For the Apostles had
Ministerial right to impose and command in the name of the Lord under pain of
censures, yet are not either Prophets or Apostles lords of men's faith, but
Ministers and mere servants: it is just as if you would say such a Justice of
peace imposes, that is commands you obey such laws under penalties, ergo
this justice of peace takes on him to be Sovereign Prince and King over these
whom he thus imposingly commands. 2. This imposing takes not away judicious
believing, all is a beggarly suiting of the question. If imposing were a
commanding that we receive absolutely what they say, be it good, or ill,
without examining the argument were concludent as God himself requires Abraham
to kill his son, Abraham was without examination to give absolute obedience,
and this proves God to be Lord of the conscience, for knowing his word to be
his word we are not to examine it by the Scripture or Law of nature, because
if we know who speaks, we are not to examine what is spoken. But though we know
who speaks among Creatures, be it a Prophet, an Apostle, an Angel, yet must we
examine both who speaks and what is spoken. 3. In vain (says he) did the
Bereans try the Apostles doctrine, and unduelie were they commended, if that
doctrine were imposed upon them.

Answer. It follows only in vain did the Bereans try Paul's doctrine, if Paul
took Gods room and commanded the Bereans to receive his Gospel hand over
head, whether it was agreeable to the Scriptures or no: the ignorance of the
nature of Protestant Synods and of Popish Synods begets many ignorant and
foolish objections in Libertines. It is true Papists say, their Synods but
impose Ministerially upon men, not as lords of men's faith, but they take away
what they give. For 1. they will have none to examine and try the decrees of
their Synods, which we leave to all. 2. Though they say they propose nothing in
Synods, but what is agreeable to the word of God, yet will they be the sole, and
only infallible judges of what is the word of God, what not, what is Scripture,
what is the word of God in the breast of the Church, and they must be the only
infallible Expositors of the word of God, and what is agreeable to the word of
God (or which is all one to men's traditions) what not, and so they by
consequence make themselves lords over men's faith. Which the Apostle Paul would
not do for he said not to the Bereans, when you have tried, whither my
doctrine be agreeable to the Scripture, or no, yet I and the Apostles are the
only sole infallible judges both of our own doctrine, and of all your tryings,
and you have not so much as a private judgment left to you.

CHAP. III. The Church may complain of Heretics.
THe same Author argues against the Churches instigating of the Magistrate
against men for matters of conscience 1. 16. 75.
Ministers are not armed with force and it is not fit they should saevire per
alios stir up the Magistrate against others, the Magistrate is the Minister
of God properly for wrath. But it is fit for Ministers to say as Christ, I came
not to destroy but to save alive.

Answ. The Author says the question is not of transmitting of such things to
the Magistrate as belong to manners, but to conscience, as if an heretic
failed against no manners. Yet all his Arguments prove that Ministers should
not complain to the Magistrate of ill manners and the scandalous conversation
of any, and this he instanceth from the example of Christ, who Joh. 8. would
not accuse a woman of adultery. 2. The Magistrate is as properly the Minister
of God for good, for the praise of well-doing, as the Minister of God for
wrath, and if the Church should tell the Magistrate his duty, as watchmen
should do to all under their care Ezekiel. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. Magistrate or
other, if the Magistrate spare the life of a murderer, the watchmen are
unfaithful, if they complain not openly and tell the Magistrate he does not
his duty, and upon the same ground, if the Magistrate must coerce with the
sword seducing wolves and Jezabels, the Pastors ought to admonish him. And its
Atheistical to say the Magistrate is conscious of sins against manners, and of
his duty and obligation he needs no instigation. Because no Magistrate be he
an Achab or a David, but he needs be quickened to his duty, and will send a
murderer away, and a bloody Joab whom God will have not to live, and should
the Prophets be called instigatores, and savientes per alios, such as destroy
men's lives when they tell the Magistrate he is a murderer and guilty of
innocent blood, if he suffer the bloody man to live? Pastors are are not out of
their calling nor Apparitours nor tale-bearers if they complain to the
Magistrate of heretics and all ev^^-doers.
or should this be called tale-telling, and the Pastor thrusting of himself
into a more disaffecting office to be a Tale-teller an Apparitour or summoner
of men to the Civil Magistrates court, he made such a poor man be fined and
wife and Children be starved because he is not of his opinion. What would this
author give an Atheist leave to say? but so s^ander free preaching or free
Synodicall complaining to the Magistrate? such a man of our charge is damned by
his own conscience and devours the flock, as Arrius and Manes did, such a one
is a bloody murderer, a Sorcerer, the Magistrate bears the sword to execute
vengeance on evil doers, and yet suffer known murderers to live and be
gray-haird, are Ministers, who are to warn Fathers, Teachers, Masters, Judges,
Kings Jer. 1. 10. Nations, and Kingdoms of their duty, thrusters of
themselves into a disaffecting office, and Apparitours and Summoners of men
before Civil courts, because they warn the Magistrate of his duty? is this
obtruding into another office to give warning to all to be free of the blood of
all men? this is like the speech of a wicked King Amaziah 2 Chro. 25. 16. To
the Prophet who rebuked him, for seeking after the Gods of the Nations. Art
thou made of the Kings Counsel? forbear, why should thou be smitten? I
therefore summon this author to compeer before the judge of the world, and
give an account of this doctrine, for he speaks it against the faithful
servants of God of the Church of Scotland, who complained to the king of
Idolatrous seducers and Semminary priests and Jesuits, of bloody murderers, of
grinders of the faces of the poor and in^orrigible scandalous offenders; whose
wretched example was a shame to the Gospel and brought guilt upon the land,
that he might use the sword against such evil doers? and should Ministers be
Apparitours and tale-tellers either against such as deserve capital punishment
for sins against the second table as well as against the first table? woe will
be to him that calls good evil, and evil good. Is the necessary duty of the
calling of a watchman to warn the Magistrate of his bloody omissions, (for so
the Lord calls it Esaias. 1. 21, 22. Esaias 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. Prove. 2^. 7. Prove.
31. 8. And exhorts to it) an over-doing? and a tale-bearing?

He cites also the example (p. 76. 77.) of Christ who would not accuse the
woman taken in adultery. What does this prove? Ergo Christ would not have
faithful pastors to complain both to God, and to preach against Rulers who
punish not uncorrigible adulterers? Christ would not accuse her, he would not
judge her. Ergo the Judges under the new Testament who accuse, judge and
condemn adulterers, are not followers of Christ? What can an Anabaptist
allege more to prove there ought to be no Magistrates under the new
Testament? Adulterers must be tolerated: A Minister should not preach that the
Magistrate sins in not punishing the Adulterer. Christ complained not of
Pilates mixing the Galileans blood with their sacrifice to Caesar, should
therefore Ministers not complain though the Christian Magistrate suffer such
bloodshed?

Of the same kind is that wrangling, prudent fathers encourage not their
children to inform of one another faults, because it does not nourish love.
What then? Ergo Ministers should complain to the Godly Magistrate of no
omissions at all? I think by this Divinity, if one brother know his brother to
kill his brother, he should neither inform father nor Magistrate that the
murderer may be rebuked by the father or corrected by the Judge, because that
may hinder love, but let this wrangler answer, whither it be more real love to
the murderers soul to inform against him, and more glory to God, more peace
to the family; or to be silent and let his brother run to hell, and wrath lie
upon the whole land? It is but a loss of time to refute such weak foolerie
against natural reason, far more contrary to sound Divinity, for if pastors
inform against evil doers out of desire of revenge, malice or hatred, they
ought not upon these grounds to rebuke any sins at all, and we condemn the
doing of good duties upon evil motives and principles.

CHAP IIII. The state of the question of compulsion of Conscience, and
tolleration.
THe question touching Liberty of conscience was never by us, nor any man,
save Libertines, themselves and ignorant Anabaptists both of old and late moved
concerning internal liberty remaining within the soul, as liberty to think,
understand, judge, conclude, whither the Magistrate can force men, with the
sword to opinions, Opinions cannot be compelled not the (...) or will in the
(...)
and cudgel them out of some into other contrary judgments, in the matters of
God, for the Magistrate cannot take on him, yea nor the Church under the pain
of censures compel any to think well of Christ, or ill or Antichrist. Yet most
of the senseless arguments of the times are drawn from the immediate subjection
of the conscience to God, from the nature of conscience, Religion, faith, fear,
and the elicit acts of the soul which cannot be compelled, yea in this meaning,
we think God can neither offer violence, to mind, understanding, will or
affections of love, fear, joy, because all these clicit acts cannot slow from
any principle, but the internal and vital inclinations of the soul, though
the devils be said to believe against their will, yet not against the
inclination of the understanding or desiring faculty.

All the question is concerning the imperated acts and these external, ^he
question is whether the (...).
that is not touching opinions and acts of the mind, but that which is visible
and audible in these opinions, to wit, the speaking, professed holding of them,
publishing, teaching, printing, and known and external persuading of others to
be of our mind. So that the question will come to this whither the Magistrates
sword be to regulate our words that concerns our neighbor, as that we lie not,
we forswear not, to the hurt of the life and credit of our neighbor, that we
slander not, rail upon no man, far less against the prince and ruler of the
people, but whether the words we utter or publish of God though never such
blasphemies, and lies, because they come from the conscience (as if truths or
words we speak for or against our neighbor did not slow from a conscience
either good or ill) be above or beyond all swords or coercive power of men. It
is clear the question must be thus stated, for all the laws of the old
Testament (which we hold in their moral equity to be perpetual) that are
touching blasphemies, heresies, solicitation to worship false Gods and the
breach of which the Godly Magistrate was to punish, command or forbid only
such things as may be proved by two or three witnesses, and which husband and
wife are not to conceal, and from which all Israel must abstain for fear of
the like punishment. Deuteronomy. 1^. 8, 9, 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 17. 5, 6. Levit. 20. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. But opinions in the mind, acts of the understanding, can never be
proved by witnesses and such as neither Magistrate nor Church can censure.

Then we refer to all the Godly, if Libertines and Anabaptists deal brotherly
in affirming that Presbiterians, persecute them, because out of tenderness of
conscience, they cannot come up to the light and judgment of their brethren in
all opinions.

2. There is a tolleration pollitick and Civil and spiritual or Ecclesiastic
shame and fear in punishing heresies either by the Judge or the Church, Shame
and fear of reb^kes by Pastors and Church censures have the same compulsorie in
(...) false teachers that the fear of public punishment by the Synod has.
whither in civil or Ecclesiastical censures, rebukes, Excommunication is an
evil of punishment in both, as is evident, if we compare Judge. 18. 7. Where it
is said, There was no Magistrate in the land that might put them so shame in
any thing. Deuteronomy. 13. 11. With these places that speaks of spiritual
censures, in the fear and shame of them as. 1. Tim. 5. 19. Receive not an
accusation against an Elder, but before two or three witnesses, then an Elder
that is scandalous may incur shame of being accused, and Mat 18. 17. let him be
to thee as a heathen and a Publicane 1 Timothy 5. 20. them that sin, rebuke
before all, that others also may fear. So the avoiding of Idolaters, and
Heretics. 1 Cor. 9. 11. Tit. 2. 10. ^, Joh. 10. Gal. 1. 8. brings public
shame on them 2. Thesse 3. 14. then look what forcing power the shame the
Magistrates can put Heretics to, and what compulsory (...) it has on the
conscience and so should not be inflicted on men for their conscience and
holding of heresies, as Libertines say, the same compulsorie power has
concionall rebukes of Pastors or private Christians, and of admonition,
excommunication or the avoiding of the society of false teachers either by the
whole Church or by private Christians, and the arguments proving the Magistrate
cannot punish for conscience in his politic Sphere, do also prove that
heretics should be rebuked sharply that they may be sound in the faith,
contrary to Tit. 1. 13. and that we should neither admonish them nor avoid
their company which is absurd; so they be more ingenious Libertines who free
false teachers and heretics from both civil and ecclesiastical censures, than
these who free them from civil and subject them to Ecclesiastical censures,
Church censures are as compuls^rie on the Conscience, as coercing by the sword.
for Ecclesiastical compulsion has no more influence on the conscience by way
of teaching then politic or civil, and the arguments taken from the nature of
conscience is as strong to prove that the Church of Pergam^^, Ephesus, Thyatira
should suffer liars, false Apostles and seducers, such as hold the doctrine of
Balaam and Jezabel the deceiving Prophetess, who teach and profess according
to their erroneous conscience contrary to Rev. 1. 2, 3, 14, 20. as that the
Godly Prince should suffer them: nor can it be said that Church Censures are
spiritual punishments and so work on the spirit, and have instructing,
rebuking and exhorting going before, but the sword is a bodily punishment, and
has not instructing going before. For I answer though these two punishments
differ, yet they agree that formally both are alike compulsory of the
conscience, and neither of them act upon the spirit by teaching and instructing
as the word does, so as excommunication of a heretic should have instructing
and convincing going before, so should also the Magistrate presuppose, before
he strike with the sword, that the false teacher has been instructed and
convinced, and so he does formally punish him with the sword, for his
pertinacious perverting of souls.

3. Nor can it be replied that men should not be punished for either opinions,
or for holding opinions that slow from mere conscience, when they publish
preach and print them from no principle, but mere conscience, not for gain or a
morsel of bread, or for preferment in the state or Army. To this I answer,
lay aside opinions and answer me this, how the Judges that are for liberty of
conscience are not to punish some words except they would be guilty of
persecution, to wit, such as these, the Trinity is but a fiction, Christ is no
more God then another holy man. Yea, Christ was but an Impostor, and yet they
punish words and deeds of the same kind that come from mere conscience. The
answer must be, the former words are from mere conscience and the publishers
thereof will swear they hold them as the mere enforcing light and judgment of
their conscience; But these other words and deeds which the Magistrate
censures, are not from mere conscience. But I believe these that acted in the
late controverted Parliament and by virtue thereof, yea and many Godly men of
them that are punished by the Judges and many of the Godly that fled for fear
act from mere conscience, and will swear they did so act according to their
sworn covenant, and to prevent a new war: and that they did it neither for
gain, nor for preferment in State or Army. And if it were referred to the
consciences of most of the Army why they disbanded not when the Parliament
commanded them, but do by their practices treat a war to themselves and the
land (a judgment of God of all others the saddest) when they have none to
fight against but shadows and enemies of straw and hay; I judge they would
swear that they judged the charge of the Houses against their conscience, Some
external actions of unjustice s^^wing from mere Conscience, are punished
justly without any note of persecution, by grant of Libertines, and why not all
others also?
and unjust, and that they hold up wars out of mere conscience, and to
vindicate the oppressed subjects and for preventing of a new war, and not for
gain or preferment. So the question is not yet answered; why some external
actions of words and deeds coming from mere conscience without any carnal
pretext, as they will swear cannot be punished, but violence must be done to
conscience, so the men persecuted, and others that do the like and speak the
like from no principle but pure conscience, without any carnal pretext, as
they will swear, are punished and yet neither violence is done to conscience
nor the men persecuted, for acting according to conscience and a sworn
Covenant. But they justly punished: if acting from mere Conscience be the
formal cause why men are not to be punished, it should hold in all such acts.

4. They seem to me sick in the brain, who hold that it is an act of love and
charity in the Magistrate to restrain (...), (...) bonds page 12
Socinianisme etc. and to discountenance such seducers, and yet bring arguments
against all external (...) in matters of Religion or compulsion in general: a
discou^^^nancing and a keeping of men from places, dignities, offices is the
highest compulsion of penalty you can devise. What arguments fight against any
compulsion of the Magistrate positive or negative does fight against all. If it
be lawful for the Magistrate, as for all other men, to do all he can for the
truth as some say, and the Magistrates invitations, recommendation, exemplarie
profession, general tuition, excluding coercing, are all nothing but words,
these agree to all Christians as Christians and are nothing peculiar to the
Magistrate, the Magistrate as a Magistrate cannot request, he must command as a
Magistrate, and all his commands if disobeyed, are in order to the sword.

5. The question is not whether Religion can be enforced upon men by the
Magistrate by the dint and violence of the sword, or only persuaded by the
power of the word, We hold with Lactantius that Religion cannot be compelled,
nor can mercy and justice and love to our neighbor commanded in the second
table be more compelled then faith in Christ. Hence give me leave to prove two
things. 1. That Religion and faith cannot be forced on men. 2. That this is a
vain consequence; Religion cannot be forced but must be persuaded by the word
and Spirit, Ergo the Magistrate can use no coercive power in punishing
Heretics and false teachers.

For the first, we lay hold on all the arguments that prove the word preached
to be the only means of converting the soul, begetting of faith and that
carnal weapons are not able, yea nor were they ever appointed of God, to doing
down strong holds, Lactan. Inst. l. 5. c 14 quid (...) quod (...) fieri (...)
libido (...).
nor can they make a willing people: and Lactantius said well, What is left to
us, if another lust (...) that by force, which we must do willingly? And that
of Tertullian. It is of the law or right of man and of his natural power what
every man worships, what he thinks he should worship, nor does the Religion of
one either do good or do evil to another man, nor is it religion to compel
religion, which ought to be received by w^ll not by force: since sacrifices (of
worship) are required of a willing mind. In which I observe. 1. Tertullian
speaks not of the true Christian Religion which is now in question: Tertullian
ad Scapul^^. Humani juris and natural^s potestatis est, un^cuique quod
putavertis coler^: n^^ alii prodost^nt o^est alterius Religio Sed: nec
Religionis est cogere Religionem, quae s^ont^ (...) debe^, non (...)
but of Religion in general as it is comprehensive of both true and false
Religion. Because he speaks of that Religion which by the Law of nature a man
chooses, and is humani juris and naturalis potestatis: but it is not of the
law of man or natural power, nor in flesh and bloods power to choose the true
Christian Religion, that election is Supernatural says Tertullian there and
else where often, as also the Scripture Joh. 6. 44. Math. 16. 17. Math. 11. 25,
26, 27 2. Religion is taken two ways 1. for the inward and outward acts of
Religion as seen both to God and man as Lactantius, Tertullian and others say,
so it is most true. Christians ought not with force of sword, compel Jews, nor
Jews or Pagans compel Christians to be of their Religion, because Religion is
not begotten many, by persuasion of the mind, nor by forcing of the man. How
Religion may be compelled, how not. One man's Religion remaining in the mind
and will may hurt or benefit the man himself, not any others: but true Religion
as it comes forth i^ to acts of teaching may coin and win the souls of
others, and false Religion may subvert the faith of others.
Again Religion is taken for the external profession and acting and
performances of true Religion within the Church or by such as profess the
truth, that are obvious to the eyes of Magistrates and Pastors, and thus the
sword is no means of God to force men positively to external worship or
performances. But the sword is a means n^g^tively to punish acts of false
worship in those that are under the Christian Magistrate and profess Christian
Religion, in so far as these acts come out to the eyes of men and are
destructive to the souls of these in a Christian society; It Is even so (and not
otherwise punishable by the Magistrate;) for he may punish omissions of hearing
the Doctrine of the Gospel and other external performances of worship, as as
these omissions by ill example or otherwise are offensive^ to the souls of
these that are to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty; nor does it follow that the sword is a kindly means to force outward
performances, for the Magistrate as the Magistrate does not command these
outward performances as service to God, but rather forbids the omissions of
them as destructine to man, for example a Physician commands fasting, Pastors
after the example of James commands fasting when judgments are on us, the
physician commands it, in so far as eating troubles the common society of
humors, The Magistrate does not command Religion, acts as service to God, but
rather forbids their contra^^^^ as disser^^^^ to Christian societies. How
^ertull. and La^^ant^^s are to be expounded of forcing to heathen Religion.
members and temper of the body, and the Physician forbids eating so as he will
have no more to do with the patient, if he will disobey: and so trouble the
temper of the body, which is the only object the physician works on. Pastors
command fasting to be in sincerity for afflicting and humbling the soul under
the mighty hand of God. So the Magistrate forbids cutting of a vein or
shedding of blood as a thing troubling the peace of humane society, yet his
command is not a direct means of preventing diseases in the body of a subject
and for healthie living. But the Physician commands to cut a viene and to shed
blood for health and to prevent a disease, and sins neither against the
Magistrate nor God in so doing: so does the Magistrate not directly command
going to Church as a worship to God, so as his commands have influence on the
conscience as the Pastors commands have, Though we can compel none to Religion
it follows not that the Magistrate may not punish there that (...) others to a
false Religion.
but he commands going to Church and hearing so as the omission of hearing
hearts the society whereof God has made him a civil and politic head: in
this latter sense must Lactantius, Tertullian and others be taken, otherwise
these words, the Religion of another does his neighbor neither good nor ill in
rigor, are not true, the ill example of others in Idolatry brings ill upon
all the Church. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. yea and the fierce anger of God. v. 17.

Again La^^antius says false Religion cannot be compelled, but he denies not
that Christians may punish blasphemies in true religion. 2. he denies we may
propagate the Gospel among Pagans with the sword: Lactan^^. 5. c. 20. non est
opus vt and (...) cogi non potest, (...) potius quam verberibu^ res agenda (...)
both which points we teach. There (...) (says he) of force and injury,
because Religion cannot be compelled, the business is to be tran^acted by words
rather than blows, that there may be willingness. Let them ( enemies of the
truth) draw the sword or sharpness of their wi^^ if their reason be good, let
it be produced: we are ready to (...), if they teach ( nothing more clear then
that he speaks of the Pagans that would force Pagans worship on Christians: we
believe nothing of their Religion whilt they are silent, as we cannot yield to
them while they rage against us, let them imitate us, and declare the reason of
the whole matter, for we (Christians) do not allure, as they (Pagans)
frequently object to us, but we teach, we prove, we demonstrate: Distringant
(hosts Religionis Christianae) aci^m ingeniorum suert^^, si ratio little vera
est offeratur: parati sumus audire, si docea^^. Tacentibus certe nihil
credimus, sicut ne saevientibus quidem cedimus, imitentur nos, aut rationem rei
totius exponant nos enim non illicimus (ut ipsi objectant) sed docemus,
probamus ostendimus: itaque nemo a nobis retinetur invitus: imutilis est enim
deo qui devotione ac side caret, and tamen nemo discedit ipsa veritate
retinante. Lactan (...). long diversa sunt Carnificina and pictas, nes potest
aut veritas eum vi, aut justitia eum crudelitate conjungi. Ibid. Sed ut in ipsa
Religione sic defensionis genere falluntur. Defendenda e^im Religio est non
occidendo, sed monen lo; alij codices moriendo, non sevitia, sed patientia, non
scelere, sed fide. Lactant. speaks of compulsion without all teaching. These
that are without the Church are not to be compelled.
therefore none by us are kept against their will, for he is unprofitable to
God who wants devotion and faith: and yet no man departs from us when the truth
detains him.

But says Celsus fol. 84. if in the time of Lactantius Christians killed men
for their religion, no man can doubt but Lactantius in these same general
words inveighs against Christians who would compel men to their faith against
their will, and that he abhorres the violence of ours against heretics.

Answ. These are of a wide difference, to kill blasphemers, and false teachers
for spreading heresies and blasphemies, and to compel them by war, and fire
and sword to be of our Christian Religion. As I hope to prove, for the formers
lawful, ^he later unlawful. Its true Lactantius speaks of all Religion true
and false, that we are to compel none with the sword to any Religion, but he
no where says that the Magistrates may not kill open and pernicious seducers
and false teachers who pervert others, for the Magistrate is not to compel yea
nor to intend the conversion of a pernicious seducer, but to intend to take his
head from him, for his destroying of souls. And Lactantius denies Religion
after it is begotten, can be defended, that is nourished and conserved in the
hearts of people by the sword, but by the word and Spirit. Those are far
different tormenting and piety (says he) nor can violence be conjoined with
verity, nor justice with cruelty.

And again, but as in Religion, so also in defending of Religion they are
deceived, Religion is to be defended not by killing but admonishing, others
read, by being killed, not by cruelty, but by patience, not by wickedness,
but by faith.

But here he speaks of defending in a hostile way, by killing those that will
not be of our Religion, be it the Pagan religion and most develish not of
defending the Christian professors, from the infection of wolvish seducers, by
the sword of the Nurse-father of the Church, who is to defend good men and to
execute vengeance on evil doers. For in all this Lactantius speaks of such a
violence as is without teaching, parati sum^s andire si doccant tacentibus
certe nihil credimus. But suppose some father: were in that error (as
Augustine was, (...)
but retracted it) though, Augustine (...) we may compel man to the faith,
(...) punish he^^^ides, so. so he should not punish murderers.
yet (...) of improper compulsion, and of Donatists the such as are (...) the
Church, whom he thinks the Magistrate on (...) to punish, which is not a
compelling of the (...) to the sound faith, but an act of justice in punishing
him for his (...) of heresi^s to the perverting of the faith of others. Upon
these (...) is Cyrilius says, Moyes Law is one and he Kingdom of C^^^t is
wholly heavenly, and spiritual, and (...) before has spiritual (...) and
spiritual armor: and therefore a spiritual not a car^^^ sword to punish the
enemies of this Kingdom, (...) Christian men. But he speaks of (...) without
the Church (who as I constantly (...)) are not with wars and the sword to be
compelled to (...) the Christian Religion and therefore a^deth on the (...) did
fight against Amorites, Canaanites and (...) with (...) of iron: but he speaks
not of the Laws (...) 24. and (...), in which death was decreed for the false
Prophet within the visible Church. At (...) the fathers have (...) with unsound
Emperors who have tolerated, (...), Arrians, and Jews, but that is no law for
us. But the other point is that though these that are without are not to be
compelled to embrace the true Religion it follows nto that the Magistrate
should not (...) Prophets, or pernicious teachers such as Baals (...), who
openly (...) the people of God to Idolatr^^. 1. Become the Magistrate cannot,
(...) ought not to compel (...) liars, to be (...) it with their own as well
as they must be such externally, no more then he can compel them to inward
fear, love, faith in God, and to the external performances (...). But it does
not follow that therefore the Magistrate cannot command external acts of
mercy, c^^astitie, selfe-contentednesse, and should not punish murder,
adultery, theft, robbery, perjurie, for to punish these makes many
hypocritically peaceable, chaste, content with their own, true in their word, as
well as punishing false teachers and heretics makes many hypocritically sound
in the faith So Augustine contra Petilian. l. 3. c. 83. 2. There is no ground
in Scripture to say that because the Canaanites erred against the duties of the
first table only, that therefore israel was to destroy them in war. For
Joshua 11. 26, 27, 28. the contrary is clear, Joshua made war with them,
because God having hardened their heart they came out in battle against Israel:
and so the cause of the war was not Religion and their madness of Idolatry
(though on the Lords part it was a provoking cause) but violence in invading an
harmless and innocent people, so Joshua and Israel compelled them not to
embrace the true Religion, then from thence it cannot follow therefore no laws
were to be made against the false Prophets and blasphemer. And if that
consequence was null then, it cannot be strong now. So we say under the new
Testament: we cannot bring in to the faith the Heathen and Pagans by violence
and the sword, it follows not Ergo, no blasphemer within the visible Church
should be forced. 3. violence and the sword is no means to work men to
subjection to Christ, it follows not, Ergo because the weapons of our warfare
are not carnal, but spiritual 2 Cor. 10. 5. 6. the Apostle should not say
shall I come unto you with the rod or in love, or in the spirit of meekness.
1. Cor. 4. 21. and therefore he should not deliver any to Satan. 4. nor is
this a good consequence, because the fear of bodily death or punishment by the
sword cannot convert, therefore it cannot terrify men from external
blasphemy and tempting of others to false worship, for the external man his
words, solicitations, do ill by teaching, and his actions, not the inward man
or the conscience and the soul is the object the Magistrate is to work on. For
neither under Moses more then now, could the sword convert men to the true
Religion. yet bodily death was to be inflicted on the seducer, then, as now
Deuteronomy. 13. 11. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you: and afflictions work the same way now
Romans 13. 3. for rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil, will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same.

There be five pull-backs that keep men even in heresy and in a false way, as
may be collected out of Augustines writings from which by the terror of just
laws, they may be affrighted from seducing of others as 1. The Magistrate may
by the sword curb five impediments that keep men from embracing the truth,
according to Augustine.
fear of offending men especially those of their own way; 2. an hardening
custom in a false way. 3. a wicked sluggishnesse in not searching the truth of
God. 4. the wicked tongues of enemies that shall traduce them, if they leave
heresies. 5. a vain persuasion that men may be saved in any Religion. See
Augustine epist. 114. and ad Vincent. epist. 48. epist. 50. ad Bonifacium.
contra Petilianum. l. 3. c. 83. lib. 3. contra Cresconium cap. 51. contra
Guidentum. l. 1. c. 19. and lib. contra Parmen. c. 10. contra Gaudent. l. 1. c.
24. de unitate Eccles. c. 20. epist. 166. And so that which the Objector Mr.
John Goodwine long ago objected is easily answered, Answer to Doctor Adam
Stewart.
that the Magistrate cannot in justice punish that which is unavoydable and
above the power of free will to resist, but such are all heresies and errors
of the mind. For this might well have been objected against that most just law
Deuteronomy. Impotencie of free will objected by Mr. John Goodwine no reason why the
Magistrate ought not to punish seducing teachers, as of old the Donatists
objected.
13. why should God command to stone to death a seducer that tempts any of his
people to worship false Gods, because such a man is sick but of an error in
the mind, he believes he does service to his God, whom he believes to be the
true God, in so doing, and had the heathen and Jews under Moses more strength
of free will and more grace to resist Apostacy, Blasphemy, wicked opinions
against the true God, then we have now under the Gospel. And the Lord has
expressly said Deuteronomy. 13. 11. Israel shall fear (bodily death) and do such
wickedness no more: now this was not Ceremonial or typical fear, but mere
natural fear sufficient to retract and withdraw men from external acts of
seducing and blaspheming, which is all that the Magistrate can do. 2. this is
the very objection of Donatists and Augustine answers truly. By this answer
the Magistrate should not punish murderers and adulterers for they have not
grace to resist temptation to murder, certainly the Spirit of Revenge, and of
whoredoms must be as strong above free will as the Spirit of error and lies.
Achab then sinned not in believing the lying Prophets who deceived him: and it
was not in his power to resist the efficacy of lying inflicted on him for his
former sins. And what sins the Magistrate punishes he does punish as the
formal Minister of God. Romans 13. and so this is the Pelagian, Arminian and
Popish objection against God and free Grace, as much as against us. 3. the
wickedest seducer is punished for his external acts of false teaching and
seducing which may, and must be proved by witness or confessed by the
delinquent, before he can justly punish him, but not for any mind-error which
is obvious neither to judge nor witness.

Then the true state of the question is not whether the sword be a means of
conversion of men to the true faith, State of the question more strictly
proposed.
nor 2. whither heathen by fire and sword are to be compelled to embrace the
truth. nor 3. whither violence without instruction and arguing from light of
Scriptures, should be used against false teachers, nor 4 whither the Magistrate
can punish the opinions of the mind, and strain internal liberty. But whither
or no ought the Godly and Christian Prince restrain and punish with the sword
false teachers, publishers of heretical and pernicious doctrines, which may be
proved by witness, and tends to the injuring of the souls of the people of
God, in a Christian society, and are dishonorable to God, and contrary to
sound doctrine; and so coerce men for external misdemeanors flowing from a
practical conscience sinning against the second table, as well as from a
speculative conscience (to borrow these terms here) when they profess and
are ready to swear they perform these externalls merely from and for
conscience. For since false teachers and heretics in regard of the
spiritualnesse of their sin are the worst of evil doers, and such as work
abomination in the Israel of God, It may as well he said, because there be no
express laws against murderers, parricids, sorcerers. Sodomites in the new
Testament more then against false teachers, that therefore Socerers are no
less then heretics to be tolerated.
and there is no particular laws in the New Testament for bodily coercing of
Sorcerers, Adulterers, Thieves, Traitors, false witnesses, who but speak lies
against the good name of their neighbor, not against the name of God, nor
against Sodomites, defilers of their bodies with beasts, perjured persons,
Covenant breakers, liars etc. What reason in nature can there be to punish the
one, and not the other? for it may with as good color of reason be said, that
all the Laws in the old Testament, for drawing of the sword against Sodomites,
Adulterers and such like, were typical and temporary, and are done away now in
Christ, for Christ will have these converted in as spiritual a way by the
only power of the word of God as the other and no where in any express law in
the New Testament does God command to use the bloody sword against them, more
then against blasphemers: And to remove these gross sins out of Christian
societies by the sword is no less a carnal and a bodily afflictive way of
dealing with their consciences, as to deal so with seducers; and its enough to
that negative argument, that no where it is expressed as a duty of the
Magistrate, under the New Testament to use the sword against false teachers,
nor does our Savior or the Apostles rebuke the Magistrate for omitting of
their duty in this. Yea Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. when he shows that some of
the Corinthians abused their body with mankind, were theev^s, drunkards,
extortioners, he no where says that it was the Magistrates duty to take away
their head for Sodomie, which certainly it was, and that by the very law of
nature, but he was Gods instrument for their conversion by the power of the
word, ver. 11. and 1 Cor. 4. 15. as he labored to convert the Galdehians who
sometimes worshipped dumb Idols, and the Ephesians who worshipped the vain
Idol Diana Act. 19. yea, nor is there any New Testament law for taking away the
life of a murderer, for that of our Saviors. Math. 26. 52. all they that take
the sword shall perish with the sword: except we say it was so a Judicial law
among the Jews, as it was a law of nature Genesis 9. before there was a Common
wealth erected among the Jews, cannot be called a new Testament law, to Peter
and John and the disciples who were obliged at that same very time to keep
the passover and to be subject to all the Jewish laws.

CHAP. V. Of Fundamentals.
A Foundation (says Pareus Iren. c. 9) is that which is in the lowest place of
the building to bear up that which is built upon it, and without which the
building cannot stand.

That then must be the foundation of faith and salvation which is precisely
necessary to be believed by all that are saved Alardas Valek gives us four
fundamentals facienda and vitanda things to be done and eschewed in the
Decalogue 2. credenda, to be believed in the Creed. 3. roganda, to be sought
from God in prayer 4. ^surpanda things to be practiced, as the Sacraments. De
vivendis Christianorian animus in fide illibata. tom. 1 l. 1. c. 10.
How the repenting thiese knew all these, I see not, yet a taste of some of
them ye may see and with the infused life of God he was ready to believe and
do the rest. For the first he knew robbery and violence to be damned in the
Decalogue* we are justly here, and repented. 2. for the second, The number of
Fundamentals.
he believed in Christ as a King, the Son of God and a Savior. Christ was
accused that he called himself the Son of God and a king, when the man says
of Christ this man has done nothing amiss: An saving disposition of faith to
believe all truths revealed, though the man be ignorant of many may consist
with the state of saving grace.
he believes him to be the Son of God, and the Savior who had the keys of
paradise at his girdle. 3. he prays to him. Lord remember me when thou comes
to thy Kingdom. 4. for external worship or Sacraments, it is like he knew
little: yet he confessed Christ a King when his disciples denied him and fled,
and the world persecuted him. Cycillus Hyerosolymitian reduces them to two;
the knowledge of points of faith. 2. the doing of good works. Had he added
according to the new covenant it were good. Calvin says epist 182. I refuse
not the Augustine confession. Cui pridem volens and libens subscripsi. sicut
eam Author interpretatus est. Yet in the 10. article thereof the substantial
body and blood of Christ is said to be really present under the spece of bread
and wine. Calv. epist. ad Martinum Shallingium an. 1557.
Ambrose in cap. 9. Lu. negat Christum, qui non omnia qua sunt Christi
confitetur. It is only thus far true the that has sufficient means of
believing what the word says may confess all truths of Christ and does not
deny Christ, but as some do not all the good they may, yet have a saving
disposition to it, though either they through infirmities leave it undone, or
through want of opportunity, yet believing are saved: So these that want means
of knowing and confessing all truths yet have the habit of faith to believe
them, though they never actually confess them, do not deny Christ. Though
Irenem l. 1. c. 3. Tertullian de Virginibus velandis Augusti. to. 10. de
Tempore sar. 2. and Russi^^^ in the exposition of the Creed say that which is
called the Apostles Creed, came from the Apostles: yet there is no sufficient
ground for us to believe the authentic Authority of it. Conrad, worships
while he was yet* sound* de pausis just it and necessariis deserendi papatus.
par. 1. dis. 1. the 29. says of these points that are contained in the
Apostles Creed: some things are simply necessary for salvation, Three things
among these that are to be believed, things simply necessary. 2. simply
profitable. 3. by consequence necessary: how the papist, err in these.
without which faith and repentance cannot be 2. some not so necessary, yet
profitable and of themselves saving. 3. other things by consequence and by
accident are necessary, not of themselves and separate from the fundamentals,
the Church of Rome erres in the fundamentals, in the doctrine of our Savior
and his offices, in the doctrine of merit, humane satisfactions, indulgences,
the Scriptures, the Church. In the 2. they err about baptism, the Lords
supper, confirmation, unction, penance, though of themselves they happily
deprive not of life eternal, yet because the subject about which the matter is
versed is most necessary, they are pernicious errors. These of the third sort
touching creation, providence, mortification, though of themselves they might
be called errors, simple ignorance, yet for the dangerous consequences, they
are pernicious heresies.

Mr. John Durie in his Theological consultation makes three sort of necessary
points. Joan. Durens in consulta. Theologica p. 14, 15.
1. these, without the knowledge of which Christ cannot be known in the
covenant of grace, nor by faith retained, which are comprehended in the paction
of the covenant. 2. saving points which secretly lurk in these necessirie
points, yet by just and evident consequence may be deduced there from, though
they be not in the express words of the covenant. 3. some things that are
profitable, the express knowledge whereof conduces to the fuller knowledge
and faith of these things necessary, yet are not such, but Christ may be
believed by simple souls and rested on for salvation, without such a precise
form of speaking.

Augusti. de Trinit. l. 14. c. 1. It is one thing to know what we are to
believe, another thing how, or with what certainty we are to believe. Some
Consequences necessary.
Nazianz. Orat. 5. de Theol. perinde ea qua ex Scripturis colliguntur, atqui ea
qua scribuntur. What is in Scripture by consequence is Scripture: the ignorance
of the Resurrection, which was in Scripture to the Sadduces by consequence
only was an ignorance of the Scripture (...). 22. 29, 30, 31. and a soul
condemning error. It is a question, yea no question, to die denying the
resurrection is to die without says, happily to die ignorant of it, having
never heard the Gospel is not so high a sin, but who can say such can be
saved? August. sermon. 30. de verbis Apost. Si negent equalem, negant filium, si
negant filium, negant Christum, si negant Christum, negant in carne venisse.

Origin l. 2. de peccat. c. 34. all Christians faith stands in these two, that
the first Adam destroyed us, the second saves us: errors about justifying
says, and errors touching historical faith are far different.

The foundation is Christ and none but he. Builders of hay and stubble on the
foundation may be saved, and these that fall in murder and adultery out of
infirmity may be also saved, yet there is no consequence; ergo the Magistrate
should tolerate both.
2. the gold builded on the foundation is the doctrine of Christ, and a created
thing, yet simply necessary to be believed. 3. the hay and stubble that is
builded on it must be vanities and fooleries believed, yet of themselves such
as extinguish not saving faith and love, no more then sins of infirmity are
inconsistent with saving faith, then both the man's hay and stubble and his sins
of infirmity against the second table may be burnt and the man saved: but it
follows not the Church and Magistrate should therefore not punish or censure
the builders of hay and stubble upon the foundation, but should tolerate them,
for a Godly man, as David and Peter may fall in adultery, in treacherous
murder and denial of Christ, yet it follows not that the Magistrate should
tolerate and not punish murder and adultery in a Christian society, and
that Paul should not sharply rebuke, and if need be, farther proceed to the
censure of the Church: if Peter either deny his Lord, though out of infirmity
and fear, or if he Judaize and look awry to the Gospel.

CHAP. VI. Errors in Non-Fundamentals obstinately holden are punishable.
Ye must bear one another infirmities, and restore these that fall with the
spirit of meekness. Gal. 6. 1. and yet not tolerate their errors, and
forbear to admonish and also sha^ply rebuke them and if need be, the Church and
Magistrate may proceed to further censures, to excommunication and the use of
the sword, for justice is not contrary to meekness, nor one fruit of the
Spirit contrary to another. Obstinacy in Ceremonies after full information
deserves punishment.
He (...) spares the rod hates the child: yet should not a father be cruel
to his child, nor is his correcting contrary to fatherly compassion, but not
correcting is cruelty to and hatred of the child: and the like we are to
think of the punishments and censures of the Nurse father of the Church, and of
the Church.

There be some things of doubtful disputations that the weak in knowledge
cannot conceive, and yet are to be instructed in meekness and received as
brethren. Romans 14. 1. 2. but if these same weak, after sufficient instruction,
when the Ceremonies of Moses law became deadly and unlawful (as they were then
indifferent) would needs be circumcised, abstain from meats, and keep the whole
Ceremonial law, whatever should be said on the contrary, and would compel
others to be circumcised and pervert the souls of many even after the date of
the indifferency of these things is expired Paul then is so far from giving
place for an hour or betraying Christian liberty Gal. 2. or from bearing with
them that he withstandeth them to their faces, and wishes that such as trouble
others so were cut off and might bear their judgment. These that err in
non-fundamentals may deserve to be punished.
Gal. 5. 10. 11. which clearly holds forth, what ever the meaning of these
words be, that Paul though these that would teach others they must be
circumcised, were worthy to bear their judgment and to be punished for so
(...) imports.

And it shall be a work of difficulty to prove that to be circumcised was
necessary to salvation, and these that so taught Act. To teach the necessity of
circumcision not an error formally and primarily; but by consequence
fundamental and the contrary truth not necessary necessitate medij.
15. and Gal. chap. 5. did teach an error of it self fundamental and that
subverted the faith: who ever then would be circumcised fell from Christ Gal.
5. as Paul says, but that was by consequence, sure it was not an error, in
terminis fundamental, as this, Christ is not the Savior of mankind, only it
was an error that by consequence subverted the foundation, and was a falling
from Christ by consequence, and a coming again under the debt of the whole
law, and of salvation by the law, which was ever impossible, and to say it was
necessary to salvation, necessitate medij, so as all the Galathians who
received Christ and the Gospel and would have plucked out their eyes for Paul,
who died ignorant of this point ( who ever will now be circumcised is fallen
from Christ) were eternally damned, and dyed out of Christ is a groundless
saying: there was a glorious Church in Galatia before Paul wrote that epistle
to them, for he wrote it upon occasion of their being seduced, who were made
believe the necessity of circumcision, and it is clear Paul would not have
written that of circumcision, if that error had not been sown among them by
false teachers, if therefore such as were made believe that had not been
bewitched to believe the necessity of Ceremonies for justification, they being
in Christ, should have been saved by faith, though this controversy in
terminis had never come to their ears: whither are believers justified by faith
only, or must they also be circumcised and keep the Law? that they may be
justified and saved. And sure many are now in our days (which is more)
glorified, who never knew, but only virtually, and implicitly, that to be
circumcised, or to keep Jewish days is not necessary to justified persons, yea
sure many in Britain are saved who never knew this fundamental truth. 2. Act.
15. it is clear that some taught the brethren, except ye be circumcised after
the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved: the contrary truth is no express
fundamental truth, because a fundamental truth expressly necessary is so
necessary ( necessitate medij) as without the knowledge thereof we cannot be
saved. Now these teachers knew that the Apostles and Elders and Saints at at
Jerusalem were not circumcised so, and they knew believing Gentiles were not
circumcised at all, and yet they knew the Apostles were not damned, they knew
all children dying before the eight day were not damned, they must then hold
that Circumcision was only necessary to salvation, by way of precept: and the
brethren that believed and so if they had dyed in that state had undeniably
been saved, were ignorant of this; and v. 7. there was much disputing among
believers yea among the Apostles who were not ignorant of fundamentals: and
undoubtedly had saving faith long before, Math. 16. 17. 18. till James fully
determined the question from the word of God. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. then it is
most clear that these that err in other points that are not fundamentals in
which all Christians agree may be perverters of souls and so deserve to be
rebuked by the Church and punished. 3. This opinion of so (...) ring all, save
such as err in fundamentals, though they (...) non fundamentals is grounded
upon this, that the Scripture is evidently plain and clear in fundamentals, The
tolleration of all who err in non fundamentals examined.
but in other points (...) non-fundamentals, the Scripture is dark, and in
regard of the darkness and natural ignorance of our mind which is in^^cible
almost, we must forbear one another and give and take elbow-roome and latitude
of indulgence, because the Magistrate and Church are not infallible, but both
Godly and learned may be on each side, so that there should be no peace nor
union of hearts in Christian societies, but all Churches or earth must disband
and be dissolved, if each should punish and censure one another for holding
contrary tenets.

But 1. M. John Goodwin hag^omastix sect. 26. page 24.
Mr. John Goodwine who contendeth for a Catholic tolleration of all, of any
Religion whatsoever, whither they err in fundamentals or non-fundamentals, and
his words because nnanswerable to me against this distinction I set down I
desire it be taken (says he) to serious consideration, (...), or how far, it
is meet to punish or censure poor miserable men, for not holding or not
asserting the truth of these things, which they cannot come without much labor
and contention of mind, yea not without some good degree of some reason and
understanding too, to judge so much as probable, nor at all to come to believe
or know them certainly, but only by an immediate and supernatural work of the
Spirit of God^ are (...) to be punished, because God has not imparted to them
his Spirit of grace and supernatural illumination? This learned and sharp
witted Divine (as any I see of that way) confirms me much that tolleration in
non-fundamentals and non-tolleration in errors fundamental, is a distinction
cannot subsist, in the way that Libertines in England now go: for to know or
believe supernatural non-fundamentals as the histories of the miracles of
Christ the Prophets and Apostles requires a work of the Spirit of grace and
supernatural illumination, is to know or believe fundamentalls; why then
should men be punished for holding errors in the one and not in the other? and
the conscience cannot be compelled in the one more then in the other: but with
favor I desire an answer to these quaeries.

Quaere. 1. Whether men deserve to be pitied and spoken of compassionately,
Queries proposed to Mr. Joh. Goodwin, who asserteth a Catholic toleration of
all Religions, upon the ground of weakness, of free will, and want of grace.
as poor miser (...) which they (...) work of the Spirit of grace, and
supernatural (...) the false Prophet, Deuteronomy 13. and Elima^ the perverter of the
Gospel deserves to be pi^ied?

Query 2. Hence whether the sinful blindness of our in (...) that makes us,
because poor and miserable, (...) must not black the spotless justice of our
Lord, who yet punishes original mind-blindnesse in thousands of the sons of
Adam?

Query 3. Whether this hinteth not at (...) power of believing, and doing what
we can, otherwise God cannot deny further grace, or punish that natural
impotency of not knowing or not believing?

Quer. 4. Whether the same query may not be retorted upon the Justice of Gods
law, Deuteronomy. 13. (...), thus whether is it mee^ that the just God should command
a poo^^ miserable seducing Jew, who says, Let us go and worship strange Gods,
since this miserable impostor* being a son of sin and wrath by nature, cannot
come without much labor and contention of mind, yea nor without some good
degree of reason to judge so much as it is probable, nor at all to believe or
know certainly, that (...) no^ the true God, but the God of the Jews, only;
excluding on the world from saving means of salvation, is the only true God,
only to be served and worshipped, but only by an immediate and supernatural
work of the Spirit of God? are men either Jews under the Law, or Gen^^les under
the Gospel, to be punished and stoned to death, because God has not ^^parted
to them his Spirit of Grace, and supernatural (...)?

Quer. 5. Is it meet to punish David (suppose he were no King) for adultery and
treacherous murder, since without a work of the Spirit of Grace, who only
effectually (...) being led into temptation, he cannot eschew the (...) into
adultery and murder? are men-adulterer^ and men murderers to be punished,
because God has not imparted ^^to them his Spirit of grace, by whose actual
assistance only they can decline adultery and marther^

Quer. 6. Whether did even (...) teach that the Magistrate should punish with
the sword poor miserable men, because they cannot believe (...) of faith by the
supernatural illumination of the Spirit? whether is (...) the question
perverted when a Query is made, whether the Magistrate is to punish poor men
for not understanding, not (...) not judging, not believing supernatural
truths? we say the Magistrate or his sword has nothing to do with the elect
and internal acts of the mind, of understanding, knowing, judging or
believing, but only with the external acts of speaking, teaching, (...)
^ishing dangerous and pernicious doctrines to the (...) and destraction of the
souls of others?

Quer. 7. Whether the Magistrate does therefore force the conscience of a false
teacher, because he cannot, he dare not keep up doctrines pornicious to the
souls of others, but publish them, because his erroneous and evil conscience
judges them to be saving and necessary truths, when the Magistrate punishes
him, more then he forces the conscience of a murderer whom he punishes,
though this murderer judged in his conscience that the man be killed did him
so crying and oppressive an injury as in the court of God, deserved bodily
death; or when this man murdered his son in a sacrifice to God out of mere
conscience?

Quer. 8. Whether or no this divine, who will have (...) to be punished for
erring in fundamentalls, because they believe them not, does not say, none that
teaches there is ^^ God, that Jesus Christ is a grand impostor, and faller
(...) the truth, and says Satan is the only God of this world, and (...) to
be served, ought to be so much as rebuked, for without the immediate and
supernatural work of the Spirit of God, they cannot know or believe these
truth; and are men to be rebuked and preached against, because, God has not
imparted to them his Spirit of grace? whether does not this arguing evict all
the Ministry, rebukes, and exhortation, and moral extirpating of heresies by
the power of the word?

Quer. 9. Whether this be not the old argument of (...) who argued from liberty
of free will to conclude liberty of conscience? and said forcing of free will,
if the Magistrate hinder men to be a willing people to Christ, is an injury
done to conscience and to free will, and to God the Creat^^, of the soul? and
the same might be objected against the decree of (...)

Quer. 10. Whether on (...) are men punished, because God (...) not bestow the
Spirit of grace (...) them, (...)
by which they would fly all evill-doing, when they are punished for
evill-doing.

Quer. 11. Whereas this distinct argument presupposes that the Magistrate
should tolerate errors in fundamentalls, and in non-fundamentalls, because of
the difficulty of knowing of fundamentalls, must it not follow that men are far
rather to be tolerated, Augus. (...) dicu, relinqu^s liber^ orbatrio, cur enim
non in homicidiis and in stupris, and in quibuscunque (...) facinorib^^ and
flagiciis libere arbitrio dimittendum to esse proclamas? quae tamen omnia
justis leg ib^^ comprim^ utilissimuma ^^ahiberrimu^ est, dedit quidem De^^
homini liberani (...) sed nec bonam Infruct: ^osam, nec malam voluit esse
impunitam, li. 1. Con. Gaudenti c. 19. secundum est as fallatissimas
vanissim^sque rations, haberis laxatis atque dimissis, humana licentia
impu^^sta pe^cata omnia relinquentur, (...)
(...) ^^re in fundamentalls, (...) such as err in non-fundamentalls, and so
the more blasphemous that seducing teachers be, as if they deny there is a God,
and that nature, and chante rules all, and that Christ was an imposter, the
Gospel a fable, the Scripture a mere (...), the more they are to be pitied, and
(...) measure of indulgence and toleration is due to them then to such ^^ are
godly and err but in lesser points, that are more easily (...) concerning
usury, accidental killing of our neighbor, or the meaning of some places of
Scripture, or err in matters touching Church Government or the like?

Quer. 12. Since also (...) lay for a ground, that the Magistrate is not
infallible in judging of matters of Religion, especially that are
supernatural, such as the mysteries of the Gospel, the incarnation,
sufferings and death of Christ, his satisfaction for sinners, etc. and
Christians are not infallible in either reaching these to others, or in
believing them, for their faith and practice, and therefore the Magistrate
ought to tolerate all these; how then can this Divine talk of a certainty of
knowing and teaching, and holding of divine truthe^^ for by (...) principle of
toleration, that no man has infallibility in matters of Religion, since the
Prophets and Apostles fell asleep, there can be no certainty of faith either
in ruler or people, but all our faith in fundamentalls or non-fundamentalls,
must be fallible, dubious, conjectu^^^

And for such as yield a toleration in non-fundamentalls, but deny it in
fundamentals: 1. They must quit all arguments used by Libertin^^ for
toleration, from the nature of conscience, Most arguments of Libertines infer a
Catholic toleration in non-fundamentals, as well as (...) fundamentals.
that it can not be constrained. 2. That they (...) be a willing people that
follow Christ. 3. That (...) Lord of the conscience only. 4. That co^pulsion
(...) hypocrites. 5. That to know, maintain, and (...) truths of the Gospel,
is not in our power, as to kill or (...) to kill, because acts of the
understanding fall not (...) dominion of free will. 6. That the preaching of
the (...) and persuading by Scripture and reason, not the sword and strong
hand, is the way to propagate truth, and (...) pate heresies. 7. That the laws
of Moses against false (...), were only typical, and perished with other
(...), and therefore there is no warrant under the N^^ Testament for punishing
heretics; all these and the like (...) with equal strength conclude against
toleration of such (...) err in non-fundamentalls, as well as in fundamental
(...) in neither the one not the other, is the conscience to ^^^strained; nor
can Magistrates be Lords of the (...) fundamentalls, more then in
non-fundamentalls, and (...) must be a willing people in fundamentalls, as in
non-fundamentalls; nor can the sword, but preaching of the word only, be a
means of propagating of non-fundamentalls more then of fundamentalls, when then
Libertines (...) lost all these arguments, by reason of this (...) which here
has no place, their cause must be weak and lean.

To determine what is fundamental, what not, and the number of fundamental
points, and the least measure of knowledge of fundamentals, in which the
essence of saving faith may consist, or the simple want of the knowledge of
which fundamentalls, is inconsistent (...) saving faith in minimo quod non, is
more then Magistrat^ or Church can well know. Sure it borders with one of Gods
secrets, touching the final state of salvation, or damnation of particular men.

And it is as sure, this is a fundamental, to belie^^ that God is, that he is
a rewarder of those that seek hi^, that there is not a name under Heaven by
which men may (...) saved, but by the Name of Jesus that no man (...) come to
the Father, but by Christ, that he that (...) not, the wrath of God abides on
him, and he is condemned (...), then he was condemned and under wrath before,
even from the womb.

Nor is this a good argument of Bellius, where Christ is, what he does, how he
sits at the right hand of God, how he is one with the Father, many things of
the Trinity, of God, Predestination, Angels, the state of men after this life,
are points not so necessary to be known, for publicans and harlots who enter
into heaven, may be ignorant of them, and though they were known, they make
not a man better, according to that, if I had all knowledge, if I have not
love, it is nothing.

For 1. The exact knowledge of these are not so necessary, and that is all that
this argument can conclude: -- but the Scripture says no more, that publicans
and harlots, remaining publicans and harlots, enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, in sensu composito, nor when it says, The blind see, the deaf hear,
What deductions the spirit makes in the soul of an elect, knowing but a few
f^^dam, and going out of this life, thou knows?
the dead are raised, the meaning should be, blind, and deaf, remaining
blind, and deaf, do see and hear: or the dead remaining dead in their
graves, and void of life, do live and have life; but these that were blind
now see, when blindness is removed, otherwise some may take harlotry into
heaven with them: and because the word of God is a seed, when this is in the
heart of a dying harlot, Christ came to save sinners, and to save me: how, or
what way the Spirit sits upon this egg and warmes it, and what births of
saving truths, the Spirit joined with the spirit of a dying man, brings forth,
who knows? the repenting thief knew Christ to be the Savior of men, and a
King, who could dispose of heaven, but what deductions the Spirit made with in,
who knows? nor is it a truth that the knowledge of any revealed truths of God
makes no man the better; for it leanes on this ground, That,

1. To know revealed truths of God, is a commanded worship of God.
The spiritual Law of God commands not a conformity between the understanding
power of the soul and the Law, to require that the mind conceive, apprehend,
and know God, and his will, as he reveals himself to us, which yet is
included in the command of loving of God with all the heart, with all the
soul, with all the strength, and so with all the mind, though that knowledge
be directed to no other practice, but belief.

2. It leanes upon another false ground, that to believe (I speak of an
intellectual assenting to divine truth^) it being an act of the understanding,
and a necessary result of knowledge does not make a man better, which yet is
most false, for beside that it is commanded, not to believe a re^^aled truth,
is a sin, and renders men morally ill, and wor^^ now that text that says, 1
Cor. 13. Though I had all knowledge, says also, though I had all faith, yea
though I gave my goods in the poor, and my body to be burnt, I am nothing;
that is, I cannot be saved, or any other then a damned hypocrite that tinkles
like gold, and is but brass: now by this reason, to give to the poor, to
believe omnipotency in miracles, should not be commanded of God.

Davenentius thinks a General confession of the Catholic Church sufficient,
One General Confession of faith, without a particular sense containing the
true and orthodox meaning of the word, not sufficient.
and that between us and Lutherans there is not required a confession in
particulars controverted. But it is true Lutherans and we agree in most
fundamentalls, but a confession in general fundamentals when expounded and
believed practically by each side (as it must be) must have contrary senses to
each side; now this way the Jews and Samaritans both agreed, there was one
God, and that the Messiah should come, and that he should tell them all things,
yet one confession common to both, that each might believe and be saved was not
possible, for Christ says, Joh^^. The Samaritans worshipped they knew not
what, but salvation is of the Jews: And should Christians and Jews agree in
one general confession drawn out of the Old Testament, that there is one God,
that the Messiah is, he that dies for the sins of his people, that the
Decalogue it a perfect rule, (...) we could not swear and subscribe that
confession, for (...) expounded by the Jews, it could not be the doctrine of
the Old Testament, nor any part of the word of God, but (...) contradictory
thereunto as any point of heathen Divinity, for fundamentalls to some may be,
and are untruths to others, even this, Diverse pious conferences between us and
Lutherans.
that the Messiah Christ is the Savior of the world, both Jews, and we say,
but they mean one thing by Messiah, we another; so we cannot have one faith,
nor one confession.

I deny not, but these were pious conferences, that at Lipse an. 1631. in which
there were on the one side, Matthias Hocus, Polycarpus Leiserus, Henricus
Haffuerus; on the other side, Joan. Bergius, Joan. Crotius, Theophilus
Nenbergius, who went through the Augustine confession and agreed in the truth,
almost in all.

At the agreement or concord of Marpurge, an. 1529. were Luther, Melanthon,
Osiander, Brentius, Stephanus Agricola, who brake not the bond of peace with
Zwinglius, Bucer, Hedion, there present.

At the conference of Wittingberge, an. 1536. where were present Capito,
Bucerus, Musculus, and other grave Divines of higher Germany; on the other
side, Luther, Melanthon, Pomeranus, Cruciger, in which Luther said, brethren,
If ye teach and believe that the true body and true blood of the Lord is
exhibited in the Supper, and quod he percept^o vere fiat, and that truly or
really there is a receiving thereof, we agree as brethren; but the truth is,
there were contrary faiths touching the presence of Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament; and therefore I humbly conceive all such General confessions as
must be a coat to cover two contrary faiths, is but a daubing of the matter
with untempered mortar; much dealing like this was in the Council of Trent, in
which neither Papist nor Protestant was condemned, and yet the truth suffered;
I speak not this as if each side could exactly know every lith and vein of
the controversy, for we prophecy but in part, but to show I cannot but
abominate truth and falsehood, patched up in one confession of faith; for if
two men should agree in such a bargain, A covenants with B to give him a ship
full of spices; B promises to give an hundredth thousand pounds for these
spices, A believes they are metaphorical spices he gives, B believes they are
the most real and excellent spices of Egypt; B promises a hundredth thousand
pounds of field stones, A expects good, real, and true money; this were but
mutual juggling of one with another. It were another consideration, if both
sides agreeing in this General confession were ignorant, and did neither know
nor believe any sense that were destructive to the true and sound sense of the
Confession, for then they might be saved by, or in one and the same faith of
this General Confession, whereas now the contrary senses of this Confession
make them now not one General, but two particular (...), and contradictory
faiths; for the question is, whether the side believing the General Confession
with a sense in the consequence, that destroys the text, have any faith at all
of this General Confession. For it is a question to me whether a Turk has
the faith of this point, that there is a God, since he believes positively so
many blasphemous fooleries of this God, as the Alcharon suggesteth, and whether
a Papist as a Papist, believes Christ to be the only one Savior of sinners,
since withal he believes so many thousand Gods and true Christ's to be at once
in sundry places, and so many blasphemies against the nature, offices, and
essential properties of Christ, as the Romish faith teaches.

But ye will say, it is not charity to say that Papists have not the faith of
the one only Savior, seeing he would dye for that point, and for the
consequences that there be many Saviors, if the monster of
tran-substantiation stand, yet he neither knows nor believes the logical
consequence, nor the consequent, but hates both, to wit, if the bread be
truly and really the Savior that dyed on the cross, ergo, how many hoasts
and consecrated breads there be, there must be as many a thousand, ten
thousand Christ's and Gods, yea he would be burnt quick before be deny this
truth, there is but one only Savior the Son of Mary; then if ye hang him or
(...) him for believing transubstantiation, since he is otherwise a (...),
pious and just man, ye hang him for the mere ignorance of a poor logical
consequence, and for no blasphemy: and the like may be said of Familists,
Antinomians, and others, who (as they say) are godly men, and cannot see the
logical consequences, and absurd blasphemies that you with your wit, deduce
from their doctrine, for their sou^e hates these blasphemies as much as you.

Ans. They hate God, and love blasphemies in the consequence, who obstinately
hold them in the antecedent
I say not for believing tran-substantiation only, men are to be hanged; the
question now is of bodily punishing, hanging and burning quick, are particular
kinds of punishing, in which I should be as sparing as another man, but the
question may draw to this, whether the Laws of England and Scotland be bloody
and unjust, that ordains seminary Priests and Jesuits, whose trade it is to
seduce souls to the whole body of Popery, to be hanged. I conceive they are
most just Laws, and warranted by Deuteronomy. 13. and many other Scriptures, and that
the King and Parliaments of either Kingdoms serve Christ, and kiss the Son in
making and executing these Laws.

2. I see nothing said against bodily punishing of such as teach
transubstantiation to others: for the Idolaters and Seducers in the Old
Testament believed the same way, there is one true God Jehovah that brought
them out of Egypt, Exodus 32. 4, 5. Jeroboam who made two Gods, and Jehu who
was zealous for Jehovah, 1 King. 13. 6. c. 13. 1, 2, 3. 2 King. 9. 25. 36, 37.
c. 10. 16. 20, 21. and Joram, 2 King. 5. 7. acknowledged God could kill and
make alive, and was just in his promises and threatenings, yet worshipped the
golden calves, those who cried the Temple of the Lord, must acknowledge there
was but one true God, yet they burnt incense to Baal, and killed their children
to Molech, Jer. 7. 4, 5 9. 30, 31. They that asked of Jehovah the ordinances of
their God, and fasted to Jehovah, Esa. 58. 1, 2, 3, 4. yet inflamed themselves
under every green tree, Esa. 57. 5. and slew their children under the clifts of
the rocks: the heathen knew God, and one God, who made the heaven and the
earth, and worshipped him, though ignorantly, (...) Romans 1. 20, 21. Act. 17.
23. yet denied and hated this logical consequence that they had forsaken the
Lord, Jer. 9. 13, 14. or Deuteronomy. 32. 18. forgotten the rock that begat them, Ps.
78. 11. 41. Ps. 107. 12, 13. that they forsook him days without number; yea
they did more then God required, to keep God in their mind, and not forget him
as they said, they changed him into the form of corruptible things to be
memorialls of God to them; and the Lord said, For all this, they r^fuse to know
me; they have said, It is not the Lord, yea they would have dyed for it, rather
then have said, there is no God that made heaven and earth. And they did err
indeed, in a consequence, against the light of nature, yet the irreligious and
wicked stopping of eyes and ears at natural consequences in matters of
Religion is no innocent (...) as is clear, Esa. 44. 18. They have not known,
nor understood* for he has shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their
hearts, that they cannot understand, 19. And none considers in his heart,
neither is there knowledge, nor understanding to say, I have but in part of it
in the fire, yea also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof, I have
roasted flesh and eaten it, and shall I make the residue thereof a^
abomination, shall I fall down to the flock of a tree, 20. He seedeth on
ashes, etc.

Now as Israel said ever, the Creator of the ends of the earth is our God, the
tree is but a likeness and resemblance of God, Esa. 18. 18. Esa. 46. 5, 6, 7.
so they denied this consequence, ergo, a part of your God is burnt in the fire,
and with the coals of your burnt God, you bake bread, roast flesh, and warm
your bodies when you are cold, and worship a lie, and an abomination, as the
Papists say, we adore very Christ in, and under the accidents of the bread,
even the same God-man, Mary's Son, who dyed on the cross; yet they deny this
consequence, ergo, a part of your God and Savior is baken in the oven, eaten,
and cast out with the draught, and a part thereof, even of the same floor and
dough is made a God by the Priest, and ye say, I will b^^ down and worship the
residue of that which the baker did bake, and roast, in the oven. and so ye
worship a lie, and an abomination, as the old Idolaters did, Esa. 44. yet the
Papist will deny this consequence, that he multiplyes Gods as loaves are
multiplied in an oven; because as Esaiah says, he knows not, he
understands not, God has shut his eyes; certainly that knowledge he denies
to the Idolator, is the natural knowledge of a natural consequence. if ye
worship a bit of an ash-tree, or a bit of bread, ergo, the half of your God,
or the quarter thereof, is baken in an oven, ergo, there is a lie, and an
abomination in your right hand; then the denial of logical consequences in
Religion, and the teaching thereof to others, may be, and is an heresy, and
punishable by the Magistrate, as Deuteronomy. 13. and Exodus 32. so Christ rebukes
Matthew. 22. Saduces as ignorant of the Scripture, when they denied but the
consequence or a logical connection, as God is not the God of the dead but of
the living, ergo, the dead must rise again, and Abraham must live, and his
body be raised from the dead. And 2. the Idolaters who were to dye by the Law
of God, Exodus 32. Deuteronomy. 13. denied not the true God more then our false
teachers do now. We see no reason why none should be false teachers, but such
only as deny fundamentals, and that pertinaciously, though these by Divines be
called Heretics.

1. They may be false teachers, and so punishable, who err not in
fundamentals.
Romans 16. 17. Paul says, Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them that cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them, then as we are not to distinguish where the Law and the Word of God
does not distinguish, so we are to count them false teachers, who lead in a
faction in the Church, contrary to any doctrine of truth, whether fundamental
or not fundamental, and to avoid them as Seducers.

2. Peter's error, since he believed Christ was come, Matthew. 16. 17. was not
fundamental, but consistent with faith, yet Paul withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed, and if he had pertinaciously gone on to walk not
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, since Paul would not have given
place by subjection to such, no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
he should have been worthy of more then rebuke, yea of higher censure, the like
we must say of Barnabas and other Jews, who all sinned though in a far
inferior degree with these, who came in privily to spy out the Christian
liberty of the Gentiles to bring them into bondage, under the Ceremonial law.

3. Gal. 1. 8. Paul says, If we or an Angel from heaven should preach (any
other Gospel) then that which we have preached, let him be accursed; which
place, with good warrant, our Divines bring against the unwritten traditions of
Papists, of what kind soever they be, fundamentalls or non-fundamentalls,
whether they be obtruded as necessary points of salvation or not necessary, but
accidentalls, or arbitrary points, yet conducing for the better observing of
necessary points, for I have proved elsewhere, that Papists esteem their
unwritten traditions, not necessary points of faith, yea many of them to be
accidentals, serving only ad mellus esse, Divine right of Churchgovernment.
for order and decency, yea and great Doctors of them say, neither the Pope nor
the Church can devile novum dogma fidei, a new article of Faith, or a new
Sacrament: nor can we say that the adding of Romish ceremonialls, such as
consecrating of Churches, baptising of bells, sign of the cross, are
fundamental errors, and inconsistent with saving faith; the text Gal. 1. 8,
9. evinceth that they or some other Gospel or doctrine, beside that the
Galathians had learned (for Paul taught the Galathians many points besides
fundamental only) and so that the teachers of them were accursed, and so to
be separated from, rebuked, withstood, censured, yea cut off as troublers of
the Church, Gal. 5.

4. These to whom the Spirit of God gives the title due to false teachers are
punishable as false teachers and heretics, though in a less degree. But the
Holy Ghost gives the title due to false teachers to such as err not in
fundamentalls, ergo, the assumption is made good by Tit. 1. 13, 14. the Apostle
wills them to be rebuked as not sound in the faith, as those that turn
others from the truth in giving (...) to Jewish fables and commandments of
men, to fables and needless Genealogies, and vain janglings, and strivings
about the Law that were unprofitable and vain: now these questions about
Genealogies and the Law, opinions on either sides being vain and unprofitable,
and not edifying in the faith could not be fundamental errors of themselves,
and inconsistent with saving grace and salvation, but hay and stubble builded
upon the foundation: yet consider what the Holy Ghost says of them, Tit. 1.
10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers, especially they
of the circumcision, 11. whose mouth must be stopped, who subvert whole houses,
teaching things they ought not, 13. Rebuke them sharply that they may be sound
in the faith, and to soundness in the faith he opposes, v. 14. giving heed
unto Jewish fables and commandments of men that turn from the truth, 1 Timothy
6. 3. If any man teach otherwise (then I have taught; now Paul's doctrine of
widows, of elders, and not sudden accusing them, his charge to Timothy not to
drink water, but a little wine, were not fundamentalls, the ignorance whereof
excludes men from salvation,) If any man consent not to the wholesome words,
even the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, 4. He is proud knowing nothing as be ought, doting about
questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railing, evil
surmisings, 5. Perverse disputing of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth, supposing that gain is godliness, from such turn away; then
doting about questions, strife of words, besides, not consenting to the words
of Christ and doctrine of godliness, is disputing of men of corrupt minds, from
which we are to turn away. 1 Timothy 1. 3.
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into M^cedonia, that
thou might charge some that they teach no other doctrine. 4. Neither give
heed to fables and endless Genealogies, which minister questions, rather then
edifying, which is in faith, then to preach fables and endless Genealogies
which are not fundamental errors, are yet another doctrine then the Apostles
taught, and those that so teach are to be charged to teach no such thing, and
so under two or three witnesses* if they wilfully continue therein; 1 Timothy 5.
19, 20.
to be accused and censured, yea and we are to avoid them, and not to receive
them in our houses, nor bid them God speed, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.
and so non-fundamentalls as questions of Genealogies come in under the name of
(...) of teaching (...) doctrine. Now sure questions of Genealogies are but the
hay and stubble that are builded on the foundation, 2 Job. 10, 11 1 Timothy 1. 3,
4. 1 Cor. 3.
which shall suffer burning, when the teacher holding the foundation Christ shall
be saved, yea such as teach circumcision, though with Christ, then must teach
another Gospel, though not as necessary to justification, as Peter and
Barnabas, compelled the Gentiles to be circumcised* though they believed that
circumcision was not necessary to salvation. Act. 2.
And it should be hard to assert the believing of the day of Christ to be at
hand, Act. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
since the believing of it was an article of faith, the time when, or how soon,
in the believing Thessalonians, though they were misled by some false
teachers, is nothing so fundamental as that an error touching that time must
be inconsistent with saving faith, for the Apostles said, Diverse things not
fundamentally believed with certainty of faith.
These were the last days, and Christ had told, the day and hour was known to
no man, no not to the Angels, yet Paul insinuates as much, as they did, shake
the faith of the Thessal^nians, who made them believe, it was at hand. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. We beseech you brethren by the coming of the Lord Jesus -- that
ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

Yea, 5. We believe with certainty of faith, many things which are not
fundamentals, as 2 Pet. 3. 8. But (beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing,
that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day. How many (suppose we) are in glory that dyed ignorant of this, and had
not faith, or any certainty of faith of this point, that time (...) with God no
coexistence of a duration long and (...) Yet Peter proposes it to be believed
with certain^y of faith, and how many points of sacred history does the (...)
Ghost tell us Heb. 11. of Caine and Abels sacrificing, (...) Abraham sojourning
in a strange Country, of Sarabs (...) a child in her old age, of Isaacks
blessing of Jacob, and Joseph's worshipping leaning on the end of a staff,
Moses being hid three months, the falling of the Walls of Jerich^, which we
believe by certainty of divine faith, that are not fundamentals? Yea, and if we
believe not whatever Paul and the rest of the Apostles have written, and what
Moses and the Prophets, have said, we must take them to be false witnesses in
saying, preaching, and writing what is not true, as Paul (...), 1 Cor. 15. 15.
and the Apostles says, Act. 5. 32. And we are his (...) of these things, and
so is also the Holy Ghost. Now (...) things refer not only to Christ's death
and resurrection, but to points not fundamental: as namely who were the
Instruments of his death, even the High Priest, Pharisees and cheife-Priests,
ver. 30. Whom ye slew and hanged on ^ tree, Act. 4. 10. Whom ye crucified,
Act. 2. 36. Whom ye have crucified. Now the Apostles and the Holy Ghost were
witnesses of the truth of both fundamentals and non-fundamentals, of all that
Jesus began to do and teach, until the day (...) was taken up to heaven, as
is clear, Act. 1. 8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem and in
Judea, and in Samaria, and (...) the uttermost part of the earth, Luke 24. 48.
Ye are my witnesses of these things, that is, ver. 44. Of all things that must
be fulfilled with were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning me, then the witnessing of the sacrificed, types, and
particular ceremonies that shadowed out Christ, of his being borne in
Bethlehem, Mic. 2. of his being crucified between two transgressors, Esaias 53.
of his riding (...) Jerusalem on an Ass colt. Zach. 9. Of his casting out
buyers (...) out of the Temple, through his zeal to the house of God, Psalm.
69. of the betraying of him by Judas, and (...) historical things that are not
fundamentals, yet all th^^ were a part of the Apostles and the Holy Ghosts
testimony, Act. 5. 32. And to be believed with divine certi^ude of (...) faith,
no less then the Articles of fundamentalls, that Christ was the son of man,
and died for our sins and rose for our righteousness, except we say that the
Apostles are false witnesses, and make God a liar, in saying that Judas
betrayed him not, and that Barrabas a Murderer was not preferred to him, 1 Cor
15. 1^. Job. 3. 33. 1 Job. 5. 10. For if we give God the lie in
non-fundamentals, and turn non-fundamentals into controversies and
conjectures, and think we must believe fundamentals, one or two fixedly and
peremptorily, and lead a good life, and so we are saved but not otherwise, but
as touching non-fundamentalls, we may believe these with a reserve and a
demurre, and may believe them for a day, or an hour, and deny them to morrow,
and again, be carried about with a new wind of doctrine and believe the third
day, and deny them the fourth day, believe them the fifth day, and deny them the
sixth day, and so make a whirly-gigge of our faith, and a new faith for a
new-moone, or for a half, and a quarter moon, as the Independents, in their
Apology makes this a principle of their faith to believe these things so, as
we leave room for a new light to cast a board again at the blowing of the
wind of a new fancy (of which we have seen more in the Assembly of Divines,
Romans in a (...). f. 7 fides millinaria potest esse omnium pessima.
these four years, past then we desire to see in any that profess godliness)
and as the Holland-Arminians say (from whom new lights or old darknesses have
their rise) a faith of a thousand years may be the worst of all, which (say
we) is most false, Believing of truths revealed of God with a reserve
blasphemous, and concerning believers in Scepticks and (...),
a false opinion of God, and a thousand year old lie, a gray-haird untruth is
the worst of conjectures, but faith it neither is, nor can be called. But the
late Independents, and the new Libertines of England do only say such a monthly
faith is to be tolerated because of the darkness of our mind in the matters of
God, which yet is faith, not but a conjectural opinion. But they say, by a
command of God, we must have no other faith except in some few fundamentals,
and no man since Adam died (except the man Christ) ever knew or could determine
how few, or how many, so our faith in fundamentals in that, totters, for they
say, these precepts and commands of the Holy Ghost. Try the spirits whither
they be of God or no. Try al things, hold that which is good, and the example
of the noble Bereans who examined Paul's doctrine, by the Scriptures, does lay a
divine command in them to believe non-fundamentals with a reserve. Yea they say
with the Arminians, etc. that it is against liberty of prophesying, whereas
liberty of lying in the name of the Lord is of the devil, who has taken
liberty or rather helish license to lie from the beginning, and they say, it is
against our growing in knowl^dge, and the prayers of the Saints that God would
open their eyes to see the wonders of his Law, and lead them into all truth,
and against the prophesies that in the last days the earth shall be filled with
the knowledge of the Lord, the light of the moon shall be as the light of the
sun, and the light of the sun, as the light of seven days, and the day star
shall arise in the hearts of many, and the spirit shall be powered on all flesh,
young and old, maids and children. To all which I say, either the Spirit of God
moves men to the faith of this (there is no Church visible on earth, but such
as is constituted of believers, such as those of Corinth, and Rome, and others
were, after they were planted and watered by the Apostles) or no. If no, they
have not faith of it, and so it is. 1. No truth of God to Independents, etc.
for which they can suffer, but a mere opinion, then they cannot suffer for it
in faith, and to believe any truth of God because the Lord so says, Beleev^ng
with a reserve against the motion of the Holy Ghost
is wrought only by the Holy Ghost, if it be wrought by the Holy Ghost, then it
is a truth of God, and a divine truth, for the Holy Ghost moves no man to
believe a lie, for a truth of God, if it be a divine truth then does not the
Holy Ghost will you so to believe it for a truth, as you must upon a new light
believe the contrary to morrow. For I renew the argument in its full strength,
touching the faith of the contradicent which you believed the last day, either
the Holy Ghost must move you to believe that contradicent as a truth of God, or
no: I^ no, It is not divine faith you have of it; if yea, then the faith of the
former was the believing of a lie, Believing with a reserve against the
stability of faith.
so that you must make the Holy Ghost the father of believing a lie. 2. The
object of divine faith a lie.

2 This is to teach us to be carried about with every wind of doctrine, whereas
faith of fundamentals or non-fundamentals is to believe a truth, because so
says the Lord, that cannot lie, nor speak untruth, but you will men to
believe those non-fundamental truths, so as they may be as well lies as divine
truths

3. Against the trying of all things, and spirits, enjoined by the Holy Ghost.
These Precepts, Try the Spirits, Try all things, enjoyne an examination of
fundamentalls, as well as non-fundamentalls: and what reason have Independents
to say these Precepts hold in non-fundamentalls only. Mr. John Goodwin with
better ground says, they hold in all, for must we hold that which is good
only in non-fundamentalls? And did not the Bereans try Paul's doctrine by the
Scripture, in the most and only necessary fundamental which Paul preached,
that Jesus Christ was the Messiah that dyed, rose again, Act. 17. 3. and are
therefore commended by the Holy Ghost, v. 10. 11? above those of Thessalonica,
and must we believe every Spirit who preach fundamental truths, or
fundamental errors, who say Christ is not yet come in the flesh, upon trust?
the contrary of which John expressly enjoyneth, 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3: yea we are
rather to try fundamentalls, and to walk upon sure and unmovable principles,
since an error here hazardeth our eternal salvation, and is of as great
concernment as our souls are, but errors or mistakes in non-fundamentalls,
though they be sins, yet are consistent with saving faith, and the state of
salvation.

4. Try all things, try the spirits, must have this sense, believe what ever
God says, be it fundamental or non-fundamentall, not only after you have
searched the Scriptures, and sound it agreeable thereunto, as the Bereans did,
but though you find it consonant to the writings of the Prophets and Apostles;
yet because you are not infallible, nor the Spirit that leads you therein
infallible, believe it with a reserve (say the Independents) and with leaving
place to a new light, so as you must believe it to day to be a truth of God, to
morrow to be a lie, the third day a truth, the fourth day a lie, and so a
circle till your doomsday come, so as you must ever believe and learn, never
come to a settlement and establishing in the truth; but dye trying, dye
doubting, dye with a trepedation and a reserve, and dye and live a Skeptic,
like the Philosophers that said they knew nothing, and I think Libertines
cannot but be Scepticks, and there is more to be said for the Scepticisme of
some, then the Libertinisme of others.

5. Would these Masters argue formally, they must say what ever doctrine, we
are to try before we receive it, that we may uncompelledly receive and believe
it, after trial that ought to be tolerated by the Magistrate in doctrine and
practice, or profession suitable thereunto before men.

I would assume, But whether there be a God, and but one God, and all
fundamentalls or non-fundamentalls, be divine truths; yea, and whether
fornication be sin, and plurality of wives, and community of goods, and
spoiling of wicked men of their wives, and their lands, and possessions, as the
Israelites spoiled the Egyptians, are such truths that we must try before we
receive, believe, and accordingly believe and practice; ergo, the Magistrate is
to tolerate fornication, plurality of wives, spoiling of men of their
possessions and goods, and community of goods, but the conclusion is absurd and
blasphemous, and against the Law of nature; for if there be no Magistracy, nor
violence to be done to ill-doers under the New Testament, neither must we
defend our own lives, nor fly, nor resist injuries, but turn up the other
cheek to him that smites the one, and if a man take your cloak, give him your
coat also, according to the sense that Anabaptists put on the words; yea and
cut off your hands and feet, pluck out your eyes, if they cause you to offend
and shed your own blood, which is the greatest and most unnatural violence
that is.

6. The sense of this ( Try all, and hold that which is good) must be, Try and
search the true senses of divine truths, and then having tried and believed,
hold the truth, and believe it for a day, and yield to the light of the just
contrary to morrow, and having found a contrary light, try that the third
morrow, and yield to another new and contrary light the third morrow. Now the
Holy Ghost must command doubting by that means, and doubting till we lose
faith, and find it again, and lose it again in a circle, and if we must try
all things, and try all spirits, the Bereans must try their own trying, and
their own doubtings and believing, and so into infinite; and when they find
Christ to be in Paul's doctrine, and that of Moses and the Prophets, yet must
they try and doubt, and believe the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and
of the Holy Ghost, with the Libertines reserve, waiting when the Holy Ghost
shall give himself the lie, and say, I moved you to believe such a truth, and
such an article of faith the last year, but now after a more deep
consideration, I move you to believe the contrary, yet so as ye leave room to
my new light.

7. Faith with a reserve against our prayers for knowledge, and growing therein.
The sense also of these ( Lord enlighten mine eyes) that I may know thee with
a suller evidence not of Moonlight, but of Daylight, or as of seven days
into one, be this, Lord open my eyes, and increase my knowledge, grant that
thy holy Spirit may bestow upon my dark soul more Scepticall, conjecturall,
and fluctuating knowledge to know and believe things with a reserve, and with a
leaving of room to believe the contrary to morrow of that which I believe to
day, and the contradicent of that the third day which I shall believe to
morrow, and so till I dye; let me, Lord, have the grace of a circular faith,
running like the wheels of the windmill; for the growing knowledge we seek of
God as in a way of growing ever in this life, till grace be turned into glory,
2 Pet. 3. 18. if our growth of knowledge stand, as Libertines say, in a
circular motion from darkness to light, and back again from light to
darkness, like the motion of a beast in a horse-mill, so as I know, and learn
and believe this topicke truth of faith to day, I unknow, I unlearn and deny it
to morrow as an untruth: And again, I take it up the third day as a truth;
then we seek in prayer not settled and fixed knowledge, and a well-rooted
faith of truths to believe them without a reserve, or a demurre, to sen^ way
the opinion I have of this non-fundamentall or fundamental truth as a gross
mistake, and to welcome the just contrary opinion as a truth: And again, to
send it away upon a new light, etc. now this is but a mocking of God to pray
for his Spirit that we may barter and change opinions with every new Moon;
for our prayer for new light, is not that the Holy Ghost would teach us faith
and opinion of truths and falsehoods in a circle; but that God, 1. Would give
the Spirit of revelation to see Gospel truths with a clear revelation of
faith. 2. That he would be pleased to cause that light by which we see the
same ancient Gospel Truths, shine more fully, with a larger measure of heavenly
evidence. 3. That our light may so grow into the perfect day, that we see new
deductions, consequences, and heavenly new fresh conclusions from the former
truth of God. But by scepticall faith, we pray that God would give us a
contrary new light, to get a new faith, of truths, formerly believed
contradicent to the word of God, and to that faith which produced joy, yea joy
unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 7, 8. and glorying in tribulation, and
sweetness of peace, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. for this, not the light of the Moon
turned in the light of the Sun, or of the Sun, as seven days in one, but light
turned in night darkness, the truth in a lie, and the Spirit of truth made
the father of lies

8. The Apostles never bid us know any truth of God with a reserve. The Holy
Ghost bids us not believe with a reserve.
Libertines bi^lus, the Apostles, and the Holy Ghost in them, bids us know
assuredly that Jesus is Christ the Lord, they exhort us to be rooted and
established in the faith, Col. 2. to be fully persuaded of all, both
fundamentalls, and the historicalls, of the birth, life, miracles, words,
facts, death, sufferings, and burial, resurrection, ascension, etc. of Christ,
as Luke exhorts Theophilus, Luke 1. 1, 2, 3. yea the Apostle clearly Heb. 5.
exhorts to the faith of many points concerning Christ, beside the first
principles of the Oracles of God; that of Catecheticke points fit for babes who
have not stomachs to bear stronger food, v. 12. 13. 1. Because he rebukes
them for being dull of hearing, which is opposite to being teachers of the word
of truth to others; which must insinuate they were to have faith, and not
conjecturall and fluctuating opinions of the things they were to teach. 2. He
reproves them for that they had not their senses exercised to discern good and
ill, and that they were unskilful in the words of righteousness. 3. He
exhorts them, chap. 6. 1. to be carried on to perfection, beyond the
principles of the doctrine of Christ. Now to be carried to know all, except
some fundamentalls and principles with a reserve and a doubting of the truth,
is not to have the senses exercised to discern good and ill, nor to be skillful
in the word of truth, nor to go on to perfection, but to stand still, as in a
horse-mill, and be at the same perfection of knowledge in knowing and believing
all, even fundamentalls, say some, or all non-fundamentalls, say other
Libertines, with a reserve, and a resolution to judge them all falsehood and
lies.

9. It argues the word of God, of obscurity and darkness, as not being able to
instruct us in all truths, and renders it as a nose of wax in all
non-fundamentals, histories, narrations, etc. in which notwithstanding the
Scripture is as evident, plain, simple, obvious to the lowest capacities in
most points, except some few Prophesies, as it is in fundamentalls, and lays a
blasphemous charge on the Holy Ghost, as if he had written the Scriptures,
upon an intention that we should have no assured and fixed knowledge, no faith
but a mere probable opinion, a conjecturall, dubious apprehension of truths,
with a reserve to believe the contrary, as if the Lords purpose had been that
we should all be Scepticks, and dye doubting: and how then can God in justice
punish any man, for not believing and doing the will of our Master and Lord? If
it be unpossible even by the light of the Spirit to know his will in whole (as
some say) and in the most part (as others say) yea it must not be our sinful
darkness in that we cannot believe most of the matters of God, but with a
reserve, but it is the will and command of God we do so: and how shall we know
the second faith contradictory to the former to be the mind of God; and not
the first, and the third, and not the second, and the fourth; and not the
third, and so to the end? since we are to believe all the four with a reserve,
and all to our dying day with a reserve for the word is alike dubious now as in
Paul's days: and since the Apostles charge us to believe and be comforted in
believing the truths which they believed, not as Apostles, but as Christians,
and as fellow-Citizens with us, we must say that the Apostles also believed
with a reserve, which is blasphemous.

10 All our practices according to fundamentals or nonfundamentals must be in
faith, To believe with a reserve contrary to our doing and suffering for truth
in faith.
that is, with a persuasion that what we do is according to the revealed will
of God, otherwise we sin, Romans 14. 23. and are condemned in all we do. But if
this faith with a reserve, be the rule of our practice, we can do nothing in
faith, but with a resolve upon doubting: so what you do, may as possibly be
murder, idolatry, stealing, lying, as obedience to God, yea, you must believe,
that what you do to day is lawful, but yet so, as to morrowyou must believe
upon a new light, that it is unlawful and sin, yea, and this makes the
erroneous conscience the rule of your faith, and practice, for if the holy
ghost command you to believe such points, with the faith of a reserve, he must
command you to practice, according to the present faith that he commands you to
have of those truths. But the present you have, may be the belief of a lie and
a blasphemous untruth, and so the ten Commandments should be a rule to no
man. But his erroneous conscience, if then he believe that it is such
acceptable worship as God craved of Abraham, that you sacrifice your Son to
God, you believe it with a reserve, and you are to practice it with a reserve,
and obliged to practice what you are obliged to believe: but you are obliged
to believe with a reserve, that it is acceptable service to God to sacrifice
your child to him; for it is a nonfundamentall not clearly determined in the
word, as least it is contraverted by many that go for godly people. Now if so,
God shall obliege men to sin and not to sin; to do his revealed will, and not
to do his revealed will, in the same commandment, which were blasphemous, now
that we are to practice according to our faith of reserve. I prove by the
doctrine of Libertines, for they teach a man is to suffer death, and any
torment, rather then that he say, there be three persons in one God, and two
natures and one person in Christ, and that Presbyterian Government is lawful,
that the Christian Prince is to punish false teachers if he believe in his
conscience, though he is to believe with a reserve and doubt somely, that
these are truths contrary to the word of God, then is his faith with a reserve,
which may be the faith of a lie, his only oblieging rule of his practice,
according to the way of Libertines. I confess he is rather to suffer death
then to profess any doctrine contrary to the dictates even of an erroneous
conscience, because he should choose afflictions rather then sin. But when we
are commanded faith with a reserve, as they say, we are commanded to believe a
lie (which is blasphemous) and what we are commanded to believe by the Lord in
his word, that must be an oblieging rule to our practice, and so must we be
obliged to sin; nor can it be said to offer your child to God in a sacrifice,
is against the light, and a clear Law of nature, and a fundamental error;
for in this dispute Libertines arguments are for a toleration of all, whether
they err in fundamentalls or non-fundamentalls, nor can they determine what is
of their own natural, are controversall and disputable to humane reason, Two
distinctions necessary touching controverted points.
and what not, for we either speak what are de facto actually controverted, in
all the Christian world, or what be those that in regard of their disproportion
to humane reason, of their own nature, may be controverted. 2. Or we speak of
those which are not controversall amongst Christians, who acknowledge the Old
and New Testament, to be the word of God, and what are not clearly determined
in the word; and touching the former, there is nothing we know not controverted
in the Christian world, except that there is a God; and that is also
controverted two ways: Atheists so far wink, though nature cannot, no not
in devils, and godless men run it self stark blind, as they deny there is
a God, out of malice. 2. They cavil at all arguments brought to prove that
there must be a God, though they be strong enough for the wit of the devil to
answer.

Now for these that are of their own nature controversall (though no truths,
Some things of their own nature not controversall, yet the deductions from them
to our blind nature, are controversall.
especially truths revealed and spoken by the God of truth, are in themselves
controversall, or such as can be opposed) yet are there two sorts of truths
that are in relation to humane reason controvertable. 1. The principles of
nature that God is, that he is infinite, omnipotent, just, merciful,
omniscient, etc. to be loved, served, obeyed, etc. that superiors and parents
are to be honored, our neighbor not to be hurt, that we should do to
others as we would they should do to us, are not of themselves controversall;
but the practical conclusions drawn from thence are controversall in regard
of our darkness, as polygamy, community of goods, all these, whether the
Saints may rob and spoil wicked men of their possessions, and kill them upon
the right, and authority of Saintship, are of themselves controversall in
relation to our nature who acknowledge Scripture to be the word of God; but
for supernatural truths that cannot find lodging in the sphere, or under the
shadow of natural reason, such as the doctrine of one God in three persons of
the incarnation of two natures in Christ, of the imputed righteousness of
Christ, of salvation by believing in a crucified Savior, the resurrection of
the dead; Fundamentalls of faith most controversall to our blind nature.
and those that are not knowable but by supernatural revelation, though they
be the fundamentalls of the Christian faith, yet are they more controversall of
themselves then the most part of non-fundamentalls, as Joh. Goodwin does
rightly observe, for nature has more shadow of reason to cavil and plead
against these, then any other truths; if then no coercive power ought to be
used against such as teach errors contrary to the word of God, and against
fundamentalls, because such points are controversall, there is far more
warrant to free those from all coercive power who deny all principles of the
Christian faith, and turn so from the faith that they deny the word of God,
the books of the Old and New Testament, to be any thing but phansied fables,
because they teach things most controversall; and so upon the grounds of
Libertines, one Catholic toleration is due to all; and if any shall turn Jew
or Mohammedan, or Indian or Heathenish in his Religion, having been a glistering
star in the Firmament of Christianity, and should pervert the right ways of
the Lord, with Elimas, the Magistrate has nothing to do to punish him, though
he carry Navies, and millions of souls to hell, yea, nor is he to be rebuked
nor declaimed against as a child of the devil, and an enemy to all
righteousness, but with all meekness and gentleness to be instructed, for
rebuking of him thus, is as unjust, since it is not in his power what he thinks
or apprehends for truth, or what not, (say Libertines) as to command the Sun to
shine at midnight.

CHAP. VII. What opinions (...)
BUt are there no far off (...) at all to be (...) not learned men give diverse
and contrary expositions (...) one and the same text of Scripture and has not
the Church suffered errors and erroneous (...) in godly (...) men in all ages
even in (...), (...) have not implored the sword of the (...) them, though all
errors printed and preached hurt the souls of others more or less.

Answ. Some errors are about things that God (...) indifferent, for the time,
(...) opinion and (...) meate^ and days, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. (...) in these,
God gives an indulgence, and bid^ us so long as the date of indifferency in
doreth, bea with the (...) 1 Cor. 8. you shall not find that Paul (...) with
the unlimited practice of days and meats (...) and in all cases, as for the
case of scandal, (...) the practice, to the scandalizing of the weak, and
calls it soul-murther, and here it in like the Church may suffer sinful
ignorances, for ^s the Magistrate is not to publish all externals, Some far off
errors may be tolerated.
sins of inf^rmity against the second table, ^or then human societies must
be dissolved, and (...) subsist, except there be a reciprocal ye^lding to the
infirmities of men, as they are weak and (...); as we must not make a man an
offender for a word, though it be a hasty and sinful word, even in a family
where the Lord of the house has the power of the (...), and proportionally in
other societies, we would hear Solomon saying, Eccles. 7. 21 Also take not
heed to all words that are spoken, least thou leave thy servant curse thee. So
it would appear, that some lower errors, that are far off, without the
compass of the ordinary discerning of man, and lie at a distance from the
(...) on (as fundametals, and Gospel promises lie heard the heart of Christ)
may be dispensed with as a conjectur^, what became of the meat that Christ
eats after his resurrection, when he was now in the state of immortality, and
some probable opinions that, neither better the holder, no^ much promove or
hinder the edification of others, are not much to be (...), save that (...) is
sinful, and happily may be tolerated: or whether the heavens and (...),
after the day of judgment, shall be (...) and turned to nothing, and be no
(...) or if (...) shall be renewed, and delivered from vanity and indeed with
new (...) to stand (...) as lasting and eternal (...) and witnesses of the
glory of God* (...) Christ's, and the redeemed in heaven in (...) live in glory
to be eternal lectures, and testimonies of the glory of the Lord, Redeemer and
Sanctifier of his people* (...) most probable, and the Scripture may (...) to
say much some other side.

2 For diverse expositions of one and (...) Heavens and new Earth, when (...)
of the expositions, so far as is revealed ^o the godly and learned, who in
this life do but know and prophecy in part, do neither doubt the fundation,
(...) truth, that is non-fundamentall, we think the opinion of both may be
tolerated, even though the one of them be in it self an error, and that upon
the ground that Church and Magistrates both are to tolerate, not to punish
these infirmities, against both tables, that are the necessary results of sin
original, common to all men, as men, (...) about with them a body of sin. And
the like I say another the like opinions about matters of religion, and
especially matters of fact, as the virginity of Mary for all her life.

3 Such opinions and practice ^^as make an evident schism in a Church, Schism
and actual gathering of churches out of churches cannot be tolerated.
and set up two distinct Churches, of different forms of Government, and
pretending to different institutions of Christ, of which the one must by the
nature of their principles labor the destruction of the other, cannot be
tolerated, etc. for each pretending their fellow Churches to be of man, and
so of the devil, though they should both make one true invisible Church,
agreeing in all fundamentals, and many other truths, yet sure the whole should
be a Kingdom divided against it self, (...) destroys peace much (...) the
devisions of one and the (...) Church of (...) though they pretended not to be
different Churches, for those that said they were of Paul professed they could
not be disciples of Peter, but he sharply rebuked them (...) man, and such as
divided Christ, and by consequence must say, Paul was crucified for them, and
was their redeemer, and so, if obstinately they had proceeded (...) that
separation, Paul would have none on to higher censures of the Church: far
more could he not end^^e gathering of true Churches out of true Churches, which
is the professed practice of Independents: and yet both sides pretending the
spirit of descerning; could say, the spirit testifies to my soul that Paul is
the only called preacher, and the other, nay but to my discerning Cepha^ or
Peter is the only man, that I can hear or follow. And a third, nay, not any
on earth, nor any ministry will I acknowledge, but Jesus Christ whom the
heavens must contain till the last day, (...) my only, only preacher, now if
a Jezabel come in and say no ministry is to be heard but Christ, and turn away
all from hearing the word, and not suffer Sergiur (...) or any other to hear
Paul or any godly minister, sure Jezabel should be a perverter of the right
ways of the Lord, and so not (...) suffered.

4 As touching opinions more manifesty erroneous a^ Justine Marty^ his saving
of men (...), of they used the light of nature well, though they were ignorant
of Christ, the Montanisme of Tertullian, and his way of damning (...) marriage
(which the very Jesuit Tole^u^ commiteur in Joan. Said he wrote contro fidem
Catholicam, against the Catholic faith) and Augustine his condemning of all in
(...) dying without Baptism, and Origin his (...) at a so^^ of purgatory after
death, the greek fathers their presidence of good works, and faith as the
causes of predestination, their Pelag^^nisme and Semi-p^lagianisme touching
men^ freewll beginning and meeting Gods grace, especially, hard sayings of
Chrysostom, Greg^^ Nyssy^^^, and others, and the (...) Hieronymus, nostrum est
incipere and dei (...) (...) extolling of the Bishop if Rome, for personal
gifts, their orations of (...) to the Martyrs dead; without (...) with that
doubtsome condition, if there be (...) feeling of our affairs in the dead,
which was the ground work of invocation of Saints, it is a question and to be
proved, whether the Church and Christian Magistrate (when th^^ were any) should
tolerate these, for some opinions to truths are as brass, so as we cannot put
a stamp of necessity of edification on them, and some are pieces of gold and
foundation stones, so other truths are near of blood to fundamentalls, and
pinnings in the wall, though not foundations, and because the want of them may
hurt the (...) they must go as pieces of current silver.

Only two or three objections must be removed; The place To. 14. willing us to
receive the weak, no plea for tolleration.
As 1. Romans 14. They erred against a Law of God* who kept days, and abstained
from mea^s, concei^ing that the conscience of Gods Law, did injoyne such a
practices whereas there was no such Law now, the Apostle was persuaded there
were no creatures unclean now; but to him, who, through error of conscience,
believed they were unclean, v. 14. Yea the earth bring the Lords, they might
eat swines flesh or meats, though sacrificed to Idols, without conscience of a
Law, 1 Cor. c. 8. c. 10. yet Paul is so far from censuring such weak ones,
that he bid^ receive them as brethren, and not trouble them with thorny
disputations.

Answ. Paul bids receive them, ergo, he bids tolerate them all together; it
follows not, he will have them informed that there is no such divine Law that
presses them, and so a moral tolleration of not refuting their error is
denied to them.

2. He bids receive them in a practice in it self, for that time, indifferent
(for 1 Cor. 8. 8. Neither if they did eat, were they the better, nor if they
did not eat, were they the worse) but only erroneous in the manner, because of
the twilight and sparklings of the light of the Gospel not fully promulgated
to the Jews. Will it follow that the Jews should be tolerated still, and
perpetually to circumcise and keep the Ceremonial law, and to teach others so
to do? for Libertines contend for a constant and perpetual tolleration of all
Jewish and sinful practices.

Ob. 2. Paul speaking of Ceremonies, Ph. 3. 15. says, Let us therefore, as
many to be perfect, be th^^ minded, and if, in any thing, ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. 16. Nevertheless whereunto we
have attained, let us walk by the some rule, let us mind the same things.

Answ. This is the only Magna Charta abused for liberty of conscience, which
yet crosses it, but favors it now. Paul gives two rules, neither of them are
for tolleration, but against it; the one is for the mind within, the other for
the practice without: for the former, he wills all the perfect to mind this,
that is, to endeavor Paul's one thing, and to be followers of him, v. 17.
forgetting that which is behind, and pressing toward the mark, and if any be
otherwise minded in the matter of circumcision, if he mind the journey toward
the garland, God shall clear his doubts to him there is nothing here for
Libertines, except we say, let all the godly mind to walk toward the garland,
The place Philip. 3. 15. Let us walk according to the same rule, etc. nothing
(...) tolleration.
by practicing circumcision, (as if that were the way) and by tollerating of
others to practice Jewish Ceremonies, and if they be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal their error, but in the mean time we are to suffer them to mind
that, for the which Paul says, their end is destruction, their belly their
God, and they are dogs and evil doers, v. 19. 2. 3. as for the other rule of
practice, v. 16. If it plead for Libertines, the sense must be, as far as we
have obtained the mind of Christ let us practice, that is, let us be
circumcised, and teach and profess and publish to others, all the heresies and
blasphemies that seem to us to be true doctrine according to this rule, and
let us mind the same thing, let us contend for the garland, and walking
according to our conscience our only rule, and practicing unlawful
ceremonies, and publishing and professing all the heresies we can, we mind the
same crown and garland. Now except walking according to the rule be restricted
to careful and diligent practicing of these things in which we all agree,
which must exclude a practicing or publishing of doctrines controverted, and
that we should abstain from practicing and publishing of opinions in which we
agree not, nothing can be extorted hence in favor of tolleration. Our brethren
say, Let us gather Churches out of true Churches, and separate our selves from
true Churches, and preach Familisme, Antinomianisme, Arrianisme, and what not?
and then we walk according to the same rule, which must be most contradictory
to the (...) of the Holy Ghost, and therefore Libertines durst (...) draw a
formal argument for tolleration out of these or any other places, but bring us
such reasons as by the nineteenth consequence comes not up to the purpose; for
by the gloss of Libertines, Let us walk according to the (...) rule, must be,
Let us practice and walk (for it cannot be meant ^f heart-opinions) according
to the known rule conceived by our conscience to be right (though it may be
wrong and sinful) and so let us be circumcised, and make a fair show in the
flesh as the false Apostles did, for if some believed circumcision, and the Law
to be necessary for justification, then Paul must bid them walk contrary to
their light, and then the perfect had attained light to practice unlawful
Jewish ceremonies.

CHAP. VIII. Whether heresy be a sin, or a mere error and innocence: whether
a^ heretic be an evil doer?
WHat is naked and mere simple heresy (say the Belgic Arminians) but a mere
device? Remonstrant i^ Apologia p. 40. P. 268. (...) and tu^a heresis (...)
^rr^r qui in merte errantis ta^^um l^cum habet ^rrer nec objectum nec causa
punitionis est, error enim merus erra^tem non egreditur, ergo (...) necoer^^ri
quidem potest* animus hominis imprio humano non (...) humane (...) Apo. ^24 ^.
28^
or is heresy only error (say they) which has place in the mind of him that
erreth: nor is error sufficient to constitute a thing heresy, nor if it were,
is it the object or cause of any punishment, a mere error does not go out of
(...) that erreth, he that erreth cannot be punished^ the mind of man is not
liable to any command, only God commands (...), thoughts are free from
paying tribute to men, pertinacy is not of the nature of heresy, nor
blasphemy; nor if they were, can heretics therefore be punished? nor does
sedition make heresy punishable; so they make heresy nothing but a name, who
( say they) can say an heretic is an evil doer? evil doers confess their
evil deeds, and know them to be worthy of punishment, by the Law of God and
man: heretics deny they are heretics, or that they have any bad opinions, or
that they blaspheme, they profess the contrary, that they are ready to dye an
hundredth deaths rather then they should blaspheme, thieves steal, that they
may steal, heretics seduce not, that they may seduce, but that they may
reduce men to a better mind and (...) them from (...). Liberti^es m^ke heresy
a mere innocent and unpunishable error of the mind.
So (...) Oelsut also de heret^^i^ (...), (...) 1. f. 5, 6.

Asser. 1. But 1. Though neither we nor Libertines could define Idolatry nor
murder, nor adultery, yet sure the Law of God condemne^ Idolatry, murder,
adultery (...) sins; this is the custom of juglers and sophisters, Heresy is
a sin as well as Idolatry, though we could neither desine heresy nor Idolatry.
who deny there is such a thing as robbing, or hedge-robbers, why, what (...)
hedge-robbing you cannot define it, and not one of twenty, agree with another
what hedge-robbers are, therefore there is not such a thing as an hedge-robber.
Nor do sorcerers confess they are sorcerers, nor can you tell what so (...)
it; and there is not such a thing in the world: so many (...).

Asser. 2. Heresy is not a mere error, nor innocence, but a heinous
transgression against God. 1. Because Paul, Gal. 5. ver. Heresy proved to be
an heinous sin.
19, 20, 21. reckons heresies among the works of ^he flesh, with Idolatry,
witchcraft, envy, strife, and sedition, then it is a work of the devil, and
of sinful flesh. 2. That which God permits, that those that are approved
may be made manifest in the Church of Christ, that must be a sin, but such is
heresy, 1 Cor. 11. 19. 3. Grievous wolves not sparing the flock, false
Prophets, and false Christ's, who deceive (if it were possible) the very elect,
such as make their Disciples twofold the children of the devil, thieves and
robbers, who come to steal and to kill, and to drink the blood of souls,
these who subvert whole houses, and whose word eat as a gangreen, are not
innocent, and simply erring men, nor is their error, simple error, but a high
trangression against God, but such are heretics, Act. 20. 29, 30. Mat. 24.
24. Mat. 23. 15. Joh. 10. 8, 9, 10 Tit. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 17. 4. These who are
deceivers and deceived, unruly, and vain talkers, to be rebuked sharply, that
they may be sound in the faith, and these, whom we are not to receive into our
houses, nor bid them God speed, least we be partakers of their evil doings,
these of whom we are to be aware, lest they ensnare us, and whom we are, after
once or twice admonition, to reject, and from whom we are to turn away, must
be such as do more then simply err in mind, and their errors being so
pernicious must come out of him that erreth, and subverteth whole houses, and
lead (...) women captive laden with diverse lusts, and must be subject to
commands of those that are in place, since they are to be sharply rebuked are
not innocent, but do grievously sin and are punishable. But such are
heretics, Tit. 1. 11, 12, 13. 2 John 10. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 15. Tit. 3. 10. 2 Timothy
3. 5. 5 Such as do evil and that as false teachers, and resist the truth, at
James and Jambres resisted Moses, and do Paul and the faithful preachers of
the Gospel much evil, in perverting souls and in withstanding the gospel, as
Alexander the copper-Smith did, who subvert whole houses, lead souls captive,
deceive many, who speak words which eat the souls of many as a Canker, and
subvert the faith of many, though they deny they do evil, or seduce any, or
that they intend to seduce any, are evil doers, not innocent. But such are
Heretics who privilie bring in damnable heresies, and make merchandise of men,
with fair words, and buy and sell souls, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 3. 8. 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15. 2 Timothy 3. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. 6 These cannot be innocent, nor
free of all commands, rebukes, punishment, whom the holy Ghost styles proud,
perverse disputers, men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6. 4,
5. False Christ's, Matthew. 24. 24. Deceivers, Tit. 1. 11. Men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Whose folly shall be made
known to many, who are self condemned, as knowing (if they would not wink
and shut their eyes at noonday) that they deceive, and are deceived, Tit. 3.
10. 7 These and many other things in these seducing teachers do evidence that
heresy, and seducing teaching of Heretics are not a simple disease in the
mind, since they are willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 7. (...) as such as believed
Baal to be God, and worship him, are such of whom the Lord says, Jer. 9. 6.
Through deceit they refuse to know me, says the Lord. The Holy Ghost says
they do much evil, resist the truth, buy men's souls as if they were
Merchants, are perverse disputers, are proud, unruly, talkers, all which
shows that their will has an influence in their knowledge and mind.

All the Arguments of Libertines against the definition of an Heretic,
Remonstrance Apol. 24. f. 283
tend to prove that there is not such a thing as an Heretic in the world As
if a robber arraigned upon his head before a judge, would say, there is no such
thing in the world as Robbery, it is a mere fiction, or their reasons
partinary, which we say is the formal reason and essence of heresy, Remon.
Apol. 24. f. 285.
is only in the heart, and known to God only, and therefore, since neither
the Church, nor the Magistrate know the heart, we must leave it to God, all
men's judgments of the heart are uncertain, and deceiving conjectures, no man
of set purpose desires to do evil, but when he knows he does evil, no man
persuades himself that he erreth, when the matter is about eternal salvation,
therefore it is not lawful to charge any heretic that he acts malice against
his light, charity persuades another thing, Min^s Celsus (...) heretic. coer.
se^. ^. f. 9, 10, 11, 12.
and who knowingly (says Minus Celsus) and willingly sins against the known
truth, his crime is not properly heresy, but the sin and blasphemy against the
holy ghost for whom we are not to pray, and is a sin that shall never be
pardoned, and therefore it is in vain to accuse this man of heresy.

Answ. The holy ghost contrary to Libertines, supposes unden^^^bly that
heretics are known, and so they are not known to God only, when (...) b^ds
us beware of them, avoid them, bid them not God sp^^d.
This vain argument of foolish men is against the Holy Ghost, not against us,
for charity then must forbid us* to judge evil of our brother, or to beware of
him, to avoid him, to admonish or rebuke him for heresy, for a sin known to
God only, or to reject him, or to refuse him lodging in our house, or to bid
him God speed, for you condemn him and flee and avoid him as an Heretic, and
in so doing ye take Gods office on you to judge the heart, now when the Holy
Ghost bids us admonish, rebuke, instruct with meekness: Heretics, if they
will not be gained, reject and avoid them, does he not clearly hold forth that
Heretics may be known; When Solomon says, go not by the door of the whore,
make no friendship with an angry^man, be not companions with thieves and
robbers, does he not insinuate, that the whore and the angry man, and the
thief may be known or would he say, the whore is only known to God, and
charity forbids you to judge any wom^n a whore, or any teacher, who says he
would show you the str^ight way to heaven, and the way that he himself walks
in, and no man persuades himself that he erreth when the matter is concerning
his own eternal salvation, and it is only known to God whether he be an
Heretic or no, yet admonish him at an Heretic, and reject him and avoid his
company as a Heretic. This is as much as if a Physician would say, it is
impossible to any man to know, save God only, what houses are infected with
the pestilence, yet I council you, for your health, go not into any
pesthouse.

2 It is most false that pertinacy is known to God only, that pertinacy that
evidenceth it self to us, Pertinacie may be, and is known to men.
by such marks and outward evidences is known to us, as such a Familist, a
Socinian leads silly women captive, and subverteth the faith of many, and
causes simple people to believe the God manifested in the flesh and crucified,
is nothing but a Saint-suffering, and having much of God and saving grace
evidenced in him, and he is ones and twice by word and writing admonished,
Libertines openly contradict the holy ghost in that they forbid to judge false
teachers to be grievous wolves.
but he still goes on and seduceth many, then he is so far pertinacious, as
ye may judge him an Heretic, and having tried that he is an heretical
spirit, avoid him, and bid him not God speed, does not Paul exhort the Elders
of Ephesus to take heed of ravening Wolves that should arise and speak (...)
perverse things to draw away disciples after them, and they should not spare
the flock, Remonst. Apol. c. 24. 285 de ma^i^ioso volu^tatis actu (...)
pertina^ia que est formalis ratione h^resees (...) nisi so^us ^o^e judicari
potest humana omni^ judicia de mente animoque alterius incerta sunt, conjectura
fallaces nisi cum quis quod malum esse novit, facere vult nemo dedita opera
erras, aut errare se sibi p^rswadet cum de ^terna salute agitur, quare fas non
est invito alicui tribuere malitiam: caritas aliud swades.
Act. 20. 29, 30. Yea; but our ab^ominable Libertines come in and say, Elders
of Ephesus, be charitable, judge them not to be grievous wolves, least ye
condemn them for wolves before men, who are the redeemed sheep of Christ in
the high court, it is true, they speak perverse things, as ye apprehend, but
Elders, are you infallible now? when Paul and the Apostles are departed this
life, they judge that you speak perverse things, and ye are the grievous
wolves. You hear them speak new doctrines, it is true, but you know not
whether they be pertinacious, pertinacy is in the heart only, be charitable,
for only God knows the heart, say not (...) the flock they are ravening
wolves, seducers, and that knowingly and willingly they sin against the known
truth, no man erreth dedi^^ opera of set purpose, nor persuades himself that
he erres, when the matter is concerning eternal salvation, charity forbids you
to ascribe malitiousnesse of erring to men, who err not with their will, and
you Church and Angel of the Churches of Pergamus and of Thyat^ra, be
charitable and judge not those that teach the doctrine of Balaam, and Jezabell
to be false Prophets, you hear their words, but God only tries the reigns
and the heart, you know not whether they teach, what they teach, with
pertinacy, all judging of the mind and heart of others are uncertain
conjectures, neither they nor any other do give believing, and being
persuaded, that they err, when the matter is of such concernment as eternal
salvation.

3. Heresy a wicked resisting of the truth, and yet not the blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost.
Nor is the crime, the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, when any do
maliciously resist the truth. 1. When there is not a high measure of
illumination and persuasion going before, which is not in every heretic. 2.
When pertinacy is bent against a side and party of godly men, not so much for
despite and malice against them as they are godly; or out of despite to the
Spirit of grace, as out of a mind puffed up with love-sicknesse, of their own
learning, and great parts, and undervaluing of a contrary faction, as they
suppose, for there be diverse branches of opposing the known truth, as from
fleshly lusts, 2 Pet. 2. 17. 18. 2 Pet. 3. 3. from pride, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.
from avarice and love of the world, v. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 3. 15, 16. and yet all
maliciously, that are not to be judged the sin against the Holy Ghost, except,
it be such an opposing of the known truth as comes from the spiritual
malicious opposing of God and his known truth, as the devils did; and it may
be also that some heretics sin the sin against the Holy Ghost in teaching
lies in hypocrisy, as the Pharisees did, who leave not off for that to be
heretics and false teachers.

4. Where men are savingly and soundly persuaded that the business is a matter
of salvation, they will not finally and totally err, but that there is such a
persuasion in heretics, is utterly denied by us; and where there is a
persuasion in great measure, but literal, and historical, and faith thereunto
answerable, that the matter is eternal salvation and damnation, that they do
not err and lead other captives to their error, is denied, and it is more
charity of heretics who are selfe-condemned by their own heart, Tit. 3. 10.
and are willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5. then the Holy Ghost allows.

5. Yea this will make heresy and heretics that are to the Holy Ghost
seducers, ^a^ching wolves, subverters of the faith of others, thieves, and
robbers, foxes, reprobate concerning the faith, selfe-condemned; to be godly,
zealous, innocent, erring against their will; free of malice, and so the Holy
Ghost must do a great deal of injury ^o (...) who go for heretics, in this
characterizing them (...) us (...) titles and characters, which no mortal man
can give to them.

But what surer sign can there be ( says Celsus) of no evil conscience then
that a man will spend his blood, neglect his life, drink a cup which was so
horrible to Christ, that it caused him sweat blood, and fall on the earth, and
yet he will joyfully dye rather, ere he quit the known truth, this he must
do for some end? and is there any man who will willingly choose eternal
destruction? nor can his and be pleasure, for he is to leave all these; wife,
children, goods; nor honor, for an heretic dies a most infamous man, and
full of reproaches.

Answ. This renders the heretic the most innocent and righteous Martyr that
ever was; for if his end be only life eternal, Liberti^es say that an
heretic dying for his heresy, has no evil conscience, but a spiritual and
heavenly end.
and none of the three ends which lead all sinners, neither pleasure, nor
profit, nor honor, 1 John 2. 16. and if he ought to follow his conscience, all
heresy shall be nothing but a most innocent, harmless, godly and zealous
error, why then does this Author say, it is such a sin as he is
selfe-condemned, that is, as he expounds it, though there were not a God, nor
any other to condemn him, yet he is condemned of himself? why does the Holy
Ghost bid us turn away from such a godly innocent man, who loves the truth of
Christ, Christ and heaven, better then father, mother, brother, sister, lands,
inheritances, his own glory and name, yea nor his own life, sure he must be
the man to whom life eternal, and a hundredth fold more is due by the promise
of our Savior, Matthew. 19. 28, 29. yea he does more then merit life eternal,
he is free of self, any aim to pleasure, profit, honor, or any created
thing, and minds God only as his end; but can his end; though never so good,
justify his heresy, or his dying for a lie? let Celsus, or any Libertine,
show what end the Fathers had in killing their sons and daughters to God? the
Holy Ghost says, they sacrifice to devils, not to God, but they would not say
they intended to gratify the devil, but to serve God in giving the dearest
thing they had for God; and could their end be pleasure, profit, honor? to
look on these, except in a spiritual fury, and mad zeal, that Satan inspired
them withal, is folly, for there was no pleasure in it but sorrow, no gain,
but to lose a sweet child, but it purchased to them great glory to be said to
love their Lord God, above the fruit of their body, and to give the fruit of
their body for the sin of their soul.

Religio tantum potuit suadere malorum. That they might be delivered from the
torment of conscience they were under, and the fury and hellish zeal of not
sparing the flesh, and losing the life for an heresy, which the heretic
knows through the glimmering of a conscience deluded, to be a heresy, but
will revenge, on a contrary sect, of a contrary opinion, desire of glory, and a
name of knowledge, of a great wit, singular holiness blind the light, and what
was their end who baked bread, and warmed themselves with a part of an Ash
tree, and of the residue made a God and worshipped it? It is a vain thing to
ask what rational end a man has in these, for God has judicially shut his
eyes and his heart, as the devil has run away with his natural wit.

2. It is bad Divinity to say there was no other cup offered to Christ, but the
cup of temporary death offered to all the Martyrs, as if Christ suffered not
the wrath of God, and death, due by justice, to all the Elect, whose sins he
bare, he must think basely of Christ, the grace of union and of unction of
whom it is said, Esa. 42. He shall not be discouraged, who teaches that the
fear and apprehension of death temporary caused him sweat blood; and complain,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and what comfort have we in Christ's
death, if he suffered not that which is equivalent to eternal wrath? and if he
suffered no other death then a godly Martyr did, whereupon Minus Celsus goes
on to extol heathens, who dyed worthily for the hope of eternity, as
Anaxarchus, who bad the enemies beat the bellows, not Anaxarchus, when they
were hammering him alive with iron hammers, and Hannibal who, lest he should
come into the hands of the Romans, drank the poison which he carried under a
pearl in his ring, hoping for immortality; these and the like serve to equal
the death of Hanniball and Jesus Christ, Tundite, tundita An^x^rchi follem
Anax^rchum enim non tundit.
and to make Anaxarchus, Hannibal, Empedecies, Seneca, who Judas-like murdered
themselves, to be freed of servitude, and upon the lean and empty hope they
had of eternal life, to have dyed conscienti^ non mal^, with no ill
conscience; for neither pleasure, profit, nor honor, but for the hope of life
eternal, as the Martyrs of the devil do, especially Servetus who dyed
roaring and crying like a hopeless beast; as if there could be a good
conscience in Hannibal, or any heathen, who knew and heard nothing of a
conscience sprinkled in the blood of Jesus, and purged from dead works, to
serve the living God, as if heathen selfe-murtherers, who against the Law of
nature kill themselves, deserved no more to be punished by the Magistrat^ ^he
Minister of God, then a godly innocent heretic burnt for blaspheming of the
Trinity and the Son of God: As a despairing dog Servetus dyed, and that they
had officax signum conscientiae non malae, they had truly a good conscience,
were free of hypocrisy, or vainglory, or any bad end in killing themselves,
this serves as much to free the most desperate and hellish murderer, from the
sword of the Minister of God as heresy: so Celsus plays the Atheist
egregiously in setting selfe-murtherers, Hannibal, Seneca, Empedocles, slaves
of vainglory up at the right hand of God with Christ. But if Celsus would but
offer a shadow of an argument, it should be thus, Innocent men that dye for no
worldly end, and will both willingly be killed, and kill themselves with their
own hands, for no end but to obtain life eternal, and because they will not
do that which an erroneous conscience, stuffed with, arrogancy, pride,
self-allo^ation of learning, zeal, and a name, judges to be sin, are not to be
punished by the sword, but such are heretics willing to be Martyrs for the
devil, and heathen that kill themselves to obtain eternal life; ergo, the
major is false, the assumption bloody and unjust, the conclusion blasphemous
and Atheistical.

3. Consider how Celsus proves that the heretics that dye for heresies is
not taken with vainglory* and for a name, because a heretic dies infamous
and filled with reproach, but make an argument of that, he that dies for that
which, in the opinion of the contrary side, is infamous and reproachful,
cannot dye for a name among men, and vainglory; but he that dies for heresy,
dies so, ergo, The major is most false, for to dye for heresy in the
estimation of the heretic, and of all of his opinion, and of all, that for all
after generations shall be of his opinion is no reproach, but an everlasting
name to the heretic so dying, and a name and glory with men is (...) an
opinion, and is coined, lives and breaths in the conceit and brain of men; we
all say, Lucretia, Seneca, Ca^o, dyed for vainglory, for to the Romans it was
glorious, yet they dyed truly and really infamous; for Christians, who know
what true honor and true liberty is, say and truly think, they dyed infamous,
and shameless murderers and slaves to the people, and the air and breath of
the peoples mouth, and their empty plaudite.

4. Celsus ibid.
Nor will any man ( far less an heretic) willingly choose the destruction of
his own soul. The vain glory and malice of the devils martyrs who dye for
heresy.


Answ. An Atheist sticks not to contradict God, Prove. 8. 36. All they that hate
me love death; but false teachers and heretics, hate wisdom and Christ, Deuteronomy.
13. 3. not to follow God is to hate God, he denies the Lord that bought him he
is proud, destitute of the truth, a vain and unruly talker, reprobate as
concerning faith, leads captive souls, and such cannot choose the fear of the
Lord.

2. He speaks like an heathen; for the will of heretics and of all godless
men is captive, and the will they have is to serve the devil, and though we
could not tell determinately what end an heretic has, in dying for his
heresy, it cannot prove his innocence.

Yea the Donatists killed themselves, and cast themselves down headlong from
an high place, they did that ( says Mr. Celsus) out of obstinacy and malice to
be avenged on Catholics, and bring them under the guilt of persecuters, which
was an evil conscience in them, but there can be no evil conscience in an
heretic dying for his opinion, an heretic dying for his opinion cannot have
an ill conscience, he prays to God, commends his safety to him, acknowledges
Christ his Son, his Redeemer and Savior, sings hymns and praises in the midst
of the flames of fire.

Answ. That is a conjecture that Donatists and Circumce^^ions killed themselves
to be revenged on Catholics, Augustine neither Ep. 61. nor Ep. 50. nor
elsewhere makes mention of such an end they had, but because they believed it
was happiness to dye for Christ; yea though so it were, praying and praising,
and crying, The Temple of the Lord, will he say there can be no malice in
thieves, murderers, adulterers, perjured persons, walkers after other Gods,
and such as kill their sons to the devil in Top^e^, Jer. 7. 3, 4, 5, 9. 30,
31. and in bloody persecuters, who said the Lord be glorified, Esa, 66. 5. and
in these that think they do God service, in killing the Apostles of the Lord,
Joh. 16. 1. the man speaks not like a divine but an Atheist, and most that are
for Libertinisme, to me are Atheists.

2. When Servetus and other Martyrs of the Devil dye^^, we heard nothing of
their singing of Psalms in the fire. Paul (...) a swearer, and a drunkard, who
denies the Deity of the Son of God, is not one of these. But Celsus (I
conceive) thinks the godly martyrs that the bloody mother of fornications
Babylon has killed, for the testimony of Jesus; were heretics, because they
had no certainty of faith for the truths they were burnt for, because the faith
of Libertines is Scepticisme.

3. Heretics may, before men, pray and acknowledge a Savior, but as the
formal of heresy, so of sound faith is in the heart, and unseen to Celsus,
and therefore this argument is but a conjecture, and so Paul, 2 Timothy 3. says,
those that (...) from the faith, have but a form of godliness, and deny the
power thereof

4, Though heretics acknowledge a Redeemer, which yet may be questioned
whether they do all so, even those who deny the Lord that bought them, yet
these arguments of Celsus and Libertines plead for liberty of conscience, not
only to heretics, that acknowledge a Redeemer, but to all, to open
blasphemers, apostates from the Christian faith to Judaisme and Mahometisme,
for should any Christian turn Jew (as some have done, and pray to God, and be
willing to dye for Judaisme and acknowledge the Messiah to come, Libertines can
no more make a window in this man's conscience to see his end in so doing, and
know infallibly that neither pleasure, profit, nor honor led him, but mere
and only principles of Religion, in regard places in the New Testament cite
passages of the Old so far, seemingly, to reason contrary to the scope of the
Prophets, then you can see to the conscience of a heretic, and Religion is to
be compelled in no man, one or other, nor the sword or violence used against
any; though Celsus and the Belgic Remonstrants think false teachers may
rather be banished and imprisoned, le^t they pervert the faith of others. But
if they yield any corporal restraint or violence may be used against false
teachers, they fall from their cause and lose all their arguments for one
degree of one violence (though banishment be cosen Germans to death, and to
some who cannot live and subsist but in England, as there are many such, far
worse) can no more be used against the conscience, then forcing of ten degrees,
or tormenting deaths.

But^ says Celsus) Heretics that dye for their heresy are stupid and
drunken. Fol. 18.
But how can stupidity and malice be in one, ( says he) malice is not without
certain knowledge, stupidity deprives men of knowledge, and render them
blocks, can ye find a man who willingly and wittingly makes defection from God
and resists the truth against his own conscience, and yet is so stupid that he
knows not what he does, and can endure foolishly to dye for maintaining a lie?

Answ. Spiritual stupidity and malice both together in heretics and Satan's
martyrs.
If the Author were not stupid, he would not declare himself so Atheistically
ignorant of spiritual stupidity; for highest malice and a hardened and fatned
heart, eyes, ears, and a heart that cannot see, hear, or perceive, and so are
spiritually stupid, do not lodge sundered one from another, Esaias 6. 9, 10, 11.
has this man read the word, Esaias 29 9. Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye
out, and cry, they are drunken but not with wine, they stagger, but not with
strong drink. 10. The Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of a deep sleep,
and has closed your eyes; the Prophets and your Rulers, the Seers has he
covered, and yet these same were deep hypocrites, and malicious opposers of the
ways of God, enemies to, and persecuters of the true Prophets sent of God: v.
13. and who were these but Scribes and Pharisees, in whom there was as much
malice against Christ and his Disciples, as can be in the devil, or such as
sin against the Holy Ghost? as may be seen, Matthew. 13, 14, 15. Matthew. 12. 31,
32. Matthew. 15. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9. And God powered the spirit of slumber on the
Jews, Romans 11. 7. 8. and there was superlative malice in them against the
known truth, Act. 13. 45. 46. and blasphemy, Act. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5. and yet
these men in evil, and as touching litterall knowledge know well what they
were doing (though they were spiritually blocks.) See Matthew. 2. 4, 5, 6. Joh.
7. 28. Joh. 3. 2. They privily bring in (2 Pet. 2.) damnable heresies, they
make merchandise of you with fair words, then they wanted not devilish wit
enough. And 1 Timothy 4. 1. They speak lies out of hypocrisy and the doctrine of
Devils, forbidding meats and marriage, there is wit, for these look like
singular mortification, yet they have a conscience so stupid, as it were burnt
with a hot iron.

This also is gross ignorance in Libertines, Some ignorance consists with the
sin against the holy ghost.
that they think those who sin against knowledge, and conscience and out of
malice, as those that sin against the Holy Ghost, do not sin through
ignorance also, which is most false, for the most malicious sin against
knowledge has an interpritative ignorance con^oyned with it, as the Pharisees
who sinned against the Holy Ghost, in crucifying Christ (some of them as is
clear, Joh. 8. 28. Joh. 9. 40, 41 and else where) yet they sinned ignorantly
also, for had thy known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1
Cor. 2. 8.

CHAP. IX. Of Liberty of prophesying of erroneous indictment of Conscience that
it is not our Rule.
BUt we judge that Heretics admonished and convinced of their error do sin
on the borders, at least, of the sin against the Holy Ghost, in regard they be
(...), self condemned, as Paul says, Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic
after the first and second admonition, reject. 11. Knowing that he, that is
such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself. Where the Apostle
says, an admonished and wrought upon heretic, who is convinced of the truth,
and yet still resists (...), He is perverted, or subverted, desperately
perverted, like a building thrown down to the foundation. 2. he finneth, as
condemned of himself, that is, judged and condemned by his own conscience,
and so sins wilfully, and with a high measure of light, but he shuts
his eyes against the light and known truth, Re^^^n, apol. c. 24. 280, 281.
and resists it.

1 The Heretic here spoken of, Ve lelius de Ar^^n. Ar^ini. P 4. l. 2. c. 4.
n. 5,
Tit. 3. 10. is not the man who moves such questions ( say they) as he knows
to be vain and light as Arminians say. For as Vedelius says, he expressly
speaks of an heretic.

2 It is a question, Who is an to Arminians Titus 3. 10.
if any be called an Heretic in the word, because he moves such questions.
1. The Heretic here is subverted, and so turned off the foundation Christ.
But he that moves vain and unprofitable questions can at best, but build his
hay and stubble upon the foundation Christ; now such a man may be builded on
the foundation, and saved, though the fire destroy his work, and so he is not
turned off the foundation. Yea, if he wittingly and willingly move vain and
light questions he cannot be saved, nor does that follow, for his knowledge of
the levity of these questions aggravates his sin, but cannot cause to amount to
a sin so high as to subvert the man's faith, because he may keep the
foundation, though he hold these vain and light opinions, for they are not in
themselves destructive of the foundation. 2. There is no mention, nor any hint
here of vain and light questions, but of admonished heretics, therefore
Eusebius l. 4. c. 13. referres it to those that deny Christ's divinity, to
Marcion and Corinthus, and they say John would not stay in the stoves with
Cerinthus, Nevi te esse primo genitum Satauae.
and Polycarpus his disciple would not speak with Marcion, but said, I know
thee to be the first borne of Satan.

3. It is here to be noted, that these Authors also make the conscience, though
erroneous even in fundamentalls, the rule of faith, if the person believe that
he worships God according to the rule of the word, and there be some moral
honesty in him, and so teach there should be a toleration of al heretics, None
to Libertines are heretics, but such as profess a Religion which they with
persuasion believe to be false.
then no man is the heretic, but he who professes points of truth, which he
believes to be lies and untruth; but so there is not an heretic in the
world, but the devil, and such as profess a false Religion, before men, which
in their conscience they believe to be false. But the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3
1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times men shall depart
from the faith, giving beed to seducing spirits (Popish Priests and Familists)
and doctrine of Devils, 2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
conscience seared with an hot iron, 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats. Now a seared conscience burnt with an hot iron may and
does teach marriage to be unlawful to some, and do believe it for a truth,
that Churchmen should not entangle themselves with the affairs of this life,
such as marriage and care of children, because Pastors go a warfare for Jesus
Christ, yet the text says, they that so teach are seducers, who with a seared
conscience, speak lies in hypocrisy, and so must be heretics and worse.

2. No rule can be falser, and more crooked then the conscience, for if ye must
be obliged to follow conscience, because it is conscience, or because right or
wrong; if you must follow conscience because conscience, ye must ever follow
your conscience, though never so wrong; for the most erroneous conscience is
conscience, though the devil should immediately actuate it, yet does not leave
off to be conscience, and to be the rule, and if so, when the conscience of
some says its good service to God to kill the Apostles of our Lord, because
they preach the Gospel, then do persecuters nothing, but what they are in duty
bound to do, when they murder the Apostles, because they preach the Gospel;
for to follow the rule, which God has appointed must be a bounden duty. And
the same must follow, if the conscience as evil be the rule, for then should
men serve God, in sacrificing their sons to God, in community and plurality
of wives, when ever their conscience should dictate any such thing to be
lawful, though, in it self, it be most contrary to the word of God. If the
conscience as good, or as the Arminians seem to say, as principled with moral
honesty be our rule, then the conscience as conscience is not the rule, but as
it is ruled by moral honesty, this we cannot say, for moral honesty
qualifying the conscience as a rule, is not able to render the conscience a
straight and perfect rule in supernatural duties, since it is but a natural
principle in us, and that a most corrupt one, by reason of sin, and how then
should it regulate us in all the ways of the service and worship of God?
should it ever oblige us to believe in him, who justifies the ungodly?

2. Again, the Lord makes the Law and his revealed will in the word, the rule
of all our actions, Deuteronomy. 5. 31, 32. Deuteronomy, 12. 31, 32. Ps. 119. 9. 2 King. 10.
31.

3. If that which is called Liberty of prophesying be examined, it is either a
liberty of believing, and teaching what is intrinsecally true according to the
word, now this they will not say, for we deny not liberty to prophecy truth to
all that are called to publish it. Liberty of prophesying taken in a threefold
sense
Or secondly, it is a liberty to prophecy what is false, which is conceived to
be false, that is devilish license not liberty; sure God has allowed no such
liberty to men to prophecy falsely, and to destroy souls, in this meaning,
God has no more allowed us liberty of prophesying false things, then liberty
of killing, whoreing, robbing, or lying. Or thirdly, liberty of prophesying is
liberty of prophesying truths or falsehood, which yet are conceived to be truth
not falsehood by those who prophecy; nor has God given so a liberty of
prophesying, The words quench not the spirit, vindicated from speaking for
liberty of prophesying any thing Remon. Apol. c. 24. Fo. 281, 282
for every true liberty of prophesying, God has given to his Prophets and
Apostles, if it be a lawful gift, the use thereof is commanded and enjoined
to us, as the Arminians say it is in these words, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20. Quench
not the Spirit, despise not prophesying, for they say, the meaning of these
words are, Quench not the spiritual sense of the word which any man says and
persuades himself he has from the Spirit of God, that is, either by
inspiration or suggestion of the Spirit, or by the help of the Spirit of God,
Spiritum ne extinguite, id est, spirituales verbi Dei sensus quos quis se
habere a Spiritu Dei, id est, vel per inspirationem and suggestionem Spiritus
vel anxiliante Spiritu Dei sibi persuadet, quo sensu vocem Spiritus videntur
ipsi Apostoli aliquando accipere, 2 These. 2. 2. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
in which sense the Apostles seem to take the word, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. 1 John 4.
1. Now all the liberty of prophesying is here set upon a brazen pillar of ( so
it seems to be) and we say ( so it seems not to be) but God certainly will
not have Nathan, David, Samuel, Ezechiel, in either Old or New Testament, to
extinguish the Spirit, or to despise prophesying, but God gave no liberty; nor
entered it ever in his heart to command such liberty of prophesying to his
Prophets of old, except we say, that God gave to Nathan liberty to say to
David, Do all that is in thine heart, build thou the Temple, and the Lord
shall be with thee, which was an untruth, and that God bad Samuel say of Eliah,
he is the Lords anointed, and gave him liberty to prophecy that which was
false, whereas the Lord says to Ezechiel, chapter 2. Hear the word of my mouth,
and Jeremiah c. 1. 17. Arise and speak unto them all that I command thee; Qua
quam alio sensu accipi potest.
and thereby binds them up, and denies all liberty of preaching or
prophesying their own word, or their own persuasions, even under the notion
of the word of the Lord, and doubtless when Nathan exhorted David to build the
Temple, and Samuel said, that Eliah was the Lords. anointed, they spoke not
that as their own word, but were persuaded that God revealed himself to them,
though both were mistaken grossly; so Christ says to his Apostles, Matthew. 28.
19, 20. Go preach, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you; he interditeth them upon the same reason to bring any of their
own Commandments flowing from their own Spirit, under any pretense, though
they think them right, though Peter should conceive to Judaize a little, Gal.
2. was the mind of Christ, and he might preach it, and practice it, as the
mind of Christ, yet Peter and all the Apostles, Matthew. 28. are bound up* they
have no liberty of conscience to preach their own ( videtur) so it seems; for
then should our faith be ultimately resolved into men's phansies, and (so
thinks our Reverend Saltmarsh, or Will. Del) and not into the word of God.
Libertines say their Goddess, their Diana, is strangled and fettered, and the
spirit it quenched, if this liberty of prophesying be denied to them; but to
restrain liberty of sinning and lying, is no violence done to the spirit of
prophecy, but this exposition calls the phansies of men the spiritual sense
of the word of God, as Familists and Antinomians in England father their
dreams upon the Spirit of God. So Pe^. Stairie, who ordinarily preaches the
rovings of his own fancy, taught 29. Oct. 1647. before the House of Commons,
after the Houses passed a brave Ordinance for Liberty of Conscience and
Prophesying, that the House should not oppose, or resist any thing that
pretended to Christ. Now if he spoke this to the House as a Parliament, he
forbad to hinder a Simon Magus, an Hymeneus, a Philetus, a Jezabel, a Jesuit,
to preach* what he pleased, for Jesuits pretend to Jesus both name and thing,
all the Familists, Sotinians, Arrians, Libertines, and false teachers, who
deceive (if it were possible) the very elect, pretend to Jesus Christ, and to
the anointing. If he spoke to the people, they are not by the word of truth,
nor all the Ministers in England to refute the false Teachers that pretend to
Christ, for to refute them, were to oppose and resist them, for if they pretend
to Christ, you know not since ye are not infallible, but they may be teachers,
sent of God, though they be the most errand seducers that ever spoke, and so
they are no ways to be resisted, who resist the truth.

2* Quench not the Spirit, must have this meaning, Quench not the dreams of
Independents, Libertines, Antinomians, for they persuade themselves they have
the Spirit of God and mind of Christ, in all they speak.

3 But this Quench not the Spirit, is, cherish, entertain the gracious motions
and inspirations of the Spirit in your selves, and despise not, that is, highly
reverence the preaching of the Gospel, separate not the Spirit and the Word,
for it is a litote, where less is spoken but more intended, as Esaias 50. 5.
Ioh. 6. 37. but this gloss yields this sense. Despise not the Spirit, that
is, believe what ever a godly preacher says, be it his own dreams and
rovings to be the word of God, and reverence it, for he persuades himself it
is so, and speaks them as the oracles of God, though they be his own
wind-mils, and sparkles of his own vainglory. For this, ( not to quench, not
to despise) is undeniably to believe these prophesyings as the word of God* how
then are we to try all doctrines and spirits, if we are to take all for first
that comes into the net? But since you are not infallible (say Libertines) it
is an extinguishing of the Spirit to account that to be the spirit of Satan
which agrees not with your spirit, R^mon Ap 282
if your authority were infallible, as that of the Apostles was, the answer
would have some color, though the Apostles used not that authority to crush
liberty of prophesying, but they commend the trying of the Spirits, and since
our judgment is not infallible, reason requires that we should not desire
other spirits pious and good to be oppressed and suffocated.

Answ. To desire false Prophets to cease out of the land, is no quenching of
the Spirit.
We reject no Spirit, because it agrees not with ours; for our Spirit is not
the rule, as Libertines contend, but because it swerves from the oracles of
God; if any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; let us prophecy
according to the proportion of faith.

2. This answer says, that no man now in the Christian Church can try all
things, doctrines, and spirits, and refuse the evil and deluding spirits, and
hold fast that which is good, and believe the spirits, speaking from God,
because it is to extinguish the Spirit (say our Libertines,) since we are not
infallible Apostles to judge these Spirits for mad phansies that agree not with
our Spirit; we say its impossible to try all things, and hold that which is
good, but we must judge false spirits to be false spirits, not because they
agree not with ours (that is the calumny of Libertines) but because they swerve
from the word of truth, though we be not infallible as the Apostles were, but
this reason supposes that because of want of Apostolic infallibility we
should try all spirits, and all doctrines, but condemn, reject, and refuse
none, as spirits of the devil, for that is to extinguish the spirit, and pitch
and settle our faith upon no doctrine, but like Scepticks sail about the coasts
of truth all our life, and dye in no belief at all.

3 It is false that the Apostles did not crush your liberty of prophesying, for
Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. extinguisheth those spirits who would shake the faith of
the Thessalonians, to make them believe that the day of Christ was at hand, for
he forbids to believe them, and John extinguisheth the Familistical and
Antichristian spirits, who denied Christ to be come in the flesh.

O but ( say Libertines) these false spirits, knew what they preached to be
lies, and yet preached them as from God, and we stand for no such liberty of
prophesying, nor such spirits as these.

Answ. This is a conjecture, that they believed the day of Christ was not near
hand, and yet preached it was near, there is not one shadow in the text, or
color hinteth that way: for, Familists and Seducers now, have not so much to
say for their dreams as they had, yea, they had much to say, that made them
believe that day was near hand, since Christ had said, these were the last
days, and the Apostles do writ it, that new were the last times, and that the
end of the world was fallen on them, and they preached al they wrote, and so it
is rather like they believed the day of Christ was near, and the Antichrist in
Jobus time, had as much as seducers now have, to make them believe that Christ
was not come in the flesh, since the blinded Jews alleged all the prophesies
of the old Testament as not fulfilled in the son of Mary, and sure they had
more to make them believe it, then Gortin, Saltmarsh, and other Familists (whom
Libertines (I believe) call a part of the godly party) if they speak according
to their conscience, can allege for their new, false, and fleshly visions
they preach and print.

4 Though we be not infallible as the Apostles were, yet reason will not say,
we should not desire that pious and good spirits, that is, those that call
themselves so, but are liars, to be extinguished. For we are to pray that God
would cause the unclean spirit, and the false Prophet, Libertines and others,
to cease out of the land, and so faith requires, we should try them by the
word, and pray and desire they were crushed and extinguished, I mean not in
their person, but as touching their false doctrine.

But present your self ( say Arminians) before the tribunal of Papists and
they will condemn you of Heresy, Remon. Apo. 282.
and if you allege the spirit teaches you, they will answer, is that the
spirit which corrupt and mad reason teaches you? the spirit of the Devil,
said the spirit of Christ was the spirit of Beelzebub.

Answ. What infer Libertines hence against us? this is to place no more power
in Synods but directive: Sir, if it please you, this is Gods will. But we hold
lawful. Synods (which is not in the Synagogue of Rome or Papist) may as well
rebuke, exhort, and instruct with all Authority, as Timothy, or any one
particular pastor, and this is more than the directive and sceptick teaching of
one private Libertine, teaching (with a reserve) convincing and condemning
another in a Scepticall way. But all tends to this, Protestant Synods convened
in Christ's name, can say no more, but we teach what our judgment is, it may
be true, it may be false, yield a Sceptik consent with a reserve to it, that is
all, and why? because Protestant Synods convened in the name of Antichrist can
peremptorily and tirannically condemn the truth as heresy, and say they are
infallible, and their Synodicall decrees are the very word of God, Ergo,
Protestant Synods, may not authoritatively command you in the name of Christ to
believe and receive their lawful decrees conditionally, after ye find them
agreeable to the word of God, there is no consequence here. Prelates condemned
the truth as heresy and schism, Pharisees condemned Christ as a Samaritan,
ergo, Protestants sound in the faith cannot condemn Popery, Familisme, and
ergo, Paul cannot condemn (...) as a perverter of the ways of righteousness:
this is, as if you would say, a robber cannot by law jure condemn a traveller
to render his purse, ergo, a Judge cannot compel this traveller to pay just
debt.

2 We do not instance from the teaching of the spirit, but from the clear word
of God.

CHAP. X. Of indulgence in fundamental, or non-fundamentall errors.
BUt say the Arminians, Remon. 16.
the question is of Heretics, not of those who dare deny the things openly
decided in the Scripture, but of those who call in question those things that
are, or may be contraverted. There was never an Heretic who called in question
whether thieves, How the Arminian Libertines do define an heretic.
drunkards, robbers, railers, Idolaters, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, or whether God be to beloved above all things, he is not a Christian,
he is not an heretic, but worse than a heretic who denies those things that
are plain and obvious in scripture. But he that lays a law upon others, which
he must follow under pain of death, imprisonment or banishment in things
belonging to liberty of prophesying, which are conjoined with the reverence of
God and the scripture, trampleth all prophesies under foot.

Answ. 1 This definition of an Heretic is in quesion, there be in England who
deny all scriptures as no word of God, yet are judged by Libertines, not
punishable by man. 2. All things that may be controverted, is wide. Nothing but
it is converted, except whether there be a God or not, and many doubt of that:
There be even now, who deny Jesus Christ God man, the necessity of his death,
his offices, the immortallity of the soul, the resurrection, last judgment, a
heaven, a hell, but al to Libertines are uncertain, and the denial of any
point, not by the light of reason, but by supernatural revelation, such as
these articles, that God is one in three distinct persons, that Christ is God
and Man in one person, that he dyed to satisfy divine justice, that we are
saved by his righteousness imputed to us by faith, etc. Is no heresy, but may
consist with true godliness, and therefore they give instance in fundamentals
which are known by the light of nature, as that thieves, drunkards shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, that God is to be loved above all things,
Heretics to Libertines only such as deny things knowable by the light of
nature diversity of opinions among them.
now th^se are principles of natural Theology known to heathens, so that such
godly men, to which Libertines would yield an indulgence and liberty, are good
moral honest civil men, who believe fundamentals known by the light of nature
to Christians and Heathens equally, for civil Heathens may have the sound
faith of al such fundamentals, and believing moral and natural fundamentals,
though they know not Jesus Christ, or possibly never heard of him, may be saved
and not be beholden to Christ known as a Savior, so some Libertines tell us,
not any man is to suffer death, though he deny and maliciously oppose, all the
principles of the Gospel, because these are known no ways, but by
supernatural revelation, and the light of faith which comes from God, but I
take the ground of this to be, because supernatural light is above us, and
not in our power, but by this reason, Christ should not have rebuked the
Pharisees for not believing in him, nor the Sadduces for denying the
resurrection, nor should Paul have smitten Eli^as with blindness for
perverting Sergius Paulus from the faith, for it was not in their power to know
or believe otherwise of these Gospel fundamentals that are not believed, but by
supernatural revelation, then they did, other Libertines say, they are only
Heretics or at least punishable by men, who deny fundamentals of Cbristian
Religion, but are sparing to tell us what fundamentals, whether of law and
known by the light of nature, or of Gospel known only by supernatural
revellation, The punishing of men forpublishing of fundamental errors and the
indulgence of a toleration yielded to them though they teach all errors in
non-fundamentals a vain distinction and has no ground in scripture.
so that ere they find the heretic, they must show you the point they deny
is fundamental, and its possible that is a difficil business, whether it be
fundamental or not, if he go for a Sectarie he is a godly man, and his
godliness shall prove the point is not fundamental, for this is the logic of
our time, such a people are godly, therefore their opinions are against no
fundamental point, whereas this is a better consequence; such points are
fundamental, ergo, if men twice or thrice admonished do yet wilfully go on
to maintain opinions manifestly contrary, they are not godly, for the Apostle
tel^ us of doctrine according to godliness then must the doctrine soundly
believed make the person godly or argue him to be so, but the man let him go
for a Saint cannot make or argue the doctrine to be the doctrine according to
godliness, if it be not so in it self, and we are inclined, if the man be of
our own tribe and sect, to defend his tenets, and not to judge them fundamental
error.

2. We wish much an argument to prove bodily violence, or Ecclesiastical
co-action may be used against men erring in points fundamental, Some murders
non-fundamentall ^n David, which yet are consistent with the state, salvation
should as well be tolerated as some errors in non-fundamentals, by the
distinction of Libertines.
but not in non-fundamentals, since God delivers his mind as clearly in
non-fundamentals, if not more clearly, as in fundamentals, and the authority
of the Lord who commands faith is as great in non-fundamentals, and our
obligation to believe no less, then in the most necessary fundamentals, as
therefore abstinence from adultery with Bathsheba, and murdering of Vriah in
David, is as necessary, necessitate precepts, as the whole course of David's
repentance and turning to God, yet it is not so necessary, necessitate medii,
for David is a saved Saint, though he absta^^^ not from that adultery and
murder, but without conversion from the state of sinful nature to the way of
saving grace, it is unpossible David can be saved; so to abstain from Idolatry,
and to demolish the high places, and to punish those who resort to them is a
godly practice, yet though (...) commit Idolatry with the golden Calfe, yea and
make the people naked also: And Asa, though he demolish not the high places all
his reign, nor punish any for that Idolatry, and did persecute the Seer, yet
Aaron was the faithful Priest, and the anointed of God, and Asa and some other
Kings heart, were perfect before the Lord, though they fell in these sins, nor
were these fundamentals, sins in practice, inconsistent with saving faith,
more then errors and teaching of errors in non-fundamentals, to the ruin of
many souls does exclude a possibility of being in the state of saving grace,
but it cannot follow, that because teaching and publishing of errors in
non-fundamentals is consistent with saving grace, that therefore these
non-fundamentall sins of murder, adultery, tolerating of Idolatrous high
places, persecuting of faithful Prophets, making of a golden Calfe, and
hallowing of it to be adored as the God that brought Israel out of Egypt, are
sins not to be tolerated in the truly godly, such as Aaron, David, and Asa, for
then should they be tolerated in the wicked also, for the toleration of such in
the godly, because they are not fundamental wickednesses, inconsistent with
saving grace, is as destructive and more, because of their extreme
scandalousnesse, to all peace and safety of human societies, and to the duty
of the godly Magistrate, as these same sins in the wicked, upon the same
grounds publishing of all errors non-fundamentall, the toleration of the high
places are as inconsistent with peace, destructive and injurious to souls,
especially in the godly, as scandalous to other false teachers, as these
non-fundamentall sins.

But (say they) the reason is not alike in non-fundamentall sins, that are
expressly condemned by all, Aarons Idolatry, David's adultery, Asaes persecution,
no man ever defended, therefore they cannot be tolerated by the Magistrate
without sin, though the acting of these sins may consist with sound faith. But
most of non-fundamentalls are not clearly determined in the word, in regard of
our dullness and natural blindness, and therefore the Magistrate cannot
punish the non-fundamentall errors, for these which be non-fundamentall
errors to some godly and learned, are non-fundamentall and seasonable truths
to others, as godly and learned as they are. But to all the godly and learned,
Aarons Idolatry, David's adultery and murder, Asa's tolerating the high places,
and imprisoning the Seer, were sins unjustifiable, and by the light of nature
such as no godly Magistrate can tolerate.

But I answer, if this be a good reason, why there is not the like
consideration of these sins non-fundamentall, and doctrines non-fundamentall,
because some doctrines non-fundamentall are seasonable truths to some godly and
learned, and these same are lies and untruths to others, as godly and learned
as they; then should also diverse fundamental errors be tolerated as well as
non-fundamentall errors, which Independents, the Masters of this distinction
with the Arminians will not say, because to some godly and learned
Independents, this is a fundamental truth, that murder, and adultery, and
robbery, are not to be tolerated by the Magistrate, that Magistracy is an
ordinance of God, but to many Anabaptists as godly and learned as they, it is
not only no fundamental truth, but a fundamental error, under our meek
Saviors reign, there ought to be neither sword nor spear, but instead of
them, plow-shares and pruning hooks, and since Libertines will not have
godliness to be valued by soundness in doctrine, but by men's spirits of
discerning and charity, Independents are to repute Familists, Socinians,
Antinomians as godly and learned as themselves: Now Independents think that
Christ God-man came to satisfy the justice of God for our sins, and that
Ordinances are necessary for all in this life, yet these, and many the like
Familists and Socinians judge fundamental lies, and who have any discerning,
and have heard Mr. John Goodwin pray, and seen his writings, which I have
done, will repute him as godly and learned as any Independent in England: so I
judge with correction; yet he will say the godly and learned Independents in
England hold many points to be fundamental truths which he reputes to be
fundamental untruths, as namely concerning justification by faith, that the
Scriptures we now have by the says whereof we must be saved, is the word of
God. Mr. Joh. Goodwin must say these are fundamental lies, and many
fundamentals in the late Confession of Ass^mbly, I know M. John Goodwin in his
writings, denies to be fundamental truths.

2. It is not enough to say most of the non-fundamentalls are not determined
clearly in the word, Some non-fundamentals clearly in the (...) revealed not
to be believed with a reserve, and others non-fundamentals with (...).
Libertines we (...) dispute withal, must say, not any non-fundamentalls are
determined in the word, but all fundamentalls are clearly determined, else they
must belie their distinction which Independents in the Apologeticke Narration
make almost a principle of faith (though I hope it shall never be one to me)
that all non-fundamentals are to be believed without a reserve, and all
fundamentalls with a reserve; for if many non-fundamentalls are also to be
believed without a reserve, it would have been service to the Church, they had
beaten out that Arminian principle a little more, and subdivided
non-fundamentalls in such as are to be believed with a reserve, and a demurre,
and such as are to be believed without a reserve, then in some
non-fundamen^^ll^ men are not to be tolerated, and what be these. 2. The
distinction should so bear a leg and halt, for then some fundamentalls we
believe without a reserve, and no toleration is to be yielded in them, but the
sword and the club must press faith in these, and we are to believe but some
non-fundamentalls with a reserve, not all, and indulgence is due to men in some
non-fundamentalls, not in others; but we know our Brethrens frequent arguing,
Independencie is not fundamentalls, ergo, our Brethren should tolerate it, but
we deny this consequence; yea Erastianisme in its highest sphere is not
fundamental, and yet high Erastianisme is persecution both of Independency and
Presbytery, does it follow then, it must be tolerated?

3. If the Magistrate cannot punish the error in non-fundamentals, because, in
regard of our dullness, they are not clear in the word, so in regard of our
dullness many fundamentals in the Gospel are as uncleare, and that all
acknowledge that Aarons Idolatry, and Davils adultery and murder, are sins
unjustifiable, and which the Magistrate by the light of nature is not to
tolerate, and that he is not a Christian who denies that thieves and Idolaters
who shall not enter into heaven, and that God is to be loved above all, is a
great untruth, many Anabaptists there were in Bullingers time, who taught none
but whores and harlots should enter into the Kingdom of God, which is cosen
Germains to this. Again, what is theft, is as disputable, as in the case of
usury, and whether the Saints the just and spiritual inheritors of the earth,
all things are yours (says Paul) do rob and steal, if they invade the
possessions, houses, moneys, and lands of unregenerate and carnal man? whether
he be a murderer who sacrifices his child to God in imitation of Abraham?
are as uncleare, in regard of our natural blindness, as most of the
non-fundamentalls: and Anabaptists that are godly and learned, have as much to
say from Scripture for denying of fundamentals, as in many in non-fundamentals
can plead, why their tenets are true, and though erroneous, yet not punishable;
and they should upon the same ground have a toleration for murderers, robbers,
thieves, that flow from mere conscience, and religious grounds, and though
these practices be destructive to peace, yet with what conscience can the
Magistrate punish them as destructive to peace, when it is not clearly
determined in the word of God that they are destructive to true human peace?
For if they be lawful, and some of them acts of worship, as the actors are in
conscience persuaded they are, they cannot be destructive to peace, yea to
punish them is tyranny over the conscience, say Libertines. Now I propose these
Queries, and desire Libertines to answer them.

1. Should not the Magistrate punish no thefts, no robbery, no murder, Queries
propounded to Libertines.
but such as are thefts, robberies, and murders, undeniably and
uncontroversally to the conscience of all that are members of that society,
whether Anabaptists or others?

2. Should the Magistrate abstain from punishing of that which is false
worship, for example sacrificing of a child to God, for fear he domineere
over the conscience of a Christian, and so transgress his sphere, and sit down
in Gods room (which is really murder, and shedding of innocent blood) though
it be not so to the manslayer, but acceptable service to God, and yet punish
the same false worship, as murder and destructive to peace, whereas to the
actors consience, whom he desires to favor, it is not murder and not
destructive to peace, Why may not the Magistrate lawfully spare the life of him
who out of a Libertine conscience merely sacrifices his child to God^ or why
should ^e punish with the sword some acts not destructive to peace in the
con^cience of the punished, and not a^ acts of the same ki^d.
does he not really and by his office as great violence, and exercises no
less a domineering power over the man's conscience, then if he should punish
this as false worship?

3. Will, or can notionall or mental consideration license the Magistrate to
domineere over men's consciences, and exercise soule-tyranny and invade the
Throne of God over the conscience, when it is upon the same reasons and
arguments of Scripture; as probable that the taking away of a fathers head for
sacrificing his son to God, is not destructive to peace, nor any breach of the
sixth Commandment, as it is probable it is true and acceptable, and worship to
God, and though it were false worship, it is as probable that to punish it, is
a sacrilegious invading of Gods place, as it is an act of justice in the
Magistrate?

4. If the Magistrate must believe, as the Libertine, does, does, and teaches
him, what he will, if it were King and Parliament, and all the Judges in
Britain, if they be of the faith of Libertines, what conscience have they to
take away the ^ead of a father, who sacrifices his only child to God, upon
mere religious principles, what warrant have they before the tribunal of God
to cut off his head, as a peace-breaker, rather then to spare his life as a
sacrificer, and a devout, and zealous (whether it be blind zeal or no, the
Libertine Magistrate has nothing to do to judge) worshipper of God? whether or
no has the Magistrate who in that case, kills a^ innocent man (according to
his own libertine-conscience) greater respect to false peace in a humane
society, then to true piety and innocent walking with God, which forbids him to
punish any thing that is only to the subject, he punishes, a mere devout
worshipping of God.

5. Upon the same ground, should not the mass, and all the broad worship on
earth be tolerated, since it has far less connection with disturbance of
peace, then the Anabaptists children-killing worship of God?

6. If the formal is ratio, the only formal reason and cause why the
Magistrate is to use corporal coersion against none now under the New
Testament, but is to suffer every man to worship God, as he best pleases,
because the worship of the New Testament is more spiritual, the Lawgiver
Christ, a meeker Mediator, then Moses, and there is no warrant now to hinder
any man, or lay bands and coactive violence upon Christ's free subjects, with
force of sword, to restrain them in one worship, more then another, what
reason an Anabaptists offering his son a sacrifice to God, should be restrained
in his sacrificing, more then in other acts of worship? is not the man
persecuted for his conscience? is not this a carnal, and no New Testament way
of restraining him, when he is restrained by the sword* is not the only word
of God, and no weapons that are carnal, the way of rescuing men from all false
worship, and the only way.

7. Nor can the bloodinesse and cruelty of that worship be a sufficient ground,
why the Magistrate may restrain the conscience of the devout worshipper; for
who ought to sit as Lord Judge above the conscience of this father, and
sentence the worship as destructive to peace, or the worshipper as a bloody
man? his conscience is under the New Testament, and the Lord his only judge.

But by the light of nature, that the father kill the son to God, (...)
murder, and ^ruel^y.

But I answer, if it be grateful worship to God, it is no more cruelty then to
burn a beast to God, and you are to suppose that a godly Anabaptist, has
warrant from God for that worship, as well for burning of beasts, and offering
yearly thousands of bullocks and sheep to God, in memory of Christ once
already sacrificed for sinners, and that there is in it neither cruelty to
beasts, nor hurt to the Commonwealth, that the Magistrate can restrain, for
though there be no reason at all for the worship, ex natura rei, if we consider
the worship it self, yet there is such reason to tolerate the worship, so as
if the Magistrate restrain, he tyranni^eth over the conscience, and a bloody
conscience is a conscience as incapable of violence, and as immediately in the
New Testament, subject to God only, not to the sword, as a good conscience,
then if the sword can strain no conscience as conscience; how can it squeeze a
conscience wading in bloody son-butchery more then any other conscience? To
compel men to do against their conscience, that is to sin neither in Old or
New Test-lawfull.


8. If the Magistrates punishing of any for his conscience be a violent
compelling of him to sin, to worship or to forbear worship against his
conscience, how will Libertines clear Magistracy in the Old Testament, from
being intrinsecally a sinful ordinance, for the Magistrate in the Old
Testament in stoning to death the seducing Prophet, and the blasphemer must
compel him to sin against his conscience, and to profess Jehovah, Deuteronomy 13.
not Baal was the true God, whereas the seducer believed in his conscience the
contrary, Deuteronomy. 17.
since to compel men to sin is intrinsecally sinful, let Libertines answer
the query, if God ever in Old or New Testament could command sin, or if there
was ever such a thing heard that a Magistrate might by his office command men
to sin, or then punish them?

9. Let Libertines answer if Arminians extend not liberty of prophesying as
far as men's lusts can carry them, ^pan^
in these words, But to suffer every man (say they) to (...) publicly in
Religion every thing i^ perilous. Why? for either that which (...) asserteth is
true, or false, if it be true, why admit we is not? why do we imprison the
Author thereof? this injury reflects upon God the Author of truth: if it be
false, the truth shall easily overcome ^^ar, of it self it shall melt like was
before the Sun, if ye offer violence (...) it, ye strip Religion of its
glory, and furnish oil to err^^^. Whether is not reason as strong to refute
errors fundamental as nonfundamentall? whether if ye offer violence to truth
in fundamentalls, as well as in non-fundamentalls, ye strippe Religion and
truth of its glory, and furnish oil to error?

They go on and tell us, (...). Apo c. 25. f. 290.
We need not ever be in learning these that are clearly determined in the
word; for they are clear, open, and of undoubled truths in the Scripture, in
other points (not fundamental) a Christian is ever a disciple and a searcher,
not that he does ever doubt and hesitate, but because, though for the present
he neither doubt, nor has cause of doubting, yet can he not be sure of these
points, with such a certitude, which is free of all danger of error, and
therefore he is often to examine these according to the rule that cannot err,
and so it is enough before God that he may be said ever to learn, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth, as far as frailty in this life can permit.

Answ. 1. There is then no stability of faith, but in two or three points, in
which all Papists, Latherans, Anti^^ni^ar^ans, Arrians, Socinians, Libertines,
Familists, Sabellians, Nestorians, Macedonians, Arminians, Antinomians,
Seekers, F^thystasts, Anabaptists, etc. agree, and make one true Church,
believing what is necessary for salvation, and holding the foundation Christ,
and we have no divine faith of the miracles that Christ wrought, that the old
world perished with waters, which God speaks as clearly in the word, as he
does fundamentalls.

But Libertines should distinguish the formal reason of believing truths,
which breeds an obligation, and the necessity of believing, for the one only
formal reason of believing, both fundam^ntalls and non-fundamentalls, is thus,
says the Lord. For we are as much obliged to believe non-fundamentalls that
are clear, There is the same obligation, the same formal reason (so says the
Lord) of believing non-fundamentals revealed, and fundamentals, and the same
necessity of divine command not the same necessity of means called, necessitas
med^^.
as that there were eight persons saved in the Arc, and the old world drowned
with waters, S^dome burnt with fire, as to believe fundamentalls, that there is
no name whereby men may be saved, but by the (...) of Jesus, for the Authority
of God speaking in his word and his Command does equally oblige to both, but
there is no such necessity so absolute in believing non-fundamentalls, as in
believing these, without the knowledge whereof, we cannot be saved; but it
never follows that errors in non-fundamentalls published and taught to the
ruin of the souls of many, they having such a strong connection and influence
on the knowledge of fundamentalls, are to be tolerated since our sinning here
does as equally and strongly strike against the authority and express command
of God (at least in most things of that kind) as in points fundamental, and
therefore the Magistrate who is to looketo the honor of God as a Christian,
and peace of societies in all, is as much obliged to punish, clearly opened,
non-fundamentall as fundamental false doctrines.

CHAP. XI. Of the obliging power of Conscience.
LIbertines bewilder themselves, Bloody Tenet c 3 p. 19.
and the Reader, both touching an erroneous conscience, and the obligation
thereof, Mr. Williams says, Such a person (what ever his doctrine be, true or
false) suffers persecution for conscience; as Daniel was cast into the Lions
den, and many thousand Christians, and the Apostles were persecuted, because
they durst not cease to prea^^ and practice what they believed was by God
commanded.

But this is a foul mistake, Daniel suffered not for conscience simply,
because he practiced what he believed to be truth, but because he practiced
what he truly congr^enter Dei voluntati revelatae, congruously and agreeably
to the revealed will of God, he believed, and the like is to be said of the
Apostles, not the convenience, and commensurablenesse of their practice, and
their conscience simply, but their believing, ^all modo, such a way made their
sufferings to be sufferings for righteousness sake; for then must we say that
Paul persecuted with the tongue, the Corinthians for their conscience, 1 Cor.
15. 34. Awake to righteousness and sin not, I speake^ it to your shame, for
some have not the knowledge of God. Those that denied the resurrection; through
error of conscience, said the dead shall not rise again, for Paul proves by
strong arguments that the dead shall rise, and so takes away the error of
their conscience, why then puts he shame and reproach on them, and names them
fools, and void of the knowledge of God? and such as believed in vain? it was
not in their power to correct the errors of their conscience, and if they
maintained, what they believed in conscience, was true (as by Paul's
demonstrating the truth to their conscience is evident) they were persecuted
for righteousness, if out of mere innocent and faultlesse ignorance, they
denied the resurrection, Paul should deal more gently with them, then upbraid
them as fools and Epi^ures who said, Let us eat, for to morrow, we shall dye,
if they did all believe the Resurrection, and yet professed the contrary, there
was no need to take pains as he does to prove it.

Saul killed the Gibeonites out of zeal to the children of Israel: R^monst.
Apo c. 25 245. Nam v^rbu^ Dei etiamsi vin obligandi ex se and p^rse habeat,
actu t^^en non obligat quenquam nisi intellectum and sic pr^ut adhibi^a omni
possibili diligentia and prudentia ^^nclligendum esse creditur, re^no enim
obligatur, ad verum v^rbi divini sensu ^ sequ^dum contra conscientiam suam
erro^^am.
It is like the blind ignorant zeal he had, thinking the Covenant that Joshua
made with them, did not oblige the posterity, was the cause of his murdering
of them, yet he suffered not in his sons that were hanged for that blind
zeal, as righteous, and following the rule of his conscience in that.

But touching an erring conscience, the question is not whether an erroneous
conscience does so tie, that we must do nothing on the contrary, nor is the
question whether the nearest actually obliging rule, be conscience; the
Arminians tell us, Though the word of God, of it self, and by it self, have
power to oblige, yet it actually obliges no man, except it be understood, and
so is believed to be understood, after we use all possible diligence and
prudence, for no man is obliged to follow the true sense of the word against
his conscience, though it be erroneous; but we think the word of God is both
the farrest and nearest, and the only obliging rule, and that the dytement of
the conscience does neither bind potentially nor actually, The state of the
question touching the obligation that conscience lays on us.
but is a mere (...), a messenger and an official relater of the will and
mind to God, to us, and all the obliging power is from the word, (...) the
messenger of a King and Judge, is not the obliging (...) that ties the subject,
or the Heralds promulgation of the Law, is no obliging rule, for promulgation
of Heralds, is common both to just and to unjust laws, and certainly unjust
laws from a just Prince lay no band on the conscience or on the man, far
less can the promulgation as the promulgation lay any bands on the conscience,
the word of a Messenger and Herald is at the best but a condition, or the
approximation of the obliging power to us, but all the obliging power is from
the King and the Judge. It is most false then, that these Libertines say, that
the word does not actually oblige, except it be understood, for the
understanding, information, and indycement of conscience, does not add any
actual obligation to the word that it had not before, it only is a Reporter,
to carry both the word and the actual obligation to the man; the Herald
promulgating the law, adds no obligation actual or potentiall to the law that
it had not before, only it makes an union, in distance, and near application
and conjunction between the actually obliging law, and the understanding
knowledge of the person, or subject, who is obliged to keep the law, though it
be true the fire cannot actually burn, but as timber is cast to it, yet the
fire has from its own nature both potentiall and actual burning, not from
the act of casting the timber in the fire; nor is this a concludent reason, no
man is obliged follow how the true sense of the word against his conscience,
though erroneous, ergo, the erroneous conscience does oblige, or ergo, actual
obligation to obedience is not from the word, but from the conscience; no more
then this is a good consequence, no man is obliged to obey the Law in it self,
just contrary to the promulgation of an erring and mistaking Herald, ergo, the
mistaking Heralds promulgation gives to the Law actual obligation over the
subject, for it only follows, (...) we are not to do contrary to the
actual indic^ment of an erroneous conscience, but not obliged to follow the
erroneous conscience, nor are we obliged to follow what our conscience says is
true and good, because, or upon this formal reason and ground, that the
conscience says so, more then we are to believe and practice, what the Church
or the conscience of others: the Church, the learned and godly say, for we make
not the word of the Church the formal object of our faith, but (thus says the
Lord only) because the Church is but a company of men, and so our faith should
depend upon men, even though holy and speaking ingenuously what their
conscience dictates as true, which is absurd, ergo, by the same reason, what
one man's conscience, our own, or others say, is not the formal object of our
faith and practices, for so also our faith should depend on man, not on God.
And we say the conscience at its best, is but Regula Regulata not, Regula
Regulans, nor ought it to have the throne of God, for God is only Regula
Regulans. If it were a rule, it is to be ruled by God, and his word, yea, as
we are to try all things and not believe with a blind faith what others say, or
their conscience proposes to themselves and us, as truth, for then we make a
Pope of the consciences of men, under the notion of teachers and Church, so we
are not to be ruled without trying, and absolutely by our own conscience, but
to try its dictates by the word of God, otherwise we make a Pope, and a God of
our own conscience.

Some say, as a right informed conscience obliegeth to do what it dictates, so
an erroneous conscience obliegeth to do according to its prescript. Durandus
and others says, ^gat non obligat, it binds that ye cannot do against it,
which some call negative obligation, but non obligat, it obliegeth not as a
divine rule, Tanner. Jesuit^ to 2. in 12. disp. 2. q 4. dub. 2. n. 21.
which is positive obligation.

Tannerus says, A Conscience that invincibly erreth, both binds, that we
cannot do against it, and obliegeth that we should not follow it. Which has
truth in the matter of fact, a Judge invincibly ignorant of an accused man's
innocence, when two or three witnesses do swear he is guilty, does lawfully
condemn the innocent man, having used all (...) diligence to find out the
truth, and not being (...) to find it, but this is rather error or ignorance of
the fact, than an erroneous conscience, for he proceeds according to the law,
with a well-informed conscience, following what the law says, by the mouth of
two or three witnesses shall every thing be established. The erroneous
conscience so long as it remains, by the law of nature, lays on an
obligation on a man, not to do against it, Romans 14. 14. To (...) the esteems
any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, verse. 23. He that doubts is
damned, if he eat, because he eats not of faith, for whatsoever is not of
faith is sin. So Ambrose, our opinion lays a law upon us. Gammacheus says
it is a vain distinction of binding and oblieging, Lib. de paradiso opinio
nostra nobis legem in ponit. Ph^. Gammacheu. in 12. q. 19. de act^. hum. c. 2.
sect. 173.
Inter ligationem and obligationem. And that we are obliged to follow an
erroneous consciencesse long as it continues erroneous, because here (says
he) (...) dispute not concerning that which is good, but that which is
commanded, But if the conscience dictate that something is to be commanded and
to be done under pain of sin, and yet we do i^ not, we resist conscience,
and so we sin, because the obligation is no mere (...) good only, Malderus 12
q. 19. a^t 5, ^. dis. 84.
but rather to that which is commanded. The Jesuit M^lderus says the same;
Contientiam erroneam and ligare and oblig^re, because an object materially
considered is such, an object by (...), but it is an object per se, kindly when
it is proposed by practical ^^^son, for what is not of faith is sin, Gal. 5.
3. I testify to (...) one that is circumcised, that he is debtor to do the
whole law.

Answ. There can be no reason, why conscience, because conscience, or because
wicked, more obliegeth; then why Will, because wicked will should obliege,
since in every wicked conscience actually drawing men to ill, of either heresy
or practice, there is something of wicked Will, and though there were nothing
of will, or of the affections in an erroneous conscience, yet since conscience
as a knowing faculty is under the law of God, an erroneous conscience must be
a transgressing conscience, and it is a contradiction, that a faculty sinning
should obliege to obedience to the law of God, in the same consideration,
because it sins. But these Schoole-^^^ties do not obliege us, we shall be
unwilling in any terms to say that God, or, which is all one, the law of
nature, lays on us an obligation to that which is sinful, or (...) if any
think he is obliged to be circumcised, sure he must think himself obliged
to eat the passover also, and to keep the whole Ceremonial law, but that
the law of nature obliegeth him either so to think, and erroneously believe
and practice, the whole Ceremonial Law is another thing. It is true, a
doubting conscience, that thinks he is obliged by the law to abstain from
eating swines flesh, is either obliged to eat swines flesh, or not to eat,
for to eat, or not eat, are opposed by way of contradiction, but there is no
apparent contradiction but admiteth of some qualification, and modification,
set the contradiction in an evangelicall sense, as you must, and then it shall
be, there be none in the visible Church, but he must either eat in faith, or
not eat in faith, he must either be circumcised in faith, and in a certain
persuasion that circumcision is acceptable to God, or he must not be
circumcised in faith, etc. For both the Law and Gospel obliege to the action
and to all the manner, way, and requisite circumstances of the action, to wit;
that it be done in faith, sincerely for God, in a due manner, etc. Now so we
say; he is neither to eat simply, nor not to eat simply, but either to eat
in faith, or to abstain from eating in faith, and without an erring and
doubting conscience: and we are not to do upon a supposition, that the
conscience stand erroneous, nor has the erroneous conscience any warrant at
all, nor commission from the Sovereigne Lord of conscience, to command you to
believe you must be circumcised, or upon the supposall of that faith to obliege
you to be circumcised, more then any earthly judge has a warrant from God to
command murder or robery; nor is it a law of nature, or of God that you must
do absolutely and without trying what an erroneous conscience indites you to
do, under pain of sin, nor is it a sin to resist an eroneous conscience by not
doing, or suspending the action, more then it is a sin not to obey an earthly
Judge, when he commands beside, and contrary to the law of the supreme
Lawgiver. No wonder they make a Pope of conscience, who make the conscience of
the Pope the supreme court that obliegeth all men on earth. The reason of this
error is, Papists (and Libertines join with them in this) dream hat as God
does command unerringly, and indeclinably, so hte has communicated to Popes
and Heralds, and to every lawful (...) under him, and so to the conscience,
that they may ^^errandly, and indeclinably also command, but they should
remember when power of commanding comes out of God, the fountain of authority,
now it loses its absolute undeclinablenesse, when it is in conscience, or in
any creature, and it is only conditional and limited in the streams, whereas
it was absolute and sovereign in the fountain.

2 In the case of an erroneous conscience standing in its vigorous thing, the
question is, both, what is commanded, and what is good, for these two are not
contrary, but agree well: for the Lords command to Adam (eat not of this
fruit) is to Adam the cause why the not eating is good, and the cause of the
obligation to what is commanded also, but only the obligation is ( ad modum
facti, non ad factum) to the ^^^ner of doing, that if we do, or abstain, we
do it (...), in faith, and persuasion without any jarring between the
conscience and the object, but there is no obligation to the fact. On the
regular way of doing, I am never obliged to obey God with an erring
conscience, or contrary to the indictment of an erring conscience.

3 The material object being sin, and forbidden by the law of God, is an object
by accident, even when it is proposed by practical reason, if that reason be
erroneous, and misinformed, as it is in this case, the proposing of practical
reason, does not make that to be good or commanded, which of it self was
neither good nor commanded, but sinful, it may make it good in the manner of
doing, and obliege in the manner of doing, but that is not our question, but
whether the practical judgment and conscience remaining erroneous, does both
ligare, bind and obliege to the fact that is sinful, that is denied. And
though he that is circumcised upon the supposall of a blind, erring, and
Jewish conscience, thinking the law of shadows obliegeth when the body Christ
is come, he is a debtor to do the whole Law, and to eat the Passover, to
sacrifice at Jerusalem, to keep the new-Moones, etc. But how is he debtor? He
is this way debtor, what warrant he has to be circumcised, he has the same
warrant to keep the Passover, to sacrifice, that is, he has as good reason
for to do all, or is as well obliged upon his false principles he goes on, to
keep all the law of ceremonies as to be circumcised, or do a part only, but
he is erroneously and sinfully made, by himself, a debtor to the whole Law,
but God made him a debtor neither to the one, nor to the other, and in Gods
Court, though if he be circumcised, he must be circumcised this way, that is,
his conscience must dictate that Gods Law still in force commands him so to
do, but this is but a necessity of supposition that falls upon the manner of
the doing, not upon the fact, for no Law of God warranteth him to be
circumcised, and no Law of God makes him debtor to do all the rest of the law
of ceremonies, he is obliged neither to be circumcised erroneously, nor to
abstain from circumcision erroneously, but to lay aside his erroneous
conscience, and to abstain from circumcision according to the enditement of a
well informed conscience.

So we easily answer that ignorant objection of fantastical Sectaries,
Ancient bonds of liberty of Conscience, se. 1. c. 6. p. 26.
in needless Pamphlets and Queries, smelling of nonsense and self-conceit,
speaking they know not what: If the sword be used against errors to suppress
them, then must the Magistrate command and compel men of tender consciences to
sin, Though the Magistrate punish false teachers it follows not that he
compels them to sin against their conscience.
and to do against the light of their conscience; for what is not of faith, is
sin. And the Spirit himself waits and violates not the liberty of the
reasonable soul, by superseding the faculties thereof, but approves every
truth to the understanding, and moves the will without violence, with a
rational force: Shall man be more zealous for God, then God is for himself?
God himself does not force men, but call them to repentance. -- If the word (
calling) be considered, whether will it warrant any further means then
arguments, persuasions, and entreaties (make them as forceable us you can) if
you hold the fear of punishment over men, it must be the fear of divine
punishment, etc.

Answ. For 1. we no where teach that the sword is a means of converting, but
the just vengeance that is inflicted by the Minister of God upon false
teachers, as upon other evil doers, so it is not destinated by God for
spiritual gaining and reducing of heretics that may repent, but for judicial
expiation of wrongs done to the flock and Christian society.

2. This poor argument will conclude against all (...) of Magistrates, against
murderers, bloody traitors, for the Laws of the Minister of God, the King
forbids the English Jesuit to stab his Prince, and compells him to (...) from
King-killing, and if this Jesuit abstain from killing his Sovereigne Lord, and
abstain not in faith, but against the light of his Jesuiticall and bloody
conscience, which dictates to him, that he is a Protestant Prince and a
heretic, and he is obliged in conscience for the advancement of the Catholic
cause to stabbe him, does the supreme Magistrate compel this Jesuit to sin?
and does he force the Jesuits conscience? for to do in faith has place in
duties of the second Table, as well as in the first, and men out of conscience
and in faith, and moved by the Holy Ghosts gracious actings are to obey all
lawful commands of the Magistrate, as to pay tribute, to abstain from murder,
treason, adultery, robbing and stealing, if they be subjects of tender
consciences, and why then should the Magistrate compel and force men to these
duties which are to be done in faith, and in a spiritual manner? for sure the
Spirit forces them not to do these in faith, so the command of the Magistrate
moves every Christian to practice, and act of obedience to men's Laws for
conscience sake, and the Spirit moves the whole powers of the soul, both the
understanding and the will without violence, with a rational force, and why
should the Magistrate then be more zealous for God, then God is for himself?
and all this may be said against all Laws in the Old Testament, why should the
Magistrate compel men against their faith and conscience not to believe, not
to practice any such seducing ways, as to say, Come let us go serve other
Gods, Should Moses be more zealous for God, then God is for himself? but the
truth is, the Magistrate as the Magistrate does not meddle with the conscience,
not the manner of obedience to Law, whether they be obeyed in faith, or against
the light of conscience, that is nothing to him, he commands but the external
actions, preach no heresy, no Familisme, Soci^^nisme under the pain of
corporal punishment; if Pastors obey this charge hypocritically, not in faith,
it is their sin, not the Magistrates, he neither commands thus, preach no
heresy, in faith and persuasion, nor yet, in no faith, in no persuasion. And
Augustine tells us the Donatists objected the same, Augustine contr. Gau^e^ti^
n, l. ^ c. 24. Et si ficti aliq ^i persever^^^, non utique ^^op er ipsos (...)
fucra^t colligendi quos viden^^s ver^^e^.
God compels none, but has given men freewill to obey him, contr. petil. l.
2. c. 83. Epist, 48. ad vincention, Contr. Gaudenti^^. l. 1. c. 25 Contr.
Cresc. l. 3. c. 51. which I often re-minde the Reader of, and the Donatists
also said this compulsion makes hypocrites, when they are compelled to go to
hear the word, Augustine answers, Although some that are compelled to bear
remain hypocrites and counterfeit, yet for these, such as are sincere, should
not have been left ungathered in.

And for that of Gods calling to repentance, Gods way and manner of calling, is
no ground why the magistrate should not punish false teachers.
he is but an ignorant senseless man who wrote that book. The Spirit waits,
(says he) and violates not liberty. If the meaning be, the Lord is
long-suffering and patient, and lets men go on in their sins, and in his own
time effectually calls them, this is a senseless sense, for God waits not on
one out of his longanimity and forbearance, lest he should force freewill, for
the freewill is ever alike impotent, rebellious and refractory, till God subdue
it, if the meaning be (as another sense it cannot have) The Spirit waits and
violates not liberty, that is, the Spirit waits until freewill be in a good
blood and a congruous disposition to obey, and then the Spirit, for fear of
forcing of it, if he should come on it undexterously to work it against the
hair; catches the opportunity when he sees it is not on a strain of
rebellion, and in a distemper, and then he draws the freewill without force;
the man (I judge) is innocent and incapable of this schoolheresie of late
Jesuits, who devise a Pelagian congruous calling: and this were nothing to the
purpose, and should neither have head nor feet to the matter in hand, for the
Spirit who can carry freewill, though most rebelliously distempered his way, is
not afraid of freewills contradictorious opposing, but can in every moment
subdue freewill without forcing, he never waits on, for such a matter, except
there be a time when freewill is to hard a party for the Spirit to yoke
withal; or when nature or some preparatory grace makes it easier for the
Spirit to conquiesse, consent at one time more then another.

2. Gods not forcing of freewill is no rule to the Magistrate not to awe men to
abstain from perverting of souls for fear of the sword, for by the same
reason, because Gods Spirit moves the Saints to be subject to every ordinance
of (...), Judge, or good Law, for the Lords sake, and for conscience, for he
must obey this, Romans 13. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. and the Spirit compells not in these
more then in the others; so this argument, God must work faith, give
repentance, and make a willing people, ergo, Ancient bonds of liberty of
Conscience, s. 1 c. 6. p. 26.
the Christian Magistrate cannot with his authority do it, is all granted.
This is but a very rotten rush, a straw, Entbysiasts so argue, God teaches
sufficiently, ergo, the Scriptu^^ and ministry of men are not requisite, the
discipline of the godly Magistrate cannot ascend so high as to have influence
on the conscience and beget faith no more then the preaching of the word by the
Ministers of the Gospel without the (...), ergo, the godly Magistrate cannot
with the sword keep the external man in outward obedience to
Gospel Ordinances, it in no sort can can be a good consequence, nor is it good
divinity to say with Pelagians and Arminians, that the calling of God extends
no further then to arguments, persuasions, entreaties and threatenings, for the
calling of God extends further then to so much as man can do, in calling of
sinners to repentance, but men can act upon the mind, will, and reasonable
soul, by arguments, persuasions, entreaties and threatenings, for all that is
done by the Ministry of men. But in effectual calling (of which we here
speak) it is certain, the Lord infuseth a new heart, a new spirit, (...)
efficaciously to the Son, which is a further and higher (...) of omnipotencies,
calling and drawing, then all the moral persuasion by arguments, entreaties,
and threatenings, performable by men or Angels; so this man is either an
ignorant or a gross Arminian.

Now from all this, it is easy to expound that character which the Holy Ghost
puts upon the heretic, Who is the self condemned heretic, Tit. 3. 1.
Tit. 3. 10. he is judged or condemned of himself, that is, the truth is so
clearly opened to him, or he may, if he did not wincke, and shut his eyes,
clearly see and believe the truth, if he did not knowingly, prudently, and
willingly resist the truth, and therefore is condemned by his own heart.

But Minus Celsus says, (...) sect. ^. 1. 13.
the words carry a far other sense, to wit, That by sinning he is the author
of his (...) condemnation, because in choosing true Religion, be thinks he both
made a right choice, when he has chosen a false Religion, being deceived by
his own judgment, he falls into damnation, which, miserable man, he has
created to himself, and in which he chooses to persist, and therefore is to be
esehewed. So it is said, the Jews judged themselves unworthy of eternal life,
but knowingly they judged not so of themselves, but they did so behave
themselves as if they made themselves unworthy of eternal life. So I believe
the heretic is called selfe-condemned, because he does those things that
renders himself worthy of damnation. So Castalio, or he is selfe-condemned,
that is, he is damned, though there were none to condemn him but himself. So
Erasmus.

Answ. He is selfe-condemned, who may be condemned by his own conscience,
though for the present the conscience be burnt with a hot iron, and the man
will not permit it to summon, accuse, condemn, no less then he who is
actually condemned of his conscience, for it is a laudable act, and a natural
virtue of the conscience to give sentence against a heresy when it ought so to
do, as it is a vice of the conscience to be dumb at heresies; but if he love
the truth, though he cannot actually condemn the heresy, he is not
selfe-condemned.

The heretic (says Celsus) is an innocent man, and is not such a man as sins
against light, nor maliciously, nor with an ill conscience, nor is his end
gain, pleasure, nor an ambitious lusting after a name, he sees none of these
are attaineable, yea, it is his desire of life eternal, and his ^eale that
sets him on work, and rather or he dishonor God and deny the known truth,
and sin against his conscience, he had rather choose torment, and dye a martyr,
and drink that direful and bitter cup of death, which was so terrible to
Jesus Christ, that it caused him to fall to the earth, sweat blood and water.
So he, fol. 14, 15, 16. which if it be true, an heretic is rather an innocent
Angel, then a guilty man, condemned of his own conscience. Yet Minus C^lsus
says here, he behaveth himself as one worthy of damnation, and damned, though
none but himself condemn him, 1 John 3. 20. For if our heart condemn us, God
is greater then our heart and knows all things. It is like then, an innocent
man is condemned, and his company to be eschewed as a pestilent wretched man.

Yet the Arminians say, though discipline is to be exercised on heretics
condemned by themselves, R^monst. vi. di. l. 2. c. 8. Ut heresis naturae potius
quam vitium vo untatis sit.
yet are they bewitched with A great prejudice -- so as heresy is a vice of
nature rather then of freewill. And in another place, only nature, by no fault
of heretics, void of grace, begets these errors, and not freewill
despising the help of grace; they are seduced not of their own accord, but by
necessity of nature, L. 11. c. 2. Err^ces istos sola parit natura per nullam
ipsoram culpam destituta gratia, non voluntas auxilium gratia aspernata
Seducuntur non sponte sua sed naturae necessitate seducunt enim non quia
seducere volunt, sed quia non possunt non seducere.
for they seduce not because they will seduce, but because they cannot seduce.

It needs not an answer, that they say, the Jews judged themselves unworthy of
life eternal, not knowingly, for knowingly they did it, Act. 13. v. 45. they
spoke against the convincing and enlightening Gospel, contradicting and
blaspheming. So ^. 14. 1, 2. for which sin against the Holy Ghost, Paid turned
from them, and preaches the Gospel to the Gentiles; yea Minus Celsus will have
the Jews to err innocently in that malicious fact.

Answ. To forbid marriage and meats, can hardly be arraigned as fundamental
errors, nor the Authors such as must deny the Scriptures to be the word of
God, yet they are such as depart from the faith, teach doctrines of devils,
speak lies in hypocrisy, and have their conscience burnt with an hot iron; and
if heretics be as innocent as their sin, if it be but a fault of nature, as
blindness from the womb, or deafness, not of will, but of nature, why are
they to be rebuked, accused, condemned of their own conscience? But they
little know the heart of man, who find not malice, prejudice, pride, desire of
glory, to hold up a faction, often gain and hunger for court to lodge with
errors of the mind; and whereas Libertines say we promote truth with blood,
we retort it thus, they promote heresy with the sword, and deny thousands of
Atheists, bloody men their way, because the^^ purse, the Parliament, the sword,
the Army is on their side.

CHAP. XII. Arguments against pretended toleration.
HEnce I proceed to argue thus against this pretended liberty.

1. Every duty of the Christian Magistrate, has warrant in the Old or New
Testament, which exactly teaches the duty of Ruler and subject, Father and
children, Master and servant, etc.

Argument 1.
BUt toleration of many false ways, Toleration has no warrant in the word.
and the permitting of men to speak lies in the name of the Lord, and to
seduce souls, has no warrant in the Old or New Testament* ergo, such a
toleration is no duty of the Magistrate; the major is clear from the
perfection of the word of God; the assumption is proved by a negative argument
from the Scripture, it is no where written expressly, or by consequence, to be
the duty of the Ruler, therefore it is not his duty to tolerate or permit.

If it be replied, because it is not holden forth in Scripture to be the Rulers
duty to punish men for their conscience, therefore it must be the Rulers duty
to tolerate and permit them.

It is answered, the word of God is as perfect in teaching for what sins the
Ruler should not punish, as for what he should punish, the son for the fathers
transgressi^^, should not be punished by the Magistrate, for that i^ injustice
in men, and he should not punish, except the (...) be confessed or proved by
the mouth of two witnesses. The (...) that was forc^d in the field, and had
none to help her, (...) free of punishment also; and so is the man that (...)
hi^ brother and hated him ^ot before.

Again, if those that seduce souls be most hurtful and pernicious to
Christian societies, and those that teach the way of God truly to be useful,
the Ruler must not be newtrall and indifferent, as touching the use of his
power toward either; but as he is for the praise of well-doing by virtue of his
office, so must he be an executer of wrath on evill-doers, especially such as
hurt Christian societies, whose peace and quiet living in all godliness and
honesty he is to procure.

Argument II.
THat which infers necessarily many Religions, Toleration infer^eth
Scepticisme.
many faiths, many sundry Gospels in one Christian society, is not of God. But
the toleration of all ways, and many Religions is such; ergo, this toleration
is not of God: The proposition is evident, because there is but one old way,
Jer. 6. 16. One Lord, one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4. One faith once
delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3. one truth to be bought, Prove. 23. 23. one
Christ, which the Apostles, heard, saw, and handled with their hands, from the
beginning, 1 John 1, 1. One name of Jesus, not any other under heaven by which
we may be saved, Act. 4. 12. not Jehovah and Malcom, Zeph. 1. 5. not Jehovah
and Baal, 1 King. 18. 21. not the true God, and the Gods of the heathen, the
Samaritan mixture, 2 King. 17. 33. (2) And this one way we are to keep with
one heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. with one judgment, one mind, one tongue, one
shoulder, Act. 4. 32. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 42. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Zeph. 3. 9. Zach.
4. 9. Being rooted and established in the faith, Col. 2. 7. Not tossed to and
fro, nor carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Without
wavering, Heb. 13. 9.

For the assumption: That God has appointed in his revealed will, that every
man should serve God as best pleases him, and as it seems good in his own
erroneous conscience, and that every man should pervert the soul of his
brother, and the Magistrate should put no man to shame for it, is as good as if
there were no Magistrate, and that it is against his calling as a Magistrate,
is clear, for the Holy Ghost says, that, Jud. 16. 5. Micah had a house of
Gods, and made an Ephod, and a Teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who
became his Priest, was from this, v. 6. In those days there was no King in
Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes; ergo, the
Magistrate by his office is to take care that Micah and others serve not God as
it seems good to their own erroneous conscience, and so, that another follow
not another Religion, and a third, another third Religion, as seems good in
every man's own eyes.

2. If the Magistrate restrain not the high places, for which he is rebuked,
as some sacrifice at Jerusalem at Gods command; so the people for the most part
sacrifice in the high place through the Princes fault, and then there be two
Religions, and upon the same sinful indulgence they may multiply groves, and
alters according to the number of their Cities: And as there were false
Prophets among the people then, so now, who with fair words make merchandise
of men's souls, who by the revealed will of God must be tolerated to do the
like, and others the like, till Religions be multiplied: and this we must
say, except it be affirmed that under the New Testament: The corruption of our
nature is not so great, through neglect of Magistracy to do what seems good
in our own eyes under the New Testament, and to run a whoring from God to
other high places as they did, and if so, neither should there be a Magistracy
under the New Testament to restrain us in ways of conversation touching the
second Table, to wit, to hedge men in from robbing and stealing, from
incestuous Marriages and Polygamie, upon mere conscience; for if the Saints be
the only ^ust owners of the earth, as many now hold, it is no more punishable
by the Ruler, as robbery, that a Saint take the Ox, Ass, Moneys. Possessions
of his neighbor, who is a carnal and wicked man, then that he take of his
own goods for his use, when he is naked and starving, which by the Law of
nature he ought to use before he famish^, and incestuous. Ma^riages are to
some consciences as unpunishable now, as when Cain and Abel married their own
sisters; and if conscience ought not to be forced in one thing, neither can
violence be offered to it in any thing that unfainedly pretends to conscience.

Argument III.
THAT indulgence and forbearance of all from the Ruler, which lays an
undeniable ground for Scepticisme, Fluctuation, and doubting in matters of
Religion, is not of God. But such is toleration of sundry Religions; ergo,

The major is thus proved: True Religion suggesteth an (...) and a perfect
understanding, Luke 1. 3. knowledge and persuasion of faith, Romans 14. 14. 23.
faith by many infallible tokens, Act. 1. 3. Full persuasion, Romans 8. 39. 2 Timothy
1. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All riches of the full assurance of understanding,
Col. 2. 2.

The assumption I thus prove; Want of infallibility in the New Testament, no
reason for the toleration in the Testament.
Because the Libertines say, that special and principal ground of no
indulgence to false Prophets under the Old Testament, was because the Prophets
were infallible, God himself who only knows the heart, designed the false
teacher, and the blasphemer by immediate resolution from his own oracle, and
made it out of question whether that was heresy or no, and whether
presumptuously against the light of conscience the man held, professed and
taught others so to do, and believe as he did: So Arminian Libertines: So
Minus Celsus: So Vaticanus: So Jo. Goodwin, and the English Libertines.

But now since the Prophets and Apostles fell asleep, no Magistrate, no Synod
is infallible, all men are apt to deceive, and be deceived, for whether in
fundamentals or non-fundamentalls: none now can challenge Prophetical or
Apostolic infallibility, the Synod condemning Socinians, Familists, as
heretics are not infallible, but may as rather be the heretics, as those
whom they condemn, for they have not monopolized the Holy Spirit to
themthemselves, so say they, we have no immediate Oracle to determine heresy:
and what we believe in all, except some few fundamentalls, we are to believe
with a reserve, leaving room to a new contrary light say the Independents; yea
but it holds in believing fundamentalls, Apolo. N^trar. p. 19.
as well as non-fundamentalls, for in neither have we Prophetical
infallibility and immediate Oracles, and Scripture shows we have as great
darkness, blindness of mind, natural fluctuation to believe nothing in
supernatural fundamentalls in the Gospel, as in non-fundamentalls, but with
trepidation and doubting of mind, we no more having monopolized the Spirit to
us then Sectaries, nor Sectaries more then we, in the one then in the other, in
fundamentalls, then in non-fundamentalls: what ever we believe, upon this
principle of Reciprocal Toleration, both we and Sectaries are to believe with
a special reserve to change that faith with the next new Moon, when contrary
new light shall appear, so are we taught to have faith of nothing, but to be
tossed to and fro, and to be carried about with every wind of doctrine, with
wavering, not rooted, nor established, nor fully persuaded of any thing,
contrary to Ephesians. 4. 14. Hebrews 3. 19. Coloss. 2. 2. 7. Roman. 14. 2^. 2
Timoth. 1. 12. And this destroys faith, and makes it a mere conjecture, and
an unsettled opinion, with a fluctuation of mind, to wait the tide of a new
contrary light, and send this old faith away, and admit of another; yet so as
to lodge that new one with a moveable reserve, and so must we live and dye
doubting, and mere nullifidians.

Argument IV.
THat which destroys all our hope, Toleration is against faith, (...) in the
Scriptures.
comfort of the Scriptures, zeal, constancy, and rejoicing in suffering for
the truth, for Christ and the Gospel is not to be held, nor is it from God.

But toleration of sundry Religions is such, ergo, The Proposition is clear
for the places of Scriptures placing these Christian graces in believers, as
Heb. 5. 19, 20. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Romans 15. 4. 5. Romans 12. 11. Romans 5.
1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 3. 1. Phil. 1. 12, 13. Heb. 10. 33, 34. Matthew. 19. 29, 30.

Now Toleration lays this ground as a principle, Men are not to be troubled
for their conscience, because they believe, hold, publish, and reach what they
do, right or wrong, according to their conscience, be it erroneous, or not
erroneous; and their zeal, hope, persuasion, comfort, carries them to
undergo the reproaches of Heretics, Seducers, false Prophets, imprisonment,
torture, death, burning quick, rather then they would sin against known
truth, and offend against a conscience though erroneous, yet because the
sufferers are not infallible, and it may be a lie, they believe, publish, and
suffer for, their hope may be grounded on a lie, their comfort not bottomed on
the Scripture, and so false hope and comfort, their rejoicing in sufferings,
and undergoing torture, and violent death, but fleeting and counterfeit joy,
their zeal without knowledge, a bastard zeal, having nothing to do with the
word, and Gospel-promises; but in the bottom, as contrary to them as light is
to darkness: for what any Saint or Professor believes and publishes, he is
to believe and publish, and dye in it, and for it, with a faith that the
contrary may be a truth of God, and so to be tolerated and borne with: now
the hope of the hypocri^e is therefore compared to the spiders web, to a broken
tree, to a blasted olive tree, his joy to a night vision, a dream, the
cracking of thorns under a pot, because both hope and joy, and all his comfort
is grounded on an erroneous conscience, a lie, an imagination, not on the word
of God.

Now so is the joy, comfort, and hope of all Religions which Libertines contend
must be tolerated, they confess they may be truths, they may be lies, yet if
they be punished for them, they suffer persecution for righteousness, for
Christ, for truth.

Argument V.
THAT which takes away all ways of removing Heresies under the New Testament,
Toleration is against the ministry of the word.
both by the Sword, and refuting of gaine-sayers by the word, all rebuking, all
avoiding of them, is not of God. But such is this pretended Toleration, ergo,
It is not of God, the major is evident of it self.

The assumption I thus prove: Therefore the Magistrate should not punish
Heretics, because he cannot do it in faith, for he not being infallible,
he cannot certainly and undeniably know that he punishes the man for that
which is a Heresy, or for that which is a truth, and so while he is plucking
up Tares, he may be plucking up Wheat, and so he cannot in faith punish him,
say they.

But this reason strongly evinceth, according to the way of Libertines, the
gaine-saying heretic is not to be refuted, nor to be sharply rebuked, that
he may be sound in the faith: nor to be avoided as selfe-condemned, contrary
to Titus 1. 11, 12, 13. Titus 3. 10. Romans 16. 17. 2 Timoth. 2. 14, 15. 1
Timoth. 6. 3, 4. Matthew. 22. 29, 30, 31, 32. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. because
what ever my Christian Professor does, as well as the Christian Magistrate, he
must do it in faith, Romans 14. 23. otherwise (...) sins.

And it is no less sin (I speak not of (...)-degree^) to refute, judge, and
condemn, rebuke and avoid a brother as a selfe-condemned Heretic, when it is
not evident to the conscience of Pastors, Synods, or any private Christians,
who may refute, admonish, and rebuke Heretics by the word of God, Titus 1.
11, 12, 13, Titus 3. 10. Romans 16. 17. that he is an Heretic, for they may
be reproaching and speaking against such as are sound in the Faith, and Wheat;
not Heretics and Tares, for ought they know, who have not monopoli^ed the
Holy Spirit to themselves only, more then, these whom they refute, admonish,
rebuke and avoid as Heretics, and so they cannot in Faith more (...) the Holy
Ghosts charge, and rebuke Heretics, then the Magistrate can in Faith draw the
Sword against them.

Argument VI.
THe father commands the children now in the state of sin, to learn and hear
the judgments and testimonies of God, Genesis 18. 19. Exodus 12. 27. Psalm: 78. 3,
5, 6. Joel. 1. 2, 3. and that in order to the rod and bodily punishment, Prove.
13. 24. Prove. 23. 13. Withold not correction from the child, for if thou
beatest him with the rod, he shall not die. 24. Thou shall beat him with the
rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell. Damnable heresies bring swift
destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1. The fourth command is given to the father of the
house, Exodus 20. in order to son, servant, and stranger, to cause them to keep
the Sabbath; which Nehemiah as a father and a ruler practiced by the sword,
Nehem. 13. 19, 20, 21, 22. And the like Morrally, lays bands on all
Magistrates and Ministers, according to the power of the rod, civil or
ecclesiastical committed to them, Eli a father and a judge despised God, 1 Samuel 2. 30. in not correcting his sons, for abusing of their priestly power:
his sons might have pretented conscience that they could not live upon the
ordinary allowance for the priest, and that the law of nature might bear them
out in their practices; yea, every man is to take care that he and his house
serve the Lord, nor did Joshua as a Magistrate only, chap. 24. 15. but as a
master of a house so speak, then must the Prince, the Parliament, the
Magistrates say the like, and take care according to their places as fathers of
the Commonwealth to do the same.

Hence we thus argue, Rulers by the fourth command are to see all under them
worship God.
what ever coercive power to command, threaten, promise, punish, restrain,
reward, God has given to parents, masters of families, teachers, tutors,
officers in war, Kings and Princes, is the good gift of God and a tallent to be
employed for the good of souls, and in order to observe the duty of the first
Table, every one in order to their station. Because Kings are to bring their
glory and honor to the new Jerusalem: its either Kingly honor and power,
which is essentially coactive, or then, it is nothing but that holy rich men
that bring their glory to it, Rev. 21. 24. And Kings shall minister to the
Church. It is either royal service as Kings, or then no more favor is
bestowed on the Church, then if private men ministered to the Church, Esa. 60.
ver. 10. And if it be not for the beautifying of the House of God at Jerusalem,
in obeying the Law of God, and insticting death, or banishment on the refusers
of obedience, as the Persian Monarch did, Ezr. 7. 28. 26, 27, 28. it is not
glory brought to Jerusalem. But such a coercive power has the Lord given, as a
talent and gift to parents, masters, teachers, tutors, officers, Kings and
Princes: as these places evince.

And thus, that which the master of a christian family may do, that the father
of the Commonwealth the King in his place may do. But the master of a family
may and ought to deny, an act of humanity, or hospitality to strangers that are
false teachers, who bring another Gospel, 2 John 10. whom he must neither
lodge, nor bid God speed: because he brings another Gospel; which he otherwise
owes by the law of nature to a Pagan, and a man not known to him, Heb. 13. 1,
2. Job 31. 32. Genesis 18. 1, 2, 3, 4. chap, 19, 1, 2, 3. The proposition is
clear upon the ground that David as an head of an house, will cut off all
liars, and wicked persons out of his house, as a godly King he will also cut
off early from the Church (called the city of God) (...) wicked doers, Psalm.
101. For if every Christian family of New England must refuse lodging to a
false teacher, must not the Governor and Judges, who have power to command and
regulate acts of hospitality, join their civil authority to forbid any master
of an house, to lodge such a (...) heretic? And what is this but the highest
degree of banishment? And if the Christian Magistrate who may in law dispose of
Innes and lodging of strangers, for the public good, should command any to
receive such a man (...) house, should he not offer violence to the conscience
of the master of the house? And yet if the man were sound in the faith, and
should only seem a false teacher to the master of the house, the adversaries
would say, the godly ruler may command an act of the law of nature, to lodge a
(...), who only upon mistake, and an erroneous (...) is suspected to be an
heretic, for they say the Ruler may (...) his power in duties of the second
Table.

3 It appears that the laws of both Kingdoms ordained English or Scottish
seminary priests, or Jesuits that come to either Kingdom to seduce men to the
Romish faith, to be hanged, to have better ground in the word of God, 2 Jo. 10.
and which forbids any under pain of death to lodge such then the twelfth
proposal for peace, Proposals of the Army under Sir Tho. Fairfax 12. p 10
that licenceth Jesuits and Priests and so commands Protestants to lodge
such, if they disturb not the peace of the Kingdom, though they lead
millions of souls to hell. For upon this proposal, suppose al England were
truly godly, the King might command the just contrary to what the Apostle John
exhorts, if he follow the consciences of the new Army.

CHAP. XIII. Magistracy and perpetual Laws in the old Testament warrant the
civil coercing of false Prophets.
Argument VII.
WHat the Patriarchs, Rulers, as Rulers, not as tipicall Rulers punished false
teachers with the sword.
and Godly Princes of Israel and Judah were obliged to do, as Rulers and
Princes, and not as such Rulers who were privileged types of Christ, that all
Kings and Rulers under the new testament are obliged to do. For quod convenit
(...) what agrees to Kings as such, and to Rulers as such, agrees to all
Kings, and to all Rulers.

But Patriarchs and Godly Princes, as Rulers commanded the putting away of
strange Gods, as Jacob, Genesis 35. 2, 3, 4. did, and the worship of the true God:
as Abraham, Genesis 18. He being a Prince within himself. So repenting Manasses,
2 Chronicles. 33. 15, 16. removed strange Gods, and new A^ers. Asa removed Idolatry
and Queen Mother for her Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 14. renewed the Covenant, and
commanded that whosoever should not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be
put to death whether small or great, whether man or women: (...) is commanded,
because he took away the high (...), and the groves, as other godly Kings are
blemished for not removing of them, 2 Chro. 19. 4. Nevertheless there are good
things found in thee, says the Prophet, Jehu. Hezekiah removed the high
places, the images, groves, brazen Serpent, restored the Passover, worship,
Priests. And Josiah destroyed the high places, groves, carved, and molten
Images, Idols, and Altars of Baal^m, the horses dedicated to the Sun, houses
of the Sodomites, Topheth, Baals Priests, 2 Chro. 34. Now that they did this as
Princes, not as privileged types of Christ, and that God requires this at the
hands of king Charles, when God shall establish him in his Throne, to take
order with Arrians, Socinians, Antitrinitarians, Familists, (...), Anabaptists,
Seekers, etc. is evident.

1. Typicalnesse did not privilege all the Kings of Judah and Israel to
compel the conscience, and punish false teachers, as Libertines say.
Their assertion, that all the Judges and Kings, were types of Christ, even
Jeroboam, Jehu, Ahab, and the vilest of them is said, not proved. 2. That
typicalnesse invested all these Kings with a power over the conscience, 2. to
convert men to God with a sword of steel. 3. To punish Idolaters, whereas they
had none, if they had wanted this typicalnesse, the contrary being evident in
Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius. 4. That this typicalnesse made Jeroboam, Ahab, and
such who sold themselves to wickedness, infallible to judge who were true
Prophets, and reward them, and who were seducers, to put them to death, the
contrary of which is clear in Ahab, and men of his stamp. 5. We require any
ground from the word that they were types of Christ. 6. That the typicalnesse
of the land made the head, the King, a type of Christ, and not all the
inhabitants types also. 7. That the typicalnesse of the land made the King head
of the Church, and yet he might not offer incense, but he must be stricken
with leprosy as King Vzzah was. 9. That Church and State was one. 10. That the
King was supreme Church-Judge above the Priests that handle the Law, and over
both judicatures of Church and State, (11.) That they were all Prophets, and by
an extraordinary typical power removed the high places, killed Baals Priests;
all which phancies taken for granted lies between them and this, That Princes
now have nothing to do with Christ and Religion more then Indians.
2. That they did this as Princes of common equity by the law of Nature; I
prove 1. Darius who was undeniably no type of Christ to his great commendation
makes a Law, Ezra 6. 11. I have made a decree that whosoever shall alter this
word, let timber be pulled from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged
thereon, and let his house be made a dunghill for this; and this is commended
by the Holy Ghost, v. 14. They prospered through the prophesying of Haggai,
etc. according to the Commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the
commandment of Cyrus and Darius, and Artaxerxes King of Persia. And Ezra chap.
7. Artaxerxes says v. 26. Whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the
law of the King (injoyning obedience thereunto) Let judgment be executed
speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. And Artaxerxes was no type of
Christ, yet Ezra adds in the next verse, 27. Blessed be the Lord God of our
Fathers, which has put such a thing as this in the heart of the King, to
beautify the house of the Lord at Jerusalem. If it stand good that patrons of
liberty say, he was not to bless God for this, he had cause to mourn, that
the heathen King being no type of Christ, should intermeddle with that which
belonged not to him, to strain the tender consciences of men, and to force
Religion upon them with the sword; for chap. 10. v. 7, 8. this is set down as
a blessed decree which brought on an Assembly, for putting away strange wives.
The like is clear in the decree of Darius, Daniel 6. for worshipping the God of
Daniel, and of the King of Niniveb, for a general fast, Jon. 3. and
Nebuchandnezar, Dan. 3. 28, 29.

3. How typicalnesse priviledgeth men to such and such actions, how not.
Typicalnesse sometime may be ground of doing what is extraordinary, as Sampson
killed himself and his enemies, which he could not have done in ordinary, but
he was in it a type of Christ, who slew more in his death, (and that most
voluntary, Joh. 10. 18.) then in his life. And Solomon as a type married the
daughter of the King of Egypt, typifying Christ, who joined himself in
marriage with the Church of the Gentiles* but it is no good consequence, the
Kings of Judah being types did punish Idolaters, therefore (...) ^^nishing of
Idolaters was extraordinary. For (...) the Ammonites and Philistimes, and so
did Joshua the (...) as types of Christ, who subdueth all our spiritual (...),
and makes the Gentiles his willing subjects, but it follows not that
therefore Christian Kings may not (...) Joshua and David in making war with
Nations that come against them in battle, as these did against the people of
Israel, Josh. 11. 26, 27. Ps. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. For sometime the ground of
typical actions is moral, as Joseph's brethren bowed to him by virtue of the
fifth Commandment, because Joseph was a Prince second to the King, yet both
^ee and they were types, for these that despised and sold Christ bowed to him;
sometimes the ground of typical actions is an extraordinary impulsion, and
then they bind not to imitation, as a man may not kill himself, that he may
kill his enemies, to follow Sampson; in that extraordinary motion of the
Spirit, in which he was a type of Christ. But if there be no more but naked
typicalnesse in the Kings of Israel and Judah in punishing Idolaters, except
they did it by extraordinary impulsion, which cannot be proved, it concludes
nothing against us.

Argument VIII.
WE argue from examples of Seducers, Seducers punished by bodily death.
who have been punished with bodily death or otherwise: As at the command of
Moses the Prince, three thousand were slain, Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28. for
worshipping the golden Calfe, that God might that day bestow a blessing on
them, 29. and Moses might make atonement for them, verse. 30. Numb. 25. Moses
commands all the heads of the people to be hanged before the (...), that the
fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel, because they were
joined to Baal-peor, and the sacrifice of the Gods of Moah, 1, 2, 3, 4. Phineas
in his zeal turned away the (...) of God in that he thrust through Zimri in
the act of uncleanness with Corby a Medianitish woman. And (...) slay the
Priests of Baal, with the sword. And Paul (...) Elimas the Sorcerer with
blindness, because he labored to pervert Sergius Pa^lus the deputy, from the
faith, Act. 13. 8, 9, 10. the son of the Israelitish woman, whose father was
an Egyptian, while he did strive with a man of Israel and so in passion and
malice toward the man, as would appear, cursed God, was stoned to death, and a
law was made on it against the blasphemer, Levit. 24. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. which
is, Punishing of Idolators and blasphemers of the law of nature.
ver. 15, 16. Whosoever curses his God shall bear his sin, 16. And whosoever
blasphemeth the name of the Lord he shall surely be put to death; and all the
congregation shall certainly stone him, as well the stranger as he that is
borne in the land, when her blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall be put to
death: there be two things here to me that proves this was no judicial
temporary law binding Israel only.

1 His God, Holds forth, that nature abhors, and the sum of the first
command written in the heart is, he that curses his maker whom he is to
bless, love, and serve with all his heart, should dye.

2 This law obliegeth the stranger, and any heathen to be put to death, if he
should blaspheme God, says it is the law of nature, and obliegeth us under the
New Testament as being the first and highest sin that nature cries shame, and
woe upon; and we are to conceive it was a lawful war attempted by the ten
tribes to go against the tribe of Ruben, Gad and the half of Manassah, Josh.
10. 11, 12. etc. to 34. because they set up a new Alter to worship (as their
brethren conceived) which if true, certainly was a clear apostasy from the God
of Israel. That Joshua destroyed the Canaanites for their Idolatry, Josh. 6.
21; 22. chap. 20, etc. I confess will not warrant us to make war, and
destroy with the sword, all the Indians, and Idolaters on earth, and to compel
them to worship the true God in the Mediator Christ, without preaching first
the gospel to them* Nor can it warrant us to kill every ignorant blinded Papist
with the sword, nor can we deny, but what Elias and Paul did against false
teachers, was by extraordinary impulsion, because the ordinary Magistrate would
not, as (...) and Jezebell, and could not, through ignorance of the gospel
punish perverters of the truth: but sure these examples prove corporal, and
sometimes capital, punishment ought by the Magistrate to be inflicted on all
blasphemers, on all ringleaders of Idolatry and false worship, as Exodus 32.
They forced Aaron to make the calfe, and Levit. 25. they were heads, rulers,
and chief offenders that were hanged, the manner of the punishment may be
exemplary and determined of God, for the example of after ages, whither by
death, for simple heresy in one seduced, which was no ringleader, (which I
find has not been done by God, in the old or new Testament) but seducers and
ringleaders by the law, such as cease not to subvert the faith of others
should dye, yet these examples clearly hold forth so much of the law of nature
as bodily punishment, according to the measure of the offense is due: otherwise
if Christ have freed false teachers from all punishment external, or that may
be thought to work any otherwise then by mere spiritual instructing in all
meekness, then by the liberty purchased by Christ they are freed from shame
and reproach, for shame and the publicknesse of suffering is an external
punishment, and is another means, besides meek instructing, as is clear from
Judge. 8. 7. and from Souls calling Jonathan the son of a rebellious woman, in
which he handled him shamefully, 1 Samuel 20. 34. Isa. 50. 6. Luke 14. 9. Yea, by
this way of Libertines, false teachers are not to be rebuked, nor avoided,
that they may be ashamed, Paul may not upbraid the Cretians, and call them idle
bellies, and liars, that they may be sound in the faith: for that must be
contrary to the liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free. And a bodily
punishment may be extraordinary in regard of the manner of doing, when done by
miracle, and fire brought from heaven, and in regard of the persons that
inflict it, How wars that are extraordinary in the manner, and in some
particular acts may be and are in the substance of the acts ordinary rules
oblieg^ng us.
as that which Phineas did being Priest, and Elias being a Prophet, and Paul
being an Apostle, when the Magistrate will not do his part; and yet the
punishment in the (...) and substance, may be according to an ordinary law of
God that binds us: Paul strikes Elimas with blindness; it is no rule for
Ministers to do the like to false teachers; but it is the rule for him that
bears the sword, to inflict bodily punishment upon perverters of the Gospel,
if this (...) not, Joshua's wars with the Canaanits that were according to a
moral and perpetual rule of justice, and binds us, Josh. 11. 26, 27. should
not bind us to lawful defensive wars in the like case, contrary to the law
of nature, Josh. 11. 26, 27. because Joshua in these wars did many things
extraordinarily, and killed all the cattle and women with child, which we are
not to do. The answer of many is, These were extraordinary, ergo, they bind
not us. Is no answer, they were extraordinary in the manner, not in the
substance and nature of the punishment, in which the course of justice warrants
us, as a rule flowing from the Law of nature, though the manner and
extraordinary accidents are before us, as no oblieging law, upon the same
ground many argue; the Apostles, who were immediately inspired, give out
synodicall decrees, Acts 15. therefore Elders that are not infallible, may not
give decrees according to the word of truth. Yea (say we) neither should this
be a good consequence, the Prophets, and immediately inspired Apostles preached
and prophesied the will of God as the Lord taught them. Ergo, Minister, now,
though not immediately inspired may not preach the mind of God according to the
proportion of faith, for we think the consequence is most strong, according to
the word, we are to follow the Prophets and Apostles in that, in which they
followed the law of nature, which is, that every Ambassador relate faithfully
his Princes will, though some have ordinary gifts, some extraordinary and rare
gifts in relating the same embassage: So it is no good consequence, some by
extraordinary warrant did punish evil doers, ergo, the ordinary Magistrate
has not therefore power to punish such evil doers.

Argument IX.
THE express law of God, The Law of God warranted by the Law teaches that
false teachers and heretics are to be punished with the sword.
and of nature written in the heart of al, proves that the seducer should die,
Deuteronomy. 13. If a Prophet or a Dreamer arise, and say, let us go after other
Gods, he shall be put to death.

That is no temporary law oblieging the Jews only, the Text says.

1 Let us go (says the Dreamer) after other Gods is (...) them, this ^in is
against the first command, and that im^aculate principle of nature, graven in
the heart of man, That there is one only true God, and he only to be served.

2 It is against the love of God, ver. 2. The Lord tries you whether you love
the Lord your God: if he be God our love is due to him.

3 It is against the fear of God, v. 4. Ye shall fear him: if he be God, he is
omnipotent, infinitely great and dreadful, therefore by the light of nature to
be feared. And 5. cleaved to as the only happiness of men. Add to these,
that it is a moral transgression, if Magistracy, and lawful revenging of
violence and unjustice by the Minister of God, and Government against highest
soule-oppression, be a natural Remedy, not a temporary positive salve (as
undoubtedly it is) then sure he that seduces so, should dye.

1. He speaks aversion and turning away from God, and that is hell and the
extremity of miseries.

2. He thrusts thee out of the way, v. 5. a word of violence.

Then 3. he is evil and destructive to the society of men, which the
Magistrate by his office should defend, v. 5. So shall thou put away the evil
from the midst of thee.

4. He seeks to thrust thee from the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt. The word (...) is to remove from God, as from an unclean and
cursed thing, and it expresses excommunication, and then to thrust men away
from the Lord in Covenant with us, that can save from the greatest of miseries,
must be the highest of injuries, and if the Lord proved a public avenger
against the highest wrongs that can be done in a society (as he does) then
certainly against this.

5. It is a wrong that God would have all Israel to fear, a wickedness that
strikes at the root of society. 11. And all Israel shall hear and fear, and
do no more any such wickedness as this among you. And v. 13. such are
children of Beliel, they make all things and persons cursed they come among,
and bring on the land, the fierce anger of the Lord, v. 17. the int^^^secall
work and end of the Magistrate is to avenge evil doing, and so to remove the
fierce anger of the Lord from a land, that the people may fear and not do any
such wickedness, as is clear, Deuteronomy. 13. 10. 11. Exodus 32. 29. 30. Deuteronomy. 19.
20. Romans 13. 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Now the false Prophet is such as brings on
all these evils, and therefore if Magistrates stand under the new Testament,
and if there be such a sin now as thrusting away people from the Lord who has,
in Christ, delivered us from a greater bondage then that of Egypt, this must
be a perpetual Law.

Deuteronomy. The law Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3. for punishing of Idolaters.
17. 2. If there ^e found any among you within any of thy gates which the Lord
thy God gives thee, man or woman, that has wrought wickedness in the sight
of the Lord in transgressing his Covenant, and has gone and served other Gods
and worshipped them, either the Sun or the Moon, or any of the host of
heaven, which I have not commanded. 4. And it be told thee, and thou have heard
of it, and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in Israel. 5.
Then shall thou bring forth that man or that woman which has committed that
wicked thing unto thy gates, even that man and that woman, and shall stone them
with stones till they dye. 6. At the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses,
shall he that is worthy of death be put to death.

Hence not simple Idolaters, nor all the Nations round about, nor all the
Papists, that are educated in Idolatry, by this Law shall be put to death, but
such as are within the gates of Israel. 2. In Covenant with God. 3. It is
wrought in Israel, and so Apostates to Judaisme, to strange Gods are to be
punished; so we teach not that Nations are to be converted by the sword, or
that the Idolatry of Indians, the blasphemy of Jews, There was no consulting
with the or^cle who should be put to death for his conscience in the old
Testament, but an ordinary way of trying such evil do^rs by judicial
proceeding and hearing of witnesses.
is a sufficient ground to make war against them, and cut them off with the
sword.

2. Apostates turning to false Gods, were by a written law judged. There is no
consulting of an Oracle by urim and th^^mim here, as Libertines say, but just
as the murderer is to be judged under the New Testament, if it be told thee,
the people or the Judge, and thou have ^eard of it. v. 6. Under two witnesses,
he shall be convinced. It were a vain thing to go and seek witnesses, and
follow reports and hear-sayes, if they had an immediate Oracle to inform the
Judge and say, Here the Idolatry, there the Idolater, bind him and lead him
away to death, (as some Patrons of Liberty plead) we read not any such
conjecture.

3 He is not persecuted for opinions, Because be cannot come up to that measure
of light in judgment that other Saints attain unto, but he is put to death for
an external act of Idolatry, that is seen, heard, proved by two witnesses. and
for external abomination wrought in Israel, v. 5, 6. the Lord never puts a
Judge to prove opinions, that remain within the walls of the heart, and are
things of the mind, by witnesses, nor is the end of putting to death to force,
beat, or cudgel him to the sound faith, with the sword, but to be avenged on
hi^ sin, to remove evil, to save the Israel of God from infection.

4 It is not single Idolatry that is his death, The end of punishing of false
teachers with the sword is not their conversion to God (Ministeis of the
Gospel only labor in that field) but the not perverting of souls and
disturbing the safety of humain societies.
but his Idolatry in seducing others by word or example, he work^ such
abomination in Israel, v. 4. in the Church of God, which tends to seduce
others.

Deuteronomy. 18. 18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren like
unto thee, that is, Christ Act. 3. 22. so the Holy Ghost in the Apostles
expounds it. And he adds ver. ^0. But the Prophet that shall presume (he must
mean in the time of the Messiah, when the true Prophet shall rise) to speak a
word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak
in the name of other gods, even that Prophet shall die. It is a prophecy of a
New Testament Law, because many were to come in Christ's name, and say, Lo I am
Christ, as many now do, so Zach. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Levit. Sacrificing of children to Molech punished with death by God^ Law, not
as murder but as spiritual whordome.
20. 2. Whosoever of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn
in Israel, that gives any of his seed to Molech, (...) shall surely be put to
death. This Law, if it did lie upon the strangers and heathen, then; it was not
judicial, but it must lie on us Gentiles, now; Who can free us from it?

Object. But he was put to death not for false worship, but for ^^rthering of
his Son.

Answ. No Law of God or men, can judge that murder, which is done without
hatred to the party murdered, as is clear Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12, 13. chap. 4. 42.
chap. 19. 4. but here, the dearer their sons were to them, they the rather
offe^ed them to their God.

^. The Text gives no reason why such should be put to death for murder, but
for false worship, against the first Table, Ver. 3. He defiles my Sanctuary, be
prophanes my holy name, ver. 5. the Magistrate must kill such a seducer, for he
commits whoredom with Molech.

CHAP. XIV. Cavils against coercive judicial Laws, for punishing false
prophets in the Old Testament removed.
THE first common Answer made to all these, is: That these were judicial and
Old Testament Laws, when God dealt more strict^y with the Jews, and hedged them
in with severer laws, penalties, and a greater measure of bondage, then now
under the meek and gentle reign of the Messiah. Laws punishing false teachers
were moral, not temporary and pedagogicall*


Answ. More severity, and a stricter tutory to be over the Church in nonage,
and under Pedagogie, we grant, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3. But that is in regard of
Ceremonial hedges, laws, and days, but it is to beg the question, to say
that moral transgressions are destructive, if not more, to Christian societies
now as then, such as blasphemy, idolatry, heresy, that were punished with the
sword then, must now be more loosed from all bodily punishment in any kind,
then murder, sorcery, adultery, perjury. For the comparison of a milder
Government under Jesus, then under Moses, cannot stand in fencing some moral
transgressions utterly from the sword, and in leaving others less weighty,
under as bloody punishments as ever they were. When no reason from the word of
truth, can be given, why the murderer should dye by the sword, now and then,
but blasphemy, and offering the sons to Molech, as the Indians do now, was
then by the law of Nature, a dis-worship, or a false worship, punishable in
Jews and heathen, but now it is not in any punishable by the sword at all. 2.
The sword did not force the conscience of any then, more than now, nor could it
cudgel an Idolater, or a blasphemer, into the sound faith then, more then now,
and weapons of the Prophets in the Old Testament, as well as the Apostles in
the New, were not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God.Prophets, as
Prophets, no more used the sword against men's consciences of old, than Christ,
his Apostles, and Ministers do now, Mat. 28. 19, 20. And as Christ says now,
preach the Gospel, but kill none, use neither staff nor sword, nor miraculous
power to destroy heretics, or burn Samaria, so he said to his Prophets, speak
my word to Israel and Judah and the Nations, to Ninive and others, but kill
none, and use the sword against none of the rebellious who will not hear, that
they may be converted. Yet he commanded the Magistrate to use the sword
against the seduceing Prophet, nor can the Libertines show us of a Ceremonial
death inflicted for the transgression of a moral law, which transgression is
now made free from all bodily punishment, indeed the man that refused to raise
up seed to his brother was put to shame by the law, and we are freed from both
the law, and the penalty thereof, and the man that gathered sticks on the
Sabbath was put to death by an answer from Gods mouth, but the breach of the
holy Sabbath instituted before the fall is no Ceremonial transgression, nor
do we think that every violation of the Sabbath was punished by death, but
that the Magistrate, Power of Fathers and Masters in the ^ourth command
coercive.
Masters and Fathers, are not to punish with bodily coercive power the
transgressors of the fourth command, is most false. For what the Magistrate
commands the Subject, the Master the servant, the Father the sons, and which
they have warrant from the Moral law to command in these relations, that they
command in order to the sword and rod, if their commandments find no other
welcome but rebellion, for the power of Magistrate, and Master, yea, and of the
Father now in the state of sin is essentially coercive; they may compel their
inferiors by strong hand, either to do or suffer the will of God, which is
sufficient to prove our point. Though it be true, some moral transgressions
Moses punished with death, as Sabbath-breaking, it follows not therefore the
godly Prince may now punish it with death, but it follows not therefore, such
transgressors are made free, through Christ of all bodily punishment, as
Libertines infer, for though the temporarines of the punishment be only in
the measure of punishment, yet not in the punishment it self.

2 We desire a reason why the gentleness of the son of Gods government
should free the blasphemer, and the soul-murtherer, from sadder, yea from all
bodily punishment, and not free him that destroys the body also. Or how all
the Sons of Levi saw by an immediate oracle that all that had worshipped the
golden Calfe, Exodus 32. had done it with such high presumption, as made that
Idolatry worthy of death, which otherwise was not worthy of death; and it is
clear the charge was without exception, v. 27. slay every man his brother, and
every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. And the like I say of all
that joined to Baal-peor. And when Asa compelled so many thousands both of
Judah and Israel to swear a Covenant, and that they should be put to death,
that would not seek the Lord, 2 Chro. 15. whether Asa and all the under-Judges
(for Asa in his own person could not do it) had a deputed dominion over the
consciences to force them, and whether he consulted the oracle to know who
sought not the Lord, and refused the Covenant out of mere weakness, as not
being able to see how Asa, who was no Prophet, and a Prince for eminency of
conversing with God far inferior to Moses, was not a little wide, in
pretended zeal, to urge the Law with an oath, and no less then death on the
refusers to seek God and the breakers of the Covenant.

Nor could Asa see and know infallibly how out of heart-obstinacy, or how out
of sinlesse, and faultlesse innocence refused the Covenant. And Asa could not
compel men to take the Covenant, and profess seeking of the Lord against
their judgments and consciences, which the thirteenth Proposal of the Army
does condemn, And yet Asa was free of compelling men to hypocrasy. When
therefore Peter struck Annanias and Saphira with death; and, Paul, Elimas with
blindness; and delivered Himeneus and Alexander to Satan; and when the
Apostles sharply rebuked and upbraided the Cretians, those who are called dogs,
evill-workers, enemies to the cross of Christ, such as serve their belly, not
the Lord Jesus; it is as pertinent and necessary a query whether or no Peter
compelled others who saw Annanias punished to death, Compelling to hypocrisy
for fear of shame and reproaches, as guilty as compelling men w^^h the sword
not to publish heresies, nor seduce others.
Paul constrained others who saw the terrible wrath of God on Hymeneus, to
dissemble, and to do, and profess against the judgment of an erroneous
conscience and lay all their goods down at the Apostles feet against their
conscience, which yet believed, they were against the law of nature defrauding
their own children, and to profess the faith, and not inword blaspheme and
say, there is no resurrection, no Christ, no heaven after this life, as
Familists now say, for fear that Paul deliver them to Satan. And we know
professors are much afraid to go for dogs and belly-Gods in the account of
such eminent Godly men as the Apostle Paul and others, and therefore will cover
themselves and profess the contrary: if therefore censures and rebukes from
the eminently Godly, do create varnished hypocrites, and it is not the sin of
Godly rebukers, and if punishments may and does constrain many to say, and
do, and unsay, and counterdoe in matters of Religion, in judgeing according to
conscience in highest judicatures, and contrary to that same conscience the
next day, this which is objected against coercive power, in matters of
conscience, that it creates hypocrites and strains men to do against their
judgment and so to sin, is all accidental to the nature of coercive and
bodily restraining power. And because many keep their hands from blood and
violence, and that out of deep hypocrisy since they lodge in their breast,
bloody hearts, only for fear of the Princes sword, yet both the Prince and
his sword is innocent of that hypocrisy, Then as coercive power is falsely
charged with any kindly begetting of hypocrites in the duties of the second
Table, so is it as harmless in matters of Religion, respecting the first
Table, nor did the Lord in the Old Testament create hypocrites by straining men's
consciences by bloody Laws.

A third Answer stands thus, (...).
those laws were made of old against false teachers, Because the Jews had the
opportunity of immediate consultation with the mouth of God himself. -- and
except the Judge had been desperately wicked, and despised the glorious
ordinance of the Oracle of God, they could not do unjustice, God being always
at hand to declare unto them, Blasphemers and Idolaters never were judged to
dye, by consulting with the immediate oracle of God, as Joh. Goodwin imagines
Hagiomast^x. Sect. 34, 35, 36, 37.
what kind of blasphemer* and what kind of Idolater it was that he intended by
his law should be put to death. Men are now fallible and the learnedest cannot
tell wha^^blasphemy or idolatry it was, which was by God sentenced to death
under the Law, So Jo. Goodwin.

Answ. If there was such immediate consultation to make short work of blood to
the Judge, we desire law or instance of the Priest or Prophets consulting with
the mouth of God touching the Prophet whether true or false, but none can be
produced, sometimes the Prophets by miracles cleared their calling: another way
we f^nd not.

1 This is against appeals that are clear, Deuteronomy. 17. In all matters of
controversy, when in the highest Court where a man's head, whether he be a
false Prophet, or any other, was at the stake, the Judges, v. 11. were to judge
according to the sentence of the law, and they proceed upon witness, Deuteronomy. 17.
6. God should by this declare law, proof and witnesses useless, for the Lord
from Heaven condemns the man.

2 Jeremiah, and all the Prophets that were killed and stoned, never sought the
benefit of the law, nor said, give us a ^ury from heaven, an oracle for to take
away our head, the Prophets never accuse Kings or Judges in persecuting the
Prophets, that they consulted not the oracle, ere they rejected the Prophet.

3 This had been a well settled law to try all Prophets, who speak from God,
and who speak the visions of their own head, all should have passed the
grand* Jury of an immediate oracle from heaven, and by this there should not
have been a false Prophet in all Judea but the Judge might have discovered him,
but God never gives this character of an Idolater, Blasphemer, or a false
Prophet: The Oracle of Vrim has blacked him as an impostor. But diverse other
characters the Lord gave. As 1. If he speak not according to the Law. 2. If
the good he foretell, never comes to pass. 3. If he ^eale the wound with
smooth words. 4. If he strengthen the arms of the wicked. When as yet God had
made no standing law, he was consulted, and God gave sentence against the man
that had broken the Sabbath* and that blasphemed* but their consulting with God
presupposes by the law of nature, the Magistrate should punish such, therefore
the pu^^ing him in ward was a punishment, only they would have the mind of God
touching the manner of his punishment, but sure this was not the ordinary and
standing law.

4 There were others as difficill and intricate controversie^, of murder,
adultery; treason, as Deuteronomy. 17. 8. Between blood and blood, plea, and plea,
stroke, and stroke, By this reason Anabaptists have a better ground to say
there should be no Christian Magistrate under the New Testament, nor any use of
the sword nor sheding of blood at all, because the Je^es under the Old
Testament had the opportunity of immediate consulting with the mouth of God
himself, we are fallible men, and the learnedest can no more tell what
murder, what incest or adultery was condemned in the law of God (for
heart-hatred, which is seen to God only, does essentially constitute murder
punishable by the Judge, Deuteronomy. 19, 11, 12, 13. chap. 4. 44. chap. 19. 4^.) then
they can define what blasphemy or idolatry it was which was by God sentenced to
death under the Law, for we are to be as wary to take a man's life and blood now
under the New Testament, for murder, and treason, and sorcery as they were
under the old in stoning blasphemers: and we are no more infallible in the one,
then they were in the other. Yea, it strongly concludes, that wars are as
unlawful under the New Testament, as under the old, for under the old, they
consulted the mouth of God before they went to battle, we have no immediate
oracles to consult, yea, when we are engaged we are neither to pursue the
enemy nor to forbear, because we have not the immediately inspired Prophets,
Micah, Jeremiah as they had, we may not make a Covenant with neighboring
Kingdoms, the Scottish Army have no oracle to show them whither they shall
remove out of England, for that will be the safety of the cause of all the
godly Presbyterians who are now persecuted for the Covenant of God, and a
carrying on of Reformation and the standing of the Covenant and treaties
between the Kingdoms, We have as (...) a wo^^, the Scripture, as immediate
consulting with the oracle of God.
or shall they not remove till peace and truth be established in both Kingdoms
because if they remove, the English Army may say, they undertook the war not
for Religion, but to make a conqueste in England for the liberty of the
Subject, and swear the Covenant in a sense. The Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax
may say, that they did fight all this time for liberty of conscience, against
both Prelaticall and Presbyteriall thraldom of the consciences of the free
born English, and therefore though the Parliament command them to di^band, they
must have liberty of conscience up, the Covenant down, and have a perpetual
standing Army, etc. For in war, peace, pursuing or forbearing, in marching from
one Kingdom to another, in making treaties and Covenants with other Nations,
they were to consult with the oracle and immediately inspired Prophets, the
opportunity whereof we have not, and so we have no be^ter warrant for all these,
for peace and war, then for killing of blasphemers, who are known to God only
by this reason, and that is no warrant at all.

5. This is to say, there was faith, certainty, and infallibility, clearness,
light, and more knowledge of God under the Jews twilight, law darkness of
ceremonies, then we have, and now since oracles ceased, Sceptismes,
conjectures, doubtings, blind, and loose uncertainties is all ou^ faith,
contrary to that the Scripture says, the Jews for all their oracles were in
the dark, and now day springs from on h^gh and visi^s us, and gives light to
them that sits in darkness, Luke. 1. 77, 78, 79. And now the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord as the sea is full of waters, Esa. 11. 9. And
we have a more sure word of Prophecy, the Scriptures, yea surer then the
Fathers voice from heaven, which was an immediate oracle indeed, 2 Per. 1. 17,
18, 19* 20, 21. And the least of the Kingdom of God note, is greater then the
Baptist the greatest of Prophets, Matthew. 11. 11. If this satisfy not, see Esa.
54. 11, 12. Jer. 31, 31, 32, 33, 34. Esa. 30. 26. Joel 2. 28, 29. Act. 2. 10,
17, 18, 19. Col. 2. 2, 3, 5. 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

6. The argument that we cannot punish under the New Testament, because the
Magistrates and Ministers, and Synods who condemn here^ies, errors, schisms,
blasphemy, are not infallible, and they know not but they may pluck up wheat
instead of tares, and take away the life of elect men who might ^ive and be
converted, is of no weight, for then the Judge should not take the li^e of a
murderer, adulterer, the most bloody robber or paricide, (the Libertines,
teach and practice the contrary)* for must the Judge read in the Lambs book,
whether the man be enrolled therein as an elect, before he pass sentence on
him in a Council of war, for felony, robbery, poligamy, etc,

2. It is most strong against admonishing, rebuking and warning one another.
Want of infallibility should exclude all Judges to judge, ^ast^rs to preach on
write, Synods to advise because we cannot do these with Prophetical
infallibility.
I may condemn the innocent in these, because I am not infallible; it is
against preaching, believing, writing of books of Divinity, making war,
peace, borrowing, lending, buying, selling, in all these I am obliged to do
upon certain persuasion of faith, that what I do is lawful, else I sin,
Romans 14. 23. and the word of God the most sure oracle to us must be my rule.
Now I may no more venture on the least sin, then a Christian Prince may
condemn to death an Idolater, and a blasphemer, who is a sound believer, which
is a greater sin, if I be not clear as if an immediate oracle were speaking
from heaven, as Libertines say, and the argument must be thus, what we cannot
do with as great infallibility of not erring, as the Priest that immediately
consulted the oracle, or the Prophet immediately inspired, that we cannot do
lawfully. But the Christian Prince under the New Testament cannot with such
infallibility punish Idolaters, Blasphemers, or any otherwise, ergo, The
proposition is false, for certain knowledge is sufficient, for the Holy Ghost
would never bid us admonish, and after admonition avoid an heretic, as Tit.
3. 10. nor would our Savior bid us beware of men, of false teachers, and false
Christ's, and avoid them, and believe them not, and try them by their works,
and search the Scriptures, and examine their doctrine, nor would the Lord bid
us try the Spirits, and try the Antichrist, and eat not with Idolaters as he
does, Matthew. 24. 23, 24, 25. Joh. 5. 39. Rem. 16, 17, 18. 1 John 5. 1. 1 Cor.
5. 11. If he laid this ground of Libertines, heart-obstinacy, only legible to
God, and knowable ^s none but to infallible Spirits, makes an heretic and a
false Christ before men, yet you are to admonish and eschew him, this is as
much, as if the Lord should say, If any man have such an opinion and
heart-thought never manifested to men or Angel, that knew whether the number of
the stars were odds or equal, admonish such a man and avoid him, and bid
him not God speed, neither receive him into your house. Yea, so no Minister of
the Gospel should preach to his flock fundamental Gospel truths, because
he is not infallible, and he may teach fundamental lies for truths.

Again, the assumption is false, for the certainty a believer has, is thus
far infallible (which is enough) that he is persuaded of the truth of it, and
may boldly and in faith seal it with his blood. Nor should Libertines suffer
for such truths as they hold for truths, to wit, that the Christian Magistrate
has nothing to do with Religion, nor is he warranted now to use the sword
against false teachers; nor Presbytery is the way of Christ, but Socinianisme,
Familisme, Antinomini^me, are the only true way, because they will not say they
themselves are in believing, teaching or suffering for these truths infallible.
But the danger is not so in believing truth or a false opinion for another, or
for a true opinion, as in taking a man's life, when ye are not certainly
persuaded by the Law of God, he ought to dye.

Answ. That is no matter of greater or less great danger. It is sin in the
Pharisees in heart and word of month to condemn the Lords Disciples of breach
of Sabbath, when they are innocent, as to kill them for Sabbath-breach when
they are innocent, Matthew. 12. 7. the one is a greater sin, the other less;
but if we may not venture on a greater sin of shedding innocent blood
because of want of infallibility, neither is it lawful to venture upon the
least sin, because of the want of that same infallibility, nor is an
infallible and immediate oracle our only rule in judgeing the blasphemer.
Suppose a man should wilfully profess there is no God, and rail against such
as say there is a God, as our Atheistical age wants not a Caliguala, and an
Anaxagoras, and the like now, if the Parliament should punish such a limb of
hell. The thirteenth Proposal of the Army will say the Parliament forces this
man to sin, and to believe and profess a truth against his judgment and
conscience; and upon this ground, for we know not infallibly such a man to be
a damned Atheist.

The 4 Answer to annull all these Laws in the Old Testament is, this
punishment was bodily, afflictive, carnal and so typical and prefigurative of
those greater and more spiritual evils under the Gospel, to wit, of eternal
damnation. As the land was a type of heaven, so to be cut off, by death, out
of that land was typical.

Answer, Had the Jews no spiritual censures then, as debarring from the
Passover, the excluding of the uncircumcised, and unclean from the
Congregation of the Lord?

2 Was not the cutting off of the murderer out of that good land, as typical
as the cutting off of the blasphemer?

3 Is there any bodily punishment, but it is carnal and afflictive? I trow
none.

4 Is punishment, and cutting off from the Church by death typical, because
bodily? Then the avenging of (...) doers under the New Testament must be
typical, and is many hangings and headings of evil doers, as many types under
the New Testament. If the punishment was typical, because in such a way bodily,
as exclusion from a typical land. Then, 1. How is not the killing of the
murderer typical? 2. Give us a warrant for this, because we may not, at our
pleasure, fancy types where the word gives no ground for them, otherwise we
shall with Anabaptists turn all the Old Testament: and whole scripture into
types upon our own imagination. 3. How shall violent death ^ypi^^e damnation
and hell, that was existent then, and not a thing to come, and that because it
was the cutting off of the blasphemer, not of the murderer?

5 But say they were types, as crucifying and hanging on a tree was, Deuteronomy. 21.
23. of Christ's crucifying Gal. 3. 10. What? shall it follow, that robbers and
murderers, (...) as Barra^^s, may not under the New Testament be (...)? Yea,
and by this argument, nor may any bodily punishment be inflicted on robbers,
more then false teachers may b^^ killed or incur any bodily punishment, for
that were ( ^^y Libertines) to rip up the grave of Moses, because undoubtedly
crucifying was a typical death, Gal. 3. 10* ^9. (...) ^ut it is known there
were two forts of typical things in the old Testament. A twofold typicalnesse
in the Old Testament; one merely ceremonial, unreducible; another typical,
but of civil and natural use, the use of the latter cease not, because it
was sometime typical, so is punishing of seducers.
1. Some that were merely typical and had no use but in divine worship, as
sacrificing Bullocks and Lambs to God, other things were so typical that they
had both a natural and civil use, at eating of manna when ye are hungry,
drinking water in the wilderne^se, living in the holy land; the former typical
things are utterly ceased, and it were impious and mere judaisme to recall
them or bring in again sacrificing of Bullockes to God, but the latter things
may well remain in their Natural and Civil use, though their typical and
religious use be abolished, as it were lawful for Jews even now after Christ
is come and ascended, and has put an end to all shadows and types by the
coming in the body, to eat manna, if they were in the wilderness, and drink
water out of the rocky mountains, if thirsty, and dwell in their own land, if
the Lord should restore them to it, yet should they not Judaize nor recall the
types of Moses, for these they should do for a natural and physical, and for
no Religious use. Now granting that stoning of blasphemers were typical, and
as typical as hanging of robbers was, Deuteronomy. 21. yet should it never follow
that stoning of blasphemers were Judaizing and unlawful, because it has a
necessary civil use, even of common and natural equity, that he that thus
perverteth the right ways of the Lord, and seduceth others should dye the
death. Yea this may well infer that prophesying of lies, blaspheming were
typical sins against a ceremonial and temporary law, and so they are not
now sins, yea because it is a falling from Christ to observe Jewish shadows,
Gal. 5. not to blaspheme, and not to prophecy lies, must be sin; and if that
be blasphemy, what more reason to remove the punishment of a sin, as
destructive to society, now as then, if the sin cease not to be sin, but
remain yet a moral heinous transgression?

The fifth Answer is, Answ. 5.
That the Laws of Moses cannot reach the heretics now under the Gospel, 1.
An heretic denies not God the Creator, nor teaches he, Let us go after
other Gods* which thou have not known as the Apostate Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13. (2.)
He denies not the word of God, therefore you may use it as a weapon against
him, but ye can use no sword, but that of iron against Apostates. 3. Heretics
as Sadduces were tolerated among the Jews, but blasphemers and Apostates were
not. 4. Scribes and Pharisees held many dangerous opinions, yet neither they
nor Sadduces were expelled the City or hindered to be Magistrates. 5. Though
the zeal of Gods house eat up Christ, and he attempted a reformation, yet he
never charged Church or State as unfaithful for not proceeding against them to
imprisonment and death. 6. These Deuteronomy. 13. would persuade they speak by the
inspiration of some Deity, and that their sayings were oracles, heretics do
not so, so Io. Goodwin, Hagiom.

Answ. 1. The conclusion we hold is not hurt, all this says an Heretic that
is not an apostate is not to be put to death. Let it be so; but we hold by
these places, that bodily punishment is to be inflicted on him, and yet the
conscience is not strained, nor he persecuted.

2. Heretics 2 Pet. 2. denies the Lord that bought them, and make shipwreck
of faith, and bring in damnable heresies, and bring on themselves swift
destruction, they depart from the faith, speak doctrines of devils, lies in
hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 1. are condemned of their own conscience, Tit. 3. 10.
Lead the simple captive, resist the truth, as Jannes and Jambres did Moses, are
men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7, 8. which
is a wilful denying of the Lord that bought them. Libertines have bowels of
charity to Arch-hereticks, as if God had made a law of sins, if we are, we
are not capable under the Gospel, whereas it is known there are (though we
need not call all false teachers Heretics) Seducers that say there is not a
God, nor a heaven, nor a hell.

3. Seducers of old denied no otherwise God then our false Prophets now ^^ayes
do now deny him
How shall they prove that the Seducer Deuteronomy. 13. formally denied God the
Creator? To deny him as Creator, and say the world was eternal as Aristotle
did, is not to deny God, for Aristotle and all his, acknowledged there was a
God, but that those dreamers denied the very existence of God, any otherwise
then as practical Atheists, and by consequence in their abominable doctrine
they cannot prove, for they profess a Religion and a God, when they say, Let
us go and serve other Gods, and these words, that thou know not, are the
words of the Holy Ghost, not that these Seduce^s so speak in so many
syllables, but the God they drew men after, was an unknown God; for there is
not a Caligula in the world can be a speculative and heart-Atheist, or if these
words ( whom thou ^ast not known) be the Seducers, they are spoken to heighten
the new God, and ex^^^^ (...) above Jehovah, as not known by the blind and
ignora^^ world; yea and those that worshipped the golden Calves at Dan and
Bethel worshipped other Gods, and turned away themselves and others from the
true God, for Deuteronomy. 32. 16. They provoked him to jealousy with strange God,
with abomination^ provoked they him to anger. 17. They sacrificed un^^ ^evills,
not (...) G^d, to Gods whom they know not, to new Gods that newly come up, w^om
your fathers feared not, 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. and Je^o^^am ordained himself
Priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he
had made, Psalm. 106. 19. They made a calfe in Hor^^, and worshipped a molten
image, yet they denied not God the Creator, except practically, Deuteronomy. 32. 18.
Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God that
formed t^ee, Psalm. 106. 21. They forg^t God their Savior, which ^ad done great
things in Egypt. Yea, and those that worshipped these Gods, denied no
otherwise God the Creator then heretics now do, for both in profession*
asser^ Jehova^ that made the heaven and the earth, Exodus 32. they said of these
calves, as Jeroboam did* v. 8. These be thy Gods O Israe^, that brought thee up
out of the Land of Egypt, 1 King. 12. 28. and Exodus 32. 5. Aaron said to
morrow shall be a feast to Jehovah, then they denied not in profession and in
words the Jehovah that made them, nor Christ their Savior, then by signs and
wonders brought them out of Egypt; so a Heretic, or a Popish Idolater,
denies not God in profession, yet both worship strange Gods, and the work of
men's hands, and the devil, not God, Deuteronomy. 32. 16. 2 Chro. 11. 15. Nor did
Jeroboam deny God in profession, for he acknowledged that the Lord God, the
true God could heal his dried up arm, 1 King 12. 6. and sent his wife to
enquire of Jehovah concerning his sick child, 1 King. 14. 1, 2. and Je^u who
clave to Jeroboams calves, 2 King. 10. 29. And so by this same law of God ought
to dye, as is clear in that he worshipped and served other Gods, as Deuteronomy. 32.
16. Ps. 106. 19. compared with Exodus 32. clears, for three thousand were
slain by the Magistrates sword for this sin, Exodus 32. 27, 28. yet these
denied Jehovah not in formal and express profession, but by the genius and
stain of their doctrine, and the same way the Heretic denies the Lord that
bought them, these that worshipped Jehovah and Malcom Zeph. 1. by this law
should dye, the Priests of Malcom come under the law as well as the Priests of
Baal, the Priests of Baal and the false Prophets were slain according to the
law, and yet they professed Jehovah as well as Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 24. and
Achab, who worshipped Baal, professed he worshipped Jehovah, and so did these
who worshipped the Samaritan strange Gods and I^hovah both together, 2 King. 17.

Nor is it of weight that some say from Deuteronomy. Not only those who ^ffend against
the principles of nature but those that publish and hold errors against the
supernatural principles of the Gospel, are to be punished by the sword.
13. only these are to be put to death who denies God as known by the light
of Nature, not these that de^y the blessed Trinity, or Christ the Mediator, or
the principles of the Gospel which are only known by the supernatural light of
faith; and only these that deny principles of Divinity that are by natures
teaching in the heart, for these sin against Natures law, and the Alphabet of
natural Theology. This has no warrant in the word, the Law condemns these to
dye who blaspheme or draw men away from the true God as revealed in the
Scriptures, which is a supernatural Revelation that flesh and blood taught not
Moses, but a Prophetical and ^mmediately inspiring Spirit, as the reason which
God ins^uateth, Exodus 32. 8. They have turned quickly aside out of the way that
I commanded them. Now the twilight and rude divinity of Nature, revealed not
this way as being supernatural, yet for this turning aside were three thousand
killed, v. 27, 28. And it is clear, Deuteronomy. 13. the dreamer shall surely be put
to death, not because he has denied the Creat or that is known by the light
of nature; but v. 5. because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord
your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God
commanded thee to walk in. Now this is not, I conceive, a natural way, nor
written in man's heart by nature, as this answer supposes. But yet its also a
sin against the law of nature, to deny the God who reveals himself in the
Mediator Christ. And these that were put to death by this law were such as
denied God revealed in Christ, Such as slew their children to Molech, denied no
more the word of God then our Heretics now do.
for Christ says, Moses wrote of me, and to Christ all the Law and the
Prophets bare witness.

2 Nor did these that worshipped Idols and the false teachers, and such as
offered their children to Molech, who were surely by the Law to be put to
death, deny the word of God more then the Heretic now: and Jeremiah uses the
weapon of the word of God against them, as Moses was to use the sword against
them, Deuteronomy, 17. 3, 4, 5, 6. Lev. 20. 2. as we read Jer. 7. 13. And they have
built the high places of Tophee which is in the valley of the son of Hinnon to
^urne their sons and their daughters in the fire, and he uses an argument
from the word of God to convince them, which I commanded them not, neither
entered it in my heart. Libertines might say, why should Jeremiah speak of a
command of God, for though our Heretics under the Gospel acknowledge the word
of God, yet the false teachers and Apostates that were to dye by the law, do
but mock the word of God* and therefore the Lord should not use this argument,
which I command not. But to me is clear, they were so far from denying the
word of God, as our Antiscripturists do, that for the offering of their sons
to God, they alleged both Abraham's example who was bidden offer Isaak his
only son to God, and the Scripture, for if we (say they) are to offer the
best of the flock to God, and its little enough to so great (...) Lord, far
more are we to offer the dearest thing we have, to wi^ our sons and
daughters: God answers, What ye offer to me must be commanded in my law, but
it never entered into my heart to bid you offer your children to me. Now if
these had both denied God their Creator, and his word, there had been no other
sword to be drawn against them but that of iron.

3 How will Libertines prove that the second sort of seducers that were to dye
for seducing, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8. the brother, son daughter, or wife that lies
in the bosom denied God the Creator, there is no warrant from the text to say
they dreamed dreams, and wrought wonders to seduce, or that they professed the
inspiration of a new Deity, yet they were to dye, and why not the Heretics,
now by the same reason? If they thrust people away from the Lord that has
ransomed them from Hell?

Yea, 4 These acknowledge the Lord, and the law, and the Lords Priests and
Prophets, as some Heretics do now, yet not standing to the sentence of the
law that the Priest shall ^each, but presumptuously rejecting it, were surely
to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 17. 10, 11, 12, 13. So he that speaks a word in the
name of the Lord (so confesses, and professes both the Lord and his word, as
heretics now do) which the Lord commanded him not to speak, or shall speak in
the name of other Gods, even that Prophet shall dye. And did not Jeremiah and
Vriah, the son of Shemaiah and the Prophets that were killed and s^oned by the
Jews, professed God, and that the word of God came to them and that they had
seen the visions of God, yet they were condemned as false Prophets, but for
prophesying destruction on Israel, Judah and Jerusalem, and if the Lord had not
sent them, but they speak the visions of their own head, they had been false
prophets, as is clear, Jer. 14. 13, 14. Jer. 23. 15, There be false Prophets
now under the New Testament as there were under the Old Testament.
16. and so justly condemned.

5 Are there not now under the New Testament who deny the word of God, as many
Antiscripturists in England and does not Saltmarsh, Del, Beacon, Randal and
many Familists and Antinomians father their new lies upon the spirit, and the
precious anointing that teaches all things? a^^ not they like to those
Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13? have not some in France, in Holland, in England made
defection to Judaisme and Tur^isme, and turned Apostates from Christ? And yet
they deny not God the Creator, nor the Scriptures of the old Testament, and by
this answer they are free of all bodily punishment? And does not Peter
contradict this answer of Libertines, that say our Heretics are not as these
Deuteronomy. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, as
there shall be false teachers among you? and our Savior, Mat. 24. 24. For
there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great signs
and wonders: insomuch that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very
elect. A vive representation of the state of England this day.

6 The formal and what is essential to a false prophet is now in our seducers
they thrust men away from God, and the way of Gospel that the Lord has
commanded us to walk in, and that is enough.

7. From the practice of the Jews, when Heretics and Seducers, and blind
guides were in the chair, and they tolerated themselves, we draw rather the
contrary argument, ergo. we are not to follow, nor to suffer blind guides now,
who deny the resurrection, as Familists and other, to lead souls into the
ditch, no more then we are to follow them in corrupting the Law, and extolling
the traditions of men.

CHAP. XV. Christ's not rebuking tolleration and the ^aw, Deuteronomy. 13. vindicated.
Christ's no when reproving Church and State for not punishing Sadduces and
Heretics denying the resurrection is, (...) not express rebukin^, of the
Magistrates, tolerating of Heresies makes not for Christ's ap^^oing of
toleration of Heresies more then of tolerating, the absolving of a murderer at
the time of the feast, or other crimes against the second Table.
1. A poor argument to prove the lawfulness of tolerating them, 1. The
Sadduces were chief Rulers themselves; Act. 23. 6. And he that reproves a
Judge for murder, must in that same; reprove him for tolerating murders. He
that said the guide leading, and the blind led, should fall in the ditch, he
reproved the mis-government and wicked toleration of the Rulers. Nor read we
that Elias reproved Achab for not killing Baals priests, ergo, Achab
transgressed not the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 17. 1, 2, 3. in tolerating
false teachers? Nor does God Deuteronomy. 32. 6, 7, 8. reprove the Rulers for not
punishing the worshipping of the golden calf, or the making of it for worship,
because Aaron and the Rulers under Moses were guilty of it; will it follow that
the Rulers and the sons of Levi should tolerate it? since the Lord commanded
the contrary. Nor does the man of God reprove Jeroboam for tollerating the
people to worship the golden calves, or because he suffered the lowest of the
people to intrude themselves in the priests office against the word and law of
the Lord, because the less sin was swallowed up in the greater, but it
follows not, that Jeroboam did the duty of a Magistrate in suffering the
people to go to Dan and Bethel to such abominable Idolatry, or in suffering the
basest of the people to take on^them the Priests Office, but the Prophets
reproving Jeroboam's commanding of that Idolatrous worship, and Priests, which
is a greater sin, must by consequence condemn his not punishing of it, which
is a less sin, so David sinned as a Magistrate in suffering Bathshe^a to
commit adultery, and to wrong her husband, and to violate Gods Law, and should
not only as a Magistate have hindered her, but should have put her to death
for adultery, he being the supreme Magistrate, and there being an express Law
of God that the adulterer, man or woman, should dye the death, Levit. 20. 10.
which David knew well; yet the Prophet Nathan does not in express terms
condemn David for not putting Bathsheba to death, though he faithfully
reproved David, because Nathan reproving David for the adultery it self
committed in his own person as the greater sin, must by consequence condemn
David's tollerating of Bathsheba an adulteress to live, which was a lesser
sin, and it will not follow that David a King should tolerate known
adultery in Bathsheba a subject, because Nathan does no where in direct terms
(nor any Scripture elsewhere that we read) condemn David for not punishing
with the sword the adultery of Bathsheba; so Nathan, G^d and other Prophets no
where reprove David sparing the life of Joab a murderer. When Christ reproved
the Sadduces, for denying the resurrection, he reproves, by consequence, both
Church and State for tollerating the denying of the Resurrection, and supposes
the tolleration of it to be against the law of God.

2. It is no argument at all from 1. A negative fact. 2. In such a particular
Scripture, to prove the lawfulness of tolleration. Let then answer this,
Christ that was a faithful Preacher to State and Church, no where reproves in
the Gospel, the tolleration of the extortion of Publicans, Sodomie, murder,
the absolving of a murderer at the feast, a bloody tolleration, denying of
God, blasphemy; ergo, it was lawful for the Church and State to suffer all
these.

3. This answer infers that the Church should tolerate all false doctrines,
and the denying of the resurrection, and that there should be no Church
censure, contrary to Mat. 18 yea Christ does no where rebuke the Pharisees,
Scribes and Priests, because they did not, by preaching, admonish and convince
their fellows the Sadduces of that heretical doctrine that the dead shall not
rise, and by this there should be not only a Physical tolleration, and a non
punishing by the Magistrate of all heresies, but a moral forbearing, and a
no-rebuking, no preaching against false ways, and so not only Church Censures
are taken away contrary to Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. Revel. 2. 1, 2, 14, 15, 16,
20. But it is not lawful for Ministers or teachers to write or teach against
Iezabel, and these that hold the doctrine of Balaam, by this reason of the
Libertines. Nor does Christ command the Rulers of the people to punish the
false witnesses that rose against him. Nor does he rebuke Church or State for
tollerating the Publicans to extort the people, nor Caesar and Pilate, for
oppressing the people, nor the Scribes and Pharisees for not preaching against
Herod's beheading of John Baptist, or Pilates mixing the Gallileans blood with
the sacrifice, Luke 13. ergo, Ministers are to tolerate bloody Magistrates,
and not to preach against them.

The sixth Answer to elude these Laws is, Answ. 6.
If these Laws bind us in the New Testament, then must you not add nor
diminish from the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. and so must the whole City, inhabitants and
cattle, be put to the edge of the sword, and devoted to a curse, v. 14, 15, 16,
17. which ye cannot say bears any truth under the New Testament, except we say
that Papists and their babies should be put to the edge of the sword, and their
houses and land they dwell in execrable.

Answ. The Laws, Deuteronomy. ^3. three in number explicated, the first two were
moral, the third ceremonial for the most part.
There are three different Laws, Deuteronomy. 13. one against the seducing false
Prophet, to v. 5. a second against any seducing person, if it were brother or
wife, to v. 12. a third, to the end of the Chapter, of a City, State or
society, that will defend a false teacher. Now we argue not from the third Law;
but there is no warrant to punish the son of a false Prophet, Idolater,
Heathenish or Popish, or of wife, or brother that tempt us to Apostasy, and to
follow false Gods, yea, or to hurt land, house, or cattle that belongs to them,
the son shall not bear the sin of the father, except God by a positive Law
command it.

But the third Law, upon which we build not our arguments, at least, as
touching any ceremonial part of it, belongs not much to us, for to gather the
spoil of such a City, and to burn it every whit, for the Lord, as a cursed
and devoted thing or place, is clearly ceremonial and typical, because now
every creature of God is clean, Romans 14. 14* and so are all the victuals or
meats of Heathens, or Papists now, and good and sanctified, 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4. and
what God has cleansed, we are not to esteem common or profane, Act. 10. 14.
and the like must we say of places, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Ioh. 4. 21. Zach. 14. 21. and
by proportion, of all creatures, the creatures cannot now be typically cursed,
and execrable as then, Deuteronomy. 13. 16. 18. For the holy Land, and every City was
made by the Lord typically and ceremonially holy, and a pledge of a Heaven,
when therefore a Seducer fled to any City from the Judge, if that City would
partake with him in his sin, and save him from the hand of Justice, that City
forfeited its typical holiness, and it, and all things in it, the spoil,
cattle and goods, made accursed, and to be burnt with fire, and all the
inhabitants young and old, put to the edge of the sword, and that not under the
no^ion of false teachers, but as open Rebels against God, his holy law; and
the Judge, the Minister of God, was to avenge that blasphemy, and the moral
part is this; If the Army now on foot in England will against the Laws of God
and man protect blasphemers and false teachers, and save them from the hand of
Justice, and will reward, countenance, and promote Seducers of souls, our
humble opinion is, that they render themselves obnoxious to the sword of the
Magistrate. But the punishing of infants, and burning of the spoil was a mere
temporary typical law that does not abolish us in the New Testament. Now
Libertines bring this as an argument. We cannot put to death false teachers by
Deuteronomy. 13. for then should we by that Law kill their children and cattle, which
consequence we deny as false and vain. For our Divines strongly argue from the
moral equity, and the Law of nature ^ar^anting Joshua to make war with the
Canaanites in the Old Testament, to prove the lawfulness of wars under the
New Testament upon the same moral equity, as ^osh. 1^. 19, 20. Those that
refused to make peace with Is^^^l, and came against Israel in battle, against
those Israel might raise war, The wars in the Old Testament warrant wars in
the New, according to the natural equity in them, but they bind not according
to the ceremonial and temporary typicalnesse annexed to them.
by the Law of nature in their own defense. But such were all the Canaanites
except those of Gib^on, Josh. 11. v. 19. 20. And this argument holds strongly
in the New Testament, if any, as some Anabaptists do infer, this is no good
argument, because if the major proposition were true, then should we also kill
the women and sucking children, as the Lord commanded Saul, touching the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. and then should we destroy the cattle and burn the
spoil with fire, for Joshua and Israel made such a war with Jericho, etc. and
the rest of those Cities, yea Israel destroyed them utterly, and showed them no
favor, Josh. 11. 20. We with good ground deny the consequence, because the
war with these seven Nations was warranted by the Law of nature, but the
war, tali modo, to destroy utterly young and old, cattle, and all they had,
was from a ceremonial and temporal law peculiar to the Jews, because God
would have his Church neither enriched by their goods, nor to make Covenants,
and marriages with them, or to live in one society with them, nor to see their
groves, lest they should be ensnared to follow their Religion and strange Gods.

CHAP. XVI. Prophesies in the Old Testament, especially Zach. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.
5, 6. for punishing false Prophets vindicated.
WE argue from the Predictions and Prophesies in the Old Testament, The
Prophesies in the Old Testament, especially that Zach. 13. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7*
prove that false teachers under the New Testament, ought to be punished with
the sword
touching the Magistrates zeal under the New Testament, especially that Zach.
13. 2. Also I will cause the Prophets and the unclean spirit to cease out of
the land. 3. And it shall come to pass that when any shall yet Prophecy, then
his father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shall not
live; for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord: and his father and his
mother that begat him shall thrust him through, when he prophesies. 4. And it
shall come to pass in that day that the Prophets shall be ashamed every one
of his vision, when he has prophesied, etc.

That which the Prophets foretell shall commend the zeal of Kings and Rulers
under the Messiahs Kingdom, must be the lawful and necessary duty of the
Christian Prince under the New Testament. But the punishing of false teachers
under the New Testament is such; ergo, the proposition is undeniable; the
assumption I prove, 1. The time when this zeal shall be put forth by the godly
Prince or Ruler, is, v. 1. In that day when there shall be a fountain opened
to the house of David for sin and for uncleanness, that is, when remi^^ion
in the blood of Christ shall be preached by Apostles, Pastors and teachers, to
David's house, to the Church of Christ, as it clearly relates to that day or
time, c. 12. 8. When the Lord shall destroy the enemies of Jerusalem, and make
the house of David, as God, and as an Angel of God, v. 9. And when he shall
pour the spirit of grace and supplication on the Church, and they shall see
him whom they have pierced, and crucified, and shall mourn every family apart
for their sins. 2. Bodily punishment is descerned, Thou shall not live. 3.
The cause is set down, for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord. 4. The
execution of the sentence is, his father and his mother, the godly Rulers, and
the dearest of his friends shall thrust him through, that is, he shall cause
the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8. etc. be executed against him.

The Answer to this argument has no hue or apparent coulorablenesse of truth.
So John Goodwin answers in his Appendix to Hagimastix.
As 1. It respects only the Church of the Jews, why? because, it says, The
house of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, 2. because Matthew. 15. 24. he
says I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and this
Fountain cannot reasonably be opened to the Gentiles, but to the Jews, 3. It
is for the Jews encouragement, Ezr. 5. 1. and the Prophets use not to speak
of the Gentiles, The Prophecy Zach. 13. and the house of David notes not the
Jews only excluding the Gentiles.
to make them equal and superior in holy privileges to them; for it argues
Gods displeasure with the Jews: I will move them to Jealousy with those that
are no people. 4. (The word land) I will cut off the names of Idols out of the
land, indefinitly put in the old Testament, notes the Land of Canaan, it was
fulfilled under Antiochus, and ended with the siege and destruction of
Jerusalem.

Ans. 1. It Is strange that the house of David should more note in prophecies
the Jews excluding the Gentiles, then the house of Israel, and the house of
Judah should signify the Jews only, which is apparently false; for the house
of Israel, Ier. 31, v. 31. v. 33. 36. the seed of Israel, Syon, Jacob, Esaias 59.
21. 15. expounded to be the Church of the New Testament, with whom the
everlasting Covenant of Grace is made, as is expounded Hebr. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
when the former Covenant that is faulty and made with the Jews only, and
undeniably, as the Fountain is first opened and preached to the Jews, Mat.
15. 25. c. 10. 5, 6. Act. 13. 46. yet not to them only, except we say this
place, and the pouring of the spirit on David's house, Zach 12. 10. and the
writing of the Law in the inward parts, and the teaching by God, and the
eternal Covenant of grace is made with only the Jews excluding the Gentiles,
that the new heart is not promised to them, and the Law not written in the
heart of the Gentiles, see Romans 11. 26. where it is said all Israel shall be
saved, and the fullness of the Gentiles comes in, and the Gentiles that
believed not have obtained mercy, v. 25. 30. Act. 13. 47. 48. So James, Act.
15. 16. After this I will return, and will build again the Tabernacle of
David. 17. That the re^idue of men might seek, and all the Gentiles, etc. 2.
It is a shame to blot paper with such Divinity, that when God intends to
comfort the Jews, he is not wont to speak of the calling of the Gentiles;
for it still argues his displeasure with the Jews, the just contrary is the
Divinity of the Prophets and Apostles, Esaias 54. 1. Sing O Barren. 2. Thy seed
shall inherit the Gentiles, Esaias 60. 1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come. 3.
for the Gentiles shall come into thy light, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

3. The names of Idols will not help, nor the name of Land, because they are
old Testament words; the contrary is, Prove. 31. 23. Prove. 29. 4. the King by
judgment establishes the land, any land, not of Judea only, Prove. 10. 16. 17.
Psalm. 107. 34. that this zeal ceased with the fiege of Jerusalem is said
gratis, and is no more true then that the Fountain of Christ's blood was dried
up then, and ran no more to David's house, to Jews and Gentiles; this were to
say, this Fountain is opened to the Jews only, and runs dry, when it
over-flowes more abundantly. Master Goodwins answer to Zach. 13.


2. Answ. Be it that civil Magistrates ought to proceed, with as great zeal,
against delinquents under the Gospel, as Eliah against Baals priests and
Phineas against Idolaters, yet it follows not they ought to put out their zeal
in killing false prophets with the ^word, for this is blind zeal under the
Gospel, John 16. 1. Act 22 3. 4. Act. 26. 9.

Answ. The Holy Ghost commends this zeal under the Gospel, when the fountain
shall be opened for David's house, his father that begat him shall thrust him
through. This answer says that this zeal, Zach. 13. is the bloody zeal of
persecuting Saul, and of others, raising persecution against the Gospel
preached by Paul and Barnabas, so the answer contradicts God, who says this
zeal was truly and lawfully set, as touching the object, not being set on
against the members of Christ and Paul, for the Gospel, but against false
prophets that speak lies in the name of the Lord, ver. 3. Mr. Goodwin brings
an example of blind and bloody zeal against the Saints and the Apostles, to
prove that the Christian Magistrate should have no zeal at all to punish false
teachers under the New Testament, which is just this in logical reduction:
Magistrates under the New Testament should not butcher the innocent, nor
murder the Saints, ergo, under the New Testament magistrates should not take
vengeance on murderers, evil doers, and blasphemers, who preach doctrines of
devils. It is as good logic as this, Godly Rulers should not do unjustice
and oppression, ergo, They should not do justice and right in saving the flock
from grievous Wolves.

3 Answ. These who are absolutely for slaying by death, and thrusting through,
do not allow, that for every error the father should kill the child.

Answ. This is yet to object against the Holy Ghost, not against us, for the
text will bear no such thing, for the Prophet that is to be thrust through, is
not every son, nor for every error. But it is 1. A false Prophet not called
to be a Prophet, but one that takes on a hairy mantle to deceive, as the 4. v.
holds forth; and so he pretends a calling from God, when he has none. 2. He
prophesies not errors only but lies, that he knows, or may know, except he
were wilfully ignorant, to be lies. 3. He speaks them in the name of the Lord
and says, he has seen the visions of God, and the word of the Lord came to
me, when no such thing was, but he utters his own phancies, and he that does
these three, deserves bodily punishment, and if they be lies, striking at the
root of the Christian faith, he deserves to dye the death.

2 The text will not bear that his father and his mother with their own hands
shall thrust him through, without addressing themselves to the Judge. But it is
an allusion to the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. His father and mother shall not pity him, but
cause him to be thrust through. So Elias said to Achab, Have thou killed and
also gotten possession? When Achab with his own hands had not killed Naboth,
but by his command and letter had procured that others should do it, so 2 Samuel
12. 9. Thou have killed Vriah, but it is exponed David procured that the
Ammonites should kill Vriah, David with his own hand did not thrust him
through.

The Answer of Mr. Goodwin.
Answer is, because the objector is like to be cumbred with this text he says,
(for I repeat not what I answered before) the best exposition, and fullest is,
His father shall pierce him through, that is, shall endeavor to take him off,
and deter him from such a practice, by laying before him the sentence of the
death out of the Law, Exodus 20. 5. 7. threatening, if thou go on thou shall not
live (with God) but shall be condemned -- he shall pierce him through with
sharp and piercing words, the word of God is compared to a two edged sword,
Psalm. 149. ^7. etc. and ver. 12. There is that speaks like the piercing of a
sword, so Turnovins. And the predictions in Scripture are spoken as
performances. Jer. 1. I have set thee over the Nations to root out, etc. That
is, to foreshew or threaten rooting out, so Chytraeus. They shall confute their
wicked opinions, etc.

Answ. Though Turnovius expound piercing through, by preaching death from the
Law, It is not metaphorical thrusting through that is spoken of Zach. 13. but
really inflicted death an^bod^ly punishment.
and terrifying, yet since the Objector weakly and groundlesly (as we saw) will
r^strict this Prophecy to the Church of the Jews, and a poor short time,
when this zeal endured. It must, with his leave, be meant ( in that day) that
is, in the time of the Gospel, as in other places it must be taken, as Ier. 50.
4. v. 20. Ier. 31. 29. Ier. 33. 15. 16. Joel* 2. 29. Zach. 8. 23. for so
prophesies of Christ's Kingdom are expounded to have their accomplishment in
Christ's Gospel-Kingdome, and then the Law, piercing through, and terrifying,
must be in use under the Gospel, which is all we crave; therefore the Objector
adds to the words of the threatening; thou shall not live (to wit before God,
and so leaps from the threatening of the sword of the Magistrate, Deuteronomy. 13.
which he says is the sense of the place, to the second death, and a dying
before God.

2. But let us have an instance where piercing through, dying and wounding, is
put for Metaphorical wounding with words to gratify, the Objectors erroneous
sense we cannot quit this place so, for all the Text cries for a real
piercing and killing.

1. It is I grant an easy way to answer places of Scripture that can but bear
a literal sense, to change them into Metaphors, so you may give to the
Magistrate with some Anabaptists, Romans 13. a Metaphorical sword, and pay him
metaphorical tribute, and give him metaphorical obedience: what more reason
to make this a moral slaying, and piercing with words, then a moral or
metaphorical Idol, or a metaphorical false Prophet, a metaphorical unclean
spirit, and passing out of the land? These words, thou shall not live, are
words of the Law, and the piercing through metaphorical, but those words,
again ( Thou speak lies in the name of the Lord) are not metaphorical, but
contain a proper truth, such a complication is not in all the Scripture.

2. The words in their literal sense are fair and easy, and not to be
wrested to a spiritual or borrowed sense without ground; it much lesseneth the
zeal foretold to be under the Gospel, and turns a real zeal over into words
of threatening; the Text says the contrary, his father shall thrust him
through, and this works so upon him, that others shall really leave their false
prophesying, and shall say, I am no Prophet, but a Herdman; now if the words be
a Prophecy to be fulfilled only in the Jews excluding the Gentiles, as the
Objector says, then is it no zeal at all, but a most sinful and unjust
dispencing with the Law, and a zeal far below the Law; for the Law says,
Deuteronomy. 13. If the seducing Prophet which were as near to thee, as a Brother,
Son, Daughter, or Wife in thy bosom, thou must not smooth him, and oil him
with sharp words, and mere threatenings; yea, but thou must act against him, v.
8. Thine eye shall not pity him, thou shall not spare him, neither shall thou
conceal him. 9. Thou shall surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon
him, to put him to death. Now this cannot be a metaphorical putting to death,
but the Objectors metaphorical, and minatory piercing of him through with
sharp and piercing words, imply necessarily that ye must conceal him, and
pity him, and not kill him, nor stretch out any hand against him, first or
last to hurt him, but only stretch your tongue against him, and barely threaten
him, and terrify him, but let him live: If the Prophecy be extended to Jew
and Gentile, under the Gospel, which against the Text the Objector denies, then
it argues, 1. That there is such a Law under the Gospel, else if it be an
unjust Law, and out of date now under the Gospel, the threatening and piercing
through must bewith lying words, and father must utter to the lying Prophet
lies to terrify him; and say, son if thou desist not from prophesying lies,
thou shall be thrust through with the Magistrates sword, and die according to
the Law; that is, I foreshew and threaten according to the Law (but it is an
unjust, and an out-dated Law to Libertines that obliegeth not under the New
Testament) that thou shall be thrust through and die; that is, I fore-shew and
prophecy a lie, that thou ought to be put to death, and persecuted for thy
conscience; whereas no such thing ought to be now, when the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. is
worn out of vigor. 2. It must follow that lying and false words uttered in a
threatening manner must be the way to cause the false Prophet to be ashamed of
his vision and prophesying falsely no more, but say, I am no Prophet but an
herdman. Whereas the Holy Ghost says, fear of thrusting through is the cause.

3 If it be only a piercing merely minatory, by threatening and rebukes, these
do not change the Prophet and gain him to the truth, as the Objector would
imply, for refutation in a doctrinall, and instructing, and teaching way only
does that: no rebukes no law-threatnings do change the false Prophet, for
threatenings and rebukes do suppose the seducer sees that he seduceth, and
that he proprophesieth lies which yet the false Prophet cannot see, till he
be convinced of the error of his way, and rebukes will not do that. But I
would put to the Objector his own quere, is it fit to rebuke a man who can do
no other but publish lies, because he lacks supernatural grace, which would
make him a true Prophet? These words v. 6. What are those wounds in thy hands?
hold forth a visible and real piercing through of the hands, for some false
doctrine he has preached, according to the merit of his heresy, then it must
be some other thing then a verbal threate or a metaphorical piercing through
with words which are transient, and not parmanent, and visible as wounds and
print of strokes, cicatrices, in the hands: so I cannot but think the Objector
has strained his light to find a violent exposition to elude the place.

Its true, that Da. Chytreus and Melanthon acknowledge a confutation of errors
by words, but Chytreus in the same place on this text, goes farther, they
shall confute false teachers (says he) as Asa removed his own mother from
worshipping of Idols. Chytaeus in Zach 13. 3. (...) doctores (...) Ut Asa
propr^^m ma^re^ removit a cu^^u ad^^orum. ^ead, propter (...) Idolorum
But how? 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. He removed her from being Queen, because she had
made an Idol in a grove. This removing was not a moral confutation by words,
but a compulsory, by royal authority, which is essentially coactive and in
order to the sword. Deodate, and the English Divines, call it a representation
of the spirit of knowledge and discretion, but they add, and zeal in Christ's
true Church to discern false doctrines and to oppose them, how? By not only
refuting them by the word, but by censures of excommunication and rebukes. The
Objector might have read forward, ver. 6. One shall say, if it appear that he
has passed through the Churches discipline, because he has been a seducer,
he shall confess it, and give God the glory, approving of the Churches
severity, used for his correction. The Objector, as we have heard, rejects
ecclesiastical coercing of false teachers as well as civil. Which Diodate and
those Divines acknowledge: nor do they exclude the Magistrate as he does; he
adds Grotius a reconciler and an apostate and calls the number of five very
late writers, the best expositers on the place of Zachary. With his leave,
Calvin, Gualther, Piscator, Junius, Daneus, five for five, and twenty and
twenty, and four as good (many of them esteemed better) have written the
contrary. I have not time now to levy Hoasts and Armies of writers. But its the
Objectors best to be silent of Divines, and to quit the cause too, for he
says nothing to a purpose. But what Socinians and Sectaries joining with
Serveiur, Castalio, Minus Celsus, Vaticanus, Acontius, Episcopius, and the
Belgic Arminians against Calvin and Beza, has said (with favor of his
learning) twice, better if they were translated into the English tongue. Nor
must we with sharp rebukes, and piercing words, like sharp swords pierce
through Heretics: for our Libertines tell us, Christ spoke words of honey and
butter to apostate Samaritans, and the servant of the Lord must be gentle. Then
must we not speak fire and hell to the Godly Saints, to Paul Best, to Tyndal
that denies the Scripture to be the Word, and blasphemeth the trinity, and
Independents though they persecute Presbyterians, nurse them if they were
Samaritans, are so far from piercing the Familists, Antinomians Enthysiasts
through with piercing words, that they advance them to highest places of
dignity.

To this prediction I add, The prophesies Esa. 49. 23.
touching Kings, Esa. 60. 10.
Those that are by office to be Nurse-fathers to the Church, Ps. 138. 4.
to minister to her, and lend their royal breasts to be sucked by her, Ps. 72.
10. 11.
and as godly Kings are to praise the Lord as godly Kings, Ps. 2. 11. Es. 60.
16. Pro. 8. 16. Rev. 21. 24.
are to bring gifts and presents to Christ, and are to be wise and serve the
Lord, and kiss the mediator, and to bring their Royal honor to the New
Jerusalem, and by whom Kings reign, they and their Royal sword cannot be
excluded from commanding the Priests, Prophets and Teachers to befriend the
bride, and decor, and d^^^ her for her Lord and husband, to give wholesome
milk to the children, as they would be rewarded of Princes as well doers, or
punished as ill doers, and would be protected from grievous wolves, not sparing
the flock, nor can they be excluded from all royal and politic guarding of
both Tables of the Law* as if they were but fleshly Ordinances. But such are
Kings and Princes, (...)
ergo etc. Non is it my mind that Kings are sub-mediators or Vicars of Christ
mediator, as Erasti^^^ dream, but what ever Kings do in, or about matters of
Religion, they do it in a politic way not as commanding the conscience, but in
order to civil and temporary rewards and punishments.

Its true Christianity adds no new Magistratical power to a King, it being
only a gracious accident without which a man may be a King, yet it
spiritualizeth the exercise of Royal power and Christianity is no accident of
a Christian King, but a Christian King, kindly, and as a Christian King, is to
serve Christ the Lord, and to conserve with his royal dignity all
Gospell-ordinances in an external politic way; and so he owes Royal service
to Christ, as such a King, so graced of God, and in this consideration he
brings his glory to Christ, and tutors the bride the lambs wi^e. Justice is an
accident of a man, but not of a just man.

CHAP. XVII. Places in the New Testament, especially Romans 13. for punishing of
false teachers vindicated.
Argument XI.
THose who are powers ordained of God, and a terror not to good works but to
evil; and Ministers of God for good, are revengers, and to execute wrath on
evil doers, are Kings and supreme, or governors sent by the King for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, are to
punish all false teachers, and such as ruin the souls of others, and waste
the Church. But the King and all lawful ^ulers, Parliaments, or others, are
such, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 13. 14. Tit. 3. 1. Matthew. 22. 21. And
false teachers are evil workers, evil doers, dogs, Phil. 3. 2. They rub the
^ontagion of their evil deeds upon others, for those that receive them into
their houses, and bid them God speed, are partakers of their evil deeds, 2 John ver. 10. 11. then must such teachers be evil doers, they subvert whole
houses.

Diverse answers to little purpose are given to this argument. As 1. So (...).
Goodwin, Hagiomastick.
It is against the wisdom of God in governing the World to make Magistrates
judges of what is truth, and heresy, since the generallity of Magistrates, yea
of men are ignorant thereof, and incapable in questions of doubtful
disputation. 2 Say that the Synod were equally divided, whether Presbytery or
Independence be the way of God, or say the major part (which is ever the worst)
determine amiss, what shall the Magistrate do? and the evil doer, Romans 13.
cannot be he that does evil without limitation, or thinks evil, but pro
subjecta materia. But he that does evil, whereof ordinary Magistrates, heathen
or Christian, are competent judges, which is manifestly of political
consideration, as that which is contrary to the light and law of nature, as
whoredom, adultery, murder, theft, unjustice, sedition, treason.

Answ. The ignorance of the Christian Magistrate in matters of Religion, no
ground why by his office he ought not to know so far truth and falsehood as
to punish heresies, published and spread.
1. This argument is against the wisdom of God in appointing Magistracy, as
well as against us, for there be a world of questions of doubtful disputation,
what is according or what contrary to the light and law of nature, in murder,
medicine, usury, polygamy, incest, marriage, contracts, false witness, and
these are so controverted, yea and there be matters too hard in judgment for
ordinary men, between blood and blood, plea and plea, stroke and stroke,
Deuteronomy. 17. 12. no less then in matters of Religion, and to err in taking the
life of a guiltless man in any subject, is as great misgovernment as can be,
though I dare not charge God with it, as the Objecter does. 2. When the Holy
Ghost forbids the Master of every Christian family (and there must be a far
larger number of heads of families then Christian Magistrates) to own a
heretic as a guest, or to salute him, 2 John 10. and commands Christians
not to eat with an Idolator, 1 Cor. 7. 11. to reject an heretic, Tit. 3. 10.
to avoid false teachers that creep into houses, 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6. and such as
cause divisions contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, Romans 16. 17, 18. sure
he supposes they have knowledge to judge what is error and heresy, what is
truth, otherwise he commands us to turn our backs on such, as the blind man
casts his club. May not one say, This is against the wisdom of God in the
government of Christian families and societies to interpose our judgment in
doubtsome disputations, to judge who is the heretic, and to be avoided,
Ordinary professors may know who are heretics and false teachers.
who is the sound believer.

3. The uncapability, of Magistrates and most men to judge here, is the want of
infallibility, such as the immediately inspired Prophets had, then its against
the wisdom of God, that we try the spirits and doctrines, and believe them,
for if the generality of men, let alone Christian Magistrates* be incapable of
fundamental truths, they cannot judge them to be truths, nor heresies, except
they be infalibly, and immediately inspired by this argument; it is then
against the wisdom of God to bid any believe the Gospel, but the Prophets and
Apostles. 4. The Magistrate being a Christian, should see with his own eyes,
and judge the Presbytery worthy of his politic sanction, and though Synods,
divide, or err, the error and uncertainties of men, that are accidental to
all Ordinances, are no rule to Magistrates on earth; and by this reason, which
has as much force against preaching the Gospel as against the Christian
Magistrates political judging, when Ministers are divided, and the equal
half or the major part preach Arrianisme, Socinianisme, Famil^^^e, etc. and
the lesser number sound doctrine, the Objecter needs not ask, under which of
their shadows shall the Magistrate repose for peace and safety? I enlarge the
question, and let the Objecter answer, under which of their shadows shall all
their hearers repose for faith and establishment in the truth? And I answer,
call no man Rabbi, let Magistrates and others receive the truth in love, and
let him answer, when four hundred Prophets say to Achab, go to Ramath Gilead*
fight and prosper, and one Michajah says, go not left thou be killed, under
which shall Achab repose? shall then Achab hear the voice of the Lord in no
Prophet, because four hundred speak lies? or shall not four hundred
Michajahs declare the mind of God to the Prince, because so many false
Prophets speak the contrary?

5. Magistrates as Magistrates cannot judge all evil do^^s, for heathen
magistrates who never heard the Gospel cannot judge Gospel-hereticks.
Its true, Ill-doers here must be such as Magistrates generally may judge, but
not all ill-doers, false Prophets, or the like, Magistrates as Magistrates, are
to judge ill-doers, but it follows not that all Magistrates whether Heathen or
Christian, are to judge all ill-doers, whether Gospel-seducing teachers or
murderers, for there wants a condition in heathen Magistrates, for the want
whereof they cannot actually, and in the capacity of heathens, judge false
teachers, Arrians, Socinians, and the like, not because they are not
essentially Magistrates as well as Christian Magistrates, but because they want
the knowledge of the Gospel, even as inferior Judges are as essentially
Judges in Israel, as the Priests and the great Sanedrim at Jerusalem, and may
judge of their office between blood and blood, but if it be a controversy too
hard for them between blood and blood, and the party be willing to appeal,
these inferior Judges cannot actually judge that controversy, but it must go
to the Sanedrim, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. 13. So a father as a father, whether heathen or
Christian, and a Master of a family by his place (the like I say of a husband,
a Tutor, a Doctor in their respective places) are by their place and relation
to teach their children and servants the principles of the doctrine of the
Gospel, by these places, Genesis 18. 18, 19. Exodus 12. 26, 27. Ps. 78. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Joel 1. 2. Prove. 4 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 6. 4. 2 Timothy 3 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. yet
while they are heathen fathers, and heathen masters, they neither can, nor are
obliged actually to teach any thing of the Gospel, they never hearing of the
Gospel, are obleiged not to believe in a Christ of whom they never heard, Romans
10. 14, 15, 16. and those that Christ was never preached to, are not condemned
for Gospell-unbeliefe, Joh. 15. 22.

But for sins against the Law of nature, Romans 2. 12. 13, 14, 15. Romans 1. 19,
20, 21, 22. and the like must we say of Judges whether heathen or Christian,
though in the state of heathenish, they never having heard of Christ, freeth
them from an obligation of actual punishing Gospel heretics, yet as Judges
their office is to punish such, but neither heathen Princes, nor heathen
fathers, masters, husbands, tutors, and teachers of Schools, are obliged to an
actual exercise of all and every Magistraticall, fatherly, masterly, maritall,
and tutory Gospell-duties, toward their underlings and pupills, if they live in
a Country where they are invincibly ignorant of the Gospel, if the Lord by no
providence send Preachers of the Gospel to them. And how shall they believe in
him of whom they never heard? And how shall they judge heretics sinning
against a Gospel of which they never heard? Let no man stumble at this
providence, God has made the supreme Magistrate Judge of all murders, yet may
this godly Prince, and the generality of men be ignorant, yea incapable, at
least most unfit to judge how a bloody Physician took away the* life of such a
child by this vegetable, or this herb, or this syrrope, to the end his own
son might be heir; dare we say with this Objecter, therefore this providence
in appointing such a godly Prince to be judge of murder, because he is not a
skilled Physician, is inconsistent with the wisdom and goodness of God in the
government of the world, the like instances I may give in thousands of the like
cases, in which the Christian Judge may be ignorant. And I cannot dissemble,
but it is a hard question how the Magistrate as a Magistrate, does punish
Gospel-hereticks, for so all Magistrates, even heathen Magistrates, who are
invincibly ignorant of the Gospel, in regard they never heard of the Gospel,
should be obliged to punish false-teachers, and Gospel-hereticks, which seems
hard; for it is a sin against the Magistraticall duty of an Indian Magistrate
not to punish Gospel-hereticks?

Answ. It follows not; for nothing follows, but, its a sin in an Indian Prince,
and he -- sins against his Magistraticall office in that he punishes not an
Indian false-teacher, who teaches against the Law of nature, because an Indian
should not worship the Devil; but the Indian Ruler invincibly ignorant of the
Gospel, sins not against his office as a Magistrate, because he punishes
not a Gospel-hereticke, for he is not obliged to every Magistraticall act as a
Magistrate, not to those of which he is invincibly and faultlessely ignorant,
as an Indian husband and Master invincibly ignorant of the Gospel sins not
against the duty of a husband and head of a family, How Christ takes service
of a Christian magistrate.
though he teach not wife, children, and servants, the principles of the
Gospel, which a Christian husband and head of a family is obliged to do, not
as a husband and head of a family simply, but as such a husband and head as
hears the Gospel, and so either hears and knows, or may hear these
Gospel principles, if he were not thereof ignorant through his own sinful
neglect.

Object. But the Magistrate as the Magistrate punishes Gospelheretickes, ergo,
All Magistrates, even heathen Magistrates fail against their Magistraticall
duty, if they punish not Gospel-heretickes, and their ignorance cannot excuse
them.

Answ. The Antecedent is not simply true, every Magistrate as a Magistrate
sins against his office, if he punish not some false teachers, if convened
before him and convinced. But every Magistrate, as a Magistrate, punishes not
every heretic against the Gospel: but only such a Magistrate as hears the
Gospel, punishes such a Gospel Heretic. We say that Magistrates by virtue
of their office make laws for no transporting of moneys out of England, but
you cannot infer that if Magistrates did this by their Magistraticall power,
then Magistrates, as Magistrates; and so all Magistrates of India, and all
Heathen Magistrates ought to make laws that no money be transported out of
England; it is no consequent at all, for though English Magistrates make such
laws by their Magistraticall power, yet they do this as such Magistrates, not
as Magistrates; thousands such we may allege.

Object. How then does the Magistrate, as the Magistrate serve Christ, Mediator
in punishing Gospel heretics, and bringing his Kingly honor to the new
Jerusalem, and casting his Crown down at the feet of the Lamb?

Answ. The Magistrate, as the Magistrate (should we speak accurately in such
an intricate debate) does not serve Christ as Mediator, for then all
Magistrates, Heathen and Indian, were obliged to serve him, as the axiom
proves. Quod convenit (...), convenit (...). But the Magistrate, as such a
Magistrate, lustred with Christianity punishes Gospel Heretics, and sins
against his Magistraticall office if he do not so: for Christianity
spiritualizeth the exercise of maritall, paternall, Magistraticall power, and
elevates them above their common nature in Christian Husbands, Fathers,
Magistrates, which it cannot do in all husbands, as husbands; fathers, as
fathers; Magistrates, as Magistrates: even suppose they be heathens, Quod non
ni est non operatur.

Object. But why then may not a Christian Magistrate, as a Christian, if not as
a Magistrate be a Vicar of Christ?

Answ. 1. Because Christ as Mediator; has no Vicars, nor sub-mediators, and so
the Minister, or the Christian Magistrate as the Christian Magistrate, cannot
be the Vicar of Christ.

2 Because the Christian Magistrate, as the Christian Magistrate, and even
lustered with Christianity, which is not in every Magistrate, yet operatur
(...) in externals and only can as a Christian Magistrate proceed according as
the heresy is proved by witness, or confessed, and obstinately maintained by
the Heretic, and all this is external, and does but externally, and in
external means promove the Churches spiritual good, and the mediatory
Kingdom, and it is such a promoving as Christ may well want, though ordinarily
he cannot want pastors and teachers.

Quest. But does not the Mediator Christ, as Mediator, promove his Mediatory
Kingdom in, and through the Christian Prince, as his instrument, subordinate
to him as Mediator?

Answ. Not at all, for Christ uses the Christian Migistrate as his servant to
beat the wolves from the flock, but not as King, mediator as God-man, head of
the Church, for Christ Mediator as Mediator, works not by external violence,
or, by the sword, in his mediatory Kingdom, Joh. 16, 36. If my Kingdom were
of this World, mine own would fight for me. Ergo, it is but borrowed
accidental help and service, that Christ has in his mediatory Kingdom, from
Kings, he works not as Mediator by fighting. Christ who is Mediator qui est
Mediator acts by believing Kings, not qua Mediator as he is Mediator, the
sword may procure good and peace to the mystical visible body, and immunity
from spiritual errors. But this is a means to Christ as Mediator in the by,
and at some times, not such as is the ministry of the word, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
which is spiritual not carnal: though ministers be not sub-mediators, yet
Christ as Mediator works and conquers in them, and by them. But I return.

6 To say the text speaks of evil doers, which appertains to the cognizance
of the ordinary Magistrate (if it were not as ordinary to the Magistrate to be
an understanding Christian as another man) is to beg the question, for we
say, false teachers, wolves in sheeps skins, woorying the flock, which may be
known by their works, as a fig^ree is known from a thistle, by its fruit, are
such evil doers. The text and law distinguishes not, and mentions no more
murderers then false teachers. Therefore the text means all evil doers, that
per^urbe human societies, as spiritual wolves and lions that devour the
flock, and those that think ill in their hearts, to all men of sound sense
are punishable only by him that knows the heart, not by Judges.

7 To say the light, and law of nature is the Judges only compass he must
sail by, and that he must punish no sins, but such as are against the law of
nature. 1. It pulls the book of the law of God, yea, the Bible out of the
Kings hand, that contains greater deepes then the law of nature can reach,
contrary to the word of God, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 17. 10. 11, 12. For
the King, as the King, should have the book of the law with him on the throne,
to be his rule, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. Josh. 1. 8. 2. This rule hinders not but the King
and Ruler may judge ill doers so far as the light, and law of nature will go
along with him. Yet the Objector will be unwilling the Ruler take away the head
of a seducer, that should say, and teach men with Caligula, there is no God,
Chance made all, and rules all: we want not such blasphemous impostors as these.

But ( says the Objector) by him that does evil, mr. ^o. Goodwin.
is not meant the spreading of errors or heresies. 1. They had no reason to
fear the Magistrate spoken of here, Romans 13. for spreading and publishing the
most orthodox truths, for they might without any danger at all from the
Magistrate, here spoken of, have taught that the Roman Idols were true Gods.
They had ten times more cause to be afraid of the power of publishing orthodox
truths, as that there is but one God, and the Roman Gods are dumb Idols, or
speaking Devils. 2. That doing of evil, against which the Magistrate, here
spoken of, IS THE MINISTER OF GOD to execute wrath, is opposed to that
subjection to higher powers. ver. 1. And of the same consideration with
resisting of powers so sharply reproved. Verse. 2. Then by it is only meant the
doing of evil, which was prohibited by the Roman laws and edicts: and no man
resistes the power who lives in an orderly subjection and obedience to all
their laws, now the Romans in their laws never forbad the publishing of
error and heresies in Religion, then doing of evil in spreading of heresies,
can be no resisting of the Roman powers and laws. Again that doing evil, ver.
4. Is opposed to doing of good, ver. 3. Unto which there is a premise of a
reward promised, even praise from the magistrate. (...) the doing of good, for
which the Apostle undertakes, they shall have praise from the Roman magistrate,
was not the preaching and publishing the great and Orthodox truths of Christian
Religion, yea, they were enemies to that good doing.

Answ. How M. Goodwin would elude the place, Romans 13. to prove that false
teachers are not evil doers
All these lean upon a castle beyond the moon, to wit, that Paul speaks,
Romans 13. of no powers but the Roman Magistrate, and that he is to be obeyed
at the only minister of God, and then having laid this most false and vain
ground, he cries out, O England, England make much of thy Scriptures, but take
heed of the glosses of thy teachers. Which we may retort, but this is an
impious gloss: For though Paul aimed at obedience to Magistrates, even to
persecuting Nero in things lawful, because some then, as Anabaptists now, said
the Gospel freed Christians from subjection and obedience to lawful
Magistracy. But I prove that the Apostle speaks of the Magistrate, such as he
is by Gods appointment, and such as he ought to be, whither he be Heathen
or Christian, Paul Romans 13. speaks of magistrates in general what they ought to
be not of Roman magistrates as they were then.
and he speaks of a Magistrate in general. Now the Roman Emperor and Senate
were not such powers in all their Government, Laws and Edicts, as every soul
should be subject unto. For they made laws in acts of the second Table, and
accordingly practiced them, with violence and unjustice, to join not only house
to house (but not being provoked by any wrong) Kingdom to Kingdom, the Isle
of Britain, and all the people of the world, and in that every soul (I
conceive) ought to be subject to supperiour powers. If the Objector render this
sense, let every soul on earth be subject to the Roman Emperor Nero, for he is
the minister of God, for thy good, that is, for the good and peaceable
Government of all and every one that has souls, because he would raise war
and tyrannically subject them all to him. We wish England to beware of such
glosses.

2 Whatever people resisted the Roman Empire and their bloody Emperor Nero, and
others, in all their bloody Edicts against innocent Christians, ( for he is the
Magistrate here spoken of, says the Objector) they receive not damnation, not
do they resist the ordinance of God.

3. The Roman Emperor and Senate in their Laws and Edicts, were a terror to
good works, not to evil, they rewarded those that persecuted and killed
Christians, and those that shed the blood of innocent people that they might
be tyrannous conquerours of them; and made them commanders in war, and hired
them so to do: then the Roman Magistrate as he actually governed, and made
neither Law^ nor Edicts against spreading of errors and heresies cannot be the
Magistrate here spoken of.

4. The Objector would be put in mind of the same Answer given to this place,
and others of the New Testament by the Anabaptists, who say there is no warrant
in the Old Testament, that Christians should be Magistrates, because the use
of the sword was then typical and ceremonial, and this, and all places of the
New Testament does command conquered Christians subjection to heathen
Magistrates, and not to raise Arms against them, but warrants not Christians
to take on them Magistracy, because heathens should not be our pattern, but
the word of God.

5. Most false it is, and a begging of the question that evil doing is
contracted and hampered in here, to subjection to the higher powers, that is,
to the Roman Laws and Edicts only; for it is opposed to the lawful subjection
due to the Parliament of England, and to the King of Britain, and to all
lawful powers as well as to Roman Magistrates, as is clear; for there is no
power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God; and Paul
speaks of all Magistrates, Christian and heathen, that are lawful
Magistrates, and commands subjection to every power, Roman and Christian, in
the Lord. What? Are there no powers ordained of God, but Roman Magistrates?
Then may Anabaptists well say, we owe not subjection to Christian Magistrates
by this text, but only to the Roman Magistrate, who made no Laws against
spreading of heresies, and when the Apostle faith, Let every soul be subject
to superior powers, Roman welldoing, and illdoing, not meant in this text.
shall every soul, by this text, be subject to none but the Roman Magistrate?
I am sure, the Reformed Churches, and all our Writers argue, that as many as
have souls, Popes, Prelates, and Roman Clergy ought to be subject, by this
text, to the good laws of the Christian Emperors, and that all men, none
excepted, neither Clergy (as they call them) nor others, but are obliged by
this Scripture, and 1 Pet. 2. and Tit. 3. to give obedience and subjection to
all lawful Magistrates, heathen and Christian, and to their Laws, and to pay
tribute, and to be judged by them, whereas Papists plead exemption to
Churchmen, and sure, if no doing of evil be prohibited here, and deserve the
just vengeance of the Minister of God, but only such which was prohibited by
the Roman Laws and Edicts, then must the Roman Laws and Edicts be as perfect as
the word of God, for then the Romans Laws must command, reward and praise, all
good that the Ruler or any power ordained of God does command, this is most
false, they did not command the saving of the lives of the innocent British in
this Island, that never injured them, but commanded to kill them, they did not
in their Laws command their under-Rulers, Pilate and others, to protect
innocent Christians, to justify and absolve Jesus Christ, but to condemn and
murder them, though they gave all that was due to Caesar, and their Laws did
not forbid all evil, that the Judges and Ministers of God are to execute wrath
against, all murdering of innocent men in thousands, and most unjust and
bloody wars against Nations that never wronged them, and they forbad not the
spreading of errors and heresies against the Gospel that came to their ears,
and made them that they had no cloak for their sin, Joh. 15. 21, 22. for
Paul brought the Gospel to them, and it is a begging of the question that the
Roman Emperors ought not to have made Laws against spreading of heresy, and
they were a terror to those that preached the Gospel, and had their
conversation among the Gentiles blamelessely; and so these Emperors did not as
the Ministers of God, ought to do, nor would the Apostle undertake or be
surety for Nero, (the Objector undertakes for the text that in which the Holy
Ghost will not bear him out) that he shall give praise and reward for
well-doing, all the welldoing that the text says, the Minister of God, by his
office, is to reward, the Roman Magistrate did abhor and persecute, if the
Apostle undertake those that do well, shall have praise from the Roman
Magistrate, if he do as a lawful Magistrate, then cannot the text be meant
of the Roman Magistrate as he actually misgoverned and abused his power, for
then he was a terror to those that preached orthodox truths, and worshipped
dumb Idols, and by Laws and Edicts, honored and rewarded heathen Priests
that were not so good as Baals Chaplains, and does Paul undertake, if the
Saints at Rome would turn Priests and servers of the Roman Gods, that they
should do well, and have praise from the Roman Magistrate? for by the Roman
Law, the Roman Rulers were to reward and praise such as did well in this sense.

2. Nor does Paul undertake they shall have praise from the Roman Magistrate,
if they do well according as the Roman Laws speaks of well-doing; for then
Paul should undertake they should have praise from the Roman Magistrate for
that which is evill-doing, which Paul would never undertake, because killing of
innocent men in unjust wars to conquer and inslave free States by the Roman
Laws was well-doing, and praised and rewarded by their Laws as weldoing. But
this was to Paul, and in it self evill-doing, and robbery, and makes the Holy
Ghost to exhort to Romish, and falsely so called, well-doing.

CHAP. XVIII. The place, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2. for coercive power over false
Prophets, cleared.
Argument XII.
THat which we are to pray, The pla^^ 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 3 explained.
we may have from the Magistrate by his office, that is his office to do,
because prayers must be in faith, and grounded on the word of God.

But we are to pray for Kings and all that are in Authority, that with the
sword they would guard Religion, and the Church of God from wolves, false
teachers, and those that think they do God service when they kill us, Joh. 16.
1. that we may (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 2.) lead a quiet and a peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty. Nor can a Magistrate procure a quiet and a
peaceable life in all godliness (...) and honesty as a Magistrate, but by his
sword, nor can he with mere words of mouth, only exhort as a Magistrate, the
foxes not to destroy the vines, and wolves not to slaughter (...) sheep, except
he coerce false teachers and Idolaters, because upon the occasion that Micah
and his mother made a molten image, and an Ephod, and imposed it on their
house, the Holy Ghost says, Judge. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. v 6. In those days there
was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes,
hence it is clear that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness, a naked permission from the Magistrate to serve God is not enough,
or that he suffer no man to do theSaints violence, but if wolves be permitted
to teach what is right in their own erroneous conscience, and there be no
Magistrate to put them to shame, Judge. 18. 7. and no King to punish them, then
godliness, and all that concerns the first Table of the Law must be marred,
and the intrinsecall end of the Magistrate, which is a peaceable life in all
godliness, is not attainable in an ordinary providence; nor will it help to
say, Paul commands prayers to be made for the Magistrates that were then
heathen, who being ignorant of Christ could confer nothing to godliness, but
merely negatively, that they persecute not the godly for their conscience, nor
permit others to persecute them; We are to pray that Magistrates as
Magistrates, may not only permit, but procure to us that we may live in
godliness.
for Paul will have us to pray for their conversion, that they may become
Christian Magistrates, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and then they
do more then negatively procure peace to the Church; for as Magistrates now
converted, they are to praise and reward, and promote to the dignity of Judges,
men fearing God, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. yea and fearing God, as the Scripture does
describe the fear of God, and so to reward Christian well-doing, Romans 13. 3.
and therefore Christian Kings as Kings are to send such, and to promote them to
bear rule over the people, 2 Pet. 2. 14. That so they may be (...) by the King
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 2.
Nor is it true that Paul will have us in that place, to pray only for heathen
Kings, and that as heathen, (as Libertines suppose) that we may have
negatively peace under them, they being excluded from all exercise of their
Magistraticall office in, or about matters of Religion; for Paul commands us to
pray for Kings and all that are in Authority; and it is clear, some in
authority, and diverse in Neroes court were converted to the Christian faith,
Phil. 1. 13. Phil. 4. 22. Nor is the prayer for Kings to be restricted to the
Kings and Rulers of that present age, when Paul wrote that, but for all Kings
to be converted, and who shall believe and be saved (seeing God will have all
men to be saved) that they may promote godliness in a politic way by their
sword. Hence those that have no more to do to procure a peaceable life in all
godliness by their office, then heathens and pagans, or if they were not in
such an office, yea those who have far less interest in Christian Religion,
then if they did not bear the sword at all, can in no sort be the object of
our prayers to God for the procuring of such a life in all godliness. But the
latter is contrary to the word of truth.

Argument XIII.
THat which is foretold to be a fruit of repentance, and a casting off of the
Antichristian yoke, Rev. The ten Kings as Kings punish the where, and burn her
flesh for her Idolatry.
must be lawful, and praiseworthy, but that the ten Kings who made war with
the Lamb, and agreed for a time to give their Kingdom to the beast, should
now turn their swords, against Babylon, under the notion of a whore, for the
Idolatrous worship and spiritual fornication of Rome, and shall hate the whore
as a whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire, is a fruit of the repentance of the ten Kings, Rev. 17*
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. therefore their turning of the sword against the Pope, the
whore of Rome for their whoredoms, must be lawful and praiseworthy; the
proposition is clear: for if to join in war with the whore against the
Lamb and his followers was a work of the devil, in giving their power and
kingdom to the Beast, when God inclines their hearts to the contrary, and they
join their power with the Lamb against the whore, and destroy her, and make
her naked, and desolate for her whoredoms, it must be a work of the Spirit of
God, and a fruit of the repentance of those Kings; for when they repent and
hate Babylon, the Holy Ghost would not set down their repentance in a work of
cruelty, and bloody persecution for consciences sake, as Li^ertines define
punishing Idolaters to be.

Argument XIV.
THat which the servants of God do in an extraordinary impulsion of the
Spirit, Extraordinary punishing of heretics, no case of the magistrates
neglect, argues that the magistrate ought to punish them.
in the case of the sinful neglect of the lawful Magistrate, or when there is
no Christian Magistrate to do it, that must be the ordinary constant duty of
the Magistrate, especially when that turns away wrath from the Land, and is
taken as acceptable service to God, as if the ordinary Magistrate had done it.
But the extraordinary punishing of those that violate the worship of God, and
pervert the ways of God, and the faith of others, is such, ergo, to punish
such as violate the worship of God, and pervert the faith of others, must be
the ordinary constant duty of the Magistrate. The proposition is evident,
because extraordinary acts necessary to be done supply the want of ordinary
acts, as in moral acts acceptable to God is clear; when the under-Rulers do
not their duty, Phineas is praised, that he being a Priest, not a Judge, slew
Zimri and Cosbey, and Phineas did acceptable service to God in so doing, Number.
25. 11, 12, 13. and Elias in his zeal killed the Priests of Baal, when Achab
the ordinary Magistrate sinfully neglected his duty, and Samuel now being no
Judge, killed Agag, ^^go, it was the duty of Saul as the ordinary Magistrate to
do it. Now in the New Testament it is clear the ordinary officers and porters
should violently have casten out the buyers and sellers, and tables of money
changers out of the Temple, our Savior Christ does it i^ an extraordinary way,
and it was the zeal of the house of God that moved him, Ps. 69. 9. Job. 2. So
Armanias and Sapheira lied to the Holy Ghost, and defrauded the Church in a
matter of goods, therefore Peter struck them dead, then if there had been a
Christian Magistrate, he should have inflicted bodily punishment upon Annanias
and Saphira; so Paul strikes Eli^^^ with blindness for attempting to pervert
the faith of Sergius Paulus, ergo, the Magistrate, if there had been any to
procure a quiet life in all godliness to the Church, should have punished
Elimas, and this is evident in acts of justice and sinful omissions of men in
ordinary places; nor were these acts extraordinary in the substance of the act
(as I have observed) but only in regard of the efficient and manner of doing,
though there be required an extraordinary impulsion in the doer, which in
others in place, should be ordinary; for acts extraordinary in the manner and
exigence of providence, may be in the substance of the act ordinary duties, and
to neglect them, is to sin against a set command, if David and his followers,
had refused to eat the Shewbread, because the Law made it lawful to none to
eat it but Priests, they had sinned against Commandments of mercy, enjoined in
the Law of nature, nor was that an extraordinary rule, I will have mercy and
not sacrifice; when the Law of nature, for the good of spiritual societies,
requires that the godly Magistrate drive away the Wolves and Lions from the
flock, we may see a positive command is not necessary.

CHAP. XIX. Exemption of false Prophets from coer^ive power, is not Christian
liberty.
Argument XV.
THat doctrine is not to be held which makes that a part of Christian liberty,
This liberty of conscience is not Christian liberty.
which the word of God makes no part at all thereof: For 1. If there be no
bodily punishment to be inflicted on false teachers and blasphemers, then must
Christ by his blood repeal^ all those Law^^ in the Old Testament; but the
Scripture shows us all our parts of Christian liberty in these places of
Scripture, Tit^ ^. 14. Romans 14. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Gal. 3. 13. Gal. 1. 4. Gal.
1. 13. Act 26. 18. Romans 6. 14. Romans 8. 28 Ps. 119. 71. 1 Cor. 15. 54* 55, 56,
57. Romans 8. 1. Gal. 5. 1. 1. Job. 4. 18. Act. 15. 10. 11. Heb. 4. 14. 16. Heb.
10. 19, 20, 21, 22. Col. 2. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 3. 13. 17. 1^. (...). Romans 14. 4.
Act. 4. 9. Act. 5. 29. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Math. 23, 8, 9, 10. Maith. 15. 9. and
elsewhere* in all which places nothing (...) hinted of the false teachers
patent under the seal of the blood of the eternal Covenant, that he is freed
from the Magistrates sword, though he destroy millions of souls.

2. Where the common place of subjection due to Kings and governors sent by
them, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 12, 13, 14. is han^led, etc. freedom to sin, and
consequently freedom to heresies, and teaching and spreading of false
doctrines that eat as a gangreen, and is no less a work of the flesh then
adultery, murders, witchcrafts, Gal. 5. 19. 10, 11, 12, ^^ judged false,
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, as if Christi^ns were so made free by
Christ, as subjects were loosed from subjection to Kings, and servants from
being buffeted for ill-doing, 1 Pet. 2. 16. if some ill-doers, and the worst of
men, even soule-murtherers be freed from punishment due to ill-doers, 1 Pet. 2.
13. and that by a writ under the hand of the Mediator of the new Covenant,
thieves, robbers, murderers, adulterers, which be innocent, if compared with
false teachers and grievous wolves, may claim the same liberty to the flesh:
for why should freedom to one sin, and with immunity from the Magistrates
sword be fathered on a charter sealed with Christ's blood, and not freedom to
all sins?

3. The end of Christ's redemption is, that we should use our freedom for no
license to the flesh, but as bought from bondage to sin. If the conscience be
immediately now under the New Testament subject to God only, and free from all
Commandments of Ministers, Church-Magistrates, who are to command according to
the word of God, and if notwithstanding of that, yet the practical conscience,
which should be the principal of all the moral actions of a Christian in the
duties of the second Table, as touching the life, chastity, goods, name, and
good report of our neighbor, must be forced, if subject to the lawful
commands of superiors, all men may do to God and men, and destroy, and kill,
and steal, as well as blaspheme and seduce souls, and the Magistrate have
nothing to do with them, let Anabaptists deny to pay tithes, or to pay
soldiers for wars, kill innocent men upon the ground of immediate raptures,
A speculative conscience no more freed from the magistrate then a practical
conscience.
rob, and steal, because the just shall inherit the earth, deny and belie
Christ and Religion before men, as Familists now teach, for Libertines must
give a reason why Christ has freed a speculative conscience, as touching all
acts of the first Table from the Magistrate, and his Jedbrugh-slaves, but has
left as innocent a conscience, to wit, the practical conscience as concerning
the second Table, which is as free in the Court of the Almighty, under the
compulsion and bondage of the sword, and ha^^ not taken in all consciences in
the same charter.

Argument XVI.
CHrist has left the consciences of false teachers and heretics under
Ecclesiastical censures of admonitions, rebukes, Ecclesiastical censures as
compulsory as the sword.
excommunication, so as those that hold the doctrine of Balaam and Jez^bel, and
such as call themselves Apostles and are not, and grievous wolves must not be
suffered, Rev. 2. 1, 2. v. 13, 14. v. 20. Tit. 1. 13. Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17,
18. Act. 20. 28, 29, 30. and these do no more act upon the consciences of men
by way of teaching, but by way of punishment, then the sword of the Magistrate
does, and they are as compulsory as the sword for this threatening ( if yet
still pervert the right ways of the Lord, and teach false doctrine, then must
ye be casten out of the Church, delivered to Satan, branded and shamed as
ravening wolves, soxes, wasting the stocks and the vineyard) this (I say) does
as much in way of compelling, as the weapon of iron and steel, yea and in the
New Testament, heretics are to be no less compelled then under the Old
Testament (though Libertines most ignorantly talk of compelling of consciences
and forcing of men to opinion^) for we are to reject and avoid the company of
heretics, and to put them to shame and reproach, not to eat with an Idolater,
nor to lodge in our houses, him that brings another Gospel, Tit. 3. 10. Romans
16. 17. 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 1. Cor 5. 11. 12. because of the public
scandalls, by which the souls of others are infected, and their faith (...)
What soever makes the name of God to be ^vill-spoke^^ (...) and all damnable
heresies, which bring swift (...), and by which men make merchandise of souls,
these we are charged to avoid, and these the whole Church should censure, and
should far more avoid.

CHAP. XX. The parable of the Wheat and the Tares, discussed and cleared.
NOw for the parable of the Tares and the Wheat, Remonstrantes Apo. 24. fol.
278. No^ d^^^^teor parabolam hanc (de zizani^s) de beretici, non direct agere.
Matthew. 13. The Author of the Apology of the Belgicke Arminians says, I deny
not but the parable of the Tares is not meant directly of Heretics.

The scope of the parable has nothing to do with the office of Magistrates,
in punishing or not punishing heretics, but tends to moderate the too
forward zeal of the Disciples, The scope of the pa^^ble of the tares, and the
vindication thereof.
and of all the godly that are inclined to murmr at providence that suffers
wicked men to flourish and live with the godly, and that they are not cut off
before the day of judgment, so does the godly complain and stumble at this
dispensation, Job 21. Jer. 12. 1, 2. Psalm. 73. 1, 2, 3. etc.

1. Christ forbids not simply to pluck up the tares, but only secundum quid,
in a case, when there is danger to pluck up the wheat with the tares, as in
punishing a multitude or a whole society.

2. Christ expounding the Parable, passes that part of it, best while ye
pluck up the tares, ye pluck up the wheat also, and that part of the parable
that Christ expounds not, when he expounds all the rest, must belong
nothing to the scope of the parable; and we can conclude solidly no
controverted point from every limb, joint, or wing of a parable; nor was it
Christ's scope to show that Magistrates should punish none of the children of
the wicked one, because of the danger of cutting off the children of the
Kingdom with them, for the words may bear (says Calvin) then, that all
punishments and censures, both Civil and Ecclesiasticke rebukes, and
excommunication, should cease till the end of the world, and so also says
Bullinger; and the truth is, if the danger of erring in taking wheat for tares,
or punishing the good and innocent, in place of the guilty, The danger of
punishing the innocent in due of the guilty through mistak is no argument that
heretics should not be punished by the Magistrate.
should hinder Rulers to punish such as are hardly known to be guilty, we
should not so much as rebuke one another, til the day of judgment, for there
is danger in sinning, if we rebuk an innocent man in liew of a guilty man or
that the Magistrate kill an innocent man inplace of a Murderer, for the danger
in sinning in the least, is as good ground of abstaining from a duty, as in
sining in the greatest, and therefore this new point of Divinity, that the
Magistrate should punish no false Prophets or Seducers, but let them al grow
til the day of judgment, for fear that he punish or put to death a faithful
teacher in liew of a false seducer, as Luther following some of the fathers
teaches, is so far from being in this text, that it is not a truth contained
in all the Old or New Testament. Yea, it is openly false, for then should we
not avoid and turn away from Idolaters and Heretics contrary to 1 Cor. ^. 11.
Tit. 3. 10. Romans 16. 17. But live and converse with them to the end of the
world, because we may take some to be Heretics who are no such thing, but
sound in the faith then our selves show me a warrant for such an untruth, that
we are to do no duties till the day of judgment, for fear of sinful
miscarriages in the manner of doing them.

3 By the tares, Christ understands all the children of the devil, ver. 38. and
those are the tares gathered and burnt in the fire, ver. 40. all things that
offend, and they which do iniquity, ver. 41. That shall be casten into a
furnace of fire, where there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. 42. and
they are such as are opposed to the righteous, who shall shine (...) the sun
in the Kingdom of their Father. Now 1. The righteous that shall shine in
heaven, are not the sonnd in the faith, only opposed to heretics, except we
say none shall be casten in the furnace but heretics. 2. Heretics are
innocent men (say Libertines) and not doers of iniquity, as the ^ares are
called, v. 41. 3. Nor are heretics the only children of the devil, ver. 38.
And the ill seed sown by the envious man; and the only seed of Satan, if
the field be the Church, if we would believe Libertines, as it is not, but
exponed by one Savior to be the world, ver. 38. Yet the false teachers would
be but the least part of the visible Church, in comparison of the ignorants,
the Atheists, the murderers, adulterers, and so not able to come up to
complete the visible Church as a company of good and bad, The Tares are not
meant of heretics but of all the wicked who shall be burnt with unquenchable
fire
that is, of heretics and true teachers, for these would not make the quarter
of the Church, yet Christ makes all the Church of wheat and tares.

4 Since the tares are all that work iniquity, it shall follow that the
Magistrate, by express command of God, is to suffer all the children of the
wicked one, and all that work iniquity, all adulterers, sorcerers, paricides,
murderers, perjured persons, traitors, robbers, thieves, and all evil doers
punishable by the Magistrate (for sure all these as well as heretics, are such
as offend and work in iniquity in this Kingdom) to grow and live till the end
of the world, then sure the Magistrate may go hunt Goats and hang up his sword.

5 If we sift every grain of the text, we must say that the Magistrate makes a
doubt, Lord, shall I draw the sword against bloody men and traitors? And the
Pastors and Church, shall we cast out the leaven that leaveneth the whole lump?
and how carnal must they imagine the Lord to be, Calvinus in Math. 13. Non
quemlibet rig^rem cessare sub^^ Christus, sed (...).
who first went on a way of forcing the consciences of men, and converting men
by the bloody sword, and rooted out wheat and tares in the old Testament, and
now is become a little more just and meek, and will have the consciences of
none to be forced, but all to grow to harvest? Whereas the Rulers and Pastors
make no such question; but the godly wonder at a providence in God, not in
Magistrates, that good and il should grow together. But God rebukes men's
carnal ^eale that murmr at his longanimity, that he throws not all the
wicked in hell fire, long before the harvest, and burns not chafe ere ever it
grow to blade; and makes not harvest, ere summer be well begun.

6 The danger that Libertines fancy to be in killing Heretics, is the taking
them away being elect, before they be converted, which is as strong against
divine providence, that appoints the Magistrate to kill the murderer without
respect of persons, not considering whether he be converted ye^ or not, to do
justice is the Magistrates duty, election and reprobation, are secrets that
belong to the Lord.

Nor does Min^^ Celsus promo^^ their cause by saying, the tares must signify
false doctrine, as in the f^rmer parable* an which this depends, the seed is
the word of God, and Christ was sent in preach the Gospel, Heb. 1. 1. to tell
us all things, John 4. 2^. a guide and leader of the people, the councellor,
Esaias 9. 6. in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.
3. Christ was no lawgiver, and when he speaks of the conversations of men
and their manners, that is not from his chief office, which is to be a Prophet,
then ill seed must be bad doctrine.

Answ. The Parable of the Tares, and of the Sower most distinct Parables in
matter, and scope.
Reduce this to an argument and it shall run mad. 1. What the seed
signifies in the former parable, that it signifies here. I deny the
proposition, the scopes of the parable are different. In the former the ground
is the heart of men, but here the Ground is the World. 2. In the former, Christ
expones the seed to be the Word: Here he expones it to be the children of
the Kingdom, and of the wicked one. 3. In the former there are not two seeds,
good and ill, and two births, but rather four, the wayside-men, the
thorny-men, the rocky-men, the good and fruiteful-hearers, and here there be
but two seeds, the seed of wheat and of tares. 4. The scope of the former is
to show who hear fruitfully the Gospel, who not, this has no such scope, but
to compose our rashness in quarrelling with God that he suffers the wicked to
have the benefit of the soil, hedge, sun, rain, dew, with the godly, and to
live until harvest.

2 He says, that which was Christ's principal work, the preaching of the word
of the Kingdom, that must be meant here by the seed, and wheat. It is a false
proposition, and a connection of hay and sand. 2. Christ came to save the lost,
to give his life a ransom for many. Ergo, by this argument the good seed
should hold forth the redeemed of God. 2. The assumption is false, to wit, that
Christ came to be a King, yea, and as principally to be a Priest, to offer
himself for the sins of the world, to give his life for his sheep, and goats
must rather be meant by Wheat and Tares then any other thing.

3 By this argument Christ should propons no Parables, but all must aim at
good seed and doctrine, what say we then of the parable of the five Talents?
The thief in the night? Of the letting out of the Vineyard to those that
killed the serv^^ts, and the heir, and brought forth ill fruit? And many
other parables respecting our Christian conversation, and sober and vigilant
walking, rather then the doctrine of the Gospel, though that be the rule of
all Christian walking.

And (says he) by our sense, if the tares signify all wicked men, then must
all robbers and murderers escape the bands of the Magistrate, for the Lord
bids, let them grow till the harvest,

Answ. let them grow not exponed by Christ and what it mean^^h.
Then must no blasphemer, not a Julian, nor any that should teach there is no
God, ^ee rooted out of the Church and State, for we say pulling up is not
necessary to be meant precizely of killing, but rather of any punishing.

2 That, Let them grow till the Harvest, (say we) is neither a charge nor a
command given to Magistrate or Church, touching censures to be inflicted by
men: For Christ expones no where, let them grow, to any such meaning,
Libertines yield that sense, and Calvin undeniably inferres by this all
censures of Magistrate or Pastors are cut off and casten over till the day of
judgment, both the word in rebuking or excommunicating, and so Ecclesiastical
plucking up, and the sword must go and sleep: but the sense of [let them grow]
is, Why do ye quarrel at the wisdom and providence of the Lord of the field,
that he suffers the children of the devil to flourish? and whereas the
servants say, 28. will thou then that we go and ^ather them up? It is a
parable, and this part not being exponed can yield no new doctrine, and the
most can be, is, Lord give us a providence of our own, and a power not to
leave one son of that wicked one in the earth (and we shall make a clean field
to our Lord) rather then suffer them thus to suffocate and corrupt the wheat.
The Lords answer is, I have ordained rather then such a providence be committed
to you, that the ^ares should grow till harvest; though the Lord have appointed
a way how to purge leaven out of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 1. Mat. 1^. 15, 16. and
how evil doers shall be ^ut off, Romans 13. though not in so strict and accurate
a way as we dream, who would not have one thistle in our Lords field. Yea,
would not suffer one sin to be in the world (as we dream) if we could hinder
it, though God sees a permitting providence to be more glorious.

But (says Celsus) if the Lord understand by tares, What is understood by
Tares.
thefts, adulteries, robberies, extortion, he would not have used the metaphor
of tares, but of briars, thorns, nettles, hemlocks, or the like, th^^ are
easily discerned from wheat whereas tares are like wheat.

Answ. We will not take on us to teach our Savior to speak, we answer, The
Lord understands, whatever wickedness cannot be punished without ^^rt to the
godly, and that heretics and Idolaters may be known by ordinary Christians,
as well as robbers and thieves, by Magistrates, the Holy Ghost teaches when he
hiddeth us not eat with them, Heresy may be known.
but reject and avoid them, and judge them accursed, Gal. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 11.
and forbids us to receive them into our house, Tit. 3. 10. 2 Jo^. 10. Now if
they cannot be discerned, he should bid us eat, converse with them* lodge
them* bless them, till the harvest come* and also thieves and robbers are as
undiscernable under the notion of thieves, so are murderers, adulterers,
plotters of treason; for all these have such shifts and coverings, that it is
hard for the Judge to pluck them up, and as hard in the matter of fact, and
more, then to know who are heretics: now heresy is known to be a work of
the flesh, no less then witchcraft, but to find out who is the heretic and
what is heresy, the Holy Ghost supposes it to be feazeable, else he could not
bid us avoid them, and judge them accursed, but by this exposition, because
there is danger, that we judge them* accursed whom God has blessed, private
Christians should no more judge them cursed the^ public Magistrates, but both
should lodge them in their hearts, in the state, in their houses, bless them
till the harvest. Yea and Minus Celsus, and other Libertines speak against the
Holy Ghost, so why shall ye judge a false teacher, and a heretic to be
accursed* should you reject and avoid him, and deny him lodging* for he is not
a thief, a robber, or a murderer* nor sins he against the light of nature,
nor is he seduced by Satan, but to be pitied, yea he is innocent and godly,
and so pious, that ere he sin against the word and his own conscience, he
had rather be forsaken cast out of our houses* and so not to be rebuked,
contrary to Tit. ^. 13.

Celsus, What is meant by plucking up
by plucking up must be meant killing as an her be withers, when plucked up by
the roots, but when one is excommunicated, be dies not.

Answ. Plucking up is a metaphor, and when an heretic is pulled out of the
gates and courts of the Lords house, the Church of God* and casten out of the
society of the godly, and cursed by them, Gal. 1. 8. and they pray against him,
and in faith avoid him, and ^^l fellowship with him, he must Ecclesiastically
dye and wither (if Gods ordinance be not blessed to recover him) and plucking
up is as well a removing of him out of that condition and place, as any other
thing.

By the field, What is meant by the field, what by the Wheat.
Christ understands the world. Celsus says, the whole is put for the part, the
world in which that seed of the word of the Gospel is sown, and that is the
Church, for the Gospel is but heard in a small part of the world. But when did
Christ sow the good seed of the Gospel first? happily when Christ himself
first preached the Gospel: or rather when the old impostor Satan first
dece^^ed our first parents, but if so, then the Serpent did not immediately
after ^ow tares, for they were long ago sown, and the ^eed was then grown
into range growing corn, and there was no need of his ^owing, but of his
further manuring of it, but this seed is sown, with every new act of preaching
of the Gospel: so this parable cannot agree to the parable of the draw-net, in
which there be both good and ill fish; now good and ill fish had their first
breeding in the water, since the beginning: not agrees it, for the same cause,
with the parable of wheat and cha^^e, which has ever been in the world,
whereas the tares are sown upon a new occasion of preaching the Gospel.

Answ. There be nothing here but vain and forced conjectures, Christ expounds
the wheat of the children of the Kingdom. Celsus of the doctrine of the Gospel
Christ makes the field the world Celsus makes the field the Church, and when he
has fancied these dreams, contrary to Christ's exposition, he goes to the
time, when the Gospel was first preached; which has nothing to do with the
text; for when God made men good, Satan came and sowed tares, and corrupted
men, and turned them into Apostates from God. And ever, since the beginning in
the world, there has been a mixture of cha^^e and corn, fishes good and bad,
and of the children of God and children of Satan, and the Saints must let both
grow till harvest, that is, they must not stumble nor murmr at God, but
submit to his wisdom, who will have this mixture till the last separation of
men for heaven, and the barn of the great husbandman, for hell and the
furnace, in which all things that offend are casten.

2. All the tithes of the Parable must be not expounded, nor the time exactly
searched into, when the Tares were first sown.
For the time of sowing wheat and tares, it has been from the beginning since
there was a field, that is a world, and the parable that speaks of sowing
wheat, and the envious man's sowing of tares immediately after, is but borrowed
from men, as the sleeping of a husbandman, which may as soon prove, that he
that watches over Israel does both slumber and sleep, and that the sowing of
tares, and of the sons of Satan in the world, is as much without the
foreknowledge, counsel, and providence of God, as the husbandman is ignorant
of his enemies sowing of tares in his field, when he is in a deep sleep as it
may (if all the joints of the text be thus squeezed to blood) it can prove that
heretics are to be tolerated, and that only tares are sown, when the
husbandman sleeps, in regard that Satan sowes wicked men and corrupts them,
beside and against the decree and irresistible will of God, nor does the text
bear that with every new sowing of wheat, there goes the immediate sowing of
heresies and tares, which though it may have a truth in it, yet it has no
ground from this text, and Celsus shall never prove it, nor any Libertine for
him.

Celsus, If long ago the City into which a false Prophet fled was to be burnt
with fire, cattle, and all, and if Angels killed many thousands at once, why
does not God by Angels now kill many, and destroy them, City and cattle? and if
sins under the Gospel be more heinous, and God not a whit meeker to sinners
under the Gospel, then under the Law, and if the punishment of the Magistrate
must grow, as the sins grow more heinous, why? then as false Prophets were but
stoned of old, Papists and others do, well to burn them quick with a slow
fire, for the more light and grace we have under the Gospel, the more ^ainous
the sin is, and the punishment must be more then death now, else Christ's
death has made God milder, not to men, but more severe, and only meeker toward
the walls of the Town; the cattle, the spoil.

Answ. If a Becold fly to Munster, and gather a number of robbers in to him,
How sins are more heinous under the New Testament, and how God (...) now no
less s^v^ (...) under the ^aw, and a City that will defend and protect a false
Prophet against justice, is to be dealt with, the same ways as under the Old
Testament, except that the typ^calnesse is removed.
and upon pretext of conscience kill and destroy, and if that City will join
with him, and defend such bloody heretics, we think under the New Testament
sadder punishment is due to him, because the sin is more heinous, and the
false Prophet so flying to a City, is not only a false Prophet, but a public
robbing murderer. And the punishment should be greater as the Lord augments
punishment for greater sins, as is clear, Heb. 2. 1, 2. so should his deputy
the Magistrate do, and no doubt, the Lord slays millions of more, with the
destroying Angel, of both pestilence and sword now (as manifestly never such
documents of saddest divine vengeance was seen on a City in the Old Testament,
as was to be seen in the City of Jerusalem) by the sword of Titus Vespasian,
because they had slain the heir Christ; but Papists burning of men quick,
because they adhere to the truth of Christ proves nothing, and we think a
Julian now deserves a rougher death at the hands of men then any seducer or
blasphemer under the Old Testament, and how ever, men with their wit think
Servetus got more then heaped justice, because he was burnt for probabilities
and nicities. I doubt not but men void of the zeal of God, if they had lived
when the son of the Egyptian was stoned, and Baals Priests, and the
Idolaters, Exodus 32. (who both acknowledged Jehovah that brought them out of
Egypt, and the Scriptures and ten Commandments) which then were killed, would
say the same, and many did say the same very thing of these, that they say now
of wicked Servetus, but they but judge of sin, and measure divine justice
with their own yard.

2. God was severer then, in some Laws, to things, and to men also, as in
commanding the cattle, and women with child to be put to the edge of the
sword, because he would both give a document of moral justice for our
imitation, and of typicalnesse of Justice, for our instruction; but in the
kind of moral justice (for all typicalnesse is now ceased) the Lord is
severer under the Gospel, then under the Law, as is evident, Mal. 4. 1, 2.
Heb. 2. 1, 2. Luke 23. 28, 29, 30. and no less jealous of his own glory now
then at that time, and his wrath rages against walls, and houses, and
senseless creatures more now then at that time, see what desolation he has
wrought in Ireland, what eating of horses, of Infants, and of killed soldiers,
has been in that land, and in Germany? And what vengeance shall lie upon the
stones, fields, of Romish Babylon? and this shall be done by lawful
Magistrates, Kings, and others, Rev. 17. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. God did then deal
more rigidly with a people whom he purposed to compel to fly to Christ. But
that his mercy ebbes or flows, increases or decreaseth with the Moon, is new
divinity. And it is true, God was more severe under the Old Testament in regard
of typical severity, commanded by God to Magistrates, as to Saul, to kill the
Amal^kites, women and sucking children, but in regard of justice inflicted by
himself, the impression of hell is more to be seen in destroying Towns that
have been swallowed up by earthquake, men, women and children in extremity of
famine, pestilence and bloody wars now, then under the Old Testament.

And clear it is, as in this Parable, the Lord will not have us to murmr,
that the godly and wicked grow together, so he will have us to know there
cannot be an exact purging of the visible Church until the day of judgment
come. Acontius, and Celsus answer 1. But so he forbids to purge the Church
universal, but if men shall be so diligent in purging all particular Churches,
what else should they do but contravene the command of God, who forbids to
pluck up the tares? 2. The Lord forbids the plucking up, in either universal
or particular Churches, because this is a general command, let them grow till
harvest.

Answ. What (let them grow) imports.
We constantly deny that ( let them grow) is a command at all, but only an
inhibition to us that we quarrel not with God who suffers them to grow, and
yet it follows not that Magistrates and Pastors sin in doing their duty so
far to pluck them out, as the wheat be not also plucked up; for as we are
not to fret and impatiently grudge at the permissive will and providence of
God, How we are to bear permissive providence wherein evils of sin fall out.
in that he permits tares to grow, so we may, without sin, both pray the
contrary of that which the permissive will ordaines to be done, and labor to
do the contrary, and yet not sin, the Disciples were not to grudge and fret at
that decree of God, when they heard Christ say, I will smite the shepherd, and
the sheep of the flock shall be scattered, yet were they to pray the contrary,
as Christ commanded them, that they might not be led into temptation, and that
they might never fulfill that permissive will of God in being scandalized at
his suffering, and in leaving and forsaking their Lord and Master and denying
him, when it was their duty not to be scattered, and not to forsake him out of
fear, but to confess and give a testimony before men. Upon the same ground
Magistrates and Pastors should do their duty, not to suffer all the tares still
to grow among the wheat, and not to permit wicked men to blaspheme, murder,
betray, and destroy the Saints, and the innocent among which they live, but
according to their places they are to punish, and hinder and impede the growing
of tares, but withal they are not impatiently to grudge and censure
providence, but to let them alone, that is, to let God alone, and suffer him in
that admirable disposal of affairs though wicked men be not fully purged out
of Church and State till harvest, and here is an argument to me that by the
tares, Christ must not mean corrupt doctrines, but wicked men, for it is a
frigid and vain interpretation to ascribe to our Savior, such a sense that he
must suffer heresies, till the harvest, Christ must mean by Tares and Wheat,
persons, not doctrines, good and ill
and when the harvest is come, he must send his Angels to gather heresies,
and bind them in a bundle and cast them into hell, and so must he gather sound
doctrines, upon the same ground, and send them to heaven, whereas the words
clearly bear that they be persons that do offend and work inquity that the
Lord thus judges at the end of the world; nor is the conceit of Celsus of
worth that by a figure he understands by tares heretics that are horn of
corrupt doctrine; for then Celsus shall first have no ground from the former
Parable to expound the seed to be the word, and the tares to be corrupt
doctrine, for then these words a certain s^wer went to sow seed, and as he
sowed some fell by the side, must have this sense, if Celsus make this parable
to agree with that in the signification of the word seed, that the preacher of
the Gospel went forth to sow seed, that is to sow true and false teachers, and
some seed, that is some false teachers fell upon the (...) side, etc. which is
nonsense.

2 It is against the justice of God, Minus Celsus.
that Heretics, since they but simply err, and are innocent, holy, and so
fear God, that they had rather suffer torment and burning quick, and are
commiseratione digni (as say the Belgic Arminians, Celsus, and other
Libertines) should be for mere innocence and godliness gathered by the Angels,
in the harvest of the world, and casten into the fire and furnace of
everlasting vengeance: I grant out of imitation of the fathers, and
particularly of Augustine, who retracted his opinion touching heretics, and
the coercing of them: Divines use this expression, hereseon zizania, tares of
heresy, but aluding to, rather then expounding the parable.

Celsus fol. 52. 53 Magistrates correcting faults, do not purge the Church of
tares, but punish the hai^ous crimes of wicked men, and though ill doers repent
and confess their error, yet the Magistrates do punish, but if heretics
abjure their false doctrine, the Magistrate pardons them.

Answ. Nor do we expound the field to be the Church, with Celsus, but like
better to follow our Savior who expounds it to be the world, and so the
Magistrates punishes societies.

2 Nor is it inconvenient that the Churches nurse-father purge the Church in a
politic way, as his place may bear.

3 It is true, some crimes as murder, the Magistrates punish with death, and
is to accept of no satisfaction, Number. 35. 30. 31. because the taking away lif^
It among things that cannot be repaired, Whether false teachers if they repent
must be spared, or because they may repent.
but it is not universally true in all cases, that the Magistrate is not to
forgive, if the guilty man repent. And though we could not determine that case
of conscience, whether the Magistrate should punish a blasphemer and a false
teacher if he repent, yet it follows not that he should not be punished who
wilfully goes on. And the reason why heretics repenting, are to be pardoned
by the Magistrates, is, because obstinatious persisting in an heresies, makes a
man an heretic punishable by death, but if a blasphemer have perverted many
souls, and have presumptuously dishonored the Majesty of God, to me, it is a
question if the Magistrates ought to pardon him, and though he be not put to
death, it is sure he ought by the Magistrate to be punished, which is the thing
we prove now.

Celsus, Tares may be turned into wheat, and converted; if the man be killed
he is gone and past recovery. Minus Celsus ^o. 53.
Heretics does no ill, but good to the wheat, he lives, says Augustine,
that either he may repent, Zizania, Tr^^ico non nocent sed prosunt.
or that a good man may be exercised by him. Some say, variety of opinions in
Religion are expressions of divine wisdom.

Answ. Augustine, Omnis (...), au^dco (...) ut corrigatur, aut, ut per eum bonus
ex^erceatur.
A murderer may be converted, as well as a heretic, and is nearer conversion
then a man of a corrupt mind, and a heretic that is to be rejected, and no
more taught and admonished, as concerning the faith, he is reprobate, Tit. 3.
10. 1 Timothy 3. 5.

2 Nor does he good to a believer, but as a gangreene and a pest to a wholesome
body.

3 And if he do Good, and be an expression of the wisdom of God by being an
heretic, why is he as chafe casten in unquenchable fire? as Libertines
expound the Parable.

4 If he should live that he may exercise the faith and patience of the Saints,
then should not the Kings of the earth burn the flesh of the whore, nor the
Magistrate take vengeance on murderers, for the faith and patience of the
Saints is seen in their oppressions, but no thanks to oppressors if heretics
must not be killed, why did Mu^cer, Becold and our Anabaptists now in arms and
having no enemy, kill all the godly, because they judge them wicked, should
they not be letter grow till the last harvest also?

CHAP. XXI. Of the Samaritans, and of no compelling of Heathens. How the
Covenant binds us.
LIbertines allege, Luke* 9. 51, 52, 53. etc. When Christ by a village of the
Samaritans, was rejected and denied lodging, James and John say, Lord, will thou that we command (...) come down from heaven, and consume them, even as
(...) did? But Christ rebuked them and said, ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of? for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save
them. Min^^ Celsus de hereticcus ^ocrecudis 24.
Then are we to spare the lives of those that refuse the true and sound
doctrine of the Gospel, yea who oppugn it, and to admonish them; Celsus says,
this example is not proposed to compare the Samaritans with heretics, or the
Apostles with the Ministers and the Magistrate, but that the benign and meek
engine of Christ, in matters of Religion, may be clear, and that we should
abhor cruelty, in matters of Religion, for if the Apostles had moved the same
question touching heretics at that time, Christ would have given the same
answer. The Holland Arminians say, if Christ suffered not his Disciples to
conceive a desire of revenge from heaven from the only love and zeal of
Religion against the Samaritans that denied lodging to him, Remonstrantes
Be^g^ci. Apol. c. 24. p. 279.
far less must we believe that he will suffer, that in matters of Religion,
for mere conscience any manifest violence should be exercised; for Christ
says, the spirit that leads you is raging, vehement, fiery, the spirit of my
Disciples is not so. 2. Your spirit seeks to destroy lives, out of a zeal for
Religion, the Spirit of the Son of man is for saving, not for destroying of
men's lives. And this general answer of Christ forbids all cruelty in the
matters of Religion, says Celsus.

Answ. The not burning of the Samaritans does prove nothing for the immunity of
heretics from the sword.
First, the Libertines must prove from this, that the Disciples made Religion
the quarrel, why they would have the Samaritans burnt, and not an inhumane
fact of denying against the Law of nature, an act of hospitality to strangers,
and that because of the envy between the Jews and Samaritans, Christ seeming to
grace Jerusalem, with his presence, then the Samaritans have had a high esteem
of Christ, and were offended that so mighty a Prophet should visit their
hateful enemies this was an act of envy rather then an heterodoxy in the
faith, or opposing the doctrine of the Gospel.

2. The Samaritans were yet in their Idolatry and utterly ignorant of the
Gospel: now we had never a question with Libertines, whether the first thing to
be done to such as will not admit Christ or his messengers within their houses;
and for the first act of refusing to hear the Gospel, before they be
instructed, we are to call for the Magistrates sword to kill them, or for fire
from heaven to destroy them? we think no: we should think this no way of God
to convert them (we plainly say) It is not lawful to us to go with fire and
sword, to force the Indians, Samaritans, or any heathen to embrace the
Christian faith, How s^re we may compel other Nations or ^eathen to embrace
the true faith.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, if they be within our power, we
may restrain them, 1. From spreading their blaspemies to hurt and seduce the
souls of the people of God. 2. We may hinder them from reproaching God or his
son Christ in the hearing of the people of God* as David fought against Goliath,
who blasph^med the (...) God. 3. If they do National injuries, and acts of
hostility, we may raise arms against them, and in these wars in case of
subduing, we may intend the propagating of the Gospel to them, as the Master is
to command and teach his servants, Genesis 18. 18. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. so the victors
having made the subdued people their servants, do now acquire some masterly
power over them to see them instructed in the knowledge of the true God. Nor is
the intention of overcomming in a lawful war, the more unlawful, but rather
more spirituallized by the accession of a spiritual intention to do good to
their souls, whether we may by force take their children from them, and train
them up in the Christian Religion, is disputable, since their condition of
being subdued denudes them not of the natural relation of fathers to sons,
or because in so robbing them of their children, we should but spoil them of
the actual abuse of that paternall right, which is now conveyed to run in a
right channel, to train up young ones in a right way, whereas their parents
would employ it to a wrong end, it would seem no violence to the souls of
young ones, since nothing is done, but by gracious education and instruction.
4. If they join with us in one Religious Covenant, and we swear with our
lives and goods to defend one another, we may cause them stand to the oath of
God they were under. As Asa compelled not only Judah but those of Israel that
fell in to him, to stand to the oath; for the Covenant, when it is mutual,
gives a reciprocation of Rights to each Kingdom over the other, for if he
that makes a promise to another, much more he that swears a Covenant to
another, makes over a right to the other, to plead for the fulfilling thereof,
omnis qui promittit facit jus alteri, cui est facta promissio, ad requirendam
promissi implectionem. This is clear in the King^ covenanting at his
coronation with his people, and the people with the King, in the compacts
between the master and the hired servant, between two merchant^; if thi^ were
not, the nerves of all societies, and lawful confederations between man and
man, nation and nation should be broken. 2. Omne promissum cadit in debitum,
promise becomes debt, and so does a Covenant.

But before I say more of compulsion of heathen, Of the Covenants obliging of
us to the religious observance thereof.
that are without. A word to the wise of forcing within, and of the Covenant,
endeavoring of uniformity, not the Prelaticall in Ceremonies and canonical
obedience, which Familists impute to the Covenant, but Scripturall uniformity
in the same faith and form of wholesome words, and external worship and
ordering of it, which is not indifferent, as Libertines and Familists, who in
this are brethren against Presbyterians, the Authors of their breathing in
England, (but we intended good to men, not to sects) endeavoring of nearest
uniformity in the three Kingdoms, which we did swear is contrary to actual
tollerating of all sects and Religions, but the Sectaries endeavor the latter,
and have compassed it, ergo, the Sectaries are gone contrary to their Oath and
Covenant. The Proposition is evident setting up of all sects and Religions by a
Law-tolleration, is an endeavoring, yea and actual erecting of the widest
multiformity that is, Yea but the Ordinance provides against Antitrinitarians,
Socinians, Papists.

Answ. There is no provision against them, Papists will say Amen to tolerate
them.

2. There is no provision made to try Socinians and Papists whether they be
such or no, but the old way of trying them by the Law removed, and no new one
established, then are they the same way tolerated, that the Familists,
Aminomians, Arminians, Libertines, Enthysiasts, Antiscripturists, Sceptists,
Seekers, are tolerated, who all will acquiesce to the Ordinance, as I
conceive, and within these few years would have rejoiced at less then the
half of it.

A certain Author has written a Treatise called Ancient bonds, Ancient bonds
c. 10. sect. 3. p. 67. 68.
in which there is little antiquity, less (...), no impartiality, much
ignorance, for he neither does, nor can so much as state the question. And he
faith 1. We are to endeavor Reformation of Religion in the three Kingdoms not
simply, but according to the word of God, The word of God as it is in every
man's conscience no rule of Reformation in the Covenant.
the only pattern and regulation of the best Reformed Churches, and of us, we
clip the Covenant of these words.

Answ. The word of God (say the Familists in their Petition to King James an.
1604.) as we understand it. So as Libertines understand it, and according to
their conscience, so the Jews would swear to endeavor a Reformation
according to the word of God in the Old Testament, as they understand it, and
the Papists according to the word of God, as they understand it, to written and
not written, and will the Author dare to look God or men in the face* and say
the words, according to the word of God, is according as every Covenanter
understands the word of God, the Prelaticall man, the Socinian, Arrian,
Familist, Antinomian, Seeker, Separatist, Antiscripturist, Antitrinitarian,
Arminian? for all these did take the Covenant (if we speak de genere
singulorum) or did those that took the Covenant speak or mean that tolleration
of all these Sects and Reformation, and nearest uniformity can consist, or that
he, and all these had this sense underhand of these words ( according to the
word of God) that is, as Socinians, Libertines, Familists, Antinomians, etc.
expound the word of God? If so, we must justify the Jesuits equivocation, and
their oaths with mental reservation, for the sense of Prelaticall men, and of
those that go for Heretics and Schismatickes now as then, The ^quivocation
of Sectaries in swearing the Covenant.
to wit, Socinians, Libertines, Arrians, Familists, and the rest were known
Heretics, and Schismatickes, and their Socinian, Arrian, Familisticall, etc.
sense of the word of God, was excluded in the second Article of the Covenant in
these words, We shall -- endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy --
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, etc. by this Jesuiticall sense, we all swear
we shall endeavor to be perjured, and to reform each man's Religion according
to his own sense of the word, and whereas in former times it was believed that
Christ was God-man. We Familists swear to reform Religion in the three
Kingdoms in that part, and to teach and profess, that every Saint is so
Godded, and Christed, that there is as much of the fullness of the Godhead
dwelling in every Saint as in Christ; so that there be as many Saints* as many
Christ's, and as many Gods manifested in the flesh, as there be Saints, for
since liberty of conscience was then not professed, and was a point holden by
no Reformed Church, yea not by the Church of New England, the best Reformed
Church (as this man says) but detested by all, it was presupposed that the
true sense of the word of God was against it, and Independents who then did
swear the Covenant knew our mind, and did swear the preservation of the
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland in doctrine, worship and discipline
against the common enemy, and they knew Presbyteriall Government approves both
of the censures of the Church and of the Magistrates sword against heretics,
and therefore Turks and Pagans would never have sworn a Covenant to endeavor
uniformity in one Religion according to the word of God, and after petition the
Parliament to set up in England the widest multiformity that Satan can devise,
and say they have sworn to endeavor the nearest uniformity in Religion, and
yet to preach and print, and endeavor by the same Covenant, and the word of
God the rule of sworn Reformation, the widest multiformity, and that the Lord
should be one, and his name one in both Kingdoms, and yet that the Lord be
two, or ten, and his name, that is, the manners and kinds of Religions be two
and twenty, that Gods name may be divided amongst Socinians, Arrians,
Familists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Seekers, Antiscripturists, Libertines,
Scepticks, Enthysiasts, Brownists, Independents^ this is worse then a Popish
implicit faith, which we disclaim.

The other thing (says he) left out, Ancient bonds p. 68.
which yet referres to all, The Covenant is, that he that swears shall by all
lawful ways and means, and according to his place and calling endeavor to
perform the Covenant, v. 13. to bring the Churches to uniformity, and to
extirpate heresy. As for instance, it is the godly Magistrates duty, their
place and calling, to send forth Ministers to the dark places of the land, and
to set up lights to guide men's feet into the ways of truth and peace, and
reclaim them from errors: and he cannot be urged upon his calling to punish or
compel gainesayers. And the Minister is to do it in his place by exhorting,
rebuking, instructing, but he is to go no further, he is not to deliver men up
to judge, and be an executioner.

Answ. The words by all lawful means and ways, which this man puts in
Italian letters, The Author of the Ancient bonds an ignorant prevoricator in
the Covenant.
and says are left out by the Author, whom he refutes, may soon be left out,
for they were never in the Covenant. The man will defend the Covenant, and
apparently has sworn it, but I think he has scarce read it, for these words
are not in the Covenant, let him read again. Turpe est doctori cum culpa
redarnit ipsum.

2 He swears to bring the Churches to nearest uniformity according to his
place, but when this man defends the tolleration of all the sects in England,
Socinians, Arians, Familists, for he writing anno 1645 when above twenty sundry
Religions in England came to the streets, he excepts not one in all his
Treatise, but calls them all the godly party, Saints, Brethren, the Godly, and
ownes them so, in his preface and whole book. He must grant there is no
uniformity in faith, discipline, worship, by the word of God, for if all these
be Saints, Godly, and holy Brethren, they have all one faith, and are saved,
but let him tell me, by the next, if he can answer, whether there is a nearest,
or any uniformity in faith, worship and government, between Presbyterians and
Socinians, Familists, Antinomians, and Seekers, yet this man swears to
endeavor the nearest conjunction and uniformity amongst all the Saints who are
to be tolerated, but let him say, if he has, in this case ingenuity or
learning, what nearest uniformity he knows amongst all these, whether the
Covenant should not obliege a Libertine to endeavor the widest contrariety and
deformity of religious amongst these, and to plead for forbearance of them all
as he expounds it.

3 But we are (says he) to endeavor by all lawful means and ways, the
nearest uniformity among the Churches, and the only lawful way, as he thinks
is not by force, but by rebuking, instructing, exhorting, and by no weapons,
but only by the word of God. But since this Author and all the Nation of
Libertines go upon this principle, Religion is not to be compelled by force,
for we are not infallible, and those whom we force as heretics may be no
heretics, for ought we know, but as sound in the faith as our selves. Then we
have no faith, nor any well-grounded persuasion of the word of God, to refute
them by the word; and we refute them not of faith, but sinfully and
erroniously, Al moral compel^ing of heretics, and refuting of false^teachers
by the wo^d, (...) as unlawful as c^^p^l^ion ^y the sw^rd, according to the
principles of Libertines.
for they may be as sound in the faith, as we our selves, for ought we know,
and this is a strong argument against moral ways of gaining heretics by the
power of the word, for if they may be sound in the faith, and we the heretics,
though we refute them by the word, we may be perverting the right ways of God,
and ^ight against Christ, as Elim^s: for Eli^^s only by moral ways, not by
force or violence labored to pervert the faith of Sergius Paulus, and it is
not apparent that Elimas was persuaded in his conscience, that the Gospel Paul
preached was the truth of God, and so by no means, lawful or unlawful, by
force, or by the word of God, are we to endeavor uniformity, for our
endeavoring is not of faith, nor from the real grounds of the word, but from
mere opinions and conjectures, for it may be (say Libertines) that all those
whom we refute as heretics, be sound in the faith, and we, not they the
heretics, and those whom we refute, are as much obliged in faith to refute
us, as we to refute them. So I see not how Libertines can use so much as moral
compelling of Heretics. For 1. They cannot compel them with the sword to
forsake their heresies, because the sword bearer being fallible knows them
not to be heresies, they may be necessary truths for him. Ergo, because the
Pastor is no more infallible then the Magistrate, the Pastor with certainty of
faith cannot say, thus says the Lord. Jezabel is a false Prophetess,
Hymaeneus and Phyletus depart from the faith, for Jezabel, Hemaeneus and
Philetus may be sound in the faith, and this Pastor, who refuteth them, the
false heretic, for there is no peremptory and imposing decision of any of
these, till the last judgment, since now the infallible Prophets and Apostles
are dead 2. Upon this ground, ye cannot eschew any as a heretic after twice
admonishing him of his here^ie, for ye have no faith, nor divine certainty, it
is an heresy that he holds, it may be you who admonish him are the heretic:
only upon opinion you admonish him. 3, You cannot rebuke any Heretic sharply,
that he may be sound in the faith, for you are not infallible in the bestowing
of the lashings of your tongue on a heretic, more then the Magistrate in
beating him with the sword, and your rebuking of him, may be heretical and
unjust, and he the man sound in the says. 4. Upon the same ground you cannot
admonish and instruct him in faith. Nor, 5. Call the opinion of the Magistrates
coercing of men with the sword for their conscience, a bloody tenet and
persecution of the Saints. Nor, 6. Can you in faith refuse him lodging in your
house, and all your 7. Saying in the pulpit, such a way of Familisme is a way
of heresy, is not resolved in, thus says the Lord, by such a preacher, but
such a preacher so thinks, possibly phancies, that the Lord says such a way
is heresy. And by the same reason what ever pastors preach, especially except
it be two or three fundamentalls which all Christians, Papists, Socinians,
Lutherans, Protestants, Familists, Arminians, Seekers, etc. Is but the dictates
of their own conscience, and so they preach, so they believe, and so they
profess not, because God so says, but because their conscience so dictates to
them. And here is the Libertines Creed, Me thinks Christ died for sinners, the
dead shall be raised, etc. And so Libertines are very Papists in this, and
resolve our faith into the testimony of men, the conjectures of the conscience.
p. ^6. 69.


So he goes on; He expounds uniformity and nearest conjunction, to be absolute
conjunction and identitie. If we be agreed of the same Church Officers with the
reformed Churches, and have cast out the old Usurpers, cashiered the
Common Prayer book, Ceremonies, Alters, Crucifixes (all which we have don by
the Covenant) do we not save our Covenant, though we cast not our Churches into
such Classical provincial, or national forms.

Answ. Nor do we plead for absolute identitie in doctrine, and worship, The
Magistrate is the magistrate cannot send ministers but (...) a compl^sory way.
but endeavor it we ought. But how I pray you does the Magistrate (for that I
had almost forgot) send Ministers to rebuke, exhort and reclaim men from their
errors, but not compel gainesayers? The Magistrate (I am sure) sent not Paul
and Barnabas; it was not so from the beginning, in the Apostilick Church there
were no Parliament-Ministers. But it may be the Author means a political
civil sending of Ministers to extirpate heresies. But be it so, all
Magistraticall sending of Magistrates is a commanding of them by the sword in a
compulsive way, that they go preach against Familisme, Socinianisme,
Arrianisme. But if so, good Sir remember your self, the Magistrate, as the
Magistrate does not request, and morally by the power of the word (for he has
not any such spiritual armor, I conceive, for his warfare) entreat, and say,
good Pastors, I beseech you go preach against Del, Randal, Saltmarsh and other
Familists, and extirpate their heresies; private men so send Pastors, but as a
Magistrate he must say, I command you go preach against these heresies, under
the pain of bearing the vengeance of my sword, now if the Pastors reply, Good
Master Judge, we cannot do that, for we think Familisme a new glorious
discovery of spirit, and Mr. Saltmarsh has beaten out of the Scriptures, new
sparkles of glory and flowings of free grace, Familisme is no heresy. If the
Magistrate notwithstanding by his place and calling send these, and command
them to go and extirpate Familisme, does he not compel the consciences of
these pastors he sends? what do ye then talk of no compelling? for what ever
the Magistrate by his place does command which is lawful, if Ministers or any
other refuse to obey, he may use the sword against them. Ye cannot say, if it
be a matter of conscience he cannot compel them to do it by his place: then
(say I) by his place he cannot command them neither. Beside that, this answer
is, directly against the words of the Covenant, if every man in like manner.
Art. 2. Be to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Heresy and
Schism, in his several places and calings, as the Author says, this referres
to the whole obligation of each person respectively. Then is the Magistrate
according to his place and calling, which is to bear the sword, to compel
with the sword, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Heresy and Schism, and
what has the Author gained by this gloss, which I conceive is the true
gloss? except he mean the Magistrate, as the Magistrate should lay aside his
sword and fall to prayers, requests, obtestations, that heretics would lay
aside their errors and preach sound doctrine, but now he does so pray and
request, not according to his place, as a Magistrate, but according to his
vocation as a Saint and a Christian, which yet crosses the Covenant, and makes
the Parliament not as the supreme Court of Judges to take the Covenant, but as
so many private Christians.

2 If so, the Judges are not in their respective places to take the Covenant,
nor endeavor the extirpation of heresy, because that is against the word of
God, but then by what authority or calling did the Parliament cast out old
Usurpers, the Prelates, casheire the Service book, Ceremonies, Alters and
Crucifixes? Either as a Parliament, and so by the sword: is not here yet the
Prelates conscience squeezed to the blood? is not here highest violence done to
the consciences of high alter men and adorers of crucifixes? Why to them more
then to Famili^s? But if this was done by reque^^, and word^ of butter and oil
from the Parliament and Committee Men, then are Ordinances of Parliament but
mere requests to the Subjects. But it is protestatio con^raria facto.

He adds, if these words (we shall endeavor the extirpation of Schism, p.
(...)
and whatsoever shall be found contrary to ^ound doctrine, etc.) be levelled
only against the Congregational men, it was not fa^re to draw them into a
Covenant to destroy themselves. Its disservice to the State, to spoil the
State of so many Godly and brave men, and seems to be but the birth of that
challenge against these men (to be the Sanballets and Tobia's of this present
work) and is the highest breach of love.

Answ. It is apparent the Congregationall men he means are the Independents,
who would have their Churches gathered out of true Churches. Who will not be
called Schismatics, as if ensis and gladius were not one thing, How
Independents were ensnared by Presbyterians to take the Covenant as the lying
Author says.
then this Author levelled these words against Presbyterians, as the
Schismatics, for where ever one Church is rent from another true Church, one
of the two is the Schismatic Church; sure but the Author will not have
Independents the Schismatics, then was it fair to level these words in the
Covenant against Presbyterians, and draw them in a Covenant to destroy both
their soul and body?

2 The Congregationall men were not drawn, but they came to another Kingdom
with fair words to draw Presbyterians in a Covenant, and said, and swore to
endeavor uniformity, and yet practice this day multiformity of Religions and
have put to the sail, the blood of many gallant men in Scotland, that so they
may buy with their lives, cursed Liberty of Conscience. But will it not be
bitterness in the end?

3. The Author hints at a story that fell out in the Assembly of Divines where
I was witness, Mr. Phi. Nigh having sworn to endeavor the preservation of
Presbyterian government in the Covenant, was pleased in the face of the
Assembly in the hearing of that renowned General of England, for the time, the
Earl of Essex, and many other honorable and noble persons, to declaime
against Presbyteriall government, as formidable to States and free Kingdoms,
as of old some called Jerusalem the rebellious City, and the Prelates the same
way burdened the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, but Mr. Alexander
Henderson, a man for piety, learning, prudency and singular moderation, from
zeal, not from the spirit of gall and wormwood, as the Author slanderously
speaks, said they were the words of Tobiah and Sanballet, to hinder the work
of Reformation; now whether that worthy man spoke what has now come to pass,
let the godly Divines of the Assembly be judge.

4. We know no service to the State done by these men, but that they set up
with the sword all the blasphemous and heretical Sects and Religions that Th.
Muncer or John of Leydon phancied contrary to the oath of God, for they all
professed they were for the Covenant, many of them did swear it, with what
conscience to perfome, let Crumwel and others speak, God will not be mocked,
which is such disservice to the State of England as cannot but draw down from
heaven the vengeance of the Lord, and the vengeance of his Temple upon the
land; or was it fair when the Congregationall men did hide their conclusion of
liberty of conscience, would keep that intended Idol in the bottom of their
heart, and join in Covenant with Presbyterians, and swear against
multiformity of Religions in words, known to be contrary to the sense of those
who drew up the Covenant, contrary to sense and reason, and the same words of
the Covenant, and now obtrude on us multiformity for uniformity.

5. The Author insinuates as much, as not to give them liberty of conscience,
as a reward of their valorous fighting, is disservice to the State. But
ingenuous workmen speak of their wages, before they engage in the work, but to
keep up any word of liberty of conscience until the work be ended, and it
come to disbanding, is no fair bargaining, but rather in plain English, either
sell to us Law, Liberties, Religion, and give them to us beside our arreares,
or we must be a perpetual standing Army to govern England, and manage
Religion with the sword, and to set up all Religions, and destroy the Covenant
and the Protestant faith, Page 70, 71.
and live upon the sweat of other men's brows.

The Covenant with a fair interpretation may be urged against Presbyterians,
and for the Congregationall way, as well as otherwise. The Covenant binds no
man, nor number of men to State or Church for their parts respectively, to any
pattern or degree of Reformation, conformity or uniformity with other Churches,
but what shall satisfactorily to them and each of their consciences, appear to
be according to the word of God; and such a Reformation do the Congregationall
men desire, pray, preach, endeavovr for and after, in the pursuance of the
Covenant, as if there had been no such outward Covenant obliging them, would
ye have men driven in droves to the Sacrament still, and the precious and the
vile mixed? and Idol-shepheards suffered? and Bishops Courts, and Consistories
continued? had these been beaten down, had not we under God, as a forlorn
hope first given them battle? how can ye say, we hinder Reformation? when we
are for a further and purer Reformation (your selves being judges?) you would
^it down on this side Jordan, we would advance? Si^ you quiet, if you will not
help us, as we helped you.

Answ. When you of the Congregationall way, that is, of the Church way (for
none are Churches but you, we are excommunicated, and all else but your selves)
did swear to endeavor the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church
of Scotland in doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, which to your
consciences, and all the Reformed Churches is Presbyterian, can the Covenant be
turned against Presbyterians, as well as against you?

2. You write and preach that the government Presbyterian, is Popish,
Antichristian, more tyrannical then that of Babel, of Egypt, so all your way,
and particularly Mr. Burton in his conformities deformity, and your
Independents in the Assembly, yet you did swear to endeavor its preservation,
and all the Independents in both Houses spoke against it as tyrannical, and
have voted to clog it with Erastianisme, I would believe Erastus, How
Independents swear to defend the Presbyterian government, and with tong^^, pen,
sword, cry out at it, as Tyrannical, Antichristian, and Popish.
if he had sworn to endeavor the preservation of it, better then your oath. I
think Pagans would not swear to endeavor the preservation of any religious
way which with tongue, pen, laws, and sword, they endeavor to undo and
extirpate* see if distinctions will defend it against the common enemy, and
whether these words, according to the word of God expounded by you, will save
you from the quarrel and wrath of God for a broken Covenant? Pass over the
Isles, and go to Turkey, to America, and see if such a thing as this has been?

2. The Covenant binds no man (says he) to any degree of Reformation, but
what shall satisfactorily appear to each man's conscience to be according to
the word of God. 1. Then the Reformed Religion in Scotland, in doctrine,
worship, and government according to the word of God, appeared once
satisfactorily to your conscience to be according to the word of God, for you
took the Covenant, yet ye say it is Antichristian, it drives men in droves to
the Sacrament, it is the Bishops Courts and Consistories continued. But ye did
swear to endeavor the preservation of their Reformed Religion according to
the word of God the only rule. But if it was sworn to as the Reformed
Religion, was it not according to the word of God? is it reformed, and not
according to the word of God? or was these words according to the word of God;
A condition, insinuating what is in the doctrine and discipline of the Reformed
Religion of that Church? not according to the word of God, to that you did not
swear. But so if the Turk should come and wage war against Papists for
their Religion, and a heathen people that maintains there be more Gods then
one, and that the Old Testament is not the word of God, should raise Arms
against the Jews, you might as well swear you should defend the doctrine of
the Church of Rome, and the Religion of the Jews against the Turk, and those
heathen people according to the word of God; for sure these fundamentalls that
Jews and Papists hold in doctrine are according to the word of God, and so you
did swear no otherwise to defend the Reformed Religion of the Church of
Scotland then that of the Church of England, before these troubles arose for
that ye swore to defend in so far as it agrees with ^^e word of God, yea so ye
did swear to defend any Religion of any Nation you never heard of, according
to the word of God, if you say, But we knew the Reformed Religion of the Church
of Scotland, therefore ye might swear to it, but ye know not all the
Religions of any Nation you never heard of. But if so, then ye knew the
Reformed Religion of Scotland to be according to the word of God, then it
appeared satisfactorily to your conscience so to be. But did their
fundamentalls against Familists, Antiscripturists, Socinians, Arrians, so
appear to your conscience to be according to the word of God, and their
Antichristian and tyrannical Presbyteries, that are but, as you say,
Episcopal Courts and Consistories appear to be so, and that satisfactorily to
your consciences? if so, why judge ye Familists, Socinians, such as deny the
Trinity, and such as make all the Saints to be Christ, and Godded with the
indwelling fullness of God, to be Gods manife^^ed in the flesh, to be Saints,
brethren, the godly party to be indulged? then you must question the
fundamentalls of the doctrine of Scotland* and they did not satisfactorily
appear to your conscience to be according to the word of God. And why did you
simply without any limitation swear to endeavor the preservation of the
Reformed Religion? you should have said, truly Reformed Religion of the Church
of Scotland; and why did you swear simply to the doctrine, worship, discipline
and government of the Church according to the word of God? when ye knew then,
as now, their government was Antichristian, and not according to the word of
God? and their doctrine even in fundamentalls not so sure but Socinians,
Arrians, and the Saints your brethren the Familists may hold the contrary, and
be tolerated as Saints, and their doctrine, though opposite in fundamentalls
to ours, may be as satisfactory truths to your conscience as ours of Scotland.
Confess and glorify God, you swear the Covenant in a Jesuiticall reserved
sense, kept up in your mind, as you insinuate page 66, 67. and such as the
words cannot bear. Libertines make conscience, not the word of God their rule.


3. There is here a new Trick put on the Covenant, it binds to no truth but
what shall appear satisfactorily to the conscience of each swearer to be
according to the word of God. If a Merchant promise and swear to a simple man
to give him for such wares an hundred pounds, So Remo^strantes in vindici^s
Apol. l. 2. c. 6. 135, 136. nominem, post quam acceptavit decretum, ( this
Author, post quam accepta^it ^uramentum) ten^ri illo diutius* quam ea ^^ge
qua^enus and qu^ndin ipse i^ co (...) sua judica illud esse ^erum.
he gives him but an hundred pounds Scotch, whereas the wares are to the man as
dear as an hundred pounds Starling, is the Merchant absolved of his oath and
promise, if he pay him but an hundred pounds Scotch? and say, it appears
satisfactorily to my Antinomian conscience the (...) of no more value then a
hundred pound Scotch, and my oath and promise obliges me to no more then
satisfactorily appears to my conscience the only rule of my obligation, to
be according to equity and justice, and so you are fully paid with an hundred
pounds Scotch.

So this Author absolves us from all oaths and covenants, though we swear not
to kill a captive taken in war, and swear to adhere to the fundamentalls
that there is one God, Christ is the one only Mediator, God and man,
consubstantiall with the father, yet if after you have talked with Sa^marsh, or
put your faith in the power of the sophismes o^ a cunning Jesuit, he makes it
satisfactorily appear to your conscience that it is according to the word of
God that the captive ^e killed, ^e is a murderer, and there be as many
Mediators, as there be Saints in heaven, and as many Christ's Godded with the
fullness of the Godhead, as there be Saints of the family of love, and so your
oath to your fundamentalls obliges you not; and you are guilty of no per^ury
though first you swear to the necessary truths of God, and now ye turn
apostate from both faith and oath. Libertines infuse such a magic in your
erroneous conscience that it is your only rule, and displaceth the Law of
nature from all obligation, or the word of God the only rule of faith and
manners, you are tied no longer by the oath of God, then your
weather-cock-conscience, How appearing to the conscience makes not the word of
God to be the obliging rule, but only as touching the right and due manner of
being obliged thereby.
with this new Moon, has catched a new light, you are as if there had been no
such outward Covenant obliging you, take it upon the word of this Gamaliel,
dormii securd in utramque aurem. But though it be true, nothing does oblige,
but it must appear to be according to the word of God, that it may oblige in
the right and due manner and way, yet it is most false that it obliges, as it
shall appear, or qua^^nus, because it does appear to the conscience to be the
word of God, for a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia. Then every thing
obliges, as it appears to be the word of God to the conscience most erroneous,
then are some obliged to murder the innocent Apostles; for it appears
satisfactorily to their conscience to be the word of God, and service to God so
to do, Joh. 16. 1. and some are obliged to sacrifice their sons to God, though
they did vow and covenant the contrary in Baptism, for it appears
satisfactorily to their conscience, it is according to the example of Abraham,
to offer their sons to God, except God from heaven forbid them as he did
Abraham.

5. To Libertines no Covenants nor Oaths of the most lawful things lays on
any more obligation to performance, then if these Oaths had never been made, if
the erroneous conscience gainsay.

6. You did know the discipline of the Church of Scotland debars not all from
the Sacrament, except known unregenerate persons; ye knew their Consistories
to be hateful to the common enemies, why then did you swear to defend them
against the commmon enemy, since both to your conscience and the common enemy
they are contrary to the word of God.

7. You durst not give the first battle to Bishops, Scotland gave it to them,
when your Grandees were as low as shrubs, as feared as Hearts.

8. You hinder Reformation, your Independents wrought with all their power,
there should be no Assembly, and that no old non-conformists, such as sound and
learned Mr. Ruthband, gracious and zealous Mr. Ash, and others, to be members
thereof, and would rather have had Prelaticall Conformists in the Assembly then
they. You join with all the Sectaries, who are against Covenant, Government,
Confession of faith, and Directory of worship, retarded the proceedings of the
Assembly; we heard often in Scotland* you wished Prelacie were gone, if ye knew
what to put in its place, as if no Government known to you could fit England
but Prelacy, and that of the Reformed Churches were not so good.

9. You would go further on then we, and be over Jordan, but we had rather sit
down on this side of Jordan, as go over with you, for ye was not well over,
when ye set up at the Kings house Idolatrous bowing to Altars, and the abjured
Masse-booke, and Familists, Socinians, Antinomians, Seekers, Arrians, preaching
Soldiers, who teach as many Saints, as many Christ's and Gods manifested in the
flesh, and when these perverters of the right ways of God were silenced by a
godly Preacher at London, they prayed woe with learning, it opposes all the
ways of God; and is that a Reformation on the other side of Jordan, which
sends out Apostles to preach that are as blind as Moles in the principles of
the single Catechism, who know not whether there bee-one God, and one Mediator
Christ, or millions of Gods and Christ's, yet these are the only a^ointed ones.
It were good that such a Reformation were over Jordan, and millions of miles
beyond America.

CHAP. XXII. The pretended Liberty of Conscience is against the National
League and Covenant, and the Ordinances of the Parliament of England engaged by
Oath for a Reformation of Religion.
A Midst our greatest fears, and the enlarged sorrows of our heart, for the
calamitous condition of our dear brethren in England, by reason of an
unnatural war raised by a Prelaticall, popish and malignant party, tending
to the destruction of the Kingdom, subversion of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, we exceedingly rejoiced, when the Lord mighty in counsel* did lay
in Sion the foundation of a hopeful building* and stirred up the spirits of
the Honorable Houses of Parliament to declare to the Commissioners of the
General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland their sense of Church government,
Return to the Commiss. of the Genesis Assemb. of Scotland, an. 1642. p. 5.
by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. to be dishonorable to God, by arrogating to
themselves a pre^^minence and power which he had not given, justly offensive to
the Kingdom, a great impediment to the growth of Religion, and promising to
remove the same, desired for the obtaining of a^ happy union with the Church of
Scotland, Return of the Parliament of England to the Com. p. ^ 6.
and other Reformed Churches abroad, the General Assembly to send to the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, some godly and learned Divines of that
Church, whereby an uniformity in form of Church government might be obtained,
and t^ereby a more easy passage made to the settling of one confession of
faith, one Liturgy or Directory of public worship, and one Catechism, in
all the three Kingdoms, and when for our faith fullness to our brethren in
sending an Army to England to help them, the enemy had wasted our land, and we
were given for lost, and filled with the cup of astonishment, of waters of gall
and wormwood, in our greatest midnight darkness* it was to us the morning
dawning of the flourishing condition of the Isle of Britain, when we did reap
first fruits of that blessed union of both Kingdoms by that National Covenant
with the Lord the most high, and of the three Kingdoms amongst themselves,
never to be forgotten, and when we received the Directory for the public
worship of God throughout the three Kingdoms, Anno 1644.
passed in Ordinance of Parliament in each Kingdom.

But now we are stricken with amazement exceedingly, when we reap no other
fruit of our expense of blood, wastation of our Kingdom, attendance on this
Assembly four years, but in stead of the nearest uniformity of the Churches of
God in the three Kingdoms, in Religion, Confession of faith, form of Church
government, Directory for worship and catechizing, a far more capacious and
wide deformity in all these then there was before our taking of the Covenant,
yea or since Christian Religion came first into this Island.

When we see a licentious tolleration in one of the three Kingdoms of all
forms and ways of serving God established by Law, and no limitation nor
bordering provided to hedge in the fleshly and lawless exorbitances of men,
whose apprehensions and phancies of the one only true God in three distinct
persons, and of his revealed will in his word, are now by nature vain,
superstitious, Idolatrous, blasphemous, impure, and devilish, save only a
poor, narrow, and dubious circle of some few fundamentalls that may be, and
are by men of corrupt minds changed in lies and blasphemies.

We therefore the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland according to the trust
committed to us, are necessitated in the name of Jesus Christ the only King
and head of his Church, and at the commandment, and in the name of the Kirk
of Scotland to protest, and by these presents do protest and declare against
the said pretended tolleration as follows.

1 Such liberty, is inconsistent with, and repugnant to the word of God, Deuteronomy.
13. 1, 2, 3* to ver. 12. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, compared with Phil. 3. 2. 2 John 10.
where false teachers are c^^^ed evil doers, so Ezra 7. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
Ne^em. 13. 15. 17. 21, 22. 25. 30. 2 Chronicles. 34. ver. 33, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13.
16, 17. 2 Kings 23. 5, 6. 9. 20, 21. Dan. 3. 29. Dan. 6. 26. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
Revel. 17. 12, 16, 17. Zach. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Esaias 49. 23. Exodus 20. 8, 9,
10, 11. Levit. 20. 2* 6. Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3, etc. Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28, 29. Numb.
25. 1, 2, 3, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 18, 19, to ver. 22. Josh. 22. 10, 11, etc.

2 God severely avengeth and plagueth breach of Covenant, either with the Lord
himself, or men. We therefore appeal to the righteous Judge of the whole
earth whose dreadful name is engaged in this Covenant.

Nor can we imagine that this Covenant is temporary, for we swear to continue
in this blessed union all the days of our life zealously and constantly. The
pretended liberty is contrary to the National Covenant
Nor has the Lord instamped his divine Image of making just Laws upon any
nomethetick power of the most free and Independent Kingdom on earth, so as the
breach of lawful promises, Covenants, Contracts, which are against the Law of
God, of nature, of nations, should, or can be the subject matter of any
nomethetick power, for God gives no power to make unjust decrees.

The pretended liberty is against the Articles, matte^, and ends of the
Covenant, a Parliamentary power interposed for the not punishing of deformity
as touching many Religions, must destroy the commanded nearest uniformity of
the one only true Religion.

2 Nor can they defend the one only reformed Religion of Scotland commanding
the Magistrate, the Minister of God to use the sword against false teachers,
who give liberty to all Religions.

3 Nor can the word of God be our rule of Reformation, except this rule be
one, and injoyne one only true Religion, and forbid tolleration of all others.

4 There can be no way so prevailing to promote, cherish and foment Heresy,
and what is contrary to sound doctrine, as for public authority by law to
permit it, except we would (praise, and reward such fleshly ways).

5 The Lord cannot be one, nor his name one in both Kingdoms, when by Law,
multitudes of names, ways and Religions are tolerated.

6 Many Religions suffered, must be contrary to the true religious liberty of
Christian States and Churches, when men are licenced to profess slavery and
bondage, to the efficacy and power of error to believe, profess, and
disseminate lies and blasphemies in the name of the Lord.

7 Many false ways of religions, does in the Scripture argue a change of Gods,
for these that are no Gods, which Heathens do abhor, Jer. 2. 9, 10, 11. and
a multiplying of Gods, according to the number of each Sect and Society, Jer.
2. 28. and a manifest countenancing of Scepticisme, of many Gods, and of no
God, since then the Parliament not only as Christian men, but as a Parliament,
and as Magistrates have sworn the Covenant; they must swear each one of them
to defend his own Religion, Familisme, Arrianisme, Antinomianisme, which he
believes to be the true religion, and that as a Magistrate with the sword of
God, and so to oppose his fellow members with his Parliamentary power, how then
can the Parliament command others, or engage themselves to the Lord their God
to endeavor the preservation of the one reformed Religion in Scotland, that we
and our posterity may live in faith and love (for this is many faiths
professedly different) and that the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of
us, and this is many Gods in the midst of us: and that we shall endeavor the
extirpation of heresy, superstition, prorpanenesse -- and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound doctrine? It is not every Parliament man, who by law,
may be of any Religion, obliged by the oath of God to endeavor the
extirpation of the true Protestant Religion, since to him who is a Familist and
Antinomian, it is heresy and contrary to sound doctrine? Are not Papists
though known Papists, to be Judges, and Members of Parliament? why should they
be debarred for their Religion? and they must by this oath endeavor the
extirpation of Heresies, and Heretics, that is, of Protestan^s.

8 The foresaid licentiousness is contrary to the endeavor to preserve the
Rights, Liberties of Parliaments, and just power and greatness of the King,
now both King, Parliaments, and all Rulers have the sword committed to them to
defend the Church against Seducers, Wolves, Heretics, false Teachers: and by
the sword are to stand against the violation of mercy, righteousness, and the
peace of human societies* and so against such, as from mere grounds of
conscience serve God in sacrificing their children to God, promiscuous use of
wives, a part of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, community of
goods; robing the just owners of their inheritances and possessions, because
the word says, the meek shall inherit the earth: lying and denying of our
Religion before men. For should the Magistrate kill the father whose only
conscience, nothatred (which is the only essential ingredient, to make killing
of our neighbor without lawful authority, that murdering of our brother,
which by the law of God and Man, is punishable with death, Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12,
13. c. 4. 42. c. 19. 4. and the sword of the Magistrate) not any hatred (I say)
or desire of revenge toward his son, whom he loves as tenderly as Abraham
did Isaac, presses out of mere religious obedience to God to offer his son
to God in a sacrifice, he should not punish a murderer, but offer violence to
the conscience of his father; since the word of God condemns this as false
worship, not as murder, yea, as superstitious adding to the Word, and as
will worship, Deu. 4. 31, 32. Jer, 7. 30, 31.

9 Diverse Religions being contrary to Christ, and the one truth of the Gospel,
of their own nature raise fire and sword between, brethren, and the mother
against the daughter in law, and must be a seminary of factions, and devisions,
which is distructive to the unity in our Covenant Micah 7. 5, 6. Matthew. 10. 34,
35. Luke 5. Verse. 51, 52. Genesis 3 16.

10 By which it cannot be possible we should defend one another in this common
cause of Religion, except a reconciliation be made between the seed of the
woman and the serpent.

11 And many being of diverse Religions, must need give themselves to a
detestable indifferency and newtrality, as touching the Common cause of God.
Since it cannot be the common cause of God, but of Satan, and of forcing
conscience by persecution to them. Many men, yea, its the cause of God to many,
to hate and persecute the Gospel by this.

12 By which means every man may resile from this blessed union and
conjunction, so far must he be from zealous and constant continuing therein all
the days of his life, for Parliamentary authority frees them to embrace any
new Religion, contrary to the Protestant Religion.

13 And to what Church, Sect, or Religious society can the Christian
Magistrate be a nurse-father by his office? is it not to the one, only true
Church of Christ, that professes the sound faith? certain the Scripture
says, as the sons of strangers shall build the walls of the true Church, so
Kings shall minister unto her, Esaias 60. 10. And she must suck the breasts of
Kings, Esaias 6. 16. which evinceth, that Kings, as Kings are by their Office to
do some princely and royal acts of justice and favor for the good of the
true Church, and true Religion: then must either the King by Office be
indifferent and newtrall to all other Religions and Sects, which must be
inconsistent with his duty, as nurse-father to the Church, Esaias 49. 23. whose
part it is, that according to his place he take care that the children suck
not poison for milk; or he must be newtrall to all Religions except to the
only true Religion, though he himself be an Arrian, or Socinian, or of
opinion that all Religions are to be tolerated by the Christian Magistrate, in
which regard, it would seem, such are not capable to be Magistrates in a
Christian society.

14 Nor can the Magistrate promote Reformation against all lets and
impediments, No not heresy, which is a work of the flesh; if both he may
take, and give license to all under him to profess what ever way shall seem
good to the dictates of an erronio^s conscience.

15 No Church can endeavor, according to our Covenant, for the power and
purity of Religion, if any Jezabel, any that shall seduce and tempt the flock
or any of them to Idolatry, or abominable* Heresies, or make defection to
Judaisme, to Familisme, which denies, as the Antichrist does, that Christ is
come into the flesh, if they purge not out such leaven, and withdraw not from
them, and deny not to them lodging, as the word of God teaches us, Revel. 2.
14. 20, 21, 22. Tit. 3. 10. Romans 16: v. 17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15. 2 Timothy 3.
1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8. Tit. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 5, 6, 11, 12. 2 John 10.

16. Nor can we give a more public scandal and just offense to the best
Reformed Churches, with whom we are to endeavor the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion, then to cry against both their doctrine and constant
practice in that they teach a necessity of both Civil and Ecclesiastical
censures against ravenous wolves who spare not the flock, and cease not, with
Elimas the Sorcerer, to pervert the right ways of the Lord.

17. And we dare appeal to the consciences of our brethren in England, when we
did willingly enter in the Covenant of God, to dye and live, sink and swim,
give our lives with, and for them in this common cause of God, if they did not
conceive our downeright and ingenuous sense and meaning of the Covenant to be
against all such pretended liberty of Conscience, for which cause sundry of
them joining with us as friends, yet did refuse to take the Covenant, or if by
the liberties of the Kingdoms, or the true public liberty, or any like word,
they did understand liberty of professing Socinianisme, Prolacy, Popery,
Familisme, Heresy, or any thing contrary to sound doctrine; or if they did
believe their brethren, who in the simplicity of their hearts did rather choose
to suffer affliction with the people of God, then enjoy their own pleasures
and peace for a season, or that the honorable Honses had any such sense, when
in the return of the Parliament of England, p. 6, 7. in their Letters and
Declarations, they invited us to join in Covenant to endeavor an uniformity of
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline with them, which sen^e, if any had, (for we
shall believe the honorable Honses, invited not us to ruin our selves, and
the Reformed Religion with any such argument) shall not the Lord search out
such double equivocation, and juggling in the sacred Oath and Covenant of God?
nor does the word of God evidence to the consciences of men, that there be some
few fundamentalls, in which Arrians, Familists, Socinians, Seekers, Arminians,
Anabaptists, etc. agree, and that the Magistrate is to punish such as profess
and teach false doctrine in these, but in all these other points that border
with these fundamentalls, both magistrates and Church are to leave men to their
own conscience to waste and destroy souls as they think good, without any
control, except in such smooth rebukes as Eli gave to his sons, or exposing
of the word of truth to mockery, after admonition an heretic is not to be
instructed at all by the word, nor do we, by our doctrine more make the sword
of the Magistrate a spiritual means as touching men's consciences, by which
they are converted to the sound faith, as concerning the duties of the first
Table and doctrine of the Gospel, because the Magistrate punishes false
teachers, then Libertines do make it a spiritual way of converting souls
from murders, rapes, sodomies, robbery, lying, to a sound conversation, in
matters of the second Table, who do hold that the Magistrate bears the sword
for punishing of murderers, adulterers, and such as fail against the second
Table; for in either the sword has no spiritual influence on the conscience,
nor is it any thing an ordinance of God for converting of heretics, but to
hinder perverting of the right ways of God, and for our external right
walking as touching the outward man in all the duties of both Tables, that we
hurt not one another in civil societies. Petition to the King, inviting him to
return to his Parliam. D^^laration from the Paul. (...) to the state of
Scotland by mr. ^ickri^ 1642.


This new liberty destroys all that the Parliament has done, said, suffered;
for the Hononourable Houses do profess before the everliving God, the safety
of Religion, Laws, and liberties to be the chief end of all their counsels
and resolutions; also that Scotland had lovingly invited them to a nearer and
higher degree of union in matters of Religion and Church Government, which we (
say they) most willingly embrace and intend to pursue.

The Honorable Houses declare, Petition to the King, 1643. (...). 11.
they have for the just and necessary defense of the Protestant Religion, his
Majesty's person, Crown, Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland when they
came into England in their second expedition to join in the cause for Religion
and the Covenant.
etc. taken up Arms, and appointed and authorized Robert Earl of Essex to be
Captain General. The same was the end of the Kingdom of Scotland. Now can it
be dreamed that the end of either Kingdoms, united by Covenant and compact in
this war, was to spend lives and fortunes, for liberty or license to many
Religions? or can any say but the intent of the Houses at that time was to
oppose, never to countenance, and tolerate (as now professedly they do)
Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, Antinomians, Socinians, Arrians, Seekers,
and Libertines, who are for all Religions? should not we have had bowels of
iron, if in charity, we had not believed our brethrens words, Treaty between
England and Scotland.
oaths, pro^essions?

The Honorable Houses engage the whole Kingdom of England to take the
Covenant by their Commissioners in a Treaty betwixt the two Kingdoms, which
Treaty was ratified in the Parliament of England, and both Kingdoms agree that
no means was thought so expedient to accomplish and strengthen the union, as
for both Nations to enter into a solemn League and Covenant, and a form
thereof drawn and presented to the Convention of Estates, and General
Assembly of Scotland, and the two Houses of the Parliament of England, and has
accordingly been done, and received their respective approbation; and

I. Ordinance of both Houses 1643.
Proposition, It is agreed and concluded that the Covenant presented to the
Convention of Estates and General Assembly of Scotland, Die Lunae 13. Septem.
and sent to both Houses of the Parliament of England to their brethren of
Scotland, and allowed by the Committee of Estates, Appoved by the Assembly of
Divines at Westmin. 64* Septem. 15.
and Commissioners of the General Assembly be swor^^ and subscribed by both
Kingdoms, (...) most (...) and conjunction betwixt them, for their mutual
defense, against the Papist and Prelaticall faction, and their adherents in
both Kingdoms, and for pursuance of the ends expressed in the said Covenant.

II. That an Army (of the Kingdom of Scotland) shall be levied forthwith, etc.
Which Treaty is approved by each Parliament respectively, and by the Parliament
of England, 1643. Novem. 1. Now what ever power the Parliament of England has
in relation to England to alter, make and unmake Laws as shall seem most fit
to the wisdom of the Houses, yet they neither have nor can have power against
the Law of nature and Nations, to alter, retract or break their promise,
agreement, faith, and contract made with another Kingdom, so that both
Kingdoms bind their own hands that they cannot but command the Covenant to
be taken by each Kingdom, not by the Representative Kingdom or Parliament,
only but by the collective or diffusive body of both Kingdoms, in regard that
the (...) not between the Parliaments only, Mr. Phillip Nigh his exhortation
before he read the Covenant which was taken by the Parliament of England, and
Assembly a^no 1643. Dec^. 25. at Margarets Church.
but between the Kingdoms, nor can the Houses think it lawful at that time
to offer violence to the consciences of some, (which some now say is to force
them to do against the present judgment and light of conscience) and
unlawful at this time to press others, for this is a Covenant (as one faith
well) that is never to be forgotten by us nor our posterity. -- And the
parties engaging in this League are three Kingdoms, famous for the knowledge
and acknowledgement of Christ above all Kingdoms of the world, that this
Covenant ties us to defend one another, beside the words thereof, the former
Author says, God has wisdom to discover, and strength to punish, if our
hearts he not upright to our brethren in this matter. So do the Houses say, Our
purpose is to consult with godly and learned Divines, mr. Nigh p. 20. Return
from the Parliament of England to the Commission. of the General Assembly anno
1642.
that so we may not only remove governments by Archbishops, but likewise settle
such a government as may be most agreeable to Gods holy word, most apt to
procure and preserve the peace of the Church at home, and a happy union with
the Church of Scotland, and other Reformed Churches abroad, and establish the
same by Law, In the Treaty between the Kingdoms, an. 1642. the Scottish Army
shall grant no tolleration for the Popish Religion.

The Honorable Houses must intend a quite other thing then pretended liberty,
when they according as they are obliged by the Treaty of both Kingdoms pass
an Ordinance that the Covenant be taken throughout the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, Ordinance of Lords and Commons an. 1643. Feb. 2.
and their names to be returned to the Houses, who shall refuse. And an
Exhortation is framed by the Assembly for taking the Covenant, which was
approved by the Houses, and Printed by a special Ordinance, to wit, Ordinance
of Parlam. 1643. Feb. 9.
That no faithful English heart be afraid to join with our Brethren of all
the three Kingdoms in this solemn League, as sometime the men of Israel
(although under another King) did with the men of Judah at the invitation of
Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 30. -- And as Ezra and Nehemiah, Ezra 10. Neh. 9. drew all
the people into a Covenant without any special commission from the Persian
Monarchs (then their Sovereignes) so to do, The Declaration of both Kingdoms
an no. 1643. p. 15. p. 7, 8, 9, 10
albeit they were not free Subjects but Vassals. And the two Kingdoms jointly
declare that not only Papists, and Popish Recusants, and Irish Rebels that are
actually in Arms against the Parliament, shall look for no favor, but be
punished as Traitors, but also all Newtralists, all the ignorant and simple
that were seduced, or compelled to take Arms, all of the Scottish Nation
misled through private respects, all dividers between the King and his
Parliament, if they would expect pardon and favor, should speedily take the
Covenant, and join heartily and really in the defense of this Cause. Nor can
the examples of Ezra, Nehemiah and Hezekiah be good Divinity then, and bad now,
or the plea of not forcing the conscience be then weak, but now strong, except
we dream that Parliaments by a Nemothetick power can alter divine truths;
Declaration to the Genesis Assembly Aug. 1642.
which we are unwilling to believe of the Parliament of England.

Such a tolleration must thwart and cross the professed sincere intentions of
the Honorable Houses for uniformity and the advancement of true Religion,
Letters of the Assembly of Divines and commissioners of the Church of Scotland,
to the Belgik, French, Helvetian and other reformed Churches, an. 1644.
out of which there will also undoubtedly result, a most firm and stable union
between the Kingdoms, and contrary to that proposed end of the Covenant, and
of all our travels for Reformation, which the Assembly of Divines testified at
the special command of the House of Commons assembled in Parliament to be aimed
at by both Kingdoms in this defencive war, in letters sent to the reformed
Churches abroad in France, Helvetia, Geneva. Wallacria, etc. (what a letter
most contradicent to that might they now write? We endeavor (making the word
our rule) the nearest conformity to the best reformed Churches and u^iformity
in all the Churches of the three Kingdoms.
) whereas this tolleration must be the sad scandalizing and sorrow of all
Reformed Churches in the Christian world, the joy and triumph of Papists, the
mocking and dispising of the ways of Christ, to Heathens within, to Atheists
round about, the sadning of all the godly, the condemning of our former ways,
as acts of apostasy from God, and rebellion and dis-loyalty to our Prince.

The Houses also declare, if his Majesty had not, denied his consent to a Bill
for an Assembly of Divines, Decla. after the battle of Kenton.
they had long since manifested to the world their utter dislike of Brownisme
and Anabaptisme. As also, Remon. of the Parl.
that it is far from their desire and intentions to let loose the reins of
Discipline and Church Government, and to let private persons, and particular
Congregations take up what form of worship they please, Decla. of the
Parliament of Scotland, ^642. Nov 7 Parliaments Decla. given by their
Commissio* Aug. 1643.
but do hold it requisite there should be through the whole Realm, a
conformity to that order which the law injoynes according to the word of God.

We was invited, to be instruments of a glorious Reformation for a nearer
union in Church Government against the common enemy in the Cause of God.

The Commissioners of England say, the Parliament desires a nearer conjunction
in form of Church Government, Directory, Confession and Catechism,
Commission. papers to the convention of States in Scotland.
and utter extirpation of Prelacie the most effectual and ready means,
whereunto is now conceived to be the stricter union and league between the
Nations, and our assistance of England by an Army.

It rejoiced the hearts of the Godly in the three Kingdoms, Ord. of Parl.
1644, J^n. 3
when the Houses passed an Ordinance for the directory of public worship, to
be used in all the three Kingdoms, and laid aside the book of
Common Prayers, and burdensome Ceremonies upon a resolution professed to the
world, according to the Covenant to reform Religion according to the word of
God, Sal^m. Spark of glory p. 287. 292. 243, 244. Del ser. before the house of
Commons, p. 7, 8. 19. 22.
and the example of the best reformed Churches, which was accordingly approved
and ratified in the Parliament of Scotland, if we then turn back again from
that begun uniformity, what do we also but pull down and destroy what we
have builded? Especially since uniformity, which we swear to endeavor in our
Covenant, is cried down by Familists, and Antinomians, and all external
worship and profession of Christ before men, as indifferent, and all Religion
retrinched into only things of the mind and heart, upon a dream that the
written word of God is not our rule oblieging us, but an inward law in the mind
beyond, all ordinances, Ordin. 1645 Octo. 20.
must regulate us now under the Gospel.

The Honorable Houses in rules and directions for suspending from the Lords
supper, Ordina. 1645 march. 14.
enumerating most of the fundamentals, do by diverse Ordinances evidence they
are by law to be punished, who profess or teach contrary to these.

And in rules for trying of Ministers before they be ordained (though thousands
now are constant Preachers without any ordination at all) the Minister must be
one that is able to defend the Orthodox doctrine contained in the Scriptures (
as the Scripture says, And an Ord. 1646 Aug. 28. Ordinance of Parl. 1645
March, 14.
1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11.) against all unsound and erroneous opinions,
Ordinance of Parl. 1645. Nov. 9.
especially those of the present age, such as these, of Arrians, Socinians,
Arminians, Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, Antinomians, Libertines, Seekers,
etc. Where the Houses mention the great duty lying on them, to settle matters
concerning Religion, and the worship of Almighty God, and have continually
before their eyes the Covenant, which they have so solemnly taken, and in
pursuance of the ends of the Covenant -- have removed the book of
Common Prayer with all its unnecessary and burdensome Ceremonies, and have
established the directory in the room thereof, and have abolished the
Prelaticall hierarchy by Archbishops Bishops, and instead thereof have laid
the foundation of a Presbyterian Government in every Congregation, with
subordination to Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies, and of them
all to the Parliament.

Both Houses of Parliament, Propositions of peace sent to the King to Newcastle
an. 1646 July 15. and now again 1647 Sep. Ordinan. 1646 feb. 4.
and the Parliament of Scotland, agree that the Kings Majesty take, or at least
approve and ratify the Covenant, and that all the Subjects of either Kingdoms
swear it. What then shall become of the Covenant? shall it not be buried, if a
law pass it shall be voluntary to men to take it, or not to take it.

The Honorable Houses ordain, That any preaching or writing, or maintaining
such errors as do subvert any Articles of the true Protestant Religion, shall
be excluded from the Lords Supper, and in case of refusal to compear before the
Eldership, or obstinate persisting in the error shall be imprisoned by the
Justice of peace, till he submit to order.

The Houses give thanks to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, that
the Lords of privy Council do so far respect the welfare and peace of
England that they are pleased to second the desires of the General Assembly of
that Church for unity in Religion, and uniformity in Church Government in his
Majesty's three Kingdoms. We cannot think the Honorable Houses would pass
an Ordinance for an universal Fast through all the Kingdom to seek
assistance from God to suppress Heresies and Errors, except the whole land be
enjoined to take the name of God in vain, Ordinance 1646. Feb. 4.
if it were not the will and mind of the Houses to detest liberty of
conscience, especially since in the Ordinance, they mention the wonderful
assistance of God since their engagement in the Covenant, in which they are to
endeavor sincerely, really, and constantly the Reformation of Religion in
doctrine, discipline and worship, and the extirpation of Popery, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to
sound Doctrine, -- And that they are resolved to improve the utmost of their
power, that nothing be said or done against the truth, but for the truth. Now
by the utmost of their power they must mean their Parliamentary power of the
sword committed to them as the Ministers of God; for that is their utmost and
highest power, otherwise all private men are to improve the utmost of their
power for the truth.

In the Ordinance for Reforming of the University of Oxford, Ordinance 1647.
Man 1.
the Honorable Houses ordain to punish those that take not the Covenant, or
oppose the execution of the Ordinances of Parliament concerning the Discipline
and Directory.

The Honorable House of Commons say, their true and real intentions are, and
endeavors shall be to settle Religion in the purity thereof according to the
Covenant. Declaration of the House of Commons 1646. April 18.
Nor can the Parliament loose men from the oath of God, nor put any exposition
on the Covenant, other then the words naturally hold forth, nor can any one
Parliament obtrude any Law interpretation of the Covenant on the subjects
different from the true sense and genuine meaning conceived by the Parliament
of the other Kingdom, since it is not the Covenant of any one single Kingdom,
nor can we say without mocking of God, and dallying with the oath of God, that
the Covenant was conceived in any such doubtsome, equivocall and two faced
sense, so as each Kingdom may swear it according to their own sense, and the
one sense for, or not against the pretended liberty of conscience, the other
for it.

And both Kingdoms esteem the end of the Wars, Declaration of both Kingdoms
1643.
an abundant reward of all that we can do or suffer in this cause, to settle
Religion, and we have resolved and decreed never to lay down Arms, until
truth and peace be settled in this Island upon a firm foundation for the
present and future generations. Then what ever Kingdom shall resyle from the
Covenant to a detestable liberty of all pretended truths, as they break with
God, so must they break with men, seeing the two Kingdoms are mutually and
reciprocally engaged to one another in the means and the end, and they must
look that the righteous God shall avenge breach of Covenant, and such
apostacy from his truth, with the saddest and heaviest of judgments that we
or our fathers have heard of, the rumor whereof shall cause our ears to
tingle.

The Honorable Houses profess an union in doctrine, Return to the Commiss.
of the Genesis Assem p. 4.
discipline, and worship, to be a more strong bulwark against the bloody
practices of Papist, and deceitful errors of other Sectaries, and more
profitable use of the Ministry. Other Sectaries can be no other then such as
swarm and abound in the Army and Kingdom.

And this diversity of Religions by tolleration utterly weakens, Declaration
after the battle at Kenton.
yea and dissolveth the blessed union between the Kingdoms: For the Houses
say, Religion cannot be altered in the one Kingdom without the other,
Declaration of both Kingdoms an. 1643 Return from the Parl. to the privy
Council of Scotland, 1643.
and the Lord would not have put it in the hearts of both Kingdoms, if he had
been minded to destroy us. They acknowledge that Religion is the band and
foundation of the safety and happiness of both Kingdoms. When therefore God
suffers it to enter into our hearts to break our Covenant with God and our
Brethren, the Lord has a mind to disquiet the inhabitants of England,
Confession of faith, c. 20. s. 4. c. 23. s. 4.
so as the fierce anger of the Lord and his jealousy must smoke against them
as fire.

The Reverend Assembly of Divines give their sense of this pretended liberty to
be against the will and mind of God in his word.

FINIS.
CHAP. XXIII. The place Acts 5. v. 34. to wit, the counsel of Gamaliel,
discussed, and found nothing for liberty of Conscience.
THe most of the strength of Master John Goodwins Argument, stands thus,
Theomachia, ser. 2. 11. This doctrine, or way, is either of men or of God
(says Gamaliel.) If it he of men, you shall not need to repress it, for it
will of it self come to naught; which he proves by the instances of Judas and
Theudas. If it be of God, it is in vain to strive against it, for it must
prevail, and the counsel of Heaven must stand; for then ye run the hazard of
fighting against God, and incurring the displeasure of the Romans, by whose
courtesy and mere grace you have the liberty of capital punishments.

The Grounds that Master Goodwin lays down, are, Gamaliel at this time was a
convert, Mr. Goodwins unsound gloss touching the counsel of Gamaliel, Acts 5.
and took on him the patrociny of the Apostles.

2. His reasoning to abstain from them is Orthodox and sound, and from the
holy Ghost.

3. It holds, That when Judges are not infallibly persuaded, (as these were,
not knowing the way of Christ) to coerce any Religion or way never so false, is
persecution, straining of free consciences, and fighting against God:

I Judge John Goodwin has ploughed with the Heifer of Vaticanus, who writes a
virulent piece against Caloin, and condemns the burning of that Monster.
Michael Servetus brings the same argument. Calvin censures both Gamaliel and
John Goodwin Commen. in Acts 5. 34. Caeterum si quis omnino rite expendat,
indigna est homine prudente sententia (Gamalielis) Scio q^^dem a multis haberi
pro oraculo sc. eos ( Anabaptistas) perp^ram judicare vel hinc satis clare
pate^, quod hoc modo abstinendum esse ab omnibus paenis nec amplius ullum
maleficium corrigendum, vere quidem dicitur non posse ullis consilus dissolvi
quod ex Deo est; quod autem ex hominibus minus fi^mum esse quam ut consistat,
sed hinc perperam colligitur, cessandum, potius videndum quid Deus nobis
mandet. vult autem maleficia a nobis coerceri, in hunc finem instituit
Magistratus eosque gl^dio armavit, Romans 13.
Vaticanus (some think it was Castalio, adversus Calvinum) Number. 10: and
Bellius, arg. 5.

But 1. Though Libertines espouse and own the Argument of Gamaliel, as from
the holy Ghost, to condemn all use of the sword against false teachers; yet it
is Gamaliels rotten Dialemme, not the holy Ghosts. 2. Abstain from these men,
is according to the medium or reason of Gamaliel, speak no boasting words,
Deal not morally with the conscience, though ye by office, ought so to do, as
sitting in the chair of Moses, far less use the sword against them. The
reason is, if the Doctrine be of God, it shall stand, and ye are no more to
fight against God, with the tongue, than the hand, and with corrupt reason,
than with a steel sword; and if the Doctrine be of men, it shall fall of will;
neither then are you to preach, nor with the arm of flesh to act against them,
and the word in the Greek is, stand up from them, (...) and in the Syriack,
(...) omittite eos, v. 38. Let them alone, v. 38. and the intention of
Gamaliel, if he speak as a Convert to Christ, (as Goodwin and Vaticanus
suppose) must import no less.

2. The Argument is as strong in the matter of adultery, treason, bloody
rebellion, and murder, against the lawful Magistrates power, coercing all
disorders against the second table, as against Religion or a way of God or of
men, by which we worship God, and therefore (as Beza says) The man was no
favorer of the Gospel, but feared the evil that might follow upon the
displeasure of the Romans. Piscator, Nam (...) ^^ones humano consilio and
audacia (...) d^sso^v untur ^^men (...) Magistratus est operum dare ut alas
conpescant, and prohibean, and hujusmodi Novatores pro merito puniant.
And Piscator and Gualther Dubious and ambigus in sermon apparet, long igitur
alia illorum Magistratuum ratio est qui v^ritates vera cognitione illuminati,
illam ex officio tueri, and errores extirpare debent.
Gualther says well, It was an evil counsel, Gualther says, Since the scope
of Gamaliel was only to save the Apostles from present danger, they abuse this
argument, who thereby shake all discipline civil and Ecclesiastical: For the
Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain, and ought to extirpate Heresies by
his Office. And Calvin says, It was a sentence unworthy of a wise man, because
that which is of God shall stand, Gamaliels consequence is null, that therefore
the Magistrate whom God armed with the Sword should do nothing against sin.
The consequence is as strong, in murders, Paricides, Sedition, as in Heresies
whatever Vaticanus says in the contrary, Vaticanus, cites Bullinger, a
contrary to Calvin in Gamaliels arguing, but both commend the moderation of
Gamaliel. ^ut Bullinger says, Adversus, Anab. lib. 5. c. 8. Nil adeo iniquum
and injustum de quo dici non potest si ex deo, perficietur, si non ex Deo
sponte cessabit.
applying this argument only to doctrine, and to plants that our heavenly
father has not planted. For,

1. It is not the purpose of Gamaliel to draw his doctrine to so narrow a
channel as to doctrins only, as if doctrins of men only came to naught, for
Gamaliel alleges the examples of Judas and Theudas the Galilean, whose fault
was not only false prophesying, but rebellion and sedition, for four hundred
armed men gathered to this man and obeyed him, Greek, (...). Syriack (...) Et
abierunt post cum quasi quadringenti homines, They went after him, as their
Captain in the fields.

And the other Judas of Galile drew away much people; Now they were drawn away,
in a course of tumultuary rebellion, Gamaliels argument proves as strongly that
murderers and adulterers should not be punished, as that men ought not to be
punished for their conscience.
as is clear by the two words, they obeyed him, and (...) Syriack, (...)
dispersi sunt, they were scattered as an army of men, then these men were not
only false teachers, but levied men to rise against authority, as Anabaptists
do after them: so shall it follow, that when men rise in bloody murders and
insurrections, we must leave them to God; for when they rise to cut the throats
of innocent people, whether that ignis fatuus the fool fire of blind zeal, or
a treasonable design raise them in arms, their way is either of men, and so
God will bring it to naught, and we must sit still and suffer our selves to be
murdered, contrary to the law of Nature, because God will not fail to crush
these novators and firebrands, or their way and courses of God, and so yet we
must sit still, and all the most just defensive wars shall be unlawful, for
if we stir one foot against them, we run the hazard of the bold blind Giants
to fight against God, it is all one to the dialemme of Gamaliel, whether he
speaks of Theudas the Magician or Sorcerer, as Josephus antiq. lib. 20. cap.
2. and Eusebius, who rose in the time that Cuspius Fadus governed Judea, who
said he could divide Jordan, and gathered his men to the banks of Jordan in
the fourth year of Claudius; or if it be Theudas that rose long before Fadus,
before the reign of Agrippa, who did reign seven years under Caligula and
Claudius, or who this Judas was, it is sure the argument will prove that
Magistrates are not to draw their swords against rebels, and traitors, and
this subverts all policy and Government Civil or Ecclesiastical.

3 The Argument, of Gamaliel, cannot conclude that God is less watchful, and
less severe to take vengeance on Sorcerers, Murderers, Lions and cruel
tyrants, bloody and deceitful men, than against new false religions, for if the
way of Robbers, Conspirators, Armies that rise in rebellion against their
masters, Covenant-breakers, be of men, God will bring it to naught and destroy
it, as he overturned the way of Theudas and Judas, as is clear. God turns the
way of the wicked upsidedown, Ps. 146. 9. And the bloody and deceitful man
shall not live half his days, Ps. 55. 23. And so shall the old Lion perish for
want of his prey, Job 4. 11. and shall want and suffer hunger, Psalm. 34. 10.
ergo, Job or any Magistrate should refrain from plucking the prey out of the
Jaws of the oppressors, contrary to Job 29. 16, 17. or if the way of
Oppressors be of God, and if God have armed them with his power to be a
scourge, Rulers should not defend the fatherless, the widow, and the
stranger, from the paws of the Lions and Murderers, but should refrain; why?
If Gods power be with them, we resist the power of God, we fight against God.
Nor is it enough that the patron of liberty, Servetus and Goodwin tell us in
doubtsome things, such as controversies of Religion, we would refrain from
drawing the sword against men, for their conscience and religion, because we
know not infallibly, but their way may be as well or rather the way of God,
than our own, and then we run the hazard of fighting against God Omnipotent;
and when it is dubious to us, but it may be the way of men, it is safest to
leave it to God, and that we hold back our hand from offering violerce to them,
for God will save our labor, and burn the hay and stubble of men's drossie
inventions, and what need then is there to file the edge of the Magistrates
sword, in a dubious case, when we have not certaine^y of faith, that the now
Sectaries way is of men and Satan.

Answ. 1. Pharoahs tyranny in detaining the people in bondage, notwithstanding
of the wonders that the God of the Hebrews wrought by Moses, was as doubtsome
to him to be Tyranny, The argument of Gamaliel owned by adversaries readers all
the fundamentalls of the Gospel uncertain, and topic Sc^pticisme to all the
most well settled beleev^rs.
since his God-Idol of Egypt did the like wonders by the Magicians, as
controversies of Religion are, and blindness in duties in the second table,
when Judicial, and from the power of the prince of darkness, is as strong and
may as much make men excuseable, and shield them from the sword of God or man,
as blindness in the duties of the first table.

2 This Answer does oil the head, and flatter the wilful and malicious
ignorance of Pharisees, who both knew Christ, and whence he was, and were
convinced that the Gospel was from God, and that the miracles of Peter and
John came nothing short of the Miracles of Moses, in point of glory and power,
and by this all the Seducers, even such as sin against the Holy Ghost, as did
these Pharisees, shall be tolerated, because we know not infallibly, but
their Anti-gospell and blaspheming of God, and his son, may be the way of God,
and therefore we must refrain from lifting a tongue against them, and they
know not but our Gospel may be the Gospel, or it may be the divinity of
devils, and by this the knowledge of the Elements and first fundamentalls of
the Gospel, to wit, that Jesus died, rose again, ascended to heaven, and
through faith in his name, Jews and Gentiles are saved, the only doctrine for
which these Apostles were persecuted, shall be mere Scepticisme; and an
adventuring fluctuation; we must leave to God either to reward and establish,
or to annihillate or crush this way of the Apostles: we must not oppose it,
because no moral man with certainty of faith can oppose the most false way,
though as clear point-blanke contrary to the Gospel as noon day to black
midnight, but he must run the hazard of either fighting against God, or
invading the chair of God, or of bringing to naught, that which God only
brings to naught, and of striking, but not in faith, him whom God will have us
not to strike.

But 3. This argument of Gamaliel, and Mr. Goodwin, must conclude that we must
not smite with the tongue, or argue by the Scriptures of God against any false
way. 1. It is dubious to us as to the Pharisees, and to al Christian Magistrates
who are infallibly in no Gospel principle, and so they cannot in faith draw the
sword where the certainty of faith does not lead them, Gamaliels argument does
co^clu^^ that w^ are not to oppose ^y arguments and Scripture, a^y Blasphemous
way agai^^t the Gospe^.
for fear they fall upon Giant fighting against God, in lie^ of acts of
justice. But so neither should Vatica^^^, M^mus, C^lsus, Mr. Go^dwin, nor any
smite with the tongue Presbyterians, Socinians, Antiscripturians, or fight
against their way by Scripture arguments, because their way may be the way of
truth, as well as yours, and to fight against any truth of God, when ye know
not, but it may be truth of God, is a fighting against God, and so al
preaching, al writing against Heretics shall be a fighting against God, for it
is no more lawful to fight morally then phisically against God, or his truth,
and that without faith and infallibility, for to reproach any precious truth of
the spirit in Saints, and call it a lie, must be to reproach God and his Son
Christ, as to deny any truth of God before men, is to deny God and Christ
before men, Matthew. 10. 32. Mark. 8. 38. Luke 9. 26. 2 Timothy 2. 12, 13.

4. This Dilemma of Gamaliel says, any way or Doctrine of men must be
refrained from; and nothing can be done by Magistrates or Ministers, nor spoken
on the contrary, because God himself will have it reserved to him, that he may
bring it to naught. Now by this Argument we are not by teaching and Doctrine so
much as in us lies, to hinder grievous wolves to draw disciples after them, and
corrupt hearers to gather to themselves an heap of teachers, by preaching the
contrary sound Doctrine, contrary to Acts 20. 28, 29, 30, 31. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2,
3, 4. Tit. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. For 1. we are no more to convince, refute, and
rebuke false teachers, except we could do it in faith and assurance, that their
way is of men and false (since all we do, or do not, speak, or speak not, must
be in the persuasion of faith, else we sin, Romans 14. 12, 14, 22, 23.) then
Christian Magistrates can punish them with the sword. 2. We can no more fight
against a way of God (for so the heretic to death under torturing Professes)
and you have no faith, on the contrary (say Libertines) with the tongue, nor
with the hand. Yea, we can no more labor to suppress what God only, in his
sole prerogative of providence, immediately working ought to suppress, and
that in a mediate providence of our own making, with preaching, refuting,
watching over the flock, stopping the mouths of gainsayers, then we can
endeavor the suppressing of it with the sword.

5. Gamaliel intended to have the Apostles, not to be meddled with, either
because godly men, and Disciples of Christ, as he was; or because their way was
dubiously, not notively and manifestly false; if the former, Then 1. Godly men,
though in an evil way, though they murder, play the Traitor, Rebel, commit
adultery, are not to be any way censured. This is the way of Anabaptisme, that
sets all believers above and beyond the reach of the Magistrates sword, and his
dilemma cannot have this sense; for if godly men, as godly men are upon this
formal reason, because godly men must not be punished by the Magistrate;
neither must they ever at all be punished for the acts of oppression, or
murdering, or treacherous dealing, or adultery, for it is clear in the person
of David, Lot, and others, that they remained godly, and Saints, under those
acts. 2. It is said, not proved, that Gamaliel being a secret Disciple of
Christ; as Nicodemi^^ was, favored the Gospel, and the witnesses of it; for
the Text insinuates no such thing, but that God used him as a moral moderate
wise man, to save the Apostles from death, for fear of politic inconveniences;
2. Anabaptists can have no better grounds then Papists, for Lorinus, Salmeron,
and some Jesuits, think so; they tell us that Gamaliel was the master of
Paul, Barnabas, and Stephen, and counted among the Martyrs, and that his body
was found with the relics of Stephen and Nicodemus, as Baronius says,
Clemens in his Recog. li. 1. c. 9. Beda says, he was a companion of the
Apostles; but Occumenus and Chrysostom say the contrary. 3. The best can be
made out of his speech, is dissimulation to save the lives of the Apostles; for
1. he will have the Council to carry themselves to the Gospel, the only
instrument of their salvation, as Neutrals; and wills them neither to try it,
and believe, nor to persecute it. Again, if the Council must not dare to
meddle with the Apostles, because their way was dubious; he proves that the
Council, as Magistrates, should not interpose their sword, but leave them to
God, by a weak argument, because the Roman Magistrates left not Theudas and
Judas to God, Imme^iate (...) is (...) the rule of our actions.
but took order with them, and killed, and dissipated all their followers; so
that the contrary follows from his reason, That the Council should not leave
them to God, and his immediate revenging hand; for immediate providence cannot
be the rule that the Magistrate or Church must follow in punishing ill doers,
and in censuring scandals; the revealed will of God must be their rule; but let
them alone, because God shall bring them to naught, by Gamaliels Logic, shall
leave the Rulers of Church and State to immediate providence.

6. The Council had power of Ecclesiastic Censures, and of casting out of the
Synagogue, at which the Romans took no exception; but this Dialemme proves
they should be left to God, as touching all censures, and that they should have
leave to ruin their own souls, and the souls of millions, in a pernicious
way, against Moses his Law, and the only true way of God, as they conceived.

CHAP. XXIV. Whether punishing of seducing Teachers, be inconsistent with the
meekness of Christ, place Luke 9. 54. discussed.
LIbertines cry much for the mansuetude and clemency of our Savior Christ to
be a skreen and shield betwixt false teachers and the sword. The (...) burning
(...) from (...). Lu. 9. (...)
So Arminians, Apolog. c. 24. fo. 279. If Christ will not permit to his
Disciples a desire of punishing, out of zeal and love to Christ, to whom the
Samaritans denied lodging, far less will he permit Christians to punish
Heretics for their conscience only. Ambro^^us (...) tibi clement^^ ad (...)
Samaritani a quibus (...) crediderunt.
But Christ proves the former to come from a spirit not such as was in Elias;
1. That spirit is sharp and bitter. 2. tending to destroy lives, which I came
to save. 3. not acceptable to me, in that you would destroy for Religion, and
this is against all cruelty for Religion. So Vaticanus, Number. 116. So
Monfortius. So Mimus Cells.

Answ. 1. Theophilactus says, it is an example of blind anger or zeal, the
Samaritans did sooner believe by clemency than by fire. But 1 to consume a
whole City, men, mothers, and sucking children, and many innocent people not
for Idolatry, Hieronimus in Locu. ut Apostolicus sermo haberet efficientiam
voluntatis est domini; nisi enim ille jussetit frustra dicunt Apostoli, ut
ignis discenda^.
there was need of an express Law of God, and (as Hieronimus says on the
place) the known will of God, though there was a Law, Deuteronomy. 13. of destroying a
City that maintained Idolaters, that tempted to follow strange Gods, and kept
out against all Israel, and so defied Israel and their God: Yet we find not
the executing of such a temporary judicial Law, without asking at the mouth of
God. Here the fiery Disciples shape a way of their own to Christ, in revenge,
in asking fire from Heaven.

2. Neither here, nor in the case of Elias, was Idolatry or false worship the
quarrel, but denying of an act of humanity to Christ, to wit, not lodging of
him; and because Christ would have nothing done or said against Samaria, for
this shall Libertines (I must use this name, because of the dangerous error)
infer upon the same grounds of Christ's meekness, that therefore Pastors ought
not sharply to rebuke, The case of Elias calling for fire from heaven, and of
the Apostles, Luke 9. much different.
and Magistrates may not in a well ordered City, reprove and punish such as
refuse an open Inn to innocent strangers, against the Law of nature. For this
conclusion follows as well as theirs.

3. Elias desired not fire to come down and burn Cities, men, women, and
sucking children, but fifty and fifty murderers that came to kill him, or then
to bring him to a Tyrant, who against all Law, sought his life, and so the case
was not alike.

4. There is no ground in the Text, that Christ condemns Elias as too severe,
but the Disciples at too vindictive; and by this blasphemers, and obstinate
open despisers of Christ and the Gospel, should not be punished. Vaticanus
says, Nu. 129. sect. seque If they deny God, and blaspheme the holy Doctrine
of Christ, and detest the holy life of the godly, Eos ego relinquo
Magistratibus puniendos. I leave them to be punished by the Magistrates, not for
their Religion, for they have none. Sed propter irreligionem, for their want of
Religion. So were the Samaritans void of Religion, and blasphemers and
maligners of the Gospel, and of Christ, and (as Libertines say) by this Text
not to be punished; and yet the Text declares them to be irreligious and
profane Atheists, and so to be punishable. But it is not our mind (says
Mimus Celsus) page 24. to compare and resemble by this Text Samaritans to
Heretics, and Ministers of the Word to Magistrates, for that were to no
purpose, but to condemn all cruelty flowing from desire of revenge, in the
matter of Religion.

Answ. If so, the Argument is much weaker than it was, for we condemn cruelty
and desire of revenge in the matter of justice, as well as of Religion; for
Libertines beg the question when they will have no bloodshed for blaspemy; but
it must be cruelty and desire of revenge; for there can be no greater cruelty
then for a Christian Magistrate to suffer bloody wolves to prey upon the flock,
and false teachers to hunt souls, and destroy them. It was justice, not
cruelty, yea mercy to the Church of God, to take away the life of Servo^us, who
used such spiritual and diabolick cruelty to many thousand souls, whom he did
pervert, and by his Book, does yet lead into perdition.

2. The mature object of the Disciples furious and blind zeal was not
Religion, but refusing of lodging most inhumanely to Christ, because the
Samaritans did not receive him, for his face was as though he would go to
Jerusalem, Luke 9. 51. and the Samaritans so maliced and envied the Jews, that
because he aimed to go to Jerusalem, being so glorious a Prophet, and famous
for holiness among them, they refused him lodging. Then surely they had an
esteem of Christ as a rare and singular Prophet, and would have monopolized
him, as a Samaritan, and worker of miracles as their own, and envied that he
should go to their enemies; though I deny not that the Samaritans had too base
and irreligious thoughts of Christ, yet that was not all the injury they did to
Christ.

3. The Samaritans worshipping a false God, They know not what, Joh. 4 22. and
no salvation being in their Religion, cannot be called Heretics; and we
confess, to burn Cities, because the in-dwellers are of a false Religion, is
no fit way to convert them to the true Religion; and because the Apostles, to
whom God has not given the sword, but only the spiritual armor of the word,
2 Cor. 10. 5. are not to use fire and sword, and that out of a vindictive
spirit against Samaritans, who despise Christ and the Gospel, it is no
consequence. Ergo, Christian Magistrates by this place, Luke 9. must not use
the sword against false teachers and apostates.

4. I grant, Christ the Mediator, and the Ambassadors of peace, whose office it
is to save souls, are not to kill men because they are of another Religion,
then they are, or because they seduce souls; nor are we to neglect what Beza
says against Monfortius, p. 160. in opus. de punien. heret. Elias did from
Gods command, what he did; the Disciples call for fire, from a wild spirit. 2.
It was not a proper function for the Apostles, nor had they any extraordinary
calling from God, as Elias had. 3. There is one consideration of Elias, who
came to restore Religion after great apostasy; another of Christ who came to
propagate the Gospel. I see not much inconvenience in the answer of Swarez,
Swarez com. de virt. Theo. disp. 18. sect. ^. nu. 2.
They were not to use violence and threatening against the Samaritans, but to
shake the dust of their feet against them; for Christ and his Disciples bare
not the sword as Magistrates. Whatever arguments Libertines extort from these
places, John Baptist, or a necessity for liberty of conscience, c. ^. p. 10. n.
12.
which say Christ is so meek, as he shall not cry, nor strive, nor break the
bruised reed; the Ministers must be so gentle, that they must teach with
meekness, Isa. 42. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Not strike, but be apt to teach, and
keep themselves to the foolishness of the Gospel; Bloody Tenet, c. 29. p.
63, 64. M. S. on John Goodwin to 2. 5 p. 1.
and only shake the dust of their feet off against rejecters, Acts 18. and not
judge before the time, 1 Cor. 4. 5. for the sword may make a whole Nation of
hypocrites, Isa. 10. but can never recover them out of the hands of Satan. I
say whatever arguments they throw by the hair from these places, Ancient
bounds 5. p. 24.
are but tokens of the prejudices of Libertines.

For 1. Is not Christ as meek to whores, publicans, the theife and robber on
the cross, persecutors, and to seducing teachers and heretics? The meekness
of Christ being extended to Publicans, Extortioners, and Harlots, does as well
conclude, such ought not to be punished by the Magistrate, as that false
Teachers ought not to be punished by him.
and should not Ministers in all gentleness, teach and instruct, drunkards,
adulterers, murderers; yea, and as many as are taken Captives in the snare of
the Devil at his will, and are in such a case, as God peradventure may give
them repentance? For of such speaks the place 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. and must not
Pastors be gentle, patient, apt to teach, and labor the conversion of all
drunkards, whores, bloody men, as well as heretics; What warrant have
Libertines to straiten the meekness of our Savior, and his Ambassadors in
these Scriptures, and confine and limit the sweet qualifications of Christ to
only seducing teachers, whereas the word does extend these to all sinners of
what ever rank, that are slaves of Satan, but especially, if they be sin-sicke
for Christ, and bruised reeds (such as seducing teachers, and Wolves that worry
the Lambs, and lead silly women captives, are seldom) and such sinners as the
Phisician came to cure; whereas false teachers are all for the most part self
righteous, sons of pride. Now make an argument from these Scriptures, By
places from the meekness of Christ Socinians labor to prove the Magistrate is
to shed ^o blood under the New Testament,
and it concludes, that it is against the meekness of Christ that murderers,
drunkards, adulterers be punished by the Sword, for since Christ and his
Ministers are no less with all patience, gentleness, forbearance to instruct
these, if at any time God shall give them repentance, and this strongly sinels
of Anabaptists and Socinians way, who contend that the meekness of our Savior
has deposed the Magistrate from his place of shedding any man's blood, S^cinius
defens. verae sent. de Magist. polit. adver. Jac. Pal. bar. 2. so. 233. 235.
Sed negant (Raccovienses) cum qui Christianus effe velit, humanum sanguinem
fundere posse, sive privatus sit, sive Magistratum gerat par. 3. fo. 288.
Christianus Judex in sententia ferenda, Christianae aequitatis and clementiae
non est obliturus.
be he never so notorious an il-doer, so says Socinius, Catechesis,
Raccoviensis, Ostorodius, Smalcius, Meek Jesus warranteth no Magistrate to take
away any men's life for any fault, Ostorodi^s inst. Roll. c. 28. Praecepta
Christi (elementissimi) non permittunt ulli homini ad amore vitam.
or to make war, for the Scripture will have the meekness and mercy of Christ
(if it stand in not punishing with bodily violence, ^malcius contra Frantz dis.
6 de ^on-oper. Nec Christus praecepit homicidas morte plectere, disp 6. de reb.
c v. semper (Magistratus) habenda est ratio legum Chri^ti.
evildoers, as these men suppose) to be extended to all sinners of whatsoever
kind. Catech Raccoviensis de proph. Mun. Chi. c. 2 fo. 136 Some. defen. vet.
sent. de Magist. poht. li. 1. fo. 13. Smaltius disp: 6 dereb: eiv


2 The argument has no foot, except it so run, That which is no means of the
converting of souls, Christ will not have to be used, for the conversion of
souls. But such is bodily violence, we grant al, for the Sword avengeth,
hurting of souls, but is not a means ordained of Christ for the converting of
souls, or if it do, it is by accident as afflictions do, as Hos. 5. in their
affliction, they will seek me early.

3 If Christ be merciful and meek, and will have his Ministers with gentleness
and patience to instruct gainsaying sinners, then will he not have the
Magistrate to draw his Swordand be severe against seducing teachers, D. Adam
Stewart in his learned and solid answer to Mr. Goodwin of Right de jure, D.
Stewart his 2 part in Answ. to M. Goodwin p. 182.
denies the proposition, and so do the learned professors of Leyden answer
Arminians objecting the same, and say Christ is meek to repenting sinners,
Censur. Professores Leidenst 2. 24. sec. ult. p. 321.
but a severe judge and a revenger of ill-doers Re. 2. 6. 9. 14. 20, 21, 22,
24. his garments are red and died with the blood of his enemies, he is so a
Lamb, as he is a Lion.

2. Nor is the meekness of Christ inconsistent with his justice, and
righteousness, in commanding the nursefathers of his house, the Rulers of the
earth, that which the Morral and perpetual standing Law of God requires, to
wit, that they use the Sword against il-doers, of all sorts and degrees; for
they stand together in the person of Christ, who is a meek King, Zach. 9. 9
and lowly and just, having salvation, Christ's not breaking the bruised reed,
would prove that heretics are gracious persons, though weak in saving grace,
and lovingly ch ^rrished by Christ, if the place Is. 42 Mat. 12. 19, 20. help
the adversaries.
and breaks not the bruised reed, nor quenches the smoking flax, which is
not meant of his forbearing the use of the Sword, against grievous Wolves that
spares not the flock, and Wolves in the skin and clothing of Sheep, seducing
heretics, for neither Calvin, Musculur, Gualther, Junius, Scultetus, Marlorat,
nor any sound interpreter, Protestant, Lutheran or Papist, save Socinians and
Anabaptists professed parties, render any such sense, for not to break or to
quench by a figure Merosis or Litote, is to cherish, and deal meekly and
tenderly with weak believers, that have something of the life of God; and
saving light of grace in them, as weak growing reeds, and smoking flaxes, and
it says that Christ does cherish saving seeds of grace in them ^ay 50. 5. The
Lord God has opened mine ear that I was not rebellious, that is, that I was
very flexible and obedient to give my back to the smiters, John 6. 37. Him
that comes to me I will in no wise cast out, that is, I will make the
believers dearly welcome, raise him up at the last day, and give him life
eternal verse. 40. Libertines then must say, Heretics and bloody wolves, are
such tender weak believers, as weak reeds and smoking floxes, Christ's
meeknes^ not ince^sistent with his ju^tice.
and Christ does not only not use the sword against such tender ones, but he
takes Wolves and sedncing teachers in his bosom, and nourishes, and tenderly
charisheth the principles of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, but
as Christ is meek to weak ones, so is, Isa. 11. 25. Righteousness the girdle
of his loins, So Psalm. 110. 5. Shall be strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath. 6. And judge (...) the heathen, and fill the places with the dead
bodies, and wound the heads over many Countries, And Rev. 19. 11. In
righteousness shall be judge and make war.

2 Considering the parties he has to do with, he is meek toward the meek, but
so as he destroys his enemies, and burns their Cities with fire, who will not
have him to reign over them, Mat. 22. 7. which yet I expound not to be the
sword of the Christian Ruler, as if he were an office-bearer in the Church,
but only bring it to prove how weak these allegorick places are, either for, or
against the point in hand.

3 To correct with the sword, and with the rod of men, as a father, is
consistent with Covenant-Mercy and Meekness, Psalm. 99. 32, 33, 34, as not to
punish is one of divine wrath, Hos. 4. 14. yea, to deliver scandalous persons
to Satan, to excommunicate them, to thunder wrath against them, to pull them
out of the fire by the hair; that they may be saved in the day of the Lord,
by as good reason, are against the meekness and gentleness of Christ; as the
Christian Magistrates using of the sword against heretics, if we speak of
that, which is penal in both these, to wit, to be under infamy, reproach and
shame, and cast out of the society of the Godly.

4 To judge before the day, Rash Judgment condemned, 1 Cor. 4. 5. 6 is nothing
for pretended tollera^^on.
1 Cor 4. 5. is not to forbid al judging of heretics, for except we judge them
to be heretics, how shall we beware of them, as Christ bids us, Mat. 7. 15.
and eschew them, Romans 16. 17. And not bid them God speed, nor receive them into
our houses, Joh. 2. 10. And avoid them, Tit. 3. 10. and far less must a
judicial trial of Jezabel be forbidden to the Church of Thiatira, Rev. 2. 20.
but it is rash judging of hidden things, as Calvin, P. Martyr, Bullinger,
Murlorat, Pareus, Beza, and the place expounds it self, for the Corinthians
crowned false teachers, defamed the sound teachers, which was to anticipate
God, for it is the Lord who brings to light the hidden thiugs of darkness, and
makes manifest the counsels of the heart, and then every man shall have praise
of God, so he manifestly forbids peremptory judging, proper to God, and
judging upon dark grounds known to God only, the words in the letter (...)
Judge nothing before the time, are brought by Anabaptists to prove that no
Christian should be a Judge, and so to judge a Murderer, is to usurp the
place of God: so the places, Mat. 7. 2. and Romans 14. are brought by Libert^nes
and Anabaptists, to prove that all judging is unlawful, whether of false
teachers or malefactors, which is but an abusing of the word.

5 The author of the bloody Tenet says, That many through the corruption of
their own heart render hipocriticall obedience, because of the sword, proves
nothing against the use of the sword, to coerce false teachers.
the sword makes a nation of hipocrites, but converteth none, and he cites,
If. 10 which speaks no such thing; But that God sends the sword of the
Assirians against an hipocriticall nation. That the Sword makes hipocrites,
and men to profess the truth against their conscience; not kindly, nor per^se,
but through the corr^ption of men's hearts, who make themselves hipocrites, of
it self, and per^se all Israel fear the sword, and shall no more tempt others
to go after other Gods, Deuteronomy. 13. 11. but that they do this in an hipocritical
manner, is not from the innocent sword, but from this, that men fear him that
can kill the body, more than they fear him that can destroy both soul and body
in bell, Mat. 10. 28. for upon this ground, the Sword should make hipocrites,
because for fear of the Sword, men abstain from bloodshed Sorcery, Paricide,
Sodomie, more then for fear of God, and shall therefore the Magistrate not use
the sword against Paricides and Sodomies? so many are made hipocrites by
hearing, and external performances, drawing near to God with their lips, when
their hearts are far from God, shall therefore the hearing of the word and
the prosperity that follows the Gospel which begets believers for a time,
who wither when the sun rises, and shall power in the hands of the people of
God, that makes the enemies lie, and hypocritically submit, Psalm. 81. 15. be
as unlawful as the drawing of the sword against false teachers? for all these
beget hypocrites, but they do it by accident, not kindly; and if we made the
sword a means of conversion of sinners, as Libertines falsely suppose, the
Argument should have some color: or if drawing of the sword against Seducers,
were of it self indifferent, and yet by accident did make hypocrites, they
might conclude against it, as we argue against humane ceremonies, in the
supposition of many who suppose their indifferency.

Of this sort is the Pamphleters objection, Ancient bounds c. 5. p. 24.
Religion should not be inacted by the Laws of the Magistrate, why? It is
inacted ( says he) already by an higher Authority than any earthly King or
Magistrate; and if it will not sway the conscience to obey, Matters of Religion
ought to be inacted by the Law of Princes and Christian Rulers, that such as
contravene may be punished.
what can the Laws of men do? can these cobwebs catch those that the Laws of
God cannot catch.

Answ. There is a fallacy in the word catch, though he be but an innocent
Sophist, who propounds it; for Laws of men to fence from outward disorders,
cannot catch souls to convert them, as they are Laws of men; nor teach we
that Acts and Statutes of Parliament, are the power of God to salvation, that
is the honor of the preached Gospel. But shall good Laws of Artaxerxes,
Laws of Rulers in matters of Religion, do only Find the outward man.
Darius, for fearing the God of Daniel, and obeying the God of Gods, be
trampled on, because they cannot come up to the power and excellency of Gods
Laws? yet they so far catch, that Laws inacted upon pain of the sword, bind
up hands and tongue from doing wickedly; and this man argues against Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 3. 11. And all Israel shall hear and fear (for the pain of stoning,
and the sword of King or Prince Moses) and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this amongst you. The man argues against the Statutes of
Parliament, against Sabbathbreaking, which yet catch some, Neh. 13. 21. If you
do so, I will lay hands on you, from that day forth, came they no more on the
Sabbath, External obedience is given, that men dare not blaspheme Christ, nor
swear, nor murder, nor whore, nor steal, though the authority of God, which
is higher than any earthly Kings, has already forbidden blasphemy, swearing,
killing. Ergo, by this reason all Laws of men against evil doers should be
cashiered, because they cannot catch souls, when as they are not ordained to
catch souls, but to bind the outward man in fetters, that he prey not upon
the soul, and body, and goods of his brethren; yea, by this reason, men should
not by Ministerial Authority preach the Gospel to catch men, for the Gospel
is inacted already by an higher Authority than any on Earth, King or Pastor can
preach, and will thy cob-web preaching, poor Minister, catch whom the net of
God will not catch? all these men sway to the Familist and Enthysiasts hand,
beware of them.

So does the bloody Tenet, c. etc. 1. and p. ^54, 156.
1 The Magistrate should not send the Heretic to the Church, to heal the
Heretic; why? like mother, like daughter, perhaps he sends an Heretic to be
healed by Heretics.

Answ. Master Williams cannot find a Church on Earth, but a false and
heretical Church to heal a Seeker, The false teacher is to be sent to the
Church and Pastors thereof, that he may be convinced before he be punished.
Familist, or Anabaptist. But say it were so, should not the Magistrate
Hezekiah exhort the Priests to teach the People, and deal with the People, who
think Baal to be the true God, because the Priests do also think Baal perhaps
the true God, which if Hezekiah do, sure he is a miserable Physician, But
(says he) the poor Heretic disputes with the Church that shall deliver him
over to the bloody sword, if he will not yield, as the Lamb in the Lions paw,
being sure to be torn in pieces in the end.

Answ, This Author makes ever the supposition of himself, as if he were
infallible, we may suppose the Heretic is a ravening wolf, and that he
obstinately, and as a self condemned man disputes; and that the Magistrate is
the Lamb and the Minister of God, who loves not to strike with the sword; and
the question is not, whether he should yield reason and conscience up for fear
of the sword, but whether he should abstain from prophesying lies in the name
of the Lord, and should say, God sent him to contradict Jeremiah, and to assure
the Kingdom of Judah, they shall neither see sword nor famine, Jer. 14.
Notwithstanding the godly Prince (we suppose such a King then in Judah) should
assure him he should be stoned to death, if he shall thus pervert the right
ways of the Lord, should not the Magistrate be a terror to all ill doers, and
to such a wolf? there can no argument be drawn from Magistrates that are
Lions and Tigers, persecuting the Saints of God for the truth, as this author
always vainly supposes.

CHAP. XXV. Whether the Rulers by their Office, in order to peace, are to stand
to the Laws of Moses, for punishing seducing Teachers.
JVdiciall Laws may be judicial and Mosaicall, and so not obligatory to us,
according to the degree and quality of punishment, such as is Deuteronomy. 13. the
destroying the City, and devoting all therein to a curse; we may not do the
like in the like degree of punishment, to all that receive and defend Idolators
and blasphemers in their City: And yet that some punishment by the sword, be
inflicted upon such a City, is of perpetual obligation; because the Magistrate
bears the sword to take vengeance on ill doers, and so on these that are
partakers of his ill deeds, who brings another Gospel, 2 Ioh, v. 10.

2. How Judicial Laws oblige to puni^^ment.
Though Saul's destroying of the Amalekites in that cause was moral, in regard
they lay in wait for Israel, when they came out of Egypt, and so of perpetual
obligation, yet the destroying of them, 1 Samuel 15. is temporary, and obliges
not us; 1. because that generation were their Sons, not those same persons that
oppressed Israel, when they came out of Egypt, and we may not punish the Sons
for the sins of their fathers with death; therefore Gods po^itive command to
Saul, and the reason, I remember what Amalek did (in Moses his time) therefore
kill them, does not oblige us, except we had the like command. 2. Because the
slaying of man, woman, infant, and suckling, ox and sheep, was temporary, and
cannot have a perpetually obligatory ground in the Law of nature or natural
justice obliging us. 3. Where there is an injury done to God, against the Law
of nature, and against our brethren, in drawing them from serving the true God,
and a punishment commanded by God to be inflicted once; that punishment, or the
like in substance and nature, Profess. L^id. in Syn^p. pair. Theo. Disp. 40.
must ever be such as obliges us in the like cases. The Learned Professors in
Leidon say, They can see no reason but they must oblige under the New
Testament. I confess when the fault is ceremonial, though the punishment be
real, as the cutting off of an infant not circumcised, and some punishments
inflicted on the Leper, it is not reason the Law should oblige us in the New
Testament, either as touching the punishment or the degree. Because these
punishments for typical faults are ordained to teach, rather than to be
punishments, and the Magistrate by no light of nature could make Laws against
unbaptised Infants.

4. No man but sees the punishment of theft is of common moral equity, and
obliges all Nations, but the manner or degree of punishment is more positive:
as to punish Theft by restoring four Oxen for the stealing of one Ox, does
not so oblige all Nations, but some other bodily punishment, as whipping, may
be used against Thieves. Mr. Jo. Weemes, vo. 3. ca. 38. of the judicial Law,
The determination (says he) in Moses Law judicial, was divini juris, and they
had greater force to bind the Sons, than any Municipall Laws have to bind
Subjects new, in regard they were given by God himself; yet these judicial
Laws (says he) commanded the outward man, whereas the moral Law called (...)
ignea lex, Deu. 33. This fiery law pierces the heart.

Gamachaeus says, Gamachaeus in 12. q. 101. c. 7.
Iuditials and Ceremonials are immediately deduced out of the principles of the
Law of nature* by way of a more remote and obscure conclusion.

Aquinas says, Judicial Laws were deduced from the Moral Law.
by way of divine determination. But the truth is, the proposition might have
some ground in the Law of nature, but why 39. stripes, not, 40. not 38. only
should be inflicted on such an evil doer, and the assumption in many judicial
Laws* Thomas, 22. q. 104. art. 2.
seem to be an act of the mere positive will of God, Swarez de legib. p. 9.
c. 11. n. 2. Epiphanius de here is. 8 Augustinus de haeres. 8.
therefore Aquinas says, Ceremonials primo and per^^se, first and chiefly were
ordained to signify things, but Judicials secundarie did signify things to
come. And Swarez says, That judi^ials aecessarily, and by accident, did
signify things. It is true, Cori^thus, (...) and ^erome says, Irenaeus, l 1.
c. 26. Augus. de her. 9.
and the Ebionits, as Irenaeus says, and the Nazarer, as Augustine tells us,
hold that Ceremoniais and Judicials do yet oblige. Shoolemen deny their
obligation as Soto, Soto de insi^t. and Jurae l. 2 c. 5. Aquinas 12* q. 9. ar.
5.
Aquinas, Medina, Valentia, Gamacheus, because the Priesthood is changed.

Yet let not us go on with Egid-Coninck to say, Medina 12. q. 13. ar. 3. q 100.
ar. 1.
that if it was lawful to make war with any nation for wrongs done to men, how
much more for injuries done to God? for making of war is an act of Magistracy,
Valentia 22. dis. 7. q 7 punc. 2.
and so suppose some jus, some power and authority, that we have either by the
law of nature, to defend our life, Gamacheus 12. 104. c. 2.
peace, liberties, or for avenging of such heineous in^uries done to the Nation
as cannot in justice be decided, but by the sword. So that sin, as sin, or as
greatest sins, Conink de acti Supe^n dis. 10. dub. 12. no. 182.
are not the just cause of war, but sins as most distructive to humane
society, for which by the Principles of the Law of nature, True causes of war
with other Nations.
they may be convinced of fearful breaches; Now these that are Idolators, the
nations that worship God in Idolatrous way, and being of a strange Religion,
worship a strange God, though they do the greatest injury to God that can be,
yet in regard they being other nations as independent on us, as we are on them;
and do it not in order to the destruction of our of our paece, liberty, and
lives, we have not jus over them, nor authority to make War with them, except
God gave us a Command to destroy them, nor is this a good consequence, we may
by war revenge injuries done to men, erg^, far more, by war, may we revenge
injuries done to God: for war is an act of revenging justice: that supposes
some authority given of God, over such a nation as we come out against in war.

2 Every just war is some way defensive, in regard every act of Magistracy, is
an act of defending of the peace, life, and liberty of the society, or the
members thereof, and a propulsion of violence, by violence; and this is the
intrinsecal and of Magistracy, to hold off unjust violence, by just and
harmless violence; for if the life of a murther^r be not taken away by the
sword of a Magistrate, he will still take the life of another man, qui semel
^alus, semper malus presumitur, ^e that is once wicked, is still presumed to be
wicked, except his wickedness be restrained, and to offend a nation or person
that has not offended us, must be unjust violence, and unlawful war: and to
make war against a nation that has worshipped a strange God, and injured God,
and not us, supposes that we must instruct them of a wrong done to God, by
teaching them, and instructing them in the true Religion: for suppose they
worship the works of men's hands, and worship Satan as some Indians do and so
by their own conscience may be convinced, and so are inexcusable in foro Dei,
before Gods tribunal, yet are they not so inexcusable, in foro humano, before
man's tribunal, as we can make war against them, till we inform and instruct
them positively of the true Religion. But they that shed our blood, and invade
our peace and liberties, are by the Law of nature convinced, and by demands of
reparation made to them, quickly silenced, and need not to be instructed in the
principles of the law of nature, which are written in their hearts. But it may
be said, What if that Nation will not be informed of the true Religion, and
will go on contumatiously to dishonor God, and reproach the true God? Shall we
not upon a mere quarrel for Religion, make war against them, and avenge the
injuries done to God, and defend his truth, no less then with the sword, we
defend our own lives and liberties?

I Answer there is not the like reason: for God and nature have given to the
strongest, a jus and authority over oppressors, to repel unjust violence, with
innocent violence but that we should force the true Religion on Idolators, we
have not the like ground, except they did attempt to obtrude their false ways
upon us, and injure our souls: for there is a vast difference between a people
never receiving the true Religion, and a people who have embraced, and
submitted to laws, that have inacted the profession of the true Religion:
those that never professed the true Religion, cannot be compelled to receive
it by the Sword of another Nation, except they first subdue them in a just
war, and be masters of them, and they may educate the posterity of the
subdued people, and discharge the duty of parents to them, and impose laws on
themselves, to cast away the Idols of their fathers house, and to learn the
knowledge of the true God: but they cannot make the not receiving of the true
Religion the ground of a war: for we read not of any such cause of war in the
Scripture. It is true, God did command his people to destroy the Canaanites,
but Idolatry was not the quarrel, Josh. 11. 19. There was not a nation that
made pe^^^ with the Children of Israel, save the Hittites the inhabitants of
Gibe on all (other) they took in battle, 20. For it was of the Lord to harden
their heart, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he might
destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor, but that he might
destroy them as the Lord commanded Moses. And those that they subdued in the
Wilderness, denied them harmless passage through their Land.

It is true, some Popish writers, as Masius, Cornelius a lapide, Abulensis say,
M^sius Cornelius a Lapide.
if the Canaanites would have sought peace, and embraced the worship of the
true God, the Israelites would not have destroyed them, Abulensis in Josh.
but the Text, Calvin and famous Papists, as Cajetanus, Swarez. Gamacha^s, and
Augustine before them, Cajeta^us in Josh. c. 11 v. 2^. Swarez de v^r. Theo.
disp. 18. sect. 4. n. 3. Gam^chaeus in 12, q. ^o de infid. q. 32.
say plainly, Israel made war against them, and Israel but defended
themselves against the Canaanites. Libertines say the teaching of the Gospel,
Mat. 28. and not the sword, is a means to spread the Gospel, so say we, I see
no warrant we have to obtrude the Gospel in the purity thereof, upon Papists
in France and Ireland: but we may lawfully avenge the blood of the people of
God on Irish Murderers, Augustinus q 4^. in Number and in John q 3 10 Two
Kingdoms, becom^ing (...) a Re^igious Co^^nant if it be (...), the one part may
ave^ge the quarrel of the (...) on the other in case of br^^ch The new Altar
(...) by the 2 Tribes ^^^ the half (...) Jordan Josh. 22. how (...) cause of
war.
who exercise extreme cruelty and Tyranny over persons and the Consciences of
the Martyrs, and the oppressed people of God amongst the Papists.

The question seems harder, when these of a false Religion, in regard of their
neernesse, and vicinitie to a Kingdom professing the true Religion, when as
they may infect them, or if they be in one National Covenant, and under the
oath of God, to endeavor, the extirpation of all false religions, and what is
contrary to sound doctrine. It is certain, the Kingdom of Judah might justly
have avenged the Apostasy of the ten Tribes from David's house, and from
Jerusalem where the Lord had set his name, for the worshipping of the Golden
Calves, if the Lord by his Prophet had not expressly forbidden them to fight
against their brethren 1 Kings 12. And the children of Israel did justly
attempt War against the two Tribes and the half, because they erected a new
Altar for worship, as they conceived, which was Apostasy from the Covenant of
God, and the true Religion which they were to maintain by the Oath of Joshua
22. 12, 13, 15, 16. and to bring the wrath of God on all the Tribes as Achan
did, Verse, 20, No doubt, says Calvin on the place, They were angry with an
holy Zeal, for says he on Verse. Calvin comment. in Josh. 22 Non dubium quin
sancto zelo excanduerint, non omnibus quidam da^as gl^dius in manum sed pro su^
quisque vocatione and officio viriliter and constanter asserere studet purum
religionis statum contra omnes corruptelas.
12. The Sword is not given to every man in his hand, but every one according
to his calling ought (by this place) manifestly and constantly to defend the
true Religion. And if the wrath of God came on all the people (says Calvin)
for the secret sin of one man, much more the people shall not go unpunished,
if they dissemble the manifest Idolatry of many. Piscator says, It was piety
in the Tribes that they resolve to make war with the two Tribes and the
half, for their defection from the true God Such was their Zeal (say the
Divines of England) that they would rather hazard their lives, then suffer
Gods true Religion to be corrupted; for God had ordained there should be but
one place for public service, and sacrifices, and but one Altar Leviticus 17.
8, 9. Deuteronomy. 12. 5. 7. 13. 27. Exodus 20. 24. Deuteronomy. 27. 5. For they were all in
Covenant with one God, and this was a Schism and an Apostasy from the Church,
(says Diodat. Calvin Ratiocinantur a minore ad majus. Piscator in Cor.
) in which alone is the true service of God and the participation of his grace,
and Covenant. So also the Geneva Notes approves the lawfullnesse of the War,
and the Dutch annotations.

To this accord also, English Divines annot. on Josh. 22.
Popish Writers on the place, as Vatablus, Cajetanus, Cornelius a lapide, who
commend this zeal, and say all the twelve Tribes made but on State and one
Church, Diodatie on Ios 22. 19.
and Tostatus says, there was a necessity of making War with the two Tribes,
Genev^ Notes. Dutch Annotations.
because the Law commanded it, Deuteronomy. 13. Therefore they took not council
whither they should make War, but they consulted touching the manner. So
agrees Hugo Cardinalis, Vat^b^us an. in Josh. 22. Cajetan com. in Josh. 22.
Cornelius a lapide com. in Josh. 22. Venerunt ut dimicarent contra ^os quasi.
apostatas and schismaticos. Vide hic Z^^um omnes enim duodecem. Tribus
faciebant unam Rempublicam unamque Ecclesiam.

Tostatus com. 2. in Josh. c. 22. q. 10. Necessitas autem pugnandi contra duas
tribus incumbebat. Lex Deuteronomy. 13. id jubebat. Consilium autem est de
contingentibus de modo. Hugo Cardinal. com. in Josh. 22.


So Masius. Masius in Josh. in loc. Se^rar. in loc. Nicho. de lyra. Menochius
anno^* in Josh. 22. v. 13. Fer^s in Declama. in Josh. c. ^^.
So Sorrarius. Lyra says, War should not be undertaken, but upon a certain
and just cause, especially against friend, therefore they send Messengers to
the two Tribes, to try the cause of the new Altar. Menochius, Out of zeal they
sent Messengers to try the crime of Idolatry, and to bring them to repentance,
if not, to make destructive War against them. And Ferus, They were ready, if
the two Tribes obeyed not, armis dicernere, (...) decide the matter by war.
Would God ( says he) there were such zeal in us, Utinam talis zelus in nobis
esset and quidem non unum altar erectum videmus sed innumera.
and we see not one Altar erected, but a number of superstitious Altars.

From this place it is clear, when a Kingdom, or two Kingdoms are united
together, and confederate by the Oath of God in one Religious Covenant, they
become an Ecclesiastic body, so as the whole may challenge any part that
makes defection, and labor to gain them, and if they contumaciously resist,
they are with the sword to decide the matter, lest wrath from the Lord break
out on the whole confederate body; as for the sin of one (...), wrath came
upon all Israel: Nor can I well see what can be answered on the contrary,
except that that war for the new Altar, was undertaken upon judicial and
temporary warrants, which do not bind us under the New Testament.

But this is said, not proved, that new Altar was not a heap of stones; but if
it had been made upon Religions grounds, and for the service of God, it had
been no less than an Apostasy from that true Religion once delivered by God.
Then if the third part of Scotland and England should turn Apostates from the
Religion once sworn, after they had bound themselves in Covenant: the question
remains, what should the State and Parliament do in that case? should they
be indifferent beholders, and not use the sword against such Apostates? Swarez
de vir. the dis. 18. sect. 3.
Swarez and others, not without reason, thinks that Infidels that are not
Subjects, and not Apostates, cannot be compelled to embrace the true faith,
even though it be sufficiently proposed to them, his reasons are, there is no
lawful power given to the Church by Jesus Christ to compel such. 2. It is no
tradition of the Church. 3. Those that are without cannot be judged; but the
truth is, the sword is not given to the Church, as the Church; and in the
spreading of the Gospel, the Lord forbids the use of the sword. It is true, a
Christian Prince may deny to Infidels liberty to dwell in his bounds. See
Weemes, vo. 3. Expos. of the Judicial Law, cap. 15. And Subjects may be
compelled not to blaspheme Christ, not to dishonor the true God with
manifestly professed impieties; Augus. Epist. 166. ad donatistas.
for if Asa made a Law, 2 Chronicles. 15. that they that would not seek the true
God, should be put to death: Constantinus prior contra partem Donati
severissimam legem dedit, hanc imitati filii ejus talia praeceperunt Quibus
succedens Iulianus deser^or Christi and inimicus supplicantibus vestris
Rogatiano and Pontio libertatem perditionis partis donati permisit, denique
^eddidit Basilicas hereticis, quando templum daemoniis eo modo putans
Christianum nomen posse perire de terris, si unitati Ecclesiae, de qua lapsus
fuerat, invideret, and sacrilegas diffensiones liberas esse permittere^: deinde
Valentinianus, legite quae contra vos jufferit* Inde Gratianus, and Theodosius
legite quando vultis quae de vobis constituerint, Quid Ergo de filiis Theodosi^
miramini, quasi allud de hac causa sequi debuerint quam Constantini judicium
per tot Christianos Imperatores ^^^issi^^ custoditum.

Christian Princes Laws against errors and ^^resies.

Eusebius in vita Co^stan. c. 43, 44. and l. 4 c. 13. Ruffinus Hist^r. p. 1. c.
19. Iovian. l. 10. c. 39. Nicephor. l. 8. c. 33. Ruffinus, c. 22. 25, 26.
Nicephor, l. 12. c. 25. Socrates, l. 1. ^. 26. Theodo^us Anagnostes collect. l.
2.

The unconstancy of Timotheus Coton Bishop of Constantinople, of Petr. Mongus
Bishop of Alexandria.


If that be temporary and judaicall, then the Christian Magistrate is not as a
Christian Magistrate, or as a nurse-father, Esai. 49. 23. so much as to command
any to serve Christ, nor to rebuke any for blasphemies. Sure this can be no
part of the peaceablenesse of Christ's Kingdom, not to rebuke sinners: But
nurse-fathers and civil Tutors must do something for the defense of the truth
from errors; for Constantine the great closed the Temples of Heathen Gods, to
the end that heathenish Idolatry might be abolished, as Euschius says; see
also Ruffinus, Iovianus, and Nicephorus, Justinian made many Laws against
Idolators. Before Constantine the great would pardon Arrius, (...) be exacted
an Oath of him, that he should stand to the Nicen faith, and he swear, but
dissembled. So Socrates; then Arrius was punishable by the Emperor. So
Timotheus Colo^, Bishop of Constantinople, under Anastius first Emperor, was
an Euty^hen, and cursed such as rejected the Synod of Chalcedon, and before the
Emperor cursed such as approved the Synod of Chalcedon; so Theod. Anagnostes,
Petrus Mongus, Bishop of Alexandria under Zonon the Emperor, was an Eutichen,
then again Orthodox, a little after he rejected the Council of Chalcedon; a
little after in an Epistle to Acacius Bishop of Alexandria, he professed the
sound faith, and denied that he rejected the council of Chalcedon; again he
rejects that counsel, and the sound faith; Evagr^^l. 13. c 13.
therefore Evagrius tells him, (...) A shoe, for every foot, a turne-coat, and a
time-server. Ergo, such heretics, beside that they have not been innocent and
godly (as Arminians say) they feared the sword of the Magistrate. But as
touching the practice of Emperors, and the Imperial Laws for ratifying Church
constitutions, there be but too many of them; as also for gathering Councels;
which proves the coactive power of Princes, Kings, and Emperors, over
heretics and seducing teachers. Constantius, I grant, made a Law, that some
godly men should be tolerated, ut pa^em cum fidelibus i^ qui errant (he says
not heretics) pacis est quietis fruitionem gaudentes accipiant. Eusebius in
vita Constan. and though the Emperor Grotian decreed, Vt quam quisque vellet
Religionem sequerentur, That all Religions should be free, he had much ad^ in
wars with the Goths, who wasted Thracia, and was therefore careful that
Ambrose should draw up a short confession, yet did he except from the
Toleration the Manichees, the Phocinians, the Eunomians. But see, codice prima
lege. Cunctos populos de sum. trinit. Martianus ibid lege. 4. Synod Chalcedo,
Leo imperator, cons. 15. C. Constable. 17. Heracl^us Imperator, constable. 1. de fide
Justinianus Novellus 123. c. 32. Novell 137. c. 6. Honorius, l. 4. c. 55.
Eccle. Valentinianus, l. 9. de Episc. cler. Novell. 123. c. 18. Novella 123. c.
29. etc. Le. constable. 87. Novell. 131. c. 4. Eusebius Pamphil de vita, Constan.
l. 3. c. 13. Surius tom. 2. Council. c. 20. p. 362. Codic. l. 1. Tit. de heret.
lex 2. 1^6. Justinian codex l. 1. Tit. 4. de sum. Trinit lex 2. Surius council.
tom. 2. p. 469 421, 494. and tom. 2. p. 668, 669, 670. Socra Scholastic. his.
l. 2. c. 37. Nicepher^ hist. l. 9. c. 4. Contur. Magdeburque 4 col. 558. So for
his power to conveene Councels, as the Nicen, by Constanti, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 6.
Sozom, l. 1. c. 17. So^rat. l. 1. c. 6. Ruff. l. 10. c. 1. Theodor. l. 1. c. 7.
the Council of Tire by Constant. Eusebius, de vit. cons. l. 4. c. 41. Sozom.
l. 1. c. 9. Theodosius elder, made a Law of death against the Anabaptists, and
banished Eu^^mius Socrat. l. 7. c. 12. It is true, Constantinus and Licinius,
as Eusebius tells us, l. 10. c. 5. say in a Law, now therefore we freely will
and command, That every man have a free liberty to observe the Christian
Religion, and that, without any grief or molestation, he may be suffered to do
the same. But the practice of heathen Emperous, is no rule.

2. God opened their hearts to make these Laws in favor of Christians.

3. They had experience of the favor of God by the prayers of Christians.

4. The Heathen Law in the Letter would prove that none should be rebuked, or
argued against, whatever Religion he chose; Maximius proclaimed, That all men
should use what Religion they like best, Eus. l. 9. c. 10. But 1. Maximius, out
of natural pity, because he had before persecuted Christians, did this. 2.
Dioclesian and Maximianus took Churches from them, he restored them; hence
followed peace till an. 130. The Council of Constantinople, 1. by Theodosius
senior, Theodoret, l. 5^ c. 7. Socrates, l. 5. c. 8. The Council of Ephesus,
1. By Theodos. junior. Evagrius, l. 1. c. 2. So Imperator Justinius. l. 44. ad
Maenam Patriarcham de Monachis and Monasteriis separandis and de Episc. and
cler. Eusebius de vita cons. l. 3. c. 25. Epistolam libella ad Synoda
constitutionem. The Bishops of the second general Council (if there was any
of them general) writ to the Emperor Theodosius, We desire your clemency,
that you by your Letters would confirm the Decrees of the Council (of
Chalcedon) and command that it be ratified and established: which he did. See
also Constantius his power, prescribing to the Councels of Arimimon and
Seleucea the subject matter they should treat upon, and commanded ten of each
Council to come and give him an account of their proceedings. S^zomen, l. 4. c.
6. Toeodosius and Valentin^ command the Council of Ephesus to send them some
Bishops to acquaint them with the causes and motives of their deliberations.
Relatio Synodi Ephesinae, quae est tom. 1. council. The second Council of Nice,
which some call the seventh General Council, relate the like to the Emperor
at Constantinople, Theodoret, l. 5. c. 8. Zonaras, tom. 3. anat. There be two
edicts of the Emperors, Valentinian and Martian, confirming the Council of
Chalcedon, so act. 3. Chalc. to. 1. Conc. all which say, the Emperors, de
facto, commanded as Magistrates, Churchmen to determine according to the word;
and corrected such as contravened. Pic^s Mirandula in apoloq. q. 8. Nemo sanae
mentis ita opinatur. Vt alio modo opinari posset, quia ita vult opinare.
And though Picus Mirandula says well, No man has power of opinions so, as if
he will, he may have another opinion, which though it may bear, that opinions
fall not under free will, yet the venting of them to others, is to Mirancula, a
free act and punishable. We know the Edict of Vale^inian and Martian, of
capital punishment against Such as shall attempt to teach things unlawful.
Let false teachers according to Justinian, have no leave to live and dwell in
Roman bounds, Edictum Valentiniani and Martiani lex 8. Quicunque Cod. de heret.
Ultimo supplicio coerecantur qui illicita docere tentaverin^.
says Pametius. Augustine says, Heretics kill souls, let them be afflicted
in body, they bring on men death eternal, and they complain that they suffer
temporal deaths. And why (says Augustine) should Sorcerers find the rigor of
the Law from Emperors, and Heretics and Schismatics go free? Constantius gave
out Edicts against Heretics, as Eusebius says. h. 2. c. 27. And also made
laws of pecuniary fines, Pametius c. 18. de diversis religionibus non
admittendis. Augustinus, Epis. 50. ad Boni^^^ Occidunt animas affligantur in
tempore, senipeternas mortes faciunt, and temporales se perpeti conqueruntur.
August. contra Epist. Parmen^ani. c. 10.
and mulcts against them.

Honorius made laws against Donatists of fining and of banishing preachers of
Donatisme. Martianus did the like. The like says Nazianz* M* Actinius de
domin^s de R^p. Eccles. l. 7. c. 8.
of Theodosius the great. Banishment and other punishment, the Emperors
inflicted upon Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Futiches and their followers.
Which the Archbishop of Spalato M^de dominis grants; though he says
Augustine excepteth capital punishment, for such (says he) he will not have
to be inflicted for the conscience, which is a manifest depraving of the mind
of Augustine, who will have such punishment according to the quality of the
fault inflicted on them, Augustine. con. Crescom. Gra. l. 3. c. 5.
as upon Sorcerers and Murderers. Let Augustine be considered in these and
other places, Desid and operib. 148. 159 epist. ad Marc^^^^a. Epist. 150.
after he retracted his too meek sentence, That they should not be punished
at all. Alexander Alexandrinus said, Arrius and his followers ought to be
punished with excommunication, and a curse, Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 4. But for
the point in hand the Christian Magistrate is tied and obliged to these
punishments to be inflicted for moral offenses, that the Law of God has
ordained, at least in nature: I prove.

1 That which is morrall, As Constantine g^ve out severe l^ws against
D^natists, so did Iulianus the apostate restore temples to heretics, and
granted liberty of Conscience to them, that so he might destroy the name and
Religion of Christians, as is before observed. So Augustine. Ep^. 166 ad
Donatistas.
and cannot be determined by the wisdom and will of man, must be determined by
the revealed will of God in his word; but the punishment of a seducing Prophet,
that ruineth the soul of our brother, and makes him twofold more the child of
Satan than before, is morrall and cannot be determined by the wisdom and will
of man: Ergo, such a punishing of a seducing Prophet, must be by the revealed
will of God in his word. The Proposition is proved. 1. Because God only, not
Moses, nor any other lawgiver under him, takes on him to determine death to be
the adulterers punishment, Levit. 20. 10. And the same he determines to be the
punishment of wilful murder, Exodus 21. 12. of smiting of the Father or
Mother, v. 15. of Man-stealing, verse. 16. of Sorcery, Exodus 22. 18. of
Beastiality. 19. Of sacrificing to a strange God, verse. 10. And upon the same
reason, God only, not any mortal man, must determine the punishment due to
such as seduce souls to eternal perdition. God only determines punishments
for sin.
For what reason can be imagined, why God can be the only determiner of such a
punishment of killing, and not for the ruining the soul and making him the
child of perdition. Let not any say by this reason, to tempt to any sin, by
any evil counsel ^^ provocation to immoderate anger or envy, should deserve
death, for every tempting to sin is a ruining of the soul of such as we give
bad counsel unto, and tempt to sin.

Answ. If we do so tempt them by a sinful way, as a sinful injuring, and
railing on them, or by a wicked course, it is sure it does deserve punishment
by the Magistrate; but the act of so counselling and tempting to sin, though
E^conditione operis, it be soule-ruin, yet it is not such as deserves death.
Otherwise, killing, adultery, sorcery, beastiality, tempt also to sin and
soule-ruine, besides the other injury in them, against the life and ch^stity of
men.

2 The Proposition is proved, because the will of God can be the Creator, and
first Author of nothing, but which is morrally good. For the Scripture is as
full in the duties of the second table touching mercy and righteousness, as in
the duties of the first, touching piety and religion, and any thing pretended
to be morrall, has God for its author, in either the first or the second
table of the Law, nor can the will of man be the author of any thing morrally
good, and will-righteousnesse, is as unlawful as will worship, or will-piety,
since the word is a perfect rule in matters of doctrine, or faith, or of life,
manners and conversation, and teaches the Judge what he should do, Deuteronomy. 17.
18, 19, 20. Psalm. 119. 9. Psalm. 19. 8, 9. Prove. 3. 21, 22, 23, etc.

3 What ever by order of justice, does concern the life and death of our
neighbor, rewarding or punishing him in name, body, goods, so as if it be
justly inflicted, it is justice; and if unduely and undeservedly, it is
unjustice, and murder: as wronging of him in his body by stripes, wounding,
death; in his liberty by prison; in his goods, by fines; that must be
determined in the word by him that is Lord of life, death, liberty, of our
name and goods, otherwise the word should not teach us when the Judge sins,
when not, when he makes just Laws, when unjust, when he exceeds in punishing,
when he is deficient.

I come to the assumption, The punishing of a seducing Prophet is morrall. The
punishing of a seducing Prophet is moral.
In that it is commanded to father and mother, not to pity him, Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
holden forth as the zeal of God, in father and mother, under the Messia^s
Kingdom, Zach. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and every one is forbidden, To bid him
God speed, yea, and commanded to deny him an act of humanity, and hospitality,
and not receive him in his house, 2 John 1. If we be commanded to put any shame
on him, far more must the Ruler be taught of God, what shame he should put on
him. For what ever under the New Testament is capable of a command, is moral.
And if moral, what the Magistrate should do to him can no more be determined
by the will and wit of man, than it can be determined what punishment the
Magistrate must inflict upon the murderer, the adulterer, the Sorcerer, the
Sodomite; which all the wisdom of God has determined: in the word, otherways
God has left the Magistrate in the dark, that from the word he has no
direction, when he commits murder, or when he does acts of justice. And
that it is a moral act also to seduce souls is clear, in that, 1. We are
commanded to beware of such. Matthew. 7. 5. and avoid them, Tit. 3. 10. Romans 16.
17. 2. That the Lord condemns them in his word, as such as make their
followers the children of perdition, Yea Matthew. 22. 15. They subvert the
hearers; their word cate as a Canker, 2 Timothy 2. 15, 17. Lead silly women
Captive, 2 Timothy 3. are Deceivers, Tit. 1. 10. Now that God has appointed a
punishment for this of old, and has spoken against this sin so much in the
New Testament, and bidden private Christians, cry shame on Seducers, and fly
them, and yet left the Magistrate under a discharge, and inhibition to draw a
sword against such: who can believe it? except that inhibition given to the
Christian Magistrate were written in the Testament of our Lord. To say the new
Testament-dispensation is so spiritual that God will have no remedying of
seducing, but by the spiritual armor of the word, is said without ground, when
the New Testament-dispensation is as spiritual to gain the Sorcerer, the
The^fe, the Sodomite, the drunkard, the Reviler, as the Idolater by the
spiritual a^mor of the Word, Act. 19. 19. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. and by this
reason the Magistrate may draw the sword against no theife, Sodomite, Drunkard,
Sorcerer, contrary to Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Especially since
the Magistrate is not indifferent toward ill-doers, and well-doers, since he
must punish the one as a Nurse-Father, praise and reward the other, 1 Peter 2.
14. gaining of souls is well-doing, Matthew 25. 21, 23. And seducing of souls
is by the Law of Nature and Nations, the worst of injuries done to men. To
punish the seducing teacher is an act of justice morally obliging men ever, and
every where.


2 Argument, That which is perpetually moral, and one act of Justice at all
times and places, must oblige us Christians, and the Christian Magistrate, as
well as the Jewish Rulers: But to punish the seducing Prophet is perpetually
moral, and an act of justice at all times, and in all places, as the rewarding
of such as teach truth, is a commendable act of justice, Ergo,

The proposition is clear, in regard the moral Law does therefore oblige us
Christians, because it is morally perpetual, and perpetually moral; and that
in all times and places* as to serve God, honor our parents, not to murder,
etc. is perpetually moral now, as among Jews, with us, as among the Indians
and Tartarians: but to punish the seducing Prophet is such; 1. because the
Heretic is condemned by his own conscience, False Teachers in seducing
others, apprehend th^^ hand of divine vengeance pursuing them; as other ill
doers do; and so it must be natural Justice in the Magistrate to punish them.
Tit. 3. 10. in believing lies Ergo, Far more by his own conscience, by
leading others into that same condemnation with himself; and if he apprehend
the vengeance of a Godhead, there must be a conscience naturally apprehending
such: as we see the conscience of murderers, and of Cain, fear some revenging
hand. If therefore the Minister of God, the Magistrate, inflict this, it must
be nothing else but an act of natural Justice, which the natural conscience
does apprehend. But what acts of Justice the conscience naturally fears, must
be acts of Justice perpetually moral, not respecting one man or Nation more
than another. 2. All Countries by an instinct, apprehend a God, The punishing
of false Prophets, is of the Law of nature.
and conceive their Priests and Prophets are to be entertained and rewarded, as
Egypt, Genesis 47. 22. Midian, F^xed, 2. 16. Exodus 18. 1. Judge. 17. 5. c. 18. 4. 2
King. 15. 18. The Philistims, 1 Samuel 5. 5. c. 6. 2. Baal and the Zidonians had
their Priests, 2 King. 10. 8, 19, Lycainia, Act 14. 13. And if their Rulers
feed their Priests, the false Prophets and Priests that deceive them, and
mis-lead them, they must punish: So the King of Babylon roasted in a fire two
false Prophets, Jer. 29. 21, 22. And it is clear, that Jeremiah argues not
from any judicial Law, when he says, The Prophets that speak lies in the
name of the Lord, shall die by the sword, c. 14. v. 14, 15. It was by the sword
of the Chaldeans, (who had nothing but the Law of nature) that they perished;
for no Judicial Law of God taught them, that he ought to die by the sword of
the Magistrate, who speaks lies in the name of the Lord; whereas the Chaldeans
knowing that Jeremiah had prophesied truth, and was sent of God, they entreated
him well, as the Lord had foretold, Ier. 15. 8. Nor can it be said, that the
consequence is null, and that that cannot oblige Christian Magistrates, which
has no better warrant than the corrupt practices of Heathens; for they
persecuted the true Prophets and Apostles that spoke in the name of the Lord;
as Herod beheaded James, Acts 12. and apprehended Peter. Nero persecuted Paul,
and D^mitian confined John to the Isle Pathutos for the Word of God. To which I
answer, That the Argument is not drawn simply from the practice of Heathen
Magistrates, but from the light of nature, that teaches all Magistrates,
Heathen and Christian, to punish public impostors, false Prophets and liers,
as most pernicious enemies to the peace of all humane Societies. And if the Law
of nature and Nations dictate to all Societies, That deceivers, and such as
raise false reports and lies upon earthly Judges, should be punished; far more
is it a principle of the Law of nature, that public liars, and such as speak
lies in the name of the Lord, and deceive and seduce the souls of father and
mother, King and Ruler, and of all ranks of men in the Society, should not be
tolerated in the society. And what though Emperors and Kings have abused the
power that God gave them for the truth, to persecute the servants of Christ for
the truth, it follows not, but they had just power, as the Ministers of God,
to punish seducing Prophets, as well as other ill-doers, by the law of nature
and Nations. And this I take is holden forth by Job, Idolatry is to be punished
by the Judge, and that by the testimony of Job c. 31.
31, 26, 27, 28. who being under no Judicial Law, obliging the Jews, but a
Gentile, and so in this led by the Law of nature and Nations, makes Idolatry
and worshipping of the Sun and Moon, Who was obliged to observe no Judicial
law but only the law moral and the law of nature.
to be an iniquity to be punished by the Judge. That this is not an iniquity to
be punished by God (as if heresy be innocence, as Libertines say, it must
neither be punished by God nor man) but by the Judge on earth is clear. For 1.
the expression, v. 28. varies only in the number from that which is v. 11. Now
there Job says of Adultery (...) and ipsum iniquitas Iudicum. English divines
^n. on Job 31. ver. 11.
And ver. 98 (...) etiam hoc iniquitas Iudie is. The English Divines do well
observe, Pagninus in verbo.
That adultery is a capital crime to be punished by the Judge, Genesis 38. 24.
Levit. 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. And they expound ver. (...)
28. the same way. Pagnin. est iniquites Iudicanda, Iudice di^na, vel
Iuditiaria. Mercerus, Exodus 21. 22, He shall give (...) according to the
Judges, Mercerus ibid.
Isai. 16. 3. do, Judgment. Shimlerus, (...) Judges that cognos^^ of causes.
Deuteronomy. 31. 31. Our enemies being Judges, Job 31. 11. Inquitas dignaque Iudicetur
and puniatur. LXX.
It is true, the LXX, expound it, Chaldaica paraphras.
(...); and the Chalde Paraphrase, (...), est enim iniquitas maxima. But it is
taken for a crime that comes before an earthly Judge. Hieronimus H^eron.
transl. Job 31. v. 11.
So Hieronimus. And Exodus 21. 22. If a man strike a woman with child, and she
live, he shall give according to the sentence of the Judges. Hieron. Trans.
Exodus 21. 22.
Hieronimus quantum arbitri Iudicaverint. The Chalde Paraphrase, (...), Biblia
parisien^. and complutens. LXX.
and dabit per sent^ntiam Iudicum.

LXX. (...). The Syriak, Dabit quantum decernent Iudices. The Samaritan,
Dabitque ex sententia Iudicum. Vatablus, Syraica versio Samaritan.
Job 31. v. 11. Iniquitas capitali supplicio persequind^, v. 28. Nam and ea
iniquitas capitali supplicio digna. Junius, Iniquitas a Iudicibus
animadvertenda. Vatab. Job 31.
Piscator, Iniquitas Iudiciaria. Complutentes, Iunius Job 31.
Iniquitas Judicanda. Pineda in Job 31. 28. Piscator ibid.
Iniquitas digna Iudicio, Iudicumque sententia severissima and gravissimo
supplicio. Pineda com. in Job 31. 28.
All agree to this, That Idolatry, according to Job, from the Law of nature,
deserves canitall punishment to be inflicted by the Judge. And Pi^eda says,
this agrees with the Law of God. Especially, Deuteronomy. 4. Sanctius in Job 31. v.
1^.
25. and 23. Sanctius gathers from Job 31. 11. That Adulterers in Jobs time
were, by the sentence of the Judge burnt. Now the same expression is, v. 28.
spoken of Idolatry. Hence is Socrates condemned to die for his false Religion,
as is supposed by the people. Maximus condemned the Priscillia^s, Ier. Tailor
Liberty of prophesying sect. 14 p. 206,
as Hieronimus observes for Heresy. Nor is it much to be valued, that Ier.
Tailor says, That Maximus was a Tyrant, and put to death Catholic Heretics.
Without choice, it proves punishing of Heretics, Spalato de Rep.
as supposed of old to be warranted by law. F^cles. l 8. c. 8. which book is
wanting in the ordinary coppies.
Vrsatus and Stacius procured at Court, Law to death against Priscillianists.
And the Niceue Fathers, that Arrius should be banished. Nor does Spalato cite
Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Hi^rome, Severus, Sulpitius, Minutius, Hilary,
Damascen, Chrysestome, Theophilact, Tay^ors liberty of prophesying sect 14. p.
207.
Bernard, for any other purpose (whatever Tailor say on the contrary) but 1. To
prove, that forcing of men to Religion, is not to the way of God, which also I
teach; for the preaching of the Word; not the using of the sword, How the
fathers deny the sword is to be used against men for their conscience.
is the means of conversion of sinners 2. That killing is not to be practiced
on all Heretics. 3. That the Law and the Sword, are not to go without
convincing of the conscience by the Word of God. 4. That to deliver up godly
men to persecuting Tyranes, because of some errors, has more scandal to cause
men stumble at truth, than to make truth victorious. 5. That neither Church nor
State can judge heart-opinions, nor punish them, but only professed and taught
opinions, that are both unnecessary and unsound. 6. That Pastors have not the
Sword, to compel to Religion. 7. That Nations of another Religion are not
gained to Christ by the Sword; not can we make war against them, because they
are Idolators, and follow a false Religion; nor was Idolatry the ground of the
war that Israel raised against the Ca^aanitos and other Nations. Tailor
liberty of prophesying sect. 13. p. 13.
To all which I add the words of Ier. Tailor. The best and ablest Doctors in
Christendom have been deceived actually in (...) of Religion, in that all
sorts of Christians dissent from the error^ of Papias, Irenaeus, Lactantius,
Justin Martyr, Cyprian, Firmilian, etc. Ergo, by Tailors sentence, we are not
rest, much upon the Fathers, whether they be for or against liberty of
conscience.

For course to be taken with Pagans (to speak by the way) all that Lactantius,
l. 5. c. 20. Tertulli ad Scap^lam, c. 2. Augustine, ser. 6. de verb. dom. c. 7.
cont. lite* Petitian* lib. 2. c. 83. we approve, and what famous Schoolmen,
(...), Thomas, Bannes, Durandus, Palud^^^ Richardus, (...), Paluda, and that of
Augustine* s^^. 6. de verb Dom. c. 7. Glandiendum est Paganu, ut audiant
veritatem, in Christianis vero secanda putredo. Pagans must be allured, and not
compelled by Wars to the faith. Because the just cause of War must either
be an open breach of Nations against the Law of nature; for it must be a finne,
of which a multitude may easily be, or are convinced of; as is clear in the
A^^lekites, and all the Nations who invaded Israel, Josh. 11. v. 19, 20. or
then in a visible Church, it must be for manifest Apostasy from the Covenant of
God, and (...) Religion, as the new Altar supposed to be erected by the two
Trib^^ and the half against the only one Altar commanded by God See
Cavarruvias in Regnum paccatum part 2. sect. 4. Setus in 4. distin. 5. 4. 1.
art. 10. Molina de Justitia disp. 106, and Bann^s 11. g. 10. art. 11. says,
that Paul the third defined well, that the Western Indians being capable of
life eternal, were true Lords of their possessions, and could not be justly
deprived thereof.

To tolerate Jews openly blaspheming Christ, or to receive them in the
Commonwealth, cannot be allowed, or to suffer them to have Synagogues, In
regard they blaspheme the God we are in Covenant with, and do no less deny
him, then Goliath and Senacharib did, 2. But simply seduced Jews are to be
instructed, for there is a peculiar prophecy touching the Jews, Romans 11. Jer.
50. 5, 6. That they shall be brought in to know Christ, and believe in him.

3 Argument, That which was a mere judicial law, and not only in no force
now, as touching any obligation to bodily punishment from the Christian
Magistrate, is now under the Gospel, either a sin offensive to humane society
Or, 2. No sin, but innocence, as some say, Or then 5. ^ thing lndifferent. If
it be a sin offensive to humane society, and the people of God, to drive them
away from the Lord their God, and an abomination that Israel should fear to
do, in the days of Moses and before Christ came, as is clear, Deuteronomy. 13. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. It must be so now: for since it is not a Typical,
but a moral sin, it is at all times, and in all places to us, and now, and to
them, and then, an abomination. Church cens^res and rebukes for conscience
inferi^^ most of all the absurdities that Libertines imp^e to us.
Ergo the Argument of the holy Ghost being perpet^all, that it is destructive
to humane society, the Lord must provide the same, or as effectual means, for
the remedying thereof. But if the Christian Magistrate have no place or power
to repress such abominations, but Isreal may seduce men after false gods, and
not fear the stroke of (...) sword, then has the Lord left the Church to the
lust of ^avenous Wolves that destroy the flock, and has left these wolves to
the Lords immediate hand of judgment: for rebukes, Church Censures are not to
be used against them, upon the same ground that the sword should not be drawn
against them, by the ground of Libertines: for rebukes and Church Censures do.
1. Force the conscience no less than the sword. 2. They beget Hypocrites. 3.
Are as contrary to the law of meekness and gentleness of Christ and his
servants, who used no such way to gain the Samaritans, and other gaine-sayers,
as the sword is repugnant to Christ's meek administration, who did not use
either sword, crying, rebukes, or excommunication, against broken reeds, though
both these may be used against Seducers in great gentleness and tenderness
toward their souls, by fathers in State or Church. 4. They are no less
against liberty of prophesying, beleiving with a reserve to believe the
contrary, than the sword. For how can we in the name of the Lord, rebuke,
threaten eterned wrath, deliveto, Satan, seducers, more than the Magistrate
can use the sword against them, yea, or refute their errors, in the name and
authority of Christ, or strike with his rod, since we are not infallibly
persuaded more than these we call Seducers, for they may upon the same grounds
call us Seducers, threaten us with eternal wrath, and deliver us to Satan, in
the same name and authority that the sound Church proceeds against them; for
neither side had the infallibility of divine authority, in a reflex knowledge,
more than others, by the Doctrine of Libertines. 5. They are no less contrary
to growing up in knowledge and new light; for contrary reasons, and rebukes,
and threatenings are as apt to expel new light, and to reduce the Seducer to
old darkness, for any certainty of persuasion any of the sides have, for both
may see beside their book, and dream the moon is made of wax, by this way,
and instructing of teachers that see but on this, and the yonder side of truth
with e^^s of flesh, as they say, is as uneffectuall a remedy against Teachers,
as the sword. 6. Since the sword and stoning, when used by the Jews, Deuteronomy. 13.
presupposes infallibility. What warrant do our Lords of license of conscience
give us, that all the Commons, and Lads, and Girls that lifted a stone against
the Seducer, had Proph^ticall, infallibility: or that every wife, to whom her
husband might say, Let us go and follow Baal and Dagon, for sure the Zid^nians
and Philistines are a people taught of God as well as we, was infallible in her
knowledge and unerrable, and the husband an erring Seducer according to the
principles that masters of license would lead us on: for there must be a
response given to all and every one to believe this is the Seducer, from the
light of Moses law, else they had no more right to stone the Seducer, then the
Seducer to stone them. For as we may err in persecuting true Prophets, I hope
so did the people kill the Prophets, (...)
and stone them that were sent, Matthew. 23. 27 and 2 Chronicles. Spernere conten^^^re.
36. 16. they mocked and misused the Prophets of God, and did as foully err in
persecuting, as now we under the Gospel. Yet Mr. Goodwin gives to the Jews an
infallibility of an Oracle to tell them who was the man to be stoned, as a
Seducer. But let him answer these Queries.

1 Did the Oracle speak immediately to all the actors in the stoning? That
there was an immediate response of Gods oracle telling who was the false
teacher, is an unwarranted forgery of Libertines.
I think no: then the Oracle spoke to the Priest only. To Pashur; then the
Officers had but the word of Peshur to put Jeremiah in the stocks, and the
people had but the Priests word for stoning the man.

2 Query, Were the people infallible in discerning the Priest to be a true
relater of the mind of God from the Oracle? How believed they then some lying
Priests who persecuted the Prophets of God?

3 Query, Was the Priest infallible in discerning the Oracle and relating the
mind of God to the people? How then did they say, he is worthy to dye? How did
Caiaphas say, What need we any more witness, We have heard himself blaspheme?

4 Were not the Priests Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 11. To Judge according to the sentence
of the Law of God delivered to Moses? Was this an immediate Oracle of
infallibility, such as Bellarmin, Becanus, Gretsorus, Valentia Corn. a lapide
ascribe to their Appollo at Rome? I think Mr. Goodwin cannot say that. If he
do, I know what to answer to the Papists in that. If it was the law and the
testimony, as I conceive it was, had not all the people that were to stone the
seducing Prophet, their way of judging the false Prophet? If they must not
follow him after other Gods, and if they must be actors in stoning him. And was
not this fallible as well as ours under the new Testament? and therefore,
because we are not infallible judging in the heart-Heretick; we must not draw
the Sword against him; and I say, nor can we draw the Sword of the Spirit
against any such; for in the using of the Sword of the Spirit, in teaching,
refuting, or arguing against Heretics; we are not infallible. If this way of
Peoples judging, and not listening to the suggestions of a false Prophet was
infallible, how erred they, and slew the true Prophets, and stoned them that
were sent, Matthew. 23. 27. As well as we may? And why may not we,
notwithstanding of our fallibility and actual erring, judge and drive away by
the sword, devourers of the flock, as well as they?

6. If God have left no means under the New Testament, but exhorting, to
suppress the seducer, what shall be said of John 2 Epist. 10. who forbids to
receive a seducer in our house, or bid him God speed. Sure this is some
external forcing of the conscience, if we credit Libertines; for rather then
some seducer lie in the fields in America in winter, he will say he abhors
Familianisme, though he hate all the sound in the faith. Now is not this a
greater external power, armed against a Seducer, then if the holy Ghost had
said, If a murderer, a Parricide, a Sorcerer, a Drunkard, come to your house,
let him not lie in the fields, lodge him, but give him course cheer, and no
bed to lie on, no fire to warm him? yet so much is not said in express words,
for the forcing of the conscience in the New Testament. Again, for the second
member, if to teach what we judge in our conscience to be truth, If Heresy be
Innocence, seducing heretics ought to be praised and rewarded.
though most erroneous, be no sin, but innocence, yea if (as Minus Celsus
said) it be a token of a good conscience, and innocent fear of God, as
Libertines say, we are to judge no man's heart, and that in a matter of
salvation, no man will be so Devill-like as to go to hell, and lead millions
of souls with him, the way being against his conscience. For Ier. Tailor
says, It is all one here, Liberty of prophesying.
whether it be a real truth the Seducer holds and teaches, or if he only
apprehend it to be a truth, though it be an untruth; and he said well according
to his way. Now, if to teach (I say) what we conceive to be truth, though most
false, be no sin, but innocence, then the Magistrate ought not only not to
punish it, but reward it; and to allow stipends and maintenance to all
Seducers, to teach what errors they judge saving truths. And grant me these
three, which cannot be denied but by gross Anabaptists, 1. Romans 13. That the
Magistrate is to reward well doing. 2. That the workman is worthy of his
wages, 1 Timothy 5. 18, 19. Matthew. 10. 10. And 3 That a preaching Ministry is
necessary under the New Testament, 1 Cor, 1. 16, 17, 18. 23, 24. Romans 10. 14,
15, 16. Then must it follow of necessity, That the Christian Magistrate should
maintain and pay stipends to all Preachers, whether sound, and Orthodox, or
Heterodox, and seducing; for if he withdraw maintenance, as a Magistrate, or
any other way, because he judges the Preacher to be unsound, and a seducer, he
takes upon himself to punish a man for his conscience, when as he has no
infallibility; and he does so punish and force the conscience of the innocent
Pastor and People both. For he is obliged to judge, that both the sound Pastor
and the Seducer follow their conscience; and whatever the Doctrine of either
be, Orthodox or Heterodox, he is to judge that both follows his innocent
conscience, and in so doing, both fears God, and does well; and by his Office
he is for the praise and reward of well doers: And suppose he judge in his
conscience, that the Doctrine of the Seducer is error and Heresy, yet is he to
judge it Heresy with a reserve, so as it may be to him the next month sound
Doctrine; and therefore not to judge otherwise of the Seducer, than that he
follows the dictates of his conscience. And so as yet he does not take on him
infallibility to judge, that the Seducer teaches against the light of his
conscience, and therefore is not to punish him, but reward him, and pay wages
to him, as to a well doer: Yea, and whatever Ministers teach, since neither
they are infallible in teaching the very fundamentals, nor the people that
hear infallible in judging, and neither are to believe with the persuasion of
faith; And all are to be heard as instructors. For suppose you believe that
Christ is God consubstantiall with the father, yet are you to hear Arrius
preach, and to admit a contrary light. If Arrius can make the contrary appear
to your mind, and Arrius preaches according to the light of his mind, and
there is no reason why you should not be instructed by the Seducer (for you are
to try his doctrine) as well as by the sound teacher, for you have no
infallible knowledge who is the seducer, or who is the sound Teacher, by the
principles of Libertines.

The third cannot be said, to wit, That it is indifferent to drive away people
from the true God; for it must either be good and praise worthy, or evil, and
so punishable, against which we have sufficiently argued.

Argument 4 What the Magistrate is foreprophecied to be under the New
Testament, The Magistrate as a Magistrate according to prophecies in the old
Testament is to punish seducers.
that he must discharge with all the power God has given him, and that
perpetually, and not by the tie of a judicial and temporary law, which binds
for a time only. But the Magistrate is fore-prophefied Isai. 49. 23. and 60.
10. Rev. 21. 26. to be a Nurse-father to the Church under the New Testament, to
keep and guard both Tables of the Law, and to see that Pastors do their duty,
to minister to the Church by his royal power, yea when the fountain shall be
opened in David's house, that is under the New Testament, he shall thrust
through the false Prophet that speaks lies in the Name of the Lord, Zach. 13.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Kings as Kings must confer some royal service to the Church,
over which they are Nurse-fathers. But all the power that Kings have, is
essentially co-active, and in order to rewarding or punishing, Romans 13. 3, 4.
therefore they must confer coactive service. Piscator says well, That the
Prince is called the keeper of both Tables of the Law by our Divines, therefore
he is to vindicate Gods glory in both. He that has the keeping of two pits,
one more horrible and dark, another more mild and heartsome for two
malefactors, a thief, and an adulterer, he must not cast the thief in such a
dark dungeon as the adulterer: So if the Magistrate keep both Tables, he must
not punish according to his own will, Bloody Tenet c. 125. p. 214. What Master
Williams gives to the Magistrate in Religion is not sufficient.
but according to the rule and prescript of God. Nor says the Author of the
Bloody Tenet any thing, when he tells us that the Magistrate owes to the true
Religion; 1. Approbation and reverend esteem. 2. Personal submission to the
spiritual government, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. 3. Protection to the Subjects whether
they be apart or met together. To a false Religion he owes permission, not
approbation Mat. 13. 30. 2. Protection from violence to their persons and
estates.

Answ. All this is very nothing, 1. Approbation and submission to truth is no
royal power. Isaiah gives a paternall and fatherly power to the King in
Church matters, when he says, He shall be a nurse-father. Now all he gives in
these two former points, to wit, approbation of, and submission to truth, is no
more then any tradesman or son owes to the Church: So Isaiah makes the King a
father; this author makes him a son subject to the Church, which subjection I
deny not in another consideration, but that as a nurse-father he should approve
the truth, and submit thereunto, as all the members of the Church, makes him
both a father and a son; a commander, and a humble submissive obeyer in the
same consid^ration, which is most contradictorious and uncongruous, for he must
speak of him as a Ruler, or else he says nothing. The third thing which is,
protection to the true Church is nothing to the purpose; for that he owes to
them as subjects, not as they are serving God in the duties of the first Table,
for the King by this man can neither command them nor forbid them, by his
Magisteriall or coactive power to serve God, or not to serve him, in the duties
of the first Table, and by the true Church that the King owes protection to,
the Author means not the Church that is in it self sound and true, but the
Church that seems and appears so to the conscience of the Magistrate though
most erroneous. Now this is the Church of Seekers and Anabaptists, but suppose
the Magistrate or Commander in war be a Familist, a gross Anabaptist; the
Author will not say, That he ought to protect the Church assembled to worship
God, and to excommunicate and deliver to Satan such as subvert the faith of
many, and say the Resurrection is already past, or that he ought to protect an
Assembly of Divines that are for Presbyteriall Government, and the truth that
Calvin and our Reformers delivered: These are to him Antichristian Synagogues;
or if he owe them protection, he ought to offer violence with his sword, to
Anabaptists, such as rose in Germany under John Becold of Leydon, that out of
mere principles of Religion, killed all that were not of their way, and to
displace, imprison, and confine Presbiterians. So yet in a defensive way the
Magistrate must offer violence to the conscience of men, who for mere Religious
grounds do labor to scatter and violently to hinder the meetings of the
servants of God: for how many of the Sectaries of England who are for liberty
of conscience have come into Churches in England, and stepped up to the Pulpit,
and hindered the Minister the discharge of his conscience to the flock, and
offered violence to the meeting of the true Church? now it is not enough to say
the Minister was but an Antichristian service-bookman, and it was no true
Church whose service such Sectaries interrupted; but giving and not granting it
were so, yet are Libertines not to offer violence to the conscience of any
Church true or false, if they be true to their own principles: but this Author
being an Anabaptist and a Seeker will say neither wars nor such violence are
lawful, but if so, the Magistrate then cannot with the sword protect the true
Church against the violence of men, who upon mere conscience disturb their
Assemblies.

2. To Libertines all Churches professing true Religion (as all Churches on
earth, Indians, and Mahometanians not excepted, do) must be true Churches, for
they are not to judge, but that they follow their conscience, Christian kings
are no more nurse-fathers Isai. 49. 23. to the true Churches of Christ, then to
the Synagogue of Antichrist according to the way of Libertines.
and so the Magistrate ow^ protection to them, though their conscience be most
erroneous, and even for such as they conceive to be true Churches, they are not
infallibly persuaded they are such, and so the Magistrate gives no protection
to them as true Churches, but only as Subjects, which the Author tells the
Magistrate he owes to false Churches, and so the King by this is a
Nurse-father, by his office and by the places Isai. 49. 23. and 60. 10. to
bring his glory of protection to the where of Rome if they be his Subjects as
well as to the New Jerusalem: but sure the King by these places ows
father-nursing and Magistratical protection to the true Church not to the
false, because Isai 49. 23. 1. The place is clearly of such a Church as the
Lord can no more forget, then a woman cannot have compassion on the fruit of
her womb, v. 14, 15. 2. Such a Church as is graven on the palms of Gods
hands, v. 16. 3. Whose ^^sters and destroyers shall be removed, v. 17. and
destroyed, verse. 18. 4. Which shall be enlarged, by the incomming of the
Gentiles, whose place shall be too narrow for multitude of Sons and daughters
begotten by the power of the Gospel, though she was a captive removing too and
fro, v. 19, 20, 21. 5. A Church that shall lift up a standard to the Gentiles,
and Nations to take in their Sons and daughters to fight under Christ's colors,
as being baptized to the same faith, verse. 22. 6 A Church whose spiritual
Government Kings and Queens shall obey, licking the dust before them, v. 23. 7.
A people that wait for the Lord, and so shall not be ashamed, v. 23. Now to say
that a false Church shall have all these glorious privileges needs no
refutation, and they must be stupid who teach that Kings are made Nurse-fathers
by this Text to Antichrists Kingdom, as if the Lord had the Beast and his
followers written on the palms of his hands, or that Kings being made
Nurse-fathers to the true Church, owe nothing to those that wait on the Lord,
but the common protection of Subjects which they owe to limbs of Antichrist,
Jews, Mahometans, Indians, who worship the Devil, if these be their Subjects
is a very pleasant dream and uncredible; for the place Isai. 60. cries to him
that runs and will read, that Kings shall minister something to the true
Church, which they do in no sort to the false Church, and it is most evident
to the judicious Reader, that the sucking of the breasts of Kings, v. 10. 16.
and the kissing of the Son, Psalm. 2. must be more then common protection to
Subjects that are open enemies to Christ and wasters of Zion; yea it must be
some protection to the Church as the Church, and to the Laws and Ordinances of
God, in rewarding the well-doers, and conserving the Ordinances, and the
correcting of wolves, Impostors, lying Prophets; for if we come to Master
Williams his way, That the King owes protection from violence to the persons
and estates of false Worshippers, to those that serve Devils, and because they
are Subjects, then those Texts say no more then Be glad Indians, Popish
Idolaters, Mahometans, for I will make Kings your nurse-fathers, and Queens
your nurse-mothers, and Kings^shall minister unto you, and you shall suck the
hreasts of Kings, and Kings shall bring their glory and riches to you. Nor need
we prove that the place Isai. 60. speaks of the true Church, read it and its
proved, v. 1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee, etc. Nor is the matter helped to say, It is a great favor,
that the power of the Kings who lent their ^orne to the Beast, is now lent to
the Lamb and his followers for their comfort, for then what power bring the
Kings to the New Jerusalem, but Royal power? and what Royal power to protect
the true Church in their persons and estates as they do the false? is this the
breasts of the milk of Kings, and their royal power as nurse-fathers? and that
power which they bring into the New Jerusalem? when it is the same very power
they brought into Babel, and the same horn they lent to the beast. 2. The Kings
lent no royal and paternall power to the true Church but what they lent to
Babel as yet, nor do they yield any royal power to hold up Christ's throne and
maintain his ordinances, or convey the sincere milk of the word, by their
politic coactive power to the Church, if our Adversaries Doctrine be received.

Again, The mind of diverse famous Authors touching the parable of the Tares.
permission to the false Church is proved by Matthew. 13. 30. Let the tares grow
^ill Harvest. Gulielmus Parisiensis part. 1. hact. de legibus p. 27. Vbi ergo
impii in consumptionem populi dei, vel diminutionem crescunt, ibi nullatenus
^rescere sinendi sunt, Mr. Williams mis-interpreteth the parable of the tares.
sed eradicandi; Quod si quis dixorit, quia ipsi sunt zizania, possunt esse
^riticum, quia converti possunt ad viam veritatis -- sed non hoc^ certum, quod
autem per* ipses, illi qui triticum sunt, Guli^l. Paris^ensts on the parable of
the tares. Let them grow till harvest, because tares may become wheat, but that
is uncertain, but it is certain that wheat may become tares, then let them grow
till harvest to destroy the people of God, is as if one should say, let a few
wolves continually eat and devour the flock, because God happily shall make
these wolves sheep and lambs, and let some few^ burning torches devour and
consume the wood, because God may make these fruitful trees, and let some few
Lepers, who continually infect most contagiously remain among whole people,
because God may save them.
zizania siant, hoc evidenter certum est* Hoc enim est ac si diceretur, ut
paucis lupis in media gregis existenti^^^, gr^g^mque incessanter lacer antibus,
ac devorantibus, parca^^^, quia forte deus, faciet illos, oves and agnos, --
and dimitte^das p^^eas faces ardentos in medio silv a lignorum germinantium,
ips^^que silv^^ inc^ssanter ardentes, quia Deus forsitan faciet illas arbores
fructiferas, -- pauc^s leprosos dimittendos esse in medio sani populi assidue
contagio ipsum corrumpentes and inficientes, quia forsitan Deus salvabit illos.
Calvin advers. Calvin advers. Servetum if the words of the parable be precisely
pressed, all Magistrates must be interdicted of the use of the sword, Ch^ker in
Parenes. the Par^ble speaks not of ^udges.
Servetum numb. 597. si praecise nobiscum agant, ex verborum formula, non
tantum prohibeantur magistratus ab usu gladii, sed omnem disciplinam e medio
tolli oportet. Joan. a Ch^kier in Paraenesi ad haereticos, c. 2. parabolam
illam non loqui de judicibus. Beza de haeret. puniendis, p. 136. Nemo patrum
haeretic^s ne quidem judicandos ante extremum diem asserit. 229. zizaniorum
appellatione intelligi arbitror non sols haereticos, sed omnes qui vitae
exemplo Ecclesiam offendunt, Chrysostom. hom. 47. in Mat. sinite crescere,
dissipate haereticorum conciliabula, ora obstruite, audacian loquendi
concidite, sed ne interficite, item ibid. dogmata quidem impia arguite and
anathematizate, sed hominibus ipsis parcite. How far is Mr. Williams Bloody
Tenet against all the power of the Ministry, ^eza nor none of the Fathers ever
said that Heretics should not be judged till the last day, Chrysos^. hom. 47.
on Matthew. d^ssipate the Assemblies of Heretics but kill them not.
or so much as rebuking Heretics, for he says c. 28. p. 53. Thirdly I have
proved that the Ministers or Messengers of the Lord Jesus ought to let (the
tares or heretics) alone, and to let them live in the world, and neither seek
by prayer nor prophecy, to pluck them up before the harvest. Enthymius and
Theophylact follow Chrysostom, puniendos, non necandes. Iacobus Acontius
stratage. Satan l. 3. p. 153. constat triticum esse pios, zizania impios -- si
sinendi sunt crescere, tam impii, quam pii -- tolleretur omnis magistratus
authoritas omnisque disciplina, and page 157. Inter Pontificios Jacobus Simanca
parisiensis Episcop* Jaco. Acontius by the wheat are meant the godly, by the
tares the ungodly, if both godly and ungodly must be ^^^ered to grow, all
Magistracy and authority of discipline should be abolished. Jacobus Simanca.
Tares are all wicked men, then no wicked men must be punished, most absurd.
Ga^acheus. If real danger be imminent, the Church and the Christian Magistrate
must abstain from discipline, and the Parable says (...) So Suarez.
in Enchyridio violatae religionis ti. 1. p. 16. nu. 12. parabolam loqui de
punitione impiorum, quando est periculum ne simul eradicetur triticum, zizania
sunt omnes filii nequam, nullus igitur facinorosus puniendus, absurdum, non
loquitur parabola de judicibus. Phillippus Gamachaeus in 12. q. 10. de infidel.
q. 13. sinite crescere, si verum ac reale non imaginarium damnum immineat,
debet tum Ecclesia, debent tum Christiani principes a coactione abstinere. Sic
Suarez tom. de vir theo. dis. 18. se. 4. nu. 9. ( ne forte eradicetis) sie
August. l. 3. contra Parmen* cap. 2. c. Tannerus, least ye pluck up etc. ^ee
gives a just and adequate reason of the permitting of evil.
33. Tannerus tom. 1. dis. 1. de fid. q. 9. du. 2. n. 30. ( ne forte
^radicetis) ratio haec est communis and adequata omnis justae permissionis
malorum quando etiam Deus eb eandem causam mala permittit, Azorius inst. par.
1. l 8. c. 13. per zizania haeretici intelliguntur secundum Chrysostimum,
Augustinum, Hieronimum, Enthymium, Theop^ylactum, sed respondet ex parabolis
non semper sumi efficax argumentum, Azorius, by tares heretics are not
understood acco^ding to the mind of Chrysostom. Augustine, Hierom^ Euthymius,
Theophylact.
and generaliter per verba, accipi hic pravos mores and falsa dogmata. Nor is
it altogether to be condemned that Gregorius 9. Innocen. 4. Paulus 3. Clemens
8. command the Talmudicall and Cabalisticall books containing Blasphemies
against God to be burnt in the fire, August. Ep. 48. ad Vincen. retracteth
ingeniously his opinion, That Heretics ought not to be punished, mea primitus
sententia, erat, neminem ad unitatem fidei cogendum. Theodore Srackius in hist.
Anabap. c. 8. in notis p. 108. to the compelling of men to religion against
their will, that which some object out of Lactantius, that Lactantius does
argue against such as being destitute of the word of God and sound reason,
would compel by the Sword only men* to receive true Religion.

It is a token the man is scant and ebb of proofs in Scriptures, The Parable
of the Tares considered.
when he can prove liberty of conscience by no Scripture, but one wing and tith
of a Parable, never expounded by Christ, who yet expounds all the rest of the
parts of the Parables, and yet (as I have said before) the tares are not
expounded by Christ to be Heretics, but ver. 38. The tares are the children
of the wicked one, and ver. 41. all things that offend and do iniquity. Mr.
Goodwin denies that Heretics are ill doers, Mr. Williams says, they do
iniquity but if he would expound and apply all the tithes and joints of the
Parable, then Mr. Williams must tell us what the sleeping of men, v. 25. and
what the springing up of the blade is, and the bringing forth of the fruit is,
v. 26. and how men quarrel with God, because of the prosperity of Heretics,
when as Scripture extends the prosperity that stumbles men, to the most
wicked, who are fat and rich, Psalm. 37. 1, 2, 3, 4. Ier. 12. 12. Job 22. 1, 2,
3. and what the bundles are, verse. 30* since Mr Williams (as all Libertines and
Anabaptists are) is bold with the word to expound tares otherwise then the word
of God and our Savior Christ does, who of purpose expounds the ^^res to be
workers of iniquity, and ill doers, now Heretics to Master Williams and
Libertines are no ill doers, but innocent men, men that fear God, such as
suffer persecution for conscience, the children of light, of the promise, of
the free woman, persecuted by the children of this world, and the sons of the
bondwoman, as all their Books say; how does Christ make these Heretics that
are named tares, such as grow and flourish till harvest, and then these
innocent men that feared God are judged by God offenders in Christ's Kingdom,
workers of iniquity, cast into a furnace of fire, where there shall be wailing
and g^ashing of teeth? To conclude why does Mr Williams say the Magistrate
owes protection, to the true Church apart and met together, Mr. Williams
holds that the Prince owes protection to all Idolatrous and bloody
Churches, if they be his Subjects.
and says not that he owes protection to the false Church, the same way apart
and met together? he must secretly insinuate that the Magistrate owes some
singular royal protection to the assemblies of Anabaptists and Seekers and the
true Church, which he owes not to the Church of wicked men met and assembled
for worship. Yet when the wicked are assembled in the valley of the sons of
Hinnon to burn their sons to Devils, when they are met in the high places to
offer and Sacrifice, to the Sun and the Queen of Heaven, and to adore the works
of men's hands, even then are these men, Subjects under a lawful Prince, and
this Prince must either in such abominable and bloody worship, defend their
persons and estates from violence, or then 1. Master Willams says amiss 2.
The Prince must by his office serve the Devil, and countenance, and defend a
most wicked and bloody service, such as Son-slaughter and Idolatry, and that
against his conscience though he judge them a false Church. 3. The Prince, if
he withdraw his royal defense, is wanting in his office, and yet it is his
conscience to neglect duty to such. 4. And must force the consciences of
people, in tempting them to de^ist from what they in conscience conceive to be
the highest worship and expression of love, fear and reverence to God, in that
he refuses to protect them in manslaughter, and such service to God, which
they dare not venture on without his protection, least men rise up against them
and destroy them.

Mr. Williams adds ib. p. 216 To profess the Magistrate must force the
Church to do her (...), and yet the Magistrate must (...) judge what that
duty is, must be to play in spiritual things.

Answ. That the Magistrate should compel godly men to keep peace, and a David
(suppose he were a Subject) not to kill, not to commit adultery under the pain
of civil punishment, I suppose is not Heresy, and yet I see not how the
Magistrate is not to judge according to the word of God, what is wilful
murder, and so deserves death, by the Law of God, what is accidental killing
and deserves no death, but a Refuge and Maneprize. But the Magistrate (say
Liberti^es) should not judge what is heresy, what sound doctrine, why? because
that is to be judged according to the word of God by Pastors. But, that is,
(...) causa pro causa, for the King is to judge what is murder, what not, and
all matters belonging to a civil Judge, what is morally good and evil, and
what is punishable by the sword, what not, by reading on the book of the Law
when he sits on the throne, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19. but this he judges in order
to civil punishment, and not in order to the gaining of souls, and in so far
as concerns his practice, and the same way is he to judge what is heresy, what
not, if this be not said, then should we play indeed in spiritual matters.

Q. But is not the Christian Ruler then as a Ruler, to judge whether Arrius
ought to be banished, and imprisoned, who denies the Son of God to be
consubstantiall with the Father? How the Magistrate is to judge of Heresy.
and so all Rulers are to judge of Heresies and Gospel* Truths even Indian and
Puga^ Magistrates, who are essentially Magistrates, as well as Christian
Rulers, for quod convenit (...).

Ans. There is a difference betwixt a Ruler, and such a Ruler, a Christian
Ruler, or a Heathen Ruler, a Ruler a^ a Ruler, should judge of all civil
businesses, and of truths and falsehood in Religion, for all Nations have some
God, and some Religion; but a Ruler as a Christian Ruler only, not as a Ruler
(as the notion of: (...) a Ruler does (...) and the Christian Ruler) ought
(...) judge what is Gospel truth, or Gospel untruth, for then all (...) Pagan,
or what not should judge the Gospel truth though they be not obliged to
believe in Christ, or to know the Gospel, which they never heard, Romans 10. 14,
15, 16. Now this is absurd. But only Rulers as Christian Rulers should judge
of Gospel Truths; Magistrates should judge, but all Magistrates as Magistrates,
should not judge of all businesses, and of all matters belonging to all
Countries; A Magistrate and a Christian Magistrate are to be d^fferenced, nor
can or ought all Magistrates to judge of, or punish all Heretics.
for then an Indian Magistrate should judge of all the matters of France,
England, Scotland, which cannot be said, so a Magistrate as a Magistrate should
judge of Religion, but not all Magistrates of all Religions, for Heathen
Magistrates cannot judge, nor ought not to judge whether Arrianisme be Heresy
or not, and whether it be punishable by the Sword or not, whether Christ
Mediator has one will, as the Monothelites said, or two as the Catholic
Protestants said, because the Heathen Magistrate (as we suppose) never heard of
Christ. So we say a judge of France cannot judge, as a judge, of transporting
of wool out of England, or of wax out of Scotland: nor can an English Judge as
a Judge, judge of transporting of wines out of France, or of crying down, or up
the worth of Moneys within Scotland, only the judges of France can, and ought
to judge of the former, and that not as Judges simply, but as ^^th Judges of
France, and only the Judges of Scotland as they are such, can judge of crying
up or down moneys in Scotland: and upon the same ground, Judges as Judges are
not, nor ought they as Judges to determine what Gospel truths are praiseworthy,
in order to civil rewards, and what Gospel heresies are punishable, for of
these they are to determine judicially as such judges, as Christian Judges who
are hearers of the Gospel. Though Christianity add nothing to the essence of
a judge as a judge, yet Christianity adds something to the being and
authoritative power of such a judge, a Christian, a Scottish, an English judge,
this remains then true of a judge. What a Judge does as a Judge, that all
Judges may do, for quod convenit (...) convenit (...) but what such a judge
does as such a judge, as Christian, as Scottish, as English, that all judges
may not, nor cannot do: So a Christian husband, father, master, as Christian,
is to give Christian Counsels and instructions to his wife, children, servant,
but it follows not that all husbands, all fathers, all masters, though
heathenish and Pagan, though they never head of Christ, are to give Christian
counsels and (...) to the principles of the Gospel, to their wives, sons,
servants; So the Christian Prince, not as a Prince simply, but as a Christian
Prince is to confer his royal authority, in a politic and co-active way to
promote the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ, which all judges on earth are not to
do, for these Judges only Psalm. 2. are to kiss the Son, who hear the decree
published, Thou art my Son, Psalm. 2. 6. for a Law never pro^^^gated, neither by
heart ingraving, neither by minister all publication can oblige no man, as is
clear Romans ^. 12. Romans 10 14, 15. and 5. 13. Joh. ^5. 22. Matthew. 11. 2^ 23, 24.
Yet shall it not follow that the Christian Judge is a sub-mediator under
Christ, and subordinate as a Vicegerent to the M^diator, for the christian
Magistrate does not promote Christ's Kingdom, as the Minister of Christ, or as
representing Christ's person, for the Christian Magistrate is the Minister of
God, and the Vicegerent of God; now God as the Sovereign Lord has a co-active
power overall, the Magistrate, Heathen, or Christian, is his Vicegerent, and
the Christian Ruler may compel with the Sword all to serve the Son, yet the
Son as Mediator whose kingdom is not of this world, sends not men out to
promote his Kingdom with the sword, Bloody Tenet, cap. 6. p. 24, 25.
Joh. 18 36, 37.

Mr. Williams civil peace is pax civitatis, the peace of the city, Jer. 29.
7. Pray for the peace of the City, which peace of the city or citizens so
compacted in a civil way of union, Whether peace of civil societies be sure,
where there is toleration of all Religions, and what peace Christians can have
in Toleration.
may be entire, unbroken, safe, etc. notwithstanding so many thousands of Gods
people, the Jews, ^^re there in bondage, and would neither be constrained to
the worship of the City of Babell, nor restrained from so much of the worship
of the true God, as they (...) practice, as is plain in Shadrach, Mosha^^, and
Abedaego, Daniel 3. in Daniel c. 6. who would rather suffer, then de^ist from
true worship, or practice fals^: So the (...) Papists keep the peace of their
Towns and Cities safe and distinct, where there is no spiritual and heavenly
peace.

Answ. All this is to prove that there may be no breach of City peace, or
civil peace, where there are (...) of sundry Religions. But 1. the man's should
remember, there is a Christian external peace, which (...) an (...) providence
can not be kept, where there be diverse Religions, and sundry ways of
worshipping Christ, and we believe our Savior intends so much, Mat. 10. 34.
Think not that I am come to send peace (...) earth, I came not to send peace,
but the sword. v. 35. For. I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother. Luke 21. 16. And ye shall be be^r
dyed ^oth by your parents, brethren, kinsfolks, and friends, and some of you
they shall cause to be put to death. And what is the quarrel, but diverse
Religions and ways of worship about Christ? So Paul exhorts to Christian
peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, not because of contrary Religions, and many Sectaries called the holy
party that are to be tolerated in meekness and mutual forbearance: Peace is
commanded in the new Testament, no word of toleration of diverse Religions,
which are the Seminaries of discords between the seed of the woman and the
Serpents seed, in all the New Testament, is to be found by precept, promise, or
practice, nor any ground of repealing judicial Laws, for puni^hing seducing
Teachers.
But v. 5. Because there is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and but one
Religion whether Presbyteriall or Independent, and since the Apostles and
Christ in the NewTestament so often recommend peace, and never once insinuate
forbearance in diversity of Religion, and all the Apostles and Apostolic
Church had but one Religion, toleration of many Religions, not being a part of
the New Testament liberty where with Christ has made us free, as is the
liberty from Ceremonies, and righteousness by the Law, that the foolish
Galathians affected, Gal. 5. 1, 2, We conclude there is a Law against
Toleration of many Religions, not any repealing of that Law in the New
Testament, but diverse Religions expressly forbidden as contrary to peace, and
foretold to fall out as sad judgments, Mat. 19. 35. Mat. 24, 24, Luke 21. 14.
15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6, 7. 8. 2 John 10.
Affirmanti incumbit probatio, Our Adversaries are obliged to give us precept,
promise, or godly practice, why a moral sin forbidden and severely punished in
the old Testament, should yet remain a Moral sin in the New Testament, and yet
not be punishable by men or Churches, yea Solomous toleration of the Idolatrous
worship, 1 Kings 11. provoked the Lord to anger, yet his wives consciences
should not have been compelled to leave off the worshipping of the Gods of the
Moabites, Ammonites, by this way, Romans 14. 19. Let us follow after the thing
that makes for peace (says Paul) but Toleration of many Religions is contrary
to peace, if one of them be the only true way, the rest are all false ways,
the mixture of the two contrary seeds, the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of
the woman must be against peace; and Paul exhorting to union and Christian
peace, thinks many Religions, many Sects and opinions tolerated, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
to be just contrary to peace. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment. Hence he seriously dehorts from Schisms and
Sects, whereas upon supposition of diverse Sects, all being godly, we should
have some charitable precepts commanding men of diverse Religions to bear with
one another; but where is that written? and if they dwell together peaceably,
why but they may marry together, Achab then in marrying the King of the
Zidonians daughter, failed not, and he married her wicked Religion. Clotildis
the daughter of Clodoveus married Almaricus the Arrian, King of the Wisigots,
the Maid being educated in the sound faith, but Procopius, l. 1. Bell. Gothorum
said, there was never peace between them. As for Mr. Williams Chaldean, and
Heathenish or American peace, we leave it to himself; the peace the people of
God was to pray for, Jer. 29. was only outward prosperity, freedom from the
Sword of Egypt, and from other Nations, that the captive Church might also
partake of that peace. But I hope Jeremiah bad not the people of God in Judea,
under the Babylonish captivity, follow an Heathenish peace, with toleration of
diverse Religions, or yet a Religious peace, or a Church peace, that stands
well with many Religions, yea they are to denounce wrath against the Chaldee
Religion, Jer. 10. 11. and would he have Christians all keeping such an
Heathenish unity and peace, Libertines give us heathenish, not Christians peace
under many Religions.
as Babylonians and Americans have, and in the mean time tolerate all
Religions, Christians who have one God, and one faith, and one hope are to
follow more then a Civil and Heathenish peace.

It is therefore in vain for Libertines to tell us, that Abraham lived long
amongst the Canaanites, who were contrary to him in Religion, Genesis 13. and
Isaac with them, Genesis 26. and Jacob twenty years with Laban an Idolater, Genesis
31. Israel in Egypt 430 years, in Babylon 70. Israel under the Romans with
Herodians, Pharisees. What of all these? the godly Rulers and Church, sometimes
Pilgrims, sometimes servants, sometimes captives, never having the Sword nor
power of it as Magistrates to take order with false Teachers, did peaceably
dwell with them, ergo, godly Magistrates armed with the Sword, must now suffer
the Sheep of Christ, to be worried and preyed upon by Wolves? this consequence
is nothing, this is a facto adjus, and to argue from the controverted practice
of Heathen.

CHAP. XXVI. Whether punishing of Seducing Teachers be persecution for
Conscience.
LIbertines lay down for a ground, That to punish any for their conscience
must be persecution; Remonst. Apo. c. 24. p. 268
Anninians call punishing of Heretics persecution: it is proper to carnal men
to persecute the Children of the Promise. He that is sick only of an error of
the mind, Remonst. Apo. c. 24. p. 2^9.
breaks not the Law of God: If the Magistrate punish him for that, he is a
Persecuter. So also the Anabaptists in Bullingers time. Mr. Williams going
after these guides says, Bullinge^ Adver. Anabap. l. 5. c. 8 Bloody Tenet. c.
3. p. 19, 20.
I acknowledge that to molest any person, Jew or Gentile, for either professing
doctrine, or practicing worship merely Religious, or Spiritual, is to
presecute him, and such a person (what ever his doctrine be, true or false)
suffers for his conscience; and beside, a man may be persecuted, because he
holds or practices what he believes in conscience to be truth, as Daniel,
and because he dare not yield obedience, to doctrines and worships invented by
men, and so the Author of Storming of the Anti. and of the Ancient bounds.

Answ. Ancient bounds
The very like the Donatists objected; so Cresconius Grammaticeus, Quisquis
Christianum persequitur, Christi inimicus est, Scripturall persecution is only
for truth. Asser. 1
whoever persecutes a Christian is an enemy of Christ, Augus. l. 3. contra a
Cresconium c. 51. answers, Verum dicis, ^^ non in illo persequitur, quod
Christi est inimicum, neque enim Dominus in servo, pater in filio, maritus in
conjuge cum sine utrique Christiani, non debent persequi vitia Cbristianae
contraria veritati, an vero si non persequuntur, non rei negligentiae merito
teneluntur? It is true, says he, He is an Enemy to Christ, who persecuteth a
Christian, if he do not persecute in a Christian, that, which is enmity to
Christ, yet are not the master, father, husband, not to persecute in servant,
son, and wife (if they be Christians) sins contrary to Christian truth, and
if they persecute not these sins, are they not justly guilty of the
negligence of their brethrens souls? So also Augustine distinguishes a two
fold persecution, de unit. Eccl. c. 20 and Psalm. 100. Had these men given us
one letter of Scripture for their bastard definition of persecution, we should
not stumble to hear Tongue-persecuters and Raylers, and Hand-persecuters say
so; but we go from them to our Saviors words, Matthew. 5. 12. Blessed are ye,
when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you (not for an erroneous and bloody conscience, as Libertines define
it) but falsely for my sake. Persecution that the Scripture condemns, is
persecution, for righteousness ^^d truth, such as the true Prophets suffered
for the truth, Matthew. 5. 12. for Christ's names sake, Luke 21. 17. Matthew. 19.
29. for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 1. 9. Rev. 6. 9.
for the testimony of the trutb, Rev 11. 7. for righteousness, Matthew. 5. 10.
for the Gospel, Mark. 4. 17. Acts 12. 25. Acts 13. 50. Gal. 5. 11. Gal. 6. 12.
2 Timothy 3. 12. Mark. 10. 30. 2 Cor. 12. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2. Tim 3 11. Matthew. 10
23. Joh. 5. 16. Joh. 15. 20. Romans 12. 14. Acts 7. 52. 1 Cor 4 11. Gal. 1. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Acts 9. 4. Acts 22. 7. c. 26. 14. Phil. 2. 6. And why was
Jeremiah persecuted? the three Children, Daniel, Christ, Paul, Peter, John,
James, the Martyrs, Heb. 11. not for Familisme, Antinomianisine, Socinianisme,
Anabaptisme, etc. show us a word of Old or New Testament warranting you to call
it persecution, to molest any for worship or practice, though most false. Mr.
Williams says, to malest any for their conscience is persecution, then must
Jeremiah be a Persecuter, for he molested those with rebukes and threatenings,
who out of mere conscience, killed their sons and daughters to Malech. Christ
molested Pharisees and Sadduces, who out of mere conscience defended the
traditions of men, false interpretations of the Law, denied the Resurrection;
yea the Lord commanded the Judges in his Law, not only to molest, but to stone
to death without mercy, those who professed doctrine out of mere conscience,
and practice worship upon merely Religious grounds, which tended to drive away
people from the true God, and such as blasphemed God, Deuteronomy. 13. Exo. 32 26, 27.
Romans 15. 1. 13. 4. Lev. 24. 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 17. 2. Levit. 20. 2. But God never
commanded in any Law persecution, but hated it, and no more commanded it, then
his holy Laws can be unjust.

2. There is a tongue persecuting by rebukes, which is condemned by Libertines
in matters of Religion, as well as handpersecution.
Asser. There is a persecution with the tongue by words like coals of Juniper,
Psalm. 120. 2, 3. and like the arrows of the mighty, like a sharp razour, Psalm.
52. 23. Job 19. 3. These ten times ye have reproached me, and are not ashamed,
v. 21. Why do ye persecute me as God? Jobs friends never put hand on him, but
by arguing him to be an hypocrite, from the mistaken doctrine of providence, as
is clear, chap. 4 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. yet they persecuted him, Job 19. 28.
they that mocked Jeremiah and in arguing opposed his doctrine, and said, Jer.
17. 15. Where is the word of the Lord, persecuted him, v. 18. Let them be
confounded that persecute me, Jer. 18. 18. Then said, they, come let us devise
devices against Jeremiah, for the Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor
counsel from the wise, nor the word of the Lord from the Prophet: and they had
much to say from the word, that the Law was with the Priests, and the word of
the Lord with their Prophets, as well as with Jeremiah, yet they resolve to
persecute Jeremiah, come and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not
give heed to any of his words. And the Scripture tells us of the scourge of the
Tongue, Job 5. 21. and the place cited by Libertines, Gal. 4. 28, 29. where it
is said that I^hmael the son of the handmaid, persecuted Isaac the son of the
Promise, it was not by offering any bodily violence to Isaac, as we teach the
Christian Magistrate, is to use the sword against Seducers; but as Pareus,
Meyer, Calvin, Piscator, Beza, Luther, Perkins, and all Interpreters do well
expound it, Ishmael but mocked Isaac, and said, the promises made to him were
but a mock, and he would have, forsooth, the dignity of the birthright. Calvin
says, the mocking and blaspheming of Christ on the Cross, He trusted in God,
let him deliver him, Psalm. 22. Matthew. 27. 39, 40. was the most cruel
persecution that ever befell him, Heb. 11. 36. and others had trial of cruel
mocking and scorning. Optatus complained that the blood of Bishops was shed not
by the sword, Opeatus Mel. vitan. l. 3. Episcopos gladio linguae jugulastis,
fundentes sanguinen non corporis, sed honoris.
but by the tongue; then must Elias persecute Baals Priests, for he mocked
them: And what warrant have Libertines to say, that all Baals Priests followed
that worship that they were brought up in, against their conscience, for the
conscience of Heretics being burnt with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 3. will make them
think the killing of the Lords Apostles is good service to God, and all the
sarcasticke mockings and jearings of M. Williams Goodwin, the Authors I cite,
and of other Libertines against Presbyterians, the followers of Calvin, the
opposers of wild and Atheistical liberty of conscience (since they are not in
fallible in maintaining toleration of all ways, Turcisme, Judaisme, Familisme,
Socinianisme, etc.) must be persecution of all in the contrary opinion for
conscience, and so while they write against persecution, they persecute all
contrary arguing and refuting of such, as we conceive do err: and all
rebuking of them, all syllogisticall collections and inferences, of the
absurdities and blasphemies of their doctrine, must be smiting with the tongue
and persecution. For that spoken against Jeremiah, The Law shall not perish
from the Priest, nor the word of the Lord from the Prophet; having so much
color of Scripture, as that also, he saved others; Ergo, if he ^e the Savior,
he must save himself, being of the dye and hew of truth, so near of blood to
it in outward face, and to the consciences of many; were notwithstanding
grievous persecuting of Jeremiah and Jesus Christ, then must M. Williams say
true, we must not by prayer or prophecy seek to pluck up the tares till
harvest. So all writing, preaching, and refuting of gainsayers, of that which
we conceive to be truth, except we be infallible, and prophetically ascertai^ed
we are right, and these we refute, wrong, must be persecution and smiting with
the tongue.

3. Nor do Libertines charge us more with persecution, then Anabaptists did
Bullinger and our Reformers, and the Donatists did Augustine, Bullinger adver
Anabap. l. 5. ^. 8
and the Catholics upon whom Augustine retorted the challenge, for the true
Church (says he) casts out Agar the handmaid, is this persecution? It is to be
observed in this Argument. 1. That none objected this but Sectaries* and such
as were conscious to themselves of foul tenets, Augus. Epist. 50 Magis ancilla
p^rsequebitur Satam superbi^n^o, qu^m ^llam Sa^a co^^cendo, illa enim dominae
faciebat injuriam, ista imponeb^t superb^ae discipli^m.
as Anabaptists in Germany, Donatists in Africa, Papists in Queen Elizabeth's
time; Calvin, Beza, Protestants never objected this, against the Papists, or
Spanish Inquisitors, the old Non-conformists never pleaded against the most
tyrannical Prelates for liberty of conscience, find this in all their books.
So Cartwright, yea Amesius though by assed with Independency, speaks against
lawless liberty.

2. Augus. Petitiano, l. 2. c. 83. Noli diccre absit, absit ^conscientia
nostra, ut ad nostram fide^ aliq^em compellamus, facitis enim, ubi potestis,
ubi autem non facitis, non p^^testis, sive legum sive (...) timore, sive
res^entium mu^^t^d ne.
Libertines, Anabaptists, Donatists, when they get the Sword in their hand, of
all men most cruelly press the consciences of others, that are not in every
punctilio in their mind. See the Authors in the Margin to prove this, none
such bloody persecuters for conscience as they.

3. All these Arguments do strongly militate against Jezabel and all Heretics,
and seducing Teachers, for Christ has ordained a spiritual coactive power in
the Church against Wolves and such as say, They are Jews and lie, and are the
Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2. as well as God has ordained a civil coactive
power in the State, and the one coactive power does 1 as much hinder Christ's
followers to be a willing people, as the other, and 2 Press the conscience. 3
Create hypocrisy. 4 Oppose the meekness of Christ and his Ministers. So were
Marcis Presbyter Victoriensis, and Mareitius Urgensis, per^ecuted by Donatists,
Augus. Epist. (...). Carwright 2 John 10. on Tit. 3. 10. Amesius de conscien. l.
4. c. 4. An haeretici ^nt ^ civil^ Magistratu puniendi. q. 6. Re. R^primendos
esse haereticos abomnibus plit. (...) Rom 13. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 2. n. 15. Si vero
etiam manifest blasphemisint, and in illis blasphemus pertinaces ac
praefracti, p^ssint etiam affici supplicio capitali, lex enim illa, Levit. 24.
15. 16. quamvis non obligit Christianos quatenus est lex, quatenus tamen est
doctrina a Deop ofecta pertinet ad Christianorum directionem in ejusdem generis
causis; Joannes Clopenbur^^^ in Gangrena Anabaptis. Tripa^. histor. l. 12. c.
9. Bullinger. l. 1. c. 8. c. 9. Petition of Famil^^^ to K James an. 1604 They
commend King James in counselling Pr. Henry to punish Putitan Non-conformists,
and plead for liberty to themselves See Survey of the spiritual Antichrist,
page 343. Apolog. Remon.
5 Savor of persecution. 6 Estrange affections. 7 Countenance domineering over
conscience as the other.

4 Nor do we profess, coercing of sound and faithful teachers, but only
seducing Heretics. The Arminians tell us, A Precept is quickly found, when we
would persecute the godly for their conscience, Bloody Tenet. c. 11. p. 3.
and Mr. Williams cries, Search all Scriptures, Records, etc. no persecuters,
not the Devil himself, profess to persecute the Son of God, Jesus as Jesus,
Christ as Christ, without a mark or covering; so said they, had we lived in
Queen Mary's days, we would not have consented to such persecution.

Answ. This argues a silly engine, for if it hold good against us, Search all
Scriptures, Records, etc. no Tyrants, no Nero having the Sword to punish
Patricides, Matricides, Sorceries, Adulteries, Sodomy, professed that they
punished just men as just men, innocent men as innocent men; what then? Shall
it follow Magistracy and the use of the sword is unlawful against any, because
Tyrants oppress the innocent, not as innocent, but as seditious, traitorous,
cruel, bloody men? Nor would I have Mr. Williams, so charitable to the Devil
as to think he will not persecute Jesus as Jesus. I dare not determine much
upon the Devils heart-reduplications, but if he be not involved in the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and a burning malice against Jesus, because he is the
Son of God, and the Savior of man, I know not much. However Mr. Williams has
reason upon his grounds to think that none should be persecuted for
conscience, because we are all Scepticks even in point of Salvation and
Fundamentalls, and not infallibly assured of either heaven or hell, and so he
is wor^e then a Papist.

2. No men know (all men since the Prophets and Apostles sell asleep, being
void of infallibility) assuredly what he believes unto salvation, if any
should deny there is a God or a Providence (as I fear there be too many
practical and Judicial Atheists amongst us) he ought not by Prophesying or
arguing to be plucked out of that estate, till harvest, but must with the
clemency of Christ; here dears brother Atheist, you are a godly pious
heretic, and have no God, but your conscience; and dare not for fear of your
conscience believe, that there is a God, and I dare not rebuke you, but be
going on in your Divinity; I have as little infallible assurance there is a
God, as you have, there is no God, and neither you nor I are to be punished for
our consciences.

3. Mr. Williams ought for no Religion venture his life to burning quick, for
he cannot dye or cast away his life but upon a conjecture, Libertines ought no^
to suffer death for any truth.
it may be there is a God, and it may be there is no God; for how dare he
break the sixth Command and hazard his life, for a truth that may be a lie? So
neither should any persecute, but in faith, that he is infallibly sure the man
is a real heretic, neither should he be persecuted, for he is not infallible
in the knowledge that he suffers for, and so cannot suffer in faith, see for
more of this, and the foregoing doctrine. Mimus Celsus Sect. 2 Fo. 62. Mimus
Celsus denies the coercing of Seducers upon Socinian principles. Citech Racco
v^d: proph. mu. 1. C. c. 1.
Cainbartus contra Lypsium; Lincaeus, de liberate Christiana, Althusius in
politicis, and Celsus gives us good stuff, It was commanded Kings in the Old
Testament to kill their enemies, but in the New Testament we are to love our
enemies, and do good to them that hate us; 2 For edification, not for killing
and destruction is Church Discipline ordained.

Ans. What this Socinian Author brings for new Precepts of Christ in the New
Testament, different from these of the Old, Socinus in praelec. c. 17.
is but wicked Socinianisme as you may see in the Catechism of Raccovias,
Socinus, Osterodius, Smalcius, Volkelius, and the Arminians, Com, in 1 John fo.
134. prae^er Theol. c 5. f. 6. 7 Ostorodi^s Inst. Chris Relig. c. 22. c. 23. c.
24. c 25 etc.
Episcopius Arminius, who make the loving of our enemies commanded by Christ,
Matthew. 5. 44. Luke 6. 35. and by Paul Romans 12. 20. not to be commanded in the
Old Testament, which argues their ignorance of the Scriptures, Prove. 25. 21.
If thine enemy be hungry give him bread, Prove. 24. 17. Rejoice not when thine
enemies fall, Exo. 23 4. If thou meet thine enemies Ox or Ass going astray,
Smalcius de divi^ C c 5. f. 17. Contra Smig^^c c. 15 f. 136.
thou shall surely bring it back to him; yea David by an Old Testament spirit,
when his enemies were sick, Psalm. 35. 13, 14 was clothed with sack cloth and
fasted, Volkelius. Episcopius dis. 17 de^es^l c 2 Arm deleg and Evan com. the.
6.
and behaved himself as one mourning at his mothers grave; what David and
Jer^mial, did prophecy against Gods enemies is fulfilled in the New Testament,
and Paul and Luke say Amen to it, Romans 11. v. 8, 9, 10. Acts 1. 20, 21. and we
are to bear the like zeal, yea more against false teachers under the Messiah
Kingdom, then they did, Zach. 13 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 2 John 10. Romans 16. 17.
Rev. 2. 19, 20. 2 The end of Church Discipline is edification, the taking away
the life of a Blasphemer is the good of the society, Deuteronomy. 13. 12. That all
Israel may hear and fear, and do so no more, but that the Christian
Magistrates end is spiritual, and the edification of souls, we read it not.

The Author of Ancient bonds having forgotten Divinity cries, God waited for
the Old world 120 years, and when this date of patience is out, Ancient bonds
of Liberty, Reas. 21, 22.
I would have gathered you, etc. I sent my Prophets early, but where does the
Lord charge the Prophet, that the Magistrate did not force and compel the
people?

Ans. Will this man let us hear Logic? the Lord waited on the old world 120
years; The Lords patience toward sinners in the old Testament was no argument
of not coercing false Prophets in that O^d Testament, as the Author of Ancient
bonds etc. supposes.
and sent his Prophets early, I dare say, many hundred years; Ergo, The
Blasphemer and the false Prophet contrary to Deuteronomy. 13. Levit. 24. must be
spared 120 years? so Ergo, We must exercise much long suffering in the old
Testament while these Laws were in vigor, (for then it must be that the
Prophets Jeremiah and Isaiah were never charged that Magistrates compelled not
consciences,) toward seducing Prophets: Why, but God using much longsuffering
toward the old world, and Israel not a world (I j^dge) of innocent and godly
Heretics, but of men that corrupted their way, despised the Prophets, hardened
their faces and hearts, were murderers, oppressors, grinders of the poor,
killed their children to Devils; Ergo, the Magistrate should extend
long-suffering for as many years as this man will to these ill-doers, no less
then to seducing torchers, should not Pastors and Rulers extend long-suffering
to all sorts of sinners as well as to Heretics? but where (answers the
Prophet) does the Lord lay it to the charge of Prophet or Magistrate, that they
did not force or compel the people, to repent, to leave their murdering,
their oppressing their grinding of the face of the poor? We teach not that the
Prophet ought to compel any, nor that the Sword is an ordinance of God to
convert oppressars, and murderers, to turn meek and righteous judges,
co-action by fire and sword in Old or New Testament can convert none to Christ,
the word and the Spirit must ever do the turn: By accident God can change the
nature of the rod and fanctifie it to Manasses, for to bring him to humiliation
and repentance. But were these that Christ would have gathered Matthew. 23. only
false Prophets, to whom he extended patience many hundred years, even from
Moses till his own coming in the flesh? Ergo, We should extend to bloody
Murderers of the Lords Prophets, the like patience, and not kill them, for
then they are past hope of being gained? Now the Text means no such thing, but
that Christ waited long on, and sent his Prophets early in the morning, to
those that were thieves, Isai. 1. murderers, adulterers, Jer. 5. that sl^w
their Children to Mole^h; by this argument the Magistrate should not draw his
Sword against adulterers, murderers; and I judge the Rulers were called Lions
and Wolves, Ezekiel. 22. because they extended too much cruel patience to these.
But if Gods patience be a rule, men must not be cut off, because there is hope
of their repentance so long as they live, your own Acontius says by this
reason, Acontius de Steatagematis Satanae, l. 3. p. 155.
Murderers and adulterers should not be punished by the Magistrate, for there
often is more hope of Publicans, Harlots and Murderers that they may be the
elect of God, and gained to repentance, then of self-wise, and judicially
blinded Pharisees: (...).
Nor find we any so deserted of God and judicially blinded of God as
Libertines, read but the book entitled John the Baptist, sure a wilderness man
void of reason wrote it, Hope of gaining blasphemers no more ground of sparing
their life, then hope of gaining Murderers can be pretended as a ground why
they should not be punished.
the man tells chap. 9. disclaiming against going to low and wars; (which yet
Anabaptists and this Scholar of that Sect practice, whether the Parliament
will or no) says, Are ye wronged in person, estate, good name, or for Christ's
sake, which is our conscience? our Savior and his Saints have drunk the same
cup. Hence he cites to no purpose Scriptures but two and forty in number, of
the persecutions to follow the Lords Disciples for the Gospel, and that it is
proper to the world to persecute, and to the Saints to be persecuted, and hated
for righteousness, and that such as are persecuted, and (...) ^^sallow all
persecuting for matters of Religion, Whether to be persecuted for conscience
true or false, be a proper note of the tru^ Church as Job. Baptist, says, cap.
9.
as the greatest stumbling block to the propagation of the Gospel, must
necessarily be the true Church and (...) of Christ, none else having a
capacity (without Gods infinite mercy, and dispensation) of being ever hewed
out and squared as members suitable to such a head: contr^riorum eadem est
ratio, since the true Church must needs be persecuted, that must needs be a
false Church which persecutes the true one, for though this false Church be
persecuted likewise, yet in regard it cannot be both true and false, that
persecuted Church must needs be the only true one, which does not persecute
others, but that the argument may be complete and full (it had much need, for
it is weak and unstable as water) as in the mouth of two witnesses unto this
evidence of reason, Let me add a Scripture proof, Viz. we brethren (true
Christians) as Isaac was, are the children of promise, but as he that was born
after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, (...) so it is
now Gal. 4. 28, 29. yet since it is better, if the will of God be so that we
suffer for w^ldoing then for evil doing, 1 Pet. 3 17 howev^r these Ishmalites
are powerful, prosperous, prevail against us, and have the world at will for
the present, yet let us comfort our-selves that God has chosen the despised
and poor, rich in faith, etc. We close this Chapter with their doom and ours,
Necessity of Toleration, Quar. 51.
neverthel^sse what says the Scripture, C^st out the bondwoman, for the son of
the bon^woman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman, so then, we
are not children of the bondwoman, See Osterodius Iustit. rel. c. 5. f. 21.
but of the free, Gal. 4. 30, 31. So of that sort is the heedlesse Quaerist to
the Assembly of Divines.

If the Magistrate as a Magistrate have a power from Christ to punish such as
he is persuaded in his conscience are erroneous and heretical, Smalcius
praefat. re^at, frant. Soci^. praelect. Theol. c. 17. Smalcius refut. lib. de
satisfact. Christi c. 1 and lib 1, de offic. Christi 7. Jesus Christus est
primus ac solus praeco hujus doctrinae ac multo perfectio is quam ea quae ante
Christum, in popul^ D^i fuit. P^liander in concertat. Socinian. disp. 27. these.
35, 36, 37. Peltiush^rmon. Socin. and remonst. art. 292. art. 21. Volke^ius in
verbis Christi illis testimoni^s (inquit) Exodus ^1. 24. Lev. 24. 20. Deuteronomy 19.
21 ^am legis mon^em fuisse comprobatur, ut ultio ac vindicta fuisse permiss^
sta^uatur, mod^ per magistratum, non autem propti^ authoritate fieret. Cui quid
em legi Christus sua verba opponens, omnem non modo privatam, sed etiam
publicam vindictam abrogat, suisque praecipit ut omnes perpessiones quae
alterius maxi^^ae obversione significantur, omnemque bonorum jacturam, quae
pallii dimissione innu^tur, omnem denique molestiam, quae coactione ad unum
milliare designatur, ita ferant, ut similem denuo injuriam subeant, potius quam
illat^m, ^ive per se, five per magistratum ulciscantur.
or because he differs in Religion from the Magistrate, then Queen Mary and her
Parliament did well in burning the Martyrs for differing from her established
Religion.

Answ. 1. The man as an Anabaptist cites, Matthew. 5. 39. 40. Whosoever shall
smite thee on the right che^k, turn to him the other. Volkelius an arrand
Socinian cries down Laws and Judges, and all wars under the New Testament,
and makes this a new Commandment not warranted in the Old Testament, as if
the hating of our enemy, and revenge, were commanded in the old, and forbidden
in the new. Nay (s^ith he) what heavenly ravished and blessed Spirit will tell
me what these Scriptures mean, Mat. 39. 40. 41, 42. as if none were heavenly
and blessed Spirits that knew the meaning of the Scriptures but Volkelius,
Chellius, Socinus and other Socinians and Anabaptis^s. I answer, Socinus and
Volkelius are these blessed Spirits that can show the meaning of these words
and tender Lettice for your lips. But see your Socinian dream, and theirs
refuted by Poliander and Joan. Peltius, for Christ in the New Testament does no
where contradict Moses Law, nor refute Moses, but he refuteth the false glosses
which Scribes and Pharisees put on Moses Law.

For 1. Christ never says, It was said by Moses, but I say the contrary. But
it was said of old by the unlucky Elders and Fathers of Scribes and Pharisees,
which these wretched Doctors and their sons said, Eye for eye, and thou shall
not kill, and thou shall not commit adultery. As is clear:

1. There be no New Commandments of Christ to love our enemies in the New
Testament, which were not commanded in the Old, as Joh. Baptist says c. 9.
Because loving of our Enemy was forbidden by Moses, and in the Old Testament,
as in the New, as I proved before, revenge is forbidden, Prove. 20. 22. Deuteronomy.
32. 35. Shedding of blood is forbidden, Genesis 9. 6. as well as by our Savior,
Matthew. 26. 52.

2. Because Christ says, Matthew. 5. 20. I say unto you, except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (he says
not, except it exceed the righteousness of the Law of God commanded by Moses
in the Old Testament) Ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And as
Christ condemns unjust anger, so is it condemned a^ murder, and accursed in
the Old Testament, Genesis 49 7. 2 Chro. 28. 9. Daniel 3. 13. Prove. 14. 16. Genesis
27. 45. Est. 1. 12. Prove. 15. 1. Prove. 19. 11. c. 27. 4. Eccles. 7. 4. Esa. 7.
4. Amos 1. 11. 1 Samuel 17. 28. 1 Samuel 20. 30. Prove. 14. 17. c. 29. 22. c. 21.
19. c. 22. 24. and forbidden in the sixth Commandment, before Christ had that
Sermon, Matthew. 5. And the forbidding of rash and sinful anger, is no new
Commandment, but more frequently condemned in the Old Testament, then in the
New. And the like may be proved of heartlusting, Prove. 6. 25. Lust not after
her beauty in thine heart, Genesis 6. 1. Job 31. 1. Jer. 5. 8. 2 Samuel 11. 2. Job
24. 15, 16. Job 31. 9. All which places, and many others in the Old Testament
condemn lusting after a woman in the heart, no less then Christ condemns it.

3. Christ refuteth Socinians and Anabaptists, Matthew. 5. 17. Think not I am
come to destroy the Law, etc. 18. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and
earth pass one jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all
he fulfilled. But if Christ oppose his new Precepts to the Law of Moses as
Velkelius says, he must utterly destroy the Law of Moses, and substitute a
more perfect Law in the place thereof. But Libertines, as Joh. Baptist here,
would have heresy forbidden in the Old Testament, and punishing of false
prophesying commanded there. But heresy must be Innocence, and Righteousness
in the New Testament, and to be punished for false teaching in the old was to
suffer for ill-doing; but now in the New (says Baptist) to be punished for
false prophesying is to suffer for well-doing, and he cites 1 Pet. 3. 17. as
if it were the will of God, that Sectaries suffer for well-doing: that is, for
Familisme, Socinianisme, Antmomianisme, Popery, Idolatry, butchering of
children to God, as some Anabaptist Parents have done, and for preaching
Doctrine that eats as a Gangrene, 2 Timothy 2 for blaspheming and denying the
Resurrection of the dead, as Hymeneus did; for he that suffers for all these,
out of mere conscience, suffers for welldoing, as Peter says, if we believe
Joh. Baptist.

2. But how shall Mr. Baptist prove Christ foretelling the Apostles should be
persecuted for the preaching of the truth of God and the Gospel, They that
suffer for heresy and killing their children to Molech by Baptists way, so
they preserve conscience, suffer for well-doing, and according to the will of
God in the Apostle Peter's sense
that these Apostles, and the Anabaptists that now are, must look in like
manner to be persecuted for the Gospel; that is, for Familisme, Socinianisme,
all the new Blasphemies now on foot in England; are all these blasphemies the
Gospel? and whosoever suffer for monstrous heresies, must they suffer as the
Apostles did? and must they lay claim to all the comforts that our Savior has
bequeathed in his Testament, to his Disciples who were to suffer for Christ's
sake, and for righteousness, then surely an erroneous and a blaspheming
conscience must be righteousness; and to suffer for blasphemy and Satan, must
be to suffer for righteousness and for Christ's sake, Joh. Baptist Preface to
the Reader, and c. 11.
for these Libertines say the Assembly of Divines teach Blasphemies, Popery,
murdering of Saints for conscience. So Baptist, so Necessity of Toleration, so
Ancient Bounds. Necessity of Toleration by Samuel Richardson, an. 1647.


3. If such as are persecuted, and disclaim totally persecution for
conscience, Quer. 54. q. 55. and page 20, 21. Ancient bounds p. 20, 21, 22.
be the only true Church, and none but they, then these Papists in England in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth who were only persecuted (in your sense of the
word Persecution) and wrote, and petitioned against Persecution, and totally
disclaimed it, are the only true Church. The like I may say of the Arrians in
the Emperors times, against whom, most severe Laws and Edicts were made, which
to M. Baptist was direful persecution, and yet they totally disclaimed
persecution for conscience, and pleaded for Toleration. So say I of the
Arminians in Holland, who always plead for liberty of Prophesying, and of
Anabaptists, and all the Sectaries in Germany, when they first arose, of the
Familists and most rigid Anabaptists in New England, and of all the vilest
Sects, Anabaptists, Antiscripturists, Socinians, Familists, etc. in Old
England. Yea, we may suppose all Papists, Jews, and the most abominable Sects,
living where there are strict Laws for the only one true Religion, to hold
the opinion of total disclaiming persecution for conscience (for sure they are
most capable of this opinion) hence it shall follow that all these wretched
Heretics shall be the only true Church and body of Christ.

4. This monopolizeth the nature and name of the true Church to only Sectaries
that profess they are ready to suffer for their conscience, and do totally
disclaim persecution, that is, for liberty of conscience: so this opinion
shall be the only essential, not and constituent form of the true Church, and
shall exclude the sound faith of all fundamentalls, and the doctrine of the Law
and Gospel. The vilest Heretics living, holding this one Article of Baptists
faith, shall be the only true Church; and this opinion shall unite men and
societies formally to Christ their head, and yet it is no matter of faith;
except Libertines say, none are capable of faith and salvation, but such as
hold this opinion. Hence it must follow all these named Calvinists, all the
Reformed Churches, all the Churches and Saints in New England, all the ancient
Brownists, the old Non-conformists, who all disclaimed toleration and license
of conscience, must not only not be the true Church, but the malignant Church
of such as profess that which they call Persecution; yea and since they detest
and abhor liberty of conscience as Atheistical. All these Saints must be
incapable of saving faith, and necessarily damned, because being professed
persecutors, and tot^^ly disclaiming toleration, they are in the judgment of
this Baptist, such as have no capacity (without Gods infinit^ mercy and
dispensation, converting them to such Libertinisme) to be hewne out and squared
to such a head as Christ, for contrariorum eudem est ratio.

5. Form an Argument, Mr. Baptist, from your two Scriptures. If to persecute
for conscience be essential to such as are borne of the flesh, and to be
persecuted for conscience be essential to such as are born after the Spirit,
then to be thus persecuted, and to disclaim totally persecution for conscience
is an essential note of the true Church. This Proposition can never be proved
in your sense, for to be persecuted for conscience; that is, for a well
informed conscience which is sound in the faith of Articles of saving knowledge
is indeed such an essential note, and so we yield all, but it is nothing for
toleration, but much against it, but to be persecuted for conscience, though
erroneous and holding Judaisme, Turcisme, Arrianisme, Papisme, Familisme, etc.
to be the true and saving way (which is the sense of Baptist) is no wise a note
of such a^ are born after the Spirit; not does any place of Scripture by the
thirteenth consequence prove the same; for Isaac was not persecuted by Ishmael
for his erroneous conscience. The Text says no such thing, except Baptist make
Isaac an Heretic, and a false Prophet: If Ishmael persecuted Isaac for his
conscience (which yet Baptist cannot prove from Scripture) sure it was not for
the heretical conscience of Isaac; nor will it help Baptist to say in the
mind and conception of Ishm^^l, Isaac was an Heretic.

Answ. We judge not that heretics seeming to be heretics should be punished,
but those that are heretics indeed ought only to be punished.
How is that proved? the Text says no such thing. 2. We teach no such thing as
that men should be punished by the Magistrate, not because they are, but
because they seem only to ^e Heretics, or because Isaacs and Saints are
Heretics in our mind and conception, but because they are so indeed; as the
Magistrate punishes not justly a murderer, because he seems in the mind and
conception of the Magistrate to be a murderer, but because he is a murderer,
and is proved by faithful witnesses to be a murderer; so is the Heretic
proved to be a Heretic by the Magistrate, and so convicted, that he is
self-condemned; for we never make the Magistrates thoughts and his conception
to be the rule of punishing an Heretic, even as we are not to avoid an
Heretic after admonition, because he is an Heretic in our conception only,
for our conception must not be the rule or formal ground of casting out any
man from our society, and avoiding of him; but we avoid him because he is an
Heretic in himself: nor exhorts Peter any man to suffer for well-doing; that
is, for his conscience, or for his erroneous and heretical conscience, that is
but an abusing of the word of God; for he speaks not of suffering directly for
only Religion true or false, though he exclude it not, but says, 1 Pet. 4.
15. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, as a thief, as an ill-doer; and
in so saying, he means that no man should (as Elimas) suffer blindness, for
perverting the faith of Sergius Paulus, and I believe, it will be a piece of
labor for Libertines to prove that such opposers of the Gospel as Elimas and
Hymeneus, who suffered as ill-doers, did yet know in their conscience the
Gospel to be the only saving truth and way of God, and that against the
warning of an illuminated conscience, Elimas perverted the right ways of God.
However to suffer here as a well, doer by Baptists way, is to suffer for an
heretical conscience defending and teaching lies in the name of the Lord* If
so, such a well-doer if blasphemously unsound, is to be thrust through, and
stabbed, as an Impostor, by the Lords mouth, Zach. 13.

Lastly, Baptist is so charitable of all Saints that are not for liberty of
conscience, as that he makes it their doom to be cast out as Ishmael, and to
have no share in Christ, or in the Gospel. But, Baptist, if you judge us, and
be not infallible, you take the Lords throne upon you, and you judge us before
our day, which is to you a strong argument against liberty of conscience, c. 3.
page 14. Know ye we are selfe-condemned? and saw you Gods secret book, Joh.
Baptist condemns.
and saw our names dashed out of the book of life, and that we are enrolled
with Ishmalites? Take the beam out of your own eye.

CHAP. XXVII. Whether our darkness and incapacity to believe and profess,
together with the darkness and obscurity of Scripture be a sufficient ground
for Toleration.
AS Mr. John Goodwin the Lord pardon his perverting of Souls) led the way from
Arminian principles, who teach with Socinians, that 1 To know is not in our
power, which he and they borrowed from Aristotle, but wickedly understood
(...). Joh. Baptist* c. 5. Ancient bounds reas. 5. p. 26. Storming of the
Antichrist. c 5. p. 14.
And 2 Arminians taught that God by an irresistible power, works illumination
in the mind. So opinions not being in our power, the Magistrate can have no
power over men to coerce them from spreading of heresy. Hence Baptist, the
Bounder, the Stormer, and other Libertines, M. Goodwin speaks for. That which
is not in our power to do, Joh. Goodwin. H^giomas.
or not do, and is wrought in us by supernatural grace, and by God only, we
are not punishable by the Magistrates sword, but to believe, to repent, to be
sound in the faith, is wrought in us by supernatural grace, and by God only.
Baptist heaps together but eighteen Scriptures, produced against Pelagians,
Papists, Arminians, and his brethren Socinians, and old Anabaptists, that no
man can come to the Son except the Father draw him; the natural man
understands not the things of God, etc. And I am sure he is ignorant of the
conclusion; for we profess the sword is to be drawn against no man, because he
repents not, or believes not, etc. Hence Baptist spitting out with other
Antinomians his venom against us, though no matter (excepting the sin of it)
if he wronged not Christ and his truth. For when a weak Christian (a disciple
of Servetus, Socinus an Apostate denying the Lord Jesus to have come in the
flesh, and all the Scriptures to be the word of God) tired of longer
imprisonment and death, shall say, You say well, but how shall I prevail with
my self to believe what you say? Thus reply these miserable comforters. Yield
obedience to what is taught you, meditate on it often, desire to believe it,
and God in time will bring you to believe it. Then poor Popery, why art thou
evil spoken of? Baptist falsely charge on us that we teach a man should
believe whether his conscience say so or not, and should do and pray without
the Spirit of Adoption, and that for these foregoing merits of congruity God
will give us faith* which doctine we detest.
and this is a lie; why? It is the Spirit that teaches us to pray, Abba
Father. This is merit and supererogations ground-stone.

Answ. 1. What if a man void of the Spirit cannot pray; ergo, we should not
advise him to pray? Is it Popery to advise him so to do; or to pray when he
wants the Spirit? sure Peter taught no Popery to Simon Magus, a man as void of
the Spirit as any Socinian or Familist, a man in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness
(I conceive this is yield obedience to what is taught you, and meditate on it,
and your evil ways, and change your mind) and pray God (though thou have no
Spirit of Adoption more then a Familist, who makes you believe honey words, or
the very Spirit given to his Anointed ones, such as they only) if perhaps the
thoughts of thine heart, may be forgiven thee; and whom does the Lord command,
Ezekiel. 18. that they would make a new heart? I conceive such as were as unable
to do it, as to make one hair white or black, Ancient bounds
as the Bounder says, and this is our advice, not because we think they can
do it without the Spirit of Christ, more than those that move the question,
Act. 2. 37. What shall we do to be saved? Act. 9. 6. Act. 16. 30. But if
unconverted they may be humbled and convinced, that they are in a lost
condition. And, I confess, if Antinomians will advise them to believe, and
pray, though they have not the Spirit, and to pray as they can, and believe as
they can, and without any preparative work of the Law, or sense or knowledge of
sin, or sickness for Christ, immediately and forth with, believe Christ dyed
for thee obstinate Socinian, and wrote thy name in the book of life, and
believe thy election to life, Baptist is a miserab^e comforter, and how he
censureth this; Its Gods absolute will and pleasure you should believe, and
that you must necessarily believe upon peril of damnation^ which he says is
our Catechism. I understand not, except he show us a conditional Commandment
to believe the Gospel, and a conditional election and reprobation, suspending
Gods decrees on what we are foreseen to do, and except he deny the threatenings
in the Gospel which shall find out an unbeleever, Joh. 3. 18. 36. If the man
be a weak Christian or a weak believer, when the advice of yielding obedience,
praying, desiring to believe is given him, appearingly he would have weak
Antinomians and all anointed ones loosed from all precepts, rule of obedience,
and have them under no rule but the immediate impulsion of the Spirit, which if
it be his mind, he should have set it down, and must prove a miserable
Comforter in so teaching.

2. But are we in all these Scriptures that hold forth our impotencie to
believe, to think a good thought, to do the works of righteousness, mercy,
truth, chastity, sobriety, prescribed in the second Table unable only to
conceive sound opinions of God and eschew Heretical ways, and false
Religions? Are we not also unable to abstain from murder, adultery, etc.
without the supernatural grace of God? Yea all these places shall prove that
the Ministry of men, Preaching of the word without the Spirit is as unable to
work faith as the sword, and the argument from our impotencle to believe, is as
strong against the one as against the other.
Pastors and Teachers of the word, are as unlawful means of converting souls
as the Magistrates Sword to bear down Heresi^^ O (say they) preaching is an
Ordinance of Christ, and a spiritual means ordained to convert souls, the
Sword is nothing but a carnal humane device!

I answer it is an humane device of converting souls to shed the blood of their
body, but it is to beg the question and not to prove it, to call it a humane
device to punish ill doers, and false Teachers who pervert the souls of many.

2. I speak to the Argument, the only preaching of the word, The sword has
strength against only the outward m^n to cause him to abstain from seducing of
souls, not against the Conscience.
it alone without the Spirit, can no more make an hair white or black, or draw
us to the Son, or work repentance in sin^^rs, then the sword of the Magistrate
can work repentance: What can man do (says the Bounder) Is it not God that
must give repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth? So say I, what can
preaching of man or angel do without God, is it not God and God only who can
open the heart? therefore this is no argument against the use of the sword
against false teachers, because it has no strength against soul obstinacy to
work repentance, for neither has preaching; but the sword has strength and
more strength against the outward man, the tongue, the pen, the profession of
seducing preachers to coerce it, and to guard the flock from grievous Wolves,
(for these being test^^ined, the flock is in no more danger from the conscience
of the Heretic, then peaceable men are in danger of the bloody man's thoughts,
hatred, heart-malice, if the Magistrate tie his hands from murder and violence
by the sword of God which he bears, Romans 13.) it has (I say) more force in
its way, then the preaching of the word has, in regard Heretics, men of
corrupt minds, fear^ men, and the sword of the Magistrate, more then God; and
the threatenings of the word; as murderers and adulterers abstain from
disturbing the peace of humane society, more for fear of the laws of men, then
for God. I grant the excessive fear is from the corruption of nature, for
oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae, yet this argues that the sword is
ordained of God to order the outward man in a peaceable way, both in state and
Church; for lay down this ground which Libertines do; that God has appointed
no law nor rule to men of corrupt minds, to those that subvert whole Houses,
but their own erroneous consciences, grievous Wolves may do in the flock to
waste, destroy, and pervert the flock as they please. But they are (say
Libertines) no wolves, but the lambs of Christ, the anointed ones, whom
Presbyterians so call, and the Presbiterians are the wolves, who so domineer
over the consciences.

I answer, this is a manifest perverting of the State of the question, and to
leap from the Proposition to the Assumption; for we dispute only upon the
Supposition, that there be Wolves and Seducers in a Christian society (but who
they be, Presbyterian, or others, is another question) whether or not the
Christian Magistrate should for his part leave them to themselves, and suffer
them to preach, print what blasphemies they list, and their erroneous
conscience dictates to them for truths.

But neither the Christian Magistrate not being infallible, nay nor any Church
on earth can judge who is the Heretic, who the Saint, and therefore should
take on him to judge none at all to be Heretics, but should suffer tares and
wheat to grow till harvest, for fear he pluck up the wheat in lieu of tares,
and persecute Saints under color of justice. Hence I argue in the contrary
demonstratively, that liberty of Conscience is unlawful, and not of God.
Argument 17.


Whatever way lays down a principle most false and contrary to the word of
God, is not of God, but must be unlawful, but the pretended liberty of
conscience is such, Ergo, etc.

The Proposition needs no probation, That must be false that by strong
consequence follows from a false principle. I prove the Assumption, The prime
and first principle of liberty of Conscience now under the New Testament is,
Its a false principle of toleration, None are punishable for heresy because
heresy is to God only knowable, and to no mortal man.
that Heretics and seducing Teachers are therefore unpunishable by the sword,
because they are unknowable: The formal and that which constituteth an
Heretic an Heretic, is in the heart, to wit, heart-contumacie, legible and
obvious only to him that knows all, say the Belgicks, Arminians, and therefore
they can neither be judged nor punished; observe by the way, the Church of
Thyatira must be then unjustly rebuked for suffering Jezabel to seduce, and
this exempteth all false Teachers from Churchcensures, yea from rebukes, for
who dares rebuke men for f^^s knowable to the almighty only who knows the
heart? 2. We are expressly commanded (say Libertines) to suffer the tares,
that is, Goodwins Sermon Theomachia.
Heretics to grow till harvest, because we cannot know tares from wheat, and
we run the hazard (says John Goodwin) of fighting against God, and fighting
against Saints, and God in them (says Saltmarsh) when we punish Heretics.
Acts 5. 34. Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory, Preface.
3. We have not that infallible Spirit, and those Prophets who cannot err, and
can infallibly tell us who is the Heretic, who not. 4. There is a great
variety, and such contrariety of judging (say they) what is heresy, what not,
that what is heresy to one, is saving truth to another, who is as worthy to be
believed as he; Ergo, We are all in the mist, and in a sea of uncertainties in
judging who is the Heretic, who the Saint. 5. Heresy is innocence; Ergo,
there is no such fault reproveable or punishable in the world, say they. But
this principle that the Seducer is not knowable in the New Testament, is most
false and contrary to Scripture.

1. He whom the Holy Ghost bids as try, and not believe, till we try, The
Heretic is knowable by the Scriptures.
he is knowable, but every teacher true or false, the Holy Ghost bids us try, 1
These. 5. 21. 1 John 4. 1. and for this are the Bercans commended, because they
tried Paul and his doctrine by the Scriptures, Acts 17. 11. Ergo, If Paul had
been an Heretic and a false Teacher, he might have been found out.

2. Such an one as the Lord forewarns us to beware of* and avoid, such an one
is knowable. But the Lord bids us beware of false Prophets and Seducers, and
bids us avoid them and believe them not, Matthew. 7. 15. Remore of false
Prophets, Marth. 24. 23. If any man say to you, lo here is Christ, or lo
there, believe it not: why if he teach me where Christ is, if I hear not him,
I refuse to hear Christ, Matthew. 10. 40, 41. Ergo the false Christ is knowable,
Tit. 2. 10. An heretic avoid, etc. when Solomon says, Make not friendship
with an angry man, is not the formality of anger in the heart? if any should
reply to Solomon, God only knows who is the angry man, who is the patient and
meek man, therefore we will make friendship withal men, or with no man. Should
any say, there is no such (...) knowable, should he not contradict the Holy
Ghost? So must we say, there is not such a man knowable to a mortal man as a
false Prophet, or an heretic; and therefore Paul does but mock the
Philippians, who were not infallible, when he writes to them thus, Beware of
dogs; and John when he says, If any man bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house. Might not Libertines say, God commands us to run the
hazard of incroaching upon Gods chair, for who but he who knows the heart can
tell who is the heretic, who not: when the Lord rebukes association with
Thieves, Robbers, Slanderers, Prove. 1. 11, 12. Ps. 15. 18, holds he not forth
that the Theif, the Robber, and the Slanderer are knowable?

3. These whom the Lord rebukes, because they judge not Jezabel and deceiving
teachers, may know Jezabel and deceiving teachers; but the Lord rebukes the
Church of Thyatira for this, Revel. 2. 20. and all other Churches in them.

4. Those that faithful Elders are to beware of, and to watch against, are
knowable; but the faithful Elders of Ephesus are to watch against the
incomming of grievous wolves, Act. 20. 29, 30, 31.

5. Those that the Holy Ghost does forewarn the Saints of, that they may be
rooted in the truth, and armed against them, those are knowable. But Christ
for^told his people that some would come in his name, and profess so much, who
yet come in their own name. Paul foretells of some who shall speak lies in
hypocrisy, and teach doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4^* and Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1,
2, 3. tele of some bringing in privily damnable heresies, does the Lord bid us
judge in charity all these tares to be wheat, and their heresies truths,
because we are not infallible? and does he foretell of such coggers and
jugglers, and yet presupposes none on earth shall be able to know them? and if
any man say Familists, Socinians, etc. are these men, they run the hazard of
reproaching God, notwithstanding the Lord foretold us of them, and set marks
upon their brows 1600 years ago? or if any now say there is a false teacher,
or an heretic breathing on earth, they must either give themselves out to be
infallible, and so must either be grand impostors, or then Apostles and
Prophets living again. Impotency of believing, being natural in the Old
Testament, as in the New, it was to the Jews as good a ple^ against the Lords
Law to punish seducers as to us.


And this same argument from our impotency to believe, was as strong in the Old
Testament against the equity of such Laws as God made against false Prophets,
Deuteronomy. 13. Levit. 24. For it was as unjust for God to command to put to death
men, the frame and imaginations of whose heart, were only evil from their
youth, then, as now, because they believed not, and could not repent, and
abstain from Prophesying in Baal, and speaking lies in the name of the Lord,
since hearts were no more naturally able without the grace of God to repent and
believe under the Old Testament, Reasons against 1 forced and unwilling
obedience. 2 Against forced abstinence from murder, particide, at al times in
the Old and New Testament, do contend against Gods Laws of punishing seducing
teachers.
then under the New. And upon the same reason they tell us, God must have a
willing people, Psalm. 110. and obedience compelled by the Sword, is no
obedience at all, and far less is it religions obedience.

To which I answer: And did not the Lord require a willing people then in the
Old Testament as now?

2. Did God ever accept of faith and repentance extorted through fear of a
direful sword?

3. Does the Lord accept of compelled and forced abstinence from murder,
patricide, adultery* as obedience, because undeniably the sword of the
Magistrate does avenge murder, adultery, parricide, Romans 13. M. Williams a
carnal weapon, Bloody Tenet, c. 40. p. 65.
a sword does produce a carnal repentant, a (...), an outside, as uniformity
things a (...), what an unregenerate man does is sin, preaching, sin-preaching,
breaking of bread, no betterthen the oblation of Swines blood; Ergo, the
Magistrate must compel men to sin, if he force the conscience by the Sword.

Answ. The Sword produces no repentance at all, for external repentance is no
repentance either in name or thing, The Magistrate commands the outward man,
and yet commands not sin and carnal repentance
the Lord commands indeed external repentance, but Precepts are not given to
the outward man, as to the adequate and proper object of the Commandment of
God; the Magistrate indeed forbids speaking of blasphemy, and teaching of
lies in the name of the Lord; but he forbids not teaching of lies, or
abstinence from blaspheming in a spiritual, but in a carnal co-active by
force of the sword, and external way, because he cannot punish the spiritual
and internal ways, and manner of external obedience, and therefore he cannot
under pain of bodily censure, command and forbid these ways of obedience, so
the Magistrate forbids murder, but God, not the Magistrate forbids
murder, or commands abstinence from killing, out of mercy and love to our
neighbor; for the Magistrate cannot punish heart-hatred of our neighbor, or
rash anger, but in so far as it comes out to his senses, in striking, maiming,
or opprobrious speeches; and these he can forbid, and censure and punish. So we
say the Magistrate is but a piece, or a bit of an Ordinance (though both
lawful and necessary, Romans 13. for our good) to reform the outside, and to
work outward reformation, and when he commands the outward man, and says,
Swear not, blaspheme not, speak not lies in the name of the Lord, kill not,
steal not under the pain of feeling the stroke of the Sword: he commands not
sinning, for though he forbid only external abstinence from sins that
troubles the outward man, without any spiritual and internal right way of
abstaining, he commands not sin and hypocrisy, perse, and kindly, and properly.

1. Because the Magistrate, as the Magistrate should, and ought, as the
Minister of God, give commandments to the outward man, under pain of
corporal punishment, not to the soul, or to the inward man.

2. Because that external obedience, not to kill, not to steal, not to speak
lies, is good, lawful external obedience, to man, and profitable in the
State, for the end that God has appointed it, which is the peaceable
conversing one with another, that same abstinence from killing in an unrenewed
man, who abstaineth not from killing for fear of God, and love to his brethren,
is a sinful abstinence, and carnal repentance, How the Magistrate commands
obedience to the Law of God; to wit, in reference only to external peace and
the half and outside of obedience, and yet not hypocritical in its kind.
by accident, and in relation to the Law of God; but the Magistrate neither
commands abstinence from killing, from an inward spiritual principle, nor
forbids he the contrary: he commands not abstinence from false doctrine
out of the love that the messenger ows to him who purchased the flock with his
blood; nor forbids he such abstinence, but only he commands abstinence
from speaking lies to the people of God.

3. If we distinguish obedience, there is first a necessary and good, and
lawful obedience. 2. There is an obedience complete and entire, and full, and
sincere. Outward obedience, which the Magistrate commands, is good and
lawful, and necessary obedience, and is, in the kind of external and
necessary obedience (I mean) necessary for its end, the safety of the society,
not hypocritical, unlawful or sinful. In this notion only, it is commanded
by the Magistrate, and the omission of it unlawful, and punishable, by the
Sword of the Deputy, and Minister of God; but if we speak of an obedience
complete, full, and sincere; which is required from the whole man, in order to
the Law of God. Then the outward obedience that the Magistrate demands is not
complete, entire, nor sincere, but in relation to the Law of God, which
requires entire obedience from the whole man, soul and body, it is not full,
not entire, not sincere obedience, but an outside of obedience but in this
sense the Magistrate does not demand obedience to the Law of God, for he has
to do with the outward man only, and as a Magistrate has nothing to do
with, the soul, and conscience: so than, though the Magistrate command to
preach sound doctrine, forbid to preach lies in the name of the Lord, yet he
commands not hypocrisy and sin; for this argument may as well prove the
Magistrate should neither forbid nor punish murder, nor command abstinence
from murder to an unrenewed man, for an unrenewed man cannot but abstain from
murder in a sinful way, and his abstinence from murder in order to the
spiritual Law of God, is no better then the oblation of Swines blood, and the
cutting off of a dogs head to God, Esa. 66. 1, 2. as is all external obedience
of either Tables of the Law, first, or second, without faith, and spiritual
inward moral principles, and heart-obedience, and Mr. Williams cannot answer
this argument, but by the principles of Anabaptists, Familists, and
Enthysiasts, who say all outward Ordinances, Ministry, Preaching Sacraments,
yea Preachers and Magistrates, who command outward obedience to God are
unlawful, now under the New Testament.

So Mr. Dell denies all Reformation, Del Sermon before the House of Commons, p.
5, 6.
but heart-reformation. Other reformation beside this in the heart, I know
none, and Gospel-reformation only minds the reformation of the heart; then
away with Preaching, Laws, the Sword, Synods. Gospel-reformation ( says he) is
inward, lays hold upon the heart, soul, and inner man, and changes and
renewes that, does not much busy it self about outward forms, or external
conformity, but only minds the conformity of the heart; for when the heart is
right with God, the outward forms cannot be amiss. Christ says touching the
worship of the New Testament, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in Spirit and Truth; he speaks not one word of any outward forms,
so that, God in the Gospel-reformation aims at nothing but the heart. Epistle
to the two Daughters of Warwick. s. 3* 4.
So the father of the Familists, impure H. Nicholas. If I could give all my
goods to the poor, etc. if I have not love, it is not any thing to me; that is,
whosoever has not Christ, he is without God, and without righteousness in
this world, I mean the being like Christ, which is conceived through the power
of the Holy Ghost, and not any ceremonial Christ, which one man speaks to
another, or promises to another, through his ceremonial service; which he,
out of his prudency, according to his fleshly mind sets up: O no, The work
or begetting of God comes not so ^lenderly to pass as men now at this time
teach each other out of their unregenerate Spirit; he means by men now at
this time, Protestants who conjoyne Paul's planting, and the watering of
Apollos, with the working of the Spirit, whereas this Impostor takes him to
the latter, and railes against the former, as a ceremonial and fleshly Christ.

See more of this in Del, Del Sermon p. 4. 5 Theol. Germa. c. 28. 71, 72.
Theologia Germanica, Rise and Reign of Antinomians, Bullinger, Calvin, Town,
the Antino^ian Sal^marsh. Rise and Reign er. 1, 2. er. 49.
Upon this ground, Samuel Gortyn, right down, denies all Magistracy, learning,
books, Libraries, Laws, and he has reason so to do, Bulli^ger adversus Anab.
l. 1. c. 1. and l. 2. c. 4.
for Magistracy, because it is a carnal Ordinance, cannot produce inward and
spiritual repentance, therefore Magistrates upon the same ground cannot coerce
nor punish heretics, Calv Instruct. adversus Liber. c. 10. p. 442.
since heresy is a spiritual evil, which cannot be remedied by a sword of
steal, for God only can enlighten the mind. Towns Assert. of grace, p. 4, 5,
6.


3. If therefore this argument be good, neither can the external preaching of
the word be a lawful Ordinance, S a'm^rsh Free grace, 179, 180.
for God only gives repentance; the preaching of the Word without the Spirit,
Bam. Gortyn.
can but produce a carnal repentance, and the Bounder may cry down all
preaching of the word, Simplicities defense p. 22. 23.
if he but change the word Magistrate, into the word Preacher, Ancientbounds c.
5. reas. 3.
or Ambassador, for this course of Preaching by men, may lay a stumbling (I
speak in his words) in every man's way, Because man may abstain from heresy
and seducing, upon false grounds to wi^, the Magistrates commandment and not
from conscience; it follows no more that the Magistrate has no power so to
command, then that the Pastor has no power so to preach.
to profane the things of God, by doing them out of obedience to men, (that
are but earthen vessels) not to God. If he say, that is by accident, because
men, look to men, as men, and not to God, whose word men carry. So say I, men's
abstaining from doing violence and murder, which the Magistrate forbids, may
infer God, has given no power to the Magistrate to forbid murder and
adultery; for men may so profane the sixth Command, and abstain from murder
because the Magistrate forbids it, not because God forbids it in the sixth
Commandment. And the preaching of the word may be art down errors, so long
as a man sound in the faith preacher^ but when there arises a corrupt teacher,
a ^^ara^h, that knew not Joseph, errors shall walk on every side, and that
not by permission, but by* commandment. Now this is the reasonlesse reason of
the (...), against the coercive power of Magistrates, these men argue ever,
from the abused power of a Magistrate, and from persecution, to prov^ heretics
ought not to be punished, as if punishing of false teachers were persecution,
which they can never prove.

But to go on, Argument 18.
That cannot be the way of God which necessarily infers the darkeness, The
Libertinisme of Toleration is grounded upon the pretended obscurity of the
Scriptures.
inevidence, and inextricable difficulty of understanding the Scriptures. But
such is the way of Liberty of Conscience; Ergo. The Proposition is clear, for
if God has not sufficiently cleared the way to heaven, but left a Testament
that men may expound to be the pathway to life eternal, and the just contrary
a pathway to life eternal, then shall men know certainly no safe way to life
eternal, and the Scriptures shall not make men inexcusable, contrary to Hos.
5. 2. and 8. 12. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6. Luke 16. 29, 30, 31.
Joh. 20. 31. and 15. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. Psalm. 119. 9. Prove. 3. 21, 22, 23.
Deuteronomy. 31. 28, 29. Matthew. 11. 21, 22, 23. 24. 2. Papists shall be in better case
then we, for though they say that the Scriptures are dark and obscure, and
admit of themselves diverse and contrary senses, so that we cannot bottom our
faith on them, yet the juridical interpretation of the Church is to men a
ground of faith, and that is the ground of faith which the Church gives, as
the only true sense of Scripture.

The Assumption is clear, because Libertines suppose that the sense of
Scripture can be undeniably known to none: what is to one saint a ground of
faith, the just contradicent to another is a ground of faith, and what sense to
one Saint is an Article of saving faith, to another is a damnable Heresy; and
both are to be tolerated, neither corrected nor punished, for since neither are
infallible, neither can deserve rebukes or rods, nor punishment civil or
Ecclesiastical; because knowing of the word of God in Scripture is not in our
freewill, but natural, and whatsoever sense the word offers to the
understanding true or false, the man cannot be guilty in receiving the false
sense, because he is not punishable therefore, as Libertines argue; and what
then should hinder but Jews may be saved in their sense of the old Testament,
who yet deny Christ to be come in the flesh? nor are they to be rebuked, far
less to be punished by God or man therefore, because 2 Cor. 3. in reading of
the Old Testament a veil is over their heart, and if it be injustice in the
Magistrate to punish men for Errors which they cannot eschew; can the righteous
judge of the world punish them therefore? Ergo, In such Errors they are
innocent and sin not, and if this be said, what should hinder others to be
saved by believing the contrary sense of the old Testament? and the like may be
said of the new Testament; and so all Heretics and Sectaries receiving the
Scriptures, as Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Papists, Socinians, etc. shall
be saved every man in his own Religion, and the sense of this, Eschew an
Heretic, to a Saint must be, eschew the company of an heretic; to another
Saint it is, Adhere to, and converse with the same saint, for he is no heretic
but sound in the says, and it falsely supposed to be an Heretic, and the
Scripture upon this ground has two contradictorie senses, which being believed
and practiced, must save, and reveals two contradictorie wills of God, and
every man may take Scripture as his mind apprehends it; The main pillar and
ground of toleration, makes the scripture a nose of wax, and puts on it a
hundred senses, and makes it a rule of faith to all the false Religions, of
Jew, Papist, Indian, American, who receive the letters of it.
and whereas the Scripture makes it self the judge and determiner of all
questions and controversies in religion: This way leaves all questions to every
man's conscience, to the conscience of a Jew, of a Turk, of an American, of a
Papist, the old Testament as expounded by a Jew is his Conscience, the old and
new Testament as the popish Church expound it, is their rule of faith, and the
Scripture lifting up Christ, and casting down Christ, and speaking with a
hundred diverse and contrary tongues, is every man's obliging rule; and because
there is no man infallible in taking up the right sense of the Scripture, if
ye control the Jew, or put him off his sense of the old Testament, which
yields him this faith, Mary's son is a false lying Prophet, the Apostles and
all the martyrs are but cousening Impostors, yea domineer over the Conscience
and force his faith, because ye are not infallible, ye may not condemn the way
of any, for ye know not but they be the wheat, and you the t^res, for ought
that Scripture says on either side: Never man in this life is sure of his
faith and salvation from Scripture, and since the Jew may be wheat, if ye would
go to raze his faith, you go to pluck up the wheat before the harvest, and
suppose we and all the Jews were converted to the Christian faith, and if we
conceive Paul's prophecy concerning them Romans 1^ to be fulfilled, they shall be
converted, yet 1. we are not infallible, but live upon our fancies and
conjectures, touching the meaning of Romans 11. say Libertines. 2. Suppose the
fullness of the Gentiles be converted to Christ, and we among them, and all the
Jews, and that in our days the earth be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, and that all the sons of Zion be taught of God, and that the wilderness
blossom as a rose, and the light of the moon be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, and that all
the glorious prophecies in Isaiah, Zechariah, and the rest be fulfilled in our
days, yet by the doctrine of Libertines, all these are but to us, for any
certainty we have, night fancies and dreams of crazie and feaver-sick heads:
For Master John Goodwin, undeniably the learned and most godly man of that
way, has said in a marginall note, of men for piety and learning, Mr John
Goodwin Hagiomast. sect. 28. p 38, 39 denies that any now living on earth has
the Scriptures, or any ground of faith, but that which is made of men's credit
and learning.
I cannot admire enough.

The Vindicators call the denying of Scriptures to be the word of God a
damnable Heresy, and we have no certainty that the Scriptures of the old and
new Testament which we now have, either the English translation, or the
Original of Hebrew and Greek copies are the word of God. So then holding the
Scriptures to be the Word of God in either of these two senses, or
significations of the words ( either translations, or original) can with no
tolerable pretext or color be called a foundation of Christian Religion,
unless their foundations be made of the credit, learning and authority of men.

Because there is need to wonder, by the way, at this, Let the reader observe,
that Libertines resolve all our faith, and so the certainty of our salvation
on Paper and Ink; and Mr. John Goodwin will allow us no foundation of faith,
but such as is made of grammers and Characters, Though the means of delivering
to us Scripture be fallible, yet it neither follows that these means are the
foundation, on which our faith is resolved, or that the Scripture it self is
not infallible.
and if the Scripture be wrong pointed, or the Printer drunk, or if the
translation slip, then our faith is go^e: Whereas the means of conveying the
things believed may be fallible, as writing, printing, translating, speaking,
are all fallible means of conveying the truth of old and new Testament to us,
and yet the Word of GOD in that which is delivered to us is infallible, 1. For
let the Printer be fallible, 2. The translation fallible. 3. The Grammar
fallible. 4. The man that reads the word or publishes it fallible, yet this
hinders not but the truth it self contained in the written word of God is
infallible; I suppose four men who shall show to a wife her Husband among ten
thousands, all four fallible and may mistake, yet when they have brought the
Husband to the wife, it cannot follow that the Wife does not certainly and as
infallibly know her own Husband by his tongue, voice, countenance, proportion
of body and statute, as one can know another without any danger of mistake: so
it comes to the ears of a man born blind, Joh. 9. there is a Prophet called
Jesus the Son of Marie, who will infallibly and indeclinably restore sight to
this blind man, yet the fame and report by which this is carried to the man's
notice and knowledge is fallible, all men standing truly, that which the Lord
reports of them, liars, and such as can be deceived, yet it is no consequence
that Jesus does restore the man to his sight in a way subject to miscarrying,
and declinably, and upon a fallible hazard, so as he may go as blind from
Jesus as he came to him: Now in the carrying of the doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles to our knowledge, through Printers, translators, grammar, pens,
and tongues of men from so many ages, all which are fallible, we are to look to
an unerring and undeclinable providence, conveying the Testament of Christ,
which in it self is infallible and begs no truth, no authority either from the
Church as Papists dream, or from Grammar, Characters, Printer, or translator,
all these being adventitious, and yesterday accidents to the nature of the word
of God, and when Mr. Goodwin resolves all our faith into a foundation of
Christian Religion (if I may call it Religon) made of the credit, learning and
authority of men, he would have men's learning and authority either the word of
God, or the essence and nature thereof, which is as good as to include the
garments and clothes of man, in the nature and definition of a man, and build
our faith upon a paper foundation, but our faith is not bottomed or resolved
upon these fallible means.

But what Arguments have Bellarmine, Stapleton, Gr^^serus, Becam^s, (...),
Valentia, the Council of Tr^nt, and other Papists to make good that the Church
of sound Catholics (who if they could fill their chair) are of more
authority then Printers or particular men, translators of the Scripture? for
they lead us from the written word as Mr. Goodwin does, and say the Church
gives authority to the word of God, and resolve our faith upon the Testimony
of the Church (says Tann^rus) as the infallible rule of faith, Tannerus disp.
1. de fide, c. 5. as. 1 Bellarm. l. 2. de council. c. 12.
on the authority of the Church (says Bellarmine) quoad explicationem and
quoad nos, in regard of our believing on God, Stapl^ton doctrine. princip. l. 8.
c. 21. ultima resolutio fidei non est in Deum revelantem simpliciter, sed in
Deum revelantem ut sic, id est per ecclesiam etc. Val. dis. 1. de fide q. 1. p.
1. Sect 10. p. 38. col. 1.
not simply revealing, but so and so revealing (says Stapleton) by his Church
etc. so as we know not that God has revealed his truth, but by, and for the
infallible proposal of the Church says Gregorius de Valentia) on the
authority of the first verity, God revealing himself as the principle and
first cause of faith (says Joan. de Lugo) and Malderus) and on the authority
of the Church as they are men eminent for Miracles, as in that which is first
believed ut in primo creditum, and the only infallible rule of faith, say
Suarez, Aegid, Connick, Lod. Maeratius, And. Duvallius, Fr. Silvius, Lod.
Caspensis? All which speak fairer for the credit of faith in words, Card. de
Lugo de side, spe, dis. 1 sect. 5. n. 56.
then Mr. John Goodwin, who raises our faith no higher then the English
grammar, the Printer, the learning and authority of men.

2. Malderus de object fidei q. 1. art 1. sect. 10. p. 6.
We believe that Christ is God man, not for the authority of men, and so of
the rest of the Articles of our faith, because Christ says John 5. 34. Ye sent
unto John, and he bare witness to the truth. Suarez de fid. disp. 3. de object.
forma fidei sect. 10 page 9. dis. 9. dub. 8. concl 4.
v. 34. But I receive not testimony from men, on which word Chrysostom says.
(...) I need not (says our Savior) the testimony of men, (...) I am God, but
because ye give more heed unto John, and believe him to be most worthy of all
of credit, Lod. Maratius tom. 2. tract. de fide dis 17. iect. 2. n. 6.
and ye come to him as a Prophet, I speak this (...) who will then receive Mr
Goodwins Testimony, who gives us nothing for faith but fluctuation of opinion,
Duvilliusde object fidei l. 2. q. 1. lit^e. d.
and some Topic grounds from men's credit, learning and authority, that the
Scripture is the Word of God, and turns all our faith into fancy. Fr. Silvius
Professor, Duace^sis m. 22 q. 1. art 1.


3. The Scripture resolves our faith on, Thus says the Lord, the only
authority that all the Prophets allege, and Paul, 1 These. Lod Cas^ensis
Capucinus Curis. Theol. tom post tract. 15. dis 1. s. 3. Reasons to prove that
we have divine certainty, that the Books of the old and New Testament that we
now have, are the word of God, contrary to Mr Goodwins Assertion, That we have
no warrant so to say, but man's credit and authority.
2. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing because when yea
received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of man (made of men's credit and learning (as Mr. Goodwin says) but (as it is
in truth) the word of God.

4. Weak, dry, and saplesse should be our faith, all our patience and
consolations of the Scriptures, Romans 15. 4. all our hope on the word of God,
Ps. 119 49, 50, 52, 54, 55. all our certainty of faith, if it were so as Mr.
Goodwin averreth. But we have (...) a more sure word of Prophecy, surer then
that which was heard on the Mount for our direction, and the establishing of
our faith, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for they bear
witness of me; let them be judge between the Jews and me, whether I be the Son
of God or no, for they bear witness of me: now if we have no better warrant,
that the books of the Old and New Testament, that we now have, to wit, the
original of Hebrew and Greek and translations are the word of God, then that
which is made of the credit of the authority and learning of men, then must all
our comfort of believing be grounded upon this man's, and this man's Grammar and
skill, in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, English, and he is not infallible in any of
these. And must our lively hope be bottomed on men's credit and learning? then
for any thing we know on the contrary, we have but dreams, opinions, and at
best, man's word, for the word of God, and how is the word of Prophecy a more
sure word; for these were written and translated prophesies, of which Peter
speaks; Mr. Goodwin and Libertines, who put heaven and Christ, and the lively
hope of our inheritance, to the conjectures of doubting Scepticks could well
reply to Peter, the word of prophecy cannot be sure; for we have no certainty
that the Scriptures of the Prophets, of the Old and New Testament, which we
have either Hebrew or Greek copies of, are the word of God, but undoubtedly
Christ appealeth to the Scriptures as to the only Judge of that controversy,
between him and the Jews, whether the Son of Mary was the eternal Son of God,
and the Savior of the world, he supposed the written Scriptures which came
through the hands of fallible Printers and Translatours, and were copies at the
second, if not at the twentieth hand from the first copy of Moses and the
Prophets, and so were written by sinful men, who might have miswritten and
corrupted the Scripture, yet to be a judge and a rule of faith, and fit to
determine that controversy and all others, and a Judge de facto, and actually
preserved by a divine hand from errors, mistakes and corruptions, else Christ
might, in that, appealed to a lying Judge, and a corrupt and uncertain
witness; and though there be errors of number, genealogies, etc. of writing
in the Scripture, as written or printed, yet we hold providence watches so
over it, that in the body of articles of faith, and necessary truths, we are
certain with the certainty of faith, it is that same very word of God, having
the same special operations of enlightening the eyes, converting the soul,
making wise the simple, as being lively, sharper then a two-edged sword, full
of divinity, life, Majesty, power, simplicity, wisdom, certainty, etc. which
the Prophets of old, and the writings of the Evangelists, and Apostles had.

M. Goodwins argument makes as much against Christ, and the Apostles, as
against us, for they could never in all their Sermons and writings so
frequently, bottom and found the faith on (...) as it is written in the
Prophets, as David says, as Isaiah says, and Hosea, as Daniel says, as Moses
and Samuel, and all the Prophets bear witness, if they had had no other
certainty, that the writings of the Prophets, that came to their hands, was the
very word of God, but the credit, learning and authority of men, as Mr. Goodwin
says, for sure Christ and the Apostles, and Evangel^sts, had not the
authentic and first copies of Moses and the Prophets, but only copies written
by men, who might mistake, Printers and Translators not being then, more then
now, immediately inspired Prophets, but fallibly men, and obnoxious to
failings, mistakes and ignorance of ancient Hebraismes, and force of words; and
if ye remove an un^rring providence, who doubts but men might add a (...) or
substract, and so vitiate the fountain sense? and omit points, change
consonants, which in the Hebrew and Greek, both might quite alter the sense:
nor can any say, Christ and the Apostles being infallible, could well cite the
Prophets, without a mistake, though the copies might have been vitiate and
corrupt. 2. Because the very citing of these Testimonies by Christ and his
Apostles, made them Scripture, and so of infallible authority; but our citing
of them, (since both, Printers and Translatours are not immediately inspired,
and we also might err) cannot adopt them into Canonical and authentic
Scripture, such as was first written by the immediately inspired Prophets.

I shall answer, that first, this objection presumes, that Christ and the
Apostles might, and did find errors, and mis-printings even in written
Scripture, which might reduce the Church in after ages to an invincible
ignorance in matters of faith, and yet they gave no notice to the Church
thereof; or if there was no error, de facto, then for so many hundred years,
yet there are now substantial errors, and so soul, that it may be, we have
no word of God, at all, amongst us, and God has no Church, no believer on
earth, but we must all take the word of Printers and Translatours, which is
merely the word of man: and what is become of all the Martyrs, that suffered by
the bloody woman Babel? they dyed for mere conjectures and opinions, for they
had not the first original copies of Moses, and the Prophets, yea Stephen the
first Martyr, who according to all our copies Act. 7. adds five to Moses his
70 souls, that went down to Egypt, in that glorious Sermon that he has
before his death, when he sealed the truth with his blood, and dyed gloriously,
and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, dyed but upon the faith of men's
fallible skill in Grammar, Printing and writing, for he cites the writings of
Moses to his enemies that stoned him, according to the copies that they then
had; As Matthew. 2. 5.
who would quickly have controlled him, Matthew. 4. 4, 6, 7 10.
if he had cited false copies, and Stephens own Testimony was contraverted,
Matthew. 11. 10.
and therefore except we say, Matthew. 21. 13.
that Stephen and Christ, Matthew. 26. 24.
and the Apostles, cited the testimonies of the Prophets as they were then
obvious to the eyes and reading of both the people of God, Mark. 14. 21. 27
and the enemies, Mark. 1. 2.
and that not simply, as their own words which they spoke as immediately
inspired, Luke 2. 23.
but as the testimony of the Prophets, Luke 4. 4. 8. 10.
according to the then written copies, we must say they spoke not Ingeniously
the truth of God, Luke 7. 27.
for it was against truth, Luke 19. 46.
candor, ingenuity, to Christ and the Apostles to say, Joh. 6. 31. 45. Joh.
12. 14.
as it is written in your Law, Jo. 8. 17. and so often it is written, Act. 1.
20.
if they would not have the hearers to receive, with certainty of faith. Act. 7
42.
and full assurance free from all doubting, Act. 13. 33.
and fear of humaue fallibility, that what they cited as written, Act. 15. 15.
was undoubtedly the same very truth of God, Romans 1. 17.
and no other, which Moses and the Prophets spoke and wrote; Romans 2. 24.
and if they would not have them to read, search, Romans 3. 4. 10.
and believe these same Scriptures, and to conceive that they drew arguments in
the New Testament to prove and confirm their doctrine, Romans 4. 17.
from that which was written by Moses and the Prophets in the Old Testament,
Romans 8. 37.
and would not have them to believe them, Romans 8. 13.
only because New Testament writers immediately inspired, Romans 11. 8.
had so said.

6. 1 Cor. 1 19. 31. ^ Cor. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 3. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 8. 15.
If God will have us to try and examine all Spirits, all Doctrines, Romans 12. 19.
by the Scriptures written, then are we certainly assured, Romans 15. 3.
that the books we now have, of the Old and New Testament, 1 Cor. 14. 21.
are the very word of God, though we cannot, Gal. 3. 10. 13.
by any possibility, have the first and original authentic copies of Moses
and the Prophets and Apostles; Gal. 4. 22. 27.
Because 1. Heb. 10. 7.
God would not bid us try, and then leave us no rule to try withal, 1 Pet. 1.
16.
but our own natural light, which must lead us into darkness. Luke 24. 14.
2. The visible Church should not be guilty of unbeleefe, Romans 15. 4.
if the written word were not among us, 1 Cor. 10. 7.
or then Christ and his Apostles speaking to us, as is clear, 2 Cor 9. 9.
Joh. 15. 22. Romans 10. 14, 15. Matthew. 11. 21, 22. The assumption is clear by
the commended practice of the Bereans, Luke 4. 17.
who tried Paul's doctrine, by the Scriptures, Act. 17. See Rivetus, Joh. 2. 17.
Whitaker, Calvin. 3. By the command of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. 1 John 4. 1. Try
all things, try the Spirits.

7. Rivet to. 1. contra. tract 1. 46. Whitaker to. 2. de authoritate Scrip. l.
3. c. 7. Calvin Comment in Act. 17.
John would not call those blessed who read and hear, Rev. 1. 5. nor would Paul
recommend reading to Timothy, and continuance in the doctrine of the
Scriptures, and so extol the necessity and utility of the Scripture, and the
indwelling of the word of God in us, as he does, 1 Timothy 4. 16. 2 Timothy 14, 15,
16. Col. 3. 16. nor could the things written by John c. 21. 31. by Moses and
the Prophets, Luke 16. 29, 30, 31. be holden forth as sufficient to bring
souls to heaven, and to cause them eschew hell, if it were true, that we have
no certainty that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the very word
of God, but such as is made of men's credit and learning.

8. Yea and so, what God spoke immediately to Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets,
could not be infallibly and by certainty of faith to them the word of God; for
if God spoke to them in a language intelligible, they had no certainty of
faith, that the words that came from God, did signify thus and thus; for sure,
God, by immediate inspiration, taught them not Grammar, and significations of
words, and those that read the Law written by Gods finger on two Tables of
stone, those who heard Moses and the Prophets preach in their Mother Tongue
even the Jews, who read the original first Hebrew copy of Moses and the
Prophets, must have had no warrant, that, that was the word of God, but the
authority of Father, Mother, and Nurses, who first taught them their
Mother Tongue, for sure the Prophets were not Schoolmasters to teach them
Hebrew; so by this learning there was never since the world was, any certainty
of faith, but such conjecturall humane and fallible opinions in all the matters
of God, as is resolved ultimately (says Mr. Goodwin) into men's fallible and
topicke authority and skill of Grammar, and all divine faith is perished out of
the earth: nay there never could be any divine faith on earth, except God by a
supernatural power taught men first Grammar, and then to believe, for which we
have no warrant, so all our faith must be dreams.

And since Mr. Goodwin acknowledges a supernatural power of the Spirit of
Grace to believe; what else does this Spirit cause us believe, but lies? or at
best phancies resolved into humane credit? which may be false for any certainty
of knowledge that Libertines allow us?

Yea confident I am (says Mr. Goodwin) that the wisest and most learned of
them, Hagiomast. Ser. 36. p. 47.
are not able clearly or demonstratively, to inform the Magistrate and Judge,
what blasphamy, and what Idolatry it was, which was, by God, sentenced to death
under the Law. But so Mr. Goodwin in accusing our darkness, and in freeing the
Magistrate of a duty he ow^ to God and the Church, lays obscurity on the
Scripture, as Papists do, though for another end: And I am as confident there
was some soro^^y, some wilful murder, some incest, some plea (...) and blood,
stroke and stroke, some adultery sentenced by God to be punished by the sword,
that Mr. Jo. Goodwin is not able clearly and demonstratively to inform the
Magistrate of. And by this argument, murder, sorcery, incest, and adultery,
ought not to be punished by the sword. Can Mr. Jo. Goodwin demonstratively
inform us, what be the false Prophets, Matthew. 7. the grievous wolves, Act. 20.
the Heretic, Tit. 3. 10. that we are not to believe, but to avoid? and by this
argument we must not beware of them, nor avoid them, since they are unknowable.

Dr. Jer. Tailor lays down the same ground for tolerating Papists, Dr.
Tailors liberty of prophesying, Sect. 4. p. 73, 74 75, etc.
Socinians, Familists, and all the dreaming Prophets on earth, because of the
difficulty there is of expounding Scripture, and all the means and ways of
coming to the true sense thereof, are fallible. There is variety of reading,
various interpunction, a parenthesis, a letter, an acce^^ may much alter the
sense.

Answ. May not reading, interpunction, a parenthesis, a letter, an acc^m, alter
the sense of all fundamentalls in the Decalogue? of the principles of the
Gospel? and turn the Scripture in all points (which Mr. Doctor restricts to
some few darker places, whose senses are off the way to heaven, and less
necessary) in a field of Problemes, and turn all believing into digladiations
of wits? all ou^ comforts of the Scriptures into the reelings of a Windmill,
and pha^cies of seven Moons at once in the firmament? this is to put our faith
and the first fruits of the Spirit, and Heaven and Hell to the Press. But
though Printers and Pens of men may err, it follows not that heresies should
be tolerated, except we say, 1 That our faith is ultimately resolved upon
characters, and the faith of Printers. 2 We must say, we have not the clear
and infallible word of God, because the Scripture comes to our hand, by
fallible means, which is a great inconsequence, for though Scribes,
Trans^atours, Grammarians, ^rimers, may all err, it follows not that an
erring providence of him that has seven eyes, has not delivered to the
Church, the Scriptures containing the infallible truth of God. Say that Baruth
might err in writing the Prophecy of Jeremiah, it follows not that the
Prophecy of Jeremiah, which we have, is not the infallible word of God; if all
Translatours and Printers did their alone watch over the Church, it were
something, and if there were not one with seven eyes to care for the Scripture.
But for Tradition, Counsels, Popes, Fathers, they are all fallible means, and
so far forth to be believed, as they bring Scripture with them.

Dr. Tailor tells us of many inculpable causes of error; 1 The variety of
humane understanding, Liberty of Prophecy, Sect. 11. p. 171.
what is plain to one, is ^bscure to another. Grego^ies and Ambroses missall
were both laid upon the Altar a whole night, to try which of them God would
miraculously approve. By the morrow m^^tins, the missall of Greg^ry was found
t^rne in pieces, and thrown upon the Church, and Ambroses found open in a
posture to be read. The miracle was expounded, that Ambroses missall was to be
received. Dr. Tailor says, that he would expound it, that Gregory's missall
was to be preferred, and to be spread through the world.

Answ. The knowledge of God is commanded, and the mind is under a divine Law,
as well as the will and the affections.
I have read of no faultlesse causes of error, nor of any invincible error in
things that we are to believe and know by virtue of a divine Commandment; for
this is a special false principle, that to know God, as he has revealed
himself in his word, is not commanded of God in his word. 1 Because to this
David exhorts Solom^n, And shall Solom^n my son know the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 28.
9. and when the Apostle bids as be renewed in the spirits of our mind, Ephesians.
4. 23. Romans 12. 2. 2 And growing in knowledge is recommended, 2 Pet. 3. 14. 1
Cor. 1. 5. Prove. 4. 1. 5 And is set down as a blessing, Esa. 11. 9. Exodus 18.
10. Prove. 1. 2. Hos. 13. 4. Its sure to know God, and his revealed will in his
word must oblige us. 4 The end of the revealed will is to know God, Deuteronomy. 4. 3.
5. Prove. 22. 21.

5. The first Command injoyneth all worship internal, and external, as to
know God, Hosea 13. 4. Jer. 9. 6. Jer. 24. 7. 2 Kings 19. 19. 2 Chronicles. 6. 33.
and reason, the mind be under the Law of God, as will and affections (...).

6. There is a connection between the mind and other faculties, or affections,
a corrupt mind is often conjoined with a guilty conscience, and faith and a
pure conscience go together, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 1 Timothy 1. ^. 2 Pet. ^. 4, 5. keep
the one, and you shall the more easily keep the other, make shipwreck of faith,
and a good conscience cannot swim safe to Land, and the will, and rebellious
affections, and lusts have influence upon the actual and habitual blinding of
the mind, in that men walking after their lusts are quickly blinded in their
mind, and the judgment depraved, 1. 2 Pet. 3. 5. they are willingly ignorant,
and so refuse to know God. 2. Turn away their ear from the Law, refuse the
means of the knowing of God, and dig not for wisdom, as for silver, hate
knowledge, Prove. 1. 24. c. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 3. Blind their own minds and
shut their eyes, Esa. 6. 10. Matthew. 13. 14, 15. Ezekiel. 12. 2. Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4.

Object. All these places do well prove that to be unwilling to know God is a
sin, but not that the simply minde-ignorance of God is sin.

Answ. And why is it sin to be unwilling to know God, which the word
commands, if not to know God be not sinful as to be willing not to fear, not
to love, not to hope in God, not to obey God, not to love our neighbor is sin,
as well as not to fear, not to love God, are sins?

Therefore what is truth in it self, and revealed to be truth in the
Scripture, if it appear an untruth to another, the cause of that is not
inculpable (as D. Tailor says) as if the letter of the Scripture tendered it
self dark and un^^plicable to us without our fault. But the wisdom of God
(we believe) in the Scripture, is plain, to those that open their eyes,
otherwise heresy should not only be no sin, contrary to the word of God,
Tit. 3. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17, 18, 19. but an
innocent apprehension of apparent truth, as there is no guiltiness in an eye
vitiated with humors mis-apprehending colors that are white; The trying of
the two Missals of Gregory and Ambrose by a miracle was mere folly.
and seeing them to be red when they are not so. And for that way of trying the
two missalls, they are but doting fools, that would choose either of them; for
the word of God may judge them both to be corrupt and superstitious, and their
trying which of the two was best, by a miracle, was a foolish and fantastical
tempting of God, much like Chilingsworths decyding of controversies of
Religion, by lotry, because Scripture, Reason, Counsels, Fathers, Doctors,
Tradition, are all insufficient, which sure is d^rogatory to the worth and
perfection of Scripture, which makes the simple wise, Ps. 19. and must show
the man that erreth, his error, if he shut not his eyes at light.

Dr. Tailor says, Liber. of Prophe. Sect. 12. p. 185, 186.
Covetousness is often is cause of heresy. Thebulis, quia rejectus ab
Episcopatu ^ierosolymitano, turbare capit Ecclesiam, says Egesippus in
Eusebius, Tertullian turned Montanist for missing the Bishopric of Garthage,
after Aggrippinus, and so did Montanus, for the same discontent, says
Nicephorus, Novatu^ would have been Bishop of Rome; Donatus of Car^^age, Arri^s
of Alexandria, Aerius of Sebastia; Socrates said Asterius did frequent the
Conventicles of the Arrians, nam Episcopatum nliquem ambiebat.

Let the error be never so great, The causes of heresy.
if it be not against an ar^^cle of the Creed, if it be simple, and have no
confederation with the personal iniquity of the man, the opinion is as
innocent as the person; though perhaps as false as he is ignorant, and
therefore shall burn, though he himself escape. The man cannot by humane
judgment be counted an heretic, unless his opinion be an open recession,
from plain demonstrative authority (which must needs be notorious, voluntary,
vincible, and criminal) or that there be a palpable serving of an end
accidental and extrinsecall to the opi^ion, but these ends spiritual are hard
to be discerned. The opinion of Purgatory though false, being neither
fundamentally false, nor practically impious, is no heresy.

Ans. All ignorance of things revealed in the word though most speculatively,
are sinful errors.
1. I am not so uncharitable of Tertullian, as Dr. Tailor, for Aerius he
maintained no heresy, I hope, Episcopacy is no article of faith. 2. I know no
error in the matters of God speculative, but the Lord forbids it in his word.
If every thing written be written for our instruction, fundamental, or
non-fundamentall as all the Scripture (...), we are under a commandment of
God, we (I say) who live in the visible Church, are to know all, and believe
all things written, be they fundamental or no, for God has written them all
for us; Ergo, the ignorance of any thing written is a sin, and a breach of a
command, and so (...) error, Happy are these that know and do. Now under
doing, I comprehend the faith of the Trinity, and the most of articles,
touching Christ, which do practically concern me, because I sin, if I do not
both know and believe them, else they are written as Aristotle's Acroamaticks
the ignorance of which in an unlette^ed man (I suppose) is no breach of a
divine command, and I conceive the ignorance of the Stories in the old and new
Testament, of Paul's leaving his cloak at Troas is a sin, in all within the
visible Church, for that the Holy Ghost has written these not for the
instruction of one; but of all who hear or may hear of them, within the
visible Church.

2. No error, except of the Article of the Creed is arraigned as Heresy by the
Doctor, but he means by error ignorance and mis-beleif both; for I hope the
Doctors charitis will not send all to hell, many godly there may be who have
much ignorance of God, who know not, or are simply ignorant of some of the
twelve Articles of the Creed, and of some of the ten Commandments, if
therefore error here does include not believing, as heresy must necessarily
do, the pertinacious mis-beleeving and denying of many Stories in the Bible,
as of the deluge, dividing of the red Sea, preserving of Jonah alive in the
whales belly, raising of Lazarus, (if obstinacy be added) must be no less
Heresy and an open belying of the God of truth, then the denying of an Article
of the Creed, for the authority of God who commands us to know the one as well
as the other, is in both despised, when we are ignorant of either.

3. It is to beg the Question, to say that any Error in the matters written to
us in our Lords Testament, which so much concerns both our knowledge and
practice, can be simple Errors and have no confederation with personal
iniquity, for it is as much as if not to read our Husbands love-letter from end
to end, or to cause to read it, if it comes to the wives hard, were not our sin
against our husband Christ, whereas to be ignorant of any thing in it, and
mis-beleeve, it is sinful ignorance, and natural blindness, so the Doctor
makes sin so innocent as to have no consideration with sin.

4. The Place 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13. expounded and vindicated from the glosses
of Adversaries.
To say the opinion shall burn though himself ^^cape, is to expound the place
1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. most corruptly in a n^w gloss of the Doctors own, as
if hay and stubb^^ that is, vain and unprofitable opinions, that are builded
upon the foundation Christ, were not sinful opinions in the matters of God,
when as they are hay and stubble to be b^ent.

1. Because they are against a Commandment, that every man is to take heed,
how, or what he is to build on the foundation, v. 10. but he that builds hay
and stubble obeyes not that Commandment, but let every one take heed how he
builds thereupon.

2. Building hay and stubble, that is, vain and fruitless opinions upon the
foundation, is privatively opposed to building of gold, silver, and precious
stones, verse. 12. but that is a work of faith, and such a work as shall abide,
and have a reward, v. 14.

3. The work that shall be brought to judgment, and made manifest so, as it
shall be burnt with fire, and shall be judged to be a fruitless work, must be
sin. But the building of (...) and stubble upon the (...) Christ is such a
work, v. 13, 14, 15. And that the man himself shall be saved, because that by
faith he is builded upon the foundation Christ, but the work burnt with fire,
will no more prove that the building of hay is not sin, then that Peter's
j^daizing, and David's adul^^ry and murder were not fins, because Peter and
David are saved, for the Apostle there compares the Apostles to builders, (as
before he compared them to (...), v. 6, 7, 8 9.) and the preaching of doctrine
to a building, and he makes Christ the foundation of the building, and two
sorts of super-structures; good doctrine, and that is gold and silver, and vain
and unedifying Toys added to the doctrine of Christ, (...) hay and stubble;
Now he makes the judgment that tries all doctrine to be fire, (whether it be
the last judgment, or fiery afflictions, it is no great matter) our good
doctrine will bide the trial of the fire and not be consumed, and the man
rewarded for his so building, and bad doctrine will be burns, and not abide the
Lords fire when it is tried, for false doctrine will vanish in the day of
trial, and yield the sower of such doctrine no comfort, yet he himself keeping
the foundation Christ shall be saved, but he shall be ^eded and (...) afflicted
for his fruitless building, so the day seems to be the day of trial and fiery
persecution coming on all the Preachers of the Gospel, to try the^ and their
doctrine, as Rev. 3. 10. the place smells nothing of p^^gato^ie fire, and the
most judicious interpreters, even Es^ins (...) Papist, ^^pounds i^ well of the
Lords trying of the sons of Levi, Mal. 3.

5. I will not say Amen to Dr. Tailor, that to count a man an heretic, his
opinion must be a plain upon recession from demonstrative authority, which
must needs be voluntary vincible, and criminal, Dr. Tailors mistake of heresy.
for the Sadduces were wilful, obstinate heretics in denying the resurrection
of the dead, a principal Article of faith; yet it is not clear that their
opinion was an open recession from: demonstrative authority. The Doctor will
not call Christ's arg^ing: God is the God of dead Abraham. Ergo, the dead must
live again, Matthew. 22. demonstrative. We may have as much natural blindness,
as we can hardly see the truth of Christ's ascension to heaven, and coming
again to judge the quick and dead, by demonstrative authority from Scripture,
yet those in the visible Church, denying these Articles of faith, are
Heretics, though there may be degrees of voluntarinesse and obstinacy in
Heretics.

6. What vinciblenesse must be in heresy.
That there must be vinciblenesse in all heresy is anobiguous, in the Doctors
sense, for by vinciblenesse, I take, he means, such vinciblenesse whereby none,
by their own industry and strength of freewill may, if they be not wanting to
that grace which is denied to none, (as Arminians say) attain to the light of
such consequences, as heretics wilfully deny. If this be his meaning, he is a
friend to Pelagius. 2. If he take vincible, as opposed to invincible ignorance,
he Popishly then says, that the Scripture offers to us many things whereof
we may be invincibly ignorant. Now invincible ignorance, Protestants
acknowledge only, in matters of fact, or of Gospel Truths never so much as in
the letter revealed, as Heathens may be invincibly ignorant of Christ, and
their ignorance not be sinful, as Joh. 15. 22. and Jacob was invincibly
ignorant, in lying with Leah, instead of Rachel. There can be no such
vinciblenesse, or invinciblenesse, in an Heretic that hears the Gospel, for
who ever hear the Gospel, and yet remain ignorant, Dr. Tailor makes the
opinion of Purgatory no heresy, and groundlesly.
their ignorance is not invincible, Nulla est invincibilis ignorantia juris.

7. The opinion of Purgatory, though it were no heresy (as the Doctor says,
and brings no argument to prove it) yet is not simply, a finlesse error in
such as know, or ought to know (since the Scripture is before their eyes) that
1. There is no word of God to warrant it. 2. Since the word, in the Parable of
Lazarus, and the rich Glutton, shows us, what abides all men, immediately
after they dye, that the bodies of all go to the earth, and one way or other
are buried, and the souls either to heaven or hell, and this he says of all
mankind. 1. Because all receive either their good things, or their evil, of
suffering in this life. 2. All men are such, as if they believe not Moses and
the Prophets, will not believe though one rise from the dead. 3. Christ should
be unperfect in this place, and in all other places, who should not tell us of
a third doom, befalling some after they are dead and buried: where their bodies
that were instruments of sin, as the rich gluttons tongue was of gluttony,
should be tormented, for their venial sins; yea and Purgatory dwells
doorneighbour with covetousness, if the Doctor remembers that Soul-masses to
Romish Masse-mongers, as well as Durges, Requiems, M^sses, are not a little
gainful.

8. Of errors how they are sinful in matters revealed in Gods word.
Nor is there any error of things revealed by the wise Lawgiver in Scripture,
which is merely speculative, in order to Gods end, his glory. It is no less
derogatory to the Lawgivers glory not to believe, A Virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son, and, there is one God in three persons, then to kill our Brother,
though the former be more speculative, farther from the experiments of humane
affairs (as he speaks) and more difficult and remoter from humane
observation, then the other.

Object. Liber. of Proph Sect. 12. n. 6.
1. Errors are then ( says he) made sins, when they are contrary to charity,
or inconsistent with a good life, or the honor of God.

Answ. Not to believe what God says, is inconsistent with his honor: for
nothing intrinsecally is inconsistent with the honor of God, not the eating of
the tree of knowledge, no simple act of loving, fearing, believing, all are
inconsistent with, or agreeable to the honor of God, because he commands, or
forbids them.

Object. Liber. of Proph n. 6.
2. No man's person is to be charged with the odious consequences of his
opinion, though the doctrine may be therefore charged, because if he did see
the consequences, and then avow them, his person is chargeable with them.

Answ. The very opinion it self may be a blasphemy, by consequence, though the
man see it not to be blasphemy: will the Doctor say, Hymeneus, and Alexander,
did make shipwreck of faith and blaspheme, because they said the resurrection
was past? Yet Paul 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. charge the persons with blasphemy; and
can the Doctor deny that Hymeneus, and Philetus, increased unto more
ungodliness, and that their word did eat as a canker, in saying, that the
resurrection was past? which yet Paul charge on them, 2 Timothy 2. 15, 16, 17.
and those that taught circumcision are charged as perverters of souls, Act.
15. yet they but perverted souls, by consequence. The like may be said of
such, as Paul said tell from Christ, and lost all benefit in Christ, if they
were circumcised, Gal. 5. 2. It may be they would retract the heresy, if they
saw the blasphemies to follow by strong consequence, and it may be not, since
they are selfe-condemned. But, sure, the Lord charge the persons of men as
making God a liar, who believe not his truth, and he charge Epicurisme, Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye, 1 Cor. 15. on the persons that
deny the resurrection: and if the doctrine be a lie, I wonder, how these that
lie of God (since God commands to know, and believe whatever he says in his
word) can be innocent.

Object. N. 7.
If no simple error condemn us before the throne of God, since God is so
pitiful to our crimes, that he pardons many de toto, and de integro, he will
far less demand an account of our weakness; the strongest understanding
cannot pretend immunity from being deceived.

Answ. Simple errors of things revealed in Gods word are condemning sins.
Then though Christ said, Joh. 8. Except ye believe, that I am b^, ye shall dye
in your sins, and he that believes not is condemned already: He charge no
man guilty of unbeleefe, that hears the Gospel for simple not believing But
then we are commanded to believe no truth that God speaks, to know no truth,
but only to know it with an inclination of heart, love, and will, toward the
Commander, and so the mind, and understanding faculty, the noblest, and most
excellent piece in the soul must be left lawless and free in its operations,
from all hazard of guilt or sin.

2. If this Argument be good, sins of infirmities, and of weakness, must be
no sin. Idle words cannot come in reckoning in the last day, contrary to Matthew.
12. 36. for God forgives crimes; Ergo, he will not call us to an account for
our venialls. If this conclude any thing, the strongest understanding cannot
pretend immunity from being deceived; Ergo, simple ignorance of the things of
God is no sin. I may argue no man can pretend to be free of sin in the
inclination of the heart and original guiltiness, Job 4. 4. Ps. 51. 5. Gen 8.
21. Prove. 20. 9. 1 John 1. 8. 10. Eccles. 7. 20. Ergo, sin is no sin, original
sin, sins of infirmities are no sins.

Object. Ob. 1. Sect. 13.
No Christian is to be put to death for his opinion, which does not teach
impiety or blasphemy. If it plainly and apparently brings in a crime, and
himself does act it, or encourage it, then the matter of fact, is punishable,
according to its proportion and malignancy; as if be preach Treason, and
Sedition, his opinion cannot excuse, because it brings in a crime, a man is
never the less Traitor, because he believes it lawful to commit Treason, and
a man is a murderer, if he kill his brother unjustly, although he think to
do God good service in it; matters of fact are equally judicable, whether the
principle of them he from within or without; and if a man could pretend to
innocence in being seditious, blasphemous or perjured, by persuading himself
it is lawful, a gate were opened for all iniquity. -- I deny not but certain
and known Idolatry, or any other sort of practical impiety, with its
principiant doctrine ought to be punished, because it is no other but matter of
fact, but no matter of mere opinion; no errors that of themselves are not sins
are to be persecuted by death or corporal inflictions.

Answ. How opinions are judicable and punishable.
1. The Doctor mocketh when he says, No mere opinions are to be persecuted.
That was never in question, a mere opinion, is a mere act of the mind within
the walls of the soul, and can be known to no man; for neither Magistrate,
nor Church can judge of invisible and hidden acts of the soul, so he says
nothing.

2. The simple apprehension of God to be a fourfooted beast, is by the Apostle,
Romans 1. esteemed Idolatry, and a mental changing of the glory of the
incorruptible God into the glory of a corruptible creature; and the profession
thereof must then be the profession of manifest Idolatry, and so punishable,
yet it is a profession of a mere opinion; but I confess of a most Idolatrous
opinion, not of a fact, otherwise by this learning of Libertines there can be
no sin in simple apprehensions of God, though most prodigious, and monstrous,
what is blasphemy, is as controverted and as unjudicable as simple error.
Servetus his naming the blessed Trinity a Cerberus, or three-headed dog,
blasphemed, say we, I think Doctor Tailor will not say so, then by his way,
blasphemy must be as unjudicable as heresy, and to him the formal of it is
within, in the heart.

3. If matters of fact be punishable according to their proportion and
malignancy, then speaking lies in the name of the Lord, and teaching and
professing malignant doctrine contrary to the doctrine of godliness, that
Christ thought it no robbery to be equal and consubstantiall to God, that God
is one in three persons, and to teach any thing contrary to what God has said
in his word, as that there were not eight persons in the Arc with Neah, must
be punishable, the contrary whereof the Doctor says here: for every breach of
a Commandment is malignancy and punishable, when it hurts humane society
especially.

4. Can a man be the less heretical, and his society the less detestable
then, that he thinks his heresy is sound doctrine? for thoughts cannot change
the nature of actions.

5. To kill a man is indifferent of it self, it may be done in justice, it may
be done in injustice, but if a man kill his son, and offer him to God, For the
Father to kill the son, upon a mere religious ground, is no murder, nor
punishable by Libertines way
neither hating, nor envying, nor grudging at the safety of his son, only upon
this mere opinion that he expresses an act of love to God, above that he
bears to his son, as Abraham did, then by this way he sins not, this
son-slaughter is not murder, nor punishable, but a simple error.

For 1. It may be said by Libertines, the act of killing is indifferent of it
self.

2. If he hate not his son, and lie not in wait for him, it is no murder,
Deuteronomy. 4. 42. Deuteronomy. 19. 46. He is not worthy of death, for as much as he hated
him not in times past. Nor can killing be called a vertuall hating, or
essentially an hatred of our brother, for then it were impossible for a Judge
to kill a man, and not to hate him: As every breach of the Law of God is
essentially an hatred of God, and a vertuall hatred of God: for simple killing
of our neighbor is not murder by Gods reasoning, but killing of him in
hatred, rage, anger, or desire of revenge. Nor can it be said, that hating,
forbidden in murder, by the Law of God, includes a loving of him, and a saving
of his life; when it is in our power to save it, as it is in the fathers power,
who sacrifices his innocent Son to God, to save his life.

Answer, I deny not but it is murder, for they teach, that a man may publish
that which by consequence, destroys the faith of fundamentals, and so subvert
the faith of others, which to do is a sin, but because the man follows the
dictment of his erroneous conscience it is no sin to the man that so teaches,
yea, he may innocently suffer persecution for his conscience, thus erroneous,
yea, and dye a martyr for it. Ergo, if the following of an erroneous
conscience, shall make a less sin to be no sin but innocence, it shall make a
greater sin, to wit, killing of his son to his heavenly father, no sin, and so
he may lawfully do it. Nor will it suffice to say, to offer a man to God and
kill him, is against the light of nature, and vincibly a sin; what then? if the
man believe he is commanded to kill him, his erroneous conscience must bind, as
the offering of whole burnt offerings to God, to us is a sin, against the light
of nature, in regard the law of nature can no more warrant it, then it can
warrant Christ to offer up himself to God. But upon the supposition of
Libertines, it is no murder, nor is it punishable at al, because the father
may, yea, and lawfully ought to worship God according to the indictment of his
conscience, whither the conscience be right, or bloody and erroneous, and yet
he is not punishable for bloodshed, by their way for merely, and simply,
without any malignancy or hatred to the child; he believes, he ought to
prefer his maker, to his dearest child's life as well as Abraham, and the
conscience does naturally, and as under no Law, simply believe it is the like
service, and worship that Abraham would have gratefully performed unto God, if
God in reward of that love, had not forbidden him again to kill his Son. And
this answer presupposes also, that it is impossible for a father to have such a
conscience, as may stimulate, and command to kill his son, and that in the
authority, and name of God, as he erroneously, yea, and as he invincibly
holds, as Socinians, Familists, Papists, believe purgatory, merits,
justification by works, who yet are not to be punished for their conscience,
according to Libertines. Again, there is no intrinsecall malignancy in the act
of naticide* or son-sacrificing, but what it has from the Lords Law forbiding
to kill, now those that killed their Sons to Molech, yea, to God, as they
thought, strongly, yea, invincibly believed God commanded them, to do him such
bodily service, as is clear from Jer. 7. 31. Jer. 15. 5. And that this is
invincible ignorance, (I take the word invincible in the Libertines sense)
Libertines grant, for in our condemning son-sacrificing, they will say we are
not infallible. Yea, the understanding, being spiritual, cannot be restrained,
says Dr. Tailor Sect. 13. n. 6. and no man can change his opinion when he
will, says he, ibid n. 7. and so should not be punished for it, and n. 13.
there is nothing under God Almighty, that has power over the soul of man, so
as to command a persuasion. If he be then persuaded, that he ought to kill his
Son, he ought unpunishably so to do. Lastly, Doctor Tailor yields the cause,
when he says that certain known Idolaters may be punished with death or
corporal inflictions. For there is no Idolatry so gross, that strongly
deluded consciences may not be carried invincibly (I speak in the Libertine
sense) out of mere conscience, to act. Ergo, some are justly punishable for
their mere conscience, and yet are not persecuted for conscience. (...) If a
man preach treason (says he) his opinion does not excuse. If a man preach
murder, and preach that Christ was an impostor, that the Scripture is a fable,
how can his opinion excuse in a great sin, and not all sins?

CHAP. XXVIII. Diverse other Arguments for pretended Toleration, answered.
DOctor Tailor objects from the Arminians, he that persecutes a disagreeing
person, Sect. 13. n. 5.
does arm all the world to persecu^^ himself, if he say he is no Heretic, he
is as confidently believed to be an Heretic, as he believes his adversary to
be an Heretic* if it be said, every side must take their venture, this is to
make the Christian world a shambles.

Ans. 1. Because sound and orthodoxe Magistrates punish Heretics, they do no
more arm Heretics against them to punish them, then they arm murderers to
punish them, because no law of Conscience teaches, that a seducer is obliged
to publish to others his erroneous opinion, touching mansacrificing, the
unlawfulness of Magistracy under the New Testament, Liberty of Conscience,
Familisme, and the (...)* for then the Law of nature must teach, men are
obliged in conscience to sin, and pervert others.

2. They are obliged to believe that their Conscience must be a rule to others;
which two the Law of nature cannot teach, since it is the just law of God. If
ye argue what Heretics do unjustly, they persecute the sound in the faith,
and there is reciprocation of persecution amongst false Religions; its true,
the Christian world is a shambles, through the corruption of men's nature. But
if ye argue what Christian Orthodox Magistrates ought to do, they ought to
punish only Heretics and Seducers, but they do not justly (...) Heretics, and
those of false Religions reciprocally against themselves, for by this argument
those that are just Magistrates, and take away the life of Pirates, Robbers,
(...) of other Nations, do they therefore justly arm all Pirates and Robbers
to take away their Lives? I think not.

Obj. Bloody Tenet, c. 95. p. 145, 146.
2. Where the Christ or his Messengers charge the Magistrate to establish by
his arm of flesh, and (...) worship of God, the beast indeed gets the power of
the earth, Rev. 17. Bloody Tenent.

Answ. The Magistrates ministry is civil, not spiritual.
Kiss the Son O Rulers Psalm. 2. The Kings of the earth shall lick the dust
before Christ, Psalm. 72. The Kings shall bring their glory to the new
Jerusalem; Ergo, They shall guard the Law of God from violence. 2. The Beast
gets the power of Kings to bear down truth, but this power of Kings shall burn
the whore, Rev. 17. 16. and act for Christ and his ordinances. 3. Where reads*
Mr. Williams that Christ and his Messengers are to charge the Magistrate to
give liberty to Wolves, Boares, Lions, Foxes? Serve your consciences O beasts
in wasting the Mountain of the Lords House, and in not sparing the flock, the
Nurse-father grants you liberty to waste the mountain of the Lord.

Obj. 3. Artaxerxes knew not the Law of God, which he confirmed, how then could
be judge it? 2. In such fits and pangs of a terrifying conscience, what laws
have Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius, Arta^erxes, put forth for the Israel of
God, yet were they not charged with the spiritual crown of governing the
worship of God. Bloody Tenet, 16. 148.


Answ. That was their Error, they knew not the Law of God, The Laws of
Artaxerxes Cyrus, Darius, Nebuchadnezzar, ratifying the Law of God by civil
punishments were their Magistraticall duties.
but it was their duty, that they ratified it. 2. Those Princes did their
duty as Magistrates in those Laws, no matter what Conscience, renewed, or not
renewed put them on to act, the duties in the substance of the act were
lawful, the corruption of nature (they being unrenewed) might vitiate the
work, and put them a working to act lawfully, in the duties. Saul as King did
fight the battles of the Lord, and led his people, and that lawfully according
to the substance of the work, but God knows his motives and end. 3. This
ignorant man never hears of a Magistraticall act to promote the worship of God
in a civil way, but he dreams of a spiritual tribunal given to the
Magistrate, which we abhor as much as he; for the material object of the
Magistrates power though spiritual, renders not his power spiritual, as the
Magistrate punishes spiritual confederacy with Satan, in Magitians, and
Sorcerers, a Witch should not be suffered to live, and Sodomie flowing from
Gods judicial delivering men up to a reprobate mind, Romans I. 28. and yet the
Mastrates power is not spiritual, nor terminated upon the consciences of men.
Not is this Argument of strength, that men cannot be persuaded to cast off
opinions of God for fear: For 1. Some must be saved through fear, and pulled
out of the fire, Jude v. 23. 2. Augustine answered this argument of Donatists,
fear of Princes Laws, 1. compels men to come in and hear truth, and truth
persuades, Epist. 48. ad Vincent. Ali^ dicant nos fals^s rumor^^^ terribam^r
(...), qu^^ false^ esse nesciremus, si non intraremus, nec intrarimus, nisi
cogere^^er, gratias domino qui trepidationem nostram flagello abstulit. 2. Fear
of Civil laws may draw men out of the society of bewitching Seducers, How
fear of civil Laws may work men to soundness in the faith.
where they are ^ettered with chains of lies, Epist. 50. ad (...). Quid de
(...) confitentur, quod iam olim volebant esse Cath^^, (...) eos habitabant,
inter quos id quod v^^ebant esse non pote^^^t per infirmitatem timoris, ubi si
unum verb^m pro Catholica fide di^^rent, and ipsi, and domus little funditus
ever^^^entur. Qu^^ est tam ^^ens qui neget, istie (...) per ^^ssa (...) tanto
^uerentur (...), etc. 3. Fear of Laws, as Augustine says to the Donatist
Vincentius Epist. 48. has daunted wild Heretics, Qui tamen ad hanc sanitatem
non (...), nisi legum istarum, quae tibi displicent, vinculis tanquam ^^netici
ligarentur.

Obj. 4. Artaxerxes gave the people liberty to return to (...) own Land,
Bloody Tenet, page 129.
assisted them with other favors, and enabled (...) to execute Laws according
to their National state: But did God put it in the Kings heart to restrain
nations from their Idolatry, to constrain them to ferme the worship, build the
Temple, (...) an Altar?

Answ. Ezra 6. 3. Cyrus (...) decree, Let the house of the Lord be built, etc.
Ezra 7. 23. Artaxerxes in his decree faith, Whatsoever is commanded by the God
of heaven, Artaxerxes made laws by the light of nature, to restrain men from
Idolatry.
let it be diligently done for the God of heaven, etc. he restrained men from
Idolatry, and all disobedience to the Law of God. ^. (...) whosoever will not
do the Law of thy God (...) Law of the King, Let judgment be executed
speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or unto
confiscation of (...), or to imprisonment: Ergo, This heathen King by the ^ight
of nature, by a civil Law established the Law of God against Idolaters and
false Prophets, which is all we crave of Christian Magistrates, and for this
cause said Ezra, Blessed ^e the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put such a
thing in the heart of the King to beautify the house of the Lord which is at
Jerusalem. He interposeth the Kings law to the law of God, though the Law of
God borrow no obligatory power or dignity from the King, and the Lord need not
the sword of flesh, yet that it may get external obedience before men, and
with the external man, it is the duty of Artaxerxes and of all kings, to add
their law of death, banishment or confiscation, etc. to the Law of God, that
such as refuse to do the Law of God, and seduce the people of God with lies
and false doctrine may be punished, it was the defect of duty in these Kings
that they compelled not the people to return.

Obj. Bloody Tenet, c. 97. p. 152.
5. For Jews and Nations that blaspheme Christ must be put to the Sword
according to the Scriptures, Exodus 22. 20. Levit. 24. 16. Deuteronomy. 13.

Answ. It follows no way, two things hinder any to execute these Laws. From
punishing of false Teachers it follows not that the Jews and all the
Idolatrous Heathen should be killed.
1. They are not so under us as we have a Magistratical power over them, as
Magistrates have the sword over ill-doers, that are subjected by divine
providence to the power. 2. They are not convicted of Blasphemy, nor
instructed in the doctrine of the Gospel, as they are convicted by the Law of
nature, that murder, and adultery deserve punishment.

Obj. 6. In all the New Testament we find not a prison appointed by Jesus
Christ for an Heretic Blasphemer. Bloody Tenet, c. 113. p. 107.


Answ. Where are the ten Commandments set down in the New Testament in
express words of Scripture order? or where speaks Christ or his Apostles of
prison, sword, gallows, faggot to witches, murderers, parricides, yea or of so
much as rebuking or excommunicating such by their specified sins in particular,
more than of blasphemers? yet does he Romans 13. appoint prison and sword for all
ill doers, and the same Socinians and Anabaptists object against all
Magistracy.

Obj. 7. The State and National Church of the Jews swear a Covenant, Bloody
Tenet, cap. 98.
2 Chronicles. 15. that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be
put to death whether small or great, whether man or woman. But may whole
Nations or Kingdoms now, (according to any title expressed by Jesus Christ to
that purpose (follow that pattern of Israel; and put to death all both men and
women, great, and small, that according to the rules of the Gospel are not born
again, penitent, humble, heavenly, patient, etc. What 1. Hypocrisy brings
this? 2 What a profanation of the holy name of God brings this? The
considerable differences between punishing such as rebel against the first
Tables of the law in the old Testament, and now in the new, and their swearing
of a Covenant and ours.
3. What masacring of people by civil wars?

Answ. 1. I confess the swearing of the Covenant in Israel, and in National
Churches, may hence be proved to differ. 1. As touching the external worship,
for their seeking of God, and ours differed, they sought God in circumcision,
Passover, Sacrifices, Feasts, Divine Ceremonies, but we do not so, 2. They
swear the Covenant, 2 (...). 15. with blowing of Trumpets, Cornets, etc. We do
not so. 3. A whole City that maintained a false Prophet against the sword of
justice, Deuteronomy. 13. was destroyed, sacked, their very cattle and every thing in
it accursed. We are not obliged to deaths and punishments, every way thus
ceremonial as they: but as for the substance of the service; the swearing of
an Oath, and Religious Covenants, being of the law of Nature, and the Punishing
of Apostates from the doctrine of the Gospel, to which they have sworn
(though the Gospel it self be far above natures law) must be from the Law of
nature lying on us; we must by the same law be tied, as they, not to kill all
not borne again, I hope the antitipe is here of Mr. Williams foregoing, not of
God, no word of Christ, says that Christ charge to inflict bodily punishment
on men by the sword of the Magistrate, because not borne again. Nor do we
think that by small and great, here are meant sucking children who could not
swear a Covenant, for the text restricteth the Covenant-breach to such as
swear the Covenant, and where infants are to be put to the sword by the
Magistrate in the Old Testament, as it is like, Deuteronomy. 13. 13, 14, 15. and 1.
Sam. 15. 1. (...) they are morally culpable before God, but not that we should
mistake that sort of justice; no^ to kill infants under the New Testament for
the sin of their parents.

2 We think Mr. Williams Arguments weak and Anabaptisticall, we should not
swear such a Covenant (...) why? It were hypocrisy, and a prophaining of Gods
name: How does this follow, but that we must put none to an Oath, but such as
are regenerate, and we know will swear sincerely, and not prophaine the name of
God? None then can be witnesses under the New Testament to swear, but such as
are regenerate, where is this divinity warranted? Or if it be, because the
substance of the Oath is sin, in that we swear to put to death the innocent
and unrenewed? we crave a ground for it in the word. But we know no such
Covenant or Oath, But here if toleration of all Religions stand, the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, grievously sin, in that they proclaim not an
open liberty to the Mass, to Jesuits, Priests, to set up Altars, Temples, the
whole body of Popish worship, and they ought to proclaim liberty to all Jews
to come and dwell in Britain, erect Synagogues, blaspheme Christ, for this is
the Liberty wherewith Christ has set us free, by Libertines way.

Obj. Papists would cut our throats, Jews would destroy us and blaspheme
Christ.

Answ. No doubt they would, but Libertines do ill that good may come of it, in
not acting lawful liberty for Christ, though the firmament should fall, we are
not to oppress consciences, force Religion; abandon the Gospel liberty and
meekness in gaining all to Christ in finding truth, Obj. 8.
etc.

Obj. Bloody Ten. c. 1^8 p 197.
Henry the 7 Leaves England Papists. Henry 8 brings all to half Papists, half
Protestants. Edward the 6 stirs about the wheel to absolute Protestanisme.
Circular turnings from Protestanisme to Popery proves nothing against punishing
of seducers.
Mary turns about all again to Popery. Elizabeth again sounds the Trumpet,
all are Protestants, are not we even now making unregenerate men the subject of
these national changes, by a national Covenant?

Answ. Does not this man lay upon the National Church of the Jews, a Church
framed by the wisdom of God, the like revolutions from Jehovah to Baal, and
the golden Calves, from Baal and the golden Calves back again to Iebovah,
according as David, Achab, Jeroboam, Ie^u, Afa, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Josiah,
Ammon, Godly or ungodly Kings came to the throne? and God must so institute and
procreat hypocrisy, prophaining of the name of God, domineering over, and
compelling consciences then at now, only subject to the Lord of spirits, and
his word, by a sword of steel? Whereas now, as then, hypocrites change from
Religion true or false, and back again in a circle, as times blow fair or
foul, through the corruption of nature, and this is not to be fathered upon
that lawful punitive power, that God has given to the Christian Ruler, to
coerce wolves, and seducing teachers, which power, Kings whose breasts the
Church should suck, often do abuse, to establish Popery, and tyrannize over
the conscience of the Godly, and undo religion, but both now, and then,
Sophists may bring a caption, ab accidente, against any lawful power. What if
murderers, Sorcerers, Drunkards, abound under unjust and loose Princes, and
when a just and watchful Prince comes to the throne, men out of hypocrisy
return from these sins? and again, when another unjust King Reigns, they
return to their vomit, is this against National righteousness and Magistracy?

2 Under all those Revolutions Christ had a Church professing the Protestant
faith, under gracious Kings, and sealing the same faith with their blood under
persecuting tirants, so that change was never in the true invisible Church, but
only in the scum and outside of the Church, and the change came never from the
p^^itive lawful power rightly used, but from the hollownes of the hearts of
time servers, or some weak men, that denied their Master in an hour of
temptation, and repented again.

3 By this Argument Mr. Williams will give us no visible Church, but the Church
of Anabaptists, consisting of sinlesse, regenerated, and justified men, who are
beyond the courtesy of the Law, Obj 9.
free grace, and a Redeemer, or pardon of (...)*

Obj. Bloody Ten. c. 120. p. 202.
An arm of flesh, and (...) of steel cannot reach to cut off the darkness of
the mind, Dr. Tailor Liber. of pro.
the hardness and unbeleife of the heart, (says Mr. Williams). A woolfe
(says Dr. Tailor) may as well give laws to the understanding, Sect. 13 n. 10.
Ancient bounds c. 6. 1. p. sect. 26.
as be whose dictates are only propounded in violence, and written in blood,
and a Dugge in (...) capable of a Law as a man, if there be no christ in his
obedience, no^ discourse in his choice, nor reason to satisfy his discourse.
Aman cannot (says the Bounder) believe at his own will, how much less at
another? Who can reveal and infuse supernatural nation and truth but the
spirit?

Answ. The objection of a carnal way by swords as no fit means to suppress
heresy answered.
This strongly concludes that the understanding and will cannot be forced by
the sword, but must move a connatural way, by the indictment of reason, and
nothing follows but that the internal and elicite acts of the understanding
and will, cannot be produced by external violence which we yield, ye say that
it involves a contradiction that the elicite acts of the understanding and
will, can be produced by external force, but if masters of Logic infer, Ergo
the Magistrate cannot punish a Seducer, a false Prophet for teaching, what his
erroneous conscience dictates to him: then we say this argument is against the
Holy Ghost, not against us; and blaspheming Celsius, Lucianus do etc. object,
the like against Moses Laws as unjust and bloody, and Scripture: The objection
from carnal weapons, and forcing of conscience, and contradictions involved,
enforcing the elicit and ^n^ernall acts of will and understanding etc. as
strong against laws in the old Testament as in the New.


For 1 Whatever involves a contradiction in the Old Testament, involves a
contradiction in the New, and contra, then Gods Laws in Deuteronomy. 13. Levit. 24.
are contradictions to reason.

2 Then God forced the understanding and will in their elicit acts in the Old
Testament as if a Wolf had given Laws, to the conscience of the false
Prophet, yea, so a dog was as capable of a law as the false Prophet, being
forced by stoning, both under the Old Testament, and under the New, (stons were
as hard weapons as steel swords) to the Jews, as to us.

3 Stones were as unable to cut off the darkness of the mind, and unbeleefe,
and hardness of heart, of Jews, as a steel sword can prevail with our
hearts.

4 None but the spirit of God could infuse supernatural notions and truths
into the mind, and will of a Seducing prophet, among the Jews, more then of an
heretic among christians, except Libertines think the Jews had no need of the
spirit of grace, free will was stronger of old than now.

5 They must say a Jew might have believed at his will, or not believed, and
could have commanded his conscience, which we cannot do.

6 The Law of God compelling conscience made hypocrites then, or then forced
men to believe against their mind, and will, as well as now.

7 Carnal weapons then could have produced spiritual repentance, says, and
obedience, but steel has lost its spiritual virtue now; but sure though the
Jews administration was rough, servile, and harder, and ours under Christ,
milder, sweeter, and easier, Gal. 4. 7. yet were these Laws of Moses righteous,
but are not made milder, as Socinians say, the will and understanding were not
then compelled to obedience, but now led with persuasions, and reasons; but
since the creation of the world to this day, the understanding and will, keep
ever their natural way of working.

8. And that which our Savior calls the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them; was the Law of Nature, and the Moral Law, and the doctrine of the
Prophets in the time of Moses, and in the Kingdom of the Messiah, though
Libertines put a false gloss on it, for I would not that others should punish
me, if I murder, steal, speak lies in the name of the Lord, though if I had
authority, I should will to punish others, that are guilty of these crimes, for
so they expound it; now if we should not will to punish others, for their
conscience under the New Testament; neither should the godly Magistrate in
Moses and David's days will to punish others for their conscience; and if we
should not will to rebuke and excommunicate heretics now: neither ought the
godly Jews to will to do the same to others, because of old, men did not will
to be punished with the Sword, rebuked, or excommunicated for their conscience.

9. It was no less unlawful for a Judge in Israel, to domineere and tyrannize
over the conscience of a false Prophet, a Priest of Baal, Dagon, and to answer
the arguments subverting the doctrine of Moses Law so shining with Divinity,
Majesty, and the Wisdom of God, with the bloody sword, and throwing of stones,
then it is for the Christian Magistrate to labor to convert, the false Prophet
now, by a Sword, or an Axe domineering over his conscience, so rendering him a
Lamb, disputing and trembling under the paw of the Lion. And whatever
arguments Libertines draw, for pretended toleration from the Law of Nature,
making punishing for conscience contradictory to the light of Nature, must
infer that the Judicial Law of Moses for punishing false Prophets, was not
only beside, but contradictory to the Law of Nature, which were a wronging of
the wisdom of God, and of the perfection of all his Laws.

Nor shall it help the matter to say, the Law of punishing the false Prophet,
The Law Deu. 13. Lev. 24 etc. was not executed upon such only, is sinned
against the light of his conscience, and the Law of nature, and upon whom the
immediate response of the Oracle fell, as false Prophets.
Deuteronomy. 13. etc. was only to be executed on such a man; as, 1. sinned against
his conscience, showing him that to say other Gods, beside the God that made
the heaven and the earth, were to be adored and worshipped, was repugnant to
the light of Nature. 2. And on such as the infallible oracle of God fell and
blacked as a heartblasphemer, and to punish such a seducer, was not to compel
understanding and will, nor to force the conscience, nor to make stoning, and
the sword of steel, the carnal weapons that produce spiritual repentance,
because there was foregoing conviction from the light of Nature persuading the
man, or which might have persuaded him that his blasphemy was against Nature;
whereas ye will have the godly punished merely by the Magistrate, because he
cannot command his mind and conscience, to be of the Magistrates Religion,
which he judges in his conscience, to be a false, superstitious, and
Idolatrous way; for this contains many uncertainties and lies: For death was
to be inflicted, not on those only that sinned against the Law of Nature, but
2 Chronicles. 15. 13. Whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, was put to
death, small or great, man or woman; now the seeking of the Lord God of Israel,
was to serve him, according to the rule revealed, in the supernatural,
spiritual and holy Law of God contained in Moses his Books. This I judge was
some higher, then the Law of Nature. 2. Let us put Libertines to make this
good, that those who said, the golden calves, were the gods that brought them
out of Egypt, and adored them, and were therefore put to death, Exodus 32.
(since our Divines prove from the place, that they made those Calves memorative
objects of Jehovah only) did that against the light of their conscience, and
the manifest Law of Nature. What if God had made Calves and Bullocks to
represent God, as there were Bullocks in the Temple, and the sacrificed
Bullocks were all types of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself to God? And what if the Lord should command to adore himself before
those Bullocks, as he commanded to pray to him before the Arc, and the face
toward the Temple? I conceive Libertines shall have to do with the bottom of
their wits, to bring arguments from the Law of Nature, to prove, that every
false instituted worship, punished by the Sword of old, was against the Law of
Nature, and that the Seducers, were convinced in their conscience it was so. No
need of a Law-processe, judge, witnesses accusers, or inquiring in the written
Law of God, if an immediate oracle from heaven, designed the false Prophet in
the Old Testament.
2. If there was an infallible Oracle to back the false Prophet, why was he
judged Deuteronomy. 17. by the Law then? why must witnesses two or three, depose
against him? why must the people that stone him, or concur to execute the
sentence of death, against a City that will welcome and defend false Prophets,
know it by report and hear-say^ Deuteronomy. 13. 12. and enquire and make search, and
ask diligently if the thing be truth and certain? v. 14. what need of
exposition of the written Law? Deuteronomy. 17. 11. what need of witnesses? Deuteronomy. 17.
6. here is shorter work, and we must be wiser then God, Libertines save all
the travel, an immediate Oracle from heaven is both the Judge, witness,
party, and all, and infallibly says, this man has prophesied falsely in the
name of the Lord, good people rise and stone him, Judge, you need no witness
(...) a witness from heaven: what needed the Priests and Pharisees, trouble
themselves to seek witnesses against Christ? Mr. Goodwin and others are of the
mind, Caiaphas, Priest and Prophet, could have given a word from heaven,
whether he was a blasphemer or not. But a Prophet of God being infallible,
might have infallibly informed them, if the man were a false Prophet. Yea but
what shall be done when the Priest and Prophet of God himself is called in
question? shall he ask the Oracle, whether he himself be the false Prophet or
no?

3. This answer lays ground, that the Jews might know the false Prophet, and
punish him, but under the New Testament we cannot know him. But I have proved
under the (...) Testament, we may sufficiently know (...), so as we may try
him, not believe him, not bid him God (...) and avoid him, and rebuke and
excomm^nicate him, as many Libertines grant.

4. As the Jewish Judge did not domineere over the conscience, nor compel
understanding, and will, because conviction, by a clear Law of God went
before; so say we upon the same ground, we hold none under the New Testament to
be punished by the Sword for false doctrine, but he that is admonished,
convicted, and selfe-condemned, Tit. 3. 10. But your Arguments for Presbytery,
and against Toleration, cannot convert us (say they.)

I answer, nor could Paul's Arguments that convicted Sergius, convict Elymas
actu secundo, God must do that, who only has the key of the heart; nor could
Gospel-arguments that convinced many, that the resurrection was not passed,
convince Hymeneus, Phyletus, Alexander, actu secundo. Therefore Paul might not
deliver them to Satan? nor is excommunication, being a mere punishment, an
argument to prove that the resurrection is not passed, Ecclesiastical and
civil coaction, do both work alike upon understanding and will.
any other way their the sword or banishment, both of them are compelling and
penal arguments, the one spiritual, the other corporal, but both work
co-actively as evils of punishment, and privations of comfort, neither of them
give light to this conclusion. The Resurrection is not past; for these two have
both alike inconsequences logical. The Church will excommunicate you; Ergo,
believe not that the Resurrection is past. And the Christian Magistrate will
punish you; Ergo, believe not that the Resurrection is past. There must either
be other arguments to sway the conscience to the faith of this, That the
Resurrection is not past, then either sword or excommunication; or these cannot
work nor settle the conscience. As Christ is risen, in his body, from the
dead; Ergo, his members that are sleeping in the dust must rise. God is the God
of Abraham, who is dead and buried; Ergo, Abraham and the dead must rise
again. This I observe, to prove that those arguments of Libertines, at least,
for the most part, that they bring against punishing of false Prophets, with
the Sword, do also conclude against all Church Censures, and excommunication;
and the truth is, we are not warranted to gain the Jews, the Indians, the
Papists over-sea to the truth, either by the sword, or by excommunicating and
delivering them to Satan, for we cannot judge those that are without.

But to return to all those kind of Argumentations that Libertines bring
against opinions, from the nature of opinion, faith, persuasion, which are all
internal acts of the mind, which neither Church nor Magistrate can punish;
they are nothing against our conclusion who maintain, that publishing and
teaching, and professing of erroneous and false Doctrines are punishable by the
Magistrate, for external acts that come from mere Conscience, as the
sacrificing of innocent children to God, by all the Arguments we hear are not
punishable by the Magistrate, for sure the Magistrates punishing of unlawful
practices coming from mere Conscience, do no less force the Conscience and
domineer over it, then when he punishes erroneous opinions, Ancient bonds, c.
2. page 7.
and therefore the Bounder draws the question to acts, and facts external,
as he says, the Magistrate (...) punish Polythesme, Errors against
supernatural truth are not rebukeable, because not punishable, and contra.
and Atheists, worshipping of Images, and of the breaden God, blasphemy, for
these (says he fight against the light of nature, but if you judge only
professed opinions against the light of nature, not against the Gospel
punishable, because we may by freewill master professed opinions against
nature, but we cannot master opinions against the supernatural truths of the
Gospel, these require supernatural grace, then, good masters, why do you
rebuke (...) against the Gospel, more then you can punish them (...) what is of
its own nature unrebukeable is unpunishable (...), what is unpunishable, as
being above our nature is unrebukeable, and falls not under exhortation, as
we cannot exhort, rebuke, or punish a stone because it descends, or fire
because it ascends.

But the Papist says, nay, but they fight not against the light of nature, for
to adore Christ under the accidents of bread is my conscience; and indeed
Doctor Tailor says, you must believe it is his conscience, and reallities and
pretenses are (...) here, though he contradict himself and in another place say
(...) some blasphemies are punishable by the Magistrate: But Libertines are
(...) of Babel, and almost as many Heads, so many sundry opinions. Mr. Willams
goes one way, Mr. Goodwin another, the Bounder a third way. John Baptist a
fourth way, Doctor Tailor a fifth way. The Belgic Arminians a sixth way. None of
them please Mr. Jeresiah Burroughes, nor Mr. Philip Nigh, yea and Mr. Sadr.
Simpson is as gross as any of them, so Socinians have a way of their own,
Anabaptists another way, Seekers and Familists, as Saltmarsh a far different
way. Mr. Oliver Cromwell calls all Religions things of the mind, Vaticanus
tells us, Vatica^us contra libel. Calvin ^n. 12.
si Deum negent, si blasphemant, si palam de sanct a Christianorum doctrina
maledicunt, (quo crimine reus est ipse Castalio) si sanctam piorum vitam
detestantur, eos ego relinquo Magistratibus puniendos, Vaticanus co^. libel.
calvi ad not. So si interficis qua sic loquitur ut sentit intersieis propter
veritatem: ^am veritas est dicere quae senrits and Psalm. 15. beatum pronunciat
eum, qui vere dicit quae habet in animo.
non propter religionem, quam nullam habent, se^ propter irreligionem.

But the Bounder and Castalio must be bloody persecuters by this. For 1. What
the Magistrate calls truth, and godly doctrine, that these men, whom the
Bounder and Castalio call Atheists, judge in their conscience to be Idolatry
and Blasphimie? and if ye kill a man because he speaks as he thinks, ye
kill him for the truth, for it is truth to speak what ^^^ think for the 15.
Psalm pronounces him blessed who speaks (...) what is in his heart. But
Castalio may read righter if he please, and he is blessed (...) who speaks
truth not falsely from his heart, nor does the Psalmist speak of the doctrine
of truth, so as he should bless Mattan and Pashur or any false Prophet, or the
King of Assyria, Libertines make all blasphemers, all seducing Prophets of
Baa^. and priests of Heathen Gods, if they speak^ what a conscience (...) with
a (...) Iron does (...) unto them, to be true Prophets, and to dwell (...) them
(...) of the Lords House, (...). 15.
because he says, No God can deliver out of the hand of that Tyrant, but the
God of the Assyrians, for so I conceive he thinks, when he relates what false
experiences he had of that Bastard God; but he speaks of truth of facts between
man and man, Psalm. 15. in speaking whereof there may be invincible and so
excusable error, whereas men sin grievously in false apprehensions of Gods
truth, when as God reveals himself sufficiently to us in his works and word;
but thus do Libertines leave the first simple apprehensions of the mind because
they are natural, not under the stroke of freewill, free from all Law and
guiltiness; so as the Egyptians sin not in apprehending the Godhead to be a
Cow, the Persians to be fire, or the Sun, Israel to be a Calfe, the Philistines
to be a Fish; for certain it is all Idolaters who worship the God that made the
Heavens and the earth, (...) ignorantly, Acts 17. in the creature, or in the
works of men's hands, should have by this way no sinful, nor unlawful
apprehensions of God, when shamefully they apprehend the Creator of the world
to be a Beast. 2. They must be blessed then and speak truth from their heart,
by the Exposition that Vaticanus puts upon Psalm. 15. who say that God is a
cow, a calf, a fish, why? because their erroneous conscience dictateth so to
them. But why should they be punished then who blaspheme, commit Idolatry? for
it is the conscience, and the mere conscience of Baals Priests to speak of
God, and worship him as they do, they had rather dye as not do that which you
call Blasphemy; and 1. It is not in their will to think what they will. 2. Will
ye compel their consciences with the Sword, etc. Answer your own arguments
Libertines.

10. Bloody Tenco c. 35. p. 59.
Object. Is not this Babels confusion to punish corporal or civil offenses,
with spiritual or Church censures, or spiritual offenses, with corporal or
temporal weapons? Bloody Tenet.

Answ. To inflict bodily punishment for Sorcery, makes not the Magistrate a
Church Officer, as he fondly phansieth, all sins against God, who is a
Spirit, or spiritual: and by this reason the Church of Thyatira, should not
censure the fornication of Jezabel and her followers; nor the Corinthians the
Incestuous man with excommunication, which is a corporal offense to speak so,
contrary to 1 Cor. 5. whereas all public sins as sins against God, are
punished by him, with bodily and spiritual plagues, In four sundry
considerations sins are censured.
as it pleases him.

2. These same sins as they are scandalls, that offend the Church, are
punished with Church Censures,

3. These same as they disturb the peace of the State, do also deserve to be
punished by the sword; though I take not on me to determine curiously whether
the Magistrate punishes sins formally, under the reduplication, as they
trouble the peace of the State, or as they dishonor God the highest Judge, it
may be there is something of both in this reduplication.

4. These same sins are rebuked by private Professors, as they are stumbling
blocks to them, Hos. 2. 1. plead with your mother; neither is it against the
nature of persuasion to be drawn to means of sound believing by men's Laws, as
I observed before from Augustine, for fear of punishment may cause men to hear
the word of truth which otherwise they would never have heard, Augus Epis. 48
ad Vincen
Epis. ad Vincen. 48. Alii dicant, nesciebamus sit esse veritatem, nec eam
discere volebamus, sed nos ad eam eognoscendam metus fecit intentos, quo
timuimus ne forte sine ullis rerum aeternarum lucris, damno rerum eternarum
feriremur, gratias domino qui negligentiam nostram stimulo terroris, excussit
ut saltem soliciti quaereremus, quod securi nunquam nosse curavimus.

11. Object. What if the Magistrate in punishing heresy, differ from the
Church, and strike with the sword, for that which the Church thinks no
heresy? what shall the Church do then? and what if the Church judge that to
be heresy, and exhort the Magistrate to punish that as heresy, The Magistrate
is subject to the just power of the Church and the Church to the just power of
the Magistrate; neither of them to abused power, and the word of God in point
of conscience supreme to regulate both
which the Magistrate in his conscience, judges to be no heresy? What shall
then the Magistrate do?

Answ. Though there be reciprocation of subordinations, that the Magistrate in
an Ecclesiasticke way be subject to the Church power, yet not to an abused
Church power, and the Church in a Civil way be subject to the Magistrates
power, yet not to the Magistrates power tyrannically used, but to the power
that is from God, and as used for God, and common justice in the one Court, and
the word of God in the other, is supreme Empire and judge that either must
follow.

12. Object. Did not the people of Israel suffer the Gentiles to stay in their
land, and enjoy their own Religion without troubling of them?

Answ. It is like they did, but if they did right in tolerating Idolatry, How
the Jews suffered heathen Idolaters to dwell amongst them.
for which the land spewed out the inhabitants, is a question.

2. They might 1. Suffer them till they were first instructed, and then
convinced, that Religion might not be forced on them. 2. They could not suffer
them in that land to blaspheme the God of Israel, lest a common guilt should
fall upon all, Jos. 22. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 3. Since the people were never to
partake of other men's sins, they were to argue against them, and rebuke them,
and endeavor the gaining of their souls.

13. Ob. The Elect cannot finally and totally fall away from Grace, and perish,
as the Scripture says, Joh. 6. 37. etc. Why then should we be so fondly
jealous, lest the people of God should be carried away with every wind of
doctrine, as to suppress each opinion supposed to be erroneous, so as to run
the hazard of sileucing the most saving truths, of putting to death Gods
dearest Saints, reducing souls to such a posture, as if we be in ignorance and
error, Baptist c. 6. p. 3^. 35.
we must be incapable of ever coming out of either.

Answ. A foolish argument without head or foot. 1. We are to be afraid of every
sin, our Lord has bidden us beware of, Joh. Baptist would have us self
careful of being carried (...) with false and strange doctrines, because we
are elected to glory, and the chosen cannot fall away, then of other abominable
sins.
though the Elect cannot perish, since he that chooses to the end, chooses to
the means, and to both immutably and irrevocably without shadow or change,
else this argument will prove, we need not be afraid to whore, murder,
oppress, or the most heinous transgressions, for these sins cannot more
prejudge the chosen of their state of grace, and certainty of glory, then being
carried about with every wind of doctrine, and unsound opinions continued in
and published to pervert others, do argue that we are of the number of those,
that are ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.
7. and are unstable and unlearned, perverting the Scriptures to our own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. given over to strong (...) to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and damned for not believing the truth, v. 11, 12. the heart not
being stablished by grace, Heb. 13. 9. like children tossed too and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine by the slight of men, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive, not speaking, and not professing the truth in love,
that so we may grow up in Christ, even in him, in all things, which is (...),
Ephesians. 4. 14, 15. All which prove that to be finally seduced, is a certain mark
of reprobation, as Matthew. 24. 23, 2^. ^ Tim. 2. 16, 17, 18. 19, 20. and the
Spirit that teaches us (...) are not to be afraid of falling from the state of
grace (...) salvation, though we fall in such sins as the spirit of Antichrist,
and of cursed Familists, who turn the grace of God into wantonness, who abuse
the doctrine of election of grace.

2. Joh. Baptist and Libertines teach that liberty of conscience is a way to
find out truth.
He makes God to bring us into an inevitable necessity of either being carried
about with every wind of doctrine to believe lies; or then run the hazard of
losing most saving truths, and of putting to death Gods most dearest Saints.
But what warrant has he, thus to make God the author of sin? or to teach
that divine providence does lead us into an inextricable perplexity and
necessity of sinning, so that whether we do this, or not do it, we must sin.

3. What Scripture makes the believing of lies, a certain hazard of losing
most saving truths? Is there no way of coming to the knowledge of the truth,
and the sparing of the lives of Gods most dear Saints, but by believing truths
which may be lies, and corrupt doctrine, a word that eats like a canker? Is
there no way to come to Gods harbor, but by sailing in the Devils boat? sure
this is no way of Gods devising, but of Satan's forging.

4. Is then cursed Toleration a way to spare the blood of the Saints, and not
resisting the blessed Spirit in them, then we cannot punish heretics and men
of corrupt minds, but we are in hazard to resist the Saints, and kill the
Spirit in them; then when the Holy Ghost forbids us to believe false Christ's,
Matthew. 24. which is a resisting of their spirit, we know not, but he bids us
believe the word of truth in Gods dearest Saints, since for any knowledge we
can have, When the holy Ghost forbids us to believe false Christ's, and to
receive Antichristian teachers into our houses, he bids us also receive them as
Saints and believe them, by the way of Libertines.
not to believe these false Christ's, it may be they are Gods dearest Saints,
whose words we refuse to believe, then in one and the same Commandment of
Christ, which is believe them not, he bids us believe their word, and resist
not the Spirit of truth in Gods dearest Saints, and when Tit. 3. 18. he forbids
us to keep company with an heretic, but avoid him, and 2 John 10. receive not
an impostour into your house, he bids us run the hazard of avoiding a Saint,
and of refusing to lodge in your house Gods dear child.

5. What if Gods dearest Saints believe and publish an heresy, and the
doctrine of Familisme, then they are to be pardoned, because they are dear
Saints. But let Libertines answer the Query, why should Indulgence and
Toleration be yielded to a Saint that speaks lies in the name of the Lord, more
then to a wicked man who also does prophecy lies? if both may fall in the same
heresy with the like pertinacy for a time, if we be not respecters of persons,
they no less deserve both to be punished, then when both commit adultery and
murder. 2. Why lying of God and speaking words that eat like a gangrene, and
believing a lie deserves rather an indulgence in a Saint, then murdering,
whoring, oppressing. And why, but we may tolerate all the Saints, because they
are Saints, as well as some sin no less, yea more dangerous, then these that
are not to be tolerated, for to infect the flock with lying doctrine is more
hurtful to the Church, then the example of adultery or murder in a Saint, if
toleration of all ways, and liberty of professing or publishing whatever
tenets or doctrines seem good to a man in his own eyes, though to the
perverting of the faith of many, be a means of finding out many precious
truths, as Libertines say, then has God commanded all men to speak all kind
of lies, against God, his Son Christ, heaven, hell, the resurrection, the last
judgment, the immortality of the soul, though most pernicious to souls; for
God commands all means of finding out truth, for it cannot be said he
commands all lawful means, for Libertines hold that to profess and publish
what the most erroneous conscience dictates to be the truth of God, though it
be black heresy, is to speak the truth as an Indweller in the Lords holy hill,
Psalm. 15. so says Vaticanus and all the Libertines who make the conscience
right or erroneous, the rule of the Christian man's walking, not the word of
God, and in so doing the Lord must by the Libertines doctrine command men to
speak lies in the Name of the Lord, and must command Heretics and Saints to
pervert the souls and the faith of one another, and make one another children
of perdition, and not spare the flock, but devour and hunt souls, and so shall
the Lord command sin. 6. How does non-toleration and liberty of believing
every spirit seeming to us to be of God, bring men in a posture of
uncapabilitie of being delivered from error and ignorance? the word never
makes a liberty to believe lies, a way to be delivered from error. The way to
be delivered from error is to be humble and fear God and he shall teach us his
ways, Psalm. 25. 9. 14. Joh. 7. 17. 2 These. 2. 11, 12.

Baptist ibid. God will have the means used by every man according to his own
light and knowledge that he may be fully persuaded in his own conscience, and
no man knows Gods cabinet counsel. Ergo, We cannot be competent judges of
other men's consciences who are Heretics who not.

Answ. God will have the means used by every man according to his own light. I
distinguish according to his own light and conscience, as a necessary
condition that must be in all right judging, it is most true, for he sins
grievously who in judging goes contrary to the indictment of his own
conscience, and so God will have the means used by every man according to his
own light and conscience, as his obliging rule which lays a law and a tie
upon him to believe and profess that is most false, for the word of God not
every man's conscienceis the obliging rule of his actions as is proved.
Libertines make the judging of Heretics, to be Heretics, a bold intruding
into the Lords ca^^net counsel.
2. The conclusion is most false, for though we are not to judge who are elect
and who reprobate, because we are not upon Gods Cabinet counsel, yet do we not
intrude upon Gods secrets to judge who is an Heretic or a false Teacher, or
who sound in the faith by his doctrine examined by the law and the Testimony,
for how can God say, Beware of the false Prophet, Matthew. 7. 15. if it were
arrogancy and an intruding upon Gods Cabinet counsel to judge a false Prophet
by his doctrine to be a false Prophet? how can we avoid an Heretic more then a
Saint, if we may not lawfully judge an heretic to be an Heretic?

Obj. Ancient bounds, cap. 6. sect. 1.
14 The Holy Ghost not only foresaw there would, but determines there must be
heresies, and its expedient for the exercise of love, and the discovery of
truth, and the Professors thereof; are not Errors as well as afflictions a part
of Christ's discipline? Reas 14. p. 30. Bloody Tenet.
then let it have its perfect work till it be cured by its proper remedy the
sword of the Spirit; Mr. Nicholas Lo^k^er, ser. 1. Col. 1. preface to the
reader.
Its not said there must be murderers, as it is said there must be Heresies.
Some seem so to be in love with new opinions as they extol them, one, a very
worthy Preacher says, variety of faces is not an affliction, but matter of
much admiration to behold. So variety of judgments simply considered is not
a grief, but a glory to me to behold, when one spirit of grace and
heavenlinesse is in them all, for I count it a glass of Gods own making
wherein to behold his manifold wisdom?

Answ. 1. There is no question but God has wise and noble ends why he permits
Heresies, but we no more can Orthodoxly say, Liber^ines say, God has de^^red
Heresies to be.
That God determines Heresies, then that God determines that sin must be, for
Heresies are sins; now we say not soundly, That God determines or decrees
sins shall be sine adjecto, he determines to permit sin. 2. God determines
Heresies must be, so he determines that murders, adulteries, oppressions must
be: it then shall follow the Christian Magistrate by this Argument does
tolerate murders, oppressions, as he tolerates heresies, but the conclusion is
gross, because Heresies are the Churches affliction (and so are bloods and
oppressions of the Saints) shall then Christian Magistrates tolerate all the
bloods and oppressions that the Saints suffer?

3. The Apostle says, Heresies must be, our Savior says more of offenses
and sins in general, Matthew. 18. 7. (...). and Luke says more, chap. 17. 1.
(...). Its needful scandalls shall come, and its impossible but scandals must
fall out, then all the murders, parricides, sorceries, rapines, for the which
Christ says, there is a woe befalling the world, fall out by necessity of a
divine working decree, yea the crucifying of the Lord of glory came to pass,
Acts 2. 23. (...) by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, Acts 4.
28. but yet the Magistrate is not to tolerate the shedding of innocent blood,
and all the offenses that fall out in the Commonwealth though never so bloody
and atrocious. 2. Variety of judgments, was no question a grief to Paul,
Variety of judgments in Gods mat^e^s is a grief to Paul and the godly
Ministers.
when he so pathetically exhorts the Philippians to fulfill his joy, and
remove his grief, and to be of one accord, and one mind, Phil. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 13.
11. Be of one mind, 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you be joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment, Heresies no question and errors in matters of
God are not free, nor can there be one spirit of grace and heavenlinesse in
Arrius, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutiches, no more then there can be one spirit
of grace in sin, nor see we a glass of Gods manifold wisdom in many sundry
fantastic opinions teaching God and his son Christ, it is a spotted and
broken glass; Gal. 5. 20.
and he might say variety of sins are the expressions of Gods infinite wisdom,
1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 17. 2 These. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
for the scripture calls Heresies works of the flesh, doctrines of devils,
gangrenes, lies delusions, corruptions of the mind, perverse disputing,
deceits, perverse things, dreams of their own heads, false dreams, vain and
foolish things, Rev. 2. 20.
false burdens which cannot be spoken of opinions in Philosophy, and so these
windmills and midnight fancies being the brats and the dunghill conceptions of
men's corrupt head and heart, Acts 20. 30.
must be contrary to that wisdom expressed in the word, 1 Cor. Ier. 23. 27 32.
2. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. 6: Psalm. 37. 30. and they may be for the declaration of the
wisdom of God as for the final cause, Zach. 10. 1.
but nothing from the wisdom of God formally, Lam. 2. 14.
being themselves mere fools. Necessity of Toleration, 1647. qu. 53. Borrowed
from Bloody Tenet.


Object. 15. If the Magistrate be above the Church and Head thereof, and to
judge their matters, and if he have his power from the people (to govern the
Church) will it not follow that the people as the people have originally, as
men, a power to govern the Church to see her do her duty, to reform and
correct her?

Answ. Though the Magistrate punish false Teachers by the Sword, The punishing
of heresies investeth not the Magistrate in a headship over the Church.
he is not for that a Church governor, far less the head of the Church, no
more then he is the head of the Church, because he defends them against their
persecuting enemies, and by his sword procures civil peace and protection to
their assemblies, persons and estates; for doing any thing in favor of the
Church does not make Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, spiritual Officers, and give
them a headship over the Church. 2. The Christian Magistrate having power from
the peoples free election to employ his sword for the external peace of the
Church, has not therefore power of governing the Church from the people. 1.
Because the civil using of the sword for the outward peace of the Church, is
not a governing of the Church, but the civil external and corporal sheilding of
them. 2. It no more follows that the people as men have the ruling of the
Church, because they chose a godly Magistrate to watch over their external
peace* then the people as Christians can be said to have a power to preach the
word and administer the Sacraments or Seals of the covenant, because the people
as Christian men choose ministers who have power from Christ to preach and
administer the Seals, for to choose a governor to rule over them is no act of
government, no more then the wives choosing of the Husband to be her head, and
govern the family is an act of the Headship and governing of the Family; nor
do the people in choosing a King, exercise an act of royal and Kingly power
over themselves by such an act of choosing; nor does an Army in choosing a
Captain General over themselves, in so doing exercise any act of a Captain
Gerall over themselves. 3. Neither do the people as men, but as Christian men
walking by the rule of the Word (which is a Catholic directorie to all men and
all societies in all moral duties, Psalm. 119, 9, 96, 105, 130. Ps. 19. 7, 8 9)
choose such and such Christian Rulers who may procure the good of the Church
and keep and guard both Tables of the Law, for the word of God gives
direction to the people, that they should not as men or as Heathens choose any
sort of Rulers, but godly men fearing God, and such Kings as read in the Book
of the Law when they sit upon the Throne, Deuteronomy. 11. c. 17. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20. Exodus 18. 21. Nor is it true, which Vaticanus replyeth to Calvin, thefts,
rapines, and adulteri^e are punished by the Magistrate, not to make up the
Kingdom of Christ, The intrinsecal end of the Magistrate or of his office is
not the conversion of Souls.
and to justify men and make them godly as we say, and Calvin says, the
Magistrate punishes Heretics. For where does Augustine say that the
Magistrate punishes Seducers to convert them to God, as if the intrinsecall
end of the Magistrate were to conquer a spiritual Kingdom to Christ? Calvin
says the just contrary in that same place, verum quidem esse fateor utque vi
armata erectum ab initi suisse regnum Christi, neque armorum praesidio stare,
Evangelii enim pradicatione regnare Christum oportet. Itaque Dominus quo
illustrior esset vocis sua efficacia, nudes and inormes misit Apostolos, nec
modo destitui veluit terrena potantia, sed totum faere mundum habere infestum,
ut calestem esse Evangelii victoriam omnibus constaret.

Obj. 16. But the Apostles sought not Laws from the Emperors, by which
Heretics might be compelled to embrace the sound faith?

Answ. Gaudentius a Donatist Bishop objected the same to Augustine, and
Augustine answers, Because Emperors were enemies to Christian Religion,
therefore Christians sought not their help.

Obj. 17. But the particulars of your directorie of worship are not in
Scripture, August. lib. 3. cont. perm. cap. to Quis enim tune in Christum
crediderat Imperator qui ei pro pietate contra impietatem leges ferendo
servitet quando adhuC illud propheticum esset, quare fremue^un^ Gentes, etc.
how then can the Magistrate punish for not following the Directorie?

Answ. That there should be prayers, preaching, reading. praising of God,
S^craments in the public worship, is evident by the Scripture, but for the
ordering of these worships secundum prius and posterius the words of prayer (so
they be according to the pattern of sound doctrine) the Preface of the
Directorie is clear, that no man is therein to be compelled, though to
transgress the Holy Ghosts express order in the celebration of the Lords
Supper, and to break bread and eat first, and that before any of the words of
Institution be mentioned, or any blessing of the Elements, must be a manifest
breach of the Directory of Jesus Christ which sure holds forth to us a
twofold ordering of acts of worship, one divine, which we must p^remptorily
follow, another prudential and humane in circumstances which concern both the
worship of God and civil Assemblies, as time, place, persons, etc. and in the
latter we are no further to be commanded in point of uniformitie then the
general rules of the word lead us; and compulsion, where God has no
compelling commandment going before in an exact uniformitie, we utterly
disclaim, nor can men, or Church, or all the Assemblies on earth make laws in
matters of Gods worship, where the Supreme Lawgiver has made none, and the
Preface of the Directorie is so clear in this, that we trust we shall quickly
agree with the godly and sound in judgment in this.

Libertines make Preaching and commanding to receive and believe, and profess
the Truth, a monopolizing of the truth.
Obj. 18. But whether were it not better that a Patent were granted to
Monopolize all the corn and cloth, and to have it measured out to us at men's
price and pleasure (which yet were intolerable) as some men, and Synods do
appoint and measure out to us what, and how much we shall believe and practice
in matters of religion, and whether there be not the same reason that
Presbyterians and the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, should be appointed
by us (Sectaries) what they shall believe and practice in Religion, as for them
to do so to us, seeing we can give as good grounds, for what we believe and
practice, as they can do for what they would have, if not better?

Answ. It were indeed better that all the corn and cloth were monopolized to
be measured out at the pleasure of men, then that truth should be monopolized
and measured out at the pleasure of men, speaking what pleases them without all
warrant of the word of God, and allege only men's mere authority or rather
lust, and commanding men without trying the Spirits and doctrines by the
Scriptures, as the Bereans tried Paul's doctrine, Acts 17. Peremptorily to
believe and practice, what they appoint under pain of the Sword, this sort of
monopolizing either corn or truth, our witness is in heaven, we detest and
refuse; But of monopolizing and appointing what truth men should believe, by an
authoritative, ministerial and official holding out of truth in the name of
Christ, and from the word of truth, in a way of leading the consciences by
persuading from strength of light, by the Law and the Testimony, and exhorting
all men in the Lord to try the Spirits; examine by the word, not what men, but
the Ambassadors of Christ say and teach, not from themselves, but from the will
and commandment of him that sent them, then must they give an account to God,
who call this monopolizing of the truth, and measuring it out at the pleasure
of men, when as the preaching of the word, being instant in season, and out of
season, reproving, rebuking, exhorting with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. should so be a monopolizing of the truth, and a measuring of it out
at the pleasure of men, in regard that Christ says Matthew. 10. 40. He that
receives you, receives me, Joh. 13. 20. and Luke 10. 16. He that hears you
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. And Matthew. 10. 14. Whosoever shall not receive you,
nor hear your words, when ye depart out of the house or City, shake off the
dust off your feet. Verily I say unto you, it shall be easier for the land of
Sodom and Gemorrah in the day of judgment then for that City: Which words are
spoken of all the faithful Ministers of Christ to the end of the world, Matthew.
28. 19, 20. so they speak according to the commission given them by the Lord
speaking in his word, whether they declare the mind of Christ in a pulpit or
Synod. This way Ministers who hear the Word at Gods mouth, Ezekiel. 3. 10. and
deliver the whole council of God, Acts 20. 27. and keep nothing back as
faithful Ambassadors and Stewards ought ministerially to declare and appoint
what, and how much, we shall believe and practice in matters of religion, but
not as Monopolizers. 3. Suppose Sectaries could teach the Ministers of the
Assembly, as well as the Ministers can teach them, yet is there more reason
that Ministers should Synodically teach then they; for a teaching Ministry is
an ordinance of Christ in the New Testament, as is clear by these places which
hold forth that Christ is present with his faithful Ministers to the end of
the world, Joh. 20. 21, 22. Matthew. 28. 19. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. and 2 Timothy 4. 1.
2. compared with Matthew. 28. 19. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, Matthew. 10. 14. v. 40.
Luke 10. 14. Joh. 15. 20. 1 Timothy A twofold obligation the word spoken or
preached lay on the hearers, one objective, another ministerial.
3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 10. 14, 15, 16. Hebr. 5. 4. and 13. 17. Tit. 1. 7, 8 9.
1 These. 4. 12, 13. Rev. 2. 1, 2. etc. and 3. 1, 2, etc. and howbeit the word of
God as the word does equally tie the conscience in regard of that objective
obligation that it has from God, not from men, who ever spoke it, whether
Ministers or private Christians, yet it lays two bands on the conscience when
Ministers declare the will of God to people, the one is official, for by the
fifth commandment, the messengers of the Lord of Hosts are to be heard,
reverenced, and received in their calling, otherwise we despise Christ: The
other is an objective obligation and a band which it lays on the conscience,
by the second Commandment in regard it is the Word of God not of men, 1 These.
2. 13. But when private Christians speak the word of the Lord in their station,
the word from them lays on only the latter obligation, Private men have not
the like warrant to prescribe what Ministers should believe and practice, as
Ministers have to prescribe to private men.
not the former; and it is false, That private men have as good grounds to
appoint what Ministers should believe and practice, as ministers have to
appoint what they should believe and practice; for private Christians want the
Ministerial grounds which Ministers called of God have, to teach and exhort in
the Name of the Lord.

4 It may be private men may see more truth then Ministers, when night and
darkness, in stead of vision, covers the Prophets, but hence it follows
not, that seeing and called watchmen should not ministerially appoint and hold
forth by their office, what private christians should believe and pr^ctice in
matters of Religion.

5. Libertines aim at this, The truth is monopolized to no one man, nor certain
kind of men, ministers or others. What then? Ergo, It is truth what every man
in his conscience believes to be truth, and he that believes and practices
what in conscience he believes to be truth, he believes and practices
according to the word of God, and is not to be controlled nor contradicted, nor
compelled by sword or censures, for let it be most false in it self, yet it is
to him Truth, and if you persecute him, he suffers for the truth, for the
Gospel, for righteousness sake, and the Ministers have no more to do to labor
to recall and gain him from his opinions to the Truth, Argum 19.
then he has to labor to gain Ministers from their opinion. Liberty of
conscience makes every man's conscience his Bible and multiplies Bibles and
sundry words of God, and rules of faith.


Hence I argue, what ever opinion makes every man^ dictate of his conscience
the true word of God, and as many Bibles, diverse and contrary Gospels and words
of God, and contrary rules of faith and practices, as there be diverse opinions,
fancies, dictates, and apprehensions of conscience, is a Godless and
Atheistical way. But such is this opinion of Liberty of Conscience and
Toleration, Ergo, etc.

The Proposition is undoubtedly true, there being but one Gospel, one Faith,
one truth, as there is but one Christ, and one Lord, Ephesians. 4* 5. and the
Scripture has but one sense, that is true, and the ground of faith, otherwise
this ( There is but one God to us) should have one sense to the Treit^ites, to
wit, There be three Gods, because three persons, it should have a contrary
sense to another: To us there is but one God in nature and essence, and yet
both should be the same truth to each man, as he apprehends.

The Ass^mption is manifest to those that will see, by the grounds of
Libertines, because to every man, that is the word of God which he phansieth to
be the Word of God; for otherwise, the truth should be monopolized to ^ut, or
some few persons, and this is the sense of the word of God, and so the very
Gospel and truth which this man believes, and of you punish him for it, the
man suffers for the (...) for the word of God; and if his neighbor believe the
contrary, that is to him the Word of God, and if you punish him for it, the man
suffers for the word of God also, and there be two contrary Gospels, All
Heretics are in a safe way of salvation, according to the way of Libertines.
and sundry truths, and if there be two, there may be two and twenty Bibles,
and contrary truths, and so we have not the Old, and New Testament, but the
letters of it, and as many senses, by this, there be of Scriptures, as many
Bibles, and as many sundry heads and various opinions of men. Hence liberty of
prophesying is lawful, and so liberty of Faiths, of contrary Bibles; and from
this it is, that which tends to unity of faith, as one Confession of faith,
or uniformitie of belief is mocked by these men, and every one that suffers
for his supposed truth, is persecuted for the Word of God, and so blessed,
because persecuted for the Truth, and if blessed, as our Savior means,
Matthew. ^. v. 11, 12. They have a great reward in Heaven, for so they expound
the place, Matthew. 5. 11, 12. All men then, are saved in their own Religion, and
to be rooted and grounded in the truth, is common to all Sect^ and Heretics,
and i^ is to be rooted and grounded in op^^ions such as every man shall fancy
to be truth, and not to be moved from the truth, is not to be moved from
opinions, and not to be carried about with every wind of doctrine, is to
adhere with pertinacie to opinions were it Arrianisme, Manichisme, and if so,
all Religions are alike safe, and all Sects, Saints, and all Heretics because
they follow their erroneous consciences are innocent, godly, grounded on Truth.

Neither needs Mr. Williams to prove that the place Romans 13. is meant of the
duties, not of the first, but of the second Table of the Law, which we grant
with Calvin and Beza; but it follows not, That the Magistrates punishing of
illdoers, and so of seducing Teachers, is excluded, for that punishing is a
duty of the second Table of the Law, though the Object be spiritual, as
sorcerie is against the first Commandment, and punished as ill doing, Romans 13.
though sorcerie be a sin formally against the first Table of the Law, and why
should the Magistrate punish one sin against the first Table, and not all, in
so far, as they are against the peace, and safety of humane Societies?

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 6. read (...) p. 12. l. 22. them r. these. p. 33. l. 5. but of
all these r. but all these. p. 23. l. 1. r. elicite acts. p. 36. l. 13. And it
is false that we are to believe, that what Synods determine according to the
Word of God must be fallible, liable to Error and an untruth, because they so
determine. p. 56. in Margin r. thus, The Magistrate may with the Sword coerce.
ibid. Five impediments that keep men from embracing the truth according to
Augustine. l. 10. for Guidentum r. Gaudentium. p. 50. l. 19. Cyrillus. p. 59.
l. penult. for worships r. Vorstius. p. 62. for elect r. elicite. p. 74. l. 2.
for or r. are. p. 82. l. 10. for this not r. this is not. p. 101. l. 7. for now
r. not. p. 106. in margin, for i^dicari r. judicare. p. 109. r. religio. p.
110. l. 28. for is r. are. p. 199. l. 26. for thou r. that. p. 201. l. 19. for
is r. its. p. 202. l. 12. for ^^ssed r. profess. p. 206. l. 31. for abolish r.
oblige. p. 215. l. 17. for and father r. and the father. p. 216. in margin r.
confuta^unt p. 223. l. 32 for Quod nou in r. Quod non est. p. 232. marg. for no
case r. in case p. 2^0. l. penult. r. impletionem. p. 254. l. 6. r. redarguit.
p. 156. l. 13. r. Protestants, F^^ilists, Arminians, Seekers, etc. hold and
believe must be the Dictates.


