For G. P. Or the Author of a little Book, entitled, Just Measures, in an
Epistle, etc. and to all the Approvers thereof; with a Postscript and a few
Words to the Yearly Meeting in London.
Friend G. P.
IF I had known as certainly where to find thee, as I may suppose who thou art,
then I would not have appeared to seek after thee in this manner, for I am
persuaded I may conclude, Thou art one of those very Persons that knows
better Things than thou practisest; and it is contrary to thy Knowledge, to
busy thy self about such Fallible Things, as are of late Days crept into the
Church, among many of which I shall at this Time take notice of what thou have
given me an occasion to consider, in a little Book, subscribed as by an Author,
G. P. and entitled, Just Measures, in an Epistle of Peace and Love, to such
Professors of Truth as are under any Dissatisfaction about the Present Order
practiced in the Church of Christ.

I cannot better begin than with one of the Scriptures thou do in Page 19.
recommend, To Read and Mark the Bent and Force of the Apostle's Spirit, as in
Romans, in many Places, so in Chapter xvi. Verse 17, and 18. Now I beseech you
Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them; for they that are such, serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own Bellies, and by good Words and fair
Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple. Consider this, and do as in Pages
18, 19, 20.

Upon a Serious Consideration of what thou have pressed us unto, thou have
taken such Measures as are not for Peace, as too many others do, which are
like-minded with thee against us: For we are conscienciously concerned to show
our Dissatisfaction against your so earnestly pressing us, for a Conformity to
such unscriptural Orders, as we have no Faith in, to be subject to in your Way
and Manner of imposing upon Peoples Consciences, contrary to their Faith; for
we look upon them as Innovations, and are certainly persuaded, they will, in a
little Time, appear to be but the Inventions of Men. It is a good Saying that is
mentioned Colloss. 3. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the
which also ye are called, in one body, and be you thankful. Thou had been a
happy Person, and the Aprovers of thy Work, if they had so walked among their
Brethren.

Though we are bid in Page 20. "Lay down every Mark or Ensign of Difference or
Separation. Now let G. P. and all his Approvers consider, What are the proper
Marks or Ensigns of Difference or Separation.

Next, let us find out the Parties who practice or give the Marks or Ensigns of
Difference for a Separation.

And to the first, we have sufficiently in our Account from Wickham made it
known: And it is also in most Meetings when we appear as Persons concerned, in
a Public Testimony, where some of you are present, then it is very apparent
what those Marks or Ensigns of Difference are, which tend to a Separation, viz.
Your unbecoming Striving in Meetings, to keep us from having any Liberty, or
Time to offer our Gifts, and to clear our Conscience in the Things of God,
whererein we are concerned. Also your Unchristian Behavior toward us, by
sitting in an uncomly Manner, when we are upon our Knees to the Lord, in that
holy Duty.

As for the Second Thing: Concerning the Persons that practice these Marks and
Ensigns of Difference, which lead to a Separation, thou and many of you know in
your own Consciences, It is them that talk so much of Good Orders, and practice
so little. And whereas we are bid to dispose our Minds to a returning State,
and frighten not our selves, as in Page 20. etc. Now we certainly know thou,
and them thou call thy Brethren, have and would impose upon us the
Observation of a Woman's Meeting, distinct from the Men: But a distinct Woman's
Meeting on a Religious account or Business, as about the Government of the
Church, concerning Order or Discipline, separate from the Men, as it is
practiced about Marriages, we look upon as an Innovation, and imposing upon our
Consciences that which we have no Faith to receive.

And here, as in other Things, thou do not take Just Measures, where thou
bidst us, as in Page 11. take Notice of our own Concessions where we allow
Meetings of Care in general, and do not deny the Women absolutely their Share
among the Men.

It is very true, we do allow Meetings of Care in general, where Men and Women
being met together, as Things offer, and as Occasions do require, we take Care
to do those Things which are for the well-being of our Societies, and that
every thing may be done according to Truth, and in the Fear of God; and as we
have published in our Account from Wickham, so we practice.

But all this makes nothing; for such a distinct Woman's Meeting from the Men,
where you would have all Marriages first proposed, etc. And here again thou
do not make Just Measure, when in so many Pages thou do make it thy
Business, as it were, to insinuate the Necessity and Usefulness of a distinct
Woman's Meeting, as Pages 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And yet, notwithstanding all
thou have said about it, thou tells us, among other Things, in Pages 5, and 7.
There is no need of an Act of Faith or other Exercises of Conscience, than to
be ready to every good Word and Work: And further, when thou have used many
Words about the Matter beforementioned, thou tells us again, it can be no
Imposition, as before is expressed, because, as thou say, It is no Matter of
Faith nor Practice of Worship, as in Page 7, etc. Although it be no Matter of
Faith to thee and them that set it up, and press others to it: Yet it is a
matter of Faith to us, you would impose upon, contrary to our Conscience: For,
as the Apostle says, Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin.

And to make short, when thou give thy Sense upon the whole Matter, as in
Page 9 and 10. Thy Measures are very unjust concerning us, where thousayest,
"Our Dissent tended to the breach of Brotherly Love and Unity in the Church;
but it is well known your Unchristian Behavior was the cause of our Dissent.

And for further Answer to G. P. and to all the Approvers of his Work, I return
what W. P. has written in his Book, called, An Address to Protestants; and it
is desired that G. P. and all others concerned, would consider what he has
said against Imposition, as from Page the 140. to Page the 150. and in many
other Places; but especially in Page 144. are these Words. But an Imposing
Church bears Witness of herself, and will be both Party and Judge; it requires
Assent without Evidence, and Faith without Proof, therefore false. Christian
Religion ought to be carried on only by that way by which it was introduced;
which was, Persuasion; If any Man will be my Disciple, let him take up his
Cross and follow me: And this is the Glory of it, that it does not destroy, but
fairly conquers the Understanding. And now for a Conclusion, let G. P. and all
his Approvers consider, what W. P. has pubished for Truth, and openly declared
as his Faith and Judgment: Then I hope G. P. and his Brethren, will not be
unwilling to do as W. P. has written in the Book and Pages before mentioned.

POSTSCRIPT, by way of Queries to G. P. and others concerned.
If according to the Ancient Doctrine of Truth, all People ought to be mindful
in Matters relating to God, of the Conviction by the Light and Spirit of Christ
in every Conscience:

Then no Man ought to impose any Religion or other Matter upon his Brother's
Conscience, contrary to his Faith; For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, to
him that does it doubtingly: He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because not
of Faith, Romans 14. 23.

And as thy Words seem to imply, it has been and is most sincerely declared by
the Brethren, That they have no Thoughts or Design of Imposing any thing upon
the Conscience of Friends; so hereby thou give occasion to ask, Who those
Brethren are among you? And also where I may find them, that do as thou have
said? Such are none of those Busybodies or talkative Preachers, who run
before they are sent, and speak of Things they do not understand; which have
too much Encouragement from you, either by your Silence, in not reproving of
them, or else by your Practice, as an ill Example unto them. And further, I
desire to know, what is the Reason you break all Union, Friendship, Charity and
Christian Fellowship, with us; and behave your selves so toward us in Public
Meetings, and wherever you meet us, before any sort of People, as if we were
Outcasts and Reprobates, and you set a Mark upon us, for all that are
like-minded with you, to shoot their Arrows of Envy and blind Zeal against us,
etc.

A few Words to the Yearly Meeting in London.

Friends, consider well among your selves, what some of you have been doing
this many years: And remember your Paper of Judgment, you gave against J. S.
and J. W. Signed by above sixty such Persons, as belonged to, or were owned by
the Yearly Meeting in that Day. Also let your Eyes and Ears be opened, that you
may see, hear and consider, the evil Works that Paper has brought forth; and
too many of you by your Silence (if not Practice) have encouraged that evil
Work for many years, to the grief and trouble of many Righteous Souls.

And it is greatly desired it may come to your Remembrance, how some Persons
among you carry or bring false Reports, and tell you that which has not been
really true; and from you it has been sent abroad as Truth: When as many know,
too much of what you say is not true, but as it was said of old, Report and we
will Report it.

Oh now no more! Let the Cry of the Oppressed Innocent, by you any longer be
neglected; for your Eyes have seen, and your Ears have heard, our Trials, and
our patient Sufferings have been before many of your Faces; and unto you have
some of us called for Justice and true Judgment, in Righteousness and Truth:
But as yet, you have taken little notice of our great Exercise and Patience,
with which we have born and suffered for Truth and Righteousness sake; your
business has been rather to make our Afflictions greater, our Burdens heavier,
and our Troubles more on every side, so did our old Persecutors: And so that
you have given us just occasion to take up against you, the Prophet's
Complaint, viz. Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off;
for Truth is falling in the Street, and Equity cannot enter: Yea Truth fails,
and he that departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey, etc.

The Lord beholds your Works, and is displeased with much of your Doings; and
if there be not Repentance, and an Amendment of all that ^s wrong and has been
done amiss; then know this is the Word of the Lord to you, and unto all that
are concerned, The Almighty God is near at Hand, to visit all Backsliders, and
all who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, and keep not the Commandments of
God; but are smiting their Fellow Servants, ^aking pleasure in Unrighteousness,
and are found in riotous Practices in the day time. Woe, Woe, for the Lord
Almighty as an angry God, will with sore and ^vere Judgments come suddenly upon
an unworthy and an unthankful People, for whomhe has done so great Things.
Therefore Oh Friends, prepare to meet ^e Lord! And let us be at Peace among our
selves.

John Rance.
Wickham the 5th of the 3d. Month, 1692.
Printed for the Author the 10th Day of the 3d Month, in the Year 1692.


