SIR RALPH HOPTONS AND All his Forces coming in to the PARLIAMENT.

On Thursday last, according to the Articles and Propositions sent to him by
SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, Certified in two Letters to the Honorable William Lenthall
Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable house of Commons

Appointed by the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons, to be forthwith printed and published.

London Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
16. March 1646.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
IN my last I acquainted you of the defeat given to a party of the Enemies
Horse, wherein Major General Pert, and others were taken prisoners, being on
Saturday last; And also of an inclination in the Lord Hopton to Treat, yet
withal endeavoring to get time, and a Cessation of Arms, both which were
denied; Whereupon the Army advanced from their several Quarters; on Monday to
Probus and Treguy, within four or five miles of Truro; the headquarter being
at Treguy, where our forlorn came near unto the Enemy; They stood in a
peaceable manner, not offering to give resistance, saying, There was a
Cessation agreed unto, and they hoped there would be a Peace; Our Officers had
much ado to perswage them there was no Cessation, and therefore it did behove
them not to stay any longer, but to retire to their places of advantage, or
otherwise our Forces would (as they might at this present have done) take
advantage upon them, by falling on them; They did very kindly thank our
Officers and soldiers for their civilitie, that they did forbear, there being
no Cessation, and so retired back. It is conceived the Lord Hopton did brute
this abroad amongst his own men, as concluded by us, to the intent that our
men might fall foul on them, and so provoke them to some desperate engagement,
but it had another effect, for the terror was such throughout their Army, upon
the advance of our whole Army in their sight, that the Lord Hopton was enforced
to send a Trumpet at twelve a clock at night to desire a Parley, expressing his
willingness to lose no time in making an end, and indeed if that had not come
to keep their men together, they had been in great disorder: the offer was
accepted; Whereupon about three a clock this morning the Trumpet was returned
with our Commissioners names, viz. Commissary General Jreton, Colonel
Lambert, Commissary Stane, the Comptroller of the Ordnance, and Colonel S.
Aubin, the place agreed to Treat at, was Tresilian Bridge near Truro: The time
nine aclock this morning, the Treaty to continue for three hours after, but
the Lord Hopton failed to send his Commissioners names till past nine: Our Army
Horse and Foot being at a Rendezvous by six aclock were advanced from their
several Quarters between nine and ten within two miles of Truro: The Trumpeter
then coming with their Commissioners names, who are these, Colonel Goring,
Colonel Pont, Colonel Bovel, Colonel Trever, and Sir Richard Prideaux, the
Kings high Sheriff of this County, whom they nominated to balance the Kings
high Sheriff nominated by the Parl. Col. S. Aubin: They desired that Colonel
Goteere, a French man might be added, which was agreed unto, and Captain Herle
added to our Commissioners: The safe Convoys from both Generals were sent this
day between ten and eleven of the clock, with a Letter further from the
General, to the Lord Hopton, letting of him know, that his Army being upon a
march, he intended to Quarter at Truro this night, which he thought good to
give him notice of, that his Forces may withdraw: And if he pleased, in regard
it might be late before the Treaty could be agreed to; the bounds being set for
each Army to quarter in, there might be a Cessation of Arms till to morrow
morning at six of the clock, by which time you need not doubt, but all things
will be concluded on; the sum of the whole will be as I conceive, and as
Instructions are given, that according to the Generals first Proposition, the
Lord Hoptons Officers and Soldiers must all lay down their Arms, yet the
Officers to march away with their horses and such Arms they had wont to wear
in peaceable times, and Passes to their several homes (or beyond Seas if they
desire it) engaging themselves never to bear Arms against the Parliament, the
common Soldiers to deliver up their Horses and Arms, and to have allowed them
twenty shillings a man to carry them home. By that Article I hope there will be
good recruites, and numbers of horses sufficient got for the Army. For the
Forraigners and strangers to have leave to depart the Kingdom, they likewise
engaging themselves never to bear Arms more against the Parliament, the
Officers to have their horses with them. This indeed we are informed will suit
well with the strangers desires, they being afraid Quarter would be denied
them, as indeed most of them do deserve it, but it is in relation to the point
of time, That these things are propounded and pursued, to the end this field
force might be totally scattered; That the Irish (which are ready, and are
every day expected to land in these parts) may not have such a Body of horse to
join with them.

This is all the account I can give of this business, and I hope when it is
effected (of which you need not doubt) the consequence will be greater then is
at present expected. God has struck our enemies hearts with a fear,
otherwise having such a brave body of horse they would not have been compelled
to listen to and seek for a Treaty, within few hours there will another
express be sent unto you, with the particulars of what is concluded, I
thought good to dispatch this Messenger away, (though the Journey be long) to
prevent misreports that might go upon this bussines.

From the Rendevouz within 2. miles of Truro March 10. 1645. 12. at noone. Your
humble servant I. R.

I Thought fit to stay the sending of this Letter till next day and can give
you this further account that the army according to former purpose marched into
Truro and possessed our selves of the Town, and another part of it to St. Allens
within less then three miles of the North Sea (which is their only piece of
Land the Enemy have left to break through, if they intend it) but our guards
are so strong, and our quarters so disposed of, that there is not the least
fear of that. We have them now before us in a pound. The Commissioners met
yesterday about three of the clock continued Treating till almost ten, some
progress they made, but there are so many circumstances concerning the
Articles and the manner of performing them as how these shall be transported and
go beyond Sea* how these shall be conveyed that are to go to their several
homes and other things of that nature, that it occasioned a necessity last
night to agree that the Treaty might continue for this day also, and their
Commissioners to come this forenoone to Truro to finish the Treaty there, the
Cessation being agreed too; their Soldiers come to our Quarters, and we go
to theirs, and they are now so fully possessed of our fair intentions toward
them, That it concerns the Lord Hopton to dispatch the Treaty or else he is
like to have few to attend him, The Lord Hopton does really profess he was
ignorant of the Princes going. That they are Traitors that had an hand in it,
and I believe it is a thing that much works with him, that the Prince should
be so carried away.

Truro March 11. 11. at Noone. J. R. 15. Martii

THe 15. of March 1645. at four of the clock in the afternoon there came
further intelligence by a Messenger from Sir Tho. Fairfax to the Honorable
William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons,
certifying the comeing in of Sir Ralph Hopton with all his forces (being about
two thousand Horse) to Sir Thomas Fairfax, according to the propositions within
mentioned. Thursday last being the day he and all his forces came in and
submitted. And further the same intelligencer certifies, that on Wednesday
there came one hundred and twenty complete armed Foot Soldiers to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, out of Pendennis Castle, and offer voluntarily to serve under his
Excellency, and with him continue, and that the Prince is in the Isle of Ceely.

FINIS.

