A BRIEF NARRATION OF SOME Church Courses Held in Opinion and Practice in the
Churches lately erected in New England.

Collected out of sundry of their own printed Papers and Manuscripts with other
good Intelligences.

Together with some short hints (given by the way) of their correspondence with
the like tenants and practices of the Separatists Churches.

And some short Animadversions upon some principal passages for the benefit of
the vulgar Reader.

Presented to public view for the good of the Church of God by W. R.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Edward Brewster at the Sign of the Bible on
Fleet-bridge. 1644.

The Preface to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
GIve me leave before I present thee with the Narration following to Apologize
something for my self. I have not fallen upon this task for want of other
work; nor out of any itching much less ambitious desire to appear in print,
which as I never affected, so much less now, when it is become no singular
praise. For Scribimus omnes, indocti, doctique; nor out of any malignancie of
spirit against the men (whose Church ways I here relate) whom so far as I
know them, I profess (God and my Conscience bearing me witness) highly to
love and honor in the Lord. But the first occasion of my thoughts in this kind
was, that a solemn agreement being a good while since made between the
brethren of the independent way (then and still residing in London) and those
of the opposite judgment, wherein (amongst other things on both sides agreed
upon) those brethren promised then shortly to put forth a narrative of their
doctrine and practice in Church courses, that so it might appear where the
differences lay: which Narrative being once published (the materials whereof
they then professed to be all ready) they also promised to join with the rest
in preaching against the Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries. But the
said brethren (though sundry times called upon to put forth their Narrative
according to promise) have yet not only delayed, but at length altogether
denied to do the same: upon which denial I began to entertain some thoughts
of making a Narrative my self; and began so to do, but through many
discouragements I laid it by again; till of late some of the said brethren
that had formerly promised the Narrative, published a Narration apologeticall,
which seemed in title to me a performance of the former engagement; but when I
had read it, I found it nothing less, as being neither full nor clear as a
Narration ought to be. But touching that I will say no more, because others
better able have, and I hope will deal thoroughly with it: Only I let the
Reader know that upon this occasion I resumed my former purpose, considering
now the necessity of such a course, in regard that not only themselves
continued in that way, but also others both Ministers and people out of
ignorance or inconsideration were daily drawn aside thereto, new Churches were
erected according to their module, our Churches and Ministry, and Gods
Ordinances in them began to be neglected, slighted, deserted, yea,
contumeliously and scornfully reproached as Antichristian, Babylonish, false
and null, that many were distracted and doubtful what to hold and do, and to
which side to cleave, some thought better of their ways, and others worse,
then they deserved, and both sorts for want of right information what they
were. That the full relation of their ways, if it did not turn men quite off
from them, yet, at least, might so far prevail as to make men pause awhile,
and enquire further into them before they were too far engaged; especially
might give occasion of a more full agitation of all these differences in this
venerable Assembly of Divines now met for consultation about matters of this
nature. That all the printed books which I had seen did not together make out
a full story, and what was in them here and there dispersed could not be so
satisfactorie as to see all things together in a short Synopsis with one view.
That my self by divine providence had sundry intelligences lay by me, which
joined to what was already printed might either make the story complete, or
else might occasion and spur on some other (perhaps of themselves) to publish
a better. And lastly, that some of that way contrary to their former promises
and pactions, and laying by not only the due regard we think they should have
had of their brethren of the contrary judgment, but also of the public peace
and common cause of Reformation, (which by such distractions is retarded) have
impetuously both in Pulpit and Press (besides what they have done in private)
labored to promote these their popular Church ways, as the only ways of God,
and to make all men, they could, to dis-rellish and abominate that which (for
distinction sake) we call Presbyterian Government. These and other like things
(after much pondering in my spirit) at last cast the balance, and caused me to
resolve to pursue my first intention in this way, as here you see.

Now lest I be mistaken, I desire the Reader to understand and hear in mind
that I intend not in this Relation to set down all things which they hold or
practice in Discipline or Church Government, but such things only or for the
most part, wherein there lies some difference between them and us, or other
the best Reformed Churches. Neither do I intend to wrap up all and every one
of the Elders (much less members) of the New England Churches in the same
imputations: Forasmuch as it is most certain, that though in practice they act
generally all alike, yet in their opinion of things practiced, much more in the
grounds and reasons thereof, some of them do not only differ from the rest,
but have stiffely opposed the rest therein, which I write to preserve the just
repute of some eminent persons there, from such censures and hard opinions as
others of them, perhaps, may seem to merit, and incur.

Lastly, because every common Reader cannot so easily discern and distinguish
of all things here presented to him, therefore I crave leave ere I part to give
him some few directions: First, he must take notice that the whole Narration is
divided into several Chapters, and each Chapter into several Articles,
printed in a Larger Character. 2 At the end of those several Articles are set
down the proofs thereof collected out of their printed Papers, and other
Manuscripts of their own either Treatises or Letters written from one friend in
New England to another here, the Originals or Copies whereof, at least, I have
by me, to produce, if need shall so require. 3. After the said proofs of the
several Articles, there usually follow by themselves some short quotations of
some one or more writers of the Brownists, which being consulted with, it will
appear, that the opinions and practices of these our brethren in Church
Courses mentioned in the preceding Articles do very much agree with them. A
complete parallel, I confess, in all things here is not: partly through want
of some Brownists Books, partly want of leisure to view over those I had,
partly also, I believe, for want of full agreement between them. For though in
substan e of things there be too great an accord, yet in some formalities or
other accessories there may be differences; in some things some of the
Brownists being more rigid then these our brethren are, as in other things
these seem more strict then any of them for ought that by their writings does
appear. 4. Over aginst many of the several Articles, and sometimes also
underneath the same there are suggested some short Animadversions, not in way
of a set confutation, (that task is now in better hands) but sometimes by way
of quaere, or doubt, sometimes pointing (as it were with the finger) to some
seeming contradiction to their own tenants or practices, or some apparent
repugnancie to the letter of Scripture, or light of common sense, added only of
purpose to admonish the vulgar and injudicious Reader, lest by reading things
so plausibly put forth (as some of them are) he should be ensnared at unawares.
5. Sometimes proofs are more sparingly affixed to the Article, or perhaps none
at all, because the things asserted in the Article are apparent by the proofs
of other Articles foregoing, or by the general tenor of the whole discourse,
out of which the Reader himself may easily (if he be willing) make out a more
full proof. 6. Nor is it always to be expected, that the proofs under every
Article should reach every Punctilio in that Article, so the substance be
proved, the rest will necessarily follow of their own accord. 7. Nor that every
proof should make good every part of the Article; I hope it may suffice if all
the proofs together will do it amongst them. 8. Lastly, the Reader must know
that when he finds quoted, Ans. to 32. q. and Ans. to 9. Pos. and Discourse of
Cov. he is to look for these in the book lately published by Mr H. Peter's.
Cott. cat. I call that Treatise printed under Mr Cottons name of Church
constitution by way of question and answer. There are also cited two other
printed Letters under the same name. When thou meetest with Apol. that is, The
Apology of the Churches in New England for Church Covenant, which I have by me
in a Manuscript. Most of the other quotations are of Letters between friend and
friend: when you have Rob. Apol. that belongs to the Allegation of the
Brownists, and is a distinct book from the former Apology. The rest are more
easy. Now the blessing of Heaven go with this poor Pamphlet, that it may
contribute some mite to the promoting of the public good, whereunto it is
devoted. Amen.

A brief NARRATION Of some Church Courses generally held in opinion and
practice by the Churches lately erected in New England.
CHAP. I.
Concerning a Plat-forme of Church Government and Discipline in general.

1. THis is to be observed and remembered all along, that all the Churches in
New England, especially within Massachusetts bay, at New The Church at N.
Plimmouth was (as I am informed) one of the first Churches that was settled
there; having been a part of Mr. Robinsons Church in Holland (that famous
Brownist) from whence they brought with them their Church opinions and
practices into N. E. and which they there still hold and practice without any
alteration, so far as ever I could learn. If therefore they and the rest of
the Churches be all of the same way, Quere whether they be not all of the
Separatists way, at least, in practice: the rather if that be true which Mr W.
an eminent man of the Church at Plimmouth told W. R. That the rest of the
Churches in New Eng. came at first to them at Plimmouth to crave their
direction in Church courses, and made them their pattern. Also I find that
Church much commended by I. C. in his printed letter to Mr W. p 13.
Plimmouth, Quillipiacke, and about the river of Connectecute are of one and
the same way in Church Constitution, Government and Discipline, without any
material difference, so that what may be truly said of any one of them, may be
believed of them all. Ans. to 32. q. p. 82. J. C. to A. H. J. W. in answ. to
10. Q. J. D. to L. H. So all affirm uno ore.

2. Yet have they no set Plat-forme solemnly agreed upon amongst them. But
only they have How should such an exact uniformity amongst all their churches
happen without any express agreement? Not by miraculous providence, nor
immediate inspiration, I suppose. If by the clear evidence of the way reveiled
in the Scriptures, and shining forth to them, then its a wonder that no other
Churches in the world should see that light which yet all the Churches in N. E.
and all their members do so clearly see, as to practice uniformlie without
difference, much more that all other Churches should oppose it. If by imitation
and president, one following another, Then quaere, whether this be not a more
rational course, and likely to be less erroneous, that the Churches should
jointly consider of, agree upon, and in writing set down a set Plat-forme
according to Reason and Scripture-Rule, to be observed amongst them, rather
then to tie themselves so to president, which if closely followed is slavish,
and worse, if loosly, will soon breed differences, if not divisions. And it is
not unknown that some such have been already amongst them.
all acted themselves into one and the same way. J. W. in answ. to 10. Q. V. S.
to W. R.

3. The reason why they have no set Plat-forme agreed upon is rendered by some
of them, to be because such an one is unnecessary; yea, Is not a Pattern
virtually a Plat-forme, if therefore this be inconvenient or unlawful, how can
that be justified? Again, let the Reader observe that the Answerers (in Ans. to
32. q. p. 63, 64.) speak of such a Plat-forme of Doctrine and Discipline, and
so imposed [as a binding rule of Faith and practice, so that all men must
believe and walk according to that Plat-forme without adding, altering, or
omitting] but of a Plat-forme so imposed, the question whereto they answer was
not put, nor reasonably could be understood; Nor is there any such amongst the
Protestant Churches, who acknowledge all their plat-formes imperfect, intend to
bind themselves thereto no longer, nor further then they shall see them
warranted by Gods word, and therefore always leave themselves a liberty to
add to, alter, or repeal any thing therein, as God shall give them more
light: that clause therefore so inserted, serves for no other use but to put a
greater odium upon the question, and a fairer gloss upon the answer then
either of them deserved. Besides if a tyrannical and imperious imposition of a
Plat-forme be so evil in their eyes, (as also it is in ours) then why do they
so rigorously press others (that come amongst them) to such a perfect
conformity to their president, In that they permit no man whatsoever to be a
member in any of their Churches, or partake with them in any Church Fellowship,
unless he exactly enter in their way of entering, and walk in their order. Nor
will own others as Sister-Churches that differ from them (though but in some
things) in Church Discipline? All which to be so will after appear: Is not
this really a more rigid imposition of their pattern, then any Church ever used
in urging of their Plat-forme? and that the more insufferable, because in other
Churches the rule is agreed upon, and (for the time at least) fixed, and
publicly held forth in writing, so that a man may understand beforehand what
he binds himself unto, and what he may look for afterward. Whereas our
brethrens course is held forth obscurely in practice only, and how long that
practice will continue uniforme in all their Churches, yea, or in any one of
them, he can have no assurance, nor how often or how far they may change he
cannot tell; so that he makes but a blind bargain at the best. Obj. There is
a Plat-forme sent over lately called, The way of the Churches in N. E. Answ.
True, but 1. that is but a mere relation of what hitherto they have practiced
without any obligation (by virtue of any agreement) to the same courses
hereafter. 2. Its compiled by one particular man, not consented to by the rest,
as from thence we are informed, and therefore warned by some of themselves, so
to look at it, and no otherwise.
inconvenient, if not utterly unlawful, at least so as to be imposed on the
Churches; as J. W. in ans. to 10. Q. implies, where he says, We all walk in
the same way, but not by any public and solemn agreement, as prescribing to
any what to do. See the Ans. to 32. q. p. 63. 64. at large.

CHAP. II.
Of the true visible Church of Christ in general, and the bounds thereof.

1. THey currantly hold that there is no visible Church of Christ now in the
days of the Gospel, but a particular Church, which may consist of a very
small number, as Though it were granted that-there is now no visible church
endued with power of Govern. and in which Church Ordinances may be administered
(for of such only we here speak) but particular, yet it may be a Quare, 1.
Whether so few as 7.8. or 9. may make up such a complete organicall body fitted
for exercise of Church power. For suppose one of the 7. or 8. members of this
Church offend his brother, the brother offended admonishes him, he denies it,
one or two more of them must be called in to witness it, yet he relents not,
one or two more yet must be joined to the first, the party offended, to join in
the second admonition, yet still he is obstinate, now the matter should be
brought to the Church, who must be another company from the former, (for they
are all plaintiffes or witnesses, and therefore cannot be judges in the cause)
Also that Church must be in reason a greater body, and of higher authority
then the former, but in this small number of 7. or 8. where will such a Church
be found? Therefore in a Church consisting but of 7. 8. or 9. no censure can
pass, much less any other Church act be sped. Again, how can so few either
employ, or ordinarily maintain officers of so many sorts as themselves hold
necessaried in every Church? and if they cannot have officers, how should they
have Church Ordinances regularly? 2. It may be a quaere whether this particular
Church may lawfully be no more in number then one only Congregation, since the
Apostles Churches (most at least if not all) consisted of so many thousands as
possibly could not meet all conveniently together in the same place, and at the
same times for all Gods public Worship to Edification. For which see more in
Master Rutherfords and Master Bals late Treatises. Neither do we ever read of
any more Churches in one place or city, and the neighborhood, but one, which
(though multiplied never so much) yet was never subdivided into more Churches
then one, yet might be and were so many as possibly could not meet together in
one congregation for Worship, unless both the place were very spacious (which
usually they then had not) and withal the Minister that did officiate had both
a body of brass, and voice like a Trumpet. Men of ordinary strength not being
able to speak audibly to above two or three thousand at the most, and most men
not to one. Much less can half so many communicate at the Lords Table at once.
Besides, how will ever any competent number in country villages, and places
less populous, be ever joined together into one Church, especially if we be so
curious in choice of our members as our N. E. brethren are? Surely we must
either take such inconsiderable numbers as they do, and as can neither employ
nor maintain Church Officers (which would bring with it unsufferable
inconveniences) or else they must be fetched from places so far distant, as
must force them either to travel far from their several abodes to the same
meeting place for worship Winter and Summer, or else many of them to be without
all Church-Ordinances, or to enjoy them rarely: the former of which is
oppressive to their bodies, the later injurious to their souls, neither of them
seems suitable to the goodness and wisdom of God, who (as it is said of the
Sabbath) has made Church-ordinances for man, not man for Church-ordinances.
But I intend no dispute, I only propound my doubts.
7.8. or 9. persons, but may not exceed the number of so many as conveniently
may and ordinarily do meet together in one Congregation, in the same place,
and at the same times, for the solemn worship of God to their mutual
edification. Ans. to 32. q. p. 9. 10. 43. Cott. cat. p. 1. Ans. to 9. Pos. p.
62. R. M. to W. R. H. W. to Master B.

See John's. plea, p. 250. Rob. Apol. p. 12. Rob. justif. p. 107. 108. 111.

2. Therefore they deny all True in such sense as the Jewish church was: For
they had a place of National meeting, the Temple; a national worship in the
sacrifices, national officers the Priests; and therefore at certain times all
the nation (representatively in the males) came up to that place and worship.
But (though not in that) yet in some other sense may be admitted both a
National Church and Provincial, yea, and Diocesan too; as a Domestical
Church, Romans 16.5. Philem. 2. As all the scattered Jewish Churches are called
one flock, 1 Pet. 5.2. and all the Gentilish Christian Churches present were
called one little Sister, Cant. 8.8. And the Jewish Christian Churches yet to
come are called one Bride, Revel. 19.7. And the Scriptures often speak of many
Churches, or all, as one in the singular number, 1 Cor. 10.32. Ephesians. 3.10.
Gal. 1.13. by reason of some bonds by which they are united togethert. And our
brethren themselves do sometimes acknowledge an universal visible Church
(though usually they deny it) as Apol. p. 16. 21. 37. 40. yea, and officers too
of that Catholic Church, viz. Apostles and Evangelists, which therefore
(whiles they remained) baptized persons into that Church, wheresoever they met
with them without any respect to a congregationall Church, as themselves
acknowledge.
National and Provincial Churches, much more an universal visible Church in
any sense. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 62. 63. 66. Apol. p. 7. 23. R. M. to E. B. p. 2.

Rob. justif. p. 217.

3. Also they deny all Yet sometimes themselves are forced to use Commisioners
or Messengers to represent the whole body absent. As at the constitution of any
new church, as after follows. So in their private examinations of members to
be admitted. As after too. Especially in their late Synod at Cambridge in N. E.
And always that part of the Church which is present includes others that are
absent by representation, and the males the women.
representative Churches, whether the officers of one particular Congregation
representing that Church in the judicature within it self, or the
Commissioners of several Churches meeting together in a compound Presbytery
or Synod representing all those Churches by whom they are sent.

Rob. justif. 162.

4. This particular visible Church they define to this effect, It is a
mystical body whereof Christ is the head, the members are Saints, called out
of the world, and united together into Here is intimated the number how many
they may not be, viz. not above one Congregation, nothing said of the number
how few: But methinks regard should have been had of the one as well as the
other, left a gap be opened to cut and mangle the Churches of God into such
small shreds, as will not only occasion numberless differences amongst
themselves, but also render them odious and contemptible to all men. Which we
see frequently falls out amongst the Brownists that follow the same
church-courses as these our brethren do. 2. Neither is here any mention of the
church officers as any part of this definition. But how can this be a complete
organicall body, fitted for exercise of all functions of the body, where there
are not some to be tongues and eyes as well as others to be hands and feet
thereto: i. e. some to rule, as well as others to be ruled?
one Congregation by an holy Covenant to worship the Lord and edify one
another in all his holy ordinances, Cott. cat. p. 1. Answ. to 32. q. p. 13.

CHAP. III.
Of the matter of a true visible Church, what is required thereunto, and how
the same may be known.

1. THe matter of a true visible Church, is either infants, or persons of age
and understanding.

2. In persons of age they require first that they be all real All the members
of the visible Church should be Saints, holy, etc. but there is an external
and federall holiness, 1 Cor. 7. and I real internal holiness. That is
absolutely necessary to Church estate, this not, what shall become of our
intants else? we shall exclude them as Anabaptists do, unless we fly to that
shift which Rob. ( just if. p 309.) does, that all infants within the Church
are truly converted, and so as fit materials for a Church as the best elder
people are. 2. Real and internal holiness is doubtless required of all
Church Members, viz. in foro. interno, and unto acceptance with God, but not
in foro externo, and unto admission into the Church. 3. There is a double
[ought to be Saints] or obligation to real holiness: one moral, vi
praecepti, because God has commanded all his people to be holy, as he is holy,
1 Pet. 1. another Physical, as absolutely necessary to the mere being of the
Church, and without which it were a false Church, no Church. In the former
sense all are bound to be holy, not in this latter. R. For if it were so
essential, then either that all should be so holy, or that some of them only:
Not that all, for then that would overthrow the truth not only of all the
Churches in the world besides, but also of their own too; into which not only
their reason, but also their experience has taught them that both hypocrites
and heretics may wind in themselves. Nor that some of them only: For there is
no more reason for some to be bound, to be holy, then for all. Besides at the
execting of some Church: Suppose the first 7. or 8. that combine in
Church Covenant should all prove hypocrites (as it is not impossible) but not as
yet discovered, whether is this a true visible Church or no? And if another
(though a true believer) join himself to them, is he a member of a true
visible Church or no? How shall he know his standing in that Church to be
lawful? or how can he in faith continue in their fellowship, partake with them
in ordinances, and submit to their censures, or join with them in censuring of
others? seeing (by this rule) they being none of them true Saints but all
hypocrites, that their Church wanted true matter, and so was incapable of the
true form of a Church, and therefore proves a false church, and all their
church acts (and his with them) are so many nullities, usurpations,
prevarications. 4. If none but real Saints may be admitted, then none but such
may be retained: will they then excommunicate all persons out of their church
that live without scandal, yet are not cenvincingly gracious?
Saints, sincere believers, not only having common gifts, but also saving
graces, that they be not common but choice Christians. Ans. to 32. q. p. 8. 9.
Discourse of Cov. p. 4. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 69. 70. Apol. p. 2. 6. 21. 43. Cott.
cat. p. 1. 4. R. M. to E. B. p. 5. 9.

So Rob. just. p. 11. 38. 41. 47. 48. 61. 91. 254.

Yea, convincingly such, T. G. to J. G.

Meek and humble spirits, for fear they should abuse their Church Power. E. O.
to W. R.

Void of insincere ends in seeking of Church Communion. Discourse of Cov. p. 4.

If any others should attempt to be admitted, the Church were bound (upon
discovery) to repel them. Apol. p. 2. 3. 4. 5. 24. 33. 43. R. M. to E. B. p.
5. The reason of which is rendered, lest they take an harlot into the bosom of
Christ in stead of a chaste Spouse.

If any such be admitted they are not true but false matter of the visible
Church.

3. That the Church may consist of none but real Saints, so far as in them
lies, they hold the Church is bound to make Admit it were necessary ad esse
ecclesiae that all the members should be really holy, yet still the question
might be by what rule we should estimate that their holiness; whether by the
rule of a large charity which believes and hops all things, judging all
them to be sanctified that do not give convincing and unquestionable proof of
the contrary, or of a strict severitie in accou^ting none to be so, but such as
give convincing and unquestionable proof that they are so indeed? And whether
in this inquiry the church is to accept of all fair overtures and shows of
Grace, in such as offer themselves, as sufficient, for the present, to
admission, or must more narrowly search and sound men's hearts to the bottom?
seeing the Scripture says to a particular person, If thy brother say it
repents me, thou shall forgive him. Q. Whether the same rule will not by
proportion reach also to a whole Church? and so by consequent to
church-admission? neither do we read of any such strict examination, in
admission of members, mentioned in Scriptures, but that men were accepted upon
very easy and general terms. The reason why they keep their Church-doores so
close shut, is good and plausible in it self, but applied to this course seems
to cast an aspersion upon Christ, that has made no such rule of prevention,
and upon the Apostles and their Churches which practiced none such that ever we
read of; and seems to be both against charity, that suspects no evil; and
against Christian wisdom too; For whether is it a greater hurt to the Church
to admit of some (yea many) hypocrites, or to keep out of the Church (through
such unwarranted scrupulositie) some (though but one, or a few) sincere
Christians? yea, against Justice too, 1. In respect of hypocrites whom and
their children to exclude from outward Church Priviledges (if God have not
excluded them) is much more in jurious then to pull the clothes off their
backs, or their meat out of their mouths. 2. Especially to some sincere
Christians and their infants, as it may fall out, to whom by all right, both
before God and men, Church-ordinances do belong, who yet by this strictness
are defrauded of the same.
strict inquiry, and take exact trial of all such persons as are to be
admitted into Church Fellowship: yea, so much and so long, as until they have
thoroughly approved their sincerity. Discourse of Cov. p. 10. Ans. to 9. Pos.
p. 70. Apol. p. 2. 43. R. M. to E. B. p. 5. R. M. to T. S. This last gives
this advice to his friend intending to go over. Above all things let those
that come to N. E. search their estate well toward God, and make their calling
sure before they come. For if men come to offer themselves to be members of any
Church here, their evidences will be then viewed and scanned, and search will
be made what they can say for themselves to show both their cutting off from
sin and ingraffing into Christ; and many other such warnings from thence we
have had.

See Bar. disc. p. 33. Rob. justif. p. 255. 256. Rob. Apol. p. 81. Can.
necess. of separation. p. 167.

4. In which trial they use to require, first, Doubtless any of these trials
may be taken, with the warrant of Scripture, so that they be not extended
beyond due measure: As 1. if all should be required to concur else no admission,
whereas we see men in Scripture have bin admitted to Church-co^munion upon
some one of them only, as Paul, act. 9. upon Barnabas his testimony alone.
And Phebe, Ron. 16.1. upon Paul's testimony, And (where other testimony is
wanting) Experience alone of ones blameless conversation, for a reasonable
time (where there is nothing to the contrary) may seem a sufficient argument
of his sincerity, to a Scripture charity, that is not suspicious, thinks no
evil, but takes all things (that well it may) in the best part. 2. If in
examining of men's knowledge and opinion in points of Religion more should be
absolutely required then the least measure, and that in mere fundamentals only.
Letters of recommendations from other Churches or persons absent. Ans. to 32.
q. p. 28. 29. Apol. p. 1.

Secondly, Testimony of their own members present, if there be any that know
the parties. Apol. p. 1. Ans. to 32. q. p. 24.

Thirdly, Experience of their Conversation amongst themselves: In taking up of
which Experience sometimes the time is long, if other testimonials be wanting.
E. C. to R. C.

Fourthly, They examine them touching their knowledge in the Principles of
Religion. Ans. to. 32. q. p. 23.

5. Though some or all the forenamed proofs be given, yet they confide not
therein, nor can be satisfied therewith, without a Q. Whether (when the other
four have preceded) 1. this addition be not superfluous, the other being
sufficient to a right qualified charity. 2. Whether (if the other four serve
not) this be not bootlesse and ineffectuall. Seeing if the party to be admitted
be not discovered unsound by any of the other trials, then either he is sound
indeed, or else a subtle hypocrite, which if he be, then he will deceive the
Church present as well as he has done others absent, and by his golden words,
(wherein hypocrites usually excel) as well or much more then by his deeds and
couversation: unless we should imagine (as some of that way here do) that the
Church has in it ever such a spirit of discerning as that it cannot be
deceived by any. 3. Whether it be not a thing to many impossible, who know not
the time when, much l^sse the manner how they were converted, or have forgotten
it, or through temptation do altogether question it; And the rather
considering 1. the manner of propounding the questions, which is at the
pleasure of him that propounds them: For all know they love no set forms. 2.
The manner required in answering, which must be both public, and ex tempore
too: Not knowing what will be asked them before it be asked, and therefore not
having much time to consider what to answer. 3. Also if we consider the
matters about which the man is to be asked: which I shall deliver unto the
Reader in some of their own words. I. W. to T. S. says, The special things
they drive at are to find some degree of legal terrors, Evangelicall
mourning for sin, desire after Christ, and upon what Promise the soul was
quieted. W. T. to Master B. The chief Points that the Church desires to be
satisfied in are concorning the cutting off from the old Adam, and a man's
ingraffing into Christ, how the Law has had it^ work, how the Gospel its
work, what sight a man has had of sin, what conviction of former erroneous
ways, what despair of Salvation in and from themselves, what throwing down
and humiliation, etc? Also whether Christ be reveiled to them, in the ministry
of the Word, or any other way? what esteem they have of him? what desire to
enjoy him? whether they have yet closed with their Redeemer in any sweet
Promise, or be still in a waiting, expecting condition, staying the time when
the Holy Ghost will stir up the act of Faith, make up the union, give the
assurance, etc? The same hand writes. The Churches here admit none but upon
confession of their Faith, and an humble commemoration before God and the
Church, how God has wrought with them, and how far and in what manner he
has gone along with them in their Vocation, etc. Now (these things before
premised being well considered) I ask again, if it be not a thing impossible
for many good souls (fit for Church-Societie, and who have right to
Church-ordinances) to render such an account, and in such manner, to the
satisfaction of a multitude concerning the soundness of their conversion. Yea,
4. I ask whether so to exact it be not a greater usurpation and tyranny over
the souls and consciences of men then the Bishops themselves (though bad
enough) did ever exercise? 5. If there must needs be such an account given both
of men's knowledge and grace, were in not better and safer that a set and
standing Rule were by common agreement made according to Gods Word, for trial
of both, and this one and the same (for substance at least) in all the
Churches, durable, and to continue the same without variation (unless upon
cogent necessity) written and recorded, and so made public not only to the
Churches and their members who are to be measured thereby, but also to other
Churches, whom it may concern to know what their Sister-churches do, and how
they walk in the Lord. For want of such a Rule, by the course which they use,
many inconveniences may follow, as in the stronger that can speak better, may
grow spiritual pride of their own abilities, and contempt of others that are
weaker. In the weaker, envy at those that do better then themselves, and
discouragement, being afraid to off^r themselves to trial, because they know
not whether they shall be judged fit or no, or having offered themselves, and
repulsed, they will hardly offer themselves again, but rather live they and
theirs out of the Church all their days: or being accepted and admitted, yet
the remembrance of their own weakness, perhaps absurdnesse, in delivering
themselves before such a multitude, when others have done so far better, and
with more acceptance then themselves, sticking by them may much rebate the edge
of that little goodness that is in them. And in the whole Church, or many
therein, it may occasion partiality, with more indulgence to some, and rigor
to others, errors and mistakes either on the right or left hand, either in the
understanding of divine truths, or in laying out the true and certain
evidences of Grace, yea differences and discord between several Churches, or
the members of the same Church thereabout, and about the persons admitted or
repulsed, admittable or not admittable into the Church.
verbal declaration (either made by a man's self, or else drawn out of him by
interrogatories) touching the manner of his Conversion from point to point, and
what evidences he can show of the truth of his grace, of his sound faith, and
sincere repentance. H. W. to T. S. says, Let none trouble himself for a
Certificate, it will not avail him, whosoever he be that comes, (though the
best known, and most eminently godly) must be examined, etc.

6. This declaration is made first in private before either some of the
officers, or other persons betrusted with the examination of the persons to be
admitted. And after also in Why may not the officers, or some prime men with
them betrusted with their private examination be sufficient, and their
testimony satisfactorie to the Church for a member to be admitted, as well as
for a whole Church to be approved? (as in Chap. 5. following) Of the
inconveniences of bringing all things to the examination of the multitude, see
after. It has been informed, and is credible, that multitudes of our English
in N. E. yea, the major part of them are there out of Church order, and so both
they and theirs live little better then Heathens, some of which before they
went were here reputed good folks, and godly people: But is not this our
brethrens rigor one of the causes thereof? If it be, they had need to have
very clear and sound grounds for what they do, or else it will be an heavy
reckoning for them one day: That many amongst them are out of the Church. See
Apol. p. 33, 36. Ans. to 32 quest. p. 7. Master F. to I. B. E. O. to W. R. and
some good ones too: I. P. to W. R. A. M. to Master C.
public before all the Church (though never so many) and that so as to the
conviction and satisfaction of them all. Ans. to 32. q. p. 23, 24. Ans. to 9.
Pos. p. 62. 70. Apol. p. 2, 3, 4. R. M. to E. B. p. 6. J. W. to T. S.

7. When any member of any of the Churches of their own way, go from one
Church to another I see no reason for this difference, nor warrant for this
distinction of members temporary, or transient, and fixed, in this case. If
such exactness must be had in the one, I see not why it should be dispensed
with in the other.
only as travelers, or sojourners for the time, they are admitted to
Sacraments, only bringing with them letters of recommendation from their own
Church. Ans. to 32. q. p. 29. But when any such member comes from one of their
Churches to another to be admitted as a fixed member there, then he is not
admitted (notwithstanding any letters of recommendation, or any other
testimonial or evidence whatsoever) without such a new By this strict course
they tell us they have seen much good to follow, both in the discovering and
cashiering of some unsound both in opinion and grace, and in the convincing,
humbling, and converting of others. Apol. p. 3. 35. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 69. But
1. all men know that success alone is not sufficient to legitimate any course:
2. They tell us what good has come thereby, but they do not tell us what
evil. How many godly have been kept out of Church-Societie by this means,
some because they durst not offer themselves to trial, others because they
could not satisfy so curious a multitude with the evidences of their grace,
and some because they approved not the course, and therefore could not submit
unto it: But of the inconveniences of this course, see before.
Examination as aforesaid, and as if he had never been examined nor admitted
into Church-Societie before. Ans. to 32. q. p. 29, 30. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 62.
Apol. p. 2, 7, 9, 35.

8. Notwithstanding all this rigor and strictness, sometimes they will assure
us that the Churches use great indulgence in their trial, and stoop unto very
If it be the mind of God that they should be so strict, and that upon the
reason aforesaid, viz. lest they should admit an harlot into the bosom of
Christ, in stead of a chaste Spouse, how can they remit any degree of that
rigor, contrary to the mind of God: If it be not his mind, how dare men
venture further into the search of other men's hearts, or in pose any thing upon
their co^sc^enc^s further then they have the mind of God to warrant them?
low terms, that they may take men into Church Fellowship. Ans. to 32. q. p.
8. the known Godly are presently admitted upon their own desire. W. T. to Mr
B. says, If a man be humble, and have an earnest desire, though he be but in a
waiting condition, if in other things he make conscience of his ways, he
knows no man of wit will deny him to become a member. The same man to P. H.
If your ministers were here, they would not think us too strict, but too
remiss in Discipline. I think in time we shall grow like old England. E. C. to
R. C. But of their abatements see after more particularly.

9. Thus far of the first (which is the maine) thing they require in persons to
be admitted into Church Fellowship, viz. true and real Saintship. A second is,
that they be such as can cleave together both in This is very good, and
comfortable, when it may be had, but suppose some differ from us in opinion, in
points inferior? may they not be admitted and tolerated in that, so long as
they be not turbulent or infectious? And what if men be of more sour and
cynicall dispositions (by nature) must no body admit them into
Church Fellowship? must they and theirs be for ever kept out of the Church, and
from all Church-ordinances and privileges, (though they should have truth of
grace, as it is possible they may) because of some invincible remains of an
harsh and crabbed constitution?
opinion and affection. Discourse of Cov. p. 4. and that there be a
sutablenesse and sweetness of spirit in them, apt to close one with another.
J. Cott. notes of the Church in fol. p. 2, 3.

10. A third is, that they Doubtless a good rule, agreeing to Scripture
Pattern, and the reason good: I could wish they that hold it forth so strictly
to others did not needlessly swerve from it themselves. For whereas our Law has
tied all men dwelling within such and such precincts to meet together in such a
place, under such a Ministry for Gods public worship and exercise of Church
duties, some of them (contrary to this good Law) destroy these (so far forth at
least) orderly consociations, pull asunder our true (though not pure) Christian
Churches, and patch up others of their own making, gotten some from one parish,
(yea, town, city) some from another, dwelling many miles asunder, and
therefore seldom or never meeting together, but at public worship, when they
have both their holy day clothes and courses on; whereby other pastors are
robbed of their sheep, confusion is bred in the Churches, the pattern of
Scripture Churches is forsaken, which ever describes the members of each Church
by the place of their cohabitation, and (besides other inconveniences) the
maine end pretended for their so firm and close uniting by Covenant, viz.
mutual watching over each other, is utterly prevented.
cohabite together, as near as may be, for their better mutual watching one
over another. Discourse of Cov. p. 4. Cott. cat. p. 5.

11. A fourth thing is, they must be such as know what belongs to Therefore, if
any man deny, or but doubt of this Church Covenant ( viz. as distinct from the
Covenant of Grace) their Church doors are for ever shut against him. God help
me then.
Church Covenant, and approve thereof. J. P. to W. R. T. G. to J. G.

12. Lastly, they must seek and desire Church Membership, and
Church Fellowship ( viz. in their way of it.) Apol. p. 11.39. Discourse of Cov.
p. 4. J.W. Ans. to 10. Quest. J.W. to T.S. Ans. to 32. q. p. 8. Cott. cat. p.
4. which if they do not, they account them This is harshest of all the rest:
may not such forbearance proceed out of humility, or modesty (though
unwarrantable) ignorance or tenderness of conscience, as scrupling their
covenant, and the courses following it, discouragement, or the like: Men forget
the royal law of love, To do as they would be done to. Some call sharply for
charity, Charity, to themselves, that show but slender charity to others.
despisers of it, yea, wicked and graceless persons, and so unworthy of it.
Apol. p. 25, 26, 27, 34. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 69. Ans. to 32. q. p. 21. J.W. ans.
to 10. quest. Discourse of Cov. p. 28.

N. Concerning the admission of infants, see after in the 7. CHAP. of
Admission, etc.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Form of the true visible Church.

1. THey hold the Form of a true visible Church of Christ is that which they
call the This point of church covenant is worthy of deep consideration, for it
will touch the freehold (not only of our English Churches, but also) of all
the Churches in the world, if this be the rule to try all Churches by.
Church Covenant, whereby all the members of the Society are united to Christ
and one to another, which therefore they count absolutely necessary,
essential and constitutive to and of the true Church. Discourse of Cov. p.
5-15. Ans. to 32. q. p. 9, 39. Apol. p. 6, 9, 17, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 38, 39.
Cott. cat. p. 4.

Without this no true Church, nor true Church members, but all are harlots and
concubines. Apol. p. 20, 24. Discourse of Cov. p. 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24.

Without it all men are without the Church, (for which they usually cite 1 Cor.
5.12.) and incapable of any Church privilege, Apol. p. 6, 11, 13, 19, 20, 24,
25, 27, 38, 39, 42. Discourse of Cov. p. 17, 22, 28. Ans. to 32. q. p. 11, 21,
24, 38. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 69.

So the Separatists. Rob. justif. p. 75, 79, 56, 81, 82, 85, 86, 110, 210, 207,
231, 257, 351.

2. No other tie, nor all others imaginable without this, they conceive are not
sufficient to knit men together into one Church, nor is there any other way of
admission into the Church but by this. Not visible profession and practice of
truth and holiness (though never so complete and sincere.) Therefore they say
A strange, yet bold, assertion, spoken without proof of Scripture, consent of
other Authors, or good show of reason, Melchizedek was a Priest, and therefore
prayed, preached, and offered sacrifice, but did he this by himself, and for
himself alone? Can there be a Priest by office, without a people?
Job and Melchisedek (with others such eminently Godly) were yet no members of
the visible Church, because not within this Church covenant. Ans. to 9. Pos. p.
66. Discourse of Cov. p. 14. Ans. to 32. q. p. 28, 37. Nor Robins. justif. p.
230, says, 'its an Anabaptillicall error to hold that Baptism constitutes
the visible Church: I suppose his sense is the same with theirs, when they say
that Baptism admits not into the visible Church; The contrary whereunto, I
conceive, is neither Popish nor Anabapt. but may well pass for Orthodoxe (as
usually it does amongst Divines) it we do but distinguish between admission
into the Chapter real and formal, between the substance of the thing and the
ceremony, or formalitie thereof. The substance and real admission indeed
usually goes before Bap^. For infants of parents within the Church, are born
within the Church, and so really within it before they be haptized. And
believers of age, making open profession of their faith and repentance, are
ipso facto made members of the visible church by their visible profession. But
the formal admission of both in the solemn performance of it, is both acted
and sealed at once in Baptism, which is (as it were) a Christians formal
matriculation or inrollment amongst the members of the visible Church. It this
be not so, then let them tell me what and when is the formal admission of
infants into the visible Church, or are they never formally admitted until
they come to age?
Baptism. Ans. to 32. q. 12. Nor cohabitation. Discourse of Cov. p. 14, 20.
Nor voluntary and usual frequenting the same place of worship, subjecting a
man's self to the same officers and laws of government, nor joining himself
in all holy fellowship both public and private with the same society.
Discourse of Cov. p. 21. Nor the law of the land made by the Magistrates
authority, with our own implicit consent in Parliament, appointing that all
Professors of Religion that sit down within such and such precincts, shall be
of such a Society or Church. Apol. p. 14. Nor all these together without the
Church covenant, which only is sufficient to do it. Ans. to 32. q. p. 24.
Discourse of Cov. p. 5, 14, 18-21, 24, 25. Apol. p. 19, 24.

3. This covenant they hold to be distinct from the Were the question only of
the Covenant of Grace to be either entered into, or renewed again and again at
the constitution or restitution of Churches, the matter were soon at an end;
that would be easily granted to be necessary, yea, essential: And such only
were all the Scripture Covenants, which are usually cited by them to prove
their Church covenant. But that will not serve their turn. 2. Or were it of a
covenant between the officers and their people, I conceive, there would be no
strife, this being tacitly employed in their mutual choice each of other. You
shall be our pastor, etc. and we will be your people; Provided 1. it be not
obtruded as essential, or absolutely necessary to have it express. 2. that it
be understood with a salvo jure, not only to that particular church and
members, nor only to that particular officer, but also to all other Churches,
who have a common interest each in other, for the good of all, most of all to
God himself. 3. Yea, if it were of a covenant between the church and her
members, and each member with another of remaining together as a fixed society,
till death (without extraordinary impediment) as a thing in it self arbitrary
and occisionall only, upon some particular reasons calling for it. I speak
what I think, This also would not be denied. 4. Or (which is all that can with
any color of reason be defined) if it were of an ecclesiastical constitution
only, binding the members to the Discipline and Covernment of such a church
(during men's convenient abode with it) as a thing expedient only for the better
being and better governing of the church, I say, an Ecclesiastical
constitution, consonant to general Rules of Scripture, though not precisely
commanded therein: And which may therefore be intended, temitted, or altered
pro re nata, according to the general Rules of Scripture at the Churches
discretion; Such as are the covenants or promises required of the members of
the Dutch and French Churcher; There would not have been many adversaries. But
when an express vocal covenant is held forth, and with all eagerness pressed
on us, and on all churches as a Divine Ordinance particularly commanded in
Scripture, absolutely necessary, essential and constitutive to a true church;
without which there is no true church, but all societies are whores and
concubines, and without which there is no right unto, nor orderly participation
of any Church duty or ordinance: And this so obligatory that it is piaculum to
remove from that society, with which one is in covenant, without their
general consent, sought at least (as after is showed.) And not only so, but
also letters are sent over with strong lines, to dissuade our people from
living any longer in the way they have done, out of Church order, because out
of church covenant. Sermons are likewise preached, books printed, and private
discourses made, and in all these arguments artificially used, and possionately
and perswasively urged, yea, the Scriptures themselves forced to speak for
their Church covenant as a Divine Ordinance, etc. I say, when it is thus held
forth and urged on us, no marvel if it be not entertained without much
agitation, yea, if it meet with much opposition, and that amongst the godly and
learned both persons and Churches.
Covenant of Grace; so, as that many which are within the Covenant of Grace (
i.e. effectually, yea, and visibly called too) are not within the Church
Covenant, and so not within the visible Church, as Job, Melchizedek, etc. of
whom before. And again, many are within the Church covenant, and so within the
visible Church, that are not within the Covenant of Grace, as hypocrites in the
Church. Apol. p. 5, 6, 14 Discourse of Cov. p. 3.16.

4. Yet sometimes they tell us, it is not distinct altogether, or in substance,
but in some respects only, as a part from the whole, this being a branch of
that. Discourse of Cov. p. 3, 7, 8, 12, 26, 28. Apol. p. 8, 31, 43. A voluntary
profession of If this Church covenant be but the covenant of Grace, then surely
we have it, and renew it daily, in Baptism, at the Lords Table, on our solemn
Fasts, etc. why call they then so eagerly for that we have, as if we wanted it?
2. If it be but the Covenant of Grace, what absolute necessity can there be of
repeating and renewing it expressly, and reciprocally, at every admission of a
new member?
subjection thereunto. Apol. p. 22, 24. Discourse of Cov. p. 18. especially to
that part thereof which concerns Church If it be a covenant of Church duties
only, and to this society only, what needs a repetition of the whole covenant
of Grace, at least as essential to this covenant, and to Church constitution,
and to Church membership, more then to a marriage covenant, or any other holy
covenant? It may be done at a wedding; true, but to make it essential to it,
would mar many a lawful marriage. Nor can it be judged essential that the
particulars of the covenant of Grace, so far as they concern church duties
should be (and that so often) repeated. If two parties intending to marry each
other, should do it in this general form only (or the like) he saying to
her, I Will be thy husband; and she to him, I Will be thy wife, if there were no
defect in the covenant, or otherwise; but want of mentioning the mutual duties
that by Gods law belong to married persons, I believe that would never make it
null: nor would that their covenant the less bind them to such mutual duties,
because the particulars were not expressed in the covenant at the marriage-making.
fellowship, and Church duties. Discourse of Cov. p. 4, 7, 8, 26. Ans. to 9.
Pos. p. 75. with application to this particular Church As this covenant is
destructive to our Churches, so is it apt to cause schisms and separations of
one Church from another even amongst themselves. Its a partition wall (as one
calls it) built up to hinder that communion that ought to be among Churches, and
that care that one Church and member ought to have of another. Here being so
strict a tie to the duties belonging to our own Church, and the members
thereof, but not a word of any duty to be performed to other Churches, or
their members. So that if a member of the same Church with my self want
watching, counsel, reproof, etc. my covenant binds me to perform
accordingly. But if one of another Church do need as much, and I have fit
opportunity, etc. yet by this covenant I have nothing to do with him, he is
without to me, 1 Cor. 5.12.
only, to which one is now to be joined by this covenant. Discourse of Cov. p.
10, 15, 28. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 75.

5. And this covenant is made by every member, both with God, and the Church,
and by the Church also back again with every member. Discourse of Cov. p. 4,
10, 12. J.W. ans. to 10. quest. R.M. to W.R.

6. And thus they define it. All the middle part of this definition explaines
the matter of a true Church: Of which in the former Chapter: only the
beginning and end do show the nature of the Covenant (which they call the
Form) of which here in this Chapter.
'Its a solemn and public Promise before the Lord and his people, whereby a
company of Christians called (by the power and mercy of God) to the
fellowship of Christ, and (by his providence) to dwell together, and (by his
Grace) to love and cleave together in the unity of faith and brotherly love,
and desirous to partake (according to the will of God) in all the holy
Ordinances of God together in one Congregation, do bind themselves to the Lord
to walk in all such The words are good and fair; but he that takes this
covenant had need to consider that in the sense of them that give it, The ways
of God, are their ways of Church constitution, and popular Government, which
if he be not upon good ground satisfied that they are indeed the ways of God,
then how can he safely engage himself to them by this covenant, and that not
only to be a patient, to tolerate what he cannot mend, but even to act with
them also in the same? Our brethren conceive that a Minister in swearing
canonical obedience, in omnibus licitis and honestis, to a Bishop, did thereby
justify Episcopacie; And do not by the same reason, all that take this
covenant justify popularitie and independencie.
ways of holy worship to him, and of edification one toward another, as God
himself has required in his word of every Church of Christ and the members
thereof. Apol. p. 5. Discourse of Cov. p. 3. Apol. p. 5.

7. The properties hereof: 1. It is sacred not civil. Discourse of Cov. p. 3,
4. 2. It must be public before all the Church. Discourse of Cov. p. 4, 17,
R.M. to W.R. 3. Vocal and express. J.W. ans. to 10. quest. Apol. p. 45. 4. So
firmly binding, as that it cannot be loosed without the consent of the Church.
Of which see more after.

8. After all this rigourous exacting of this Covenant, sometimes they mollify
the matter, and tell us, That an If so little will serve, what need such
outcries for more, and the truth of all Churches to be questioned, such sharp
contentions amongst brethren to be raised, and sad separations of one Church
and Christian from another to be made about and for want of an express covenant
as essential and absolutely necessary to Church estate?
agreement or consent to be members of this or that society, and to walk with
them in Church fellowship will serve and is equivalent. Apol. p. 32, 44.
Discourse of Cov. p. 21, 22, 23. T.G. to J.G. And sometimes in stead of
exacting this covenant, they only inquire what is men's intention, whether they
intend to do so or no, and if they intend it, that suffices. Mr W. to Mr P.
And as for us, they sometimes acknowledge, that ourconsent to the law of the
land made by King and Parliament, appointing that all such as sit down within
such precincts, shall be of this or that Parish or Church, is an implicit
covenant. Apol. p. 14. and sometimes that our promise to believe and walk
according to our Articles of Religion is sufficient. Discourse of Cov. p. 40.

9. This Covenant amongst them, though for substance of matter it be all one,
in all their Churches, yet in form of words it is diverse in diverse Churches,
but in the same Church it is ever in one and the same Here we have a set form
of holy Covenant in the Church, (a principal part of worship) invented by one
or more men (perhaps of a former age) and imposed upon others, even as many as
shall enter into that Church, read also upon a book; And what is this better or
more lawful then such a set form of Prayer, especially since this covenant is
imposed as an Ordinance of God, and absolutely necestarie, so as no book prayer
is, And seeing the matter is confessed to be all one in all Churches, why may not
the form also be lawfully all one by mutual agreement; And if one form of
covenant be lawful for all the Churches consociated? why not one form of
Leitourgy, or Directorie for worship also?
Form of words, as well as matter, and therefore put in writing, and when any
one is admitted it is then read, either by the party himself that is admitted,
or else unto him by some other man, whereunto he is to give his assent. R.M. to
W.R. Apol. p. 5.

10. One or two of their forms I will here insert, that the Reader may the
better by example take up their sense touching this Covenant.

1. The Covenant of the English Church at Roterdame (as is reported to us)
renewed when Mr H.P. was made their Pastor, was to this effect.

WE whose names are here-under written, having a long time found by sad
experience how uncomfortable it is to walk in a disordered and unsettled
condition, etc. 1. All things in these two forms, in a fait construction, are
very good, but some things are subject to an harsh construction: as, where they
promise to submit to Christian Discipline without murmuring, i.e. as some would
think without complaining: But what if he receive wrong, may he not orderly
complain either to his own Church, or to the neighbor Churches for redress?
Especially that clause seems to be of a very large extent, where they promise
to be ready to take their Churches advice for themselves and theirs, as
occasion shall be presented: which will reach (if extended to the utmost) not
only to restrain their liberty of removal from that Church, without their
consent (which yet were too much) but also in other things, as in marrying a
man's daughter, changing a man's servant, taking a journey, making a bargain,
etc. 2. Here are many good duties promised, and sins protested against, but the
most of them are common to all men, at least to all Christians (not to
Church Members only.) But by the same reason that its needful and useful to
express these particulars, 'its needful and useful to express many more: as
they protest against oppression, idleness and earthly cares, may they not as
justly add non-payment of debts, wastfulnesse by pride, apparel, and riot in
wines, and the like? 3. The former covenant mentions little or nothing of that
for which the Church Covenant is so pressed as essential, etc. viz.
Church Fellowship in Church-duties with approptiation to this particular
Church: And may be as sit at a wedding as at the constitution of a visible
Church, for ought I know. 4. The latter ties strictly to duties to their own
Church, but no word of watching over, admonishing, comforting, releeving the
members of other Churches, or Christians that are no members. Charity, they
say, begins at home, but it should not stay there. It seeks not its own things
only, but also the good of its neighbor, of as many as possibly it can.
Do renew our Covenant in Baptism, and avouch God to be our God. 2. We
resolve to cleave to the true and pure worship of God, opposing to our power
all false ways. 3. We will not allow our selves in any known sin, but will
renounce it, so soon as it is manifested from Gods Word so to be: the Lord
lending us power. 4. We resolve to carry our selves in our several places of
government and obedience with all good conscience, knowing we must give an
account to God. 5. We will labor for further growth in grace, by hearing,
reading, prayer, meditation, and all other ways we can. 6. We mean not to
over-burthen our hearts with earthly cares, which are the bane of all holy
duties, the breach of the Sabbath, and the other Commandments. 7. We will
willingly and meekly submit to Christian Discipline, without murmuring, and
shall labor so to continue, and will endeavor to be more forward, zealous,
faithful, loving and wise in admonishing others. 8. We will labor by all our
abilities for the furtherance of the Gospel as occasion shall be offered to
us. 9. We promise to have our children, servants, and all our charge taught the
ways of God. 10. We will strive to give no offense to our brethren by
censuring them rashly by suspicions, evil speakings, or any other way. 11.
Lastly, we do protest not only against open and scandalous sins, as
drunkenness, swearing, etc. but also against evil company, and all
appearance of evil to the utmost of our power.

Per me F.H.


2. The Covenant of the Church of Christ at Salem was renewed to this effect.

WE whose names are here-under written, 5. We have in the latter a particular
promise, not to be forward in speaking in public, or scrupling: By which it
appears that they are allowed (when called) publicly both to speak (that is
as I understand it, to prophecy) and to scruple (that is, to propound
questions, make objections, etc.) else what need a law to restrain them from
doing it uncalled? And if it were not for some such law to restrain them, there
must needs be much consusion where each member has equal power, if he had
equal liberty to exercise that power when he pleased. But what differs this law
(in force) from an Ecclesiastical Canon? but that Canons are now grown out of
request, that Church Covenants may be the better cried up.
members of the present Church of Christ at Salem, etc. solemnly in the
presence of God, etc. renew that Church Covenant which we find this Church
bound unto at their first beginning, viz. We covenant with the Lord, and one
with another, and do bind our selves in the presence of God to walk together
in all the ways of God, according as he is pleased to reveal himself to us
in his Word. And do more explicitly in the fear of the Lord profess and
protest to walk as follows. 1. We avow the Lord to be our God, and our solves
his people, in the truth and simplicity of our spirits. 2. We give up our
selves to the Lord Jesus Christ, and the word of his Grace, for the teaching,
sanctifying, and ruling of us in matters of worship and conversation, resolving
to cleave to him alone for life and glory, and oppose all contrary ways,
canons and constitutions of men in his worship. 3. We promise to walk with our
brethren and sisters in this Congregation with all watchfulness, and
tenderness, avoiding all jealousies, suspicions, backbitings, censurings,
provokings, secret risings of spirit against them, but in all offenses to
follow the rule of the Lord Jesus, to bear and forbear, give and forgive, as he
has taught us. 4. In public or private we will willingly do nothing to the
offense of our Church, but will be ready to take advice for our selves and
ours, as occasion shall be presented. 5. We will not in the Congregation be
forward either to show our own gifts or parts in speaking, or scrupling, or
there to discover the failings of our brethren or sisters, 6. In this latter
also here is a strict tie or bond of walking together in Church Fellowship, and
mutual watchfulness, one over another: But how can they do that, that live
far asunder, and never see one another but at public meetings? and some of
them that live some thousands of miles asunder, and perhaps being Ministers of
Churches there, yet accept of fixed employments, even the charge of souls
here. How can these watch over one another?
but attend an orderly call thereunto: knowing how much the Lord may be
dishonored, etc. by our distempers, and weaknesses in public. 6. We bind our
selves to study the advancement of the Gospel in all truth and peace, both in
regard of those that are within and without, no way slighting our
Sister-churches, but using their counsel, as need shall be, not laying a
stumbling block before any. 7. We hereby promise to carry our selves in all
lawful obedience to those that are set over us in Church and Commonwealth,
knowing how wel-pleasing it will be to the Lord, etc. 8. We resolve to approve
our selves to the Lord in our particular callings, shunning idleness as the
bane of any state, nor will we deal hardly or oppressingly with any. 9. We will
also to our best abilities teach our children and servants the knowledge of the
Lord, and his will, that they may serve him also.

O. H.


11. This Covenant (thus distinguished from the Covenant of Grace) they hold to
be that Covenant which is Here is a piece or two of such Divinity as I never
heard or read before: but uno absurdo dato, mill sequuntur.
sealed by the Sacraments, and for the sealing and ratifying of which the
Sacraments were principally ordained of God, and therefore to be administered
only to such as are first entered into this Covenant, as seals thereof. Apol.
p. 15, 19, 31. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 63, 66. And therefore, that such persons as
(by their condition) cannot join in Church Covenant, nor live in Church
fellowship with a set society, are not bound to partake in Sacraments. Apol.
p. 39, 41.

See Robins. justif. p. 80, 110. Though I do not find the Brownists so
solicitously to distinguish between the Church covenant, and the covenant of
Grace, as these our brethren do.

12. Such as were admitted into their Churches infants by the covenant of their
parents, are not yet permitted to receive the Lords Supper, when they come to
years, until they have first run through all the foresaid course of What if
upon examination they prove neither co^vincingly gracious, as wanting expected
evidences, nor yet openly scandalous, as being over-powred with Gods
ordinances, and good education and government? what shall become of them then,
admitted as members to the Lords Supper they shall not be; and excommunicated,
I trow, they cannot justly be; By this rule they must remain in a middle
condition, neither of the Church, nor without the Church; And what warrant have
we for this?
public and private examination, profession of faith, declaration of the
manner of their conversion, and personal, vocal, express entering into the
same covenant, as others of years have before them done, and as if they had
never been received members before. Ans. to 32. q. p. 20, 21.

CHAP. V.
Of the manner of their first erecting of a visible Church.

1. The Reader may perhaps think (in reading these two first articles) some
fault to be in the collectour, that so foul a contradiction should be held;
but if there be any fault, it must be none but their own, either in holding
and practicing things in themselves so contradictory, or else in reporting to
us such things as they neither hold nor practice: But this contradiction will
yet appear more foul, when we consider what will after follow, that they hold
it not only lawful to do it without their consent, but also sometimes
necessary to do it against their consent: of which see Chap. 15.
ANy small number (almost) of persons (so fitted as before) they hold, may
lawfully unite themselves into a Church body, by entering into the Church
covenant aforesaid; and so may constitute themselves a true visible Church of
Christ, without any authoritative consent of the Christian Magistrate
(supposing there be one) or of the neighboring Churches or their Ministers.
R.M. to W.R. Ans. to 32. q. p. 43.

Robins. justif. p. 181, 182.

2. Yet a The law doubtless is good, as from the Magistrate: but how does this
agree with that opinion (which too many of them amongst us that run the same
Church-courses with these brethren hold) that the Magistrate has nothing to
do with the first Table, unless the public peace be broken, he is to force
no man against his conscience too or fro, but leave every man to follow his own
light and religion? Also as it is an agreement of the Churches and Ministers, I
the rather like it, because it seems to amount to little less in substance
then a compound Presbytery set up amongst them; the rather, if we add what
the same H.P. tells us, that they have also agreed amongst themselves that no
man shall preach or vent any new or uncouth tenants, until he have first
communicated them with the neighboring ministers. A very good Canon,
especially for these times wherein men run a madding after novelties, and
niceties, under the false pretense of a new light, and new truths.
Law is made in their general Court (civil) that no Church shall be there set
up, without the knowledge of the Magistrate, and neighbor Churches. R.M. to
W.R. yea, as Mr H.P. informs us, not without the consent of five or six of
the neighboring Churches at the least.

3. The Here is another Ecclesiastical canon in act, though not in rule. If
this be needful at the first erection of a Church, that each should try and
know others spirits, why not also after at the admission of every member, he to
try and know their spirits as well as they his?
persons intending to enter into Church estate, do before hand often meet
privately amongst themselves to be inwardly acquainted with each others
spirits, by conferring, praying together, and mutually examining each other,
until they have approved themselves to one another consciences in the sight
of God: Which when they have thoroughly done in private, then they agree
together to enter into a church estate. R.M. to W.R. H.W. to Mr B.

4. Which before they do, notice is given thereof to the Magistrate, and
neighboring Churches, that so such as please may be present at the time and
place thereunto appointed. R.M. to W.R. H.W. to Mr B. J.W. to T.S.

5. The number wherewith they usually begin at the first constitution of every
Church, is about 7.8. or 9. Ibid.

6. Notice being given, the Magistrate and Churches send their Here then
Churches use messengers or deputies to represent themselves, and to act in
their room, why not in a Synod as well? And if they may trust their power with
their messengers for approving or disapproving whole Churches, much more of
particular members at their admission.
Messengers or Deputies to see how things are carried, and to give them advice,
direction, approbation, or disapprobation, as they shall see cause. Ibid.

7. The day appointed is kept with fasting and prayer, and sometimes (if not
always) preaching of the Word, which is performed by some of the persons that
now come to be combined into this Church-societie. In the latter end of the
day, each of those persons now to be churched (if I may so say) makes public
profession of his faith, thereby showing his knowledge, and opinion in the
Grounds and Principles of Religion, and declaring from point to point the work
of God upon his soul in his Conversion. And all this in an extemporarie (at
least) conceived speech, i. e. not in any set form. Ibid.

8. Which when the Messengers of the Magistrate and Churches have heard and
considered, if they be unsatisfied, (or any stander by) they make their
objections, or propound further questions, as they think fit, until they be
Its an hard task to satisfy all comers touching these things, questioning
and objecting what they please, and harder for a man to be stayed perhaps for
some differences about Church Discipline, or suppose some objection be made
against his life, it must here be presently, and openly declared, and scanned
before all the country. This is little wisdom, less charity.
satisfied, if it may be. Ibid.

9. If in the end the said Messengers be not satisfied, then they or so many of
them, as concerning whom they are not satisfied, either in point of knowledge
or grace, are forbidden to enter into Church estate, and so remain still, as
before, out of the pale of the Church. Ibid.

10. If at length they be fully satisfied, and all doubts cleared, then the
said persons proceed to enter into Church Covenant, which being written one of
them reads, and all of them subscribe it, and so they are become a true If so
much time and so many encumstances be needful to join 7. or 8. together into
one church, how much time would be requisite to join 3000. together. But our
brethren will acknowledge the Apostles went a shorter way to work. Discourse of
Cov. p. 29, 30. the reason whereof they render, because the Church was not then
subject to so many hypocrites: which is more then any man knows, when Christ
says, Many are called, few chosen. Many seek, but few sinde. Besides, this
course is used by our brethren not to ordinary Christians only, but to the most
godly and best approved. I believe therefore it was rather, because the Holy
Ghost had given them no such direction, nor was this manner of church
constitution then hatched.
constituted visible Church, as they say. Ibid.

11. Which being done the said Messengers of the other Churches give them the
right hand of fellowship, and own them for a sister Church. And so returning
back do make report to the Churches that sent them, of all things done, and
declare to them that they are to account of them as of a true Church of Christ.
Ibid.

CHAP. VI.
Of Church Power, or the power of the Keys, the first subject in whom it
resides, and the exercise of it in general.

1. THey hold that every such company (as aforesaid) though never so small,
consisting of private persons only ( i.e. such as are in no church-office,) and
perhaps all illiterate too, yet is rightly and immediately entitled to all the
privileges of the visible Church of Christ, and invested with all
Ecclesiastical Who would not long to be soon churched in this way, seeing
thereby immediately they might be endued with so vast a power? This is a sweet
morsel, no marvel if peoples teeth water for it. But where or when did God so
grant all this power over to the people, that yet he excepted the Sacraments,
and them only out of the charter? surely either he gave them all or none. The
necessity of which consequence some Brownists perceiving, therefore of late
(here in London) have claimed and contended for them also. The word and
Sacraments (in our Saviors commission) are knit together, Go preach and
baptize, and both settled upon the Ministry. But our brethren have here
divided them, and made preaching common to the people: And though our brethren
intend not so, yet in event possibly this may nourish in the vulgar some
fragment of popery, as if the Sacraments were more excellent then the
preaching of the Word, they being reserved as peculiar to the Ministers, this
common to others with them.
power from Christ, as the first and proper receptacle thereof, have the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to them, and may now forthwith administer
and partake of all church-ordinances (except only Sacraments) execute all
Church Censures, and transact all their own businesses within themselves. Ans.
to 32. q. p. 10. 41, 44, 48, 49, 50. Cott. cat. p. 10. R. M. to W. R. R. M. to
E. B. p. 4. J. W. ans. to. 10. quest.

See Rob. justif. p. 106, 107, 112, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 138, 190, 113,
167, 184, 198, 331. Sions royal prerog. Preface. Bar. discov. p. 39.

2. The particular sorts of which Church businesses are these. 1. Admission of
more members into their Society. 2. Authoritative admonition of members
offending. 3. Binding and excommunicating of such as having offended prove
incorrigible. 4. Loosing and authoritative forgiving such as upon admonition
and excommunication do repent, re-accepting them into the communion of the
Church again. 5. How weak good people are and insufficient without their
guides assistance, to examine Ministers abilities, to judge of Doctrines, and
other matters touching persons and things needful to the exercise of
Church Government, he that please may see in our brethrens late Apologeticall
narration, p. 24, 28. Besides, the experience of the Bostoners in N. E. who
generally would have chosen Mr Wheel-right (the notorious Familist) to have
been co-teacher with Mr C. there, had not some few withstood it, as I. P. told
W. R.
Making, i.e. examining, electing, and with imposition of hands ordaining their
Pastors, and all other their officers. 6. Unmaking, i.e. degrading and
deposing them again, when they see cause so to do. 7. Preaching, i.e.
expounding and applying the word with all authority to the several uses of
their members. 8. And generally whatsoever else may concern the edification
and spiritual good of that society (save only the administration of the
seals.) And all this before they have any officers, or if they have any, yet
without reference to them as officers at all. 9. And when they have Ministers
then they have Sacraments too. Ans. to 32. q. p. 10, 15, 41, 42, 44, 45, 48,
49, 50, 68. Cott. cat. p. 10, 11, 12. Dis-course of Cov. p. 23. Ans. to 9. Pos.
p. 62, 70, 76, 77. J. W. ans. to 10. quest. R. M. to E. B. p. 4. R. M. to W. R.
Apol. p. 24.

Rob. justif. p. 9, 111.

3. All which things they claim to themselves power to do without any When
officers are not yet settled in any Church, or being once settled do fail through
casualtie, it is agreed upon on all hands that some extraordinary course is to
be taken. Let it therefore be considered whether it be not more proper and
nearer to the ordinary rule, to call in the assistance of the officers of some
neighboring churches (by virtue of that communion of Churches which themselves
acknowledge) to supply the wan: of their own officers in examination,
ordination, and deposition of Ministers, etc. rather then to use mere private
persons, i.e. non-officers of the same Church?
authoritative concurrence or assistance of any other Churches or their
officers, which they hold unlawful in others to offer, and in themselves to
accept or admit. Ans. to 32. q. p. 41. R. M. to E. B. p. 10.

Rob. justif. p. 335, 339.

4. Therefore they ordinarily convene together (before they have any officers)
and hold public Ecclesiastical meetings, and execute all Ecclesiastical
duties and offices Hereby it comes to pass that because oft-times their
Churches are long without Ministers, that they are also long without
Sacraments, both the Lords Supper for the elder people, and Baptism for their
infants.
(Sacraments only excepted) by mere lay men, that neither are, nor perhaps
ever shall be officers in the Church.

5. This Church (being thus invested with all Church Power) deriveth part
thereof upon her officers, viz. so much as she cannot conveniently execute her
self, and the rest she keeps still in her own hands and executes accordingly.
Ans. to 32. q. p. 57. R. M. to W. R. R. M. to E. B. p. 4.

Bar. Disc. p. 223.

6. The officers have no power in Church matters, but what the Church deriveth
on them, and which she may revoke, and resume unto her self, if she conceive
they do not use it well. Ibid. And therefore she may call them to account for
their actions, though they were even Apostles themselves. J. Cott. on 5. vial.
p. 10.

7. The officers are all but the Churches Where says the Scripture that the
Church should rule her officers, and the officers obey the church? we find that
officers are called rulers, and people are commanded to obey them in the Lord
frequently, 1 Timothy 5.19. Heb. 13.17. but the other we never find. We find
indeed the Apostles call themselves the servants of the Church, as Christ also
made himself servant unto all, but that is not to be understood properly, but
metaphorically, and by way of some similitude, unto servants, who (it good) do
seek their masters good, and are for their profit not their own; so did Christ
and all the Apostles seek the Churches good, not their own, and so all
Christians are commanded to serve each other in love; But we may not thence
conclude that therefore every Christian is in peoprietie to be another
servant, for then who should be master? much less that the Apostles were
properly the servants of the Church, who gave rules to the Church what to do,
and how to walk, but received none from the Church, least of all that Christ
was so, who both was and is the head of that body, and King of that Kingdom.
We read also that Ministers are to do the acts of their ministry in the Name
of Christ, and by his power, 1 Cor. 5.4. Matthew. 28.19. Mat. 7.22. But that they
act in the name of the Church, or by the power of the Church, such phrases we
do not read them, and therefore we do not believe them.
servants in propriety of speech, and she is the mistress, the queen. In all
things she has the power of decreeing, and they with her, as others, the
meanest members of the Society: but as Ministers, so they are only as her
mouth to speak and her hand to act what she decrees, doing all things for her,
by her power, and in her name. Ibid. Mr N. to W. R. R. M. to W. R.

Rob. Apol. p. 49. Rob. justif. p. 121, 122, 138, 166, 178, 180, 185, 303, 322.

8. The And this were well too, if this service of the Church were reserved
only and entirely to the officers, but alas, this is but common to them with
other members. For, if either the officers be not, or be absent, or refuse
(through scruple of conscience perhaps) to act according to their mind, they
will (and they hold they lawfully may) call forth any other member whom they
judge fit, and enable him with their power to do all that which their officers
should have done: Sacraments only excepted.
acts which they ascribe unto the officers, are such as these: viz. 1. To
declare unto their people the mind of God in any matter, to advise, counsel,
exhort, reprove, etc. 2. To moderate in Church meetings, that order may be
observed by propounding of things to be debated, gathering of voices,
pronouncing the sentence accordingly. 3. To execute all the Churches decrees,
in admission of members, ordination of ministers, admonition, excommunication,
etc. Ans. to 32. q. p. 57. Cott. cat. p. 3, 10. Cott. on vial 5. p. 9, 10.

Rob. justif. p. 9, 111, 114, 116, 121. Cannes necess. of separation, p. 135.

9. This body is all eye, and all tongue, no diversity of members, all
governors, none to be governed. All teachers contrary to the Apostles rule,
Are all teachers? 1 Cor 12.^9. And if their reasons for this be well examined,
it will appear they make as much for women to rule, as men. No marvel then if
this be so that they complain in print and otherwise, that Ministers are
slighted amongst them, yea, trampled upon by some, Cott. on vial second, p. 24.
Master H. to S. A. They profess to condemn Morellian and popular Government,
but what can be more popular then this, wherein all have equal power to
decree, and any of them may be used to act as well as the officers, and the
officers are used as mere servants to the body, which is the Mistress^: At most
they are but as the Speaker in the house of Parliament, or as a Moderator in a
Synod, which rule not but are rather ruled.
Every member of the Society, that is of years (except women) has equal
power with other, even with the ministers themselves (as they conceive) in
propounding, debating, objecting, answering, and in judicially decreeing, and
giving sentence in all matters of the Church, whether pertaining to faith or
manners, doctrine or practice whatsoever. W. T. to P. H. Mr W. letter to a
friend. Ans. to 32. q. p. 44.

Bar. refut. of Giff. p. 81. and in his Discov. p. 36, 38, 125, 223. Rob.
justif. p. 9, 111, 121. Sions royal Prerog. Preface.

10. And therefore although the officers may lawfully prepare matters in
private for the Churches hearing, yet they hold all things ought to have a full
public debate in the This popular government makes good store of work both for
Ministers and people, especially if the body be numerous, as the Apostolical
Churches were, and ours ought to be (if conveniently they may) and if they must
all conveene in one Congregation, to he are, examine and debate all matters
till all be satisfied, and brought to one unanimous vote. It will not be one
hour or two in a week, nor in every day of the week, nor searce all the
whole weeks time that will suffice to finish all businesses that may fall out.
And what time shall the Ministers then have for study and other duties, or the
people to follow their worldly calling? This course seems neither agreeable
to the wisdom of God, nor profitable to the weal of the Church. Besides, the
time of keeping their courts (on the Sabbath day) seems many ways
inconvenient: It must needs tire men out (both Ministers and people) make them
forgetful of what they have heard, neglective of private and domestical
duties, fill their heads and tongues full of worldly discourses, and their
hearts of carnal passions and distempers, all which are enemies to the right
observation of the Lords day. Object. They find no such inconvenience, their
Churches have few offenders, and when they have, matters are soon dispatched.
Answ. It may well be, now whiles their choice materials roman, and their
numbers are so small and inconsiderable, but when their Churches shall grow
numerous, and their materials (in process of time) shall degenerate, as they
must needs, will not these inconveniences, and many more follow then?
presence of the whole Society, that so they may be able to give their
sentence in faith. Apol. p. 31. J. C. printed letter, p. 4. which is therefore
usually done on the Sabbath day after Evening Sermon.

John's. plea, p. 307. Rob. apol. p. 38.

11. Whether matters be carried amongst them by most voices or no, is not so
generally agreed upon. Some affirm that the major part carries it against the
lesser part, yea, though the officers be in this lesser part, and do show
strong reason to the contrary. Mr M. to J. M. Others, that the whole body must
agree else nothing proceeds. J. P. to W. R. Ans. to 32. q. p. 60, 61. Some,
that things are not carried by voices at all, but by The question here it not
what ought to be done in foro conscientie, and divino, but in foro ecclesie,
and externo. It will be granted on all hands that all things in the
Ecclesiastical (as civil) Court, ought to be done according to truth and
right. But supposing a difference do arise, and both sides pretend to truth and
right; (our brethren denying any others to interpose otherwise then by way of
advice) the question is then, Whether nothing shall be done, which in the end
amounts to little less then Anarchy, the mother of consusion, and this of
destruction: or that (seeing the officers may not) the mayor part of the people
shall corey it in foro externo? Reason, and the Examples of all other
judicatures do seem to conclude that the most voices of the Judges ought to
take place.
truth and right, and according to God. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 72. Ans. to 32. q.
p. 58, 60.

Bar. discov. p. 78, 261. John's. plea. p. 307.

Sometimes they grant indeed all things are curried by consent of all; but then
they explain it thus, viz. That if it fall out that any lesser number do
dissent, then the greater endeavor to give unto, or to receive from them due
satisfaction; which if it be done then all agree in one vote. If the lesser
party dissenting neither can give satisfaction to the greater, nor will receive
satisfaction from them, but still persist in dissenting, then do the mayor
part (after due forbearance, and calling in the counsel of some neighboring
Churches) Indeed it were much better that the whole Church, and every member
thereof did consent, but to extort and force a consent after this manner,
seems not only harsh and uncharitable, but also foolish, yea, destructive too:
For either the aforesaid admonition may sometime proceed to an excommunication
or not: If it may not, then 'its vain and of no efficacy to compel consent;
it may rather occasion contempt. If it may, then (as suppose it be in the case
of admission of some member) for the gaining of one man (and that perhaps none
of the best neither) 7, 10, or 20. may be lost, and be cut off from the Church.
But were it not better to let all things currantly pass by the most voices,
then thus by seeking to force an universal consent to expose the Church to
such dangers and inconveniences.
judicially admonish them; who being thus under censure, their voice is now
extinct, and made void. And so the rest proceed to vote, which vote is now the
vote of all the Church, viz. of all that have the power of voting therein. Ans.
to 32. q. p. 58, 61.

12. Notwithstanding all this power aforesaid, by them attributed to this
Church, when it is yet young, of very small number and without officers too.
Yet do they deny unto it (though grown never so numerous and well furnished
with godly and learned officers, and withal strengthened with the consent of
other Churches, and the Christian Magistrates authority) Yet contrary to this
Article, I believe, themselves take liberty to appoint some humane
observances, or which is worse, to impose them on men's consciences for divine
Ordinances.
all power to make any particular rules or laws in things indifferent
(conducing to the better government of her self, and more orderly, and more
edifying performance of Gods worship, and use of his Ordinances) according to
the general rules of Scripture in such cases provided. Ans. to 32. q. p. 66.
Cott. cat. p. 9. R. M. to E. B. p. 9.

Bar. discov. p. 84, 255. Rob. Apol. p. 73.

CHAP. VII.
Of Church membership and admission of more members into the Church thus
constituted and erected.

1. ALL men are bound, say they, to become What if it be (though possible) yet
for the present very inconvenient, and discommodious, may they not delay a
while? No, say they; yet because that might seem harsh and heavy, therefore to
engage the more, and withal to make the engagement the more easy, they allow
some to be admitted as members transient, for the time only. Apol. p. 20, 27.
But why may not this favor be allowed to all as well as to some? Also how does
this agree with the tenor of the covenant that limits no time? and with the
sense of it, that (as they conceive) obliges all the members to ask and take
counsel of the Church, and not to remove without their consent as is both
before and after said?
settled members of such a particular Church, as is before described; And
whosoever does not, (if possibly he can) sins. And whether he can or no, yet
he remains for the time without the visible Church of Christ (for which they
frequently allege 1 Cor. 5.12.) and in that estate incapable of any Yet
sometimes themselves consesse that men converted have right to the Sacraments,
and Church privileges in their state, as believers and men converted: If there
were any that could administer the same unto the^ which ordinary Ministers
cannot do, say they, whose power reaches only to church members. These things
do not cohere.
Church ordinance or privilege, though he be not only baptized, but also truly
converted, yea, eminent in the profession of faith, and practice of holiness,
even unto martyrdom it self. Ans. to 32. q. p. 11, 30, 38. D. ag. P. p. 4. R.
M. to E. B. p. 6. Nay, he is accounted as one that despises Church Fellowship,
and so unworthy of it, yea, wicked and profane. Apol. p. 25, 26, 27, 34. Ans.
to 9. Pos. p. 69, 62. Ans. to 32. q. p. 11, 12, 21. J. W. ans. to 10. quest.

Rob. justif. p. 56, 71, 85, 86.

2. Persons admitted are either infants, or such as are of age.

3. When any person of age is to be admitted, he is first to desire and seek
it in this or that particular Church. And therefore to make his desire known
to the Church by some of the Elders, or members of the same R. M. to W. R. J.
M. to R. M. J. W. to T. S. Ans. to 32. q. p. 8.

4. Which said Elders or others do If the man be not otherwise well known and
approved, he is not admitted to this first trial, till he have lived some good
space amongst them, that they may observe his conversation, whatsoever
testimonial he have.
first privately examine him, touching his knowledge in the Doctrine of faith,
and the truth of his conversion, as is before showed. H. W. to Mr B. J. W. to
T. S. E. C. to R. C. J. M. to R. M. Apol. p. 3, 4.

5. If the examiners (upon this trial) conceive him not fit to enter into
Church fellowship, then he is there stayed without any further proceeding. J.
M. to R. M.

6. If they find him fit, (according to the fitness mentioned CHAP. 3.) then
they propound the man and his motion to the Church, who are then desired to
inquire further of him for their better satisfaction. And if any of them do or
shall (by such inquiry) know any thing justly to hinder his admission, to
declare it before he be admitted. J. W. to T. S. E. C. to R. C.

7. After this a day is appointed (usually on the Sabbath) and when other
public worship is ended, the said party is called forth, and there makes If
the party be a woman, or otherwise weak in or pression, some tell us, that the
body of the Church meets more privately in the week day, to receive
satisfaction touching them. E. C. to R. C. But if all the Church meet then, how
is it more private? If but some only, how shall the rest (by their tenent)
judicially consent to that which they do not know? And for delegation or
representation they will by no means allow these. Sometimes they say their
confessions are taken privately by the examiners, and by them only related in
public to the Church, and so their own public professions and declarations
are spared, as Master H. to S. A. intimates. But how does this agree with the
Apostles rule, Do nothing partially, 1 Timothy 5.21. If it be needful that all
the Church hear une man relate his conversion, why should they not hear ^ll?
And if the examiners may be trusted with examining of some, why not of all the
rest also?
public Profession of his Faith, and declares the manner of his conversion;
which (by such as can) is done in a continued speech of their own; by others
(not so well able) in making answers to questions propounded to them cocerning
the same. Apol. p. 3, 4. wherewith if any of the company be not satisfied, his
admission is stayed for the time, till all things be cleared, and all
objections answered. And then by consent of the Church, he enters into
Church Covenant with them, and so is admitted in the same manner as the rest
were at the first constitution of the Church. R. M. to W. R. H. W. to Mr B. E.
C. to R. C. J. M. to R. M. J. W. to T. S.

8. After the party is so admitted, the Minister or some one or more of the
members of that Church, in name of the rest, do give him the right hand of
fellowship; and do likewise repromise to perform all Church duties to him,
contained in the same covenant, as unto the rest of her members, J. W. to T. S.

9. Thus for admission of persons of age. Now for infants they account them in
the same estate with their next parents: For if either of their next natural
parents be now, or (being deceased) died a member of some such particular
society, as aforesaid, then are their children also accounted members, and so
baptized, if they were not baptized before? Cold comfort to Christian parents
(not of their way) and cold charity to their infants.
But if neither of them have been, or having been formerly, if at the present
(being alive) neither of them be a member; then their infants (as themselves)
are accounted to be without the visible Church. In the same estate with the
children of Turks and Heathens, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and so
incapable of Baptism, or any other Church privilege whatsoever: yea, though
the Grandfather be a member or (perhaps) a Minister of that Church; or though
one or more of the next parents being no members be eminently and famously
Godly, and will undertake to educate their children in the true faith and Fear
of God; And neither wilfully, nor negligently omit to join themselves to such
a Church, but abstain only out of want of sic opportunity to do it, or out
of tenderness of Conscience, as scrupling some things in their way, yet for
all this, their infants shall not be admitted to Baptism; as not being within,
but without the Church. Mr M. Ans. to 9. Pos. 61, 62, 63, etc. Ans. to 32. q.
p. 20, 21. Apol. p. 29.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their dismissing of members from one Church to another, or otherwise.

1. NO person once thus admitted (as aforesaid) into any of their Churches,
ought to remove thence without the consent of the said Church first sought and
obtained. For if lie do, they hold that he breaks covenant with God and the
Church, and like Ananias and Sapphira lies against the Holy Ghost. Ans. to 9.
Pos. p. 73. Apol. p. 39. R.M. to E.B. p. 6. Inasmuch as they conceive their
convenant binds them not to depart without consent. Ibid.

2. Therefore when any would remove, they require that he first give notice
thereof to the Why must he needs consult with this rather then any other?
perhaps this may be more partiald then any other, because concerned more. No
man so fit to be judge in his own cause. But if with this Church, why with the
whole Church? why not rather with some few of the more secret and discreer
persons, that know both how to give counsel, and to keep counsel? What if his
reasons be secret, and he cannot discoyer them but to his shame, loss or
danger?
Church, wherewith he is in covenant, and lay before them (how many soever they
be) in a public meeting, both his reasons for which he desires to remove, and
also to what other Church he would remove, and consult with them about both.
Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 74. Apol. p. 20.

3. If upon examination, they approve both of his reasons why, and of the place
whither he would go, then they consent, and giving him letters of dismission
and recommendation to that other Church, they send him away with their prayers
and blessing. Ibid.

4. If contrarily they approve not, either the one or the other, they dissuade
him from his purpose, if they prevail nor, they will not hold him by violence,
(for that they cannot,) yet they will neither give their If this be so, as the
Disciples said of marriage, It is not good to touch this Covenant: A man may
soon enter into this bond, but be cannot so soon get free again. These are hard
conditions: He must discover all to a multitude (many of which are no wiser
then they should be) who are to be h^s judge in their own cause: and who can
assure him of their judicious and unpartiall dealing? It may be (though his
reasons be never so sufficient yet) they will not consent to his departure; And
if he depart without consent, he goes not only not commended, but tacitly
accused, slandered: not only not blessed, but virtually cast out and cursed; and
to make up his misery, (if all Courches were of their way,) for ever made
incapable of admission into any other Church; and so necessitated to live (be
and his) all their days as an heathen and publican without the pale of the
Church. There being (as it seems) a tacit agreement amongst them to receive
no members from one Church to another, unless they bring with them letters of
dismission and recommendation. Yea, a man that is once entered into this way, is
so rivetted in it, that he can hardly ever get out of it; but in a sort, is
necessitated to continue therein, though perhaps against his conscience. Seeing
depart he cannot (with leave) unless they approve of the Church to which he
would go, as well as of the reasons why. Now they will not approve of any
Church that differs from themselves in Church constitution, discipline and
government. Therefore he must either continue where he is, or remove to some
other Church of the same way, or live out of Church estate like an heathen, as
aforesaid. The best of all which choises may prove bad enough. This so strict
and hard tying of men together (unless it can be proved to be an ordinance of
God) must needs be an intolerable burden, pressing and pinching men not only in
their estates, names and comforts, but also in their consciences too. Sometimes
causing sharp contests and contentions with, yea, perhaps deadly hatred of
such with whom they arc so forced to continue in society against their minds,
or wills, at least. And sometimes violent rents and ruptures, when they are
feign to break away from them by violence, by whom with good leave they
cannot be dismissed. When I consider these strict tyings of people to their own
members and officers, I cannot but pity the good people of this Kingdom,
especially of this City, if the New England Discipline and Government should
take place, (as many of them do desire.) For how will they endure to be so
tied, who have so long time accustomed to keep with no society, but to pick
and choose, now one and then another, every Sabbath almost a new Ministry and
a new Church; yea, tenaciously hold it as a Maxim, That they will be bound to
none; That they may lawfully go where they like best, and where they can
profit most, etc
consent, nor give him their letters of recommendation (though he were
otherwise never so well deserving) nor send him away with their benediction, as
otherwise they would. Ibid. Yea, he shall depart little better then an
excommunicate, as a Covenantbreaker with God and man, and as one that is wise
in his own conceit, and refuses to hearken to counsel. Ibid.

CHAP. IX.
Of Church Communion in general, wherein it consists, to whom it does belong,
of corruptions in it, and separation from it.

1. THey solicitously distinguish between Church Communion, and Christian or
religious communion. This latter they hold generally with all whom they
conceive to be true Christians, without reference to their Church estate, and
whether they be in Church estate or no: therefore they will confer, pray with
them, etc. If by Church were to be meant only such a particular body as is
before by them defined, the distinction might the rather pass. But forasmuch
as the word Church in Scripture sometimes extends it self to all, or any
believers on the face of the earth, without respect had to any such
congregationall union, therefore Church communion will and may extend it self
to all communion with visible believers in all religious duties whatsoever. For
as there is a persecution of the Church, Gal. 1.13. Prayers of the Church, Act.
12.5. and a communion of Saints without such a respect, so a communion of the
Church in all religious duties, without such a respect.
But the former they hold only with such as they acknowledge to be true
Churches, and with their Church Members. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 62, 63. Apol. p.
28, 34.

Robins. has a distinction not much unlike, of private and public communion,
that he allows with all Christians, this only with Church Members; concerning
which see his whole treatise of public and private communion.

2. They call that Church communion which is only in such duties, privileges
and ordinances as are proper to such a particular society, and belong to none
other, as 1. Admission of members into their society. 2. Mutual watchfulness
of each member over other. 3. Admonition in way to censure. 4. Excommunication.
5. Re-acception into society again upon repentance. 6. Administration, and
receiving of the seals. 7. Vocation of Ministers and all other officers, and
deposing of them again. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 63. Ans. to 32. q. p. 7. Apol. p.
27-29.

3. As for Here we may see how much and how long we have been mistaken: For
when our brethren of that way do so frequently (perhaps fixedly) preach and
pray with us not only privately in houses, but in our public assemblies also,
we (fools) think all this while, they hold Church communion with us, and do
thereby actually own our Ministry and Church estate as true. But, alas, there
is no such matter. It is but Christian communion at the best, neither do they
at all preach unto us, or pray with us, as Ministers ex officio, much less as
our Ministers; No they will not confess themselves to be so much as members of
our Churches: but ex deno, only as men well gisted, and so able to edify the
church by their gifts, as mere private men, ex communi officio charitatis, as
any man else may do that has a gift to speak to the churches edification.
Nay, what do they more to us in public then they would do to so many Turks or
Indians, to whom they would preach, and with and for whom they would pray (I
believe) as well as they do unto and with, and for us. If they judged any
Church communion to consist in any of these things they could (following their
own principles) no more join with us in preaching and prayer, then now they do
in Sacraments. The like is to be thought of their hearing of our Ministers also.
preaching, reading and hearing the word, catechizing, praying, singing of
Psalms, blessing the people, etc. though performed by Church officers and
members only, and in the Church Assembly only, yet in these, they hold, there
is no Church communion at all. Ans. to 32. q. p. 7, 28. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 62.
Apol. p. 26, 34. Rob. justif. p. 192, 195.

4. These things, say they, do not only belong to Church Communion, but to
the Communion of this How does this agree with that which follows after of
administering and receiving of Sacraments in other Churches by virtue of the
communion of churches.
particular Church only, of which one is stated a member; and therefore are to
be performed only to the members thereof, and not to the members of other
Churches, much less to any such as are not at all in Church estate. Ans. to
32. q. p. 11.

5. Especially Sacraments are to be administered (as only by Ministers of the
same Churches as after so) only to Church How is it then that they acknowledge
Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 63, 64. Apol. p. 6, 7, 21, 40. that scattied members of
Christ may partake of the Sacraments as members of the Catholic Church. Also
that Sacraments do rightfully belong to all visible believers and their sced,
as such, if so be there were any Ministers now that might lawfully administer
the same unto them, viz. such as were the Apossles and Evangelists. And that
the reason why they cannot now actually partake therein, is because now
ordinary Ministers power extends not beyond the bounds of their own church.
Whence I infer, 1. that then church membership is not necessary to
participation of the Sacraments, of it self, but by accident only. 2. that
believers are not incapable of Sacraments (by their own tenent) through any
defect in themselves but in the ministry, (that I say not, in God) they
indeed are capable of them, but God has provided no ministry to administer
the same to the^, I mean, to scattred Saints. 3. That participation of
Sacraments is no part of church communion, since of right it belongs as well to
all visible believers, as such, though they be no church members at all. 4.
That Baptism is not given only to a Church body. 5. That it was not intended
as a seal of the Church Covenant: All which are contrary to their tenants.
members, and Here also they seem as before not constant to themselves, who
after tell us that by communion of Churches the Minister of one Church may
administer the Sacraments to the members of another Church: why not then to
such as are members of no Church also (being believers) seeing the A postles
did so: and seeing ordinary Ministers have as much power over such as are no
members, as over the members of another Church, both being without the Church
to them.
members of the same Church. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 62, 63, 64, 66, 70. Ans. to 32.
q. p. 11, 12, 37. Apol. p. 29, 30, 39, 40, 41. Cott. cat. p. 6, 7. R. M. to E.
B. p. 4, 5, 6. R.M. to W.R.

6. They hold that if any sin be committed by any in the Church, for want of
watchfulness, and admonition in others, all the body is defiled therewith, and
made liable to a common judgment, as was all Israel by Achans sin. Ans. to
32. q.p. 50. Ans. to 9. Pos.p. 75. Discourse of Cov. p. 7. Apol. p. 10.

7. That a man that is sui juris, may not lawfully stand member of such a
Church, in which he cannot observe and enjoy all Gods ordinances, nor where any
Who then may stand members of their Churches? or will they say that there are
no corruptions amongst them suffered? doubtless if other Churches may be
judges, (not themselves who are parties) they are faulty one way, as well as
others are another way. It may be also as hard to reduce as others are.
corruption in Gods worship, or other sin is suffered unreformed, but if he
be joined to it, he must separate from it, else he is defiled therewith. Ans.
to 32. q. p. 32, 33.

Rob. justif. p. 15, 16, 197, 200, 201. John's. plea, p. 245. Bar. discov. p.
26, 29, 34, 38.

8. Especially where any set Leitourgy, or Yet themselves allow set forms of
Psalms to be sang as Prayers and Praifes to God, and of benedictions or
blessing the people, of church covenan (as before) some of them also set forms
of catechizing, and confessions of Faith, as H. P. I C. his Catechism of the
Church. So Robinsons cat. of Discipline, added to the end of Perkins cat. Why
then not a set form of Prayer too? whereas they dislike set forms because
imposed: I cannot see how bare imposition by lawful authority of that which
is lawful (so far only as it is lawful) should make it unlawful; I should
rather think it should make it necessary: And whereas they inculcate that our
set forms have been so imposed as leave no liberty of adding, altering or
taking any thing away: I answer, we have no such imposition among us, seeing
all experience has showed that any man might lawfully add, what he would,
though by the law, he might not, perhaps, take away or alter ought: But
supposing the worst that our set forms were so rigidly imposed by law, that no
man might add to, or alter, or take away ought, yet if Ministers did both add
to what they thought defective, and alter what was offensive, and leave out
what they judged unlawful; I see no reason why the fault of the imposers
should be imputed to such as obeyed their imposition no further then it was
faultlesse.
set form of prayer is imposed to be used. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 52, 59, 60, 61.
Mr M. to J.M. Cott. cat. p. 5, 6. R.M. to E.B.p. 7.

John's. plea, p. 245, 285. Brown. confess. art. 45. Cannes necess. of
separation, p. 110. Rob. justif. p. 344.

9. And where If they will walk close to their own principles; they must
grant that not only open and gross wicked defile the worship of God to all
the society, but also unregenerate persons, and all that give not good
evidence of their conversion, yea, even secret sinness also (such as Achan was)
though perhaps they have the truth of grace, if they be admitted. Of which see
before Art. 6. But then who shall escape free? or with what society can a man
join to be assured not to be defiled?
bad men are suffered to come to the Sacraments with the good, because thereby
both the ordinances, and all that partake in them are defiled. Apol. p. 37. J.
D. to L.H.

Bar. discov. p. 34. Rob. justif. p. 15, 197, 201, 204.

CHAP. X.
Of the Communion of Churches one with another, and of separation from corrupt
Churches.

1. THey grant that several Churches have a If there be a communion of
Churches, then an union, whereby many therefore may be rightly called one. And
if an union of many Churches without Covenant, why not also of many members in
the same Church without covenant.
Communion amongst themselves, whereby they do and may How can this stand with
their doctrine of the covenant before, which tyeth the members to church duties
only to their own Church? and that Sacraments belong only to the members of
their own Church: and with their doctrine following that Ministers are
Ministers only to their own people, and cannot do a ministerial act to any
but such as by calling them, have given them power over them, which some of
themselves perceiving, rather then part with this latter (which they hug as a
precious truth) are content to question the former of the communion of
Churches, as S. E.
mutually partake each with other in some Church-ordinances, If this may be
done in Sacraments (by virtue of Church communion) why not in Ordination and
Excommunication also?
as Sacraments. And that this Communion is both between the Ministers and
members of the same. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 62, 78. Ans. to 32. q. p. 29. Apol. p.
2, 13. R.M. to E.B. p. 11.

2. By virtue of this Church communion, they say; one Church by letters of
recommendation may give power to another Church over any of her members for
Excommunication, and the This Divinity is strange to me: Themselves hold the
Ministers power is not his own, but concredited to him by the church, so that
he is but a Deputy himself, and deputat^a non potest deputare. How then should
he derive his authority to another, and convey his power over to him, as his
deputy, who himself is but the Churches deputy?
Ministers of one Church may convey power to the Ministers of another Church
for Administration of the Sacraments to any of their members. Cott. cat. p. 7.
Apol. p. 2, 14, 26, 40. J.W. to T.S. Hence the infants of some of Windsor
Church in N.E. have been baptized by the Ministers of the Church of Dorchester
there. R.M. to W.R.

3. But without such letters of recommendations, and formal granting over of
such power, from one Church and Minister to another, it were They are very
tender of losing any of their members, and of having them but to communicate
for a time with any other churches but their own: but they make no bomes of
getting all the members they can from cur Ministers and Churches, belike we
have neither true Ministers nor Churches, and therefore they may do with us
what they list.
unlawful in any case to administer any Church ordinance to any Church or
members but their own, or to admit them to any Church communion upon any
pretense whatsoever. Apol. p. 14, 26, 40.

4. Though they hold it lawful by this Communion of Churches for one Church to
admit the members of another unto fellowship of Church ordinances and
privileges; yet not of every Church. But they think themselves bound to know
the Church well (whose members they so admit, as well as the members
themselves) whether it be a true Church or a false, a pure Church, or a
corrupt. Ans. 10 32. q. p. 29.

5. And that if they should admit any members of a false Church, they should
offend in so holding communion with a false Church; yea, if they should admit
any members of a corrupt Church, they should be defiled by such communion;
unless they did first protest against their corruptions. Ans. to 32. q. p. 29.
J.C. printed letter, p. 12. yet they hold no such What ground for this
distinction, of defilement by Church communion, and no defilement by religious
communion?
defilement by admitting them unto religious communion, though their Church
were not only impure, but utterly false.

6. They are very straight-laced in denying communion to the members of other
Churches that are not This is one cause and the chief why our most godly
English going over thither are yet rejected from all Church communion there:
Not because of any personal defect, but because of the reputed corrupt estate
of our Churches, whereof they stand, or lately did stand as members.
constirated and governed in the same manner with their own which only they
conceive to be constituted and governed according to the Rule of Christ. Ans.
to 32. q. p. 82, 83, 84. yea, if a company of approved godly people should sit
down near them (where their power reaches) differing from them only in some
points of Church Government, some of them tell us, that not only they should
not be If upon such smaller differences they be so severe, how much more would
they be in greater; Some of their pactie here plead hard to be indulged in
sesser differences, yet what those are we may not know, or whether they he
lesser or greater tolerable in a Church or not, and if they be not hearkened
unto, they are apt to cry out, Persecution, persecution: yet when others desire
the like favor of them, they tell us there is no favor to be expected if we
persist to break any Rule of Christ, their meaning is, if we follow them not
close in their ways. So partial and s^lfish are some men, that they think
all severitie to others too little, to themselves too much.
owned as a sister Church, but should also be in danger of severe punishment by
the civil Magistrate. H.W. to P.H. What they hold of our English Churches and
Ministers see in the Postscript.

CHAP. XI.
Of Excommunication and Re-acception into Church Fellowship again upon
repentance.

N. I find little difference herein between them and others of the reformed
Religion, more then what is above touched, save that

1. I Hear some of them have pressed that not only the scandalous, but also the
And no marvel For if none must be of the Church but real Saints, such as have
truth of grace, which they cannot have that do not in some proportion grow in
grace, therefore it must needs follow that such should be cast out. And by the
same reason cut with all that do not convincingly show all such evidences of
grace, as Divines (from Scripture) do l^y down as demonstrations of grace in
men. But if we closely hold to this way of trial of the members of true
visible Churches, we may well make Churches (as the Brownists) consisting of 2.
or 3. or perhaps (as our N.E. brethren) of 7, 8, or c. members, but we shall
rarely (if ever) meet with such numerous Churches as the Scriptures hold forth,
and therefore such as all Churches ought to be, as near as may be.
non-proficients, that grow not in grace under the means, might be
excommunicated; Which was the ground (as some of them report) of a groundless
course set on foot amongst them at Cambridge in N. Engl. That the people met
together privately at certain times, weekly or fortnightly, each one to hold
forth unto the rest the work of God upon his or her soul, from their first
conversion unto that present day, that so their Pastor might know how they
grew in grace. A.W. to Mr B.

CHAP. XII.
Of Church officers, their office, manner of calling, their power,
maintenance, and the dis-officing or deposing of them again.

1. WHen a Church by admission of more members, is now grown to a competent
number (which ofttimes proves some No wonder it is long first, what for want of
such choice members as they seek, and what for want of choice Ministers: for
they tell us to our comfort that many that were counted good Ministers in old
Eng. are there laid aside, because the Churches there do aim at men of
special abilities.
years first) then they address themselves to the calling of some to the
Ministry, and other offices in the Church. R.M. to W.R.

2. If any of their own members be fit for the service, they make choice of
them. If not, they procure elsewhere. Yet so that none is chosen to be an
officer in any Church, till he be first formally admitted Church membership is
the salt that sealons all things. 'Its strange that his membership in the
Church whence he last came (by communion of Churches) can stand him in no stead.
member of the same Church, in the same manner every way, as others have been.
H.W. to Mr B.

3. The several Churches with them, (how small soever, and though as yet
without any officers) do challenge to themselves both power and execution of
all things whatsoever do belong to the calling and creating of their own
officers, as, 1. To What abilities most good men have in judging of Ministers,
as reason so their own experience will tell them, when as (if I be rightly
informed) all the members of the Church of Boston (some few excepted) did
strongly stickle to have had Mr Wheelwright (that famous Familist) joined as co
teacher with Master C. in that Church. Also see Apol. Narr. p. 24.
examine and try their abilities and fitness. 2. To elect them. 3. To instruct
them in their office, at their ordination. 4. To ordain them with imposition
of hands, prayers, and charges given them. And in sum, to give them all the
power of their office in that Church in the name of Christ. Ans. to 32. q. p.
40, 41, 42, 68, 71. Discourse of Cov. p. 23. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 70, 77. R.M. to
W.R. H.W. to Mr B.

Rob. justif. p. 300, 303. Cannes Necess. of separ. p. 29. Bar. refut. of
Giff. p. 130. A light for the ign. p. 7. Rob. Apology.

4. Whereby it is come to pass, that every of their first Ministers (at least)
in every of their Churches, is ordained by one or more Have not we as much
cause to doubt of the truth of their ministry, as they of ours, they being
made by mere private men ( i.e.) not in any office, ours by Presbyters at
least, and therein according to the Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 4.14. seeing the
Bishops themselves were Presbyters, with whom were other Presbyters ever joined
in Ordination of any: Besides, the choice and approbation of many of us by our
people also: whether they or we come nearer to the Rule, let the Reader judge.
private men, appointed by the rest, in their names to pray over them, impose
hands upon them, instruct, charge them, and give them authority there to
minister: The act being the act of the whole Church, but for order, and ease
sake, the formalitie is committed to one or two, in name of the rest: The
Levites election was from God immediately, and their Ordination by the Priest
by Gods appointment, Numb. ^.11, 13, 14. The peoples laying on of their hands
in this work was not authoritative, that were needless, when God had
authorized them both immediately by himself and mediately by the Priest
before, if not presumptuous, that they should interpose their authority, when
God himself had established them by his. But either it was obedientiall only,
to declare their approbation of Gods choice and Ordination, and then it is
nothing to our brethrens authoritative imposition of the peoples hands. Or
rather (as I conceive) for the same end for which they were commanded to lay
hands on the head of the sacrifice to be oftred (as verse. 12.) viz. to signisie
that they, i.e. their first born by right were all the Lords, and did owe to
be, but that God of his goodness was now pleased to accept of the Levites for
them, verse. 16.
As the Israelites laid hands on the Levites, Numb. 8.10. J.M. to R.M. Ans. to
32. q. p. 68, 69, 70. R.M. to E.B. p. 10.

Rob. justif. p. 328, 331, 338.

5. They hold that the peoples By this reason (me thinks) all that are elected
by the people to a constant exercise to a constant exercise of the chief duty
of the Pastors office (which is prenching of the Word) and do also by compact
receive the tithes and wages due by law to the Pastor, should be the Pastors
of the places where by the peoples choice they do so preach, and by consequent
many of our brethren of that way, here in London, and England, should be
Pastors of many of our Parish Churches. But do they count themselves so? or
do they carry themselves so?
Election is not only essential unto, but also the whole substance of the
calling of the Minister, or other officer. But as for Ordination with
imposition of hands of the Presbytery, or other sign, they hold it not
essential at all, but a mere formalitie, or solemnity of the calling; the
presence whereof adds nothing to the substance of the calling, and the
absence thereof takes nothing from it. Ans. to 32. q. p. 67, 68, 69. Discourse
of Cov. p. 23. R.M. to E.B. p. 10. Apol. p. 24.

Rob. justif. p. 308, 332, 333, 334, 335. Rob. Apol. p. Per electionem jus
ministerii Presbyteris confertur, etc. Bar. refut. of Giff. p. 219, 130.

6. After the first officers are thus made by the Church, the formalitie of
ordaining the rest, is ordinarily committed to such So that if they have but
one Pastor or Teacher he alone lays hand on the next officer to be ordained:
But Se Paul's rule for Ordination is, that it should be done by the hands of
the Presbytery, not of one Imgle Presbyter, much less of one private man.
officers as are already called and ordained, not as having any more power (by
virtue of their office) to do it, then before; for the power is the Churches,
and belongs equally to every member, as a member; but as being the Churches
public servants, to do it for them, and in threi name and stead. See the
quotations cited before Art. 4. Rob. justif. p. 321, 323, 327.

7. In the sorts or kinds of their officers, they agree with others of the best
reformed Churches. I will not impute to the general that private opinion (but
too publicly here) by some of them vented: that the Pastor is only to feed the
people with wholesome doctrine, the ruling Elders only to visit them, and see
to their manners.
Only whereas in opinion and tenent they precisely distinguish between the
Pastors and Teachers office, yet in practice they usually confound them: both
Pastor and Teacher equally teaching and equally applying both the Word and
Seals without any difference. And either of them usually supplying the place
of both in diverse of their Churches, which are not furnished with both. See J.
C. his Sermons on Revel. and other texts, for proof of this: Besides what we
have by others report.

8. They hold the officers so called and made by this Church, are officers
only in and unto this particular Church, that has so called them. And bound
only to minister to that, and the members thereof, and to none other. So that
the Pastors and Teachers thereof may lawfully do no Yet their Ministers
frequently administer the Sacraments to the members of other Churches then
their own: They will answer, that is done by virtue of the communion of
Churches. I reply, But this latter rule quite overthrows the former and all
the reasons they bring for it; which some perceiving, question this rule of
communion of Churches, others to maintain the former have invented a power in
every particular Church and Minister to transfer their own power over to
another Church and Minister pro tempore, to administer the Seals, (yea, and
censures too) to any of their members, so that translation be formally done, as
before Chap. 10. If there can be no act valid where there is no power. Whether
ministerial acts done by a minister in and unto another Church be not null and
void: which if they be, then have we millions of persons of age unbaptized to
this very day.
ministerial act whatsoever in or unto any other Church or the members
thereof, then their own. Ans. to 32. q. p. 11, 15, 70. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 64,
67, 70, 76, 78. Apol. p. 14, 26, 29, 38.

Rob. justif. p. 317, 318, 335.

9. They grant indeed that Ministers may preach unto, and pray with other
Churches and their members, because these are properly no ministerial acts.
Only the administration of the Preaching and Baptizing were wont to be joined
together, Matthew. 28. And the Word and Prayer to be counted chief employments
of the Ministers, Act. 6. yea, Preaching rather then Sacraments, 1 Cor. 1. But
it is the nature of popular government to incroach upon all or most of the
rights of the ministry, which must either have nothing to do, or but what
the people will allow them, and lend them their power for to do. Alas poor
Ministers, it seems it is their destiny ever to be servants (if good) yea
slaves and foot-stools. Hitherto they have been trodden under foot by the
Prelates, and now they must be by their people!
Sacraments (with them) are properly ministerial, and therefore belong only
to the Ministers. All other acts are common to other members, either by virtue
of their gifts, and ex communi officio charitatis, or by the power of the
Keys, which they have received in common with that Church of which they are
members, or by a temporary deputation from the same. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 78.

Rob. justif. p. 195.

10. They hold that a Ministers calling lives and dies with his union unto and
disuniting from that particular Church wherein and whereby he was so called, as
before. So that if a Minister lawfully chosen and ordained in one place, shall
remove (upon never so just and necessary grounds) to another Congregation: He
is thereby divested of his former Ministry, and now become as a mere private
man again, unless and until he shall be called and so created again by the
same or some other Congregation. In which case he is not only to be elected
anew, but also to be ordained anew, by the imposition of the hands (perhaps of
some mere private man or men) as if he had never been ordained before. And so
toties quoties. Ans. to 32. q. p. 69, 70. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 67, 77. J. W. ans.
to 10. quest.

Rob. justif. p. 317.

11. They hold the Ministers are but the Churches servants, her mouth by whom
she speaks, and hands whereby she acts. And therefore though they meet
together to consult of matters for the good of the Churches, or to prepare
matters for the Churches hearing; yet in point of Government they can Yet Mr^
P. tells us that the Ministers have there agreed amongst themselves that none of
them shall preach any doctrine that is not commonly received amongst them, till
he have first communicated it with the test of the Ministers: And what is this
but in effect a compound Presbytery ruling without peoples votes, and also a
Canon made by common consent and imposed: both contrary to their own principles.
decree, act, or execute They call them rulers, and tell us they have great
power of Government, but show us nothing that they may do (except
Administration of Sacraments) which others may not as lawfully do as they:
unless they will say (as Rob justif. p. 116.) that Ministers rule consists in
serving the Church, and the people obey their Ministers in using their service:
which is most absurd in reason and contradictious to it self.
nothing but what the Church does dictate and direct: Ans. to 32. q. p. 57.

Rob. Apol. p. 49. Sions royal Prerog. p. 26, 20.

12. Ministers (they hold) are only Ministers of Churches already gathered,
which are all supposed to be already real Saints, effectually called. So that
the end and work of the office of Ministers and their Ministry, is only the
confirmation and building up of men already converted and inchurched. Nor are
they bound by virtue of their office to attend unto the work of Thus the
Conversion of sinners which is the crown of Ministers Calling, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1
These. 2. ult. is pulled off their heads, and put on the head of every gifted
brother, and why not sister too? since such may possibly convert also: and if
they may convert, belike they may consirme as well, and so they may take all;
For what then has the Minister left him to do by office? But if this were so
it would follow, 1. That a Minister of a Church need not by office preach some
Doctrines, viz. the Doctrines of the beginnings of Christ, at least not in some
manner of teaching them: whence it is that spire have held that the Minister is
to apply himself in all his Sermons to the members, and not to them that are
without: the rest of the members are to do that in their prophesying. N. P. 2.
That Ministers being fixed to particular charges, to which they owe
themselves, and all that they can possibly do, are thereby bound out from
laboring in the work of conversion of others at all: it being both without
the compass of their calling (by this doctrine) and beyond the possibility of
their power too, 3. And therefore that either men unconverted must so
continue, and perish in their sins, for want of some body to seek and bring
them home, Or else men gifted, that are no Ministers (which I fear upon
account will prove but few) must leave their callings, and give themselves to
the preaching of the word and Prayer, which both were diligently practiced by
the Apostles (as Ministers) and with strict charge imposed upon all Ministers
to practice (as belonging to their office) to the end of the world. Again, it
this be so, how is it that some of our brethren of that way, are far more busy
in seeking our cunversion here (not so much to grace, as to their Church
covenant) then to build up their own Churches, with which they are in covenant
already at home?
converting souls, any more then other gifted brethren are, who owe it by the
office of common charity. Ans. to 32. q. p. 80, 82.

Rob. justif. p. 308, 11, 47.

whence it must needs follow that either none are converted in their Churches
by their ministry, or else if any be, that falls out only accidentally, not as
the direct end of their office, and Gods Ordinance.

13. They acknowledge a most A right tenent, if rightly understood and
limited: But how comes it then that some of them that have charges, as
Pastors, in other Kingdoms far off, yet take and hold places of settled
ministerial employment here?
strict tie between the Minister and his people, and that the one has special
propriety in the other. Apol. p. 11, 24. R. M. to E. B. p. 11.

14. They conceive it unwarrantable that Ministers should have set and certain
stipends or wages, much less that they should live upon tithes: But rather
upon the peoples Let the unpartiall Reader (now laying all ends together) judge
whether the Ministers, according to the^r rules, be not the unhappiest servants
under Heaven; For 1. they must serve many masters, perhaps many hundred. 2. do
great work. 3. Yet nothing (in effect) proper to them, but as other servants
of the Church. 4. Yet may neither know the certain bounds of their obedience:
5. Nor indent for certain wages: 6. Nor change their master or mistresle if
they do not like, they may possibly be expulst, at the Churches pleasure, but
never can depart at their own: But if this be so, how comes it to pass that
some of them amongst us, do not only receive, but strictly require so much set
stipend for such a Lecture, and so much more for such another, or else they
will not preach; but also can be content to take the glebe, tithes and other
profits of sequestered Parsonages and Vicaridges amongst us, as well as others.
But in some sort, I marvel not at it, if that be true (which we are credibly
informed) that some of our brethren of the ministry there have not long since
complained that their Prophets did now prophecy in sack for want of
maintenance. M. B. to S. A. and others of them out of their love have warned
us of the like danger, if tithes (amongst us) should go down. Mr. W. to Mr.
M. And therefore no marvel if our brethren that have been bitten with the
peoples cold contributions there, be content to forsake that rule, and to
covenant for wages, as we do here.
voluntary contribution, weekly cast into the common treasury, according to
their weekly gains: Out of which the Deacons are to distribute both unto the
officers and poor, according to that which is brought in, and as they conceive
to be fit and needful for every one. R. M. to W. R. Mr B. to S. A. J. W. to T.
S. Ans. to 32. q. p. 77. Cott. cat. p. 7, 8. R. M. to E. B. p. 7, 8.

Rob. justif. p. 214, 353. Bar. Discov. p. 53, 61, 62. Brow. Confess. art. 20,
45.

15. As this Church has power to make her own Ministers, so also to Which
power (we hear) also they have used upon very slender grounds, as in M. W. S.
B. R. S. their cases.
question, censure, unmake and depose them; and by reassuming their power, to
reduce them into the state of mere private men again. And this also they
claim power to do (as well as the other) without any authoritative
concurrence of any others whomsoever; whose counsel although they may, and
perhaps will crave and use, yet that is done freely without any authoritative
obligation in foro externo. Ans. to 32. q. p. 41. Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 77. J. C.
printed letter, p. 3.

Rob. justif. p. 111, 176, 177. Sions royal Prerog. p. 26. Seper. Conf. art.
23. Cann. necess. of se. par. p. 155.

CHAP. XIII.
Of those whom they call Prophets, and of prophesying, or private men's
preaching.

1. THey hold it lawful for mere private persons ( i.e. such as neither are
in office, nor are ever likely to be) to exercise their gifts in and before the
whole Congregation, in Some say without any Moderator, at pleasure, whereby
strange things have been vented, and Scriptures sometimes notoriously abused.
Mr W.
preaching, i. e. in expounding and applying the Scriptures to the several
uses of the auditors, by instruction, confutation, reprehension, with all
authority; yea, that this is an ordinary and perpetual ordinance in the
Church grounded upon 1 Cor. 14. Ans. to 32. q. p. 78. Cott. cat. p. 6. R. M. to
E. B. p. 7. There is a book printed, called, A Sermon preached at Plimmouth in
N. E. which (as I am certified) was made there by a Comber of wool.

Rob. justif. p. 183. John's. Inq. p. 7. A light for the ignor. p. 19.

Some of them (indeed) tell us that its seldom used, viz. only where the
Church is But such occasions are not rare with them, who often for a long time
want Ministers in their Churches, at least a full supply. Also some of them
have their farms, and so their families or servants so far off from their
settled Congregations, as that they cannot possibly come every Sabbath (hardly
any) to the Ministry there; and therefore must either preach one to another,
or else be utterly without. I. P. Besitles (we are informed from thence) the
people, of late, grow more violent in clayming that their pretended liberty
and privilege of public prophesying, urging for it the writings and arguments
of Mr Rob. the Brownist, sometimes also contemning and deserting their own
Ministers and Churches, because they are not suffered to enjoy it. M. B. to S. A.
unfurnished with officers, or in case of their absence or sickness. Ans. to
32. q. p. 77.

2. Also after their Preaching they take upon them to bless the people at
their dismission, as the Ministers do.

3. Likewise they have a course (before their dismission) to give leave to any
that doubts of any thing that has been then or formerly delivered in public
by the Minister or any other, Me thinks its an abrupt course at the first dash
openly to implead the Minister of error delivered, before all the people; were
it not more civilitie, piety, charity, and prudence to talk with him first
in private: whereby either the doubter may be satisfied, or the Minister
reduced, and both without any molestation or scandal to the people, or
repreach to the Minister? Besides, who must be judge in such a case, must the
injudicious multitude? For other judge they will not allow (I mean in foro
externo) nor any appeal to an higher Court.
publicly to propound their doubts, and make their objections, and to argue
pro and con, about any matter good for edification. W. T. to P. H. Ans. to 32.
q. p. 78. Cot. cat. p. 6.

Bar. discov. p. 139. John's. Inq. p. 7.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Of late, some of them grow shy of the word Independent, H. P. in his
Epistle to the Reader. Some utterly renounce it, Apol. Narr. p. 23. But yet its
generally owned by most in the name, R. M. to E. B. p. 9. Ans. to 32. q p. 46,
47, 64, 65. by all in the thing, as after, Ans. to 32. q p. 43, 44, 46.
independencie of one Church upon another, and the Combination of several
Churches together, in Classes, Synods, etc.

1. THey grant that Churches may and ought to consult and advise one with
another, in any doubtful matter incident, and ought to hearken to the good
advice of one another. And therefore they sometimes allow combinations of
diverse Churches for consultation: But not They love no imperative Synods or
Presbyteries, but they have store of imperative Churches, who may command, yea,
compel both members and Ministers to act, it may be what they like not: why
have not many Churches united as much power over every particular church within
the union, as many members united have over every person amongst themselves.
imperative or coercive. Ans. to 32. q. p. 64, 65, 66.

John's. plea, p. 251.

2. But that each particular congregationall Church is the supreme judicature,
whose power is absolute and imperial, and therefore may and ought to transact
all things within themselves without seeking or submitting unto any
authoritative concurrence of any other Churches. R. M. to W. R. Cott. cat. p.
12, 13. Ans. to 32. q. p. 44, 62, 64, 65, 66. J. W. ans. to 10. quest.

Rob. justif. p. 107, 112, 444. John's. plea, p. 70, 251. Bar. discov. p. 261.

3. Therefore they hold it unlawful for any such combinations, whether in
Classes, ( i.e. compound Presbyteries) or Synods provincial, national, or
others to take upon them authoritatively to determine or decree any thing in
matter of doctrine or practice, as intending thereby to oblige any more, or
others then their own persons, no not in foro externo. (...)

The Postscript,
THus at length, Good Reader, thou have the sum of the Church Courses of our
New England brethren; even the way that so many that know it not, or cannot
judge of it, do so admire, so desire. And which themselves do hold forth to
us as the only way of God, with such superlative commendations in their
Letters to us, as if it were a perfect Idea of the Constitution, Discipline,
and Government set up and exerced in and by the Apostolic Churches from point
to point; from the beginning (till now of late me thinks they begin to abate)
[See Mr Parkers late Letter to Mr B. printed] inculcating what rare and
admirable effects it has produced amongst them, impatient that any should
oppose it, or so much as question it; yea, threatening us with continuance of
the sword until we shall embrace it: See M. Peter's Preface, p. 1. excluding
and exploding all other ways as erroneous, false, wicked, and savouring at
least strongly of Antichristianisme. But now that I have thus laid it before
thee, I leave it to thy judgment (praying God to guide thee aright therein)
whether it deserve all this or no. As for my self I look for lashes from many
hands and tongues, but in patience (through the help of Christ) I shall
possess my soul, being supported by the conscience of mine own integrity.
And yet that I may somewhat rebate and take off the edge of as many men's
displeasure as I may, I shall crave leave of thee to add a few words more in
answer to some of the principal objections in defense of my self and this
Narration. Object. It will be said perhaps by some that this Narration is
false, that they believe it not, or that they have heard of others the
contrary. Answ. I pray it may be conceived and remembered that I have not
undertaken to report things as there they really are, (which I could not do,
unless I had been an eye witness) but to collect their own reports of things
scattered here and there in their own Papers, and present them jointly together
to thy view: so that, whether their reports be true or false is nothing to me;
If I can clear it to a candid and ingenuous Reader that I have not
mis-reported their reports, I will be guiltless both before God and men: For
my part I believe their reports to be true, as here they are represented to
thee: Seeing they come not from malignants amongst them, or enemies to them,
nor yet from men of small or no credit, but such as are members at the least of
their Churches, and therefore true and real Saints, which will not, at least,
should not lie; yea, many of them officers, and some, yea, most of them
Ministers of the Word in their Churches, who as they cannot be thought to be
ignorant of, or mistaken in their courses, so much less can they be reasonably
suspected of falsehood or partiality in their relations; At least, shall not by
me, who both sufficiently know the fidelity of the most of these from whom
these intelligences come, and also have been by some of them so often chastened
for making any doubt thereof. But suppose these reports should not be true, or
that others of them should report otherwise, this may perhaps impeach their
credit, it cannot mine; and I shall desire of him whosoever he be that shall
call the truth of this Relation in question (for substance at least) that he
himself would put forth a truer. It is a small thing to say, They hold not or
they do not this or that, but tell us what they do hold and practice, that we
may be misted no longer, as hitherto.

Object. But if this report he crew, yet (if you think they do evil) you
should rather conceal your brothers faults and errors, Love covers the
multitude of sins.

Answ. Love covers what sins may be covered, but some sins cannot be
covered, they are so publicly committed; and some may not, though they could,
because the concealment of them may do hurt, to themselves or others, the
public, or private wealth: in which case it were both against Piety,
Charity, and Prudence to conceal them. In both these respects, I conceive,
their courses are not to be covered; First, they cannot, at least in great
part, being long since made public to the world, and daily are more and more
by their own printing, preaching, and private instilling them into others.
Secondly, they may not, if they could; seeing by forbearance all this while
they have fretted like a Gangrene into the bowels both of city and country;
and I fear we have kept their counsel so long, that many of them are already
past cure in their error, and we almost remediless in our rents, tending unto
ruin.

Object. You should rather have confuted them by arguments, etc.

Answ. This is already done in part by others, and the press is still in
travel, ready to bring forth more and new confutations of them. 2. This is
none of the worst ways of confuting them, as I conceive; To relate them fully
is to confute them sufficiently in the judgment of men judicious and uningaged.

Object. You seem by your parallel places quoted to accuse them of Brownisme,
wherein you highly wrong them?

Answ. True, I do so, and let the Reader judge upon examination and comparing
of the places alleged, if it be not so: nay, if in some things they do not
build up an higher partition wall between themselves and all other churches
then ever the Brownists did, as in their strict examination of members, in
urging a Church covenant distinct from the covenant of grace, etc.

Besides, to what has been said in the Narration, we may add for further
probabilities, and just causes of our fear in this kind, that 1. They
sometimes cite, and approve of the Brownists Books in questions between us and
them, and provoke us to answer them: So we are informed from some of themselves
(P. B.) that they cite Rob. book for prophecy, and hold it unanswerable in
that point: And their party here boast much of Robijustif, and bid us answer
it, if we can: which book is also in some sort approved by the Ministers of N.
E. in their Apology for Church covenant, p. 30. 2. They use the same arguments,
and produce the same texts of Scripture to the same purposes, as whosoever
reads their writings may observe. 3. They condemn their courses but coldly,
with a quarenus, only so far and so far, their rigiditie only, not simply
their separation, Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 13. Apol. p. 30. Discourse of Cov. p. 41,
42. They profess it there be any separating opinion amongst them they hold not
themselves bound to inquire after it, nor to separate from the Brownists for
their separating from us, I. W. ans. to 10. quest. M. H. ans. to I. P. 4. They
distinguish of separations, one they call moderate, the other rigid or bitter,
this they condemn, but that they own. But what they mean by this rigid
separation, we well know not, for even the Separatists themselves do conde
nine each others rigor, the latter generally condemn some bitterness used
against our Churches by Barrow, and Greenwood: And of the latter also, some (as
Robinson) were far more moderate then the rest, yet were all of them complete
Separatists, and so may these our brethren be too, notwithstanding that
distinction. 5. They associate themselves in private communion, and in Church
communion too with them: So Master H. to I. P. acknowledges and justifies it
also. See the Preface to Master G. defense of Master B. against Can. And we
are credibly informed that H. P. received the Sacrament in a Brownists Church
here in London; yea, some assure us of professed correspondence and agreement
between some of our late Apologists themselves; and those of the Separation
here, only that they have advised them to be moderate in their courses. 6. The
Brownists themselves do claim them as their own, and boast of them. See
Master G. defense of Master Bradshaw against Can in the Presace. 7. Though in
the general they profess to differ much from them, yet when it comes to
reckoning we find it not so: which that it may appear the better, let us he
are our brethren themselves express the differences: Epist. before the ans. to
the 9. Positions, p. 53, 60. They (i.e. the rigid Separatists) separate from
your Congreg. as no Churches, from the Ordinances dispensed by you as mere
Antichristian, and from your selver as no visible Christians: and so in diverse
other places, Now excepting the last, which is proper to the most rigid, rigid
Brownists of all as Barrow, etc. which the more moderate do utterly dislike as
well as these our brethren, Rob. justif p. All the rest for ought I yet see
(putting in the word unlawful in stead of Antichristian, as a milder term;
and by Ordinances understanding Church ordinances, as they needs must they
cannot refuse by their Principles and practices but to own them.

Object. By no means, for they confess your Parochial Congregations to be
true Churches, which the other do utterly deny. Answ. True, in words they
do, but in effect it is far otherwise. 1. In that they lay the self same
principles that the moderater sort of Brownists do, touching Church
Constitution, Matter, Form, Power, Government, Communion, corruptions, etc.
which being granted, the natural product of such premises must needs be that
we have no true Churches, and that our Ordinances are all unlawful. 2. By
carrying themselves toward us, as if we were no true Churches, or members of
true Churches, for they deny our best and most eminent Christians all Church
Communion with them, so they do not to the members of any of the Churches of
their own way; they withdraw themselves from all Church communion with us in
the best and purest of our Assemblies, so they do not from the Brownists: and
whereas they hold they may not lawfully admit of the members of other Churches
without power given them so to do, by Letters of Recommendations from the said
Churches, yet they not only admit, but invite thousands of the members of our
Churches to their communion without, yea, against their consents. 3. Sometimes
they approve of us but faintly and coldly, many faults they find with our
Churches, little or nothing worthy of commendation in regard of our Church
estate, or Church ordinances, Apol. p. 38. Ans. to 32. q. p. 25, 26, 27, 31.
Discourse of Cov. p. 36. And when they would seem to justify, and plead for
us, yet then they do it with such uncouth and far fetched proofs, as we know
not whether to accept or refuse their acknowledgement of the truth of our
churches upon such conditions be the worse bargain; as when they say we have
true Churches, because knit together in Church covenant, though implicit,
because we had true Churches planted here (in the New England frame) in the
Apostles times, and perhaps also since, etc. Ans. to 32. q p. 26. Discourse of
Cov. p. 36, 37. R. M. to E. B. 4. Some of them come off as roundly as any
Brownists do, and tell us plainly that in deed we have good Materials, but we
want form, our Churches are Babels, harlots, Master M. to I. M. I. R. to his
parents. Mr S. to I. B. That we have true Churches, no right Sacraments, nor
Ministers, I. S. to Mris B. I. P. to W. R. R. W. to I. L. Mr M. to I. M. Mr L.
to his parents, etc. And threaten us with destruction eo nomine, inviting
therefore all they can to depart from us, as from Babel, Ibid. and doctrinally
teaching separation from us, as a duty, Ans. to 32. q. p. 32. And herein some
of them are so cruelly kind unto us, that they profess to be grieved that we
have here any Preaching or Ordinances at all in our way, wishing we had none at
all, that so we might be forced to fall into their Church-wayes for the
enjoyment of them. Mr M. to I. M. And what is here said of their opinion of the
truth of our Churches, the same is for substance to be understood of the truth
of our Church Ministry.

Object. You may as well call the good old non-conformists Brownists, as these
men who have followed them (in these their opinions and practices) as their
guides. Answ. In like manner do the Brownists father their separation also
upon the Non-conformists; but both forts do it unjustly: that the Brownists do
it unjustly, he that will may see by Mr Balls book against Mr Can upon that
very point, and in good part by another book lately printed, called a grave
confutation of the errors of the Brownists made long since by sundry Godly
Divines, which in their times suffered in the cause of inconformitie: For my
self at this time I may not, I will not attempt to give satisfaction at large
to this objection, only this I say for the present that in such things wherein
either the Brownists, or these brethren do mainly differ from other the best
reformed Churches, they have no consent or approbation from the Non-conformists
at all; nay, contrarily by many undeniable evidences from their writings and
practices it will appear that they have ever stiffely opposed and conflicted
with all popular and independent government, in behalf of that we call
Presbyteriall. True, indeed some of them, especially in their polemicke
writings, while they had the Prelacie in their eye, and no considerable
adversary, but that to contest withal, did perhaps somewhat unwarily (as may
befall the best, and best learned men in such cases) let fall some few things,
which those brethren make their advantage of; As that 1.2 particular Church
ought only to consist of one Congregation. 2. That each particular Church has
power to transact all its own matters. 3. That this power is seated in the
body: Many more then these I do not now remember, which are in question
between us and these brethren. But 1. these things they hold not as now cur
brethren do: as if every small company of 7.8. or 9. might make such a
complete Church or Congregation to transact all their own businesses
independently, without assistance of or being accountable unto classical or
higher combinations, nor that this power is seated in such a Congregation
without their officers, or that they can exercise it any otherwise but by
them: But if any of them have gone far, as its more then I know, so its more
then I will defend: But if all these in the Non-conformists sense-were granted,
it would do our brethren little good. 2. Besides suppose they had the
Non-conformists their guides in these three and three more of their Church
courses in question, yet would not this reach to cover and hide the nakedness
of all the rest.

Object. We see the most of the better sort go this way now. Answ. I believe
not the most by many; but if it were so, that were no good argument to justify
it. 1. Because of those that do go that way, a great number are Anabaptists,
Familists and Antinomians, etc. who all willingly choose to fall into the same
channel of popularitie and independencie, perhaps partly out of design, to
make a more considerable (I say not sormidable) party, that so either for
favor or fear, they may be the more indulged; partly because it suites so
well with man's proud nature; for every man by his good will would rule, and no
man would willingly depend upon or be obnoxious unto another. 2. Most good men's
affections are strong, when often their judgments are weak. 3. All men are ever
apt to run into extremes, hence it is that whiles they fly prelaticall tyranny,
they easily fall into popular Anarchy. 4. The noveltie of the course. 5. The
peoples good opinion of the persons that way siding and drawing. 6. And the
advantage the said persons have had, whereby to screw themselves further and
further into the peoples good opinion and affection, by being ever employed in
the chiefest work of the ministry in some of the chiefest of our Churches,
although they have been so far from acknowledging themselves ministers, as
that they do not so much as acknowledge themselves as members of any of our
Churches, but as to us (according to their own rule) altogether without.

Object. This seems to reflect upon our brethren that come out of Holland, but
these are not so rigid as the rest; what is this Relation to them? Arsw. It
concerns them I grant not so much, nor so directly, yet in some sort it does:
1. Because sometimes they tell us they are of the same way with the N. E.
brethren. 2. Both their disputes and practices so far as they are known do
all look that way. 3. Their lying so close locked up and reserved in many things
makes them (I conceive not without cause) the more suspected; For truth seeks
no corners, no cloaks. If therefore now by this occasion they would please to
put out according to their promise, not a mock-Natrative, a mere gull, such as
the last was, but (as a true so) a full, perfect and plain discovery of their
opinions in these things from point to point, and from end to end, I should
heartily rejoice, as in the much desired fruit of this my poor labor; That so
all misunderstandings and mispristons being removed, and we rightly informed of
the just latitude of their and our differences: we might either more hopefully
address our selves to satisfy their judgments, or else (if that cannot be
obtained) the more willingly condescend to move (with them) for the favoring
of their consciences, according to the rules of Piety and prudence, in such
things as are capable of toleration and indulgence. But lest (good Reader) I
should be tedious to thee, I will cease to pursue these things any further at
this time. And praying the God of peace and truth to send down his Spirit into
all our hearts to lead us into both, that we, with all his, may truth it in
love, and may all serve one God with one heart according to one way, even his
own will revealed in his Word. To him I commit thee.

FINIS.

