MERCURIVS RUSTICUS. THE COVNTRYS COMPLAINT Recovnting the Sad Events of this
Unparraleld WAR


Angliae Ruina: OR, ENGLANDS RUIN, Represented in the Barbarous, and
Sacrilegious Outrages of the Sectaries of this Kingdom, committed upon the
Lives, Consciences and Estates of all His Maj: Loyal Subjects in general; but
more particularly upon the Churches, Colleges, Clergy, and Scholars of the
same.

Containing two brief Catalogues of such Heads and Fellows of Colleges in
the University of Cambridge, and other Learned and Pious Divines, within the
City of London, as have been ejected, Plundered, Imprisoned, or, Banished, for
their Constancy in the Protestant Religion, and Loyalty to their Sovereign.

Whereunto is added, A Chronology of the time and place of all the Battails,
Sieges, Conflicts, and other remarkable passages which have happened betwixt
His Majesty and the Parliament; with a Catalogue of such Persons of Quality, as
have been slain on either party, from November. 3. 1640 till the 25. of March,
1647.

AMOS 9. 11. I will raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and alose
up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as
in the days of old.

ANNO 1647.

The Preface.
WHen the sins of this Kingdom were ripe for punishment, the Divine Justice
permitted a great part of it to be besotted with Discontents, either wholly
causeless, or such as His Maj. was pleased to remeay with Grants so
unmeasurably gracious, as could not otherwise be justified, then by their
importunity that demanded them, and His Majesty's Royal tenderness of his
Subjects peace and safety.

These grants were so far from satisfying those whose broken fortunes and
boundless desires would not permit them to live without a Civil War, that
they made of them no other use, then thereby to strenthen themselves to demand
more: till at last they broke out into most unnatural Rebellion.

The people always apt to cherish murmures and invectives against their
Princes, and now grown wanton with the fruits of a long peace, incline to
Abners mind, and think the War (which yet they knew not) but a sport.
Therefore with a great facility they embrace the design: and the baits to
cover the Hooks with, are the preservation of Religion, and the vindication of
liberty. And howsoever they cannot reconcile their practice with Gods command,
which under pain of damnation forbids all Subjects to resist their King: yet
they are so wedded to that interest which they Challenge in Religion, and
Liberty, that for Gods command, if they cannot untie the knot, they resolve to
cut it. Do but assure them that the forbidden fruit will make them as Gods,
and they will eat it though it be forbidden: do but persuade them that to
take up arms against their Sovereign is the way to secure their Religion and
Liberty, and they make bold with God for once to choose their own way for so
good an end.

From so desperate Resolution, had they had but Moral justice, they might have
been kept back by the improbability of those calumnies whereby His Majesty
was traduced, as intending to alter Religion and infringe their Liberties.

Or had Religion (to which they do so Zealously pretend) had that potent
influence upon them, it might have taught them, that Religion cannot be
defended by transgressing Gods commands, which are the Rule of it.

But if nothing else, yet even regard to their own pretensions, the defense of
Religion and Liberty, should have wrought in them a detestation of Rebellion,
which is so contrary to both.

For as an eye had to Gods dominion over us should exact obedience to his
commands, though never so much to our prejudice: So the meditation of his
infinite goodness ought to win it from us, because his commands enjoyne us
only what is for our good, if we could see it.

He would not have forbidden Subjects to defend Religion against their King by
force of Arms, but that he knew as Rebels can be no friends to Religion, so
it gains love and admiration by the innocent patience of those that profess
it; where as Bloodshed, Force, and Rapine, the fruits of Rebellion) procure
Hatred or Hypocrisy.

And for Liberty, it is for he good of Mankind, to forbid the assertion of it
by Subjects Arms taken up against their Prince: both because that pretense
would otherwise be used by those that have a design to make the abused people
their own slaves, and because Rebellion does more violate the Subjects
liberty, then is morally possible for the worst Prince in times of peace to do.

This truth was known before by speculation to a few, whose endeavors to
infuse it into the distempered peoples minds, had the fate of Caffandraes
predictions, to hit the truth and want belief, till these sad times have at
last verified it by acostly experience.

That this may be more universally beneficial; you have too plentiful a
harvest of Instances collected in the ensuing Relations: wherein may evidently
be seen, that this War which the multitude was so fond of, as the only means
to preserve Religion and Liberty, has been the utter ruin of them both.

Here you shall find these great pretenders to Religion, Suppressing that which
themselves confess to be Divine Truth, Debarring poor prisoners the comfort
of joining their prayers together, enforcing men to take Oaths of blind
obedience to whatsoever they should afterward command them; turning out
Clergiemen above all exception, and placing most scandalous and insufficient
wretches in their rooms, darting from their invenomed mouths most horrid
Blasphemies against our Lord and Savior, abusing the service of God, and
profaning not only the Form of it, the Book of Common Prayer, which now they
have utterly extirpated, but even Gods own Word, the holy Bible, which they
pretend to reverence.

Here shall you behold them not only (like those Canes Sepulchrales) violating
the bones and ashes of the dead, to make the world know that they believe what
some of their fellows openly profess, that of those sometime living Temples
of the holy Chost, there shall be no Resurrection, but exercising their sury on
the Churches of God; which they have defaced with barbarous rudeness, defiled
with more then beastly nastinesse, and (as if contrary to their wont they had
studied the Book of Maccabes to find out and out-doe the most Heathenish
wickednesses therein related) they have polluted the very Altar with their
whoredoms.

Nor can these Reformers (at whose door the profanations of the Houses of God
must lie) make the world believe they are in earnest when they plead for
Religion, whilst they deface and demolish the places where it should be taught
and practiced, and put out the Eyes of the most flourishing Universities of
Christendom.

Then for the other point, the Subjects Liberty, the following Narrations will
plainly show that it has not been spared by those that would be accounted the
Champions of it, when the violation of it might satisfy either their Lust,
their Covetousness, or their Cruelty.

Their Lust has prompted them not only to threaten Rape, but with violence to
attempt it, and to wound and murder those upon whom they could not effect
their beastly purpose.

To satisfy their Covetousness, they have unmercifully robbed of their
fortunes, and exposed to the extremest want, not only those that were their
opposites and able to hurt them, but those whose sex, age and condition might
have melted stones into pity, women, children, the sick, the aged, women in
labor, and even those of their own party.

Their Cruelty has not contented it self with the murder of those they
hated, but, as if they had been the professed Scholars of that inhumane
monster, whose Maxim was, Perimat Tyrannus lenis, in regno meo mors
impetratur, they have insulted over the persons and lives of their fellows
Subjects with most exquisite Tortures, whipped some to Death, and starved others:
they have made it a Crime in some that they were neighbors to those whom they
persecuted for Loyalty, and punished others for showing them mercy: As if they
would tell you, that they are not inferior to the worst of all the Primitive
persecutors Dioclesian, by whose command (as Eusebius lib. 10. Chap. 8.
reports) all charity was forbidden to those in Prison, yea even to those whom
they were bound to pity by the Law of Nature, their kindred, etc.

Nay more, so far has their malice transcended all bounds: that they have
done mischief where they were not invited by any benefit to themselves or any
other, only for the delight they took in doing it, burning houses, spoiling
goods, destroying Books, Evidences, and Public Records, to the prejudice of
Posterity, the disturbance of Pessessions, the obstruction of Justice, and the
impairing of Learning, only to make themselves Sport: They have by breaking
Articles of surrender, by offering savage force to the persons of messengers
for Treaty, and to the goods and houses of foreign Ambassadors, broken the
Sacred Laws and disturbed the Commerce of N^tions.

In a word, these new Physicians of State, have proved such Saltimbancoes to
the Common wealth, and by their recipes prescribed such drugs, as have purged
the Body Politic of all its Treasure, and left nothing, but Melancholy
behind. This truth clearly appears in the late London Account, from which
single City, they have draind 17. Millions, and it can be no small.
Proportion, therest of the Kingdom bears to it: Consider next, how they
dispose of the Kingdoms Treasure, in voting every Active Member a Benja. part
(no less then 89000l.in three days) whilst some of those that hazarded their
lives, in their Service, are forced to starve in the streets, and lie three
days unburied, ere their Masters would vote them a Winding sheet: But these
heavy burdens, must dwell upon our shoulders, for we cannot but imagine their
swelling greatness must be maintained: If so, then which way the supplies must
be raised Tacitus will truly tell us, AErarium ambitione exhaustum, per scelera
supplendum erit, Treasure spent Ambitiously, must be supplied by wickedness:
To the Intelligible Common wealths man, Verbum sat, nay half a word is
sufficient.

'T was a sad Omen to this Kingdom, to have the Sun Eclipsed, that very
hour this Parlia. began; And though it was not visible here, yet the effects
have not been clouded from our Eyes. But let the afflicted comfort themselves,
Post nubila Phoebus, Eclipses are never perpetual. No age was ever blessed with
a more pious Prince, or brought forth more crooked natures to perplex a
righteous soul. His easy Inclinations gave their dark practices confidence to
appear in the light, and through whose yielding clemency (thinking like the
Sun by attracting vapors to disperse them) they (with the help of a Northern
Fag) condenst into a cloud, that first darkened, then rained blood over all the
Land, and what number, or power, was not able to overthrow, Treachery, or
Bribery did on a sudden ruin.

And now, in the close of all miseries; behold an action detestable beyond
Expression, a misfortune, which (heightened with accumulated Injuries) deserves
to be looked upon with a compassionate Eye, and a bleeding heart. Is it not a
most sorrowful object to see a king set forth to Sale? to behold Majesty to
become Merchandise, and Sovereignty sold for Silver? To see a Prince weighed in
a Treacherous, and persidious Balance, and made to turn which way Coin shall
move the Beam? to deliver him up for the same cause Aristides was banished,
Justus quia justus, and at length to Crucify him between two Thieves? O high
Ingratitude, to ruin so great a Benefactor, when they found his hands bound up
from usual tenders! Doubtless they are worse enemies, that surprise by
Ambush, then those that fight in open field.

We read, that Wealth may choke as well as a Halter; and Judas his Bribe was
the cause he became his own Executioner. Time may manifest to the world some
noted issue; for sure both parties cannot but become Bankrupts, as well those
which buy dear, as those that sell cheap.

But this being an action beyond president, (the rehearsal whereof, is enough
to make the most innocent and patient pen criminal) I Will forbear to trace it
any further, but leave it to a vindictive Justice, stigmatized with that brand
Cicero stamps upon such another, Perditissimi est hominis, fallere cum qui
laesus non effet, nifi credidisset: None but the most villainous of Mankind will
deceive him, that had been safe, but for trusting.

But though I decline them, yet may I not leave my injured Sovereign in His
Sufferings, without letting the world know, how sad and weighty they are, his
Infelicities sinking a deeper Impression, because thrown from so high a Spire,
heretofore enjoying what Majesty could present, and now doomed to embrace what
the worst of miseries will impose: And surely the Consideration hereof cannot
but press them the closer together. This conditions strips him of those
ordinary Consolations, every Peasant may enjoy, and robs him of all those
Comforts that are dear unto his Soul; His Royal Consort, Children, and
Friends; The last of which the Devils charity extended to allow Job, and which
if they shall deny him (from whom their former Comforts flowed) they deserve to
be branded with the Character of unpresidented Impiety.

And that nothing might be wanting to fill up the measure of their Iniquity,
behold another of their unparalled impieties, whereat Posterity will stand
aghast; such an one as will justify all the barbarous acts that the most savage
Persecutors of the Church were ever guilty of: Yea such a one as the Lords of
the Inquisition, yea the Turk himself would not have denied an ordinary
Christian, nor our Laws the worst of Malefactors: That a King of his
Greatness, and piety, should be denied a Spiritual Minister to assist him, in
his Devotions; and to direct him in point of Conscience. If ever there was such
a thing as Implicit Faith, they are the greatest Assertors of it, that would
enforce not only their own fellow Subjects, but even their Sovereign King, to
believe, as they believe, or else to forfeit all, both spirituals and
temporals. Yet let the sufferings of the Loyal Party receive this Consolation;
That these present Misfortunes cannot startle him, so as to make him warp from
his first Principles, his clear Conscience and well grounded Resolutions
rendering him like a Marble Wall, that shivereth all the shafts that are shot
against it.

But we fear we have trespassed upon the Rules of prepertion, in framing too
large a Portall, for so little a Fabrics: We shall therefore draw the
Curtains, and withhold you no longer from viewing the Scenes, promising in the
sight of God, and remembering that Liars are in the number of those against whom
the gates of the new Jerusalem shall be shut, to deals in the ensuing stories
with all candor and ingenuity, not out of a desire to render the actors of
these impieties odious, or abuse the Reader either with falsehoods or
uncertainties, but to report nothing but what has been examined and attested
by men of known truth and integrity; And that the world may see what violent
affect one these Sectaries brought to these ho^tile acts, we shall begin with
the times of peace when the King had no formidable Army toi some their
Iealousies, nor these men provoked to (...) by any foregoing injuries; The
Sce^e is Essex and the (...) man that shall be tendered to your view in Sir John
Luca^.

Viget, Vigebit, victa vincet veritas.

JER. 15. 13. Thy substance and thy treasure will I give to the spoil without
price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.

MERCVRIVS RVSTICVS: OR, The Countries Complaint, etc.
I.
Sir John Lucas and M. Newcomin a Minister, barbarously used by the Brownists
and Anabaptists of Colchester: Sir John's house plundered, his Mother, Lady, and
Sister abused, and committed to the common Ga^le. The inhumane usage of Sir
William Boteler in Kent, his house plundered, and his servants tortured, etc.

ON Monday Aug. 22. 1642. Sir John Lucas intended with some Horse and Arms, to
begin his journey toward the North to wait upon the King; which purpose of his
being on Saturday by a treacherous servant discovered to Joh Langley of
Colchester Grocer, and Captain of the Train Band; He, with Henry Barrington
Brewer, and Alderman of the Town, spent the next day being Sunday, in riding to
Coggeshall, Bocking, Bayntree, Halsteed, and other Towns of their own Faction,
to communicate to them the knowledge of it, and invite them with strong guards
of muskets, to beset the ways, and intercept him in his journey, and did also
(by the assistance of the Major) set a guard of Colchester Trainband, on Sunday
night about his house. Sir Ioh. Lucas intended to begin his journey carely by
one or two a clock on Monday morning, supposing he might so pass with most
privacy and no opposition, but the back gate at which he thought to issue out
was no sooner opened, but a strong guard from under a hedge present themselves,
and one of them discharged his musket as a Warning-piece to the Town, where
the Alarm is presently taken, the Drum struck up and the whole Town raised,
The Volunteers (of which there were 400 or 500 then in Town gathered to serve
under the Earl of Essex and Lord Say) brought up the Beacon, by direction of
Dan. Cole Alderman, fired, and ^orsemen into all parts sent forth to call in
the Country against the Cavaliers in Sir John Lucas house.

The house is presently beset with at least 2000 people, and two pieces of
Ordnance are brought to make a Battery; at last they rushed into the house, and
the first man they seize upon is M. Newcomin, Parson of S. Trinity Parish in
Colchester; they tear his clothes off his back, beat him with their Cudgels
and Halberts, and with infinite exclamations, carry him in triumph through the
chief streets of the Town; by the way entering into a wild but very serious
consideration, not whether he should dye (for that they had resolved at first)
but to what death to put him; one votes drowning, another stoning, another bids
beat out his brains. At length having consulted with Alderman Cole, they carry
him to the common Jail, commanding the Jailer to put him in the strong hold,
(a place provided for the most desperate Malefactors) affirming they would
soon return to take further order with him. There he remained till one a
clock, being then removed to another chamber. They now return to their fellows
who were searching Sir John Lucas's house, some twenty of them rusht into the
Ladies Chamber, laid hands upon her, set a sword to her breast, requiring her
to tell where the Arms and Cavaliers were. The Horse and Arms are soon found
and seized on by the Major, who sends the Arms to the Towne-hall, the Horse to
an lane to be there kept on Sir John Lucas's cost, till they could be sent to
the Parliament. The people lay hands on Sir John Lucas his Lady and Sister, and
carry them attended with Swords, Guns, and Halberts to the common Jail. Last
of all, they bring forth his Mother with the like or greater insolency, who
being saint and breathless, hardly obtained leave to rest her self in a Shop
by the way; yet this leave was no sooner obtained, but the rest of that rude
rabble threatened to pull down the house, unless they thrust her out, being by
this means forced to depart from thence. A Countryman (whom the Alarm had
summoned to this work) espyes her, and pres^ing with his Horse through the
crowd, struck at her head with his Sword so heartily, that if an Halbert had
not crossed the blow, both her sorrows and her journey had there found an end.
Two Gentlewomen(one of which had long been sick) by flight escaped their fury,
but their most wel-wishing neighbors dared not to be known to receive them
into their house, the people threatening to burn that house that gave them
entertainment. Having secured the Master, they now begin to Plunder the house,
all is prize that comes to hand, ^oney, Plate, Jewels, Linen, Woollen, Brass,
Pewter, etc. A few hours dis-robe the house of that rich furniture that had
adorned it many years. The Major and Aldermen standing by all this while, but
either not able or not willing to conjure down the devil which themselves had
raised up. All the servants they could meet with they bring to prison, they
laid hands on I. Brown(one who had bin a servant to the family from the time of
Sir John Lucas's Grandfather) they bind him to a tree, set a Musket to his
breast, and a sword to his throat, and tie lighted matches between his fingers,
and Io. Furley (a young pragmaticall boy) examins him concerning his Masters
Intentions, Horses, Money, etc, but especially concerning M. Newcomin, whether
he had not given an Oath of secrecy: Whether he were not to ride a great Horse?
whether he were not habited in a Buffe jerkin and velvet coat? etc. Fear
easily prompts the old man to answer what he thought would give content. Out of
his Examination the Major frams an Information against Sir John and M Newcomin,
not forgetting to relate the good service he had done, the Horse and Arms he
had taken, but withal implying, how miserably the house was plundered by the
zealous people, adding in his Letters (and that very truly) That he could do
no more then a child among them, with these Letters he presently dispatcheth a
Post to the House of Commons.

About one a clock a new Alarm is raised, that 200 armed Horsemen are
discovered in a vault at Sir J. Lucas's, That they had killed nine men already,
and were issuing forth to destroy the Town. The shops are shut up in an
instant, and the multitude throng down thither to take or kill these
Cavaliers. And because they find none there, they now spend their rage upon the
house, they batter down the doors and walls, beat down the windows, tear his
Evidences, deface his Walks and Gardens, do any thing that may do mischief.
From thence they go to his Park, pull down his Pales, kill his Dear, drive
away his Cattle. And to show that their rage will know no bounds, and that
nothing is so sacred or venerable which they dare not to violate, they break
into Saint Giles his Church, open the Vault where his Ancestors were buried,
and with Pistols, Swords, and Halberts, transfixe the Coffins of the dead.

And now the Majors care begins to show it self, he sets a Guard upon the
house that no hurt should be done unto it, yet that Guard suffered 100 l. worth
of corn, (which at first was neglected as contemptible luggage) to be carried
out, and the most of it to their own houses. Another guard he sets upon the
Prison, left the Prisoners should be assaulted by the people who were so much
incensed against them, though it had bin sit to set some honest men to guard
them from those guardians, who were as forward as the people to drink their
blood.

On Thursday comes down Sir Thomas Barrington and M. Grimston, as a Committee
from the House, who coming into the market place before the Prison-doore (the
Town Hall not able to receive the least part of the multitude) there published
two Orders from the House, one wherein Sir John Lucas and his adherents were
proclaimed guilty of high Treason for intending to assist the King. Another,
wherein thanks were given the people for the good service they had done, yet
they were told withal, that their act of Plundering was against the sense of
the House. Some of the agents in that work, produced a Printed Order of
Parliament (not heard of before among honest men) by which they justified what
they had done; Sir Thomas Barrington replied that it was a false and feigned
Order, contrived by the malignant party to render the House odious, and very
lovingly besought the people to do so no more. And indeed the next weeks
Diurnall tells us, that upon occasion of the outrageous plundering in Essex, It
was Ordered that thence forward none should Plunder but those that were
authorized by the House to do it.

Friday was designed for the carrying up of the Traitors (Sir. John Lucas and
Newcomin) for whom there was one Messenger come from the Black-Rodde, and
another from the Sergeant at Arms, (for the Ladies were declared no prisoners
after they had lain in the common Jail four days.) When the time of their
departure was come, many thousands of people were gathered together (both of
Town and Country) a Drum being struck up to give them warning. The Coaches
are come, and the Prisoners called forth; only M. Newcomin they dared not
carry forth as yet, because the people threatened to tear him in pieces; as
assuredly they had done, had not M. Grimston's care been very great, who
placing a Court of Guard on each side of Sir Thomas Barringtons Coach from the
prison door, brought him forth unexpectedly and put him into the Coach, the
people then not daring to strike or stone him, least mischief intended him
should light on Sir Thomas Barrington.

The Coach being guarded thus a mile out of Town, they passed on, suffering no
other strokes but those of the tongue (bitter Curses and revilings) and those
they met withal abundantly, at Chelmesford, Ronford, and in all the Towns
whither the news of their Treason had gone before them, Sir John Lucas's
captive Horses being carried in triumph with the Coach all the way; at London
Sir Thomas Barrington sent the Horses to the Red Lion, the Prisoners to the
Sergeant at Arms, where they remained all Sunday, not permitted to go to
Church with their Keeper: on Monday they were sent for to the House, and
committed Sir John Lucas to the Gate House, M. Newcomin to the Fleet.
Immediately issued out a Declaration of both Houses to the whole Kingdom, but
especially to the County of Essex, ordered to be read in all Churches and
Chapels; wherein for the better encouragement of good people (so run the
words) it is told them that Sir John Lucas's Horse and Arms are employed for
the service of His Excellency, that Sir John, and M. Newcomin are committed to
several Prisons, and shall speedily be brought to their trial, to receive
condign punishment according to their demerits.

Sir John Lucas was afterward enlarged, giving 40000 l. bail to appear upon
summons, and not to depart London and the Suburbs without leave. M Newcomin
remained in the Fleet from Aug. 29. to Sept. 24. being never called for, and at
length discharged.

Sir William Boteler of Kent, returning about the beginning of April 16^2, from
his attendance, (being then Gone Genleman Pentioner) on the King at York, then
celebrating Saint Georges feast, was by the earnest solicitation of the Gentry
of Kent, engaged to join with them in presenting the most honest and famous
Petition of theirs to the House of Commons, delivered by Captain Richard
Lovelace, for which service, the Captain was committed Prisoner to the
Gate House, and Sir William Boteler to the Fleet, from whence after seven weeks
close imprisonment, no Impeachment in all that time brought in against him,
many Petitions being delivered and read in the House for his enlargement, he
was at last upon bail of 20000 l. remitted to his House in London, to attend
de die in diem, the pleasure of the House. And having thus danced attendance
six weeks more, at last he obtained leave for his healths sake to go to his
own house in Kent, called Barrhams Place in Teston, and from thence, for
recovery of his health much impaired by long Imprisonment, he visited the Wells
near Tunbridge, leaving with his servants both in London and in the Country a
strict charge as of his house, so to give him speedy information, if Sergeant
Hunt should summon him to make his appearance: while Sir William Boteler
remained thus a Prisoner to the House, resolving to yield obedience according
to the condition of his bond, 500 Horse and Dragoones under the command of
Colonel Edwine Sands, Sir John Seaton, and Douglas, accompanied by several
Gentlemen his Neighbors; as Sir William Brooks, Sir Michael Lucy. M. Richard
Lea Burgess for Rochester, M. Blunt, and others, on the 24. of August, between
eight and nine of the clock at night, beset his house: The servants were within
and the doors shut, only William Nelson, Sir William's Groom coming from the
Stables pressed through the midst of them to the Hall door, where Sands and
Seaton stood: They demand of him whether he belonged to Sir William? who
answering that he did, Thou Rogue, says Sands, open the door; the poor
Groom tried, but could not, but assured them that there should be no
resistance made: and withal told them, that his Master was at the Wells, but
had lest order to give them the best welcome the house could afford, and upon
notice given would be ready (if they had such Order) to render himself up to
the House of Commons, whose Prisoner he acknowledged himself to be: and
withal offered that if they would have patience but while he went to the back
door, the House should open unto them. This so reasonable an answer could not
satisfy unreasonable men, who it seems were resolved to force the door,
rather then have it opened, to give a peaceable admittance: Therefore they
revile the Groom, call him Rogue, and threaten to kill him, not because he
would not, but because he could not give them entrance. And to make good their
threats, Sands and Seaton commanded some of their Rout to hold him up against
his Masters Hall door, and bade some twelve or more Dragooners to give fire on
him, which was done accordingly: on the word given, they that held him
withdrew, not trusting to the undistinguishing bullet, and presently the Groom
fell down, by which means he escaped the fury of the shot, which took
effect only on the door, and beat it down. The entrance that was offered,
thus forced, the house is instantly filled by the Commanders, the Gentlemen,
their abettors, and the Soldiers. The first man they meet with is Ben. wiand,
Sir Williams Steward, who being demanded by Sands where his Master was,
returned answer, the same in effect which before they received from the Groom:
Sands was as courteous to the Steward as the Groom, calls him Rogue, and
tells him that he would have his Master alive or dead, commands him to bring
him to the Chamber where Sir William did lodge, their drawn Sword and Muskets
bent upon him extort obedience. Being brought into the Bedchamber, Sands
demands whether there were no private Outlet or Closet? to lay all naked
before him, the Steward solds back the Hangings, by which means the Colonel
discovers a close-stole, which at worst could not be so loathsome, as he was
before he dyed: This sight enraged him, not only to revile the Steward,
calling him Rogue, but cruelly to beat him with his Pole-axe; and having thus
prepared him, he commands him upon no less pain then the loss of his life,
to reveal his Masters Plate and Money; and to enforce the discovery from him,
with drawn Swords they prick him, and force him from one room to another. At
last being come to the Dining Chamber, Colonel Sands causes a dozen of Candles
to be lighted, and so to be held to and under the Stewards hands, and lighted
Match to be applied between his fingers, for the space of a quarter of an
hour, Sands himself all the while looking on, commanded both Candle and
Match to be renewed, as often as either went out, or burnt dull. In this
Torment they continued the poor soul, until both his hands were shamefully
burnt, not being able to relieve himself by that discovery for which they
tortured him. Nor was their barbarous cruelty thus practiced on the Steward
only, from him they descend to the rest of the servants, whom they prick with
their swords, beat with their Poleaxes to the indangering their lives, and all
this to extort a Confession where their Masters Money and Plate were: but when
this inhumanitie produced not the effect they looked for, they broke up every
door, plundered every Trunk and Chest, and examined every dark place from the
Closet and Cabinet to the Powdring-Tub and Oven. Nay, the Cellar escaped not
their fury; What they could not drink, either Wine or Beer, they let out and
poured upon the ground. In this search they found and carried away five hundred
pounds in money, and some store of Arms. And because the great adventures of
valiant Knights must not be forgotten, To the Eternal same of Sir Will.
Brooks we are to tell you, that when the Ladies Closet was broken open,
besides the charitable provision of Medicinal ^yrupes and Salves for the poor
and the needy neighbors, all which were trampled under foot and spoiled. There
were some hospitable provisions for Entertainments, as diverse sorts of
Preserves and other sweetmeats, and in these this doughty Knight had his
finger as deep as any, except a common soldier, who seeing him feed greedily
on a Gally-pot, and presuming his judgment to be good in the choice, (for the
Proverb is true which end soever you put foremost, A liquo^ish layle has a
liquorish tooth) rudely thust his whole fist all begrimed and besmeared in
blood and powder, into the pot with him: which as it turned his Worships
stomach for the time, so it may serve as a sure Prognosticke, That it these
distractions go on, where the Gentleman has his finger, the Clown will be
sure to have his fist. But to leave him to his sweetmeats, which perchance may
have a sour sauce, and return to the Colonel and his plundring Regiment.
Being Masters of the House, they plundered and pillaged not only Sir William
Boteler, but all his servants, men and maids, not only their chests, but their
very pockets. News of this being brought to Sir William Boteler the next
morning early by three of the clock, and finding by their threats, that his
life was in danger, he resolved to fly for protection to the King at
Nottingham: In his way thither at Pinkeny M^wlton in Northamptonshire, he was
seized on by the Country people, and by about 150 Horse conveyed first to
Northampton, and from thence to London. About the beginning of September he was
brought before the House of Commons, and there in a full House was examined
twice; to whom he gave a full and clear satisfaction in every particular. And
being unimpeached, the whole House being utterly unable to accuse him of any
the least kind of offense or Delinquencie, Sir William Boteler did th^n and
there in the public House make his complaint of this intolerable oppression
and injustice, charging by name before the House, Colonel Edwine Sands, Sir
John Staton, Sir Michael Livysey, M. Richard Lea, who then was present fitting
in the house, and Sir William Brooks with Felony and Burglary, for breaking up
his house in the night, and stealing and carrying away his Money and Goods: and
implored the justice of the House against them. And now behold their great
zeal of Justice, their care of the Subjects Property, and the freedom of
their persons from illegal imprisonment, in stead of harkning to his just
complaint, and relieving him in his losses, to keep Magna Charta inviolable,
they Remand Sir William Boteler again Prisoner to the Gate House, where he
remained for six months longer: at last being certainly informed, that it was
really intended if not ordered by the House to send him to I^switch, he
endeavored and effected an escape from the Gate House, and got safe to Oxford,
where he attested all these particulars.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. II.
Sir Hen. Audley's house plundered: Variety of insolences committed by the
Rabble of Essex, upon M. Laud, M. Honifold, M. Stevens, and M. Simmons,
Ministers. The Countess of Rivers is plundered to the value of 100000 pounds,
etc.

THe last weeks Mercurius told you of the Plundring of Sir Iobn Lucas his
house in Essex, and the barbarous insolences practiced on him and his. The
Tumult thus raised, and made confident by success, they go on in ^riumph, and
like a violent Torrent swelling above its Channel, carry all before them, and
fearing no opposition, they divide themselves into several companies, every
place where they come ^asts of their fury and madness: Some go to Sir Henry
Audlyes at Beere-Church, whose house they Plundered of its furniture, and his
Grounds and Pastures of his Cattle.

Others go to M Erasmus Land a poor Minister of Little Try, whose very name
with these men was a Crime and reason enough to expose him to their rage:
guilty he was of nothing but a good and honest name, yet they spoil him of his
goods, drive away his Cattle, rob him of 20 li. in Moneys, his own and his
Wives Clothes, all except those upon their backs: M. Land knowing diverse of
them, and knowing them to be Colchester men, repaired thither to the Major for
Justice, and by chance found him well circumstanced for an action of that
nature, both in respect of place and company, for he found him at the
Moote-hall, and the Aldermen his Brethren with him: Being come thither, he was
so far from finding what he sought for, Justice, that he was not permitted to
make his complaint, M. Cole one of the Aldermen, telling him openly, that they
knew him and his Cause, he was the Minister of Try that was Plundered the day
before, but they had other business in hand and he must be gone, for they
could not hear him.

Others of them went to M. Honifold a Bachelor in Divinit^e, and near 70
years of age dwelling in Colchester, there they rifle his house of all its
furniture, take away his Bonds, Bills, and Evidences, leave not a shelfe behind
them, nor a pin to hang a hat on. The good old man, thinking that spoil and
Robbery had been as punishable now as when he was a young man, and not knowing
that the pretending defenders of the Law had banished all Law out of the
Kingdom, went to crave the Majors assistance, to restore his goods and punish
the offenders. Alderman Cole the Fulk of Colchester being present, told him,
That he wondered he would offer to come abroad being a man so much hated, and so
rated him away. In his return, a multitude of boys and rude people throng
about him, and prosecute him throngh the streets with exclamations and
outcries: nor do they stay here, their hands second their tongues, throwing
stones and dirt at him. So little did either the hoary head and venerable old
age, or the Privilege of his sacred function afford him protection from the
enraged multitude: Many see him, some pity him, but none dare own him or take
him into protection, least they should divert this swelling tide of popular
fury from the good old man, and draw it on themselves; at last bowels of
compassion yearn on him, a kinsman of his emboldned, what by the urgency of
Nature, and the constraint of Charity, opens his doors to afford him shelter
from this storm, but all in vain; like so many Bears robbed of their Whelps,
they double their rage, the multitude threaten to pull down the house unless
the prey be delivered up unto them: the good old man seeing the inexorablenes
of his prosecutors, to make a full return of the kindness which he found,
resolves rather to expose his own person as the subject of his fury, then his
kinsmans house: and so he did, for out he goes unto them; and now having
retrived the game, they pursue him with a high advanced dinne and confused
clamor: At last, when all other means to escape their fury failed, he made a
voluntary captivity his safety, and took the Common Jail for his Sanctuary.

Having thus thrown Master Honifold into prison, not so much the ignominy of
the place where they had lodged him, or sacietie of contempt of Gods Minister
which they had cast upon him, as the want of more day light, sets an end to
this days frenzy. They part for the present, but resolve to meet next
morning; and so they do, a day or two are too scantie to act their boundless
malice. Being met, their next plundering expedition is to the Countesle of
Rivers house at S. Osyth, a rich prize: there they enter the house, and being
entered, they pull down, cut in pieces, and carry away her costly Hangings,
Beds, Couches, Chaires, and the whole furniture of her house, rob her of her
Plate and Moneys: They tear down her Wainscote, Leads, and Windows, they
leave not a door, nor so much as a bar of a window behind them, The
Countess with her family, forewarned of their intentions to come thither, made
an escape, and retired to her house at Melford in Suffolk: thither within a
day or two they pursue her, Essex is too narrow to bound the madness of the
Essex Schismatics; in Suffolk they meet with some that are as mad as
themselves: Few Counties (the more is the pity) but can y^eld companions in
such outrages. From thence she hardly escapes with her life, she abandons her
house, and leaves it to the mercy of these new Ministers of new justice, who
not only rifle the house, but make strict search for her person. And that you
may ghesle what spiritual men they were, and likewise in what danger this
honorable Person was in, they express themselves in this rude unchristian
language, That if They found her they would try what flesh she had. From whence
she fled to S. Edmunds Bury, where the Gates were shut against her an hour at
least at length she was suffered to lodge there that night, and next day with a
strong guard she was conveyed out of Town, and so keeping her self as private
as she could, made an escape to London. Her losses at both her houses were
valued at an hundred thousand pounds at least, though some that knew the rich
furniture that adorned both, affirm it to be no less then an hundred and
fifty thousand pounds, besides her Parks in both places were utterly spoiled.
One of these Plunderers whose name was Bawyer, was apprehended in London
selling some of these goods in the very act, and for this committed to Newgate
as a Felon, two of the Countesse's servants entering into Recognizance to give
in evidence against him for the King, but upon his Petition to the House of
Commons it was ordered he should be discharged without paying any fees, which
was done accordingly; and 'twas but an oversight that his prosecutors had not
been laid in his place, and public thanks decreed him for his zeal to the
Cause.

M. Stevens Parson of South-Hamfield in Essex, hearing that the Plunderers of
that County were coming on him, took horse and fled, and so saved both
himself and his horse, for he knew that both were sought after. The father
being fled, the children left to their own providence, bethink how to secure
those little pieces of Plate which each had received from the bounty of their
Godfathers and Godmothers; neither time nor acquaintance could give them
latitude of much choice where to hide it; and thinking any place safer then
their own house, they run to a poote woman their neighbor, and there with her
they deposite their whole Treasure. When the Plunderers came and sound that the
birds were flowne, having intelligence, or as some say, but suspecting that the
poor woman's house might hide M. Stevens his goods, they go to her house and
demand them: The woman denies that she has any of M. Stevens his goods:
hereupon one of the Plunderers strikes her on the head with a Club with such
violence, that her brains came out at her nostrils. The poor woman being thus
murdered, the bloody Murderers insult over her, and say, that the just hand
of God was upon her, for lying against her knowledge, and denying those parcels
of M. Stevens his goods that were in her possession:so usual a thing it is
with these men to blaspheme God, and entitle him to all those wickednesses
which they commit on others.

M. Edward Symmons Parson of Rain in Essex, in the Months of June and July
1642. Preached against the sin of Rebellion and Disobedience, and against
traducing the King, slandering the footsteps of Gods Anoyn^ed, and refused to
promote the Civil War (then begun) by stirring up the people to contribute
Money, Plate, and Horses, the maintenance of so unnatural, so destructive a
division as most of the Ministers of those parts did. This as it was more
remarkable in him, so it was more hainously taken from him, in regard of his
former intimate acquaintance with M. Stephen Marshall Parson of Pinching field
in Essex, the great incendiary of this unhappy war, and had given him the right
hand of Fellowship: Hereupon he was sent for to the House of Commons by a
Pursevant, and was told, That he being an honest man (but of a different
judgment from the Sense and Vote of the House) did more prejudice to the good
Cause in hand, then a hundred Knaves, and therefore would suffer accordingly:
which saying since that time, has been plentifully made good, and verified in
many particular oppressions and sufferings, unjustly inflicted on him and his
whole family.

First, he was imprisoned and most illegally deprived of his liberty, for no
other cause, but because he would not, contrary to the dictate of Religion, and
his own conscience, countenance and promote an accursed Rebellion against his
gracious Sovereign.

Secondly, he was referi'd after to the Committee for scandalous Ministers,
thereby to blast his Credit and Reputation in his Ministry: a most diabolical
and divelish Course, and a work of him who is the accuser of the Brethr^n, to
defame honest Orthodox Ministers with the odious name of Scandalous and
Malignants, though made so neither by error in doctrine, wickedness of life,
or debauchnes of conversation, but by the malignity of a Vote, knowing, that by
this means, such Ministers doctrines and Testimonies will be of little or no
credit afterward with the vulgar: for had it been Scandal in a true and proper
sense, which they endeavored to take away out of the Church, they would never
have brought over his head, so scandalous, so infamous a man to be Lecturer in
his Cure as they did: for to the wounding of M. Simmons his soul, and the
indangering the souls of his Parishioners, one Lemuel Tuke is appointed
Lecturer in Master Simmons his Church, a man by education a Weaver, and that
had not so much as saluted either University, yet while men slept he intruded
into a Cure of Souls in Nottinghamshire, from which ever since the Parliament
began he has been a Nonresident: for not long after the sitting of this
Parliament, his Parishioners framed a Bill against him to the Lower House,
Articling against him, not only as negligent, but insufficient in his calling:
Nay they accuse him of no less then Barrettry and Battery, Drunkenness and
whoredom, and some such other sins, which in the judgment of all honest
men, make a man truly and properly scandalous: yet this man thus Articled
against to the House of Commons as Scandalous, is thought worthy to be
substituted as a Coadjutor in M. Simmons his Cure, who only was voted
Scandalous because not Rebellious: so that all the world may judge what it is
to be Scandalous in this new sense, To honor the King, and to live in
obedience to the established orders of the Church.

Thirdly, having preached that it was unlawful to take up Arms against the
King, and contrary to the doctrine of the Scriptures to contribute to a War
against Him, in opposition to Lemuel Tuke, who labored to payson his People
with Sedition and Rebellion, affirming openly, that in some Cases it was
lawful not only to Resist, but (which I tremble to relate) to kill the king;
instancing in the example of Athaliah, 2 King. II. yet the said Tuke is
countenanced and encouraged, whereas Master Simmons for asserting the Truth,
was summoned before the Committee, there to answer as a Delinquent: who was so
f^rre from a Retractation, that he justified the doctrine: which he did so
fully, that one of the Committee was convicted of it, yet as he himself did,
so he would have Master Simmons to withhold that Truth in unrighteousness; for
Sir Thomas Barrington (who was the man) confessed that it was a Truth and a
Divine Truth, yet not fit to be preached at all times, no not by those that
were entrusted with it by God himself, no though it might be in some danger of
Impeachment. At last being charged to preach no more such doctrine, and putting
in bail, by the Committee he is permitted to return to his charge. But behold
what it is to be voted a delinquent, or a Scandalous Minister by the Committee;
it is to be put out of the protection of the Law, and exposed to the fury of
the people: for on his return Oath is made before a Justice of Peace, that at
Halstead in Essex it was concluded that an hundred men from Cogshall and
Colchester side (some of that Crew that plundered Sir John Lucas his house)
should suddenly surprise M. Simmons in his house, Plunder his goods, and cut
off his person as one not fit to live, because he was (as they said) against
the Parliament: But by the good providence of God this conspiracy was
discovered and prevented.

Fourthly, they oppressed him in his State, for after his Return home, seeing
the necessity of opposing that inundation of wickedness which was overflowing
his Charge, and pressed earnestly in conscience according to his duty and
place, to labor to undermine tha^ throne of Satan which by the Luxation of the
nerves and sinews of Government was like to be set up both there and in all
parts of the Kingdom, he bent himself in his Sermon chiefly against the
prevailing sins of the time, as Lying and Slandering, Rebellion and Treason,
Pride and Opprestion, Malice and Cruelty: yet these Sermons by his malicious
enemies were interpreted little better then Libells against the Parliament: and
upon Information given he was sent for up, three or four times, to the Lower
House, to his very great charge and trouble, though when he came to London he
was never called to answer to the Accusation. And because he refused to
contribute voluntarily to the maintenance of the Rebellion, his malicious
Neighbors resolved to extort it from him in a seeming legal way: for in the
rates made for the Royal Subsidy, they raised him far beyond his just
proportion, and therefore in the first rate, they seized him twice as much, and
in the second almost thrice as much as themselves; and contrived their
business so cunningly, that they caused him to be font for up to the Parliment
while these things were in doing, and returned rates in to the Exchequer in his
absence, that so he might not have the opportunity, by complaint of a just
greivance, to relieve himself.

Lastly, having by most unjust v^xations exhausted his Estate and drayned his
purse: without hearing his defense indeed without further summoning him to
appear, they sequester his Parsonage and Glebe, and Tyt^e, and put one Robert
Atkins a stranger into Cure; and as they put his Livelihood into a strangers
hands, so they put his life into the power of his enemies, who are authorized
to apprehend him, and carry him Prisoner to Cambridge: but upon Intimation
given, he withdrew himself, and leaving all to the mercy of his Enemies, was
forced by flight to socur^ his Person.

And here by the way give me leave to observe one thing to the Courteous
Reader, and it is the Reason which was alleged in the sequestration of M.
Simmons his Parsonage, and indeed is generally used in all these
sequestrations, and it is, For the better supply of an able and godly man in
the said Church: I would they go^ll tell us where we should find these two
Epithites Able and Godly to meet in any one of those which they have
Substituted in the Revenues and Employments of those Orthodox Divines, which
they have banished from their Cures and families: do but survey the new
Plantations which they have made, and you will think that Ieroboams Priests
were risen again from the dead, the lowest and basest of the people: for while
honest, learned, and conscientious men could not suffer themselves to be made
the base instruments to corrupt and seduce the Ignorant multitudes to comply
with the treasonable practices of the heads of this Rebellion, it was necessary
to seek out and invite such of the Clergy into their Party whom either want of
merit, or want of honesty, had left destitute of means, and when Orthodox men
are displaced or driven away, and such Trencher Chaplains put in their places,
we may easily guess what work is in hand, even the alteration of the
Government; for while they are so earnest both to Preach and Print that other
forms of Government are Gods ordinance as well as Monarchy, they will in time
go on to undervalue Monarchy in comparison of the rest: but to leave my
diversion and to return to M. Simmons.

His living sequestrated, and his person exposed to the license of his veryest
enemies, but he withdrawing himself from this storm, and being out of their
reach, they wreck their malice on his poor Wife and Children, and his aged
Father: They threaten to beat down the house about their cares, unless they
would yield possession to M. Atkins: his father for cutting down three trees
on the Glebe for necessary uses, and an honest Parishioner for loving M.
Simmons and plowing his Land, were most maliciously handled, and sent for up
before the Committee in the Exchequer Chamber: and when after all these threats
and oppressions they still keep possession of the Parsonage house, having no
place else wherein to put their heads, at last May the 15. Watt Tyler, I mean
Watt Long, whom some call Colonel Long, came with some Troops of Horse, and
cast his whole family out of doors, his aged Father, his Wife and three
Children, the eldest but seven years old, and his servants: and so gave
possession of the house to M. Atkins.

He that desires to be better satisfied concerning this faithful Minister of
God, and what raised this persecution against him, let him have recourse to
that Learned and Orthodox Book of his lately published, called, A Loyal
Subjects Belief, worthy every man's reading, wherein he shall see a solid and
satisfactory Answer to all those Arguments divulged by way of a Letter by
Stephen Ma^shall the great Patri^rch of Rebellion, whereby he endeavors to
maintain the Lawfulness of this present War against the King: In which
Letter you may see the true character of a Cauterized Schismatique, for as if
he were afraid the World should not think him sealed up to a reprobate sense,
and past all grace of Repentance, he tells us that as soon as he has recovered
his health (much impaired by a hot eager prosequution of this Rebellion) he
intends to return (with the Dog to his vomit) to sacrifice his strength to
the service of the Cause and his Excellency, in all which, while he labors to
free himself from the imputation of Madness, and apologizeth against a
prevailing report, that the horror of his guilt had distracted him, he proves
himself to be madder then ever the World took him.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. III.
The great increase of Brownists and Anabaptists at Chelmsford of late years.
Their abuse of the Church, and Doctor Michelson Parson there. Their Te^ets in
matters of Religion. Master Cornelius a Minister plundered, etc.

ESSEX is a deep Country, and though we have traveled almost two weeks in it,
yet we cannot get out: we are now at Chelmesford, which is the Shire-towne,
and has in it two thousand Communicans; all these are Parishioners of one and
the same Church, for there is but one Church in this great Town, whereof at
this time Doctor Michelson is Parson, an able and godly man. Before this
P^rliament was called, of this numerous Congregation there was not one to be
named Man or Woman, that boggl^d at the Common Prayers, or refused to receive
the Sacrament kneeling, the posture which the Church of England (walking in the
footsteps of venerable Antiquity) has by Act of Parliam^nt enjoined all those
which account it their happiness to be called her children. But since this
magnified Reformation was set on foot, this Town (as indeed most Corporations,
as we find by experience, are Nurceries of Faction and Rebellion) is so filled
with Sectaries, especially Brownists and Anabaptists, that a third part of the
people refuse to communicate in the Church-Lyturgie, and half refuse to
receive the blessed Sacrament, unless they may receive it in what posture they
please to take it. They have amongst them two sorts of Anabaptists; the one
they call the Old men or Aspersi, because they were but sprinkled: the other
they call the New men, or the Immersi, because they were overwhelmed in their
Rebaptization.

In August 1641. there was an Order published by the House of Commons (indeed
by some leaders in a Committee) for the taking away all Scandalous Pictures out
of Churches, in which there was more intended by the Authors then at first
their instruments understood, until instructed by private information how
far the People were to enlarge the meaning. When this Order came forth, there
was standing in the Chancell a goodly fair Window at the East end, untouched
from the first foundation of the Church, in which was painted the History of
Christ from his Conception to his Ascension: and to perpetuate the memory of
the Benefactors, in the vac^nt places there were the Eschochions and Arms of
the ancient Nobility and Gentry, who had contributed to the building building
and beautifying that fair structure. In obedience to the Order the
Churchwardens took down the pictures of the blessed Virgin, and of Christ on
the Cross, and supplied the places with white glass. But the Sectaries who
understood the sense of that Order better then the Churchwardens, did rest
very ill satisfied with this partial imperfect Reformation: That therefore
they might, according to the phrase of the times, make a Thorough Reformation,
on the Fist of November in the Evening, all the Sectaries assemble together,
and in a Riotous manner with long Poles and stones beat down and deface the
whole Window.

This excrcise of an usurped power in the People without the Lawful
Magistrate, like that which Andreas Corolostadius put in practice in the
Reformation under Luther, and was sharply condemned by him: and ind^ed gave the
unhappy occasion to that Schism^ which is hardly made up at this day: st^rred
the spirit of the Doctor to inveigh, the next Lords day, against Popular
tumultuous Reformations, though to the ^etter: as being vitiated, First, by the
defect of lawful Authority, which cannot reside in the people: Secondly, in
the intempe^ancy of the prosecution, who commonly cast out one Devil by
another: abolishing Superstition with S.dition. This so incensed the Sectaries
thus to be opposed in their furious zeal, that they threatened the Doctor to
ruin him if he preached any more on that subject: and to let him see how
welcome such doctrine was unto them, there was a Carbine discharged at a window
of that room where the Doctors usual abode was, the Bullet passed through the
place, and in all probability had slain him, had not the good Providence of God
(without which a Sparrow falls not to the ground) diverted him unexpectedly
from a business before known to be appointed for that place and hour. This
design frustrated, about a fortnight after one of these new Proselytes a young
Clothier with others poss^ssed with the same frenzy came into the Church
immediately after divine Service was ended, laid violent hands upon the Doctor,
took him by the Throat, and would have torn his Surplesse off his back, and
were so enraged, that had not some of his honest peaceable Parishioners come to
his rescue, they had in all probability endangered his life: but whom they
could not wound with their hands, they cut with their tongues, as with a sharp
razor: they revile him and call hin Baals Priest, and Popish Priest for wearing
the Rags of Rome, my they cry out against him as a Perjured Person that had
violated his faith engaged in the Protestation, to abolish Popery, of which (in
their opinion) wearing the Surplesse was a part. Many attempts they made upon
the Doctor and his Curate, affronting them, both in officiating Divine service,
and administration of the Sacraments; but they being countenanced by a
considerable part in the Town, the Sectaries could not effect what they
desired, until at last in the Months of June, July, and August, 1642. they
were animated by the coming of the Forces raised in Essex, Suffolk and
Norflok: for as they raised each Company it was sent to Chelmesford the common
Rendevouz, and there stayed until they were made up three hundred or four
hundred, and so sent to London. In all the time of their stay there, the Doctor
lay at the mercy of the Soldiers, who egged on by the Brownists and
Anabaptists of the Town, used his house as their Quarter, consumed his
provisions for his Family, and commanded there as Lords: Amongst many Outrages
committed by the Soldiers, Three are most remarkable.

First, upon a Fast day they send a Command to the Doctor that he should not
pray for the Bishops, nor so much as make mention of t^em in his lips: nor use
the Book of Common Prayer, if he did they threaten to pull him out of the
Pulpit, and tear him in pieces: the Doctor not intimidated by their Threat,
gives order to his Curate to read the Prayers appointed: which accordingly he
did. The Soldiers right bred being Volunteeres of Colchester and Ipswich; and
rightly designed too, for my Lord Says own Regiment, fit Soldiers for such a
Leader, irreverently fit with their Hans en, make a noise to drown the Curates
voice, nay they call to him to come out of his Calves Coope, meaning the
Reading-deske, and make an end of his Pottage: the Curate remembering that
advice of our Savior not to cast pearls before Swine, nor holy things to
dogs, gives over ^eading, unwilling to expose the holy worship of God to so
soul contempt and scorn. Having thus silenced the Curate, their commanders
looking on, they violently take the Sacred Bible to tear it, but being
reproved for it by Sergeant Major Bamfeild then present, they exchange the
Bible for the Book of Common Prayer: having it in their power in Solemn
triumph they carry it into the streets, and that which holy Ma^tyrs inspired by
the holy Ghost composed, and sealed the truth and sanctity of it with their
dearest blood, these Savage Miscreants rent in pieces: some of the leaves they
tread under feet, some they cast into the kennell, some they p^ssed upon, and
some they fixed on the end of their Clubbs and Cudgels, and in a Triumphant
manner marched with them up and down the Town.

Secondly, about a week after when the Doctor was in the Chancell there to
interre the Corpse of a Gentleman lately deceased, these Soldiers rushed into
the place with an intent to bury the quick with the dead, to put the Doctor
into the same grave, which they had done (for no other reason but because he
used the form prescribed by the Church at burial of the dead) had he not been
powerfully rescued by his Parishioners. Lastly,

when the glad Tidings were brought to Chelmesford, that Episcopaty was voted
down by the house of Commons, all usual expressions of an exulting joy were
used, amongst the rest Boonefires were kindled in every street, but most of the
fuel was violently taken from the Doctors wood-yard. And now the pile raised
and the fire kindled, they want nothing but a Sacrifice, this they resolve
shall be the Doctor himself: to this purpose the Separatists of the Town
assisted by two companies of Soldiers, in the Evening assault him in his
house, seize upon his person, and are ready to carry him to the fire, there to
throw him headlong into the midst of it: but some of his friends having
information of the design, go and acquaint the Command^rs with the bloody
intentions of their Soldiers, who presently take a guard and rescue the Doctor
out of their power as soon as ever they had seized on him.

Since that oppressed and worryed every day by these ravenous wolves, he was
forced to forsake his Charge (as many other godly Ministers are) and to fly for
his life: leaving his wife and eight children to the m ^cy of the Rebels, who
have deprived his family of all their livelihood, and exposed them to extreme
want: Nay, they have several times broken violently into his house under
pretense to search for him, and have held Pistolls cocked, and Swords drawn, at
the breasts of his Children and Servants, charging them upon their lives to
reveal where the Doctor was.

It was lately certified from thence by a chief Member of that Town and no
friend of the Doctors, that he finds the case there to be far worse then he
expected, for while they hoped that the power being (Traitorously) wrested out
of the Kings hand, they should have shared it amongst themselves, they find
that either the power is fallen into their hands that are fa^re beneath them,
or else has raised these men up far above them, for as he writes, the Town is
governed by a Tinke^, two Cobblers, two Tailors, two Pedlers, etc. And

that the World may see what a Systeme of Divinity these Cobblers and Tailors
are like in time to sti^ch together, and what Principles they intend to Rule
by, I shall here set down certain preparatory prelusory Propositions which they
usually Preach (for Preach they do) to their infatuated Disciples, and by them
are received as the divine Oracles of God: and you shall have them in their
own^ Terms: viz. First, That Kings are the burdens and plagues of those people
or Nations over which they gove^ne. Secondly, That the relation of Master and
Servant has no ground or warrant in the New Testament, but rather the contray:
for there we read, In Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor free, and, we are
all one in Christ. Thirdly, That the Honors and Titles of Dukes, Marques^es,
Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen are but Ethnicall and
Heathenish distinctions amongst Christians. Fourthly, That one man should have
a Thousand pounds a year, and another not one pound, perhaps not so much, but
must live by the sweat of his brows, and must labor before he eat, has no
ground, neither in Nature or in Scripture. Fifthly, That the common people
heretofore kept under blindness and ignorance, have a long time yielded
themselves servants, nay slaves to the Nobility and Gentry: but God has now
opened their eyes, and discovered unto them their Christian liberty: and that
therefore it is now fit that the Nobility and Gentry should serve their
servants, or at least work for their own maintenance; and if they will not
work, they ought not to eat. Sixthly, That Learning has always been an enemy
to the Gospel, and that it were a happy thing if there were no Universities,
and all Books burnt except the Bible. Seventhly, That any man whom God has (as
they call it) Gisted, may be chos^n by the Congregation for their Pastor: and
that imposition of hands by the Bishop and Presbytery are mee^e Papish
Innovations.


What more additions to these monstrous Opinions, the wildness of such men's
brains, a^ist d by the cunning of the Devil, and encouraged by the ^surped
^ower of these times may pro^uce, we must l^ave to the discovery of time. In
the interim (good Render) stand amazed, and wonder at this excellent pattern^
of the inten^ed bl^ssed Reformation. Had not God, to prepare us for
destruction, deprived us of knowledge, had he not closed our eyes that we
should not see, an^ hardened our hearts that we should not understand, were we
not a people as the Proph^t speaks, forsaken and meted out for destruction, it
could not be, but that Mankind would rise up against this Generation of Vipers
and their Protecto^s, and sw^ep them away, to use the Metaphor of the holy
Ghost, with the beesome of destruction, who if a while connived at, will prove
moths fretting to the destruction both of Church and State: for in this Model
you may see the Babel which is now in building, and the budding forth of those
Brambles, out of which (if not timely quenched) will come forth a fire (as it
is in Jothams Parable) which will devour the Cedars of Lebanon.

The same godly Reformers which plundered Master Laud before mentioned, came
afterward to Master Cornelius Parson of Peldon in the same County of Essex,
whom they rob of all his goods within doors and without: they spared not his
Library, nor his Wives Childbed Linen, though the was great with Child, and
in danger by the fright she took at their coming, to have occasion to make use
of them before her due time, they plunder him to the value of four hundred
pounds, a very great sum in a poor Clergie-mans purse, especially as these
times go. For relief of his loss he sends his servant to the Major of
Colchester (a famous Justiciary as you may remember the last W^eke in the
relation of Master Laud and Master Honifields cases) having made his Complaint,
and accused the Plunderers by name, the Major knew that some body deserved
Commitment, but had the ill luck to be mistaken in the person, and therefore
instead of the Plunderers he commits Master Cornelius his man to the Jail,
where he is lodged for a Malignant, until his Master (plundered of his man
too) came and put in Bail that his servant should be forthcomming to answer to
all objections the next Sessions. Master Cornelius knowing that he should in
vain expect Justice where he found Oppression, from the Major goes to Master
Gardner a Justice of Peace not far off, who grants his Warrant for
apprehension of the parties: who being apprehended (though for Felony) put in
Bail to answer the next Sessions. When the time came, Master Cornelius indicts
these Plunderers, the Bill was found by the Grand Jury upon the evidence of
three or four witnesses who were Spectators, and saw them carry away the
goods: nay the Prisoners at the Bar not only confessed the fact in their
examination before the Justice, when they were first apprehended, but in the
face of the Court, and presence of the Jurors: yet the Petty-Jury, contrary to
reason and their own consciences, found the Indictment against the King. The
Court wondering at so wilful blindness, cause the Statute to be read, lay open
the evidence, and remand them back, not doubting but comparing the fact with
the Law, the Result would be a verdict for the King: they persist in their
obstinacy and return Ignoramus: Being asked by the Bench how they could go
against so clear evidence? They answered in general, Because they did not
think PLUNDERING (a new name for an old Theft) to be Felony by the Law: but
being beaten out of this starting hole, though ten are convicted, yet two
stand out, and give this reason, that they were a Malignants goods, and the
Parliament had given power to plunder such: but when it was replied that no
such Order was produced, nor was it pleaded by the Prisoners at the Bar, they
then professed openly, that these men arraigned at the Bar were honest men,
that they had an In^ent to do them favor and they would do it: Hereupon the
Bench justly incensed against so wilful p^rjury binds over the Jurors to
answer it the next Assiz^s: and withal, order M. Cornelius to indict these
plunderers again upon an other Felony, he obeyes their command and the Grand
Jury find it to be Billa vera: but when the underSheriffe went out to impanell
a Jury to try the Prisoners, he could find none but Separatists, who attended
there that day purposely to be of the Jury, and professed openly that they
stayed there to save the Prisoners. Happy men these, that may commit Murders,
robberies, and thefts, and yet sear no Condemnation, neither at the Tribunal
of God or Man. It is an usual doctrine of this Sect, That God sees no sin in
his children, (for that name they will ingrosse to themselves, though no men
less deserve it) and it seems they are resolved to see no sin one in
another. It was a wild saying of a great Patriarch of theirs, That the Children
of God were Heteroclites, because God did often save them even contrary to his
own Rules. I know not how true they will find this assertion at the great day,
when Murder shall be Murder, and Theft Theft, and God that righteous Judge,
who without respect of persons, shall render to every man according to his
d^eds, yet here on earth, if these men may judge one another, they may commit
what wickedness they list, and let the raines loose to all kinds of villainy,
and yet be saved contrary to all the rules of Law and Justice.

M. Archer Lecturer at the same place, in his Sermon encouraged the people to
take up Arms against the King, but it may be objected, says he, that the
Gentry gainsay this Doctrine, and the Learned utterly disclaim it as erroneous
and damnable, but what though the Gentry and Learned. (as you call them)
dissent, yet let it not Stagger your belief of this undouted Truth: for I tell
you that in my Conscience you may do it, and in doing it you are so far from
sinning, that you will do that which is acceptable to Go^. Be liberal
therefore in contributing to this holy war, and sending forth men to fight
this Battle of the Lord. This man in his Prayers and Sermons constantly calls
the Parliament, The Lords Anointed, but with what Oil it is not yet
determined: I am sure by experience we find that it is not Oil of Gladness.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. IV.
Sir Rich: Mynshull's house in Buckinghamshire plundered by the Lord Brooks
command. The Kings picture abused. A house burnt near Hounslow by the Lord
Wharto^s Soldiers. M Wiborow and M. Thorn, the one a Minister in Essex, the
other in Bedfordshire, the first ill-intreated on the Lords day by the Lo: S.
John's Troopers, the other unjustly committed to Prison for a private revenge.

ON Monday the 15. of August, 1642. Sir Richard Mynshull of Bourton in the
County of Buckingham Knight, furnished with ten Horse and Arms, began his
journey into the North to wait upon the King, as in the duty of a servant and
subject he was bound. This being discovered (for they have spies in every
corner) to the Lord Brook, Sir Peter Temple, Sir Rich: Ingoldesby, Master
Goodwine, and others then at Aylesbury, leaders of an Army raised against His
Majesty. It fell under consideration to make Sir Richard Mynshul a precedent to
deter others from serving the King, since it was not to be done but by exposing
their persons to Imprisonment and their estates to plundering, for the Result
of that deliberation was, that since they could not secure his person, they
would seize on his estate, Nor do they stay long before they put the sentence
in execution: for on Thursday the 18. of August, the Lord Brook commanding a
great part of the Army, came to Sir Richards house, and in case he should find
Resistance, they bring diverse piece of Ordnance to batter the House: but being
come they find no opposition. The first company that enters the house were
under the command of one Cap: Jones, who either detesting the oppression, or
yet not fleshed in the sin, which but then found footing in this Kingdom, (for
this was the first of this kind committed in Buckinghamshire, and the second in
England) moderated the eagerness of the Soldiers sharp set on the prey, so
that they gleaned but a little here and there; this moderation renders Captain
Jones suspected for a Papist both to the Lord Brook and the rest of the
Commanders: nay he is not only voiced for a Papist, but a Rumor is raised that
he was bribed into this Moderation, and had taken a reward to spare Sir
Richards goods: the Captain blasted with these reports, the jealousy of him
grew so high that they threaten to kill him: to avoid the sury of the Soldiers
he is feign to withdraw himself, nor d^rst he appear before a Servant of Sir
Richards had made oath that he was Innocent of any such Contract. And now the
Lord Brook and his Company being masters of the House, the first thing on
which they express their rage is the Kings picture, which with their swords
they most traitorously pierce through in diverse places: and not content to
wound him in that representation, (whose person God miraculously has, and we
hope will preserve from them) They whet their tongues against their Sovereign,
using Traitorous and scornful language against Him: by all which it is more
then manifest to all the world, what they would do to the Substance, if they
had Him in their power, that express such malice on his shadow: having at
first entrance violated their loyalty to their King (according to His
Majesty's frequent predictions) their fellow Subjects cannot expect Justice at
their hands: now all is lawful prize that comes to hand, Money, Plate, Jewels,
many fuits of Rich Hangings, Linen, Bedding, they Plunder from the Cabinet to
the Larder, and make clean work as they go, leaving no booty for a second
Plunder. And though that house were but one, yet in that one they Plundered
three, Sir Richard having dis-robed two houses, one in Essex, the other in
London, thinking to secure all in this third: while these things were in doing,
the Lord Brook; with other Commanders, commands the Wine-seller to be broke up:
but in a saucy imitation of greatness, they will not drink without a Taster,
yet not being confident enough, professedly to own Regal observances, for
prevention of danger, a pretense was made, that the Wine was Poisoned, and one
of Sir Rich. servants is compelled (a Pistol set to his breast) to begin and
lead the way, that if there were any danger the experiment might be made in
him: he having gained a Cup of Wine by their dissembled State, they follow
freely, and drink very liberally to the good success of their designs:
without ever scrupling whether drinking so, did not come within the nature of a
health. And indeed it was an oversight that Casui^t Prin was not consulted in
the Case, the Cup often goes round, at last some inspired with the spirit of
Wine, Prophecy, that Sir Richards Treasure was buried in the Seller, presently
they fall to digging, and instead of Treasure find a Mine of Bottles: they
drink up the Wine, and in indignation break the bottles: from hence to cool
the Wine they go to the Beer Seller, and in both what they could not drink,
they break the vessels, and let run on the ground: after this they break
open his Library, and the place where he kept his Evidences: they seize on all
the Bills, Bonds, Deeds, Evidences, Writings and Books which they find,
whether Sir Richards, or his friends: some of these they take away with them,
some they tear in pieces, some they bind in bundles and make them serve
instead of fuel both to heat Ovens and to roast meat for their supper: and
would by no means suffer any of them to be redeemed, though large sums of
money were offered for them: the house it self escapes not their fury: wanting
Ladders to come at the Lead, they supply this defect with the Rackes broken
down from the Stables: they rip up the Lead and carry it away, they tear
down the walls of the houses with Spades and Mattocks, they dig up the lower
rooms, hoping there to find more Treasure: they break the Windows Doors,
Wainscot, Seelings, Glass, they take away all Iron Bars, Casements, Locks,
Keys and Hinges: They break open his Wooll-house and Barns and empty and all:
they enter the Dove-house, and like vermin destroy the Pigeons: only one of
these vermin falling from the holes brake his back and dyed thereof: and
because they could not carry away his house covertly they endeavor to fire it,
to this purpose they leave matches burning in the mats but were discovered.
From his house they issue our into his ground; there they lay all common, they
break up his rales and fences: of his Sheep, what they did not eat, they sold,
Sheep worth 20 ^. for twelve pence, Lambs worth 10 ^. for six pence: and the
reasons why the rates of their market were so low, were, first they were a
Malignant and Traitors goods (so they styled Sir Richard.) Secondly, they were
sold to their Brethren, and therefore must afford good Penniworths. The rest of
the Stock they run their swords or Pikes into most of them and spoiled them.
Nor was Plunder the only thing they looked after, blood is in their thoughts.
First, they send a Troop of horse to pursue Sir Richard, and threaten to cut
him as small as herbs to the Pot: they clap a strong guard on Sir Richards
Lady, deny her a bed to lie on, though the neighbors earnestly entreated. Some
there were among them, who (poor Souls) affrighted with these barbarous
Insolences fled into the field, and hid themselves in growing Hemp, and there
lay on the ground almost 20 hours without meat or any sustenance, so that what
with fright and dampnesse of the earth, some of them contracted dangerous
sicknesses, and hardly escaped with life. The Torrour which fell upon the
Country there about was so great, that the neighboring Justice of Peace durst
not grant his Warrant to search after any of Sir Richards goods, though
earnestly entreated to it: and the neighbors were so ill used and threatened to
extort confession from them where Sir Richard was, or where any of his goods
were conveyed, that some sounded for fear, some fell mad, and some dyed.
Certain it is their carria^e was so barbarous, that it enforced M. Jo. Crew
one of the Company to profess his dislike, and to tell the Lord Brooks and
the rest, That they being Lawmakers should not be Law-breakers, nor make such
precedents as would discover their intentions and render them odious unto the
Country: since that knowing Sir Richard to have put himself for preservation
of his Life under his Majesty's Protection, they have caused his Pond heads to
be dug down, and have destroyed all his Fish, they have cut down his woods
and seized on all his Lands, or made them utterly unprofitable unto him, for
they will not suffer any Bayliffe or servant of his to take any care of his
estate, but have often sent parties of horse to seize on them or kill them.

At a place called Kings-harbour near Hounslow-he^th, three Soldiers, under
the Command of the Lord ^ha^ton, came into a house to drink, going away, they
of the house demand money for their drink: so unexpected an affront did so
incense the Soldiers, that one of them told his Companions he would show them
how they see houses on fire in Ireland, and so put his Carbine into the Thatch
and discharged it, let the house on fire and departed. The General ESSEX
returning from London, came by as the house was on fire, complaint is made unto
him that the owner of the house was undone, but all in vain, his excellency
was not at leisure to do Justice.

The Countess of Rivers (who as you heard in the second Weeks Relation was
Plundered to the value of an hundred thousand, or an hundred and fifty
thousand pound) finding her abode here unsafe, having lost her goods, and her
person in danger, to secure her self resolved for a time to abandon her
Country, and rather expose her self to the hazard of Travel, then commit her
self to that protection which the contemned Laws now affords. To this purpose
she obtained a Pass to go beyond Seas: While she was in preparing for her
voyage, Master Martin Plunder-master General, he that so familiarly speaks
Treason, and steals the Kings Horses, or does any thing, Plunders the
Countess of her Coach horses, notwithstanding a Warrant from the Lords House
to secure them: And when this Warrant was produced to stave off this Parliament
Horse-taker, he replied, That if the Warrant had been from both Houses he would
obey it, as coming from the highest Authority in England, (sure this man was
borne with Treason in his month) but since it came But from the Lords, he did
not value it. When this Warrant could not prevail, the Countess obtaines a
Warrant from the Earl of Essex to have the Horses restored unto her again, but
Master Martin, to over-bear all, procures an Order from the House of Commons to
keep them. This honorable Ladies goods were seized on, though licensed to
pass by the Lords, and searched and allowed by the Custom House;

At Pebmarsh in the same County of Essex, on the Lords day, diverse of the
Parliament Volunteers came into the Church, while the Parson Master Wiborow was
in his prayer before Sermon, and placed themselves near the Pulput, and when
he was in his Prayer, one of them struck diverse times with his staff against
the Pulpit to interrupt him, and while he was in his Sermon in contempt of the
place where they were, and the sacred action in doing, they were almost as loud
as the Preacher, to the great disturbance of the Congregation. No sooner was
the Sermon ended, and the Parson come out of the Pulpit as far as the Reading
desk, but they lay violent hands upon him, rent his clothes, and threaten to
pull him in pieces in the Church. With much entreaty they spare him there, and
permit him to go into the Churchyard: he is no sooner come thither, but they
assault him more violently then before: Master Wiborow seeing the Constable
(who all this while stood a spectator of his hard usage) calls unto him, and
charges him in the Kings name to keep the Kings Peace: at his request they did
a little forbear him: but before he could get half ways home, they assault
him again, and demand his Book of Common Prayer which he used in the Church,
(That which was found by the Parish, being torn in pieces before) which he
refusing to deliver up unto them, they wreck their fury on him: They tugge and
^ale him, and vow to kill him, unless he deliver up the Book of Common Prayer
to their pleasure: he stoutly refuses: Hereupon they fall upon him, strike up
his heels, and take it from him by force, and so carry it away in triumph.

M. Blaker by (a silenced Minister heretofore) preaching at Halstead in the
same County, told them that to bow at the Name of Jesus, was to thrust a spear
into Christ's side, and such Ministers as signed children with the sign of the
Cross, did as much as in them lay to send such children unto the Devil.

When the Earl of Essex and the rest, went from Reading to London, after the
unhappy (to say no more) surrender to that Town, they left there a Committee
consisting of none but City Captains and Tradesmen, these according to the
authority committed unto them, summon all the able men of the Parishes
thereabout, to appear before them at Reading, and assessed them at their
pleasure. In Marlow they assessed one Master Drue at 1000 l.. they fell to 500
l. he refusing to pay was imprisoned, but the Prison being, most nastic and
loathsome, denied the Accommodation of Bedding, was forced to pay 300 l. Master
Hor^epoole, they feased at 200 l. Master Chase (a man Plundered before) at 40
l. twenty pound was offered, but nothing will be abated of thirty Eliot a
Butcher at an hundred pound and imprisoned. Cock a Baker at 20 l. Master
Furnace the Vicar (not suffered to speak for himself because a Malignant) at
10 l. and paid seven. John Langley 10 l. Thomas Langley 20 l. William Langley 5
l. and Wilmot his servant 5.l. John More 80 l. Haskins a Shoemaker 5 l. Cane an
Inne-keeper 7 l. Rates so illegal, or had they bin legal, so unequally
proportioned to these men's Estates, that had Ship Money been still on foot, it
would not have drawn so much money out of their purses in forty or fifty
years, as this blew Apron Committee at Reading, removed some seven or eight
degrees from the Close Committee at Westminster, extorted from them at one
clap. O that we were but so wise as to compare our Conditions! certainly then
we could not but acknowledge the just wrath of God upon us for our ingratitude,
murmuring so much when we had so little cause, and bless God for the return
of our former Peace, though with all its grievances, and those maliciously
aggravated.

Master Gues Thorn, Bachelor in Divinity, and Parson of S. C^berts in
Bedford, was upon Sunday in the begi^ning of August last 1642. apprehended in
his Parish Church immediately after he came out of the Pulpit (ha^ing preached
three Sermons in the Town that day) by the Lord Saint-Johns Troops, who lay
then in Bedford, and in a very boisterous manner carried away to an Inn in the
Town, not permitted to go home to his house to visit his family, nor any of
his friends suffered to come to him: the next day he was carried away to
London, where when he had ly^n more then three weeks under the Messengers
hands, he was brought to his I ryall at the Bar in the Lords House:
Accusations are framed against him out of Sermons preached nine years before,
Witnesses are produced to prove the Articles, who so well remembered what they
were to say, that they were feign to read their depositions out of Papers which
they brought in their hands. Master Thorn gives so full an answer to all the
objections, that the Lords pronounce themselves satisfied and him innocent,
only the Lord Say disputes with him, and the Earl of Bullingbrooke grumbles at
him. At length it is pretended, that there is another witness in the Country
that can say somewhat, especially if it be written down in a Paper, as it was
to his fellow deponents: hereupon he is committed to the Fleet, there to
remain till that Witness can be prevailed with to find leisure to come up.
About three weeks after the Witness appears, and is sworn, and contrary to
the Rules of that Court is sent to be examined by a Clerk. Master Thorn with
much ado obtaines a Copy of his depositions: which upon a view contain no new
matter but what he had before answered unto and cleared: hereupon he Petitions
again for a sentence: he is ordered to attend the House: after a chargeable
attendance of many days with his Keeper, he is called, the cause reviewed,
upon the review, the Earls of Pembroke, Holland, Clare, and diverse others,
affirm that in their consciences they had acquitted him at the first hearing,
and now upon the review, found nothing to alter their opinion, and therefore
thought it fit he should be discharged. But well f^re a good neighbor at a
dead list: the Earl of Bullingbrook objects, that he is a man of a malignant
spirit, that he has great interest in the affections of the people amongst
whom he lives, and therefore if enlarged and remitted home may do much
prejudice to the good Cause in hand, upon these just and weighty
Considerations, M. Thorn is remanded to the Fleet: ^nce that time he has used
the assistance of many friends, drawn many Petitions, humbly desiring that he
might be heard: or if the great affairs of State would not afford their
Lordships so much leisure, that he might have leave upon bail to go down to
attend his Cure, until their Lordships should please to call for him: but was
so far from obtaining his desire, that he could never get so far toward it
as have his Petition read. His Parishioners sensible of his oppression and
their own injury, being bereaved of the comfort and labors of their own
Pastor, sent up a Petition subscribed with three hundred hands to the same
effect, that Justice might have a free uninterrupted course either to condemn
or absolve him, but all in vain: so that for ought we yet understand he is
still a Prisoner, and for any thing we are yet informed to the contrary, he is
without hopes for enlargement, though his Judges have pronounced him innocent.
And now would you know the true cause of all this oppression? Know then that it
is possible for the high Court of England to be made the instrument of private
revenge: for Sir Samuel Luke diverse years since suing M. Thorn in the
Star Chamber, it was M. Thorns unhappines to get the day of him, an injury
which Sir Samuel could never forget, and did now revenge it by the help of the
Earl of Bullingbrooke, the Lord Saint John's son, and his own interest in the
house. This story has been attested by some that were both care and eye
witnesses of these particulars, and let me be substituted Prisoner in M.
Thorns place if he (for ought I know) know any thing that I know this, or
intended to make it known to the World.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. V.
Warder Castle gallantly defended by the Lady Arundel, agasinst Sir Edward
Hungerford and his power: his perfidiousnesse in breaking the Articles of
Surrender: his barbarous usage of the Lady, her children, and goods. Master
John Bykar, a Vicars son, murdered at Coventry. Master Abraham Haynes
robbed, abused, and unjustly committed, etc.

ON Tuesday the second of May, 1643. Sir Edward Hungerford, a chief Commander
of the Rebels in Wil^shire, came with his Forces before Warder Castle in the
same County, being the Mansion house of the Lord Ar^ndel of Warder: But
finding the Castle strong, and those that were in it resolute, not to yield it
up unless by force, called Colonel St^ode to his help: Both these joined in
one, made a Body of 1300 or thereabout. Being come before it, by a Trumpete^
they summon the Castle to surrender: The reason pretended was, because the
Castle being a Receptacle of Cavaliers and Malignants, both Houses of
Parliament had ordered it to be searched for Men and Arms, and withal by the
same Trumpeter declared, that if they found either Money or Plate, they would
seize on it for the use of the Parliament. The Lady Arundel (her husband being
then at Oxford, and since that dead there) refused to deliver up the Castle,
and bravely replied, that she had a command from her Lord to keep it, and she
would obey his command. Being denied entrance, the next day being Wednesday the
third of May, they bring up the Cannon within Musket shot and begin the
Battery, and continue it from the Wednesday to the Monday following, never
giving any intermission to the besieged, who were but 25 fighting men to make
good the place against an Army of 1300. In this time they sprung two Mines, the
first in a vault through which Beer and Wood and other necessaries were brought
into the Castle: this did not much hurt, it being without the foundation of the
Castle. The second was conveyed into the small Vaults, which by reason of the
intercourse between the several passages to every office, and almost every
room in the Castle, did much shake and endanger the whole fabric. The Rebels
had often rendered some unreasonable conditions to the besieged to surrender, as
to give the Ladies, both the Mother and the Daughter in Law, and the women and
children quarter, but not the men, the Ladies both infinitely scorning to
sacrifice the lives of their Friends and Servants to redeem their own from the
cruelty of the Rebels, who had no other crime of which they could count them
guilty, but their fidelity and earnest endeavors to preserve them from
violence and robbery, choose bravely (according to the Nobleness of those
Honorable Families from which they are both extracted) rather to dye together
then live on so dishonorable terms. But now the Castle brought to this
distress, the defendants few, oppressed with number, tired out with continual
watching and labor from Tuesday to Monday, so distracted between hunger and
want of rest, that when the hand endeavored to administer food, surprised with
sleep, it forgot its employment, the morsells falling from their hands while
they were about to eat, deluding their appeties now when it might have been a
doubt which they would first have laded their muskets withal, either Powder
before Bullet, or Bullet before Powder, had not the Maid servants (valiant
beyond their Sex) assisted them, and done that service for them. Lastly, now
when the Rebels had brought Petars, and applied them to the Garden door (which
if forced, opened a free passage into the Castle) and balls of wildfire to
throw in at their broken windows, and all hope of keeping the Castle was taken
away, now and not till now did the besieged found a Parley. And though in their
Diurnals at London, they have told the world that they offered threescore
thousand pounds to redeem themselves and the Castle, and that it was refused,
yet few men take themselves to be bound anything the more to believe it,
because they report it. I would Master Case would leave preaching Treason, and
instruct his Disciples to put away lying, and speak every man truth with his
neigbbour: certainly the world would not be so abused with untruths as now they
are: amongst which number this report was one, for if they in the Castle
offered so liberally, how came the Rebels to agree upon Articles of Surrender
so far beneath that overture? for the Articles of Surrender were these: First,
that the Ladies and all others in the Castle should have Quarter. Secondly,
that the Ladies and servants should carry away all t^eir wearing ^pparell, and
that six of the S^rving men, whom the Ladies should nominate, should attend
upon their persons whereso^ver the Rebels should dispose of the^. Thirdly, that
all the furniture and goods in the house should be safe from Plunder, and to
this purpose one of the six nominated to attend the Ladies was to stay in the
Castle, and take an Inventory of all in the house, of which the Commanders were
to have one Copy, and the Ladies another.


But being on these terms Masters of the Castle and all within it, it is true,
they observe the first Article, and spare the lives of all the besieged, though
they had slain in the defense at least 60 of the rebels: but for the other two
they observe them not in any part: as soon as they enter the Castle, they
first seize upon the several Trunks and Packs which they of the Castle were
making up, and left neither the Ladies or servants any other wearing clothes
but what was on their backs. There was in the Castle amongst many rich ones one
extraordinary Chimny piece, valued at two thousand pounds, this they utterly
deface, and beat down all the carved works thereof with their Pole-axes.
There were likewise rare Pictures, the work of the most curious pencills that
were known to these latter times of the World, and such that if Apelles
himself (had he been now alive) needed not to blush to own for his. These in a
wild fury they break and tear in pieces, a loss that neither Cost nor Art can
repair. Having thus given them a taste what performance of Articles they were
to expect from them, they barbarously lead the Ladies, and the young Ladies
children, two sons and a daughter, Prisoners to Shaftsbury, some four or five
miles from Warder. While they are there Prisoners, to mitigate their sorrows,
in triumph they bring five cart loads of their richest Hangings and other
furniture through Shaftsbury toward Do^chester, and since that, contrary to
their promise and faith, given both by Sir Edward Hungerford and Strode, they
have Plun^ered the whole Castle: so little use was there of the Inventory we
told you of, unless to let the world know, what my Lord Arundel lost, and what
these Rebels gained. This havoc they made within the Castle. Without they
burn all the Outhouses, they pull up the pales of two Parkes, one of
RedDeere, the other of Fallow: what they did not kill, they let loose to the
world for the next taker. In the Parks they burn three Tenements and two
Lodges, they cut down all the Trees about the House and Grounds, Oaks and
Elmes, such as few places could boast of the like, whose goodly bushy advanced
heads drew the eyes of Travelers on the Plains to gaze on them, these they
sold for four pence, six pence, or twelve pence a piece, that were worth
Three, Four, or Five pound a Tree: The Fruit Trees they pluck up by the roots,
extending their malice to commit spoil on that, that God by a special Law
protected from destruction, even in the Land of his curse, the Land of Canaan:
for so we read, When thou shall besiege a City, thou shall not destroy the
trees thereof, by forcing an axe against them, for thou may ca^e of them, and
thou shall not cut them down to employ them in the siege: only the trees
which thou know that they be not trees for meat thou shall de^^^oy, Deuteronomy.
20. 19, 20. Nay, that which escaped destruction in the deluge, cannot escape
the hands of these children of the Apollyon the destroyer. They dig up the
heads of twelve great Ponds, some of five or six Acres apiece, and destroy all
the Fish: They sell Carpes of two foot long for two pence and three pence
apiece: They send out the Fish by Cart loads, so that the Country could not
spend them: nay, as if the present generation were too narrow an object for
their rage, they Plunder posterity, and destroy the Nurseries to the greater
Ponds: they drive away and fell their Horses, Kine, and other Cattle: and
having left nothing either in the Air or Water, they dig under the earth, the
Castle was served with water brought two miles by a Cunduit of Lead: and
intending rather mischief to the Kings friends then profit to themselves, they
cut up the Pipe and sold it (as these men's wives in North Wil^shire do
bone-Lance) at six pence a yard: making that waste for a poor inconsiderable
sum, which two thousand pounds will not make good They that have the unhappy
occasion to sum up these losses, value them at no less then an hundred
thousand pound. And though this loss were very great, not to be paralleld by
any, except that of the Countess of Rivers, yet there was something in these
sufferings which did aggravate them beyond all example of Barbaritie, which
this unnatural War till now did produce, and that was Rachels Tears:
Lamentation and Weeping and great Mourning, a mother weeping for her Children,
and would not be comforted because they were taken from her, for the Rebels,
as you hear, having carried the two Ladies Prisoners to Shaftsbury, thinking
them not safe enough there intend to remove them to Bath, a place then much
infected both with the Plague and the small pox: The old Lady was sick, under a
double consinement, that of the Rebels and her own in-disposition, all were
unwilling to be exposed to the danger of the infection, especially the young
Lady, having three children with her, they were too dear, too rich a treasure
to be snatched away to such probable loss without reluctance: Therefore they
resolve not to yield themselves Prisoners for that place, unless they will
take the old Lady out of her bed, and the rest by violence, and so carry them
away But the Rebels fearing left so great inhumanitie might incense the people
against them, and render them odious to the Country, decline this, and since
they dare not carry all to Bath, they resolve to carry some to Dorchester, a
place no less dangerous for the infection of Schisine and Rebellion then B th
for the Plague and the Pox. To this purpose they take the young Ladies two sons
(the eldest but nine, the younger but seven years of age) and carry them
captives to Dorchester.

In vain does the Mother, with tears entreat that these pretty pledges of her
Lords affections may not be snatched from her: in vain do the Children,
embrace and hang about the neck of their Mother, and implore help from her
that neither knows how to keep them, nor yet how to part with them: but the
Rebels having lost all bowels of Compassion, remain inexorable. The Complaints
of the Mother, pitiful cry of the Children prevail not with them, like
ravenous Wolves they seize on the prey: and though they do not Crop, yet they
transplant those Olive branches that stood about their Parents Table: A
barbarous fact, and such as must look out of Christendom for a president, and
hardly find it though amongst the Heathen except amongst the unwashed Turks,
who take Christian Children from their Mothers breasts either to make a
Seminary for their guards of Janissaries, or by desalation to make them Eunuchs
unsuspected guardians of their Concubines, or if in Christendom, amongst none
but the Jesuits their brethren, a generation whom they would be thought most
to hate, yet are known most to imitate. Exodus 21. To steal a Man was death by
the Law of Moses, nay the Romans that saw by no other Light, but that dim
Spark of Nature discerned the equity of this Law, as is apparent in their Lex
Fabia de Plagiarii^: and though these men blanch the Inhumanitie pretending
that they rob the Mother to enrich the Church, to bring them up in the true
Religion, it were worth the while to ask (if they would vouchsafe an answer)
what they mean by the true Religion, if they mean the Protestant, or to speak
more properly the Religion of the Church of England, it is apparent they
persecute that, but suppose (which we do not grant) that they did bereave
Parents of their Children to that purpose to bring them up in the true
Religion, yet cannot a good Intention warrant an unlawful act, not ought they
to do evil that good may come of it: nor do we find either that the Church
was ever pleased with such accessions, or that God did give a blessing to such
unwarrantable zeal. When Sesibutus King of Aragon in the year 600 prevailed
against the Sarazins, and in a better zeal then this, but not according to
knowledge, compelled his Captives to be baptized, he quickly found his error
by the want of Gods blessing upon his endeavors, nay Gods dislike was so
visible in the success, that the Church of God observing it, determined, That
the children of Infidells not having the use and exercise of right Reason,
should not be baptized Invitis Parentibus, contrary to the consent of the
Parents. And the fourth Council of T^ledo, Cap. 56, dis-allowing the
inconsiderate zeal of Sesibutus forbad to compel any man to the faith under
the sensure of Anathema, and determined withal, that to baptize children
without the consent of the parents, is all one as to compel men of full age to
be baptized. The same determination is cited and approved by the Canonist.
Did. 45. Cap. De Judaeis, and were it but consistent with the nature of this
work, it were easy to decry this Jesuiticall Turkish practice by most
impregnable arguments, both in the Schoolmen and Casuists: but I must leave
this to men of the sacred Function, and only beg leave to infer, that if it
be not lawful to baptize the Children of Jews, Infidels, or Heretics without
consent of their Parents, though without Baptisine when it may be had there is
no entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, certainly it must be far more
unlawful being baptized to take them from their parents to season their tender
years with dangerous principles leading to Profanesse, Brownisme, Anabaptisme
and Rebellion. A just indignation against so barbarous practice has
transported me in this argument farther then I intended, though not so far as
the haynousnesse of the Fact deserves, therefore if any man desires to be more
fully satisfied of the power and interest which Parents have over and in their
Children, being an Inheritance given them of the Lord, as the Prophet David,
and the possession of their Parents, as Aristotle in his Politics, and the
great violation of Justice in relation of the Laws of God, nature and men, in
dispoyling their Parents of them, let him have recourse to that learned and
Elegant discourse of Petrus AErod^us, Chief Justice or President of Aniou, in
his Book de Patris Potestate, who being robbed of his Son stolen from him by
the Jesuits, to plant him as a hopeful Impe in their Society, and not able to
rescue him out their power, though he implored, and had the King of Spain's
assistance (for thither he was carried) pursues his Son with Arguments, and
Labors to recall him to his Obedience by laying before him his duty
Artificially Collected and strongly applied from the Laws, Divine, Natural,
and Moral, and therefore to him I remit him and turn my discourse into its
proper channel.

On Friday the 12 of May 1643. M. John Bykar (son to the Vicar of Dun-Church)
was with his Father in Law, one of the High Constables of Warwick shire, at the
market at Coventry. Being in a house in the City, he rece^ved some rude
affronts from a Soldier of that Garri^o^: He being a very civil man, of good
moder^tion, and it seems well instructed not to answer a fool^ ^n his ^olly, or
being reviled to answer again, withdrew himself from the place, to decline
the insolent madness of the Soldiers, and free himself from his provocations:
being come into the streets, secure, as he thought, from all violence, he was
suddenly run through the body, and falling down, dyed instantly. His offense
was (for as yet we can hear of no others) that he was a Parsons son; so
inveterate malice to that function and all depending on it, do these Rebels
bear. And therefore if in this Relation you meet with frequent mention of
Affronts, Oppressions, Plundering and ^urthers of the Ministers of the Gospel,
do not attribute it to any partiality, as if the Relator were more querulous
for them then others, but to a serious desire to proportion his labors in a
just measure to the merit of each man's case.

Master Abraham Haynes of London, in September last, traveling into
Shrop-shire to visit his daughter and some other friends, being benighted, was
forced to take up his lodging in a little Village some eight miles short of his
daughters house: After supper, his Host in a seeming way of courtesy comes to
visit his guest, and brings with him two or three of his Neighbors, whereof
the Constable was one, to bear him company. After a little discourse, they
will needs persuade him that he is a Malignant, a hard word in those parts
before this Parliament began, but however it served the Constables turn well
enough to lay hold on him: having seized on him, they search him, under
pretense that he carried Letters of dangerous consequence, but searching, they
find what they sought for, his Money. 14 l. he had about him, this as good
b^otie they take from him, and for ^eare he should run away from his Money, that
night they set a strong watch upon him. Next morning very early they carry him
before a Parliament man, residing about two miles distant from that place, who
most Committee-man like, out of the abundance of his Justice, though no crime
were objected, nor any thing found about him to render him liable to restraint,
but only the sin of ^aving 14 l. or because he was guilty of the Constables
affirming him to be a Malignant, he commits him to his former guardians, by
them to be conveyed to London. M. Haynes unwilling to come so near his journeys
end, and yet not arrive there, tenders bail, Gentlemen of the best rank and
quality in the Country: but it will not be accepted: he desires to have leave
but to send a Messenger to his daughter where he was that day expected, but it
will not be granted: Away they carry him, they mount him and his man upon two
poor Jades, while my Host and M.Constable ride on their G^ldings. The first
night they will allow him no supper, unless he will pay for it, though they
knew he had no mon^y, having themselves seized on all he had. Afterward, upon
much opportunity and earnest int^ea^y, they are pleased out of his own Moneys
to allow him a poor thin allowance of food by the way. Being arrived at
London, they bring their Prisoner before the Committee, who upon an implicit
faith send him unheard, unaccused, unexamined Prisoner to the Fleet, where
after he had lain six weeks, having made use of many friends, and presented
many humble Petitions, and (t^s thought some Moneys too) he is restored to his
liberty upon this ground, that there were no Articles nor any accusation found
in the Comittee against him: but for his Money that (in the great justice and
equity of the Committee) was bestowed upon his Accusers as a just reward of
their zeal ^o the Parliament.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. VI.
Welling borow in Northamptonshire miserably I lundered. Master Flint a cu^ate
murdered by a Rebel there. The Rebels breach of faith at the surrender of
Sudley Castle, and their abuse of the Church and Monuments there. Col.
Purefoy's desacing S. Mary's Church, and the Chapel, with other Monuments in
Warwick, etc.

THat the Kingdom might not be undone but at their own charges, sundry ways
and arts, both by force and entreaty, have been used to extort moneys from
the Kings good Subjects to maintain the present Rebellion. Amongst others
Master Gray of Wellingborow, Clerk of the Peace for the County of
North-hampton, was assaulted by persuasion, and very earnestly solicited by Sir
Rowland S. John, to contribute liberally to this unnatural War: but his
refusal to partake in so crying a sin, did produce a double effect,
indignation in the Rebels, that hate all men that run not into the same
excess of Treason and Rebellion with them, because others backwardness does
upbraid their forwardness that rush into Rebellion like the horse into the
battle: but brought forth imitation in others, not only in Wellingborow, but
in some Villages bordering on that Town: who seeing so good a president of
Loyalty, refuse with him to hearken to so ^raiterous proposalls: and now
thinking themselves endangered by their refusal, and exposed to the mercy of
Rebell-Plunderers, they enter into a consultation how to secure themselves from
violence, and resolve to come to each others assistance, it the Dragooners from
North-hampton or anyelse should assault them, upon notice given by jangling
their bells: and that the world might not think their fears to be groundless,
on the 26 of December 1642. at 12 of the clock at night, Captain Fran^is
Sawyer (and as is supposed a brother of Sir Gilbert Pickerings) attended by
100. Dragooners beset M. Grayes house: and the signal of jangling the bells
being discovered by some of the Town that were of their Faction, to prevent
the Alarm to the Country, they tie up the bell-ropes, and place a guard of
twelve Musketeers in the Church yard to secure the passage to the belfrey:
having thus beset the house, and as they thought frustrated the device of
calling the confederate Villages to their help, Captain Sawyer demands
entrance, M. Gray out of his Window tells him, that he and his family were in
bed, and withal desired to know what their intentions were, thus in the dead
of the night to disturb their rest, and what Warrant they had to command
entrance ^ they return him answer, that they had a Warrant to apprehend his
person, and seize on his Plate and Arms for the use of the Parliament: half
an hour was spent in this Parley, M. Gray protracting the time, that perhaps
his neighbors hearing of his danger might come to his rescue: which
accordingly fell out, for some of the Town hearing that the Rebels had beset
M. Grayes house, hasten toward the Church, that by the sound of the bells (the
signal agreed on) they might summ^ the Country: when they come thither, they
find the way intercepted, a guard of Musketeers denying them entrance: but
enraged to find opposition where they did not expect it, they fell foul on the
guard, beat them off, took five of their Muskets, forced their entrance, and so
rang the bel^. Hereupon the Rebels, fearing that their entrance was delayed
thereby to gain time till the Town and Country might come in to his Rescue,
brake open a Window, and put in one or two of their company who presently open
the doors to them and give them free entrance; having thus possessed
themselves of the house, their first work is to seize upon M Grayes person, to
this purpose they make directly to his Chamber, whom they found in his shirt,
and would hardly give him leave to put on his clothes; and that their seizing
of his person might not be without all show antho^itie, they produce a Warrant
signed by the Earl of Essex, in which M. Grayes name was, this they show
only, but will not permit him to read it. All the moneys and Pl^^e which they
found in the house they take away, and as for M. Gray himself having taken him
prisoner, they compel him to go on foot from Wellingborow to Welby: while
they are on their way toward Welby, some 40 or 50 men from Wellingborow, armed
only with Swords and Staves come to rescue M. Gray from the Rebels: after a
short skirmish (wherein one or two of the Pursuers were hurt only, not slain)
finding that they were unequal for the Rebels both in number and Arms,
leaving the prey in the hands of the Oppressors, they retreat to Wellingborow:
being returned thither, they find five hundred of the Country come in to their
assistance: The common people (who seldom love or hate moderately) enraged
that Master Gray should thus be taken from them, especially some of his poor
neighbors, who in him were robbed of the relief which they received from his
Charity, resolve to make some of the Rebels Faction in that Town sensible of
their displeasure: and therefore since they cannot wreck their anger on the
Rebels that did the Fact, they fall foul on those that did approve it, if they
were not abettors and underhand contrivers of it: they break their windows,
break into some of their houses, and spoil their goods. Amongst the number of
those that suffered under the fury of the people, a Chandler and a Cooper
under-went the greatest loss, yet it could not be much, since upon a strict
survey the whole spoil done in the Town did not amount ^o 30 l.

Many of this assembly, utterly disliking such disorders, did not only reprove
the chief actors in this outrage, but to dis-countenance their proceeding
withdrew themselves: They of the Town to their houses, they of the Country to
their several habitations: so that by the break of day the Tumult was
appeased and the Town cleared. While these things were in doing, the Cooper
and one or two with him post away to M. Perne the Parson of Welby, a Turbulent
and Seditious man, and make their complaint to him, and to inflame him that was
too apt to kindle without their help, they do not only aggravate their own
losses at Wellingborow, but tell him that they threatened to come and do the
like at Welby: M. Perne, (changing his black Coat for a gray) instantly goes to
North hampton, and there represents the injury done to their Faction at
Wellingborow, and the pretended danger of Welby so effectually, that by noone
that Tuesday Colonel Norwich commanding in chief, Sergeant Major Mol^, Captain
John Sawyer, Captain Francis Sawyer, Captain Pe^t^ow, Captain Redman, Captain
Farmar, Captain Harrold, with 500 but others say, 1000. Horses and Dragooners,
came to Wellingborow: being come thither, they divide themselves into several
Troops to make good several passages into the Town, thereby to keep out the
Country that were coming to their aid, Captain John Sawyer with 80 or a 100
Dragooners enters the Town at that side which leads to Welby: and riding in
the Front of his men, marched directly toward M. Neile of Wollaston, and some
few with him who stood to oppose him: Sawyer discharges at M. Ne^le, and whom
he missed with his Bullet h^ would be sure to hit with his tongue, shooting out
arrows, even bitter words, calling him Pop^sh Rascal: but what reward shall be
given unto thee O thou false Tongue^ he stayed not long without it, for the
words were no sooner spoken, and (^o second his words) a charge given to his
Soldiers to give fire, but he received what he would have given, his deaths
wound by a shot in the head and neck by Goose-shot, which made him fall on his
Horse neck, which shot was seconded by a Countryman, who with a Club beat him
off his Horse into the dirt; being thus beaten down, the women to revenge their
husbands Quarrel fasten on him: but M. Oliver Gray (Nephew to M. Gray before
mentioned) and M Woollaston rescued him out of their hands, who otherwise had
immediately died the death of Sisera by the hands of women: reprived thus for
some few hours, they carry him to one Gray's house an Alehouse-keeper, whose
wife was Capt. Sawyers Aunt, where they administered what they could, but in
vain, for after two and twenty hours Languishment he dyed: as soon as
Captain Sawyer was fallen, his Soldiers instantly ran away, only his son,
unwilling to leave his Father, followed him to the hazard of his life by many
wounds which he received. In other Parts of the Town, the Townes-men quit
themselves like valiant Soldiers and loyal Subjects, and with very little
help of the Country Kept the Rebels out: M. Gray's man and another, with each
man his Musket, kept out above a 100 at the lower end of the Town, and
repelled them twice or thrice: and had not Captain Sawyer coming to himself
a little before his death, persuaded them that it was in vain to stand out,
there being three Pieces on the way from Northampton to batter the Town (which
proved true) and withal persuading them to write a Letter to the Commanders,
promising that upon their submission the Town should be secured, they had held
it out to the last man: but the dying Captain prevailed with them, they write a
Letter according to his advice, which as they say, was signed by his own hand,
the apprehensio of his desperate condition having put newthoughts in him. But
this resolution not being so fully made known to the Town as a business of
that concernment ought to have been, some of the Town, being ignorant of any
Treaty, made some shot, and the Rebels willing to take advantage, rush into
the Town, put both those of the Town and Country to flight. Captain Francis
Sawyer much enraged for his Brother, and coming near the place where his
Brother was wounded, seeing Master Flint the Curate of Harrowden stand there,
not any way engaged in the resistance, having not given any provocation, he
barbarously struck him with his Pole-axe, and cleft his head down to the eyes,
of which wound he dyed instantly: the earth drinking up that innocent blood,
shed by the hand of an accursed Doeg, which like the blood of Abel, calls loud
in the ears of God for vengeance upon them who authorize and countenance such
horrid Murders; Cursed be his anger for it was fierce, and his wrath for it
was cruel.

Being Masters of the Town at three of the Clock in the afternoon, they begin
to Plunder, and continue the spoil until the next day light failed them,
until Wednesday night. In this time they carry away the Wealth of the Town to
Northampton and other places, sparing none but those whose tongues were framed
to Shiboleth, men of their own Faction, whether they were active against them
or stood Neuters: by which Essay those Lukewarm men (who stand pendulous
equally poysed between Rebellion and Loyalty, and know not which side to lean
unto) may guess what measure they are like to receive from the Rebels hands,
if ever they come to have them in their power.

In the Town, two men especially suffer under these Free-booters, Master Gray
and Master Fisher; from the first being Clerk of the Peace, they take away the
Commissions of Peace, the Sessions Rolls, together with his own Evidences and
Leases, all his household stuff, even to his very bed-cords, leaving but one
sheet for his wife and five children: his Wheat and other Corn they give to
their Horse; what they did not care, they threw into the streets, and trampled
it in the dirt. From the other they took goods, and other things, amounting to
a very great sum: and to complete their wickedness, to their oppression they
add scorn; for having taken away all that they could, in derision they affix
Protections in writing under Colonel Norwich his hand, at his and some others
doors, forbidding any man to Plunder. Generally what they could not carry
away, they spoil, so that the loss sustained by the Town is valued at six
thousand pounds.

They took Master Neile Prisoner, and some forty more, amongst them they took
the Vicar, Master Jones, a grave and learned man, but lame and very sickly, and
having Plundered him of all he had, they mount him on a poor Jade, with a
Halter instead of a Bridle; the rest they tie two and two together, and drive
them before them to Northampton. Master Gray as I told you, was the day before
led Prisoner to Wilby, from thence to Northampton, where his Prison cannot
afford him protection from the fury and rage of the Soldiers; to make way to
his death, they threaten to pull down the house where he was confined: and the
Commissioners finding that he could not remain there with any safety, were
constrained to send him away Prisoner to London. Being come thither, Articles
are framed and exhibited against him, which being examined at a Committee, and
no proof at all made, he was voted to be discharged his Imprisonment: yet to
delude Justice and the Petition of Right, the Chaire-man could never find a
time to make his report to the House; so that he remained a Prisoner for a long
time.

On the 28 of January, 1642, the Castle of Sudley upon composition was
delivered up to the Rebels; there were Articles agreed on and sworn to, but as
he spoke truly, Children were deceived with Apples, and Men with Oaths; the
Rebels as they swear to Articles for their advantage, so they break them as
easily for their advantage, and make Perjury an easy uninterrupted passage to
Theft and robbery, for these Rebels brake as many Articles as they swore unto:
they Plunder not only the Castle, the Seat and house of the Lord Chandoi^, and
Winchcombe a neighboring Village, to the utter undoing the poor Inhabitants,
but in defense of the Protestant Religion and vindication of the honor of God
they profane his House. There is in the Castle a goodly fair Church, here
they dig up the graves, and disturb the ashes of the dead: they break down
the ancient Monuments of the Chandoses, and instead thereof, leave a prodigious
monument of their sacrilegious profaneness: for each part of the Church they
find a peculiar way to profane it: the lower part of it they make their
Stable, the Chancell their Slaughterhouse. Unto the Pulpit (which of all other
places in probability might have escaped their impiety) they fasten pegs to
hang the Carcasles of the slaughtered Sheep: the Communion Table, according to
their own language, they make their Dresser or Chopping-board to cut out their
meat; into the Vault, wherein lay the bodies of the Chandose^, an Ancient and
honorable Family, they cast the guts and garbage: mingling the loathsome
Intralls of beasts with those bones and ashes which did there rest in hope of a
joyful Resurrection. The Nave or body of the Church was all covered with the
dung and blood of beasts: and which was (if it be possible) a degree beyond
these prophanations, in contempt of God and his holy Temple, they defile each
part and corner both of Church and Chancell with their own excrements, and
going away left nothing behind them in the Church (besides walls and Seats) but
a stinking memory that part of the Parliament Army raised for the defense of
Religion had been there. Let that railing R^bsh^kah or jeering Sanballat, I
mean the Author of the ridiculous Pamphlet, entitled, One Argument more
against the Cavaliers, read this Story, and then tell me which are most guilty
of profanation of Churches, the Cavaliers or the Roundheads; which were most
profaned, either Saint Mary Maudlins in Oxford, or the Church at Sudley
Castle: and yet this dog sticks not with Shimei to ba^ke at his Sovereign and
blaspheme his Piety, as if the Rebels brought from Cy^encester had been
Quartered in this Church by his approbation, who to expiate that guilt gave an
hundred and fifty pounds to adorn and beautify that Church. The truth is,
there was a fault in the Commanders for lodging them in Churches, who if they
had had their due, had been hanged for Rebellion, their Carcasses exposed to
the F^wles of the air, and the Beasts of the Field, that the Ravens of the
valleys might have had their due portion, and never suffered them to come so
near the Church, as to have the privilege of Christian burial in the
Churchyard. So, even so, let all the Kings Enemies perish, O Lord, and let all
the people say, Amen.

In Saint Mary's Church in Warwick, and the Chapel, (commonly called the
Earls Chappel^) adjoining to the Quire of that Church, are diverse fair
Monuments of the Beuchamps, anciently Earls of that place, which Family long
flourishing there, had bin great Benefactors and beautifiers of that Church,
whereof Thomas Beuchamp (Earl of Warwick, and Earl Marshall of England, and
one of the Founders of the most noble Order of the Garter, in the Reign of
King Edward the third) built the Quire now standing, in the midst whereof is
his Monument, and ado^ned the windows with the Pictures of himself, his wife
and children, which were many, upon the Sur-coats of the men were their Arms
skilfully depicted, the women having the like, and Man^les, over which were the
Arms of their Matches, their Husbands being the prime Nobility of those times:
the like portraitures in glass, but much more rich and costly, were in that
stately Chapel before mentioned: In this stood the Monument of Earl Richard
being Brass gilt; and in the opinion of judicious observant Travelers
esteemed the rarest Piece erected for any Subject in the Christian World: but
such is the barbarousnesse of the pretenders to Reformation, that upon
Wednesday the 14. of this instant June, the Soldiers by the appointment and
encouragement of one whom (in these degenerous times wherein the dregs of the
people are made Commanders for the advancement of Rebellion) men call Colonel
Puresey (a man of a mean desperate fortune, but by the means of the late Lord
Brook chosen Burgess of Parliament for Warwick, and who had the greatest
influence in seducing that unhappy Lord to this desperate Rebellion, in which
he miserably perished:) did beat down and deface those Monuments of Antiquity,
and not content with this, by the same Command they break down the Cross in
the market place, not leaving one Stone upon another, Purefey all the while
standing by, animating and encouraging them, until they had finished their so
barbarous work: In which the World may observe that these men are the sworn
Enemies, not only of pretended Superstition, but of the Ensigns of Nobility
and Gentry, that if their Diana, I mean their Parity may take effect, posterity
may forget and not read the distinction of Noble from ignoble in these
venerable monuments of ancient Nobility: there being in these windows
something ^^deed to instruct a Herald, nothing to oftend the weakest Christian.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. VII.
Doctor Cox barbarously used by the Earl of Stamford at Exeter, contrary to
the Law of Arms. The unheard of cruelties committed by the Lord Gray of Groby
and his Soldiers, on the person, house, goods and servants of Master Nowel in
Rutland-shire. Doctor Bargrave ill entreated by Col. Sands in Kent, etc.

AFter the great and happy defeat given by the victorious Sir Ralph Hopton to
the Devon-shire forces at Starton, it pleased the Commanders of His Majesty's
Forces to entertain thoughts of Clemency toward the remainder of the Rebels.
To testify to the world therefore that there was nothing more in their desires
then a Thrift of Christian blood, and withal to heap Coals of fire upon their
heads, to conquer them by kindness whom they had often conquered by the Sword:
by their Letters they signify their readiness to close up those wide ^ents
between them, by a Treaty. And that a Message of Peace might be well suited
with a Messenger, they sent the Letters by Doctor Cox Doctor of Divinity, who
attended by a Trumpeter, came to Exeter that Sunday in the afternoon. The
Trumpeter as the manner is gave the Town warning as soon as he came within
sight of the first guard, and presently an Officer came to receive him, who
blind-folding him with a handkerchiefe pinned over his eyes, conducted him
through the City unto the Earl of Stamfords house: having admittance there,
the Doctor takes off his handkerchiefe, but accidentally did not dispose of the
pin that fastened it, but still kept it in his hand: the Earl he had no
sooner set his eyes upon the Doctor, but presently he reviles him, and calls
him all the reproachful names he could imagine, and swore that he would hang
him instantly: but first to extort a confession from him, he offers a Knife or
Dagger to his breast, demanding an Answer to some Interrogatories: the Doctor
not affrighted with such rough usage, replies very discreetly, that he had
received commands to deliver certain Letters from the commanders of the Cornish
to those of the Devonshire Army, but that he had no Commission to satisfy any
different and by-demands, this denial to answer, together with after dinner,
inflamed the Earl, and put him into a new sit of railing: and for variety sake
he did intermix the opprobrious names with many menaces and others of stabbing
him: In the end, seeing that this harsh welcome could effect nothing, nor awe
the Doctor to make any discovery, he demands the Letters: the Doctor, that he
might clear his hands, and so dive into his pockets suddenly, put the pin
which he held in his hands between his lips: hereupon one Baxter, a Sergeant
Major of the City, observing the motion of his hand, but not perceiving what it
conveyed to his mouth, cried out, What does the Rogue eat there? He ^wallowes
papers of Intelligence: With this, the Earl forgetting the gravitie and
serious deportment of a Peer of the Kingdom of England, began in an antique
manner to leap, and skip, and frisk, crying out, Treason. Treason, he comes to
betray the City, Courage my brave blades; and so turning to the Doctor, he set
his dagger again to his breast, and demanded what it was that he had put into
his mouth? The Doctor mildly and softly putting his hands to his lips, took
the pin thence, and showing it to his Lordship, said, It is a pin my Lord. The
Sergeant Major thinking to intercept the supposed Intelligence going down the
Doctors throat, instantly flies to him, took him by the throat, and griped him
so hard that he had almost strangled him. The Earl himself (most unworthily)
crying out, Cut the villains throat, cut it: nor did he command another what he
would not do himself, for with his own hands he offered his knife thrice at
the Doctors throat to cut it, but the Doctor still put it by, God who is a
present help in trouble, restrained the Earl, and delivered the Doctor out of
his hands. Nor was it his hap to suffer from honorable hands only, the
standers by are not idle, but follow so leading an example: as if he had been
sent for from Cornwall to Exeter on no other errand then to be made the City
scorn, and the subject whereon their wanton insolency should vent itself:
every one in the room had a fling at him: some with their fists beat him about
the head, others scratch his face, one with his fingers boares his ears, to
his extreme torment another with his fingers rakes in his mouth, hoping there
to find some papers of Intelligence: one tears his hair, another forces his
hand down his throat, and the thing for which they make this strict search is
Intelligence, some scrole of Intelligence: Sure there is much want of
Intelligence in their own heads, that made such strict inquisition for it in
another man's. Well, they continue this pursuit of Intelligence so long and so
eagerly, that the Doctor fainting under so barbarous usage, was ready to give
up the ghost, and for fear he should dye under their hands, they leave him a
sad Emblem of that entertainment which the Messengers of Peace find from the
men of this Generation. Let that rebellious City remember and tremble at that
condolement of our Savior over the like sin, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Proph^ts, and ^o^est them that are sent unto thee, I am
unwilling to go on and read her destiny, and therefore shall return to the
story.

Having in this unchristian manner insulted long enough upon the Doctor, they
divert their rage, and spend the residue of their fury on the Trumpeter, and
having either before, in part breathed out their madness, or not thinking the
poor Trumpeter so Malignant as the Doctor, though they used him bad enough,
yet they express not so keen a malice against him as against the Doctor Having
satiated themselves by cumulating injury upon injury upon them, they are both
commanded to an outward Room, here they are assaulted by fresh furies, for
they had not stayed long there, but two Alderman renew the same insolences and
act the injuries all over again, and the very dregs of the people animated by
their example bear them Company. After this the Earl Commits them to Prison,
and being brought into the Room where they were to lodge, they were stripped
naked, and their clothes narrowly searched: and though after all this scrutiny
nothing could be found, yet Intelligence is the thing the Earl looks after,
and Intelligence he will have if it be to be had. And though the world never
took his Lordship for a Physician, yet he prescribes two vomits, where his
honor had his Simples I know not, but the composition was of a green color,
divided into two draughts, put into two bowls, these the Earl commands to be
administered to the Doctor and the Trumpeter, that so they may vomit up those
supposed Papers of Intelligence which Sergeant Major Baxter thought they had
swallowed: the Doctor the chief Patient begins first, whom instantly they ply
with Posset-drinke, having likewise some infusion in it to provoke and help on
the Potion taken: all night long did they keep the Doctor at this exercise,
though they saw that what came from him came with great difficulty and
Torment, yet they gave not off, till at last it drew blood from him: all the
return that was made into the basin was very exactly strained, to see if there
were any ragge of Intelligence: but there was none: but in case it should work
both ways, (though his Lordship had many about him wondrous fit for such
employment) yet whom he placed Sentinel for the posterne if any Intelligence
should chance, to escape that way, my intelligence fails me. This inhumane
usage brought the Doctor so low, that in three days he was not able to receive
any sustenance. In this his extremity and weakness, he had many visits from
the people of the Town, who like Jobs comforters ^^vile him instead of
pitying him: and the third night as he lay very sick and weak in his bed,
there came into his Chamber a man very likely to prove the messenger of death
unto him, his name was Down, Lieutenant to Captain White, who presently
asking for the Jesuit, and calling him Rogue, and as many base names as
himself deserved, offered to lay violent hands upon him: but one of the
Soldiers abhorring so barbarous cruelty, in mere mercy to a dying man, as he
had reason to judge him, interposing, restrained him from acting those
murtherous thoughts which he brought with him. After the Doctor had remained
Prisoner five or six days, and having recovered so much strength as to hold
out another worrying, he was, (with an ill intention in some) brought before
the Council of War, where upon the Doctors complaint of the hard usage he had
undergone, some of the prime Gentry being ashamed of the cruelties acted on
him, being a Messenger, and in that regard by the Law at Arms ought to be
privileged from all affronts, much more from such violent outrages, Sir John
Northcoote endeavored to palliate the business, and to take off from the
odiousness of it, by alleagding the Contents of the Letters, which indeed
being for some preparatories and overtures of Peace, might inrage these men
that were Enemies unto it: To which the Doctor replied, that under favor, that
could be no ground nor yet excuse for their savage usage of him; because they
had beaten him, and almost murdered him in the Earl of Stamfords presence,
before they knew the Contents of the Letters, or read so much as one syllable
of them, or indeed received them, the violent Sergeant Major seizing on him
before he could deliver them: This so unanswerable a return, put the Knight to
his Italian shrug, and rejoyned no more, but I know not That. After a week (and
more) imprisonment, the Earl commands the Doctor to be carried aboard the Hope
of Toptham, where the stench and noisome smell of the Ship had almost poisoned
him. The Doctors wife hearing of her husbands imprisonment came to Exeter to
see him, but before she came her husband being shi^t for London, on much
entreaty she obtained leave to go on Shipboard to see him, but on her return
she was imprisoned till her husband being under sail, she had liberty to go
away. After ten days being at Sea, the Doctor arrived at London, where he was
long detained Prisoner at the Lord Peter's his house in Alders^gate-street.

The Lord Gray, with other some Rebels under his Conduct, came to Master Nowels
house, Brother to the Lord Nowel that now is, demanding his person Prisoner,
and his Arms for the use of the Parliament. Master Nowel modestly replied,
that he knew not wherein he had offended, that he should forfeit his liberty
or goods to the justice of the Parliament: his house was his Castle, his Arms
were his Defense, and his liberty was precious unto him; so that he could not
satisfy their demands in any thing. Hereupon they plant a Cannon very near
the house, so near that the fire of it took hold of an out-house that was
thatched, this house though burnt down was not of any great consequence.
Therefore they discharge again, and beat down a beam of his dwelling house,
but hurt no man within it; and making a third shot, they beat down a Chimney,
and the fall of it bruised the foot of one of his servants. At last, finding
that Master Nowel was resolved to make good his house against them,
notwithstanding their Cannon Battery, and would not deliver up his person to
Captivity, nor his house to their Plunder, they fire six of his Neghbours
houses, in one of which there was a woman in Labor, by which means the
neighbors were compelled to expose her to a probable, by snatching her from
certain destruction, for in the midst of her Throws and pangs of Childbirth,
they were feign to carry her in a Chair out into the streets: having a while
sported and warmed themselves at those flames, at which the poor Inhabitants
wept and wrung their hands, they threaten, that unless Master Nowel will yield
himself Prisoner, and deliver up his house to their pleasure, they will not
only fire his house, but will not leave a house unburnt in the whole Parish.
This so affrighted the poor Inhabitants and Neighbors, that men, women and
children, come with tears, and earnestly beseech him to surrender himself,
rather than suffer them to be ruined, and utterly spoiled before his face.
Overcome at last, not by the Rebels Ordnance, but by that which spoke louder in
his ears, The pitiful complaints and out cries of his Neighbors, he founds
a Parley, the result of which was, First, That the Rebels should see the fire
quenched. Secondly, That all in his house should have liberty to depart
whither they pleased. Thirdly, That none should enter the house but Commanders.


But this generation of Truce Breakers (that keep faith neither with God nor
man, and break Oaths faster then ever Sampson did his Cords, whom nothing can
tie fast but a Halter, the strongest Obligation for a Traitor) were no sooner
entered the house, but presently they seize on Master Nowel and Master Skipwith
as their Prisoners: and whereas by the Article of agreement none were to enter
the house but Commanders, and since if the Article had been kept unviolated,
there were like to be as many Thieves within as without doors; Therefore
Commanders and common Soldiers, common Soldiers and Commanders, all Thieves,
enter the house, and rifle it. They take away his goods, cut the Ticks of his
beds, burn the Feathers, tear in pieces his Accounts, Writings, and
Evidences, and That which we have not read in the black Catalogue of the
outrages of the Rebellious Irish, was atten pted by these, for in the
examinations upon Oath of those that report the miserable sufferings of the
poor Protestants in Ireland, and the barbarousnesse of the Irish, published by
Order of Parliament, we do not find that God gave them up to so reprobate a
sense, as to commit or attempt any Rapes; give the Devil his due, this sin
we find not laid to their charge: But these blessed Reformers, whom they have
not blushed blasphemously to call The Houst of God, and Christ's Armies, and
Champions of Religion, added this to the rest of their innumerable
wickednesses, that they attempted to ravish two of his maidservants, one was
dumb but fourteen years of age, another had her knee put out of joint,
striving to resist a villain in so beastly an attempt. In a word, their
practices were generally so wicked, so impious, that one that stood Spectator
of all passages, and observed strictly what was done, affirms, that Master
Griffith (whom some call Prince Griff^^^) was the only civilized man amongst
them. Having committed these inhumane acts among the Living, they go into the
Church among the Dead, and there deface a goodly Monument which this Noble
Gentleman Master Nowel had erected for his deceased Wife: deeply wounding the
living Husband, by spoiling that Memorial which he had consecrated to the dear
Memory of his dead Wife. Having ransacked all from the living to the dead, they
carry away M Nowel and M. ^kipwith Prisoners to London, and commit them to safe
custody in the Lord Peter's his house (before mentioned) in Alders-gate-street,
where they remained Prisoners for a long time.

Colonel Sandyes in his perambulation of Kent, bestowed a visit upon Doctor
Bargraves house then Deane of Canterbury, the Deane himself then being from
home. Sandyes came late in the night, and the whole family were in bed: they
soon raise the house, and where they did not find they make an entrance,
forcing Mistress Bargrave, a virtuous good Gentlewoman (whom their hasty
summons had permitted to cast only her Night gowue about her) to wait upon
them from room to room, not suffering her to turn aside (though she for
modesty sake requested that favor at their hands) to draw on her Stockings,
unless they might stand by and see it done. They rudely rush into Mistress
Boys her Chamber, the Widow of Doctor Boys Deane of Canterbury, a Gentlewoman
about four score years old, there they seize upon a Cabinet of hers, and
break it open, (though the good old woman would very saine have had it spared,
and offered them the key to open it) they find in it forty five pounds in old
Gold, which she had laid by to bestow as Legacies upon her friends: this they
hug and call their own. She entreats them to forbear it, and directs them to
her Will, which was laid up with the Gold, and in that they might see how she
had bequeathed it. Upon perusal of the Will, they find that she had made Deane
Bargrave her own Brother her Executor, this they pronounce a Crime of so high
a nature, that nothing could expiate the guilt, but the forfeiture of the Gold,
and the Cancelling of the Will; but by the earnest mediation of Master King,
one of their company, at length they are persuaded to restore the Gold, and
spare the Will. From hence they go to the Chamber where young Master Bargrave
the Deanes Son did lodge; Sandyes valiantly breaks his Sword (which hung at
his beds head) before his face, and calling him out of his bed, sends him
Prisoner to Dover Castle. Soon after, the Deane hastening home to comfort his
distressed Family, Sandyes hears where he was lodged at an Inn at G^avis-end,
and as he was undressed and ready to go into bed, Sandyes and 13 of his
Soldiers, press into his Chamber with their Swords drawn, and command him to
yield himself a Prisoner, which the Deane (having neither power nor will to
resist) did accordingly; having (with out any reason given) brought him a
Captive to London, they commit him Prisoner to the Fleet, where after he had
lain three weeks, he was at last released, without ever being examined, or so
much as called to the House. After this, Sandyes writes (I blush to mention so
degenerous a Pamphlet) a book, and was not ashamed to call it, His Travailes
into Kent, unworthy his Predecessors, to stain the Name of Sandyes with such
Travailes: In this worthless commentary, the Register of his perpetual
Infamy, amongst Others things he fastens the Note of a debauched drunken young
fellow, upon young M. Bargrave, a Gentleman of so ingenuous a Countenance, so
modest and sweet a Temper, that he deserves a far better Character. The old
Deane, a grave and Learned Gentleman, heart-broken with these Injuries, soon
after dies; the World in the mean time Condemning Sandyes, not so much for his
Barbaritie as ingratitude in dealing thus with him, who had not many years
before, been a special means to save him from the Gallows, when he was
indicted for a Rape at the general Assizes at Maidstone. But you know the old
Proverb, Save a The^fe from the Gallows, and he will cut your Throat.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. VIII.
Master Swift Parson of Goodwich in Hereford-shire, his wife and ten children
most inhumanely dealt with by Captain Kirle a stony hear^ed Rebel. The Duke
of Vendosme Plundered at Uxbridge, with other frauds and abuses committed by
the Rebels, etc.

WHen the Earl of Stamford was in Herefordshire in October 1642. and Pillaged
all that kept faith and Allegiance to the King, information was given to
Mistress Swift, wife of Master Thomas Swift Parson of Goodwich, that her house
was designed to be Plundered: To prevent so great a danger, she instantly
repaired to Hereford where the Earl then was, some ten miles from her own
home to Petition him, that no violence might be offered by his Soldiers to her
house or goods: He most nobly, and according to the goodness of his
disposition, ^threw the Petition away, and swore no small Oaths that she
should be Plundered to morrow. The good Gentlwoman being out of hope to
prevail, and seeing there was no good to be done by Petitioning him, speeds
home as fast as she could, and that night removed as much of her goods as the
shortness of the time would permit: next morning to made good the Earl of
Stanfords word, Captain Kirle his Troop, consisting of 70 Horse and 30 Foot
which were hangers on, (birds of prey) came to Master Swifts house; there they
took away all his provision of Victuals, Corn, Household Stuff, which was
not conveyed away: they empty his Beds, and fill the Ticks with Malt; they rob
him of his Cart and six Horses, and make this part of their theft the means to
convey away the rest: Mistress Swift much affrighted to see such a sight as
this, thought it best to save her self though she lost her goods, therefore
taking up a young Child in her arms, began to secure her self by flight:
which one of the Troopers perceiving, he commanded her to stay, or (holding his
Pistol at her breast) threatened to shoot her dead: the (good Woman) fearing
death w^ether she went on or returned, at last shunning that death which was
next unto her, she retires back to her house, where she saw her self undone,
and yet du^st not oppose or ask why they did so ^ Having thus rifled the house
and gone, next morning early she goes again to Hereford, and there again
Petitions the Earl to show some compassion on her, and her ten Children, and
that he would be pleased to cause her Horses and some part of her goods to be
restored unto her: the good Parle was so far from granting her Petition, that
he would not vouchsafe so much as to read it: when she could not prevail her
self, she makes use of the mediation of friends: these have the repluse too,
his Lordship remaining inexorable without any inclination t^ mercy: at last
hoping that all men's hearts were not Adamant, relentlesse, she leaves the Earl
and makes her address to ^apraine Kirle, who upon her earnest entreaty grants
her a Protection for what was left, but for restitution there was no hope of
that, this Protection cost her no less then 30s. It seems Paper and Ink are
dear in those parts: And now thinking her self secured by this Protection,
she returns home, in hope that what was left she might enjoy in peace and
quietness: She had not been long time at home, but Captain Kirle sends her
word, that if it pleased her, she might buy four of her own six horses
again, assuring her by his Fathers Servant and Tenant, that she should not
fear being Plundered of them any more by the Earl of Stamfords forces while
they were in those parts. Encouraged by these promises, she was content to buy
her own, and deposited eight pound ten shill, for four of her horses: and now
conceiving the storm to be blown over, and all danger past, and placing much
confidence in her purchased Protection, she cauleth all her goods secured in
her neighbors houses to be brought home; and since it could not be better,
rejoiced that she had not lost all. She had not enjoyed these thoughts long,
but Captain Kirle sent unto her for some vessels of Cider, whereof having
tasted, but not liking it, since he could not have drink for himself, he
would have Provender for his Horse, and therefore instead of Cider he demands
ten busnels of Oats. Mistress Swift fearing that the denial might give some
ground of a Quarrel, sent him word that her Husband had not two bushels of
Oats in a year for ^ythe, nor did they s^w any on their Gleabe: both which
were most true: yet to show how willing she was (to her power) to comply with
him, that the Messenger might not return empty, she sent him sortie shillings
to buy Oats. Suddenly after the Captain of Goo^r^ge-Castle, sends to Master
Swifts house for Victual and Corn, Mistress Swift instantly repaires to him,
and shows him her Protection: He to answer show with show, shows her his
Warrant, and so without any regard to her Protection, seizes upon that
provision which was in the house, together with the Cider which Captain Kirle
refused. Hereupon Mistress Swift writes to Captain Kirle complaining of this
injury, and the affront done to him in sleighting his Protection: But before
the Messenger could return with an Answer to her Letter, some from the Castle
come a second time to Plunder the house, and they did what they came for:
Presently after comes a Letter from Captain Kirle in Answer to Mistress
Swifts, telling her, that the Earl of Stamford did by no means approve of the
injuries done unto her, and withal by word of mouth sends to her for more
Oats: She perceiving that as long as she gave, they would never leave asking,
resolved to be drilled no more: the return not answering expectation, on the
third of December two hours before day, Captain kir^es Lieutenant, attended
by a considerable number of Horse and Dragoones, comes to M. Swifts house and
demands entrance, but the doors being kept shut against them, and not able to
force them, they broke down two Iron Bars in a Stone window, and so with
Swords drawn and Pistols cocked, they enter the house. Being entered, they take
all Master Swift and his wives apparel, his Books and his Childrens clothes,
they being in bed, and those poor children that hung by their clothes,
unwilling to part with them, they swung them about until (their hold-^ast
failing) they dashed them against the walls. They took away all his Servants
clothes, and made so clean work with one, that they left him not a Shirt to
cover his nakedness. There was one of the Children, an Infant lying in the
Cradle, they robbed that, and left not the little poor soul a rag to defend it
from the cold. They took away all the Iron, Pewter and Brass, and a very fair
Cupboard of Glasses which they could not carry away, they broke to pieces: and
the four Horses lately redeemed are with them lawful prize again, and left
nothing of all the goods but a few stools for his wife, children and servants
to sit down and bemoane their distressed condition. Having taken away all, and
being gone, Mistress Swift in compassion to her poor Infant in the Cradle,
took it up almost starved with cold, and wrapped it in a Petti-coat which she
took off from her self: and now hoped, that having nothing to lose, would be
a better protection for their persons, then that which she purchased of
Captain kirle for 30 shill. But as if Jobs Messengers would never make an end,
her three Maidservants whom they of the Castle had compelled to carry the
Poultry to the Castle, return and tell their Mistress that they in the Castle
said, that they had a Warrant to seize upon Mistress Swift and bring her into
the Castle, and that they would make her three ^aid-servants wait on her there,
threatening to Plunder all under the petti-coat, and other uncivil immodest
words, not fit for them to speak, or me to write. Hereupon Mistress Swift fled
to the place where her Husband for ^eare of the Rebels had withdrawn himself;
she had not been gone two hours, but they come from the Castle, and bring
with him three Teemes to carry away what was before designed for Plunder, but
wanted means of conveyance. When they came, amongst other things, there was a
batch of bread hot in the Oven, this they seize on, ten Children on their knees
entreat but for one loaf, and at last with much importunity obtained it: but
before the Children had eaten it, they took even that one loaf away, and left
them destitute of a morsel of bread amongst ten Children. Ransacking every
corner of the house, that nothing might be left behind, they find a small
Pewter dish in which the dry Nurse had put Pap to feed the poor Infant, the
mother which gave it suck being fled to save her life, this they seize on too
The Nurse entreats, for Gods sake, that they would spare that, pleading that in
the Mothers absence, it was all the sustenance which was or could be provided
to sustain the life of the Child, and on her knees entreated to show mercy
unto the Child, that knew not the right hand from the left, a motive which
prevailed with God himself, though justly incensed against Nineveh. But to
show what bowels of compassion and mercy are to be expected in Sectaries, and
how far they are from being Disciples to him who says, Be ye merciful, as
your Father which is in heaven is merciful, They transgress that precept of
our Savior in the Letter, and take away the Childrens meat and give it unto
dogs for throwing the Pap to the dogs, they put up the dish as lawful prize.

Master Swifts eldest son, a youth, seeing this barbarous cruelty, demanded
of them a reason of this so hard usage; They replied, that his Father was a
Traitor to the King and Parliament, and added that they would keep them so
short, that they should eat the very fle^h from their arms; and to make good
their word, they threaten the ^iller, that if he ground any Corn for these
Children, they would grind him in his ^wne Mill; and not contented with this,
they go to Master Swifts next neighbor (whose daughter was his Servant) and
take him Prisoner, they examine him upon oath what goods of M. Swifts he had in
his custody, he professing that he had none, they charge him to take his
daughter away from M. Swifts service, or else they threaten to Plunder him, and
to make sure work, they make him give them security to obey all their
commands: terrified with this, the neighbors stand a^ far off and pi^^ie the
distressed Condition of these persecuted Children, but dare not come or send to
their reliese: by this means the Children and Servants had no sustenance,
hardly any thing to cover them, from Friday six a clock at night, until
Saturday twelve at night, until at last the neighbors moved with the
lamentable cries and complaints of the Children and Servants, one of the
neighbors over-looking all difficulties, and showing that he durst be
Charitable in despite of these Monsters, ventured in and brought them some
provision. And if the World would know what it was that so exasperated these
Rebels against this Gentleman, the E. of Stamford, a man that is not bound to
give an account of all his actions, gave two reasons for it, first, because he
had bought arms and conveyed them into Munmouth-shire, which under his
Lordships good favor was not so; and secondly, because not long before, he
Preached a Sermon in Rosse upon that Text, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, in which his Lordship said, he had spoken Treason in endeavoring to
give Caesar more then his due: these two Crimes cost Master Swift no less then
300 l.

About Feb. 1642. the Duke of Vendosme being to return home into France, but
resolving first to take his leave of the King at Oxford, obtained a Pass from
the close Committee, that he might be free from any ^et or molestation in his
journey, but notwithstanding this Pass, in his Return from Oxford he was
searched and Plundered at Vxbridge, by that worthy Knight Sir Samuel Luke, who
was sent by his Excellency from Windsor, with a Troop of Horse for that
purpose, That France by experience might know, that Thieves Rob as confidently
in the Towns of England, as in the woods of Ardenna, or any Forest in France.

About December 1642. the Colonels, Waller, Brown, and others, marching from
Aylesbury to Windsor, and thence by Newbury to Winchester, their Soldiers in
their March Plundered every Minister within five miles of the Road, without
distinction, whether of their own party or of the other, whether they
subscribed for Episcopacy, Presbytery, or Independency, whether they wore a
Surplice, or refused it; only if they did not, they afforded them the less
booty. Those that were Considers, whose Irregularitie, and Non-Conformitie,
armed them with confidence to appear, Petitioned the House of Commons for
Relief and satisfaction: it being taken into Consideration, that this was not
according to their new Phrase to weaken the wicked, but the Religious and such
who stood well-affected to the Parliament: hereupon slandering the Cavaliers,
with the fact which their own Soldiers had done, and to make the foolish
Citizens bleed free, there was an Order drawn up and published, That in regard
the Petitioners were well-affected men, and Plundered by the Cavaliers, that
there should be a general Collection made for them the next Fast day, and that
the Preachers should exhort the People, and Pray to God to enlarge the Peoples
hearts, bountifully to relieve the Petitioners.

But winchester being surprised, and the Lord Grandison taken Prisoner, Colonel
Brown in a Letter to famous Isaac Pennington, magnifies the Victory, and
enlarged the glory of it very much by that Circumstance of taking that Noble
Lord Prisoner, but which did much eclipse the honor obtained that day, in the
Letter he adds, that by the treachery of Colonel Vr^ey, he was escaped: little
Isaac had hardly so much patience, as to read out the Letter, but he Summons
his M^rmidons, and gives an A arm to his Red-contes, the Messengers of his
fury, and sends them instantly to Plunder Mistress Vrri^s lodging: It was no
sooner said then done, they being as swift to act misch^efe as Isaac was ready
to command it; what they had in charge they perform faithfully, and Plunder
her of no more but all. Mistress Vrrey presently gives notice to her Husband
what measure she found in the City, while he was in their Service in the
Country: the Colonel upon the Information hastens to London, to expostulate for
this Injury, and for redress, complains to the House against the Ringleader
Brown, and Rout-Master little Isaac: upon hearing both parties, the House
quits Colonel Vrrey from any conspiracy with my Lord Grandison or connivance at
his escape: and for reparation of his losses, they order him 400 l. to be paid
him out of the Moneys collected the last Fast day for the Plundered Ministers,
who by this means were Plundered twice: and so one order begetting another,
they order that a new collection shall be made for the Petitioners the next
Fast day: nor was this the first debt by many that have been paid by the
abused Charity of London, the great Tax-bearing Mule as one justly calls it.

There is one Bea^e dwelling at Hasely (as I take it) in Oxfordshire: a man
much devoted to the proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament, yet it was his
chance to fall into their hands who weaken the wicked: some of the Rebels
under the command of the Earl of Essex Plundered him of two Horses: upon
complaint made unto the Earl, he gives Beal command to attend him at Tame, and
there he should have them again: according to the directions given him by the
Earl, (accompanied by his Brother) he comes to Tame, hoping to have his Horses
restored, being come thither, Bcale is apprehended and committed to Prison, and
his Horse, together with that which his Brother rode on, are both seized for
the Earls use, nor can either Man or Horse be released, unless he will pay
down 20 l. in ready money: having continued in Prison four days, at last his
Mother (for fear if she had rode she might have been Prisoner for her Horses
sake, as her Son was) comes to Tame on foot and brings 20 l. with her to
redeem her Son out of Prison, upon receipt of the Money, being a debt so
justly due and so truly paid, his Excellency released him out or his
Imprisonment, and restored him the two worst Horses of the four, and wisely
kept the two best for himself, which with a very little help, may serve to
explain the mystery of his Motto, CAVE ADSUM: i.e. where I come look well to
your Money and Horses.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. IX.
Master Jones Vicar of Wellingborow, starved to death in Pri^on at Northampton.
A Barber and a Maidservant murdered by the Rebels at Wellingborow. Captain
Ven^, ab^se of Windsor castle, and his barbarous usag^ of Pris^ners there, etc.

When I first entered on this Work, it was a pro^ise solemnly made, not to
abuse the World with salthoods or uncertainties, but to use all Candor and
Integrity: and if any thing should chance to pass, which upon better
information should appear false, I should not blush to make a free and an
ingenuous acknowledgement. In these several Relations what to retract or
recall of the Rebels cruelties, I yet know nothing, but what to add unto them
I do.

The sixth weeks Mercury told you of the Plundering of Willingbo^ow in
Northamptonshire by the Rebels, and the taking of Master Jones, Vicar of that
Town Prisoner, and in tha^ account which I there gave of him, I left him in
Captivity at North^mpton: since that Mercury went abroad, some good body
finding that Relat^on to come far short of that barbarous usage which Master
Jones found from the Rebels, moved either with detestation of such inhumane
cruelt^e not to be bu^yed in oblivion, or out of affection to his person
murdered by these savage Monsters, has supplied the former defect, and
enabled me to bring this Story to its sad conclusion.

Master Jones was a man very aged, being arrived at that Term which Moses made
the usual boundary of man's life in his life, Threescore and ten, and had not
these bloodthi^stie men shortened his days by an untimely death, he might have
been so strong as to come to fourscore years; and though age it self be a
disease (which yet few men that have it are willing to be cured of) it pleased
God to add a casual infirmity to his natural, for some two years since by
a fall he unhappily broke his leg, of which he continued lame to his death.
When the Rebels, those Locusts that devour all the good things of the Land,
came to Wellingborow, having ransacked the Town, they took many Prisoners, and
amongst the rest Master Jones: all that knew him must bear him record, that he
was a man of a most unblameable life and conversation, an able Scholar, and
extraordinarily gifted for Preaching, of which he gave ample proof by his
Labors diligently bestowed among his Parishioners by the space of forty years:
having him in their power whom they knew to be a great means by his Orthodox
Preaching to keep that Town and some parts thereabouts in Obedience, when the
rest of the Country were in Rebellion against their Sovereign: they neither
reverence his Calling, nor honor his age, nor pity his infirmity, but abuse
him by scosse^, and jeeres, and compel him to go on foot a great part of the
way (lame and weak as he was) between Wellingborow and Northampton: and that
he might keep pace with the rest, they compel him to make more speed then his
infirmity could brook. At Wellingborow the Rebels murdered a Barber and
stole away his Bear, and when they could not force this reverend old man to
mend his pace, Lieutenant Grimes (a desperate Brownist, the master of this
mis-rule, and the chief agent in inflicting all this scor^e and tyranny on
Master Jones, but since a pr^soner in Banbury Castle) to see if fear would
add to his strength, forces the Bear upon him, which running between his
legs took him upon her back, and laying ande the intractablenesse of its
Nature, grew patient of her burden; and to the astonishment of the beholders
carried him quietly, so that what was intended as a violence, became his ease.
The Rebels overcome by so unusual an example of kindness, the savage Bea^e
reproving the madness of their fury, they remove Master Io^es from off the
Bear to a Horse, but such a Horse as did but vary, not better the condition of
his transportation. One of the rout observed to be extremely active in all
these insolences, and to have a hand in murdering the Barber, seeing the
tamenesse of the Bear, as quiet under Master Jones, as if she had bin
accustomed to the Saddle, prefumes that it was no more but up and ride, and
presently bestrides the Bear, who as if she had been of that race that did
revenge the Prophet Elis^as quarrel, dismounts the bold Rider, and as if she
had bin robbed of her whelps, did so mangle, rend, and tear him with her teeth,
and paws, that the presumptuous wretch dyed of these hurts suddenly after.

Stay, Reader, suspend thy opinion, be not too hasty, I profess ingenuously
the relation seems at first blush to partake something of the Romanse, or at
best to be but an imitation of some Popish Legend, as if we meant to implo^e
the help of seyned miracles to gain credit to a party: but against all this
prejudice I must oppose, first the Integritic and quality of the Relator,
being beyond all exception, and affirms it on his credit. Secondly, why may not
God stop and open the mouth of the Bear now as well as the Lions heretofore ^
to revenge the indignities offered to a Minister under the Gospel, by the same
creature, as those offered to a Prophet under the Law? Or lastly, why may not
the blood of him that owned this Beast, be required by this Beast of him that
had his hand in shedding it? This was not the first time that God gave
commission to the Brute to execute his vengeance. But I forget my self; my
business is to relate things done, not to encounter Objections against their
probability of doing. To go on therefore.

Having brought Master Jones to N^^thampton, his entertainment there was as bad
as his usage in the way thither: though it were in the depth of Winter, when
old age needed good fortifications of Lodging and Diet against the incursions
of Cold and Wet, yet they afford him nothing but a hard mat, with a little
straw under him, and to cover him and to keep him warm nothing but one Blanket
and his own wearing clothes: As for his food, they give him the bread of
afflict on, d^^ying his own friends leave to supply him with competent diet,
to sustain nature, and his growing infirmities: yet to show that Man lives not
by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, it
pleased his good providence to preserve him like the young children in Daniel,
fed only with Pulse so that he was in good plight and seemed to want nothing,
though he continued in this distressed condition from Christmas to almost
Easter: about which time, not remorse of conscience for so much cruelty
practiced on a decrepid old man, (but an Orthodox Reverend Divine) but
importunity of friends, prevailed with the Rebels to release him of his
imprisonment in Northampton, and to remit him to a neighbor Ministers of his
one M. Walters, Bachelor in Divinity, Vicar of Doddington near Wellingborow, a
very learned and industrious Preacher, and permitted him to Officiate in his
own Cure at Easter, there being but one Parish Church in the Town, but no
less then two thousand Communicants. Having license to visit his Charge, not
awed by that Tyrannous usage which he had undergone, Conscience of his duty
does press him to a punctual observance of the Orders and Canons of the
Church: he Celebrates Divine Service according to the Book of Common Prayer;
preaches Obedience as boldly as if there had been no Rebels in
Northamptonshire, administreth the Sacraments with the same Reverence, Decency
and Devotion, as if there had been no Puritans in Wellingborow. Nor does the
undaunted old man remit any thing enjoined by Canon or Rubric. This constancy
of his so incen^ed the Schismatic Puritanicall party of the Town, that
complaint is made at Northampton, that M. Jones is the same man he was, as much
a true Son and Minister of the Church of England as ever. Upon this
information, he is apprehended in Easter week, and carried Prisoner to
Northampton a second time, where they use him with more inhumanity (if it be
possible) then before; they will not permit his wife to visit him, and kept him
so short in h^s diet, not suffering his wife or friends to relieve him, that
most barbarously they starved him to death, for about Whitsontide his spirits
exhausted, and his body pined by famine, the good old Martyr resigned his soul
to God.

There is in Northam^ton one John Gifford, for his extraction the Hogge-herds
son of Little-Hougton, for his education a Knitter, ^fterward a Hose-buyer,
now Major of Northampton, and Colonel of the Town Regiment. This man to his
power Civil and Martial, assumes an Ecclesiastical Superintendency too, and
orders what forms shall be used in Baptis^e, the Lords Supper, Buryall of the
Dead, and the like: When therefore they came to interre the skin and bo^^s of
this starved Martyr, for flesh he had none, the form enjoined by this Gifford
was the same which one Brooks, a London Lecturer, used at the burial of Jo^n
Gough of S. James Dukes place within Algate in London, viz. Ashes to Ashes,
Dust to Dust,
Here Is the Pit, and in you must.


The World may in this see what devout Liturgies we are like to have, when a
Major of a Town shall suppress the An^ient Pious Forms, and introduce rhyme
doggerels, fitter for a painted Cloth in an Alehouse, then the Church of
Christ.

Before I leave this particular Relation, I must not forget to tell you one act
of these Religious Reformers: being at Wellingborow at the Sign of the Swan,
two Maidservants making a bed. some of these Rebels did solicit them to
Incontinency, but the Maids refusing to hearken to their beastly
solicitations, they began to offer violence, and to enforce what they could
not persuade, they still making resistance, they shot one of them dead in the
place, and shot the other through the wrist: such Monuments of Religion and
Purity do these blessed Reformers leave at all places where they come

Master Frederick Gibb Parson of Hartist in Suffolk, in Morning Prayer before
Sermon, desired his Parishioners to give attention to one of His Majesty's
Declarations newly set forth, with an express Command to have it Published in
all Parish Churches, thereby to rectify the people, and to wipe off those
false Impressions which the Incendiaries of the Kingdom had made in them
concerning the Kings Actions and Intentions: whereupon one Master Coleman a
Parishioner being present, impudently replied unto him, openly in the Church,
that he might be ashamed to abuse the people by Reading His Majesty's
Declarations unto them, and therefore he would fetch him some Parliament
Declarations which were a great deal better to be Published unto them, while
this railing Rabshekeh reviled his Sovereign, Master Gibb, as it he had
received the Command in that case given, answers him not, made no reply at all,
but as not heeding this snarler, calls on the Congregation a second time to
give attention, Coleman interrupts him again, and in a scoffing manner, says,
well then Sir, you mean to be an obedient Servant to his Majesty. Master Gibb
then thinking it not only seasonable, but necessary to profess his Loyalty,
replied, yes, Sir, I am, and hope to continue a faithful Servant unto Him as
long as I live: and so proceeds to read the Declaration; the People
notwithstanding all this Encouragement from Coleman to contradict with them,
standing very attentive to hear it: The main drift of the Kings Declaration,
was to assure all His loving Subje^ts, That as He expected that they should
make the Laws the rule of their obedience, so He would make the Laws the guide
of His government: Master Gibb having published the Declaration, Coleman stands
up, and most Traitorously replied to his Parson, well, Sir, the King neither
is, nor shall be Judge of the Law what ever such prating fello^e^ as you would
have him: after this, being enraged (as the rest of that Faction are) that the
peoples eyes should be opened, or that they should, being truly informed,
conceive of the King as he is, a most just and pious Prince, but still to look
on him and all his actions through those false Perspectives of slander and
falsehood which they hold before their eyes; Coleman speeds to London, and
complains (to that Conventicle which call themselves a Parliament) against
Master Gibb for so foul an Affront put upon them by publishing the Kings
Declaration: presently (being servilely Observ^nt to every base informer) they
dispatch several Pursevants to apprehend Master Gibb, he seeing the storm
coming (as wise men do) hides himself, after sometime of retirement (advised
unto it by his friend) he goes to London, where by the great mediation of
friends, and paying fees to the sum of 30 l. he was dismissed, upon
engagement to be forth-comming, whenever they should call for him.

There is none so insolent and intolerable as a base mean man started up into
Command or Authority, we cannot give you a greater Instance, then in That
beggarly Captain Ven, Citizen of London, made Colonel and Commander in chief of
Windsor Castle, who does not only assume to himself the propriety of his
Sovereigns house, dating his Letters to Iezabel his wife, From our Castle at
Windsor, and building some additions to the Deanes Lodgings, as if he meant to
set up his rest there, and make that his habitation: when no place in that
Royal Castle is fit for such a Couple but the Cole-house, and even that too
good for them; but as if there would never come a time to call him to an
account, he does use the Gentlemen and Soldiers taken by the Rebels, and sent
Prisoners thither, with that cruelty and inhumanitie, as if they were Turks,
not Christians, for the Gentlemen that are Prisoners there are not only kept
from Church, nor permitted to receive the Sacrament neither from their own
Preachers, nor from any friend whom they could procure to do that office for
them, nay, they were not permitted to join together in devotions in their
private lodgings, but each man a part, and if this petty Tyrant could have
hindered that intercourse which every particular devout Soul injoyes with his
God, this Ath^^st would have hindered that too. And because the sedentary
Solitary Lives which they led there were prejudicial to their healthes, they
earnestly entreated Ven that they might: recreate themselves in the Tennis
Court near the Keep, and offerred to be at the charges of a Guard, if those
high walls, and the many guards about them were not thought sufficient to
secure them, but yet were denied. Nay, when the Sheriff of Sussex was brought
Prisoner from London to Windsor very lame, though his Surgeon offered
Colonel Ven to be deposed, that on the least neglect his Leg was like to
Gangreene, yet after he came to Windsor, he was forced to lie with the rest of
the Knights and Gentlemen on the ground many nights; at last, showing his Leg
to Ven, he confessed, that he never saw a more dangerous lamenesse, and
promised to acquaint the Earl of Essex with it: and the Sheriff himself
being acquainted with the Earl, presuming on some interest in him, wrote unto
him to acquaint him with his Condition, and earnestly entreating him that he
might be sent to London and disposed of, though in a Dungeon, for a week, that
he might have the assistance of his own Physician and Surgeon, offering to
give anysecurity, and be at any charges to assure him of his safe Return, to
render himself true Prisoner; but neither the sense of his misery, nor his
earnest solicitations could prevail with his Excellency. And if the Knights
and Gentlemen, who had money to bribe that compassion which they could not
entreat, found no better measure at their hands, what then, think you, were
those heavy pressures under which the poor common Soldiers groaned? there
were in the Castle eight poor Soldiers to whom the Sheriff of Sussex allowed
eight shillings a week: yet not withstanding, because they refused to take the
wages of Iniquity, and serve under the Rebels Colors, and fight against
their Sovereign, they starved them, insomuch that being released, (that they
might not dye in the Castle) coming into the air, three of them fell down
dead in the streets: three more recovered as far as Eaton, where a good woman
for five shillings a Week given for their relief by the Sheriff of Sussex,
gave them entertainment, and when the Sheriff made his happy escape, he left
them alive.

There was a poor man living near Moore Park, whom (when Prince Rupert was
in those parts) commanded to show him where the Pipes lay which conveyed water
to the Castle, for this crime they apprehend him, and commit him prisoner to
the Castle, where they fed him with so slender diet, that they even starved
him: and when upon his wives tears and lamentable cries that she and her
children were like to starve at home, while her husband starved at Windsor,
they having no subsistence but what he got by the sweat of his brows, he was
released, he was not able to stand on his legs, and whether dead since we have
no Information.

There was at the same time in the Castle, one Lieutenant Atkinson prisoner,
who suffering under the same want of necessary food, sent to his Father, humbly
petitioning for reliese; his Father, though a man of good estate, returned
answer, that unless he would take proffered Entertainment from the Parli meant,
he should ly^ there, rot^ and starve, and be damned, for him: He finding no
p^t^ie from his Father, where Nature and Religion bade him expect it,
petition^d the Gentlemen in the Keep for bread, as many others daily did, and
on his Petition had moneys sent him, but dyed starved two days after, and left
this just ground to the world to make this Observation, That where Pur tanisme
prevails, it can^els all Obl^gations both of Religi^n and Nature, and never
fa^l^s to make men guilty of that ^in which is in the n^mber of those which the
Scri^tu^^s tell us, shall hear wrath on the end of the World, the want of
N^turall affection

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. X.
Master Chaldwell and his wife barbar^usly used by the Reb^ll^ at Lincoln, and
his servan^ murdered. Master Le^^e, Parson of Wedon-Pinkny in
Northamptonshire, himself and his Church infini^ely abused on the Lords day by
some Rebell-Troopers of Northampton, etc.

WIlliam Chaldmell of Thorgon^y, in the County of Linco^ne Esquire, and Justice
of Peace, being an aged Gentleman, yet his Loyalty and desire to se^ve the King
in ^is just Wars, made him over-looke his infirmities, so that he resolved in
person to come to His assistance: To this purpose he provided four horses
completely furnished, of which the Rebels having intelligence, they surprise
him and seize on his horses. In Februa^y 1643. some Rebell-Troopers came to M.
Chaldw^lls house and demanded entrance, which he denying unless they could
show some Commission from the King, they presently broke up his hall windows,
and forcing his entrance, apprehend his person: yet his person is not all they
come for, they begin to plunder his goods, and the first thing which they lay
hold on, was some Linen lying, on the Hall Table. A servant of Master
Chaldwels standing by, unwilling to lose any thing, if it might be saved, takes
hold on the Linen too, and entreats the Troopers to spare it: Presently same
cry out shoot him, which was no sooner said then done, for one discharging a
Pistol at him, shot a Bullet into his heart, and the top of his seouring-stick
into his body near it. The poor man instantly fell down dead, hardly by any
motion expressing the farewell of life: While most stood amazed at so barbarous
an act, some make toward him, thinking to help him, but were forbid by the
bloody Villains to come near him, who were so far from remorse for what
they had done, that to murder they added theft, diving into the Pockets of him
whom they had thus murdered, and ^obbing him of his moneys: Nay, his wife whom
they had murdered, hearing of this sad accident, being great with child, came
to see her dead Husband, but was not permitted to come near him, being
threatened by these Troopers, that if she came near him, they should do unto
her as they had done unto her Husband, shoot her dead.

Having done their pleasure in Master Chaldwels houese, they carry him away
Prisoner to Lincoln; Being come thither, they commit him to the Town Jail,
and lodged him there in the common Keep amongst Murderers and Felons: The day
after the Lincolne-shire Rebels received the defeat before Newarke, by a
verbal command from the Earl of Lincolne^, he was removed from the
Towne-Prison to the Castle in Lincoln, where he was put into a ^as^ie stinking
place called the Witch Hole, and without any regard to his quality, being a
Gentleman of prime ^ote in his Country, or to his age being an old man, they
permit him to stay there all night, having no other bed but the Ground, and no
other Pillow but the hard stones. The next day they vouchsafe him the favor to
let him purchase a little and but a very little better accommodation by buying
out some poor Prisoners out of their lodging: remaining there in this
disconsolate condition, his wife an aged Gentlewoman came to visit him, being
very willing to share with him in his Misery, as before she had done in his
Prosperity.

Having spent some time in mutual consolation, and exhorting one another
patiently to bear this unjust oppression, hoping that they might enjoy one
another society, in so mean a condition, without the envy of their
oppressors: but even this contented misery did not last long, for the next day
after the Rebels lost Grantham by the Kings recovering that Town, out of
their possession, the Governor of Lincoln ( Welden by name) enraged, and not
knowing where to wreck his malice, safer then on this poor old Gentleman,
comes up to the Castle, and most imperiously commands that Chaldwell should
come before him: the Messenger that was sent to command his appearance,
returned with this answer, That Master Chaldwell labored under some
indisposition, that he was in bed, and his Wife with him: the Governor not
satisfied with so reasonable an answer, snatched a cudgel out of a Soldiers
hand, and swears that he would make the old rascal rise: in this fury away he
goes to Master Chaldwells chamber, and rushing in, in a menacing way shakes his
cudgel at him, and holding it upon his head, threatened to bastinado him if he
did not rise presently, the good old Gentlewoman his wife, prognosticating by
the rough message sent her Husband, that there was a storm coming, forsook
her bed, and stood by it in her Nightgown, but bare-legged, there to interpose
and plead for her Husband if occasion served: and now finding more inhumanitie
then her fear at first suggested, in an humble manner she beseeched the
Governor to use her Husband like a Gentleman, not like a dog, to be awed by a
cudgel. The Governor impatient of any mediation, though from a wife, and
though b^cked with never so much reason, c^mmands his Soldiers to take her
away, which they did in so rude and boisterous a manner, that they dragged her
down the stairs, pulled her dressing off her head, and at last thrust her out
of the Castle. Being thus violently snatched from her dear Husband, and
^ea^ing he might suffer as much violence within, as she did in being thurst out
of the Castle; she sits down on a stone at the Castle gate, where the winter
blasts sand her gray hair, a sad spectacle to all that passed by, and knew who
she was. Many there were that pitied her distress, and would willingly have
received her into their houses, but durst not; it is a crime to show mercy where
the Rebels intend cruelty. At last having sat there long, full of tears and
sorrow, bassled with cold winds and weather, a sister of Master St ts the
Apotheca^y (and the God o^ mercy restore it an hundred fold into her bosom)
^ends her a Petti-coat (for they thrust her out with no clothes on but her
night-Gowne) to fence her against the extremity of the cold. But to let this
charitable Gentlewoman know, that the rewards of mercy are to be expected in
another world, and that here to do good, and for that to suffer evil, is the
recompense of this world, that very afternoon her Brothers house was
plundered, and all their goods seized on, so that they needed a return of that
compassion in the evening which they showed to others in the morning. Welden
the Governor, having compelled the good old Gentleman to rise out of his bed,
notwithstanding his present infirmity, sends him from his poor lodging which
he had lately purchased, to the common Dungeon, where he had neither light nor
air but what the Grate afforded. The place was of such condition, that there
being three Prisoners with him in the same room, but one of four must lie
down at once, the rest must stand: and yet in this little case (as was
testified by a Letter under his own hand) he remained eleven or twelve nights
without Bed, Chair, or Stool: and in that time, for four or five nights, he
was not permitted to go forth to do the offices of nature, a command being
given, that if he offered to stir forth they should beat out his brains.
Thus much, and diverse other particulars were signfied to the Commissioners at
Newarke, when the Ammunition came from thence: At which time information was
given, that Master Chaldwell was then in a condition not much better then what
you have heard here related: and whether their barbarous cruelties and
inhumanitie have not set an end to his sufferings by death, is uncertain.

On Sunday the second of July 1643. in the afternoon, ten or twelve Troopers
under the command of Captain Samuel, came from Northampton to We^on Pinkney in
the same County, and coming thither in Prayer time, they came into the
Church, one of them being Horse-keeper (as it was reported) to Sir Richard
Samuel, father to the Captain, came up to the Reading Pew, where Master Loss,
Parson of that Parish was officiating Divine Service, and commanded him to
leave off his Portage and to follow him: Master Loss in^^eating him in that
Sacred work, but to have patience until he had finished what he had began;
Patience me no patience (replied the Groom) my business is of greater
importance then to admit of any delay, come away therefore, or I will pull you
^^t by the cares: thereupon, not knowing whose Soldiers they were, nor of what
consequence their business might be or it he had known both, yet not able to
make resistance, be obeyes his command, and followed him into the Churc^yard.
Being come thither, Master Loss demands what he would have with him? the
Groom tells him, that he must go along with them to Northampton, Master Loss
deman^s again, by what authority, and by virtue of what Commission? The Groom
replies, that he should know that when he came to Northampton: Master Loss
entreats that he may be excused, alleading that he had lost twelve or thirteen
horses taken from him by the Parliament Soldiers, and that he had never a horse
able to carry him two miles out of the Town: one of the Troopers swears
wounds and blood, that he would carry him behind him, and if that did not like
him, he would drag him along with a Halter at his horse tail. Master Loss
abominating so great insolency from Grooms, boldly told them that he would
never be a slave to slaves; and so rushing from them took Sanctuary in the
Church, and shut the door upon him, and perceiving the door on the other side
of the Church open, the people having unbard it for their speedier passage out,
he hastens thither, and though he made what speed he could, he was like to be
prevented by one of the Troopers who was come about and was ready to enter the
Church on horseback: which Master Loss observing, took up the bar of the
door, and resolutely ran at the Trooper to unhorse him: This unexpected
resistance so valiantly made, put the Trooper to a retreat, whereby M. Loss
gained time to bar the door fast against him. Having shut both the Church
doors upon himself, and the remainder of the Congregation, some being fled
for fear; the Clerk at a hole gave him the Key of the Belfrey: Master Loss
not thinking himself secure enough in the Church, gets up into the Belfrey,
and locks the doors fast after him; being come to the place where the Bells
hang, he discovers over head a little hole, only big enough for a man to creep
through, and a Ladder standing there which led up unto it, Master Loss goes up
the Ladder, and through the hole gets upon the Leads, and with great
difficulty draws the Ladder after him, being massey and very heavy; by which
means he did not only deprive his pursuers of the means to come at him, but
with the Ladder laid over the hole baracadoed the passage against them: and now
being here, had he had any weapon to defend himself, he had been impregnable.
While Master Loss was up in the Belfrey securing of himself, the Troopers are
at the Church windows, endeavoring to wrench out the Irons bars, but
without any success: at last, with their Pole-axes and great Tomb-stones,
Impiously taken from the graves of the Dead, they break open the Church
doors; having thus forced their entrance, they r^de into the Church (not
remembering they were in Gods house) from one end of it to another, spurring and
switching their horses purposely to endanger the People. These barbarous
outrages did much affright the People, but especially Mistress Loss; and her
poor children, whom it most concerned, M. Loss being the only man aimed at;
Mistress Loss fell into a swound in the Church, and had no show of life in
her for a long time; at which the people moved with compassion interceded with
the Troopers, and desired them to desist, putting them in mind of the place
where they were, a place where God met with his People, and they with their
God. It seems this Congregation had been better taught, then to subscribe to
Doctor Twist the Prolocutor of the absurd Heterogen^ous Synod, his
Interpretation of that Text of Scripture, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and
reve^ence my Sanctuary, In his Pre^ace to Master Meads Book of the Apo^^acie of
the latter times; as if this Text enjoined no reverence to be used toward the
places of Gods public worship: they were much scandalized at this profane
irreverence, and made it an argument to awe them to civil demeanor at least,
because of the place: and withail they objected, that they did much abuse
themselves and dishonor their Cause by such our-ragious carriages: all this
would reflect on the Cause they pretended to maintain. And lastly, they
alleged, that if they had any shame in them, they might be ashamed, in the
Lords house on the Lords day to abuse a Minister in his own Congregation, who
besides the honor and reverence due to his Calling, might challenge some
respect from them being a Gentleman of good birth, and descent. In reply to so
good reason, (being indeed but Pearl cast before Swine) one breaks out with a
great oath, swearing wounds and blood (so that all the Blasphemy is not on the
Cavaliers side) and saying, What do you tell me of birth and descent? a plague
take him and his Gentilitie, ^ h pe within this year to see never a Gentleman
in F^^land: you remember the Proverb, Children and Fo^^st t^ll truth, having
thus despised all wholesome admonition, they go to the Belfrey, they break
open the door, and come to the place where the ^els did hang, and from the top
of the Frames of the Bells endeavored through the hole (but now mentioned) to
get upon the Leads, where Master Loss was, but he having stopped that paslage
with the Ladder, and making the best use he could of his hands and feet (being
all the weapons either offensive or defensive which he had) made good the place
against them: yet notwithstanding in the Resistance he was in very great danger
to lose his life, for they discharged their Pistols at him at least eight or
nine times, but by the good providence of God they missed their mark, with
their swords they wounded him in three several parts of his body, yet God be
blessed the wounds were not mortal, at last having received a hurt in his
hand, having a vein p^icked with one of their swords, his blood flowed so fast
upon the Troopers underneath him, that as they bragged there, and in other
places after they were gone thence, they thought they had dispatched him, and
therefore thinking him to be a dead man they left him, yet to imbalme him to
his Funeral, they pour out a flood of reproachful names upon him, calling
him Rogue, Rascal, Slave, Villain, Dog, Devil, making no stop till their
master the Devil, and their own memories could suggest no more names of the
same stamp: At last, to seal up all, for fear they had not murdered him,
they protest with many Execrations upon themselves, that if they had not now
sped him (which yet they hoped they had) they would return another time, and
have him either dead or alive.

At Bridstow in Devonshire there dwells a Husbandman (and though I cannot tell
his name, yet let it not weaken the credit of the Relation) who not satisfied
with the Parliaments proceedings in taking up Arms against their lawful
undoubted Sovereign, stood in a seeming Neutrality: at last conceiving it time
to declare himself, he openly adhered to the Kings party, hereupon he was very
diligently sought after, and the Earl of Sta^ford sent a Troop of Horse to his
house to apprehend him: When they came thither, they found not the good man at
home, but a son of his, about ten or eleven years old, they ask him where
his Father was, the child replied, that he was not at home, they threaten him,
and use all arts to make him discover where his Father had hid himself the
child being ignorant where his Father was, still persisted in the same answer,
that he knew not where he was: hereupon they threaten to hang him, neither does
that prevail; at last they take the poor innocent child and hang him up,
either because he would not betray his Father, had he been able to satisfy
their doubt, or for not having the spirit of Prophecy, not being able to
reveal what by an ordinary way of knowledge he did not know: having let him
hang awhile, they cut him down, not intending to hang him unto death, but
being cut down they could perceive nothing discovering life in him, hereupon
in a barbarous way of experiment, they prick him with their swords in the back
and thighs, using the means leading to death, to find out life: at last after
some long stay, some small symptoms of life did appear, yet so weak, that
there they left him nearer the confines of death then life: and whether the
child did ever recover, is more than my Informer former can assure me. Only
courteous Reader observe from this short Narration, that these bloody Rebels
spare neither the venerablenesse of the sacred Function, the infirmities of old
Age, or the tenderness of Youth.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XI.
The particulars of the first Siege of Corfe-Castle, gallantly defended by the
Lady Banks, and Captain Laurence, against the Powers, Plots, and Policies of
Sir Walter Earl and his Adhereats, etc.

THere is in the ^^^e of Purbecke a strong Castle called Corffe-Castle, seated
on a very sleep Hill, in the fracture of a Hill in the very midst of it, being
8 miles in length, running from the East end of the Pentrsu^a to the West: and
though it stand between the two ends of this fracture, so that it may (...) to
lose much advantage of its natural and artificial (...) as commanded ^^o
thence, being in height equal to, if not over-looking the tops of the highest
Towers of the Castle yet the structure of the Castle is so strong, the ascent
so s^^^p, the walls so massy and thick, that it is one of the imp^^gnablest
Forts of the Kingdom, and of very gre^ concernment, in respect of its command
over the (...), and the ^laces about it. This Castle is now the Possession and
Inheritance of the Right Honorable Sir John Ba^ks, Chie^e Justice of the
Common Pleas, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councell, who
receiving commands from the King to attend Him at York, York, in Easter Term
1641. had leave from the two Houses to obey those commands: After the unhappy
difference^ between the King and the two Houses, or rather between the King and
the Faction in both Houses, grew high, it being generally feared that the sword
would decide the controversy, the Lady Ranks, a virtuous and prudent Lady,
resolved with her children and fan^ly to retire to this Castle, there to
shelter themselves from the storm which she saw coming, which accordingly she
did, there she and her Family remained in peace all the Winter, and a great
part of the Spring, until May 1643. about which time the Rebels under the
command of Sir Walter Earl, Sir Thomas T^enchard, and others, had possessed
themselves of Dorchester, L^me, Melcome, Weym^^th, Warham, and Poole. (
Portland Castle being treacherously delivered to the Rebels) only Corffe Castle
remaining in obedience to the King: but the Rebels knowing how much it
concerned them to add this Castle to their other Garrisons, to make all the
Seacoast wholly for them, and thinking it more seizable to gain it by
Treachery then open Hostility, resolved to lay hold on an opportunity coming
on, to see if they could become Masters of it.

There is an ancient usage that the Major and Barons (as they call them) of
Corffe Castle, accompanied by the Gentry of the Island, have permission from
the Lord of the Castle on May Day to coarse a Stagge, which every year is
performed with much solemnity and great concourse of People: On this day some
Troops of Horse from Dorchester and other places came into the Island,
intending to find other game then to hunt the Stagge, their business being
suddenly to surprise the gentlemen in the hunting, and to take the Castle; the
news of their coming dispersed the Hunters, and spoiled the sport for that day,
and made the Lady ^anks to give order for the safe custody of the Castle gates,
and to keep them shut against all comers. The Troopers having mist their prey
on the Hills, (the Gentlemen having withdrawn themselve) some of them came to
the Castle under a pretense to see it, but entrance being denied them, the
Common Soldiers used threatening language, casting out words implying some
intentions to take the Castle, but the Commanders (who better knew how to
conceal their resolutions) utterly disavowed any such thought, denying that
they had any such Commission; however the ^ady Banks very wisely, and like her
self, hence took occasion to call in a Guard to assist her, not knowing how
soon the might have occasion to make use of them, it being now more then
probable that the Rebels had a design upon the Castle. The taking in this
guard as it secured her at home, so it rendered her suspected abroad, from
thence forward there was a watchful and vigilant eye to servey all her
actions, whatsoever she sends out, or sends for in, is suspected, her ordinary
provisions for her family are by same multiplied, and reported to be more then
double what indeed they were, as if she had now an intention to Victual and
Man the castle against the Forces of the two Houses of Parliament, presently
Letters are sent from the Committees of Poole, to demand the four small pieces
in the Castle, and the present was, because the Islanders conceived strange
jealousies, that the Pieces were mounted and put on their Carriages; hereupon
the Lady Banks dispatched Messengers to Dorchester and to Poole to entreat the
Commissioners that the small Pieces might remain in the Castle for her own
defense; and to take away the ground of the Islanders jealousies, she caused
the Pieces to be taken off their Carriages again; hereupon a promise was made,
that they sold be left to her possession; but there passed not many days
before forty Seamen (they in the Castle not suspecting any such thing) came
very early in the morning to demand the Peaces, the Lady in Person (early as it
was) goes to the Gates and desires to see their War^^^^, they (...) the hands
of some of the Commissioners, but in stead of delivering them, though at that
time there were but five men in the Castle, yet these five assisted by the
Maidservants at their Ladies Command, mount these pieces on their Carriages
again, and lading one of them they gave fire, which small Thunder so
affrighted the Seamen, that they all quitted the place and ran away. They
being gone, by beat of Drum she summons help into the Castle, and upon the
Alarm given, a very considerable guard of Tenants and friends came in to her
assistance, there being withal some fifty Arms brought into the Castle, from
several parts of the Island: This guard was kept in the Castle about a week,
during this time, many threatening Letters were sent unto the Lady; telling her,
what great Forces sold be sent to fetch them, if the would not by fair means
be persuaded to deliver them, and to deprive her of her Auxiliaries, all or
most of them being neighbors thereabouts, they threaten that if they oppose
the delivery of them, they would fire their house: presently their wives come
to the Castle, there they weep, and w^ing their hands, and with clamorous
Oratory persuade their Husbands to come home, and not by saving others to
expose their own houses to spoil and ruin, nay to reduce the Castle into a
distressed condition, they did not only intercept two hundred weight of powder
provided against a siege; but they interdict them the Liberty of
Common-markets, Proclamation is made at Warham, (a Market-Towne hard by) that
no Beer, Beef, or other provision should be sold to the Lady Banks, or for
her use-strict watches are kept, that no Messenger or intelligence shall pass
into or out of the Castle: being thus distressed, all means of victualling the
Castle being taken away and being but slenderly furnished for a siege, either
with ammunition or with victual, at last they came to a Treary of Composition,
of which the result was, that the Lady Banks should deliver up those 4 small
Pieces, the biggest carring not above ^ 3 pound bullet, and that the Rebels
should permit her to enjoy the Castle and Arms in it in peace and quietness.

And though this wise Lady knew too well to rest satisfied or secured in these
promises (their often breach of Faith having sufficiently instructed her what
she might expect from them) yet she was glad of this opportunity to strengthen
her self even by that means, by which many in the world thought she had done
her self much prejudice, for the Rebels being now possessed of their Guns,
presumed the Castle to be theirs as sure as it they had actually possessed it.
Now it was no more but ask and have: hereupon they grow remiss in their
Watches, negligent in their observations, not heeding what was brought in, not
taking care, as before, to intercept supplies, which might enable them to hold
out against a Siege: and the Lady making good use of their remisnes, laid hold
on the present opportunity, and as much as the time would permit, furnished the
Castle with provisions of all sorts. In this Intervall there was brought in, a
hundred and half of powder, and a quantity of match proportionable. And
understanding that the Kings Forces under the Conduct of Prince Maurice, and
the Marquess Hertford were advancing toward Blanford, she, by her Messenger
made her address to them, to signify unto them the present condition in which
they were, the great consequence of the place, desiring their assistance, and
in particular that they would be pleased to take into their serious
consideration to send some commanders thither to take the charge of the Castle;
hereupon they send Captain Laurence son of Sir Edward Laurence, a Gentleman
of that Island to command in ch^e^, but he coming without a Commission could
not command moneys or provisions to be brought in until it was too late.
There was likewise in the Castle one Captain Bond an old soldier, whom I
should deprive of his due honor, not to mention him, having a share in the
honor of this resistance. The first time the Rebels faced the Castle, they
brought a body of between two and three hundred Horse and Foot, and two Pieces
of Ordnance, and from the Hills played on the Castle, fired four houses in the
Town, and then summoned the Castle, but receiving a denial for that time they
left it But on the three and twentieth of June, the Sagicious Knight, Sir
Walter Earl (that has the gift of discerning Treasons and might have made up
his nine and thirty Treasons forty, by reckoning in his own) accompanied by
Captain Sidenham, Captain Henry Jarvis, Captain Skut, son of that
Arch-Traytor, Skut of Poole, with a body between five and six hundred came and
possessed themselves of the Town, taking the opportunity of a misty morning,
that they might find no resistance from the Castle. They brought with them to
the Siege a Demi Canon, a Culverin and two Sacres, with these and their small
shot, they played on the Castle on all quarters of it, with good observation of
Advantages, making their bettery strongest where they thought the Castle
weakest. And to bind the soldiers by tie of Conscience to an eager prosecution
of the Siege, they administer them an Oath, and mutually bind themselves to
most unchristian resolutions; That if they found the defendants obstinate not
to yield, they would maintain the Siege to victory and then deny Quarter unto
all, killing without m^rty, Men, Women, and Children. As to bring on their own
soldiers, they abused them with falsehoods, telling them that the Castle stood
in a Level, yet with good advantages of approach, that there were but forty
men in the Castle, whereof twenty were for them, that there was rich booty and
the like; so, during the Siege they used all base, unworthy means, to corrupt
the defendants, to betray the Castle into their hand, the better sort they
endeavor to corrupt with bribes, to the rest they offer double Pay, and the
whole Plunder of the Castle; when all these Arts took no effect, then they
fall to Stra^agems and Engines. To make their approaches to the wall with more
safety, they make two Engines, one they call the Sow, the other the Boar,
being made with boards lined with wool to dead the shot. The first that moved
forward was the Sow, but not being Musket proof, she cast nine of eleven of her
Farrow, for the Musketeers fro the castle were so good marks-men at their
legs, the only part of all their bodies left without defense, that 9 ran away,
as well as their broken and battered legs would give them leave; and of the
two which knew neither how to run away, nor well to stay, for fear, one was
slain. The Boar of the two (a man would think) the valianter creature, seeing
the ill success of the Sow, to cast her Litter before her time, durst not
advance. The most advantageous part for their Batteries was the Church, which
they without fe^^e of profanation used, not only as their Rampart, but their
rendezvous: of the Surplesse they made two shirts for two soldiers, they broke
down the Organs, and made the Pipes serve for Cases to hold their powder and
shot, and not being furnished with Musquet-bullets, they cut off the Lead of
the Church, and rolled it up, and shoot it without ever casting in a mould Sir
Walter and the Commanders were earnest to press forward the soldiers; but as
prodigal as they were of the blood of their common soldiers, they were
sparing enough of their own; it was a general observation, that valiant Sir
Walter nevel willingly exposed himself to any hazard; for being by chance
endangered by a Bullet, shot through his Coat, afterward he put on a Bears
skin, and to the eternal honor of this Knights valor be it recorded, for
fear of Musket Shot, (for other they had none) he was seen to creep on all
four, on the sides of the hill, to keep himself out of danger. This base
Cowardisme in the Assaylants, added courage and resolution to the defendants:
therefore not compelled by want, but rather to brave the Rebels, they sallyed
out, and brought in eight ^owes and a Bull into the Castle, without the loss
of a man, or a man wounded. At another time five boys setcht in four Cowes.
They that stood on the hills, called to one in a house in the valley, crying,
Shoot Anthony, but Anthony thought it good to sleep in a whole skin, and
durst not look out, so that afterward it grew into a prove^biall jeere, from
the Defendants to the Assaylants, Shoot Anthony. The Rebels having spent much
time and Ammunition, and some men, and yet being as far from hopes of taking
the Castle, as the first day they came thither, at last the Earl of Warw^cke
sends them a supply of an hundred and fifty Mariners, with several Cart-loads
of Petars, Grenades, and other Warlike provision, with scaling Ladders to
assault the Castle by scaladoe; They make large offers to him that should first
scale the wall, 20 l. to the first, and so by descending sums a reward to the
twentieth, but all this could not prevail with these silly wretches, who were
brought thither as themselves confessed, like sheep to the slaughter, some of
them having but exchanged the manner of their death, the halter for the bullet,
having taken them out of Gaoles, one of them being taken Prisoner, had Letters
Testimonial in his hands whence he came, the Letters I mean when he was burnt
for a Felon, being very visible to the beholders, but when they found that
persuasion could not prevail, with such abject low-spirited men, the
Commanders resolve on another course, which was to make them drunk, knowing
that drunkenness makes some men fight like Lions, that being sober would run
away like Hares. To this purpose they fill them with strong waters, even to
madness, and ready they are now for any design, and for fear Sir Walter
should be valiant against his will, like C^sar, he was the only man almost
that came sober to the assault: an imitation of the Turkish practice, (for
certainly there can be nothing of Christianitic in it, to send poor souls to
Gods Judgment Seat, in the very act of two grievous sins, Rebellion and
Drunkenness) who to stupifie their Soldiers, and make them insensible of
their dangers, give them Opium; being now armed with drink, they resolve to
storm the Castle on all sides, and apply their scalding Ladders, it being
ordered by the Leaders, (if I may without a Solecism call them so, that stood
behind and did not so much as follow) that when twenty were entered, they
should give a watchword to the rest, and that was Old Wat: a word ill cholen,
by (...) Earl, and considering the business in hand, little better then
ominous, for if I be not deceived, the Hunters that beat bushes for the
fearful timoous Hare, call him Old Wat.

Being now Pot valiant, and possessed with a borrowed courage, which was to
Evaporate in sleep, they divide their Forces into two Parties, whereof one
assaults the Middle ward, defended by valiant Captain Lawrence, and the greater
part of the Soldiers; the other assault the Upper ward, which the Lady Banks
(to her eternal honor be it spoken) with her daughters, women, and five
Soldiers, undertook to make good against the Rebels, and did bravely
perform what she undertook; for by heaving over stones and hot embers they
repelled the Rebels, and kept them from climbing their Ladders, thence to
throw in that wildfire, which every Rebel had ready in his hand. Being
repelled, and having in this Siege and this Assault lost and hurt an hundred
men, Old Sir Wat, hearing the Kings Forces were advanced, cried, and ran away
crying, leaving Sydenham to Command in Chief, to bring off the Ordnance,
Ammunition, and the remainder of the Army, who afraid to appear abroad kept
Sanctuary in the Church till night, meaning to sup and run away by Starlight;
but supper being ready, and set on the Table, an Alarm was given that the
Kings Forces were coming; this news took away Sydenhams stomach; all this
provision was but messes of meat set before the Sepulchers of the dead, he
leaves his Artillery, Ammunition, and (which with these men is something) a
good supper, and ran away to take Boat for Poole, leaving likewise at the
shore about an hundred Horse to the next Takers, which next day proved good
prize to the Soldiers of the Castle. Thus after six weeks strict Siege, this
Castle, the desire of the Rebels, the tears of Old Sir Wat, and the Key of
those parts, by the Loyalty, and brave resolution of this honorable Lady, the
valor of Captain Lawrence and some eighty Soldiers, (by the loss only of
two men) was delivered from the bloody intentions of these merciless Rebels on
the 4. of August 1643.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XII.
Master Thomas Jones, Bachelor in Divinity, ill-intreated by the Rebe^s in
Devon A Soldier hanged at Tame on the signe-post of the Kings head. Master
Wright, a Minister in Cheshire Plundered, and two of his Maidservants
mur^hered. D^ctor Beale, Doctor Martin, and Doctor Ste^ne, brought Prisoners
from Cambridge by C^on well, and their barba^ous usage, etc.

MAster Thomas Jones, Bachelor in Divinity, and Rector of Offw^ll in the
County of D^von, having discovered that the right of Patronage of one of the
Cures of Tuisord^on was in the Crown, and worth three hundred pounds per
annum, did in the pursuance of this Right, spend a thousand pounds to recover
it from those, who account all lawful gain whatsoever they can purloyne
either from God or the King. The pretended Patrons, who had invaded this Right,
were much offended with Master Jones for being at so great expense to redeem
the prey out of their hands, and did but watch an Opportunity to make him know
how sensible they were of this their loss. This Parliament being called, and
these men made Members of the Lower House, they quickly perceived that this
wished-for opportunity was now come, wherein they might pervert public
justice to private revenge, quickly learning to exercise that Arbitrary
unlimited power over their fellow Subjects, which the prevalency of a dangerous
faction had put into their hands. According to the general practice since this
Parliament, they accuse Master Jones of some Anti-parliamentary passages in his
Sermon, which his Judges understood as little as his Accusers: Nay perhaps it
was with him (as with many of his Orthodox Brethren) the same men were both his
Accusers and Judges. However any or no accusation we know have served these
mensturnes, to bring Godly and Learned Ministers to the Beare-bayting of a
Committee, and to put them into the expensive custody of a Sergeant at Arms:
so it was with Master Jones, they first pretended some Crimes, and on these
pretenses they commit him prisoner to a Sergeant at Arms. Having deprived him
of his Liberty, and put him into a consumption of his estate by the
unreasonable unlimited exactions of Parliament-Gaolers, they then think him
reduced to such a condition as to be willing to hearken to a Composition, on
any terms. At last, vexed to an agreement, he is to enjoy his Liberty and
Peace on this mutual stipulation: They are to pardon him the error of his
doctrine, to deliver up his bail, being with two sureties Parliament men bound
in a Bond of two thousand pounds, and to give him two hundred pounds toward
his charges. Master Jones must resign his lately recovered Cure at Tuisord^on
to make way for a Clerk of their own: which to avoid farther molestation, to
his very great prejudice, he was enforced to condescend unto. After, in
September, 1642. Master Jones riding to Taunton in Somersetshire, accompanied
by one of the Prince his servants, who wore his Masters Colors, was for that
reason, together with that Gentleman, immediately after his departure from
thence, apprehended, and like a ^elon brought back to the Castle, where he
remained Prisoner three weeks, and could not be released without the earnest
solicitation of his friends, and his Wives humble and often petitioning the
Earl of Bedford. In November last, suffering under continual molestations,
and out of all hope to live peaceably at home, he resolved to put himself under
the protection of Sir Ralph Hoptons Army then in Cornwall. To this purpose he
furnished three Horses and Arms proportionable, and set forward to deliver them
up for His Majesty's service: but unhappily in the way thither he was
intercepted by the Earl of Stamfords Forces, under the command of Captain
Gould, taken Prisoner, robbed so the value of 80.l. the Plunderers leaving him
not so much as a Boot to ^ide in. By these he is led Captive to Liskard in
Cornwall, where they kept him three days, in which time he and another
Minister with him, with his servant, had but one pint of Beer for their
sustenance, being kept without either fire or light, and for one night had
their hands bound behind them, and had st^ll been kept in the like bondage, had
not God in mercy rescued them by Sir Ralph Hopton, after the famous battle of
Liskard: During the time of their imprisonment, they offer them Conditions on
which they may purchase their liberty; viz to pay three hundred pound; to take
an Oath never any more to assist the King with Horse, Arms, or Money: But
being delivered on far better terms he was not long after imprisoned for
giving God public thanks for his deliverance. Afterward, seeing that
Religion if self was but abused, being made the Cloak of these men's
Hypocrisy and Treasons, and that they did ^ast but is strife and debate, he
did not observe the Fast every ^ast wednesday in the month, with that strict
observation as was expected from him by that Faction, hereupon some of them put
him in mind of it: Good Friday coming on presently, upon the last Wednesday in
Apr^ll ^e ces^ed his Neigh^ours and Parishioners to keep that ancient Fast
enjoined by the Church, in Commemoration of the bitter Death and Passion of
Christ; and the better to invite them to that days ^^^^mne Humiliation, he
Preached to them twice that day. Though Se^mons be all their Religion, yet two
Sermons on Good Friday are with these men no better then Superstition: ^or, for
this contempt (as they interpreted it) of the Parliament Fast, not setting so
high an estim^t on on it as on this Ca^b^like Fast of Good Fryd^y (received and
practiced by all Churches in all Ages, ti^l o^ late a Jewish observation of one
day has sh^uldred out the religious observation of all other days) he was
convented before the Sessions, where Edmund Prideaux a Parliament man, and a
pretender to this Law, pressed this his obedience to the Church most violently
against him; maliciously affirming, that he did it to affront the Parliament,
and to advance Pop^sh Superstition, and I^novation, and that therefore He (see
what it is to be a Parliament man) would make him an Example to the world, and
as the times then were (God, as he threatened Israel pro^oking us by foolish
people) was like enough to have done it, had not M. Io^e^ prevented him by
withdrawing himself, and so declined the evil intended against him. Yet we
may not omit one thing: though it were so heinous a C^ime in M Jones not to
observe one of their Wednesdayes Fasts, yet M Dark Minister of Musbury in the
same County, and a man of that Faction, could command his men to follow the
Plough that day, and yet was never thought fit of a Reprehension, nor so much
as a Brotherly Admonition: and no wonder, for though heretofore Actions did
Qualify persons, and denominate them, by the Sectaries new Divinity they make
persons to Qualify Actions; those things which are sins in others lose their
Nature and their Name in a Child of God, and they will take it very ill from
you not to be so reputed, though living in the most notorious scandalous sins
that de^le the soul, and lay waste the Conscience of Man. But to return to
our Story.

From the beginning of this Parliament (till God, by the glorious and no less
then miraculous Victories of Sir Ralph Hopton, restored some Peace to that
miserably distracted Country) Master Jones was not permitted to live quietly at
his own dwelling, they threaten to hang him, and burn his house, which they
Plundered no less then seven times: and not content with this, they threaten
to carry away his aged Father Prisoner, being no less then 86 years of age;
and had been as good as their word, (for in mischief they seldom fail of
their promises) had not the Women of the Parish (in detestation of so great
barbarism) rescued him out of their hands: After that memorable defeat of the
Rebels at Sira^ton in the edge of Cornwall by the brave Sir Ralph Hopton, M.
Jones returned to his own house, fearing no danger from the fitters of that
broken Army: but four Troopers of the Rebels horse came to his house, searched
it very narrowly for him, insomuch that he heard them swear, how cruelly they
would use that Cavaliering Priest if they could meet with him, when they were
nearer him then they were aware of, (had they known it) there being but an Inch
board between him and them: at which time missing of the intended Prey, they
wreck their malice on his household stuff, what they could not carry away they
spoil; Beds, Bedsteeds, Hangings, all are torn and spoiled: They Plunder the
Maid servants, and that of their Smocks, and exchange in their very presence
their lowzie shirts for their clean Linen: Hereupon M. Jones finding by
experience (that there was no safety out of one of the Kings Armies (the only
Protection which the King is able for the present to afford His good Subjects)
he put himself under the Protection of Sir Ralph Hoptons Army, where he now
^emaines.

While the Rebels Army lay at Tame sending out parties, by chance they lighted
on some of the Kings Soldiers, and amongst them there was one, who touched in
conscience for so grievous a sin, as listing up his hand against his lawful
Sovereign, the Lords Anointed, forsook the Rebels Army and was entertained in
his Majesty's pay: and being in their power they resolve instantly to hang him:
but with such Circumstances as in the murder of the Subject they evidently
manifest their malicious rebellious hearts toward their Sovereign. Nothing
will serve to hang him on, but the sign post of the Kings Head in Tame; the
poor man being ready to be thrown from the Ladder, Prayed very servently, and
cried out Lord Jesus receive my Soul. The Rebels standing about him, instead
of joining with him in his devotions made a confused noise, and laughed at him.
They that had so little mercy for his Soul were not likely to draw out any
bowels of Compassion toward his body. No, they will not only Murder him, but
Murder him by a lingering Torment, they will not afford him the favor of a
running knot quickly to obstruct the Throat, and totally deprive him of breath,
but the halter is tied so fast, that he hanged gasping for breath, not drawing
so much as to maintain life, nor so little as suddenly to lose it: having in
this Torment hanged a while, a barbarous Inhuman Vi^laine, stepped to him, and
fearing he should give up his vexed Gh^st too soon, he puts his hands under
his feet and listed him up to give him some scope of Respiration, but even in
this unchristian usage of a poor wretch he did not forget to blaspheme his
Lord and King: for having lifted him up, he turned the dying man's face toward
the sign it self of the Kings head: and jeering said, Nay, Sir, you must
speak one word with the King before you go, you are blindfold, and be cannot
see, and by and by you shall both come down together: Let the world if it can
now give us a parrallel of so undutifull, so high a co^empt of regal authority,
or tell us whether any of the several Spawns of Hell but only an Atheistical
Puritan could possibly commit such devilish Cruelties against his fellow
Subject, or belch out such venom against his Soveraigne^ Amongst those many
Sins which call for our public Humiliation, and our earnest zeal to purge the
Land from the guilt which has polluted it, certainly Contempt and Scorn of so
good, so gracious a King, is none of the least.

On Monday the 29 of May 1643, a boy of five or six years of age, attended by a
youth, was coming to Oxford to his father an officer in the Kings Army,
passing through Buckinghamshire, he fell into the hands of some Troopers of
Colonel Goodwins Regiment, who not only Pillaged him of the clothes which he
brought with him, but took his doublet off his back, and would have taken away
his hat and boots, if the youth that attended on him had not very earnestly
interceded for them to save them. For one of the company, more tender hearted
then the rest, moved with the child's cries and affrightment, and with the
youths earnest entreaty, prevailed with the rest not to rob the child of these
necessary fences from the injury of wind and weather. Yet though they spare him
these things, they rob him of his horse, and leave the poor child to a tedious
long journey on foot: This barbarism to a poor child far from his friends,
almost distracted with fear, so prevailed with some, that they made Colonel
Goodwin and Sir Robert Pie acquainted with it, hoping to find them sensible of
so cruel practices on a poor child: but these great Professors and Champions
of Religion, only laughed at the Relation, without giving any redress^ to the
child's injuries. This want of Justice in the Commanders, animated the Soldiers
to prosecute their villainies to a greater height: for that night they came to
the place where the child lay, and the poor Soul being in bed fast a sleep,
his Innocent rest not disturbed with the injuries of the day: they dived into
his, and his attendants (...), robbed them of all their monyes, and lest them
^ither to borrow more, or beg for sustenance in their journey to Oxford.

Captain Duck^^peld a Commander of the Rebels in Che^^^re, came to M. Wrights
house, Parson of Wemslow in that County, a man of fourscore years of age, of
a very honest li^e and conversation, and eminent for his hospitali^y amongst
his neighbors. The Captain and his follower enter the house by violence,
killed two of his maidserva^^ts, wounded others, and in all probability had
murdered M. W^^gh himself, had not his neighbors that loved him well,
rescued him out of their hands. The crime objected against him, was Loyalty,
and that amongst Rebels is crime enough: for this he is forced to live an exile
from his own habitation, and has absented himself from his house now twelve
months. The same Rebels came to one Master John Leeth his house in the same
County, as I take it, they enter his house by violence, they kill one of his
maidservants for endeavoring to keep the door shut against them, and took
away Master Leech prisoner. There was a gentlewoman in the house come thither
but two days before, who seeing so barbarous cruelty practiced upon Innocents
for no other fault but living in peace and obedience, was so affrighted, that
for some time she remained almost distracted.

When the rebellious city of London first delivered up it s;elfe the servile
instrument to execute the illegal Commands of the heads of the faction in
Parliament; a Troop of factious Citisens under the command of Colonel Cr^m^e^
came to the University of Cambridge, and there seized on the persons of Doctor
Beale, Doctor Martin, and Doctor St^rne, men of known Integrity, Exemplary
lives, profound learning, and heads of several Colleges in that famous
University: having them in their custody they use them with all possible scorn
and contempt, especially Cromwell behaving himself (...) when one of the
Doctors made it a request to Cromwell, that he might stay a little to put up
some linen, Cromwell denied him the favor; and whether in a jeere, or simple
malice told him, that it was not in his Commission: having now prepared a show
to entertain the people, in triumph they lead the captives toward London,
where the people were beforehand informed what captives Colonel Cromwell was
bringing. In the Villages as they passed from Cambridge to London, the People
were called by some of their Agents to come and abuse, and revise them. When
they came to London being to bring their prisoners to the Tower, no other way
would serve th ir turn but from Shore-ditch through Bartholomew-Faire, when
the Concourse was as thick as the negotiation of buyers and sellers, and the
warning of the Beadles of the Faction (that use to give notice to their party)
could make it; they lead these captives leisurely through the midst of the
Fair: as they pass along they are entertained with exclamations, reproaches,
scorns, and curses, and considering the prejudice raised in the City of them,
it was Gods great mercy that they found no worse usage from them: having
brought t^^ to the Tower, the people there use them with no less incivility
within the walls, then the people did without, calling them Papists, Arminians,
and I know not what. After some time imprisonment there, they were removed to
the Lord ^ete^s house in Aldersgate Street and though they often petitioned to
be heard and brought to Judgment, yet they could obtain neither a Trial, nor
enlargement, unless to free their bodies they should ensnare their souls by
loanes of money to be employed against the King, or taking impious Oaths or
Covenant^^^t last after almost a years imprisonment, on Friday the 11 of
August, 1643. by order from the Faction that call themselves a Parliament, they
were removed from thence, and all put on Ship board, in a Ship called The
prosper^^^ S^^le, or the Prospero^s Sayler lying before Wapping. They ^ent by
Coach from Alders-gate-street to Billinsgate, in the way to the Common Stair,
there to take water, one was overheard to say, these look like honest men, and
he was not a jot mistaken: however for bearing testimony to the truth he
incurred the censure of a Malignant, and was in danger to be committed: but
another looking these grave learned Divines in the face, reviled them, saying,
that they did not look like Christians: and prayed that they might break
their necks as they went down the Stairs to take water. This harsh usage they
found by land, but yet they found far worse by water: being come on
shipboard they were instantly put under Hatches, where the Decks were so low
that they could not stand upright, and yet were denied stools to sit on, or so
much as a burden of straw to lie on. Into this Little Ease in a small ship they
crowd no less then fourscore Prisoners of quality, and that they might
stifle one another, having no more breath then what they sucked from one
another mouths, most maliciously, and (certainly) to a murtherous intent, they
stop up all the small Auger holes, and all other in lets which might relieve
them with fresh air: an act of such horrid barbarism, that nor Age, nor
Story, nor Rebellion can parallel; But, O Lord God to whom Vengeance belongs,
thou God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self, O let the vengeance of
thy Servants blood, that has been shed in this land, be openly snewed upon
these worse then Heathen Salvages in our sight, O let the sorrowful sighing of
thy prisoners come before thee, according to the greatness of thy power
preserve thou those that are appointed to dye.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XIII.
Master Anthony Tyringham a Minister, wounded and most inhumanely used by the
Rebels in Buckinghamshire. Mistress Wiborow (the Parsons wife of Pebmarth in
Essex) and her children exposed to great extremity by the Sectaries of that
County. A lively pattern of ingratitude acted by a Schisma^^call Smith at
Dalham in Suffolk, etc.

MAster Anthony Tyringham, Parson of Tyringham in Buckingham-shire, having
business at Maids-morton, at his return came to Buckingham, where he met with
two of his Nephews. The Uncle and his Nephews glad of so happy a meeting,
after some stay to congratulate the good chance, and to refresh themselves, set
forward in their journey, and passed in peace without danger until they came
near Stony-Stratford, where a partee of Diagooners coming from Aylesbury
surprised them: and instantly (scarce asking them from whence they came)
searched and disarmed them, which was no difficult a^chievement, there being
but one Sword amongst all three. The Rebels take from them their Horses, their
Coats and Money: superfluous things as they conceived for men designed to
captivity: for having spoiled them of their Horses, Money, and Garments, they
send them with a strong guard Prisoners to Aylesbury: while the rest of the
Partee, lurking about Stony-Stratford, stayed there to expect some fresh
booty: And that in this we do not slander these great Champions of the
Subjects Liberties and Properties, the issue will acquit us, for presently
after (to show that all was Fish which came to Net) they seized upon a poor
Bone-lace-man and a Shoemaker, robbed them of what they had, and in the same
manner sent them away prisoners to A^lisbury. The guard of Dragooners having
brought their ^ prisoners about a mile and a half on the way toward Alisbury,
commanded them again to alight: The first Plunder was for the Captain or
Commanders, or else a share was set apart Anathema for the support of the
Public Cause, these men to whose trust they were committed, now intend to
plunder for themselves: And first, they command Master Tyringham to put off his
Cassocke: who being not sudden in obeying the Command, nor overhasty to untye
his girdle to dis^oabe himself of the distinctive Garment of his Profession:
(though now a cassock, contracted into the Compendium of a Gippo, is become the
Garb of the Reformers) one of the Dragoons to quicken him, cut him through the
hat into the head with the sword taken from one of his nephews, and with
another blow cut him over the fingers: Master Tyringham wondering at so
barbarous usage without any provocation, came toward him that had thus wounded
him, and desired him to hold his hands, pleading that he was a Clergyman, a
prisoner, and disarmed: the cowardly villain either fearing the approach of a
disarmed man, or willing to lay hold on any advantage to expose the prisoners
to the fury of his fellows, cried out, Shoot the rogues, for they intend to
resist: the word was no sooner given, but a Musket was instantly discharged at
one of M. Tyringhams nephews; but the Musqueteere missing his mark, another of
the Rebels with his sword aimed righter, and ran him into the shoulder: a
Musket was presented to the other nephew, but Gods providence restrained the
murtherous intention of the Rebel that he did not give fire. Thus exercising
their pleasure upon disarmed wounded men, they rob M. Tyringham of his
Cassocke, rifle all their pockets, and take from them what they please; and to
palliate their cruelty, they send two Dragooners back, to tell their Captains
and their companies that the prisoners committed to their custody and conduct
made resistance: Upon this false alarm given, presently the Captains and their
Companies make up to them, to assist a strong Guard against three disarmed, and
of them two wounded men; being come where they were, they encompasse them
about, and without any examination of the business, presuming the suggestion
to be undoubted truth, one of the Rebels, Captain Pollard by name, with a full
blow strikes at Master Tryingham, and with his sword cuts his Arm and
Cub^-bones cross the elbow almost asunder: M. Tyringham (almost three^core
years of age within two) bore this barbarous usage with undaunted courage, and
hearing this bloody villain called Captain Pollard, in a pleasant indignation
expressed the sense of the injury but thus, That now he had made him a Pollard
indeed: A Metaphor easily understood by Wood-men, who usually call a Tree,
whose limbs or branches are lopped off, a Pollard: M. Tyringhams Arm thus
miserably wounded, and hanging dangling from his shoulder, without any
government from the nerves or sinews, one of his nephews having a mourning
Riband, tendered it to his Uncle to bind up his Arm, but the Rebels will not
permit it: though M. Tyringhem entreat the favor to have his wounds bound up,
and the very spectacle before their eyes, was argument enough to extort this
mercy from them; yet they remain inexorable, nor would they be persuaded
until a long time after: having now made sure work with their prisoners, and
rendered them so far unable to resist, that some were hardly able to sit the
jades on which they were mounted, they again set forward for Ailesbury. The
Dragooners horses on which they were set, being tired, made the way very
tedious, especially to M. Tyringham, who lost much blood all the way as they
went.

While these Gentlemen were in this miserable condition, Captain Pollard, not
troubled at all for so bloody a fact, barbarously committed by himself on an
aged Gentleman, and a Minster of that Gospel which they falsely pretend to
maintain, but indeed deny and blaspheme in all their actions, turned aside to
whaddon Chase, and sported himself in killing some of His Majesty's Dear,
which he carried along with him to Aylesbury: after almost four hours riding,
tired out with tired Jades, and ^ainting with loss of blood, the Prisoners
were again commanded to alight at a Town called Whitchurch within two miles of
Aylesbury. Here they fall on Master Tyringham afresh, and Plunder him as
eagerly as if he had bin new come into their hands, and not touched by them
before. They pluck off his boots, and take from him his Jerkin, his Hat, and
Cap, all the fences provided for cold and weather, and the usual
fortifications against the injuries of wind and rain: and so made a Pat^erne
of the man wounded between Jerusalem and Jericho, they mount him on his
Spittle again and drive on, and after an hours riding in cold and darkness,
at last they arrived at Aylesbury, that night the Chirurgions (as soon as they
could be found) viewed and dressed the wound, but concluded unanimously that
they must cut off his Arm the next day, or else it would Gangreene and
infallibly kill him, which next day was done accordingly: Master Tyringham bore
the loss of his Arm with incredible resolution and courage, as knowing the
Justice of that Cause for which he suffered, and as willing to lay down his
Life in testimony of his Loyalty, as his Brother Master Edward Tyringham, one
of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber had done before him, who the last
Winter being employed in His Majesty's service, and set on by a Partee of
Rebels fought valiantly, but oppressed with multitudes, received so many
wounds that he dyed of them. But it has pleased God so to bless the means
used for this Gentleman's recovery, that there are great hopes he will survive
these maimes, and (as himself undauntedly told the Rebels to their faces) Live
to see them banged. Amen.

In the fourth Week of this Mercury, you heard of the cruel usage of Master
Wiborow Parson of Pebma^sh in the County of Essex, by the Rebels in those
parts; how they abused him in the Church, beat him in the fields, and took from
him the Book of Common Prayer, having before torn another of his in pieces.
After this the Brownists and Anabaptists of that place (with which that Country
swarms) threaten to kill him; Master Wiborow, not da^ing to trust himself
amongst these cruel blood-thirsty men, to preserve his life, was compelled to
leave his Cure, his Wife and Children, some seven months since, and to put
himself under the Kings Protection: hoping that his absence might be a means
to secure his Wife and Children, and prevail with these Monsters to permit
them to enjoy that which he left behind him for their sustenance: but his
absence was so far from working this good effect in them, that they made use
of it, to eject him out of the possession of the Profits of his Parsonage, and
his Wife and Children out of their house, exposing them harbourlesse to the
wide world: for taking advantage of his absence, they accuse him to the
pretended Parliament, and frame a Bill of Falsehood and Lies against him,
thereby to gain a Sequestration of his Living: A business not of any great
difficulty, they being more ready to grant such illegal oppressive ejections
then the People to ask them: for upon the Accusation, John White that
fornicating Brownist, sitting in the Chair, M. Wiborows Living was Sequestered,
and the Profits of it given to one Burrows, though the Cure was never
neglected, but supplied by M. Wiborows friends, to the content and satisfaction
of all moderate peaceable men: yet though they had robbed him of his livelihood,
and given his Wives and Childrens bread to strangers, by most unjust practices,
yet his hopes were that his poor Wife and Children should enjoy the
accommodation of their dwelling in the Parsonage house: but such is the
implacable cruelty and malice of these Sectaries, that on the tenth of June
1643. a Troop of the Rebels came to the Parsonage house and demanded entrance:
Mistress Wiborow and her Children being alone in the house, she barred up the
doors against them, and for her better safetic retired to an upper room, to
which the passage was through a Trap-doore, which likewise she made as fast as
she could: all this fortification could not keep these Rebels out, they break
open the doors, and make way to the ^oome where Mistress Wiborow and her
Children thought to secure themselves: when they came thither, three of these
Rebels set their Pistolls at her breast, threatening to shoot her, if she and her
Children would not suddenly depart the house, and leave it to a new Master.
Mistress Wiborow replied, That she would rather be killed within doors, then
perish without, but withal earnestly entreated that she might enjoy so much of
her husbands right, as his house to shelter her and her Children, who poor
souls stood about their mother crying, and in their natural oratory craving
compassion toward their Mother, whom at every word the Rebels threaten to
Pistol; but neither the earnest entreaty of the Mother, nor the pitiful
outcries of the Children, could prevail with them, they remain as dease men,
void of all pi^ti^ or bowels of compassion: ^ay, they violently seize on her,
drag her down the stairs, and out of the house into the yard: the poor
Children being almost distracted and at their wits end for fear what would
become of their Mother, being thus violently drawn out of the house into the
yard, there she found Mer ton Simpson and Cook the Sequestrators, with other
attending there to see this joyful spectacle, a poor oppressed Gentlewoman
and her small children cruelly cast out of their own habitation by Rebels and
Traitors. As soon as Mistress Wiborow saw them, she presented them with the
Kings Proclamation against the Oppression of the Clergy, by the intrusion of
Factious and Schismatic persons into the Cures and Revenues of Learned,
Orthodox Divines, by Order of one, or both pretended Houses of Parliament,
contrary to all Law and Justice: which she hoped would have found so much
obedience and respect, as to restore her to her house: This was so far from
mollifying these Rebels and Schismatiques, that it provoked them to great
insolences: at last, when Mistress Wiborow perceived that all her entreaties,
and her childrens tears prevailed nothing, to restore her to her house, she
entreated the Sequestrators, that in case she could not be permitted to dwell
in her own house, that yet she might have some other place of accommodation
provided, to receive her and her children: Meriton insolently replied, That he
would provide his Tumbrill, that is, his Dung-ca^t, to carry her and her
Children from Constable to Constable, till she came to her Husband: After many
bitter scoffs and scorns in this her affliction, she desired, that if she
might not obtain so much favor to dwell in her house, yet they would not deny
her access to her house, but that she might go in to fetch out provision for
her Childrens supper that night: but these Monsters of men would not give her
leave: and to complete this unheard of Tyranny and Oppression, the Authorized
Theoves, I mean the Commissioners appointed by the pretended House of
Parliament to seize upon the Estates of all Delinquents, and to point out who
shall be Plundered next. Order, that whatsoever Master Wiborow had left, should
be seized on for the use of that Thing which they call a Parliament: thereby to
support Rebellion with Robbery and Theft. Instantly they seize on his Corn,
and those few Cattle, the remainder of former Plunderings, though they knew it
was the life of the Mother and her children, and that in taking away these,
they deprived them of all means of subsistence, and exposed them to extreme
want, having reduced them o this miserable condition, to beg or starve: Now for
the comfortless trouble sake of the needy, and because of the deep sighing of
the poor, I will up says the Lord, and will help every one from him that
swells against him, and will set him at rest: The good God perform his
promise, Let God arise, and let these enemies of God and man be scattered.

Master Thomas Dalton Bachelor of Divinity, and Parson of Dalham in the County
of Suffolk, being Plundered of his Horse by Colonel Russels Troop, Deputtie
Lieutenant of the County of Cambridge, on more then probable grounds, fearing
that they would seize upon his person, and commit him to Prison, was compelled
to leave his family and retire privately to some friends, where he continued
some months. In the interim, one Barnard a poor Smith, and one that formerly
had lived on the Parish alms, informed the Committee at Cambridge of M. Daltons
absence, and making it his Crime, Petitioned for a Sequestration of his Living,
intending to make a gain of it himself; for whereas the Living is worth 140 l.
per annum, and had been so let for many years before, Vulcan, I mean Bernard
the Smith, having got a Chaplain of his own, one Randal by name, indents with
him to serve the Cure for 50 or 60. pounds a year, intending to put up the
Overplus into his own purse: nor did he fail of his pious project, so
apparently tending to the public good, and reformation of the Church: For on
the Smiths bare instance, though earnestly opposed by the Lord of the Town,
and about forty of the chiefest of the Parish, who all labored earnestly to
withstand it, the Committee for the advancement of the reformation, hearken to
Barnard and substitute Randal Vulcans Priest in Master Daltons place, and
revenew; This grant of the Committee was ratified by the Committee at
Westminster, for'tis not impossible but Barnard might have sharers with him in
both Committees: For the Tyth of the Tyth was enough for an Almes-man: nay,
this Committee did not only ratify the Order of the other Committee, but
added to the injustice by ordering Mistress Dalton instantly to resign
possession of the Parsonage house to Randal: of which Ordinance, when the
Patron of the Living had intelligence, ^he instantly posted to London, and
knowing how unjust and trivial the Accusations against M. Dalton were, absence
being his maine Crime, (being put to this hard Option, either to stay and be
committed Prisoner, or to fly and be robbed of the Profits of his Living, for
this is the Dilemma to which all Orthodox Conformable Ministers are now put)
resolved to intercede for him, hoping either quite to take him off, or at least
to procure a mitigation of the Order; but contrary to his expectation he found
the Smith Courted, Applauded, and to enjoy freedom of access to the
Committee, and himself (a Gentleman of very good rank and esteem in his
Country) to be slighted, neglected, and made dance attendance, and after long
waiting, not regarded what he spoke for his Minister: At last this good
Gentleman having by experience observed, that the practices of the Faction in
Parliament did engage them to slight and suppress the Gentry, and all that
made Honor or Conscience the rule of their Actions, and to court and observe
the dregs and scum of the people, (as the fittest instruments for their
designs) returned home, and sending for Mistress Dalton, entreats her to make
use of his house as her own, until God should enable the King to restore her,
and all his loyal Subjects to their own: Mistress Dalton accepts of his
courteous offer, but leaves her man to keep possession of the Parsonage house:
she had not stayed long here before her Host is threatened to be Plundered for
his hospitality: Barnard the Smith (as bad as Alexander the Copper-Smith)
being now so rich as to be able to travail to London, and trouble his
neighbors; that his Levite might have the Parsonage house to better his
bargain, speeds to the Committee, and prefers a Complaint against Mistress
Dalton for not giving up possession of her house according to their Order: upon
complaint made, it is further ordered by the same Committee, that because she
had not presently quitted the house, she should be brought up to London before
the Committee, there to answer the contempt: to avoid further vexation she
obeyed the Order, and gave up possession, hoping that this resigning of her
right, would set an end to her trouble: but according to the Rebels Method from
the beginning of this Parliament, first invade the Clergy, and then the Laity,
so here they vary not from the first pattern, for having robbed Master Dalton
of his Ecclesiastical Revenues, presently they seize upon his Temporal, his
Rents and other debts due unto him, they leave him nothing. But if you please
to see the lively Character of a Malicious, Ungrateful, Cheating Schisma^ike,
whole Religion it is to return evil for good, and hatred for good will, look
once more on this Barnard the Smith, and you will conclude it doubtful which
is hardest, his Anvill of his heart. For this wretch owing to M. Dalton twenty
seven pounds, when the time of payment was come, Barnard comes to the
Church Porch, the place appointed for payment of the Debt, ^ttended with four
Rebel Troopers, as witness of the tender of the monyes. Mistress Dalton
being there to receive it, he poures it out, she having told it was putting it
up into her purse; but Barnard interrupted her, saying, Sta^, this is for
better use then so, it is for the service of the Parliament: and presently (as
the Plot was laid) the Troopers bent their Pistols at her breast, and force the
moneys from her: ^ay, before it was lawful by Order and Ordinances to violate
all the Obligations of religion and gratitude, this Barnard acknowledged
himself much bound to Master Dalton for many favors, who having many ways
indeared him, thought all things sa^e which were committed to Barnard, trust;
in this confidence Master Dalton laid up diverse Coo^es of Wheat in Barnards
house, to be a help in time of need: when M. Dalton was gone, his wife sent to
Barnards house to demand some Wheat, this unthankful wretch denied it,
affirming, that M. Dalton, being a Malignant, had no right or property in
those goods; and therefore forbad her man to come on his ground, threatening
that he would run his Pitchforke in him, if he came thither to make any such
demand: Ab uno disce Omnes.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XIV.
The Rebels barbarous usage of Sir Ralph Canterils man in Chancery Lane
London. Of the Minstery of London. A Character of Master Ephraim Udall, Parson
of Saint Austins, with the cruelty used toward him and his wife. Sir Tho Hides
covetousness and n^utral^^y, here rewarded by the Rebels. Master Bowlstrodes
Prayer by the Spirit, etc.

IF in the Relation of these sad Stories thou find (Cour^eous Reader) some
Complaints of London, mingled with those of the Country, know that the earnest
request of Mercurius C^vicus must plead my Apology. The heads of this Rebel
on, deal with that miserable City as unjust Step-mothers do with their poor
Children, Whip them till they cry, and then whip them again for crying: for
they have not so much loosers Privilege le^t them as to have Liberty to
Complain: and then let the World judge to what a narrow Scan^ing the Li^ertie
of the Subject is reduced, by these pretended Assertors of the Liberty, when
it is lawful for them to Murder and Plunder the Kings good Subjects, and yet
it is not lawful for the oppressed to bemoane their own Condition. Being
therefore denied the common natural mi^igation of great pressures, to be wail
their own miseries, and breath out the sense of them in free expressions, for
fear they further provoke their Oppressors while they implore the compassion of
their friends, Mercurius Civicus in his letter, dated Aug. 5.1643 and directed
to me, earnestly entreated (their own Presses not da^ing to publish the truth
of their miserable condition) that their sufferings under the Insolency,
Injustice, ^yranny and R^pine of this horrid Rebellion, might be made known to
the World by a borrowed Pen, and int^^woven with those of the Country: that
therefore we may not be wanting to so just requests, nor leave posterity
i^no^ant what transcendent cruelties are practiced as well within the Walls of
that wretched City as without, as o^t as they shall privately (by such secret
ways of intelligence as the present condition of the times permit) impart
their Calamities, I shall according to Mercurius Civicus desire, insert them
with those of the Country, and so impart them to the World; and though the
Barbarous murders committed on Master Tompkins and Master Chaloner, that
second pair of State-Martyrs, together with the butchery of a Peaceable
Citizen slain by Captain Harvey: and the women slaughtered by Sir William
Wallers Troopers (that ran away at Roundway Down to kill Women and Virgins in
London, for the unpardonable crime of petitioning for Peace) might justly
challenge precedence, yet because the memories of those two Worthies are
reserved for a peculiar Martyrologue, and these are already imbalmed by the
Piety of our Brother Aulicus, I shall set before you the misery, into which
that Rebellious City has plunged it self and us, in some other instances.

On Tuesday the 15 of Aug. 1643, a Partee of Colonel Harvies Regiment came to
one Walkers house in Chancer^Lane, to seize on Sir Ralph Cante^^l, whom they
supposed then to have lodged there: on their coming, finding that the Knight
was either gone out of Town, or had shifted his lodging, but on diligent
inquiry discovering that there was a man in the house that now was, or lately
had been Sir Ralphs servant, they apprehend him, and demand where his Master
was, and where he had hid his Money, Plate, and Jewels? The man replied, that
he had left his Masters service, and did know nothing, either where his Master
was, or how he had disposed of his goods: presently they lay violent hands on
him, and carry him out into the backside into the house of Office, there to
examine him by Torment: there they rip up the Tiles, and one of the Rebels
taking a cord out of his pocket, fastened one end of it about the poor man's
neck, and threw the other end over the rafters of the untiled house: Having him
at this posture, they interrogate him again where this (Imaginary) Treasure was
hid: he returns the same answer, that he could give no account what Sir Ralph
had done with it: for being to leave his service, he was a stranger to his
Masters actions: Not satisfied with so reasonable an answer, they hoyle him up
by the Neck, and let him hang a good distance from the ground, where having
hanged a while, they let him down, and examine him again where Sir Ralph had
bestowed his Money, Pla^e, and Jewels? The poor man not able to give any other
answer to their Querie, pro^ests his ignorance, and that if the discovery might
save his life, yet he could not redeem it so, for he knew nothing concerning
what they asked him: enraged that the man could not Prophecy, (for without
that gift he could not resolve them) they suddenly hoyse him up to the top of
the house, and letting go their hold, they let him as suddenly fall to the
ground: being fallen, there he lay for dead without any expres^ion of life but
these barbarous Rebels, hoping that there may yet remain some life in him
whereon to practice further cruelty, stand by the man, and watch him, and at
last perceiving that he was not dead, but that he began to stir and breath,
presently they put burning matches between his fingers: hoping by this way of
Torment to extort a discovery from him: but in vain, the extremity of this
Torment indeed (though half dead as he was) made him cry out and roar in a
very lamentable manner, which a ^aid-servant of the house hearing, and
affrighted at the noise, ran to her Master, and told him, that certainly the
Rebels were murdering the man in the house of Office, hereupon Master Walker
ha^tned out, and when he came to the place, found the conjecture of his Servant
true, and amazed at so horrid, so inhumane a spectacle, interceded for the poor
man, and earnestly desired them, not to defile his ground and habitation with
innocent blood: instead of desisting, they return the Egyptians answer to
Moses, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge? bad him be silent, and withdraw, or
else they threatened to use him in like manner: M. Watker searing that those
perjured perfidious Villains, which keep their words in nothing else, might
yet be punctual in performance of mischief, not daring to commit himself to
their mercy, left them, and went into his house, where the Quartermaster to
the Rebels lay sleeping while the Troopers were acting this cruelty, him he
rayseth from sleep, and tells him what the Troopers were doing without: who
something moved at the relation, went out unto them, and took them off from
farther prosecuting their Barbarous intentions. But whether or no the man on
whom all this cruelty was acted, survived this Barbarous usage, is uncertain.

As amongst the many blessings wherewith it pleased God to advance the City of
Lon^on far above all other Cities, either of this, or other Nations of the
Christian World, one was their Clergy: for a more Pious, Learned, and laborious
Ministry no people ever enjoyed, even their enemies themselv^s being ^udges:
So amongst the many crying sins whereby that Proud Rebellious City has
provo^ed God, to give them up to a Reprobate sense and hardness of heart to
their own destruction, certainly, the contempt and oppression of their Clergy
are none of the least: as before the last Parliament began, a main part of
their Religion was to strive with their Priests, and to rob them of their
maintenance, by all possible arts of deceit, and fraud, so as soon as the
Parliament was sat, and the basest of the people were set loose to worrey
their Ministers (though never so blameless, never so Orthodox, if they did not
conspire with them to innovate both Church and State:) the Citizens of London
showed themselves most forward in Petitioning against their Ministers: yet at
first pretended to molest such only, who had expressed greatest zeal to the
order, and decency of Gods worship, professing that for the rest there was no
thought to trouble them: but at last, having put to slight or imprisoned those,
they go on and discover plainly, that whosoever is a friend to the Protestant
Religion, as it is established in the Church of England, is their Enemy: how
many have they silenced, imprisoned, or banished from their Cures, whom
heretofore they did magnify for the undaunted Champions of the Protestant
Religion? and stou^ opposers of those supposed pretended innovations, which
they vainly imagined were the eager endeavors of some men to impose upon the
Church: he that knows London, and has frequented the most thronged
Congregations there, cannot be ignorant, that Master Ephraim Vdal, Parson of
Saint Austines in the O^d-Change near Saint Austines Gate, is a man of eminent
Pictie, exemplary conversation, profound learning, indefatigable industry
preaching constantly every Lords Day twice, and for the Winter half year, if
not the whole year, preaching a Lecture at his own Parish every Tuesday in
the afternoon, and if I am not mistaken, every Saturday before the first Sunday
in the month a Preparatory Sermon to the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper:
and besides all this, he is a man of an affable, courteous, peaceable
Conversation amongst his neighbors: in a word, he was a man of their own
Vote: and is (without profanation be it spoken) a shining and burning light,
and his people for a while much pleased themselves in their choice, and were
content to walk by his light: but when he found himself mistaken in the ends
and intentions of the heads of this Rebellion, when he saw that the zeal of
some did degenerate into madness and frenzy, and that the endeavors of
others (under the pretense of Reformation) was to bring in Anarchy and
Sacrilege, to devour Gods portion, and the poor remainder of the patrimony of
the Church, he did strongly and powerfully bend both his tongue and pen against
them: against Sacrilege be published that learned Tract, called A Coal from
the Altar: against Anarchy he declared himself for ^piscopacie, and the
established Lyturgie: and published another Book, called Commun^on
Comeliness, in which by many impregnable arguments he proves a high
Convenience, if not a necessity, for that most laudable custom of having
Railes about the Lords Table: These were in the Schismatiques opinion Crimes
enough to un-saint a man, nay, had Saint Paul himself been now in the (...),
and preached against Sacrilege and Anarchy, there is no doubt, but there would
have bin some found to Petition against him, and John White sitting in the
Chair, a^ undoubtedly he had been voted a scandalous Minister at a Committee:
but because when these Books were published, Injustice and Oppression did not
march so ^uriously, nor were grown so frontlesse and impudent to seize on
Innocence it self, not slur'd with slanders and calumnies, Master Vdal sat
something quiet, some murmurings there were, but his former Reputation in the
City bore him up against the Obloquy of private discontent: the Faction found
it no eas^e matter to brand M. Vdal with Po^^ry, or Popishly affected, or these
slanders to make any impression in that estimation which the people had of him:
but at last when they came openly to defy their Sovereign, the Lords
Anointed, and it was almost Treason but to name the 13. Chapter of the Romans,
it was a fit time to Silence and remove M. Vdal, for neither Doctor Gouge his
Church in Black Friars, or M. Goodwins in Colemanstreet, were half so full
before this Parliament began, as M Vdals has been since. First, therefore,
they Plunder his house, they take away his Library and household stuff: Then
they remove him from the execution of his Ministry, and Sequester the profit
for a Levite of their own: Thirdly, they sought for him to commit him close
Prisoner, being aged, of very weak and infirm body, his strength exhausted
with continual labors in Preaching the Word of God, visiting the sick, and in
execution of other Ministerial Functions, in performance of which in his own
person few of his Brethren were more Conscientious: And Lastly, they cast him
out of his dwelling house: But when they came to seize on his house, they found
one impediment, which unless they could find some art to remove, they could
not take full possession of it: Mistress Vdal (besides the infirmities of age)
was lame, and it had been monstrous inhumanity to take her by violence and
carry her our of her house, not knowing where to dispose of her, but in the
open street: Therefore to gain her consent, and prevent clamor until the ^eat
was done, they tell the good old Gentlewoman that the Parliament had a tender
respect unto her years, and to her present Infirmities: and therefore though
they had ordered to dispossess her of that house, yet they did not mean to
leave her harbourlesse, but had out of the abundance of their goodness
provided another house to recieve her: She, good old woman, neither awed by
fear, nor won by their persuasions and promises, was taken up by two men
brought in by him that had broken open three locks, and entered the house by
force, and carried (...) of her house into the street, there they set her down
in (...) Chair, and so leave this weak infirm Matron of a long time not
accustomed to the open air, nor being able to go out of doors in three or
four years before, unless unto the Church, exposed her (a sad spectable of
the Rebels cruelty) to the mercy of wind and weather.

The Rebels in their march toward Gloucester, seized on Sir Thomas Hide a
Bed^ord-shire man, whose fordid covetousness had made him so far forget all
Duty and Loyalty to his Sovereign, as that he refused to assist him either
in his person or his purse: but because either his estate lay nearer to the
power of the Rebels, then to the Kings Prot^ction, a Consideration which in
these Ath^isticall Rebellious times is admitted as a just Apology, either for
Neutralitie or ready Compliance with the Rebels, so far as to submit to all
Taxes and Impositions laid on them, a most Traiterous and Irreligious liberty
and dispensation of Conscience, which if all men had made use of, the Kings
Crown might long before this have been thrown down to the ground: Or else
conceiving it a very unlikely, if not an impossible thing for the King to
withstand their power, who had not only by Lies and Slanders s^olne away the
hearts of the people, but had seized on all his Castles, Towns, Forts,
Magazines: did contribute to the Rebels aid, and wholly complied with them,
not so much out of judgment, as ^eare: thinking that this compliance would be
the security of his estate, and turn to his great advantage: but his wealth
was so well known, that bare compliance, and final Contributions must not
serve his turn, he must bleed more freely: They sease him the Twentieth part,
and that highly set: This demand struck his heart like pangs of death; and he
that was so forward in p^ttie assistances, now discovered the love of himself
to be more then that of the holy Cause, and refused to part with more monyes:
wherefore in recompense of his former good deeds, they seize on his person, and
carry him captive in their Army, and suffered his servant to walk along by
him, leading a horse in his hand, while his Master the Knight was chained arm
to arm with another Prisoner, and was compelled to beat it on the hoof: Thus
did he march for three days on foot, coupled with another Prisoner, and that
Prisoner, as we are informed, is Doctor Stubbing, Doctor in Divinity, whom
likewise the Rebels gathered up in their march, and taking him from his Cure,
added him to the number of their Captives: So soon can these Rebels forget
former aides, if men do not comply with them, and answer their expectation in
every thing: and indeed what measure their dearest friends are to expect from
them, if they fail them in any particular, not running into the same excess
of Madness and Treason as they do, and shall not show themselves ready at a
call (to their perpetual in^amy, contrary to the Religion which they prosesse,
the Oaths which they have taken, and the solemn Protestations which they have
made) to rush into the damnable s^^ne of Rebellion, and give the right hand of
fellowship to the Rebels here, to assist them in so unnatural a War against
their own gracious native Sovereign, we may fully learn by a Prayer (for now
they have turned their vary Prayers into sin, being no better then very Libells
and Pasquills) lately made by Master Bowlstrode, son to Colonel Bowlstrod a
Factious Rebel of Buckingham shire, before his Sermon at Horton near
Colebrooke, which that you may see what Spirit of Prayer and Supplication it is
of which they boast, and that the Nation whom it concerns may see what opinion
the Factious Preachers here have of them, unless they will serve their vile
purposes and engage themselves as deeply (which God forbid) in the pr^sent
Rebellion as themselves, we have here inserted.

Thou have, O Lord, of late, written bitter things against thy Children, and
forsaken thine own Inheritance, and now Lord, in our misery and distress, we
expected aid from our Brethren of the neighboring Nation, (the Scots I mean)
but good Lord, then know that they are a false and perfidious Nation; and
do all they do for their own ends, and not for our good: if therefore, good
Lord, their coming into the Land at this time be for our good, bring them in
speedily, if otherwise, keep them out, for they are a false and perfidious
Nation.

There was present at Church at that time, one Master Kenada a Scotchman, who
being drowsy was wakened by a friend that sat by him, to hear the devotion of
the Preacher; who hearing his whole Nation thus publicly blasphemed by this
contemptible Zelot, spoke out in the Congregation saying, I think the man is
mad: and certainly Master Kenada was not a jot mistaken, to think him mad that
should thus rashly in the face of a solemn Congregation traduce a Nation, and
if there be amongst the heads of the Rebellion (in whose power he is) any care
of the honor of that Nation, we doubt not but we shall shortly hear of some
exemplary punishment inflicted on this incendiary between the two Nations: and
heightened according to the nature of the Crime. If any man doubt of the truth
of this Relation, whether it be a fiction or a thing really done, he may
consult Master Kenada or any of Horton Parish, who are ready to bear Testimony
to this Truth.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XV.
Master Squire of Little Saint Bartholomews London, Plundered of four thousand
pounds. Nath. Fiennes his Warrant for a Citizen of Bristol. A touch of Col.
Morleys tyranny in Suffex, with the hard usage of M. Hinson a Minister there. A
woman most unchristianly tortured to death by the Rebels at Chippingnorton, etc.

UPon Friday the 18 of Aug. 1643. Master Squire of Little Saint Bartholmews
London, having this present Rebellion upon several Rates, Taxes and Loans,
disbursed near a thousand pounds, was sent unto for a new Sum toward the
maintenance of the Holy Cause; but he foreseeing, that as long as their purses
were open to foment this unnatural War, there would be no end of it till their
Estates were exhausted, and the wealthiest amongst them reduced to beggary, and
a morsel of bread, returned a denial, yet withal professed his readiness to
have supplied them if he had been provided: and his Wife to indeare themselves,
and to show how well-affected they were to the Cause, wished that all the
Malignants in London were Plundered, and then there would be less cause to
call so often on the well-affected for so great supplies, not imagining (good
woman) that her Husband might be numbered shortly amongst the Malignants: or,
that to be wealthy and not pour out all, as often as the heads of this
Rebellion should call for it, was in their opinion, high Malign^tie: for next
day, notwithstanding their former compliance with the Rebels in so great a
measure, six men with Pistolls were sent to Master Squires house, under
pretense to search for Arms, but indeed to find out a hoard of moneys which
either their own jealousy, grounded on the general received opinion of his
wealth, or the treachery of some, who knew the house had suggested unto them.
After some small search, (though M. Squire thought that his tre^sure had bin
close enough hid) instead of Arms they find four thousand pounds, a rich
booty, and very greedily seized upon. At last, Mistress Squire finding her
self so unexpectedly in the number and condition of Malignants, robbed of so
great a Sum, fell into a swound, and for fear she should be recal'd to pursue
the inju^ie with just Clamours and Expostalations, when Strong Water were
brought to relieve and comfort her surprised spirits, the Rebels would not
permit it to be administered unto her: but left nature to the work of its own
recovery, without the assistance of any borrowed help. Of this four thousand
pounds, eight hundred was due to a Son in Law of Master Squires, a Creature
of the Parliaments, and a great friend to the Cause, and therefore to redeem
the rest, Master Squire freely offered to give the Parliament (as those tame
people call the Faction of both Houses) the sum of three hundred pounds, so
the rest might be restored unto him: but all in vain, it was judged a very
high Symptom of Malignancy to hide four thousand pounds, and suffer the Holy
League to be endangered for want of supplies, and therefore as a just
panishment for his coldness, and want of zeal to the good Cause in hand, it
was wholly taken from him without restitution (for ought we yet know) of a
farthing: and indeed what measure the Rich either of London or any other place,
cursed with the Tyranny and Oppression of this Rebellion are to expect from
their hands (when the necessities of supplies shall press upon them) the world
may read in this Warrant, directed from Nathaniel Fienn^s, in the time of his
reign in Bristol, to Master Gunning the younger of that City: which for the
plain English that it speaks, and because it contains a perfect discovery of
their Resolutions when occasion shall serve, we have here inserted. BRISTOL.
WHereas the City is at this time environed, and in great and imminent danger
to be swallowed up by many cruel and barbarous enemies of Papists, Irish
Rebels, and others: and most of the Inhabitants of this City have, and all
ought to take an Oath and Protestation for defense thereof with their lives and
fortunes: These are to require you forth with, to pay to my Servant Ralph
Hooker, to be employed for the defense of the City, the sum of two hundred
pounds, which sum, in respect of your estate, is below the proportion
required of other persons of your quality by an Ordinance of Parliament. And
if you shall refuse in this time of so great necessity, you may expect
whatsoever the desp^rate resolution of Soldiers, reduced un^^ extreme
necessity, may put them to act against your persons and estates, unless by a
speedy Constitution toward their supply you shall prevent the same.

NATH. FIENNES.
Given under my hand, July 25. 1643.
To Master Gunning the younger.


On Sunday morning, being the ninth of July, 1643. in time of Divine Service,
Colonel Morley, the Crooked Rebel of Sussex, came toward Hasting, one of the
Cingue Ports, but in his march being discovered, presently notice was given to
Master Hinson Curate of All Saints, who knowing that one end of the Colonels
Sabbath days Journey, was to apprehend him, was compelled to break off Divine
Service in the midst, and fly into a Wood near at hand, there to hide
himself: The Colonel being entered the Town, scattered the body of his horse
into several parts, to intercept all passages out of the Town: and having
secured the Ports, he summons the Major and Jurats, and demands the Arms of
the Town: to which he found ready obedience, for presently the Major and
Jurats sent their servants to command all the Inhabitants to deliver up their
Arms, which was done accordingly, and one of the Jurats, Fray by name,
furnished the Colonel with a Wagon, he sent them away to Battle, being a
Town in Suffex some five miles from Hasting: that night some Soldiers lay in
the Church, where Master Hinson officiated, where one Wicker, a common
Soldier, getting up into the Pulpit, preached unto his fellows: and to show
the Fruits of so good doctrine, going out of the Church, either the Preacher,
or one of his Auditory, stole away the Surplice, Ralph Mills, the honest Parish
Clerk, to recover it, complained to their Captain Richard Cockeram of Rye,
but received no other answer but this, Do not you think he loves a Smock as
well as you? Morley being now master of the Town, began to exercise his power
given him for the good of the Kingdom, and the preservation of the Subjects
Property, and demanded a sum of Monyes from some of the Jurats, which they
paid him, and because they came off so readily, he demanded more, which they
refusing, he took them with him Prisoners to Battle: where having stayed but a
night, they return with a Warrant next day signed by Morley, which they
undertook to execute upon such persons as themselves had designed for Plunder
and Imprisonment: whereof Master Car the Parson of Saint Clements in Hasting,
and Master Hinson, were the chiefest: M. Car that Sunday was not at home, being
^ed to prevent surprizall: but hearing that Colonel Morley was gone to Battle,
and thinking the storm to be now blown over, he resolved to return to
Hasting, and being on the way thither, he met Fray the Jurat, who was one of
the Combination to execute Morlyes Warrant, and apprehend him: as Fray was
drilling M. Car along, by chance one Master Breame met them, and seeing M. Car
so familiarly conversing with a Judas that was resolved to betray him, called
Master Car aside to speak with him, what he said is uncertain, but in all
probabilite he discovered to Master Car the danger in which he was, for
immediately he left Frayes company and rode back again: Fray thus unexpectedly
robbed of his prey, instantly informed Colonel Morley, that Master Breame had
srayed away the Bird that was so near going into the snare: Morley presently
sends some Troopers to apprehend Master Breame, and at what sum he did
redeem this Crime, is uncertain. On the Tuesday after Morlyes coming to
Hasting, Master Hinson returned home: and that day, the Jurats that Morley
took with him, being come back, summoned the rest of their Brethren unto the
Towne-Hall, where they acquainted them with the Contents of their new Warrant:
who with, joint consent, promise their best endeavors to put it in execution:
To this purpose, having picked out of the Town a sufficient number to assist
them and execute their commands, and having put their names in the Warrant with
their own, they bind them by the Religion, and strict bond of an Oath, to do
what they would have them, without ever specifying any particulars, wherein
they intended to exercise their obedience, until they should give them in
charge what they were to do: N^y, not only so, but having received their
commands, they swear them not to reveal what commands were laid on them to
any body, no not to their own wives, until they had executed the commands and
when some of these assistants startled at this J^suiticall implicit Obedience,
to know to what in particular their Oath should bind them: Wenb^m a Factious
Jurat replied, that they must swear in general, and afterward they should
know the particular. Thomas Staple, one of the Assistants, being pressed to
take this Oath, rejoyned, That you may make us swear, and the business we
swear to, may be to knock our Fathers in the head, or betray them: W^nham
(most convincingly) replied, That if they would not swear, they had authority
for their reful all, to imprison them for a year: The rest adding, That they
need not be so scrupulous, though they did not know what they sw^^^ unto, it
was no harm. for they had taken the same Oath themselves, to d^e that which
they were to assi^t them (...): And so, partly by fear, and partly by the
ind^cement of the Jurats example, they took an oath upon the holy Evangelists,
to assist the Jurats in what they were to do, not knowing what, and to be
secret, until it was done. Sure the Oath of Canonical Obidience, and the so
much decryed and ^aetera, must now for ever rest in peace, and never more be
m^liciously and ignorantly traduced after this most Papistuall, Iesuiticad,
Puritanicall Practice.

Having thus engaged these men by an Oath, to do any thing which they shall
command them, they then think them sufficiently prepared to receive the
Mysteries of the Warrant which now they reveal unto them, and tell them, that
they must apprehend Master Hinson, and ^ome others nominated in the Warrant: In
obedience therefore to the command, they presently go to Master Hinson, and
seize on him in his lodging and being brought before the Major and his Brethren
the Jurats, he never questioned by what authority he was apprehended, but only
told them, that he had not done any thing that deseved this usage: presently
Weaham replied, that be had highly deserved it, because he read the Kings
Declarations. After this, all the Jurats went out, one by one, and left Master
Hinson locked up with one Master Parker, whom they had a little before
committed, because he would not pay for the carriage of some Ordnance to Rye, a
most Factious Town not far off: Master Parker was that night removed from
the Town Hall, but Master Hirson was left there all night, strongly guarded by
eight Bill-men, having no other bed but a bench: next day Master Parker (who
had the favor to be lodged that night in a Sergeant house) desirous to see his
fellow Prisoner, prevailed with his Landlord to go along with him to visit
Master Hinson: of which when Wenham had notice, he told Biddenham (for so was
the Sergeants name) that he deserved for this to be laid by the heels
himself: which check so awed many of Master Hinsons friends, that they durst
not visit him for fear of imprisonment: The Major and Wenham command the
Maidservant that attended him, not to carry any Letters from him, and being
examined by them, whether she had conveyed any from him already, upon the
denial, Barlow a Factious Schismatic (who because heretofore his neighbors
of Hasting refused to concur with him in Petitioning against Episcopacy,
joined and subscribed with those of Rye) told her, that she deserved to be put
into the Ducking-house (a Prison for women) for denying it: That night
Biddenham the Sergeant was commanded to carry Master Hinson out of the Town
Hall, and put him into the Common Jail, which the Sergeant refusing, that
busy fellow Wenham told him, that he deserved to be committed himself, for
refusing to perform his Office: hereupon by virtue of this Oath, they command
four of the men whom: they had sworn to apprehend Master Hinso^, to tell him
that he must exchange his Prison, the Town Hall for the Common Jail, whither
they presently led him, there they lock him fast up, in a loathsome place,
where there was but one short bench, and no company but a Tinker, and he none
of the jovialists neither, for the stubborn sullen Tinker pleading senioritie
in the place, took possession of the bench, and most unsociably kept in all
night, not interchanging with Master (...) his repose for a walk ^^varietie
take, but left him one while to walk, and (...) while to sleep on that sloore,
in which he was forced to do the necessary acts of Nature: while he lay in
this loathsome condition, four of the Jurats, Jurats, I mean four that had
taken the Oath, to do what ever was commanded them, came to die Jail, and
prosessed to Master Hinson their hearty sorrow that they ever had a hand in
his Attachment, entreated him that he would not think evil of them, for they
were compelled to do that for which they were now sorry: And Thomas Staple
that (as before you heard) expostulated so freely, and pleaded against the
taking the Oath before he was awed to take it, showing the monstrous evil in
which it might engage them, openly exclaimed against the Major and his
Brethren, wishing that the plague from God might light upon them, for insnaring
their consciences with such an Oath; when not only Religion, but right reason
might have told him and the rest, That their sin was to take an unlawful
Oath, it had been no sin to beak it: while Master Hinson lay thus in the
Goal, one Master Besanno a Counselor at Law interceded for him, and
earnestly entreated that he might be removed from the Common Goal, and committed
to sat custody in some Chamber in the Town, but could not prevail: at last,
after three weeks imprisonment, upon Master Besanno's request, seconded by
Master Brian (heretofore a Jurat of Hasting, but now removed to Battle, as too
honest for such a Fraternity as he left behind him) Master Hinson was sent
with a strong Guard to Colonel Morley, by whom he was transmitted to London to
Learned Miles Co^be^, who committed him to the Custody of a Messenger, and
having no particular Acculation but a general charge, and finding no hopes to
be brought to a hearing, but perceiving himself designed (as others before him
had been) too long attendance and vexatious delays, he withdrew himself from
his Tyranny and Oppression, and escaping to Oxford, put himself under the
Kings Protection.

As the Rebels in their march toward Gloucester passed through Chipping-Norton
in the County of Oxford, a woman of that Town (whose zeal to the King and the
Justice of his cause, could not contain it self though in the midst of his
mortal Enemies) said in the hearing of some of the Rebels, God ^lesse the
Cavaliers: (^o are all good and faithful Subjects called by the Rebels) this
expression of the poor woman's affection to the King and his loyal Subjects in
so innocent a Prayer, so highly incensed the Rebels, that to punish so heinous
a Crime, presently they tied her to the tail of one of their Carts, and
stripping her to the middle, for two miles march whipped her in so cruel a
manner with their Cart-whips, that her body in many places was cut so deep, as
if she had been lanced with Knives, the torment being so great (as much as her
straight bounds, would give leave) she cast her self on the ground, so to
shelter her self from their stripes, but in a most barbarous manner they
dragged her along, insomuch that her legs and feet were so to torn by the
stony rough ways, that her flesh was worn off in many places to the very
bones, at last, having far exceeded the number of stripes limited by God
himself in the Law of Moses, (though given by the hand of Justice) Forty
stripes be may give him and not excced, Deuteronomy. 25. 3. they left her a Lamentable
spectacle of their cruelty: in this miserable condition lay this poor soul
for some few days, and since dyed of those wounds which she received from
them: The blood of this innocent, mingled with the rest shed by their hands,
crying loud with them under the Altar, Rev. 6. 10. How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on carth?

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XVI.
Burton, Prinne, and Bastwick, three Arch-Schismatiques, unjustly freed from a
just censure. The committing and removing of Master Chestlen from S. Matthews
Friday-street, to make way for Burton, contrary to all Law and Equity, etc.

AFter that bold affront offered (and that without check or control) to
public Justice, and the known Laws of the Land, in those Triumphant
Reductions of that Triumvirat of seditious Schismatiques, Burton, Bastwick, and
Prinne, from their several Confinements: It was no hard matter for the world
to guess what measure the obedient Sons of the Church of England might
expect, when that spurious, degenerous Brood, (which most undutifully cast dirt
in their mothers face, and in their scurrilous, Libellous Pamphlets proclaimed
her a Harlot) became the darlings both of the heads of the Faction in
Parliament and the people: And though it seemed good to the heads of the
Faction, by restoring these Turbulent men, to brave that Authority by which
they were justly censured, yet being restored, all were not thought to be of
equal concernment: As for Bastwicke, if any man laboring under any
lndisposition(besides that to the present established Government) had a mind to
be a Patient, and put himself into the hands of a mad man, he might do as he
pleased at his own peril: every man was left to the liberty of his own
choice: So for ^rinne, if any man desired to retain him of his Counsel, it
was lawful for the Client to give, and him to receive his Fee; but all this
was but voluntary: no man was constable rained to be a Patient to the one, nor a
Client to the other: for the intended Rebellion might well go forward, though
Bastwicke never wrote an Apothecaries Bill, or Prinne pleaded at the Bar: But
for Burton (a maine Engine to promote the design in hand) it concerned them to
restore him, not only to a Liberty of the exercise of his Calling at large, but
likewise to invest him in his former Cure in particular; from which, by the
just sentence of Law he was ejected: To this purpose no arts were left
unattempted, by the under-Agents, for the heads of this rebellion, to restore
Burton to his Parsonage of Saint Matthewes in Friday-street London: by unjust
molestations they endeavor to weary out Master Chestlen that succeeded him
(but not immediately) in it, to relinquish his cure, and make way for this
Trumpet of sedition; That so, what was not feazable in Law, might yet be
effected by horrible in justice and oppression: First, therefore, some of
Master Chestlens Parishioners,(but Burtons old disciples, levened with his
schismatic doctrine) deny to pay him his Tithes, or any other accustomed
duties: nor are they content with their own denial, but by earnest
persuasions, and other means they labor to draw other men into the like
obstinacy and perverseness: nor did they stick openly to profess that they
did this, that by unjust vexations they might weary out Master Chestlen, and
make way for Burton: hereupon (the Ecclesiastical Court being suppressed, which
otherwise have cognizance of the Causes of Tithes of London, nor can there any
prohibition be justly granted as Coram non Judice, The Statute only enabling
the Lord Major to be Judge, if the person grieved think fit to appleale unto
him, but no way disabling the Ordinary, or abolishing his power) Master
Chestlen petitioned (as the Statute in that case provides) the Lord Major that
then was, Sir Edmund Wright: To the hearing before the Lord Major came Little I
saac Pennington, no ways interested in the cause, but only to give countenance
to Master Chestlens Parishioners: being there, he openly reviled Master
Chestlen, calling him Saucie Jack, brazen faced fellow, and the like; nay he
threatened the Judge, thinking by this to stave him off from doing Justice, who
bravely scorning the threats of so contemptible a Mushrome, in a just
indignation replied, What, shall I be afraid to do Justice? and indeed the
event showed that he was not afraid; for upon a full hearing of the Cause, the
Lord Mayor gave sentence for Master Chestlen, and ordered the Parishioners to
pay their Tithes: Tillat a Linen Draper, one of the Citizens that was sued,
refused to obey the Lord Majors Decree: and therefore the time limited in the
Decree being expired, the Lord Mayor, according to the power given him by the
Statute of the 37 of H 8. committed Tillat to prison, without bail or
mainprize, until he did submit to the sentence as the Statute gives him power:
But see the Justice of the great pretenders to the maintenance of the Laws of
the Land, Tillat had not stood committed many days, before two of the House of
Commons (as the Keeper of Newgate says) in the name of the House of Commons,
command him to be set at liberty, which accordingly was done, though he were in
upon Execution, and the debt not satisfied: every man wondering at, but no man
daring to question so illegal an action. When this way took no effect, they
joined their purses to vex him with an Action of Ejectment, threatening to spend
five hundred pounds, but they would out him of his Living: but presently
deserted those intentions as not seizable. After this, they slander him for
preaching Popery and Arminiasme: which unjust scand^ll so prevailed in the
City, that he could not pass the streets without affronts and jeeres put upon
him: they dislwade his Parishioners from hearing him, telling them, that they
would be damned if they lived under his Ministry, they branded them with the
name of Malignants, if they frequented their own Church, and procured them to
be deeply taxed in all Sessements. In a word, that nothing might be wanting to
their own malice, and M. Chestlens vexation, they threw menacing Libels into
his house, laid wait in the Pewes of his Church, while others provoked him to
express himself in the great differences of the times, hoping to entangle him
in his words: and examined his conversation in the very places where he lived,
even from his Childhood to that time, hoping to find something whence to frame
an Accusation against him: When all these malicious courses would not effect
the thing they aimed at, they go from house to house for hands to a Petition
against him, to the House of Commons, pretending that he had preached false
doctrine, and made it the subject matter of their Petition: and if any man
refused to subscribe (as many did because they could not testify the truth of
the Petition) in their spirit of meekness, they called them Malignants,
Papists, and Enemies to Religion: however it is too well known, that two or
three men (though the very dregs of the people) petitioning against Orthodox
Ministers, have in the judgment and acceptance of the Faction of the House of
Commons, out-poized the rest of the Parish, though infinitely beyond them, as
in number so in quality: their testimony being rejected with much acrimony and
sharpness, when the others Libels have gained credit and reputation with them:
Therefore about March, 1641. the Schismatiques of Master Chestlens Parish,
presented a Petition against him to the House of Commons, in the name of the
whole Parish, though three parts of sour protested against it under their own
hands: When it was presented, Pennington and Venne car^cstly urged that it
might be read, pleading in their drivelling, railing Oratory, that he was a
very dangerous man, fit to be looked after: To satisfy their Importunity; the
Witnesses (who as their manner is, were never sworn, and yet were both
Witnesses and Accusers) were produced and examined at the Bar, and upon
examination the Petition was thrown out as frivilous, but like eager
bloodhounds not giving off the pursuit, for being at one loss, upon Easter
Eve, to show the world that malice is part of a Puritans preparation to the
Sacrament, when the House was very thin, the Protestants of the House being in
their Closets, close at their devotions to prepare themselves for the great
Feast at hand, and when private businesses by Order of both Houses were laid
aside (for as yet all opinion of the Sanctity of the ancient Festivalls of the
Primitive Church, was not lost amongst them) Pennington and Ven prevailed to
have this soyled ejected Petition to be revived and read again in the House,
and the Patrons of Justice and integrity being then absent, the Petition was
referred to the Committee for Scandalous Ministers: so they are pleased to call
all Orthodox, consclentious Ministers, who abhor their Rebellion, and refuse
to comply with them in their seditious practices: and that no time might be
lost, in Easter week, the Committee sat purposely for this business: to which
there was a full confluence of Seditious Schismatic people from all Quarters
of the City; that so nothing might be wanting to this Triumph: while Master
Chestlen was thus tied to a tedious chargeable attendance, God, to whom
appertain the Issues of death, ^mote Tillat, the maine promoter of Master
Chestlens troubles with the Plague, of which he dyed: with whom also for the
present dyed Master Chestlens trouble and vexation: and though some (that
think that all acts of providence are aimed point-blanke at them) having such
an opportunity as this, would interpret this to their own Interest as a sign
of personal favor to them, yet not daring to press into the hidden will of
God, nor making our selves of familiar acquaintance with his Counsels, I shall
not make any inference from hence, but leave every man to abound in his own
sense, only thus much we say, Tillat being dead, the hot prosecution of Master
Chestlen, for a while lay dead too: when all these endeavors could not
re-estate Burton in the Parsonage, some of the Factious of the Parish combine
to make him their Lecturer, and perhaps better approved of him as their
Lecturer then their Parson: to this purpose cunningly, and on feigned pretenses
they get some subscriptions of the Parishioners, and annexing them to a
Petition, for which they were never intended, preferred it in their own names,
and the names of the rest, to the House of Commons, that Burton might be their
Lecturer: which was no sooner proposed then granted, and an order presently
drawn up to give Burton power to preach in M. Chestlens Pulpit, which M.
Chestlen resolutely opposing, kindled such Coals against him as afterward
fired him out of the City: for since Master Chestlen will not give way to
Burton to be partner with him in his Pulpit, they resolve to give him
possession of the whole, by removing Master Chestlen totally from his Cure: To
this purpose Master Case sends to the Faction in Master Chestlens Parish to
frame some accusation against him, in obedience to so ghostly Council, Master
Chestlen is presently accused to the House of Commons for Preaching a Seditious
Sermon on Sunday the 23 of October, that very day whereon the Battle was
fought at Edgehill: The subject of the Sermon in truth, being nothing else,
but an earnest exhortation to his Parishioners to persuade them to constancy in
the Protestant Religion, perseverancc in the fear of God and the King:
presently a Warrant is granted for the apprehension of Master Chestlen: on the
Thursday following, they riotously assault him in his house, with great
Tumults, armed with drawn Swords and Pistols: and seizing on him, in great
triumph they carry him to the Court of Aldermen, who now (it seems) are
succeeded in the place of the High Commission, and are to be Judges of true or
false doctrine: being brought before this Lay Sanedrim, whereof Pennington the
pretended Lord Mayor was President, and a rabble of Schismatics crowding in,
to give countenance to the business, Captain Ven their Leader, stands forth
and accuses Master Chestlen for a most dangerous seditious Preacher (though he
confessed that he never heard him) and that he stood a delinquent in
Parliament: others objected against him, that he discouraged the Citizens from
going to Windsor, though this Sermon were preached before that treasonable
design was known, that the Kings Royal Castle should become Captain Vens
Royal Castle, or his Countrey-house for the recreation of his Mopsa: and that
the people might have full content, M. Chesblen was there baited on every hand,
every Alderman had his fling at him: at last having made him a public scorn
of the multitude, Pennington commits him into the hands of his accusers to
expose him to more abuse, and to commit him to the Compter: the Rabble being
now made Sergeants, they threaten to carry him in a Cart through the open
streets to the Prison: to deliver him from the fury, and rage of the people,
his Father (a known able Citizen) tendered Bail of ten thousand Pounds, but
it was not accepted: away they carry him to the Compter, and the next day being
Friday, he is brought to the B. ^^e at the House of Commons: where the Speaker
(who had bin happy in the deceived worlds opinion both of his wisdom and
honesty had he never known other Bar, but that of the Exchequer)
interrogated him touching his Preaching against Brownists and Anabaptists: and
presently, though no witness appeared, though no crime were objected, though
no accuser appeared against him: he was Voted by the House of Commons to be
sent Prisoner to Colchester Jail in Essex, there to remain during the
pleasure of the House: and to pay the Charges of his conveyance thither: And
that Posterity may read, and reading stand amazed to see how Tyrannical, how
unlimited an Empire, these Subjects have exercised upon their fellow Subjects,
without any legal Process, or any cause shown, to doom them to Banishment
and Captivity, during their high and mighty pleasure, we have here inserted a
true and perfect Copy of the Warrant and Sub-warrant, by which Master Chestlen
was sent from hand to hand, till he came to his Jail at Colchester.

By virtue of an Order this day made by the Commons House of Parliament, These
are to will and require you, to take into your custody the body of Master
Robert Chestlen Clerk, and him by your self, your deputy or deputies,
according to the said Order, to carry in safe custody to the Prison of
Colchester Castle in Essex, there to be delivered to the Jailer or Keeper of
the said Prison, to be kept in safe custody as his Prisoner, until the
pleasure of the House be made known to him to the contrary: It is also
Ordered, That the said Master Chestlen shall desray the charges of his carriage
to Colchester Castle aforesaid: And for so doing, this shall be a sufficient
Warrant.

Dated this 26. of October. 1642. Henry Elsynge, cler. Parl D ^

To John Hunt the Sergeant at Arms, attending on the House of Commons, his
deputy or deputies.
I do appoint the Party or Parties, whose name or na^^^ are subscribed to be
my lawful deputy or deputies, for the execution of this warrant. witness my
hand this 28. day of October. 1642.

John Hunt Sergeant at Arms. M. Dodson. Gentlemen. Walter Story. Gentlemen.
John Hind. Gentlemen.


Next morning being Saturday was this (righteous) sentence put in execution:
Thus to make way to reduce Burton, a Stigmatized infamous Schismatique to his
former place, was Master Chestlen doomed to banishment and captivity: in a
remote place from his Father, his Wife and Family, into a noisome Jail, where
he was made a companion to Thieves and Felons; in a Town, where 'twas little
less then death to be Loyal: or as themselves phrase it, to be Casars friend:
A Town in which they that sent him thither, could not but know that they
exposed his life (...) the fury of an enraged fanatic people, and not long
before had almost murdered Sir John Lucas, his Mother, and Sister, together
with Master Newcomin, one of their Own Ministers, and for this had received
public thanks from the House of Commons for their forwardness and zeal to
the service of the Parliament; Lastly, in a Town arrived at that high degree of
madness, that the Independent Church is openly practiced in it, and the Major
banished one of the Town for a Malignant and a Cavalier, whose name was
Parsons, and gave this learned reason for this exemplary piece of Justice,
Because it was an Ominous same: While Master Chestlen remained in this durance,
if any man durst visit him, it was at his peril, he was in danger to be
Plundered and branded with the dangerous name of a Malignant. They raised
reports of great resort of Cavaliers to him, and of Arms brought unto him,
insomuch that Alderman Barrington told the Committee, that their Town was not
in safety because of M Chestlen, who ^oore man, had no other endeavor then
how to free himself from the loath some nastinesle of his Prison; To this end
many Petitions were delivered to the House of Commons, that he might be
delivered from the Jail to some private house, which boon, after much and
earnest prosecution by Mistress Chestlen, and his friends, was obtained: (...)
an Order to exchange his Jail for a private (...) Master Hammon, an honest
Gentleman, dwelling in the Town, entertained Master Chestlen: but for his
charity incurred the hatred of the common people, for whereas before he lived
beloved, and in good estimation amongst his neighbors, now for harboring
Master chestlen, and for this and other actions, being under the jealousy of
the crime of Loyalty, they call him Cavalier, they threaten to call him up to
the Parliament, and at last were as good as their word, for upon their
Complaint, he was sent for up to the Parliament, and committed for receiving
Master Chestlen into his house: though in reason he might safely conclude,
that, that Order of the House which gave Master Chestlen liberty to remove to
another house, did withal give that house liberty to entertain him: Thus
continued Master chestlen in this exile and Imprisonment from October 1642.
until the February following, when the Kings express Warrant being sent for
his release, having the opportunity now and then to go abroad and take the
air, he left the Warrant for the Jailer to make use of for his best advantage,
while he came away to Oxford and put himself under the Kings Protection: since
that, in London they have broken up his house and Plundered his goods: a common
evil incident to all the Kings faithful Subjects, which are within the Verge
of the Rebels usurped power.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XVII.
Master Fowler, Parson of Minchin-Hampton in Gloucester-shire, his wife and
children barbarously used, and his house Plundered by the Rebels. Master
Bartlets house at Castle-morton in Worcestershire, five times Plunderd, but
especially by Captain Seriven, an Impudent Rebel, etc.

ON Newyears day, 1643. seventeene Soldiers sent by Captain jeremy Buck, came
to Master Henry Fowlers house, Parson of Minshin-Hampton, in the County of
Gloucester; being entered the house, they find Master Fowler fitting (as the
season of the year required) by the fire side, presently they seize on him,
and tell him, that he is their Prisoner: and though he instantly submitted unto
them without any the least resistance, yet to wreck their own malice, and the
malice of him that sent them, upon him, one of the Rebels takes him by the
throat, and holds the point of his Sword at his breast, two more (on each side
one) present their Pistols at him, another shakes his Pole-axe over his head,
others strike him with their Pole-axes; threatened he is on every side with
varieties of death. All Smile him with the tongue, they ravle at him, objecting
against him as heinous crimes. First, that he read the Common Prayers at
length, and that he had published the Kings Proclamations with a loud voice:
and then with renewed sury they assault him again they beat him with their
Pole-axes, and call him Ma^^e-Priest, Rogue, Rascal, and tell him, Sirrah, you
can (...) the King (...) Musquer, a Carstel, and a LightHorse, Horse, but thou
old knave, thou can not find any thing at all for the Parliament: And then to
work they fall again with their Pole-axes, and beat and bruile him in most
parts of his body; so that being aged, (no less then Threescore and two years
old) and being not yet perfectly recovered or a former lamenesse in one of his
hippes, though he were in a probable way toward it, by this barbarous usage,
being so cruelly beaten, and tugged, and haled by them, he is made a very
Cripple, irrecoverably lame, without all possibility of recovering of his
Limbs: All this inhumanitie was practiced on Master Fowler in the presence of
his Wife and Children, the Wife in the behalf of her Husband, the Children in
the behalf of their Father, humbly entreating on their knees, that they would
have compassion on him, and not murder a peaceable man in his own house.
While some of these Rebels were executing this Cruelty on his person, others
go up into his Study and Chambers, and take away all that was of good value,
and portable. And having crippled the Master of the Family, and rifled his
house, like the true Servants of that Master whom they serve, the Devil, they
leave him, but it was but for a season.

Now, though the present sense of these sufferings could not be but very great
to an aged man, and one laboring under former infirmities, especially to have
his sufferings imbittered by the reproachful raylings of the Rebels, and the
mocks and mowes of Captain Bucks friends and Kindred, who stood by jeering,
and clapped their hands for joy, applauding the exact execution of Bucks
commands, given his Soldiers concerning Master Fowler, yet the sad effects
which followed were evidence enough how cruel his usage was: First, Master
Fowler presently upon the Rebels departure, fell into an extreme bleeding,
which continued, and could not be stanched in six hours and more, by which
great outlet of Spirits, his strength was so much exhausted, that he was not
able to stand. Secondly, the next day after his bleeding, what with the loss
of so much blood, and what with violence offered to his whole body, the
Retentive faculty was so weakened, that his Urine came from him insensibly, and
in this wretched condition he continued very near a month. Lastly, by the many
contusions and knocks which he received on his head with their Pole-axes he
lost his hearing, which he has not prefectly recovered unto this day. And now
after all this barbarous usage, remains there yet any thing else to be added
to his sufferings was not their malice satisfied, and these outrages (designed
to be committed on him) completed yet? No, Captain Buck knew that it would not
be lawful always to commit murder, and rob those that are quiet in the Land,
and therefore resolved to make use of the present opportunity: he was not
ignorant that the wages of a faithful servant to the Rebellion was full
license to do any thing that can satisfy Lust, private Revenge or Avarice:
And therefore in July last, Buck himself, not like a Captain of Soldiers,
but a Ringleader to a Rout of Rogues, came to Master Fowlers house at
Minchin-Hampton, and most theevishly broke open the Window of his Sons Study,
and so entered the house: In the Study they found rich Treasure which they did
not know, being indeed without a Metaphor Pearl before Swines, for young M.
Fowler, a Practicioner it seems in Physic, had in his Study Extract of
Pearl, Aurum Potabilc, Confections of Amber, a great quantity of Compound
waters, a good proportion of Pearl in Boxes, a Box full of Bezoar Stone, with
many other things of admirable use, for the preservation of the life of man,
and of very great value, all which they took and brake in pieces, and trampling
them under foot, made them utterly unuseful either for themselves or others.
One of M. Fowlers daughters in a just indignation at so great waste of things
so precious, told Buck, that he might be ashamed to spoil things of that use
and value, Buck (a rude untutored man as he is) called her Whore, and with his
Pole-axe gave her a blow on the neck, and struck her down, and being risen
again, again he strikes her down with his Pole-axe, nay, to pursue the
glorious victory, he strikes her down a third time, and had she bin able to
rise from the floor, questionless, had struck her down a fourth time. The
compassionate mother Mistress Fowler standing by, and seeing her daughter thus
barbarously used, to redeem her from this cruelty, resolved to expose her own
person to the fury of this mad Beast, and therefore interposing, asked Buck,
whether he thought she could endure to see her child murdered before her face?
But as soon as Mistress Fowler came within his reach, without regard either to
her Age, or Sex, he caught her by the Throat, knocked her down, and being
down, kicked her, and trampled on her with his feet. At last, having acted
what cruelty he pleased (according to the Latitude of that Tacit Commission
given every Captain of the Rebellion) on Mistress Fowler and her daughter, he
and his Rabble Plundered the House, and so departed.

If the monstrousness of these barbarous and inhumane cruelties, committed on
this Reverend Divine, his Wife and Daughter, and reported in this Relation,
shall weaken the credit of the Relation, and render the truth of it suspected,
let the world know, that there is nothing set down in this account given unto
the world, but what was testified upon Oath before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Heath Knight, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench,
on the 18. day of Aug. 1643.

On the 21. of September 1642. being Saing Matthew the Apostle and Evangelists
day, a hundred and fifty Soldiers, some from Gloucester sent from Captain
Beard being of his Company, and some others from Teuabury, (all conspiring
together, and taking advantage of the peoples absence from their homes, and
being at a Pair that day at Ledbury two miles distant from Malverne Hills)
under the conduct of Captain Scriven, son to Seriven the Rich Iron-monger,
and late Major of Gloucester, came to castle-Morton, in the County of
Worcester, to Plunder Master Rowland Bartlets house: a man so well beloved in
his Country, for his hospitality, so dear to all sorts of people, especially
to the poor, for his Charity, and those helps which he freely bestowed on
them, for the recovery or the sick, the lame, and infirm, that had not these
Rebels taken the opportunity of his Neighbors being at the Fa^re, this force
had been too weak, to have made him the first instance of the Rebels insolency
(in that County) by way of Plunder: when they came to Castle-Morton, for fear
of surprizal their Horse secure the streets, and highwayes, while the Pikes and
Musketeers beset the house: having made good all passages, that none could go
in or come out, without their leave, Scriven advanced toward the house: M.
Bartlet perceiving himself to be enclosed with armed men, their Muskets being
bent upon his house, and his Pales serving them instead of Rests, coming out
of his doors, met Scriven in the Porch, and after a friendly salute, demanded
of him the Reason of this warlike approach to his house: Scriven answered, that
he came in the name of the Parliament, and by their command to search for
Arms: Alas! replied Master Bartlet, you are like to loose your labor, for
Justice Salloway (meaning that traiterous beggarly fellow, who in the time of
the late universal madness, was made Knight of the Shire for the County of
Worcester)has prevented you: yet Master Bartlet bad him use his discretion, to
see if he could find any gleaning, after the others full Vintage: amd so
brought him through his Hall into his Parlor; being there, Master Bartlet,
according to the freeness of his disposition, and after the good old English
way of bidding welcome, called for some Beer, while Scriven fare there, and
with a curious eye surveyed the furniture of the Room, he espied Master
Bartlets Sword hanging on the Wainscot, Scriven presently taking it down,
said, Is not this Arms? yes, replied Master Bartlet, but no more then is
necessary for every honest man, to prevent or repel injury on the highway;
young Master Bartlets Sword hanging by his fathers, Scriven takes down that too:
and utterly to disarme them, that so they might rob them without resistance,
the Rebels in the outward Rooms possess themselves of Master Bartlets man's
Sword: young Master Bartlet coming into the Parlour, hoping to recover his
Sword, Scriven perceiving a Ring (in which was set a Rubey) hanging in his
Bandstrings, rudely seized upon it, and after some struggling, some seconds with
Pistolls and Carbines, coming to his assistance, Scriven either broke, or cut
it off: having robbed the young man of his Ring, animated by the presence of his
fellow Thieves, he dives into his Fathers Pockets, and takes thence his moneys,
between three and four pounds; Master Bartlet, perceiving his hand in the
return to be full of money, put his own hand into his pocket to see what was
left, and finding but one poor three pence, to have escaped his theevish
fingers, tendered him that too, desiring him all might go together, which was
no sooner offered, then taken by this poor conditioned unworthy fellow, yet
Heir to a thousand pounds a year, unless the Hangman cut off the entaile;
Master Bertlet being clad in a fair Scarlet Gippo (a shroud temptation to a
man not accustomed to wear good Clothes, especially at his own charge) so
dazeled Srivens eyes, that he offered to pull it from the others back: Master
Bartles entreated him not to strip him of his Clothes sincc he had taken away
his moneys, with which he should buy more: O Sir, replied this doughty Captain,
you have money enough to buy more, and so the hopes of a greater prize making
him forget the Gippo, he drew his Sword, and threatened to kill M. Bartlet,
unless he would confess where he had hid his money and plate: but finding him
resolute not to betray his own Treasure, Scriven seazeth upon a woman that was
Master Bartlets housekeeper, an old faithful servant, in whom Master Bartlet
and his wife reposed much trust, and thinking to work upon the weakness of
her Sex, and affright her into a confession, he causes some to present Pistolls
at her breast, and others the points of their Swords, threatening her with
present death, if she would not discover where her Masters Treasure was:but
finding this woman not to be terrified with their threats, and fearing
surprizall by some Forces which might come from worcester, or the return of the
Country people from the Fair at Ledbury, he resolved to make trial if he could
find out that which he saw would not be disclosed unto him: Therefore without
further delay to work they go; resolving to search the house from the top to
the bottom. In Master Bartlets chamber, Scriven seizes upon Mistress
Bartlets Watch, he breaks open a Trunk, and took thence (by his own
confession) six hundred pounds in money, he takes away all Mistress Bartlets
wearing Linen, to the value of threescore pounds, he breaks open her Cabinets,
Trunks, and Boxes; and in them seized, or (to speak more properly) stole more
Money, Plate, Jewels, and Bracelets, amounting to a great sum: amongst other
things valuable, both for Raritie and use, took a Cook Eagles Stone, for which
thirty pieces had been offered by a Physician, but were refused: having thus
scim'd the house, and risted it of the Principal things in it, a warning-Piece
is shot off, to signify to the Rascallitie, that now they might have free
leave to enter: upon the signal given, leaving (instant) their Guards and
Stations, in a confused Tumult they rush into the house: and as eager hounds at
a loss offer here and there, and know not well where to fasten, so these hunt
from the Parlour to the Kitchen, from thence, by the Chambers, to the Garrats:
every Room is full, every one fearing that his ^llow thiese would prevent him,
and seize upon the prey before himself; besides Master Bartlets, his Wives and
Childrens wearing apparel, they rob their servants of their Clothes: with the
but ends of their Muskets they break open the hanging-Presses, Cup-boards,
and Chests, no place was free from this ragged-Regiment: and if so barbarous an
out rage, could possibly have admitted any time, but for a serious detestation
of so soul injustice, it might have drawn a smile from the most concernd
beholders, to see their thrusting and tumbling one another, the rude arts used
to supplaint one another, and how one thief snatched and stole from another:
after this storm was seen coming on, and to threaten this house in
particular, the servants fearing, that though the main brunt might light on
their Master, yet some sprinkling might chance to fall on them, used all the
art of cunning they could devise, to preserve those small sums of money of
which their honest labor, and frugalite had made them masters. But ^twas in
vain to hide, where desperate beggary, and resolved Rapine were to be seekers:
in one place the Rebels find twenty shillings, in another forty, three pounds
here, more or less there:but were it more or less, all was fish which came to
Net, they spare none: In this strict search, they met with Mistress Bartlets
sweetmeats, these they scatter on the ground, not daring to taste of them for
fear of poison: a wary consideration, and such as staved not off the hardy
Knight Sir William Brook of Kent, to meet fists with a greazy common Soldier
in a Gally-pot, when the Rebels of that County did the like outrage on the
truly honored Lady Butlers Closet, as you heard in the first weeks Relation
of this Mercury:and as for Syrups and Salves, those charitable Provisions for
the sick and maimed, these they trampled under foot, not providently
foreseeing, that some of their Brethren in this Rebellion, might stand in need
of them, the Friday next following, at the Battle of Wickesield near
Worcester, where God, by the hand of the Kings Forces, under the Conduct or
Prince Rupert, gave the Rebels their first over throw; The happy Omen of Edge
Hill, and those many other succeeding Victories with which (no less to the
wonder then confusion of the Rebels) it has pleased God since to bless his
Sacred Majesty: In a word, except Bedding, Pewter, and Lumber, they left
nothing behind them, for besides two horses laden with the best things (
Scrivens own Plunder) there being an hundred and fifty Rebels, each Rebel
returned with a Pack at his back. As for his Beer and Perry, what they could
not devour, they spoil, the earth drinking what the Rebelis could not, and
then triumphing in their wickedness, and glorying in their villainy, they
vaunted, That they had made Bartlet a beggar, and left him not worth a groat:
yet all the Rebels were not of the same belief, for presently after, when the
Earl of Essex possessed himself of Worcester some under his Command came from
Worcester to Master Bartlets house, where what was under-valued, and left by
Scriven, and his Rout, was good booty to these; They take away good store of
Bacon from his Roof, and Beef out of the Powdering-Tubs; they steal his
Pots, Pans, and Kettles, together with his Pewter to a great value, they seize
on all his provisions for hospitality and housekeeping, and then break his
Spits, as unnecessary utensills, they expose his Bedding to sale, and Presle
Carts to carry away his Chaires, Stools, Couches, and Trunks, though emptied
before by Scriven; and sharply threaten all such as should be known to harbor
any of Master Bartlets goods. And though these two Plunders, one upon the neck
of the other, left Master Bartlet a desolate naked house, yet when the Earl of
Essex came lately down toward Gloucester and hid himself, and his Army in
Hedges, Ditches, and the enclosures about Tue^bury, on three several days,
three several Companies came to visit Master Bartlets house, presuming, that
in almost a twelve months time the house might be new furnished, nor were they
altogether deceived in their expectation; without, they Plunder him of eight
Horses, and within what ever they found, they made clean work, the fifth
Plunder not sparing his Kitching-stuffe, which being reserved in a small
barrel, a Soldier putting it on his shoulder, carried it away: coming this
last time to M. Bartlets house, and understanding that he and his sons were in
the Kings Army, they abused his wife in beastly, immodest, scurrilous Language,
which I shall omit to relate as offensive to Christian ears: I shall conclude
this five-fold Plunder, with the Relation of one of their Captains bypocrisie,
and a common Soldiers impiety, glorying in his wickedness: The Captain being
invited to eat of a stubble-Goose, which a Soldier had Plundered and brought
into his Quarters, refused to taste of it, and gave this reason for his
refusal, because it was stolen, which bred in Mistress Bartlet a great opinion
that he was a conscientious man, but being to match away, he that would care no
stolen Goose, made no scruple to ride away upon a stolen Mare, for Plundering
Mistress Bartlet of her own Mare, this hypocritical Captain (and pity it
is I cannot tell you his name) gave sufficient restimony to the world, That the
old Pharisee and the new Puritan, have consciences of the selfsame temper, To
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, measuring all actions, not by lawful
and unlawful, but as they are more ar less gainful. But while the Captain
chose rather to be a Villain, then openly to appear so, the common Soldier
would not only be so in deed, but desired so to be accounted; and therefore
when his companions were carrying out M. Bartlets goods, amongst other things,
one seized on some live Partridges, and being entreated to forbear, and to
spare them, because they were provided for a Great-bellied Gentlewoman, and now
readyto lay down her burden, the common Soldier hearing him plead thus,
barbarously replied, If we had made Venison of her great belly, the would not
have longed for Partridges, for I have killed young and old, Men, Women and
Children: and boasting himself in his sin, and glorying in his Shame, without
regard had to the dangerous longing of a pregnant woman, if not satisfied, took
them away. So truly is that of the Prophet, verified in these miscreants, They
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, woc unto their Soul, for they
have rewarded evil to themselves, Esaias 3. 9.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XVIII.
The R bells persecution of Doctor Featley, a known Champion of the Protestant
Religion: part of his Sermon against the Sectaries: his death: Together with
their murdering of two of the Inhabitants of Lambeth on the Lords day, etc.

IN November. 1642. some of the Rebeils Foot Soldiers being Billetted at Acton
in the County of Middlesex, they presently enquire of their Hosts what their
Doctor was, (meaning Doctor Featley, their then Rector) and what Divine Service
they had; they answered according to the truth, that he was a man who precisely
observed the Canons of the Church, and swerved not a tittle from the Rubric of
the Common Prayer, wearing the Surplice, and using all the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church established by Law. Some of the Red coats replied, Does he so^ We
will teach him another Lesson, and make him leave those Popisn Superstitions,
or he shall ^ue it. Soon after, they repair to the Church at Acton, break
open the doors by force, in the Chancell they find ^his subscription on the
wall, This Chancell was repaired and beantified such a year by Daniel Featley
D.D. Rector, Which they utterly deseaced: Then laying hands on the Rayles, they
dealt with them (as Ducks do with a frog) tear them limblesle, and afterward
burnt them in the street, saying, That if they had the Parson there, they would
burn him with his Popith Trinkets.

Soon after, Colonel Vrrey took up his Quartors at the Parsonage house, some
of whose Soldiers (whether willingly or by carelessness being in drink is not
certified) lying in the Doctors Barn, set it on fire, which burned the whole
Barn full of Corn, and two Stables down to the ground, the loss being
estimated by the Inhabitants at 211 li.

But to leave Acton, and come to Lambeth, where the Sectaries wrecked their
spleen, not upon Pales or Rayles, or the fruits of the earth, as at Acton, but
upon the bodies of Christ's Servants, on his own day, and in his own House and
Court. For Feb. 19.1642. even in the midst of Divine Service, at the reading of
the Te Deum laudamus, four or five Soldiers rushed into the Church with
Pistolls and drawn Swords, affrighted the whole Congregation out, wounded one
of the Inhabitants, (whereof he soon after dyed) shot another dead, as he hung
by the hands on the Churchyard wall, looking over to the Palace Court, who
might truly have said in the words of the Poet, though in another sense, Vt
vidi, ut perii.

It was gathered by many circumstances, especially by depositions taken before
thc Coroner, and by some speeches that fell from their own mouths, that their
principal aim at that time was to have murdered the Doctor, which it is
probable they had effected, had not some honest Inhabitants premonished the
Doctor, who was at the same time on his way toward the Church, intending to
have Preached.

About the same time many of these Murderers were heard expressing their
rancour against the Doctor, thus: Some said, they would chop the Rogue as small
as Herbs to the Pot, for suffering Pottage (for by that name they usually
style the Book of Common Prayer) to be read in his Church: Others said, they
would squeeze the Pope out of his belly, with such like scurrilous and
malicious Language.

The Sunday sennight after this outrage, being the fifth of March, the Doctor
perceiving some Separatists at Sermon at Lambeth, took occasion to speak as
follows:

IF ever Schismatiques and foul-mouthed Separatists were set forth in their
native colors, the Schismatiques of this age are: P^al. 50.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, (whatsoever thou pratest
of Reformation) and castest my words behind thee, (namely, Prove.14.21,
Eccles.10.20. Romans 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb.13. 8, 9, 17. 1 Pet.2.13.) when thou
saw a thmese, then thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with
Adulterers. Thou give thy mouth to lying, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou
fittest and speak against thy brother, and standerest thins own mothers
son. For is not this their chanting Language? The Prelates of England, are
all Antichristian; The Ministers, Baals Priests; The Public Service,
Idolatrous; The Ceremonies, Superstitious; And the Sacraments, corrupted with
man's invention? I take them at their word; If this be true, then is the Church
of England no true Church of Christ; then they which have received all the
Religion they have from her, are no better then Miscreants, Pagans, and
Infidels, in apparent peril of drowning in everlasting perdition, because out
of the Arc, without God in this world, because without his Church. For as the
blessed Martyr St. Cy^^ian soundly argues against their forefathers the
Catharists, Deum non potest habere Patrem, qui ^t clesiam non habet Matrem: And
Church they have none for their Mother, for they disclaim the true Protestant
Church of England, and the Popish disclaimes them; so they are mere A per se
A's, Independents, like the horli pensiles in Lactantius, and Mausolus his
Sepulcher in Martial, hanging and hovering in the air.

The Scripture sets forth the true visible Church of Christ upon earth, under
the emblem of a great field, a great fl^ore, a great house, a great sheet, a
great draw net, a great and large foundation, etc. The Church shadowed out
under these similitudes, cannot be their Congregation, or rather Conventicles:
For as they brag and commend themselves, wanting good neighbors, In their
Field there are no tares, in their floor there is no chasse, in their house no
vessels of dishonor, in their sheet no unclean beasts, in their net no
trash, on their foundation nothing built, but gold, silver, and precious
stones. They have not sat with vain persons, nor kept company with
dissemblers; they have hated the assembly of Malignants, and have not
acompanied with the ungodly; they have not, nor will not Christen in the same
Font, nor sit at the holy Table, (for to kneel at the Sacrament is Idolarry)
nor drink spiritually the blood of our Redeemer in the same Chalice with the
wicked. Get ye packing then out of our Churches with your bags and baggages,
hoyse up sail for New England, or the Isle of Providence, or rather Sir Thomas
Mores Eutopia, where Pluto's Commoner, and Os^rius his Nobleman, and Castillio
his Courtier, and Vegetius his Soldier, and Tully his Orator, and Aristocles
Eelix, and the Jews Ben^ohab, and the Manichees Paraslet, and the Gnostics
illuminate ones, and the Montanists spiritual ones, and the Pellagians Perfect
ones, and the Cathacists pure ones, and their precise and holy ones are all met
at Prince Arthurs Round Table, where every guest (like the Table) is totus
teres alqque totundus.

There are three heads of Catechism and grounds of Christianity, The Apostles
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and and Tea Commandments; these may be more truly
then Gorran his Postills, termed aurea fundamenta, which they go about to
overthrow and cast down, and when they have done it, no place remains for the
to build their Synagogues or Maria Rotunda's, but the sand in the Saw pit,
where there Apostle Brown first taught most profoundly. The Lords Prayer they
have excluded out of their Lyturgie, the Apostles Creed out of their
Confession, and the Ten Commandments by the Antinomians their Disciples out of
their rule of life. They are too good to say the Lords Prayer, better taught
then to rehearse the Apostles Creed, better lived then to hear the Decalogue
read at their Service, for God can see no sin in them, nor man honesty.

Tell me, ye bastard-brood of Martins, is it not sufficient for the conviction
of your cauterized consciences, that ye wreck your spleen upon the material
Temples of God, by breaking down Organs, burning Rayles, and defacing the
Monuments ot the dead, but will ye go about to destroy the spiritual Temple of
the holy Ghost? not fearing that dreadful sentence of the Apostle, He that
destroys the Temple of God, kim shall God dstroy. Could they not be content
to tear the Book of Common Prayer in pieces, and scatter the leaves all about
the Church, but will they also rend and dilacerate the living members of
Christ's mystical body? Will they charge the Cannon with murdering shot to
destroy and dislipate whole assemblies of Gods; Servants met together upon his
own day to worship him in his own house? Do they that their bare opposition to
Popery will save them? If that alone would give a man a good title to heaven,
not only the Socinians, Liberrines, Fami^^sts, Antinomians, and other damnable
H^retiques, but even the Jews and Turks would snatch heaven from them, and
take it by force, for these are as vehe^^ent opposers of Popery as they are:
And howsoever the ^^^nt opposition to Popish Superstition is all the
Religi^^^^e of them have, yet are they not at so deadly feud with Papists as
they would bear the world in hand, for they shake hands with them in many of
their Tenets and practices, both of them condemn our English Lyturgie, and
profess Recusanci^: both of them Idolize their teachers, etc. Who has
bewitched them, that they should believe Bedlam shall be so far enlarged, and
the spirit of Frenzy possess Old England, that they should have the like
success here, as their cozen germans the Anabapticts had at Munster? though we
envy them not their high preferment in the end. After these fits of Convulsion
are over, and Peace settled in the Body of the Kingdom, do they think the
wisdom of the State will ever change our holy Churches into their profane
Barnes and Stables? our Pulpits into Tubs? our Linen Ephods into their Aprons?
our Lyturgy into their extemporary Enthusiasmes? our Learned Pastors into their
ignorant Hirelings? and our Apostolical Hierarchy into their Apostaticall
Anarchie? But I will restrain my self, and confine my discourse.

Soon after this Sermon, seven Articles were preferred against the Doctor to
the Committee for Plundered Ministers by three Mechanics, who had formerly
been indicted for Brownists at the Sessions for the County of Surr^y, but
after long attendance the Doct. was acquirred of the^^ yet at length these
Sectaries wrought so powerfully, that the Doctor must be committed to Prison,
how unjustly soever, 'twas enough that he was a Doctor, and maintained the
Religion established in the Church of England: And accordingly on the 30 of
September. 1643. he is committed to Peter-house, his own house, Library and goods
being frist seized on, and his estate Sequestered The Sunday after his
commitment, and for diverse other Lords days, he preach^ ^ to his
fellow prisoners, but after a while he was prohibited by Isaac Pennington the
pretended Major of London. And though Sir George Sands, Sir John Butter, Master
Nevile, and other Prisoners of quality Petitioned that he might continue his
so doing, yet it would not be granted.

See how this unjust imprisonment is relished by a Foreign Divine, in these
words:

I Am sorry to hear of the close Imprisonment of that worthy Doctor Featley;
What? He who is, and ever has bin so stout a Champion for Religion to be
soused by the Reformers thereof? But let not the Disciple think it strange,
when his Master suffered so much cruelty from the great Rabbis of Israel.

Yours from my heart, J.S.


After the Doctor had been many months stifled up in Prison, and having a
Certificate from his Physician, that he could not live long, if he had not some
fresh air, he Petitioned these soule-enthralling tyrants, and at last obtained
leave to go to Chelsey College for six weeks, upon good bail, to recover his
health; but it pleased God to take him out of this world, upon the 17 day or
April, 1645. being the very last day of the six weeks limited for his return.

During his sickness, he gave himself wholly to Divine Meditations, often
bewayling with tears the present state of the Church of England: he made a
Confession of his Faith to Doctor Leo, and the Dutch Ambassadors Chap-laines,
saying, That the doctrine which he had always Preached, and the Books which
he had ^riated against Anabaptists and other Sectaris, were agreeable to Gods
Word; And that he would scale the Protestant Religion, (as it was established
and confirmed by the Acts of three Pious Princes) with his blood. And being
asked by some that came to visit him, what he thought of the Covenant? he said,
it was a damnable and execrable Oath, made purposely to ensnare poor souls,
and full of malice and Treason against our gracious Sovereign. And said he,
For Church Government (a thing now much controverted) I dare boldly affirm,
that the Hierarchy of Bishops is most agreeable to the World of God, as being
of Apostolical institution, the taking away where of is damnable, and that by
consequence, both the presbyterian and independent Governments are absurd and
erroneous, neither of them being ever heard of in the church of God, till of
late at Geneva^ nor is there so much as any color for them in holy writ. It is
evident ( said he) that as the ^ riects in the Old Testament were above the
Levites, so in the Now the Apostles were above the Disciples, and that the
seven Angels of the seven Churches in the Apocalypse were seven Bishops, and
that Polycarpus was Bishop of Smyrna, and Timotheus of Ephesus. And for the
Laity, no pregnant proof can be produced, that they ever meddled with the
Priests Function, or had any power to or daine Ministers. And these things (
said he) I intended to have published to the world, if God had spared me longer
life, which I might (through his goodness) have enjoyed, had I not been
unjustly imprisoned: which he several times reiterated to his friends.

Anon after he prayed thus: Lord strike throuth the reins of them that rise
against the church and king, and let them be as chasse before the wind, and as
stubble before the fire; let them be scattered at Partridges upon the
mountains, and let the breath of the Lord consume them but upon our gracious
Sovereign and his posterit^e, let the Crown flourish, This ( said he) is the
hearty and earnest Prayer of a poor sick creature. With which, and other such
spiritual ejaculations, he expired.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. XIX.
The Murder of Master Robert Yeomans, and M. George Bowcher, Citizens of
Bristol, by Nathaniel Fiennes, (second s^nne to the Lord Say) and the rest of
his Accomplices, etc.

THe care that God took to preserve the Land of his people undefiled by
Innocent blood was very great, and therefore did provide not only when the
Murderer was known, that he that thed man's blood, by man his blood should be
shed again, according to that command, Te shall not pollute the Land where
year: for blood it desileth the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the
blood that is shed the ein but by the blood of him that shed it: Namb. 35.33.
But likewise, where the Murderer was not known, that the Innocent blood shed
in the Land might not be charged upon them: and therefore in the 21 of Deuteronomy.
God prescribes an Expiation for Murder when the Murderer was not known, for
if a man were found slain in the field, The Elders of the City next to the
slain man were to take an Heiser and strike off his ^ec ke in a rough valley,
and shall wash their hands over the Heiser: and say, Our hands have not shed
this blood, Neither have our eyes seen t: Be merciful O Lord unto thy people
Israel whom thou bast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of
Isreal's charge: and the blood shall be forgiven them: so shall thou put away
the guilt of Innocent blood from among you: verse. 6 7, 8.etc. In which law it
is plain, that the guilt of Innocent blood may cleave to our hands though our
hands have not shed it, and the way to wash our hands clean from that guilt is
to protest against the shedding it, to deny our consent to it, being done, and
as much as in us lies, to bring the punishment of Innocent blood upon the heads
of those that shed it: without this we contract another guilt and communicate
in his sins. The Innocent blood shall not be forgiven us. When therefore God,
to whom appertain the issues of Life, shall come and make Inquisition for
blood, and the murdered shall cry out with Job, O earth cover not thou my
blood: Job 16-18. That then we may lift up pure hands undefiled with our
neighbors blood, though but with consent and approbation; Nay, that we may
free our selves from the blood of all men by earnest prayer to God, not to lay
Innocent blood though shed by others to our charge, to inflame your devotion, I
have, as it were, brought forth the bodies of these two State-Martyrs, Master
Robert Yeomans, and Master George Bowther, Citizens of Bristol, and exposed
them to the view of the world, that so shedding some tears over their graves,
they may remain an Everlasting Monument of our Innocence in the sight of God,
of our Just indignation against such cruelty in the fight of men, and a sweet
ointment to imbalme these men to their funerals, That though with their
Savior (the ignominy of whose Cross fanctisiyd the death even of that
accursed tree) in their death they were numbered amongst the transgr^ssors, yet
(Loyalty being their Epitaph) they may make their graves amongst the
Honorable.

But because to blind the eyes of the world not to see the cruel Injustice
practiced on these worthy Citizens, to amaze the minds of the people, and to
take off from the odiousenesse of so soul a Murder, they did not only in
their lying Pamphlets proclaim it unto the world, that Master Ycomans, Master
Bowether, and some other weiassected Members of that City had contrived a
horrid Treason, that in the barbarousnesse of it did out-doe, the Powder
Treason, having conspired at once to ruin the Protestant Religion, and to
murder all those of that City which did adhere to the Parliament, but also to
mock God (to that height of impiety they were grown) Solemn thanks were
Ordained to be given for deliverance from so dangerous a conspiracy: It will
not be amiss to derive this ^ragedy by way of Historical Narration from the
first to the last Scene: that so the abused world may see what arts are used on
that side to possess themselves of the good opinion of men, that in the mean
time they may practice cruelties unheard of, until the bloody Anabaptists
sprung up the most pernicious weeds that ever intested the Church or Christ.

When this Parliament first fate, these two Gentlemen with the rest of the
Kingdom rejoiced to see that day, and stood at gaze as greedily as any,
expecting what acts of bounty, what relief from grievances our Gracious
Sovereign through their hands would convey unto his Subjects. While their
endeavors were Loyal, though roughly carried; while bounded within the duty
of Subjects, though only not exceeding it, they were as forward to applaud
them as any: but after the publication of the Remonstrance by the House of
Commons (that appeal to the people, and indeed the groundwork of this
present Rebellion by slandering the Kings Government) they that went one mile
with them would not be compelled to go two, especially after the way appeared
dangerous, and apparently leading to open Rebellion: Nullam esse Civitatem qua
non improbes ^ives aliquando and Imperitam Mult^^udinem semp^r babeat: was the
saying of the Rhodii in the Reman Senate recorded by Livy, lib. 45. There is no
City but has sometimes some ill-affected Citizens, but always an Ignorant
multitude, perhaps this in part might be the temper of Bristol at this time:
but the Critical time was now come, in which men must declare themselves
either for the King or against him; and though many men in that City then were
deeply Leavened with disloyal principles, yet the major part of the City were
the Kings faithful Subjects, of this party the most eminent men were, Master
Ro^ers Yeomans Sheriff of Bristol for the ye^re 1642. Master George Ba^^ber,
with diverse others, men of good esteem, plentiful estates, known integ^itie,
and true Children of the Church of England; These men seeing the miserable
Condition of those places where the Rebels bare sway, and beginning to be
sensible of the same bondage under Colonel Essex, enter into a Consultation how
to put the City of Bristol into the Kings possession and protection: To this
purpose they dispatch an Agent to the Court, to inform the King that he had
many good Subjects in Bristol, and withal to signify their desire to deliver
up his own Citieto himself, if he would be pleased to send some of his Forces
thither, to take it.

The Reasons which prevailed with them, to make this tender unto His Majesty,
were many, we may reduce them to three heads.

First, Confedence to God, not to resist the King, Knowing, that they that do
resist shall receive unto themselves damnation, and therefore resolved never to
join themselves to the damnable Sect of the Hotbamites, those
State-Heretickes, who accounted it their duty to keep the Kings Towns for
the Kings use, by shutting the Gates against the Kings Person.

The second Inducement was the frequent affronts given to His Majesty by the
Rebels, to the great regret of every good Subject: and of these they give many
Instances.

First, Scandalous and disloyal Speeches on all occasions belched out against
His Majesty's Person, His Protestations, Declarations, Proclamations, indeed
all his Actions.

Secondly, Contempt of His Majesty's gracious offers, even to the very face of
His Messenger; for when in February 1642, the King sent His gracious Letters to
the City of Bristol, requiring them not to give admittance to any of the
Parliament Forces, promising that He Himself would not impose any on them,
but what they themselves should desire; together with the tender of many
promises of his favor (given in charge to Sir Baynham Throkmo ton (whom he
sent unto them for that purpose) vet notwithstanding at that very instant, in
contempt ((...) say) of this great vouchsafement, The Major, Richard Aldworth,
with Brown the Sheriff, two Boutefues in perverting that City, with some
other their Associates, did send four pieces of Ordnance to Marlberough, there
to be employed against the King. And though Sir Ba^nham, upon information given
unto him, did expostulate the affront with the Major, and in the Kings name
commanded the stay of them; and though some of the well affected Citizens having
notice of it, came and threw them off their Carriages, because they knew that
the intention was to employ them against the King: yetover-borne by a greater
number, who produced the Major and Sheriffs Warrant for their conveyance
without let or interruption; they were enforced to give way, and thither they
were sent.

Thirdly, When in the beginning of March, 1642. amongst other Proclamations
sent to Bristol, one was concerning the Kings Royal Navic, invaded and
possessed by the Earl of Wa^ wicks, and employed against His Majesty and His
Loyal Subjefts; The King by that Proclamation forbidding all Seamen, and
Mariners, and all Officers of His Navy, to take employment under the Earl, or
to obey His Commands, though Colonel Fines then Governor of Bristol, could
have caused that Proclamation to be suppressed and not published, yet as much
as he could to dishonor the King in the eyes of His Subjects, He permits it to
be Proclaimed, that thence he might take, occasion to blaspheme His Sovereign:
for being Proclaimed on Friday the third of March, the next day ( Saturday)
being the chief Market day, when the Market was fullest, that the news might
be carried into all parts of the Country, and every one learn from so
desperate an example to contemn their Sovereigns Commands: Fines comes in his
Coach to the high Cross, attended by a Troop of Horse, and after a
Declaration read, That the Proclamation published the day before was a
Scandalous and Libellous Paper, and such as deserved to be burnt by the hand of
a public Hangman; he caused the Sergeant that Ploclaimed it to burn it,
holding Pistolls to his breast, and threatening to shoot him if he did not hold
them high enough, fearing it seems that so damnable, so unpardonable a Treason
should want witnesses.

Lastly, As the direct end of their desire to deliver up the City to the Kings
protection, was conscience of duty to God and their Sovereign, so the
reflected end was their own security, and quitting themselves of those
Oppressions and Grievances under which they suffered; And these were many.

First, The often repeated Taxations and Loanes of Money unto the King and
Parliament, as they were pleased to join them upon the threadbare security of
the Puplique Faith, and if any man refused to lend on that credit which they
had banckrupted long before, he was threatened with Imprisonment, Plundring, or
which was worse then both, sending up to the Parliament: And to these may be
added, the daily drayning their purses by illegal exactions employed for
repayring the Castle, building of Forts, and maintaining a Garrison against the
King.

Secondly, By urging upon them new and Treasonable Votes and Protestations: If
not fully in words, yet in the the use and interpretation of them directly
opposite to the Oath of Allegiance, the Oath of the City taken by every
Citizen when he is elected into the place of a Burgess, in which they swear
in the sixth Article of that Oath, not to enter into any Oath or Confederacy
against the king, contrary to the Laws of the Land: and likewise contrary to
the Protestation recommended from the Parliament to the Subjects of this
Kingdom: The Oath (for the tenor of words) was this following.

IA. B. do protest and vow, in the presence of Almighty God, that I will to
the utmest of my power, and to the hazard my t se and fortunes, oppose all such
Forces as shall attempt any thing against the City of Bristol, Without the
consent of the King and Parliament so to do.

In which Protestation, they took the name of the King in vain, for when they
say ( King and Parliament) they meant the two Houses without the King, for if
actions be the best interpreters of the Agents words, it is more then
manifest, that by the Protestation they intended to engage that City in
Rebellion against the King, and that under the tie of Religion. And for proof,
I offer first their seconding this Protestation with another which spoke more
plainly, wherein they were to protest with their lives and fortunes to resist
Prince Rupert the Lord General the Earl of Forth, the Lord Marquess
Hertford; the Earl of Newcastle, Sir Ralph Hopton and their Forces: and
secondly, because as before the tendering of this Protestation, they had
received Colonel Essex to Command there for the Parliament; so within 2 few
days after the first Protestation was tendered, they admitted Colonel Popham
and Sir Edward Hungerford, with their Regiments, and afterward Colonel Fines
without any oppositiog, that so now being backed with so strong a power, they
might make the latter Protestation the interpreter of the former Upon the
Petition of Mistress Majoresse, the Lady Rogers, Mistress Holsworth, Miresse
Vicaris, with other Zealous Sisters, to the number of a hundred.

Thirdly, By difarming all such as were any ways suspected to bear a good and
loyal affection to His Majestic, unless they would take such Protestations as
should be tendered to them, and having taken away such Arms as they found.
(not satisfied with this) they urge on them another Protestation, protesting in
the sight of God, and calling him to witness, that they had no other Arms
concealed in their houses, either their own or ohers: and if any man refused
to take this Protestation, he was instantly imprisomed as an enemy to the
State, and a man not to be confided in.

Fourthly, The perpetual scorn and obloquy to which they were exposed,
reproached every day as they passed the streets, with names of Malignants, and
Papists; nay, as if they had been worse then Jews, they spit at them, and
threaten to take a speedy course with them.

Fifthly, The general contempt and profanation of Gods holy Worship and
Service, rending of Surplices, tearing the Book of Common Prayer, breaking
down Organs, exterminating the whole Liturgy out of their Congregations, and
all these Outrages, not only winked at, but countenanced and encouraged by
Fixes and his fellow Rebels; and that they might have Like People, Like
Priest, They discountenance or drive away the Orthodox Ministers, and
substitute in their places the most infamous notorious Schismatics that they
can pick out of several Counties, as Tumb's of Limster in All Saints, in
Master Williamssons Cure an Orthodox and godly man; Craddocke Bacon, Walter,
Simonds, and one Matthew Hazard, whom though f name last, yet deserves to have
the precedence of all the rest, as being a maine Incendia^y in this Rebellion,
violently egged on by his Wise, whose disciple the silly man is: this gave
occasion of scandal to all pious godly men, which honored the Protestant
Religion as it is established, and made them even to abhor the service of the
Lord.

Lastly, because upon the point they were confined to Bristol, not daring to
go out of the City, for in all places, where the Commands and Ordinances of
the two Houses prevailed, they had given a List of the names of the Malignants
that durst appear for the King, to the end, that if any of them, came thither
they might be apprehended and sent Prisoners to Taunton, Barkley Castle, or
some other Prisons; or as Delinquents sent to the Parliament.

It was no wonder therefore, that a City thus robbed of its wealth and
liberty, groaning under an unsupportable yoke of bondage and ^yranny, should
endeavor by restoring the King to His Rights, to restore themselves to their
former freedom; which could not be done but by breaking these bonds, and
easting these cords from them: On these weightic motives therefore, they enter
into a loyal consederacy to deliver up the City from its captivity under the
Rebels into His Majesty's protection, and that without shedding of one drop of
blood if it were possible, but most certain without any resolution to Massacre
the Citizens, as has been most falsely both Preached and Printed: for Master
Yeomans and Bowcher, both on their Examinations, and after their Condemnation
both affirmed, that their was not any intention of bloodshed; and in the
Examinations of Master Yeomans and others, taken before the Council of War
at Bristol sent up by Master Clement Walker Usher of the Exchequer, but since
Advocate to that Congregation of Murderers that adjudged these Innocents to
death, and Ordered by the House of Commons, Die Luna, 22 Maii, 1643. to be
Printed, we thus read, page 3. The King bad also assured us, and given charge
to Prince Rupert, that no violence should be used to any, which 2 do believe
was his full intent, the (...) for that I hear there came a Proclamation to
that effect: Where it is observable, that Walker (a man that had his hands
stained with his own Wives blood before he dipped them so deep in these
Martyrs,) though in that contrived Confession of Master Yeomans, he brings him
in, professing his Conviction in conscience of the justness of the Parliaments
Cause (when it is known, that if he would have recanted and contributed toward
this unnatural War, he and Master Bowcher, both might have saved their
lives) yet he dares not so to murder his fame after his person, by charging
upon him so bloody a Crime, as an intention to Massacre his fellow Citizens.

It Is therefore cenfessed on all hands, That Master Yeomans, Master Bowcher,
and others, had an intention to cast out the Rebels, and to deliver Bristol
into the Kings possession, resolving to secure the person of the Governor and
some others of the chiefest Rebels, but not to kill them: To this purpose, a
Commission is obtained and sent to Master Robert Yeomans to raise Forces, and
constitute Commanders for the Kings service. Master George Bowcher contrives a
Protestation to be taken by all that joined themselves to this Association,
fully expressing the latitude of their intentions in that undertaking: The
Protestation is extant in Master Bowchers Examination taken by Walker, on the
10 of March, 1642: and published in the Book before mentioned: and is attested
upder his own hand, which I have seen, and was Written nor long before his
death. The Protestation was this:

IDee voluntarily protest before Almighty God, upon the Faith of a christian,
That I will to the ulmost of my power, and with the bazard of my life and
fortunes, defend my Dread Sovereign Lord King Charles, His Rights, crown, and
Dignity, against all Force and Forces which are or shall be raised within His
Majesty's Dominions without His Royal Assent, Authority, and Command. Which
was the sum of this pretended horrid Treason.

After communication of Counsels, and many Messages interchanged between
Oxford and Bristol, drawing some of Colonel Essex his Commanders into the
Combination, who loathed and condemned themselves in their own employment, it
was resolved, that upon-Monday the seventh of March, 1642. Prince Rupert, with
a parte^ of the Kings Forces, should face the City on Durdan Down, distant
not a full mile from the City, and for the Association in the City, their
task was to make good two Ports, Proome-gate and Newgate: who having seized
on the Guards, were to open the Gares, and to signify the accomplishment of
the design, to the Kings Forces to make their approach by the Ringing of Saint
John's and Saint Michaels Bells: Prince Rupert a vigilant and valiant Prince,
comes that Monday night to the place appointed, expecting the next morning by
five of the clock the signal to be given, and the Ports opened unto him: but
that night (whether by negligence amongst their own, or vigilance of the
Rebels, is uncertain) the Combination was discovered, and Master Yeomans,
Master Bowcher, and diverse others, were that night apprehended in their houses,
having some armed men with them, and were instantly committed to safe custody;
which bring signified to the Prince, he immediately withdrew his Forces, and
marched away.

And now having them in their power, they clap Irons on them, tie them head and
feet together, commit them close Prisoners, deprive them of all comfort to be
administered by their Wives or Children, or Friends, and used them with that
barbarousnesse and inhumanitie as cannot be imagined, could be practiced by one
Christian upon another; and after seventie six days hard Imprisonment, oftest
examination, barbarous insulting overthem, especially by Nathaniel Fines, they
were brought to their trial, at a Council of War; where Articles being
exhibited against them by Advocate Walker, they received Sentence of death:
what the Articles exhibited against M. Yeomans were, may be collected out of
the Sentence it self, as we find it in page 4. of the before mentioned Book
of M. Yeomans his examinations, published by command of the House of Commons,
which for satifaction of such as shall cast a compassionate eye on this sad
story we have here inserted.

The Judgment upon Robert Yeomans.

UPon due consideration of the Articles exhibited on May 8. by Clement Walker
Esquire, Advocate to this Council of War, against Robert Yeomans, and others
the late Conspirators in this City, and upon due hearing of the Answers, and
defense of the said Robert to the several Articles, and also upon examination
and proofs before them taken upon Oath. It is unanimously adjudged by this
Court, That the said Robert Yeomans is guilty of traiterous intelligence, and
correspondency with the Enemy, and of a traiterous and wicked conspiracy to
betray this Town into the hands, of the Enemy; and thereupon this Court does
adjudge and paste Sentence of death upon him as a Traitor and Conspirator; and
accordingly does order, That the said Roberts Yeomans shall be re^^rned to the
place of his former Imprisonment, and from thence be brought before the maine
Court of Guard, there to be hanged by the neck till he dye:

Nath.Fines, Richard Cole, Wall. White, James Ford, Joh. Clifton, Joh. Chamneys,
Tho. Hippesly, Martin Husbands, Tho. Raulins, Rich. Hippesly, Tho. Air, Tho.
Goodere, James Hean, Tho Wallis, Will. Bowel, Robert Baugh.

To this bloody Sentence I have added the names of that bloody Conspiracy of
Murderers that gave it, that their names and memory may stink with
posterity, and be loathsome to all Generations that shall hereafter read and
bemoane the condition of their predecessor that groaned under the tyranny of a
prevayling Faction of Br^wnists and Ana^aptists.

Mister Robert Yeomans being thus most unjustly condemned, May 8. on the 22 of
the same Month, Master George Bowcher was called before Fines and the rest of
that Rebellious crew which called themselves a Council of War, and that you
may guess at the whole by some; William Bowel was a Pedant, and from whipping
of boys was made an unrighteous Judge of men; James Heane a drunken Attorney;
and Robert Baugh a Sheep-skinne dresser, who in the times of peace durst not
come near Master Yeomans, but uncovered at a distance as his duty was, now
plucked off Master Yeomans his Hat, commanding him to stand bare before him:
the Articles exhibited by Walker their Advocate were seven, Recorded under
Master Bowchers own hand, whereof the maine and first they insisted on, was,

1. First, That he had framed a Protestation to defend the King. His Crown and
Dignity, against, etc. The Pro^ which you heard before. 2. Secondly, That he
had raised Men, and provided Arms and Ammunition of all forts, Crowe^ of
(...), Pickaxes, Axes and ^^on wedges, with Torches and Linkes, to further the
Design of suppressing the court of Guard at Froome-gate. 3. Thirdly, That he
conspired with others to let in Prince Ruperr, a foreign Prince ( as they
styled him) who being entered the City, should put to death and plunder all the
Inhabitants of that City that came not out to assist and join with them. 4.
Fourthly, That be did undertake to give Prince Rupert a signal when he should
make his approaches to the City, by Ringing Saint John's and Saint Michaels
Bells. 5. Fifthly, That he certified Prince Rupe^t, that the Design of giving
him entrance into the Town was discovered, and advised him to retreat. 6.
Sixthly, That he forced a open the crowd door ( being a burial place under the
Quire) under Saint John Baptist Church, with an intention to use it for a
Prison, to secure such as sold make resistance, whether they were of the Guard
or others, while they were in pursuance of their Design. Lastly, That he had
Looks and other Provisions to cleanup the passages at Saint Johns-gate, in case
any of the Parliament Horse should rush in upon them while the work was in
doing.
These Articles, though maliciously expressed and a^ gravated, yet for the
matter of them, were drawn either from his own Confessions, or Depositions of
others, and upon these, at the Lady Rogers her house, he received the like
Sentence of death, as Master Yeomans had done before.

When the report of so illegal, proceedings arrived (...) Court, though at
first few men did think that their bold insoleney would go on to put the
Sentence in execution; yet at last considering, that they were in the hands,
not of honorable enemies, but of Rebels; and of Rebels that were Sectaries,
and which was more then both, Rebellious Sectaries at the devotion of Master
Fints, who did command in chief, and had strong influence on the rest. The
Earl of Forth, Lord Lieutenant of all His Majesty's Forces, resolved to write
unto Fines, and that by way of Threat, Pari p^na exacta, at hosts a superb^
and insolenti supplicio temperarent, as Diodorus Siculus reports of Phi^ometus
in the like case; that by the menace of the like punishment on the Prisoners
here, he might stave them off from their intended cruelty on the Kings good
Subjects there: for thus he writes,

Patrick Earl of Forth, Lord Etterick, and Lord Lieutenant of all His Majesty's
Forces.
I Having been informed, that lately at a court of war, you have condemned
to death Robert Yeomans, late Sheriffs of the City of Bristol, who has His
Majesty's Commission for raising a Regiment for his service, William Yeomans
his Brother, George Bowcher and Edward Dacres, all for expressing their
Loyalty to His Majesty, and endeavoring his service, according to their
Allegiance, and that you intend to proceed speedily against diverse others in
the like manner: Do thereso e signify unto you, That I intend speedily to put
Master George, Master Stevens, Captain Huntly, and others taken in Rebellion
against His Majesty at Cyrencester, into the somecondition: Do further
advertise you, That if you offer by that unjust judgment to Execute any of
them, you have so condemned, that those now in custody here, especially Master
George, Master Stevens, and Captain Huntly, must expect no favor or mercy.

Given under my hand at Oxford, this 16 of May, 1643. To the Commander in
Chief and the Council of War in the City of Bristol. FORTH.


Having received this Letter by a Drum, and knowing the the great advantage
they had by the meannesse and baseness of the Prisoners in the Kings hands,
put in the balance with those of the Kings in their hands, while Earls,
Barons, and the flower of the Nobility and Gentry were exposed to blew Aprons
and Broome-men, Fines knowing this advantage, returns this insolent Answer.

Nathaniel Fiennes Governor, and the Council of War in the City of Bristol.
HAving received a writing from your Lordship, wherein it is declared, That
upon information of our late proceedings against Robert Yeomans, William
Yeomans, and others, you intend speed'y to put Master George Master Stevens,
Captain Huntly, and others into the same condition. We are well assured, That
neither your Lordship, nor any mortal man, can put them into the same
condition; for whether they live or dye, they will always be accounted true
and honest men, faithful to their King and Country, and as in a fair and open
way have always prosecuted that Cause, which in their judgment, guided by the
judgment of the Highest Court, they held the Justest: Whereas, the
Conspirators of this City must both in life and death carry perpetually with
them the brand of Treachery and Conspiracy. And if Robert Yeomans had made use
of his Commission in an open way, be should be put into no worse condition then
others in the like kind bad been: But the Law of Nature amongst all men, and
the Law of Arms amongst all Soldiers, makes a difference between open
Enemies, and secrei Spies and Conspirators: And if you shall not make the like
distinction, we do sgnifie unto you, That we shall not only proceed to the
execution of the persons already condemned, but also of diverse others of the
Conspirators, unto whom we had some thoughts of extending mercy: And do
advertise you, That if by any inhumane, and unsouldier-like sentence you shall
proceed to the execution of the persons by you named, or any other of our
friends in your custody, that have been taken in fair and open way of war;
then Sir Walter Pie, Sir William Crofts, colonel Connesby, and diverse others
taken in open Rebellion, and actual War against the king and kingdom, whom
we have here in custody, must expect no favor or mercy. And by Gods blessing,
upon our just Cause, we have pawnes enough for our friends security, without
taking in any that have gotten out of our reach and power; although diverse of
yours, of no mean quality and condition, have been freely released by us.

Given under our hands this 18 day of May, 1643. Nath. Fiennes, President.
Clement Walker, etc.
To Patrick Earl of Forth, Lord Lieut. General.

When this took no effect, the King, gracious as he is, and full of goodness,
His bowels yearning over the destruction of His worst Subjects, takes the
condition of these that suffer for him into his pious consideration; and since
Fines swaying the rest remained obstinare; the King by a Trumpeter sends His
Letter to the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of Bristol, commanding them to
raise the power of the City, and employ it to the resecue of these men
designed for slaughter: Thus He writes. CHARLES R.

Trusty and Welbeloved We greet you well. Whereas We are informed, That by the
power and Authority of certain Factions and Rebellious Persons in that Our
City of Bristol, diverse of Our good Subjects (as namely, Robert Yeomans,
George Bowcher, William Yeomans, Edward Dacres, and others) of that Our Citte
are imprisoned for preserving their Duty and Loyalty to us, and for refusing
to join in, or assist this horrid and odious Rebellion against us, and that
the said wicked and traiterous Persons, have presumed to condemn the said
innocent men to dye, and upon such their sentence, notoriously against the
Laws of God and Man, they intend to execute and murder Our said Subjects; We
have thought fit to signify to you, the Major, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the
rest of the body of the Common Council of that Our City, That if you suffer
this borrid and execrable murder to be committed upon the persons aforesaid,
and thereby call the Judgment of God, and bring perpetual infamy upon that
Our City, We shall look upon it as the most barbarous and inhumane Act that
has been yet committed against us, and upon you as the most desperate
betrayers of us, and of the lives and liberties of your fellow Subjects. And We
do therefore will and command you, not to suffer any violence to be done upon
the persons aforesaid, but that if any such be attempted against them, that you
raise all the power and strength of that Our City for their rescue. And to
that purpose, We command all Our good Subjects of that Our City, to aid and
assist you upon their Allegiance, and as they hope for any Grace and favor at
Our hands; And that you and they Kill and Stay all such who shall attempt or
endeavor to take away the lives of Our said Subjects, And for so doing this
shall be your Warranty. And hereof you may not fail at your almost Peril.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the 29 of May, 1643. To Our Trusty and
Welbeloved the Major, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the rest of the common Council
of Our City of BRISTOL.


This Letter arrived at Bristol that very day that these Gentlemen by laying
down their lives did bear a good testimony to the truth, but came too late;
yet had it come sooner, Fines having intelligence that a Letter was coming
from the King, kept the Gates shut to keep out the Messenger, until their
intended Murders were fully finished: But at last, when he had admittance,
contrary to the Law of Arms and Nations, Fines committed him to prison, where
he remained long.

All these endeavors of a pious Prince to rescue His faithful Subjects, being
frustrated by the obstinate malice of these bloody Rebels, and having no force
to compel what he could not persuade, they go on to act their cruel
intentions. After Sentence of death passed on them, they pursue them with
threats, and use no language to them but death and hanging, often menacing what
they could but once inflict: So that each night they thought to dye next
morning: Having some days languished under the insulting Cruelty of these
bloody Butchers, and being frequently robbed of their necessary food by the
Centinells, (that stood at their Prisons, not so much that they might not
withdraw themselves from the intended death, as to intercept all comforts that
were brought unto them) had they not hastened the execution, famine would have
saved them that labor: for Master Yeomans (whom of the two they most hated)
laden with chains, stifled with the nastinesse of a Dungeon, macerated with
want of food, but filled with the scornful reproof of the proud, reproached
every day with the name of bloody villain, and the like, was like to have
prevented their malice by dying that morning that he dyed: he was a man of a
magnanimous spirit, a large Soul fit for great employments, and therefore more
sensible of indignities, for great spirits or pressed like Tapers held
downward, are extinguished by the same matter which gives them life; so that
sitting by his dear Wife that morning that he dyed, and leaning on her breast,
he fell into a sound, and in probability had then departed, had not the
shrickes and out-eryes of his Wife recalled him to a more glorious death, that
so posterity might read his ^name^, together with Master Bowchers, not in the
Catalog ^e^ of Confessors, but enrolled in the Noble Army of Mayers.

When the time of their Martyrdom drew near, Colonel Fines, for fear the
City should oppose his bloody intentions, concealed the time resolved on to
put them in execution: But when the fatal day was come, Fiennes drew his Force
into the Marsh, the common place where they made their Masters: he caused the
Gates suddenly to be shut, the City not knowing his intention, and presently
drew Partees of Horse and ^oot into every street, to awe the Citizens, and to
suppress insurrections, if happily they should recover so much of the ancient
courage of true Englishmen, not to suffer so great a breach to be made on their
lives and liberties, as to see their fellow Citizens led to the slaughter, and
they in the mean time stand dumb like sheep and not oppose it: nor was it
without good raeson that Fiennes should suspect some opposition from the City,
for (besides that, they now saw the basest of the City made of the Council of
War, and the power of life and death over the Magistrates delivered in their
hands, that before this Rebellion were never thought fit to bear the office of
a Scavenger) Master Temans and Master Bowcher, were men of Emi^ency in the
City, generally beloved, and then Crime known to be nothing but Loyalty,
That they could not likewise but consider, that an isisue of blood was that day
opened that might in time prove satall to them, and involve them in the same
condition, for it Fiennes and his bloodhounds shall for any other virtue pass
the like Sentence on any of them, as they did on these for their Loyalty, not
conspiring with them to murder their Sovereign, what power shall protect them
from such oppression, who having to their own ruin refused the Kings
protection, are grown so tame, as not with the hazard of their lives to protect
themselves?

Having thus made all secure, they bring the Prisoners from the Castle to the
maine Court of Guard, in the way as they went, the people greedy to see, and
salute these unhappy assertors of their liberty, press to the hazard of many
blows to take their farewell of them, they in a courteous deportment, returning
heartic thanks for those dangerous expressions of their affections, for it was
reason enough to be committed as a Malignant to own them, or so much as to pay
for them.

To prepare themselves for their death, they made it an humble request, that
they might have the assistance of Master Twog^od and Master Standsast, two
Orthodox and Learned and Pious Ministers of the City, to help to sweeten that
bitter Cup of which they were to drink, and by spiritual comfort to take off
from the sharpness of those dregs which they were to suck up: but as if they
meant to murder their Souls as well as their bodies, to vex their righreous
Souls instead of comforting them against the approach of death, they refuse to
condescend to so reasonable a request, and impose on them Cradock and Fowler,
two Eunssaries sent to that City, to poison it with Schisine and Rebellion,
that so they might fill up the measure of their sins and ripen them for
destruction.

Standing at the foot of the Tree, that by and by was to bear fruit unto
eternal iife, it was observed by some of these Murderers (well skilled it
seems in the art and Method of hanging) that the Halters were too long, or too
short, or else not ^yed fast enough, some fault there was which the deaths man
had directions to correct, he obeying the directions of the chief Hangman,
goes up and takes off the halter^; the people, who came thither spectators of
this bloody Tragedy, standing at distance, and not privy to the intention,
fondly conceited, that certainly Colonel Fiennes had sent a Reprive, and
instantly expressed the greatness of their joy by the loudness of their
Acclamations, Never considering Fines his Extraction, being borne and bred in a
family. Sworn Enemies to Monarchy and all that love it: At last, seeing the
Guards stand fixed, and that this stay was but to make surer work, the
Executioner fastening his instruments of death, according to the directions
given him by them, whose journey-man he was, The people, as if struck with
thunder, or blasted with lightnings stood amazed, until at last, astonishment
giving way to Compassion, they sent out tears instead of Acclamations, and
exchanged their joy for lamentations.

All things thus made ready to offer up these Innocents, sacrifices to the
implacable rage of Fines and his fellow Rebels, Master Rober^ Yeomans is first
commanded to ascend the Ladder, thence to reach his Crown of Martyrdom. But
remembering whose pictie it was, in the midst of his sufferings to recommend
his mother to the care of a Guardian (being hiselfe to leave this world) he
first makes his address to his Father-in-law Master Yeomans, and tells him,
that he had left him a Legacy, viz. his Wife then great with-child, and eigth
small children, the eldest not able to put on its own clothes: and so with
many imbracements left him, and set forward in his way to Heaven

And now being seated in that place of shame and Ignominy (so it is in its own
Nature where the goodness of the Cause does not change the accursed Tree into
a Theater of honor) and finding himself made a spectacle to that City
wherein he had lived in plentic and honor, being Sheriff but the year
before, in discharge of which office he was interior to none of his
Predecessors in bounty and magnificence, which Colonel Popham and his friends
by frequent experince know very well: And from that sad prospect, taking a view
of many friends that could hardly look through their own tears to see him
again: And from thence too, seeing some of a sarre different affection that
rejoyeed in his sufferings, and amongst them Robert Baugh the
Sheeps-skin-dresser ( Fines his associate in the Council of War) in a
devilish cruelty (And let God that righteous judge require it at his hands)
stand jeering and mocking at him to his face, here flesh and blood interposed,
which transported him to an expostulation bordering between Indignation and
Submission, saying, Good God, what have I done to be here? But instantly sorry
that humane fraileie should extort any thing from him, ^ubeseeming the justice
of his cause, or the bravenesse of Christian resolution, silencing suggestions
of such ill Councillors, he composed himself to speak something to the
people.

His strength exhausted by long and many sufferings, disabled him to speak
much or loud, yet willing to clear hiselfe from that prejudice under which he
lay, of an intention to Massacre all that should adhere to the Two Houses
(which some mis-call a Parliament) laying his hand upon his breast, and fixing
his eyes on Heaven, the habitation of the God of Truth, he made a solemn
Protestation of his innocence from any such thought: he professed his firm
persuasion of the justice of that cause for the defense of which he suffered,
affirming, that if he had more lives he would sacrifice them all to the service
of His Sovereign in the same way: and therefore we may justly wonder at the
frontlesse impudence of that Clement Walker, that should tell the world in
Print, That Master Yeomans did confess, that he was convicted in conscience of
the justness of the Parliaments Cause: But they that know the man, and that
poor stock, either of Religion or Honesty which he has, need not wonder,
that he that before this Parliament made it his frequent Theme to declaime
against Puritans, should now (judging them to be the prevailing Faction) to
indeare himself unto them: first embrew his hands in this Gentleman's blood;
and then report him falsely to posterity, as if he had recanted that Loyalty,
for which, and in which, he professed he dyed.

While he was thus speaking to the people, Sergeant Major Langridge and
Cliston, call upon the Executioner to hasten the work: Nay, they did not stick
to interrupt Master Yeomans in his discourse, and to goad him on the sides and
thighs with their Halberts, bidding him to contract and make an end: hereupon
he desired the witnesses of his suffering, to sing with him the 130 Psalm,
which he sung with great elevation of spirit and servency of devotion, knowing
that presently he should be translated from this Bochim the valley of tears,
where we do not so much as sing or sigh out our Hymns into that triumphant
Quire, where with Angels, and Archangells, and all the powers of Heaven, he
should sing Halclujahs and Anthems of Joy for evermore. Having finished the
Psalm and some other Prayers, and amongst the rest, instanly beseeching God,
not to charge his death upon that City, nor require his Innocent blood at
their hands: prayed for his Persecutors, and adjured his friends not to harbor
a thought of revenge, he began again to make some address to the people,
challenging the world there to testify against him, if he had wronged any man,
and beginning to apologize for his Innocence, even in the very cause of his
death, Langridge and Cliston, the chief Hangman under Fines their Master,
knowing how much his words might prevail with the people, and that one Martyr
falling quickly springs up into many Converts. caused him instantly to be
thrown off, hardly giving him so time as in some short ejaculations to
recommend his Soul to God: and now, there he is under the Altar, and ^oynes in
that shrill cry that calls loud in the cares of God, How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?
Rev. 6 10. Being thrown off, and his body swinging with the fall, his Brother
in-law Master John Haggat, an honest Gentleman, and of good quality in the
City, put out his hand to stay it, which (that inhumane villain) Cliston
seeing, struck him with his Cane, with that violence, that he had almost
stricken him to the ground: good God! which shall we most wonder at, either the
barbarous inhumanitie of this Murderer, or the degenerous Ignoble patience of
the Citizens of Bristol, that could stand by and see all this, and not choose
either to live freely, or dye courageously together?

Having had sufficient experience of the Tamenesse of the citizens, and that
there was no danger of opposition to be feared from them, the Rebels wade on in
blood. And having murdered Master Yeomans, they command Master Bowcher so
ascend the Ladder: It seems by what he left written by his own hand, and
written to that purpose to communicate it to the world, that he intended to be
large, Exhorting those (to use his own words) who had set their hands to the
Plow (meaning the maintenance of the Kings cause) not to be too hasty ( as
terisied with their sufferings) to take them off: nor to regard those beggarly
and Schismatic rudiments which crafty and malicious men had inverted and
introduced into the Church of God in these last and worst times of the world,
denying the Truth, and bringing in damnable positions of their own devising,
etc. And likewise, giving an exact Character of the Schismatics that domineere
at this time in the draught, borrowing the pencil of the Holy Ghost, I mean
describing them in the Phrase of the Scriptures, a man very well able to do
it, bing versed in the Scriptures, a frequent hearer of Sermons, and by the
testimony of his very enemies, confessed, to be a Religious man; Proud (says
he) They are Boasters, Heady, Unstable, who censure as unjust the actions of
others, before they receive resolution from God, or rightly understand his will
touching their own, having hearts fraught with malice, incessantly laboring
to bring to pass their d^vilish designs by pestilent Plots, daw^ing and
painting them over with false glosses against the light of their ow^e
conscience, and against that knowledge which they have in the Laws, both of
God and Man; justifying the wicked, and condemning the innocent, etc. This was
too much truth to be spoken to them whom it did so much concern, and therefore
was not permitted to speak so largely to the Assembly: at last, presled on to
hasten his death, by those that are swift to shed blood, he desired to sing
Psalm. 16. which being ended, he began to recommend his Soul to God in most
pious patheticall Prayers and ejaculations; but they are not content that he
should speak either to the People or to his God; For Rosewell, a Levi^e of
their own, and a cract-braind Separatist, interrupts him in the midst of his
Devotions, reviles him, and calls him Hypocrite and Apostate, That after so
strict a conversation, so much time spent in the profession of Religion, he
should render all suspected for hypocrisy, by so obstinate perseverance in his
Rebellion against the Parliament, he meant for dying for his Loyalty to his
Sovereign: all this moved not the constancy of this resolved Martyr, but
according to the advice of Saint Bernard, he held up s^utum consciexti^ con^^a
Gladium Lingue, the buckler of a good conscience to ward the blows of a
malicious Tongue, Sermon. 4^. De mode been vivendi. Knowing that as the
flattering Tongue is no c^re for a bad, so the railing Tongue is no wound to
the good conseience, possessing his Soul therefore in patience, he lets this
snarling Dog bark on, resolving with holy Job, Ecce in c^lo Test is me^^,
Behold my witnesse^ is in Heaven, and my Record is on high: Job 16.19. And so
sustaining his Soul under the burden of that reproach, with that comfortable
promise of our Savior, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, Rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven: Mat. 5. 11, 12. He
yielded himself to the will and desire of his Murderers, This Rosewel, in his
very fall from the Lader, persuing him with the odious names of Hypocrite and
Apostate, thereby (if it had-beene possible) to disturb the peace of his
Soul, and endanger his Charity in that very instant when he was going out or
the World, and ready to be presented at the dreadful ^ribunall of that most
Righteous Judge, who puts no (...) in his Saints, yea the Heavens are not
c^eare in his sight, Job 15. 15. a practice so void of Christanitie, nay so
perfectly devilish to extend malice even to the endeavors of a second death,
That had a black Angel been dispatched from Hell, (an agent for that kingdom
of darkness) he could not have done more to advance damnation, or approve
himself a malicious emis^ary of that bottomless pit, then this Schisnatique
did.

These two now glorious Martyrs, having thus through their ignominious death's
rendered their Souls to God, the spectators smite their breasts and return:
Never was there so general a face of sorrow, such bitter lamentation heard in
that City, as on this day: Their bodies taken down, were both carried to
Master Ye^mans his house, Father in-law to Master Yeomans: In the evening
Master Bowchers body was conveyed to his own house, a sad spectacle to his
poor Widow and seven Orphans, and that night they were both interred, Master
Yeomans at Christ Church, and Master Bowcher at Saint Warburgh's; their
Funerals being attended by those Orthodox Ministers that the persecution had
left, and by most of the honest well-affected Citizens; though they knew that
they could not express this piety to the dead, but to the hazard of losing
their liberties, and plundering their estates.

Thus have you seen the Martyrdom of these Loyal Citizens, suffering for
their Religion, by Sectaries and Atheists; for their Loyalty, by Traitors and
Rebels; and for their Laws and Liberties, by Libertines and sons of Belial;
a Fact so horrid, and in which so many Acts of Cruelty and Injustice did meet
and concentre, that as no History (not that of the Anabaptists of Germany) can
give us a Parallel of this Rebellion, so this Rebellion cannot give us a
Parallel of this Murder, except that of Master Tompkins and Master Chaloner at
London, in the same manner.

FINIS.
Mercurius Rusticus: OR, The Countries Complaint, OF The Sacriledges,
Prophanations, and Plundrings, Committed by the Schismatiques, on the
Cathedral Churches of this KINGDOM.

MATTHEW. 21.13. My house shall be called the house of Prayer, but ye have made
it a den of Thieves.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1646.

The Prefece.
THe Author of the French History, relating that horrid Rebellion of the holy
League in Franch, the Prototype of the present Rebillion in England, gives this
definition or Character of one of those Zealots: The Essential form (said he)
of a Zealous Catholic in the Holy League, was to Rob and Profane Churches, to
Ravish Wives, and Virgins, to murder Men against the Altars, to spoil the
Clergy, not to be the Kings Servants, which that age held for a Crime, but to
vomit out against him, all the indignities, and all the wickednesses which
Irreligion, and Injustice could invent in mad Soldiers: do but change Zealous
Catholic into Zealous Puritan, and no Pencill ever limbed a Rebel of this
present Rebellion so exactly to the life as this: And though they have outdone
all examples, president, of Wickedness, Cruelt^e, Disloyalt^e, Sacrilege, and
Profanation, as if in them the devil meant to show his Mster-piece, raging in
them horribly, because he knows that he has but a short time, yet to their
dishonouring of God, their vilifying his holy worship, profaning his Temples,
blaspheming the footsteps of his Anointed, affronting and contemning his
Priests, and Minister, to their rending, tearing, and trampling underfoot all
Ha^owed Ornaments and Utensills, provided for the reverend and decent worship
of God; I know nothing that they have left undone, which remains yet to be
added to their accursed impietes: So that what the old Eustathians, Messalias,
Pratricelli, and the rest of those wild Heretics, (who placed their Religion
in Contempt of Consecrated Churches, Temples, and Oratories, places
consecrated, and set apart for the public worship of God) durst not do. These
Schismatic Rebels, (having wilfully smothered, not only their Consciences,
but the dictate of common reason) putting no diference between Holy and
Profane, have acted with greednes^ whatsoever things they are, whereon the
Name of God is called, whether Persons, times or places, in the judgment of
venerable Antiquity; whether Councels, Fathers or Historians, those things were
ever held Sacred and Inviolable, always habenda cum Discrimine, and that extra
U^um Sacrum, to be regarded with areverentiall, and discriminative ufance, that
is, with a select and different respect from other thing of the same kind, but
not employed to holy uses: Nay, the honoring Gods house, was ever held an
Ingredient of that Petition of the Lords Prayer, Sanctisicetur Nomen tuum,
Hallowed be thy Name: What opinion the Ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin,
had of such places, may be collected from those Magnificent, and honorable
Names, whereby they commended them to the due esteem of several Ages in which
they lived: Some in regard of their use and employment called them the Lords
house, some the Patrimony of Christ, some the Dowry of the Spouse of Christ,
some a Consecreated Possession of God, and a holy Soil: Others, in respect of
their Magnificance of Structure, and Costlinesse of Oranments, called them
Royal or Kingly Houses: Nay, would we but sharpen our Gords at a Philistines
Forge, or weave the woollen Yearne of the Gentiles, with the linen web of the
Christians, I mean, call is the Testimony and practice of the Heathen, in what
veneration, and esteem they had their Idol Temples (which was in them the
dictate of Nature, mistaken only in the object) and they would stand up as so
many witnesses, and cetainly in the day of Judgment, shall condemn this
Profane Generation, who under an Hypocritical pretense of worshipping God in
Spirit, in a true Anabaptisticall fury, have laid waste the Sanctuaries of God,
polluted his Temples, and broken down all their carved work with Axes and
Hammers: And though these Rebellions Schismatics have in all place (which have
been plagued with their presence) roared in the midst of our Cogregations, set
up their Banners for tokens, and left some infamous memorial of their frenzy,
and hatred of the beauty and magnificence of Gods house; and therefore in every
place made it their first business (as in introduction to the rest) to rob and
deface Churches, and violate the Sepulchers and Monuments of the dead, so they
have expressed their greatest hatred against the Mother Churches, and Cathedrals
of this Kingdom, because in them, the Primitive Order and decency, prescribed
in the Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer, and ratified by act of Parliament,
have been best preserved from those Omissions, Neglects, and Contempts, which
had almost banished them out of private Parochial Congregations, and rendered
them obnoxious to sinister interpretations, and suspected of no less then
Popery, Superstition, and Innovation, in those places wherein they were
retained, and practiced: when therefore our Posterity shall see this
Abomination of desolation, which these Rebels have brought into these Temples
of God, and by Tradition hear of those costly utencills, and Ornaments, which
most Sacrilegiously they have carried out, and shall with wonder, and
astonishment inquire, what Lunacy? what Frenzy? what accursed madness
possessed the hearts of the men of this present age, to lay wast the places
where Gods honor dwells? where God vouchsafes to meet with his People, and the
People, with united devotion, to propitiate their God, and impiously (as much
as in them is) to turn these Beauties of Holiness into desolate places, for Zum
and Ochim, (as the prophet speaks) and the Satyrs to dance in, Esaias 13.12. Let
them know, that the Puritans, Brownists, and Anabaptists Rebels, marching under
the banners of a Faction in two pretended Houses of Parliament (which yet some
have the impundence to call the Great and Highest Court, the Supreme
Judicature, and the most zealous Protections and Assertors of the Established
Protestant Religion) have brought this desolation upon us. And because this
Tempest raged first in the East, and so spread it self into all parts of the
Kingdom, West, North, and South, I shall in the relation keep the same Method
(if so great confusion can be ranged into a Method) whereby we shall give (as
is due) Precedence to the famous Metropolitan Church of Canterbury, which as it
is (in respect of her lesser Sisters) first in Order and, Dignity, so was it
then, and now shll be, the first instance of the Rebels Sacrilege.

Mercurius Rusticus, amp;c. I.
The Cathedral Church of Canterbury horribly abused and desaced by the
Rebels, under the conduct of Col. Sandys and Sir Michael Livesey: Together
with the-miserable end of the said Colonel at Worcester, etc.

THe City of Canterbury, the ancient seat of the Kings of Rent, while the
Saxon Heptarchy flourished in this Island, was by King Ethelbert given,
together with the Royalty thereof to Augustine, the first consecrated
Archbishop of the English Nation, who there fixed his seat for himself and his
successors: for whose sake Gregory the great, then Bishop of Rome, translated
the Metropolitan dignity, together with the honor of the Pall, from London to
Canterbury: This City (as the rest) had its share in that spoil and
devastation, which War and the Sword in the Innovations of Foreign nations and
domestic broyls brought upon it: the greatest impressions of desolation made
on it, were in the Danish Wars, but the Normans succeding, through the piety
of godly religious men, residing there, and the bounty and liberality of the
Bishops, it did suddenly start up, not only into its primitive beuty and
luster, but outstripped all other places, as in the number and sumptuosnesse of
private houses, so especially in the magnificence and splendour of religious
houses: amongst which, two were most famous, far exceeding all the rest, viz.
ChristChurch, Et hujus pertinacissimus amulus (as Learned cambden speaks) the
eager rival of Christ-Church, Saint Augustines. This Church, by the injury of
Sacrilege and time, (two greedy devourers) lies almost buried in its own
Ruins, presenting nothing else to the eye of the beholders but a sad
spectacle, how spacious and ample a structure it once was, when now, a piece of
it has the honor to be styled (though seldom employed as) the Kings House.
But Christ-Church, placed as it were in the Navel of the City, rayseth it self
to so great a Majesty and Stateliness, that Krasmus, a man not too much taken
with magnificence in this kind, I am sure not doting on it, says, that this
does present it self with so Majestic State, VI procul etians intuentibus
religionem incutiat, that it occasions that devotion which should be used
there, and strikes a sensible impression of Religion, in their hearts that
behold it, though a far off, and at a distance. This Church built in old time
(as Beda says) by the faithful and believing Romans, and by King Ethelbert
given to Augustine, in process of time needed the like piety to susport it,
as at first built it, and works of that nature in those days did not long lie
neglected for want of Benefactors: Lanfranke therefore, the thirty third
Archbishop of this Sea, (whether more famous for repairing of decayed
Churches, as this of Canterbury, Rochester, and S. Albans, or his indefatigable
pains, in correcting the corrupt translations of the Holy Bible, scattered
every where through the Kingdom in his days, is uncertain.) William Corbet, or
(as others will have it) Gorbois, the thirty sixth Archbishop of the same
Sea, reedified the Quire, and the upper part of this Church, and the piety of
succeeding Bishops built and joined the Nave or body to the Quire, and brought
it to this magnificence and splendour in which we now see it. But what out
forefathers thought Religion to build up, we, their degenerous posterity, think
Piety to pull down, so that while some leading Atheists (enemies to God and
his Religion, and reprobate to every good work) are busy to Vote and cry down
Episcopacy, with the Sacred Hierarchy, Root and Branch:their Emissaries
encouraged and set on by them, first deface these Churches, and in the next
place, will utterly ruin them' that so, the places where God is worshipped,
being demolished, the revenue that maintains the worship, may become a prey to
these Sacrilegious Cormorants: But my God shall make them like a wheel. Now,
how the Rebels behaved themselves in their first attempt, in this kind, on the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, under the conduct of Colonel Sandys, I cannot
better express then in the passionate elegancy of Reverend Doctor Pas^e, one
of the Prebends, and at the time Sub-deane of that Church, to the Earl of
Holland, the most ungrateful, and most unthankful of men.

My ever honored Lord,
Did it not conduce unto the Public, I should not preume to interrupt your
Lordships weighty affairs; but the long experience of your Lordships (...)
for Religion, and vigilance for your universitie of Cambridge, has assured me
of your Lordships Patronage of our whole Church in general, and (as the case
new stands) of this Mother Church in particular: (...) spected P^, but have
found much trouble from the Troopers sent among (...); with what barbarousnesse
they have (...) themselves at Rochester, and in other parts of this County, I
leave to the Relation of others, and beg your Lordships patience, only to be
informed what has happened here with us: and wherein I am more nearly
concerned, by mine Office in the absence of the Deane.

Colonel Sandys arriving here with his Troopers, on Friday night, presently
casued a (...) Watch and Sentinells to be set, both upon the Church, and upon
our several honses, to the great affright of all the Inhabitants (...) this
done, Sergeant Major Cockaine came to me, and in the name of the Parliament,
demanded to see the Arms of the Church, and the store Powder of the county,
which I presently showed him; when her possessed himself of the Keys, and
kept them in his own custody: the next morning we were excluded the Church,
and might not be permitted to enter, for the performance of our Divine
Exercises, but about eight of the clock, Sir Michael Livesey,attended with many
Soldiers, came unto our Officers, and commanded them, to deliver up the keys
of the Church to one of their Company, which they did, and thereupon be
departed, when the Soldiers entering the Church and Quire, Giant-like, began a
fight with God himself, overthrew the CommunionTable, toare the Velvet-Cloth
from before it, defaced the goodly Screene, or Tabernack-worke, violated the
Monuments of the dead, spoiled the Organs, brake down the ancient Rayles and
Seats, with the brazen Eagle which did support the Bible, forced open the
Cupboards of the Singing-men, rent some of their Surplices, Gommes, and Bibles,
and carried away others, mangled all our ServiceBooks, and Books of
Common Prayer; bestrowing tbe whole Pavement with the leaves thereof: a
misereble spectacle to all good eyes: but as if all this had b^ene too little,
to satisfy the sury of some indiscreet Zealots among them (for many did
abhor what was done already) they further exercised their malice upon the
Arras hanging in the Quire, representing the whole Story of our Savior,
wherein observing diverse figures of Cbrist, (I tremble to express their
blasphemies) One said, That here is Christ, and swore that he would stab him:
Another said, here is Christ, and swore that he would rip up his bowels: which
they did accordingly, so far as the figures were capable thereof, besides
many other villainies: And not content therewith, finding another statue of
christ in the Frontis^iece of the South-Gate, they discharged against it forty
shot at the least, trium^hing much, when they did hit it in the head or face,
as if they were resolved to crucisie him again in his Figure, whom they could
not hurt in truth: nor had their fury beeme thus stopped, threatening the ruins
of the whole Fabric, had not the Colonel, with some others, come to the
reliese and rescue: the Tumults appeased, they presently d^parted for Dover,
from whence we expect them this day;and are much afraid, that as they have
already vilisied our persons, and offered extreme indignity to one of our
Brethren, so they will Plunder our houses at their return, unless the care of
the Major, the Colonel, and some Members of the House of Commons (Sir Edward
Masters, and captain Nut, now with us, who have promised to present their
knowledge to that Honorable House) do prevent the same.

Your Lordship will be pleased to pardon my hasty expressions, which proceed
from a grieved heart, and I am confident the honorable Houses of Parliament,
being rightly informed herein, will proceed against the like abuses, and
impieties in other places, in the mean time we submit with patience to the
providence of him, who can, and will bring good out of evil, which is the
earnest prayer of

Christ-Church, Cant, Aug.30.1648. Your Lorships most obliged Servant Thomas
Paske.


What effect this just complaint wrought, how it prevailed, either with that
Lord to whom it was addressed, or with the pretended Houses of Parliament,
whose authority and assistance was implored to prevent further our-rage, either
here or elsewhere, we have too clear testimony, not only in the like
sacrileges and prophanations, every day acted, without any the least check, or
restraint from the heads of this Rebellion, but more especially from their
Votes and Ordinances, for the abolishing all remainders of Popery and
Supe^stition, as they call it: in all which, Intelligi malunt quain Audiri,they
would have their creatures understand, more then they speak, being certain
politic Litotes,in which, Minus dicisur, plus inselligitur, signifying more
then the Grammatical construction will permit, and carry in them a hidden
secret sense and meaning, which their own Emissaries know how to interpret and
enlarge, according to the full intention of the Authors. But before we pass
from the relation of this horr'd Sacrilege, committed on the Church of
canterbury, I could not free my self from being guilty of that great sin of
obscuring the great manifestation of Gods Justice, it I should in silence pass
over that most exemplary vengeance, which persued to death that unfortunate
Gentleman Colonel Sandys, the ringleader to that Rebellious rout, which were
Actors in that more then Barbarous outrage.

Whether the cunning persuasions of others or his own ambition first embarked
him in this fatal undertaking is uncertain, but as himself confessed on his
death bed, to a friend and kinsman of his, who asked him, what he meant, being
a Gentleman of so fair an estate, to engage himself in this Treason: He
answered, That he was so far drawn in before he was awar^, that he knew not
how to come ^ff without the danger of his head: So usual it is, for one sin
to engage the finner for a second: having therefore once lifted up his hand
against his Sovereign, the Lords Anointed, he thought the way to be secure
from the pun shment of Rebellion,was to persevere in his Crime, and go on in
Rebellion: In pursuance therefore of so black designs, being Colonel of a
Regiment of Horse, in Sept. 1642. with the rest of the Rebels Army under the
Conduct of the Earl of Effex he advanced toward Worcester, and making some
excursions with ten Troops of Horse from the body of their Army, at
wickefield near Worcester, accidentally were met by Prince Rupert, accompanied
by Prince Maurice and some others, Lords and Gentlemen of his Majesty's
Cavallry:being thus by chance met, the Prince glad of any opportunity, to
express the brayenes of his resolution, charged the Rebels with incomparable
valor: In this short but fierce Conflict, Colonel Sandys was wounded, and
being dismounted his Horse, became prisoner to the Kings Partee. Being thus
wounded, and as then was conceived, mortally, he began to reflect upon
himself, and finding so little warrant in his now unblass'd conscience for his
undertaking, which had brought him into this condition, his perplexed soul
brake out into many sad expressions of remorse: crying out, Woe, Woe, to evil
Counsel, and happy are they that do not take it. And being put in mind by a
Reverend Doctor in Divinity, and Chaplain to Prince Rupert, of the
haynousnesse of the sin of Rebellion, he acknowledged himself to have fallen
into that sin, and that God was just in his judgments for finding him out in
his iniquity, prosessing withal his hearty sorrow and repentance for it:
whereupon the Doctor replied, that if he recovered, perhaps the same
persuasions from others, or inconside^atencsse in himself, might again engage
him in this Rebellion, at which words, a little lifting up his hand, he
prosessed, He would rather have it cut off, then ever again life it up against
the King: he freely acknowledged the justice of the Kings cause, and that he
had observed the blessings of God to accomany it and when the Doctor desired
leave to restihe his repentance to the world, he freely gave him leave, asking
God and the King forgiveness, praying for a blessing upon him, and his
proceedings. In this mind he continued while Prince Rupert and the Kings Forces
with him stayed in Warcester: and whether after the Earls possessing himself
of Worcester, by the impetuous solicitations of those Murderers of Souls,
those Factors for hell, their Schismatical Lecturers, (who make men twosold
more the children of the devil then themselves) he fell off, and turned
Apostate from his newly resolved Loyalty, as repenting of his repentance, in
uncertain; Those that were about him and saw his weakness, ever declining from
the first hour he received his wounds, must testify to the World that he had
neither strength of hand to write, nor so much composedness of spirit, to be
the Author of that Spurious, Supposititious Vindication, Published in his name
Oct. 11. 1642. he being (whatsoever that sorgery pretends) as unable to
vindicate himself with his pen, as his sword: but if they had his heart as well
as hand, subscribing to that Atheistical resolution, where they thus bring him
in foaming out his own them, The App^chension of death never hitherto so
nearly touched me, but if God shall once restore me to my former strength, I
shall by his help, with as much alacrity and I hope courage, endeavor to
defend, and maintain with my dearest blood, this so good a cause (meaning this
present Rebellion) as ever I was at first engaged in it, If I say they had his
heart as well as his hand to that Resolution, I am afraid it was too evident a
Symptom of a wicked man, given up to a Reprobate sense, which of all
spiritual judgments questionless is the greatest; and might justly call for
those Torments of body, which afterward, as a Gangreen devoured and eat up his
flesh, and those pangs of Conscieace, which I am afraid were but the earnest of
a worse condition to ensue: for as the Psalmist says, As for such as turn
back unto their own wickedness, the Lord shall lead them forth with the
workers of iniquity, Psalm.125.5. but I remember that of Saint Paul, Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, I Cor. 4.5. And therefore while
on Supposition I write my fears, positively I determine nothing, not knowing
whether God might not give him the grace of repentance at the last, which if he
did, he only (I d^re say) that gave the Grace, knew of it: concerning his
eternal condition therefore, I shall leave him to the judgment of that
Righteous God, that judges Righteous judgment, and gives to every man
according to his works: and only inform the World in what condition the
Colonel lay, until the time of his dissolution, and putting off his earthly,
bat loathsome Tabernacle.

As the Colonel was amongst the Rebels a very considerable man, both for his
extraction and quality, and likewise for his Estate (to say nothing of his
valor and resolution, had they been Loyally employed) so it was among their
chiefest cares to recover him of those wounds which he received in their
unchristian quarreil: while therefore the Rebels army lay in Worcester (which
was about three weeks) though then upon more strict searching his wounds, in
the opinion of the best Chirurgions they were not mortal, yet, whatsoever the
Art and invention, either of the Physician or Surgeon, could contribute to
his recovery, was not omitted: when the Rebels army drew out to meet the King,
in their march from Shrewsbury, which they did to their cost at Edgehill, the
Colonel was committed to the care of his own Surgeon, then in pay under him,
John Anthony of London: to whom, as a witness and an assistant in the cure,
was joined a Surgeon of the City of Worcester, Edward Marshall: who, though
they both used all the art and industry that possibly they could to effect the
cure, yet the difficulties every day multiplied against the means, and in
de^pight of their Balsomes, his wounds did putrisie and the flesh rot, to the
wonder of the Artists, and the Scorn of their Art: In so much that the
Chirurgions, after much variety of means used, and much struggling with these
growing-evils (the cure still going backward, as if their skill had bin employed
to widen those wounds which they pretended to close up) were heard by many of
the City of Worcester, to confess, what Hippocrates syes, every Physician
should first look after in every cure, that there was S^ ri, the hand of God in
it, that it was a peculiar judgment upon him, and that the cause of this
putrefaction was more then natural: nor were they without good grounds for this
conjecture, for besides the conclusions of their own Art, directly thwarted,
experience on the several parts of the body of their patient, was a clear
demonstiation: those wounds in the upper parts of his body near the vitalls,
and therefore more dangerous, were cured long before his death, but those in
his thigh, which were flesh-wounds, asthey call them, These were the Opprobria
Chirargorum, here the flesh did daily rot and putrise, and was cut away by
degrees, even to the leaving of the bones naked, and stunk in so to loathsome a
manner, that as he was a burden to himself, so to his friends too, and those
that were about him, being hardly able, for the noisomeness of the smell,
either to come near him to do the officers of necessary attendance, or so
much as to endure the room where he lay, so intolerable was the stench, and so
offensive.

Nor were the wounds of his body more insufferable to his friends, then the
wounds of his conscience to himself, the gu lt of Rebellion wrought in him
strong convulsions of Soul, high distempers of mind, yet that he might not
sink under the burden of his wounded spirit, a weight that requires more then
man to support it, he sent for Master Cotterell, an Orthodox godly Minister,
and Parson of Saint Andrews in Worcester, to Administer a word of comfort unto
him in this his afflicted condition.

When Master Cotterell came unto him, he found Obadiah Sedgwick, that
scandalous seditious Minister of Effex, in private conference with the Colonel,
and Bread and Wine, ready prepared for the Lords Supper: Sedgwick having ended
his discourse, went to Prayers, whereup in Master Cotterell offering to
withdraw, he was entreated by one of the Colonels servants to stay, which
accordingly he did: Sedgwick having concluded his extemporary prayer, took his
leave and departed, refusing to stay either to administer the Sacrament to the
Colonel, or to communicate with him: of which refusal, when Master Cotterell
afterward desire to know the reason, all satisfaction that was given him, was,
That Sedgwick was not fully assured of the fitness and due preparation of
those that were to receive the Sacrament with him. Desperate
Hypocrisielwhatsoever he was persuaded of the preparation of the other
Communicants, it is most certain, he could not be ignorant of the unfitness of
the Colonel himself, whom he himself in all probability persuaded to return
with the dog to his vomit, and to justify himself in that sin of which
but very lately he seemed to repent: it is more probable, that, that poor
remainder of Conscience in Sedgwick, not quite yet put away, though it suffered
him to betray, in private, a dying man to impenitency, under falned pretenses
of what he in his own soul must need confess to be a crying sin, and inrowled
by Saint Paul himself amongst those works of the flesh, which do exclude from
the kingdom of Heaven: yet his heart might smite him, and his conscience
withstand him, as it were to the face, that he durst not seal that destructive
counsel by delivery of the Sacrament: Sedgwick being gone, the Colonel
willingly entertained conference with Master Cotterell, to whom he made a
general confession of his sins, and the grievousnesse of them, professing his
hearty repentance and sorrow for them, But as the two pretended Houses of
Parliament, in their Catalogue of sins, reckoned up in their Homily (if
without offense I may so call it) and offered to this Nation as the subject
matter of their solemre humiliation, quite forgot Lying and Rebellion, for some
reasons best known to themselves: so this Champion of theirs, in his general
Confession, made no mention of the sin of Rebellion, which most nearly
concerned him, and for which in all probability he was verysuddenly to render
an account to God: a Confession most necessary both for him to make, and the
Minister to require, before he could be thought a fit receiver of those
dreadful mysteries: but after this general Confession, having received the
Sacrament, Master Cotterell commended him to the grace of God, for that time
left him; and having by one or two visits, after that, as he thought gained
some interest in the Colonel, coming again to him, and finding him in a calm
temper, and judging it a fit opportunity to inquire into his Conscience, and
found him what persuasion he now had of his taking up Arms against his
Sovereign, he desired the Colonel to command his servants out of the room,
that he might speak with him in private, which being done, and all witnesses
removed, but God, and their own Consciences, Master Cotterell; prefacing his
discourse, with a solemn Protestation, that in what he did, he proposed no
other end, but the salvation of his soul, demanded of him, whether he were not
sorry for drawing his sword against the King: And whether he were not persuaded
in his Conscience of the unlawfulness of it? To which the Colonel replied,
That he was persoeaded, that it was lawful, having taken up Arms not against
the King, but for the King, for his good, to being him back to his Parliament,
to make him more glorious then any of his Predecessors, and to redeem him from
his evil Counsel rs, and those Popish Malignants that were about him. To
which old thredbare pretenses (invented to palliate Treason, and blanch their
most gross Rebellion) when Master Cotterell opposed the Laws of God, the
Laws of the Kingdom, and seconded both, by the Kings most clear and
satisfactory Declaration, able to undeceive the abused world, and dispell that
mist of error and prejudice, which the heads of this Rebellion had cast before
the eyes of the people of this deluded Nation: the Colonel not able to return
any reasonable answer, or pre-instructed by edgwick, who foresaw what encounter
he was like to meet withal, suddenly called aloud to his servants to come in,
whose presence set an end to the Conference: after this, ^ after Cotterell,
(some say by Doctor Bruc^ his Physicians advice, though I do not absolutely
affirm it) was wholly neglected, and Master Halsetor was sent for, Parson
indeed of Saint Nicholas in Worcester, but more acceptable to those that gave
this counsel, under another capacity, as he was the City Lecturer.

But before we acquaint you with what success Halsetor undertook, and
discharged this employment, it will not be amiss to let the world know, what
reward this dying Colonel intended to bestow on Master Cotterell for all his
pains taken with him, when the Colonels Wife came to Worcester to visit her
husband, and being informed by her servants how frequently Master Cotterell had
visited her husband, what pains he had taken in administering the Sacrament,
and his great care in praying and conserring with him: the very nobly pressed
her husband to gratify Master Cotterell by some honorary gift, as an
acknowledgment of his thankfulness, that he might reap some of his
Temporalls, to whom he had so plentifully sowed spiritual things: to so
reasonable a motion, made by the wife of his bosom, the Colonel most
unworthily, and most uncharitably replied, Sweetheart be content, we shall
find him a Delinquent: but he that shall reward a cup of cold water, shall not
forget so great a work of Charitieche that endeavors to turn a sinner to
righteonsnesse (though the success answer neither his labor, not expectation)
yet he shall shine at the Stars for ever and ever, nor shall his work be in
vain in the Lord.

Master Coterell being thus most unthankfully rejected, the Colonel is now
committed wholly to the care of his new ghostly Father Master Halsetor, a man
of a Schismatic Turbulent spirit, fitter to make a Rebel then reclame a
relapsed Traitor, and since has followed that counsel which he gave by
deserting his Cure and joining himself to the Rebel^: the men of this Faction
have an Art to torment perplexed consciences instead of cosorting them,
dispensing not so much the pro^is^s of the G^spel, as the terrors of the Law,
as if the way to spiritual Consolation were through despair, and no way led
to Heaven so sure, as what coated by the confines of Hell: whether Master
Helsetor dealt thus with the Colonel, I cannot say, perhaps he might go about
as some others of his Faction have done, to sow pillows under their seduced
champions arme-holes, and to justify the sinner in the sin, comparing
circumstances, questionless this was his way, but the lad effects of his
Rebellion which the Colonel felt in his body, and those flashes of horror
affrighting his guilty soul, would not permit this dying man to be lulled
asleep in so vain presumption: though at first therefore when Master
Cotterell was with him, to assist him in that great work, to prepare him to
stand before the judgment Seat of Christ, and the preparitories were
Consessions and Sorrow for sins, (though but in the general) deprecations of
judgment, and the wrath of God, and the like, some spiritual comfort, began
to dawne in his be-nighted soul, and that he might seal that obscure
glimmering of hope opened unto him in this valley of Achor, and obtain more,
he desired to Communicate in the body and blood of Christ, yet after Master
Halsetor came unto him, ( Woe, woe to evil Counsel, to use his own
exclamation) it was observed that the Colonel tell into strong distempers or
mind, which suddenly grew to so great a height, that he was utterly distracted,
even to raving and madness: which amongst them that think the Gospel
ineffectuall, unless the spiritual man be mad, is taken for the undoubted
evidence of a Powerful Ministry: certainly it was a sad spectacle, to see him
lie in this condition, and a horrid thing to hear, that his last breath, which
should have been breathed out in prayers and deprecations, and humble
Confessions of sin, should be spent in venting the wild fancies of his
distracted brain: sometimes crying out, that his Surgeon and servants had
broken up his Trunks, and robbed him of his gold: and by and by starting up, and
crying out, that the Enemy was at the wall's of the City, and calling for the
keys to lock up the gates: Thus he lay diverse weeks, and in these
distractions dyed; dreadful things are these, but it is written, The Lord shall
smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart. His Wife
and Son coming to visit him in this wretched condition (poisoned with the
stench of his body) both fell sick of the small Pox, of which she dyed, and
both of them lie buried in the South I Will of the body of the Cathedral, in that
Cathedral of worcester, where his Grandfather Doctor Edwyne Sandys, afterward
Archbishop of York, made his first step to the Archi-Episcopall honor, being
first Consecrated Bishop of that D^^cesse, and therelayd the foundation of
those fortunes, which descending to this man, made him forget his own
extraction, and certainly it was no final aggravation of his sin, that being
descended from an Archbishop, and that estate which made him considerable in
the world, being raised out of the Revenues of the Church, and a Cathedral
Church (a blessing which but few Churchmen have attained unto, though advanced
to the same, or the like dignity to raise a family) he should yet so far
degenerate, so far forget himself, and the Rock from whence he was hewn, to
be a Ringleader to so Barbarous a Rout, which beginning at Canterbury, went on
to ruin and deface all Cathedral Churches where they came, ending with that
of worecester, where he had the undeserved Privilege to be interred.

Thus as briefly as I could, I have given an account of the unhappy end of this
miserable Gentleman. In which; I call God to witness, there is nothing sained,
nothing suborned, there being no hing here recorded, but what is attested by
men beyond all exception. And I must appleale again to the same God, that this
accont is not given to that end to make his name or memory odious, either with
the men of this present age, or with posterity (I must confess I would
disgrace the sin) but my intent is, by this example, to teach those that are
seduced as this man was, to know, and foresee in him, what end attends those,
who forgetting all Religion and Loyalty, shall lift up their hands against
their God in Sacrilege, and against their Sovereign in Rebellion.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. II.
The Cathedral Church of Rochester violated: the Sacrilege and profaneness
of the Rebels under command of Sir William Waller and Sir Arthur Hasterig,
acted on the Cathedral Church of Chichester, etc.

As when the Spirit brought the Prophet Ezekiel into the Holy Temple, he led
him from place to place, and each place, entertained him with greater
Abominations than the former, so that the farewell to the last Vision, and the
invitation to the next is, Turn thee yet again and thou shall see greater
Abominations than these: So, having brought you in the cathedralls of this
Kingdom, Temples (in despite of Atheists, Rebels and Anabaptists) of God too:
and having showed you the Abomination of Desolation in one of them, viz. in
Canterbury, the first instance of their accursed rage, and having viewed that,
I must now lead you on as the Spirit did the Prophet; from place to place, and
the inticement may be the same, for though you have seen great prophanations
in the former relation, Yet you shall see greater abominations than these.

The next instance of the Rebels profaneness, which I shall offer unto you,
is in the Cathedral of Rochester, recompensed for the finalnesse of its
Revenue, with the honor of its Antiquity, as boasting of Ethelbert King of
Kent, a common Founder to this Church, with those of Canterbury and London. The
unhappy loss of Earnulphus History, the thirty second Bishop of this See,
deprives us of that Light which discovered the various condition of this
Church, how long in the beginning it struggled with its own poverty, and in
afterages with the injuries of Time and War, remaining some years in a kind
of Widow hood, without the Government and Super-intendency of a Bishop; till at
last Gundulfus the thirtieth Bishop of this See, re-edified this Church from
the ground, and brought it into that magnificence in which we now see it: To
which pious work, he brought so good, so vigorous affections, that as
Malmesbury records of him, Praevene^at vivacitas Gundulsi omnium successorum
diligeatiam, Gundulphus ^lacrity in that work did so prevent the piety of his
successors, that he hardly left them any place in this kind wherein to exercise
their bounty. Little did the overflowing zeal of our Ancestors to the house
of God, like that of the old lsraelites, pouring out their wealth and precious
things to adorn the Tabernacle, in so great measure, that M^sas was sain to
publish a Proclamation to restrain their liberality, For the stuff they had
was sufficient for the work to make it, and too much, Exodus 36.6.7. Little (I
say) did they think, when they did this, that what they thus bountifully gave
unto God, should ever, while this Kingdom remained Christian, become a prey to
those, which as Tcr^^llian speaks, Gentes agunt Christ's nomine, have not so
much as a form, but the bare usurped name of Christianity, which they fulley
and pollute with those worse than heathenish crimes of Sacrilege and
Profaneness: had the ^acrilege lately committed at Canterbury been applauded
by the people, (to gain whom, no arts though never so repugnant' pugnant either
to Religion or common honesty were left unattempted) certainly, this Church
which next stood in their way, and immediately after Canterbury tasted of their
fury, had been utterly demolished, and offered up a sacrifice to Popularitie.
But Plundering being then but a stranger in England, newly arrived here from
desolate Germany, especially Plundering of Churches, which heretofore were held
inviolable Sanctuaries for offenders, but much more for their own innocent
ornaments; this made a general outcry, every manderested so soul impiety;
nay, their own party (some of them) not yet so deeply leavened with their
Anabaptisticall Doctrines, nor given up to so reprebate a sense to believe
monstrous lies for truth, did not only not approve, but sparingly condemn the
Fact: and the general vote of the people, awakened by Doctor Pask his Letter,
declared it barbarous and wicked; nay, the dislike of such proceedings grew to
so great a height, that some wise men were deceived into an opinion, that the
Houses would punish the offenders for the present, and publish an Order to
restrain the like outrages for the future; and indeed, though some good men,
Members of both Houses, did earnestly desire it, yet by experience they quickly
found how unequal they were to effect any thing, in which they had not the
concurrence of the heads of the Faction which ruled in both Houses, but much
less when they rowed against the stream, andhad them for their adversaries.
The Rebels therefore coming to Rochester, brought the same affections along
with them which they expressed at Canterbury, but in wisdom thought it not
safe to give them the same scope, here as there; for the multitude though mad
enough, yet were not so mad, nor stood yet so prepared to approve such
heathenish practices: by this means the Monuments of the dead, which elsewhere
they brake up and violated, stood untouched; Escoucheons and Arms of the
Nobility and Gentry (upbraiding eye-sorcs to broken, mean Citizens, and vulga^
Rebels) remained undefaced, the Seats and Seals of the Quire escaped breaking
down, only those things which were wont to stuff up Parliament Petitions,
and were branded by the Leaders of the Faction, for Pepery and Innovation, in
these they took liberty to let loose their wild zeal: they brake down the
Rayl about the Lords Table, or Altar, call it which you please; and not only
so, but most basly reviled, a now Reverend Prelate, who being lately. Deane of
that Church, had for the more uniforme, and reverend receiving of the blessed
Sacrament set it up, with the odious name of Rogue, often repeated: they seized
upon the Velvet covering of the holy Table, and in contempt of those holy
Mysteries which were Celebrated on the Table, removed the Table it self into a
lower place of the Church, in this, perfect disciples of that profane Author
of the book called, Altar Damascenum, Who in the 718P. devoutly resolves thus:
De loco ubi consistat cur solliciti, sum quovis loco utl Angulo extra Tempus
Administrationis c^ll^cari ^ossit; Concerning the place where the Lords Table
shall stand, what need we to be sollicitous, when out of the time of
administration of the Sacrament it may be see aside, in any place, or obscure
corner. And to show what Members they are of the Church of England, they
strowed the Pavemenet with the torn mangled leaves of the Book of
Common Prayer, which, with the Book of Homilies, and the 39 Articles, makes up
the third Book, wherein the Doctrine of the Church of England is fully
contained: under standing that the Deane that then was, was to Preach on Sunday
morning, Colonel Sandys and Sir John Seatont, that false Traiterous Scoe, sent
unto him to command him to forbear the wearing of the Surplice and Hood; to
which this answer, That if they would expect any Sermon from him, they must
permit him to appear in such Ornaments, as the Church, and his degree
required, and accordingly did so: afterward Sandys and Seaton, Coming ming
toward the Church, and hearing the Organs, Seaton started back, and in the
usual blessing of some of his Country, cried, A Devil these Bag-pipes:
perhaps he never read so ^arre as David's Psalms, where-it is written, Praise
God upon the Strings and Pipe: Psalm.150.4. or if he had, it is more then
probable, that it had been all one to him: however, this served them both, as
a pre^ence to cloak their Irreligion, and refusal to join with that true
Protestant Congregation. While the Rebels were pulling down the Rayles about
the CommunionTable, one of the Prebends of the Church, Master Larken,
interposed, and attempted to stay their madness by reason, and persuasion; but
he quickly found, that he did not only profane Reason, by urging it to Saint
paul's, absurd, unreasonable, wicked men, men made up of incongruities, but that
he did it to the hazard of his life; for one of the Rebels, instead of
returning a reasonable answer, discharged a Pistol or Carbine at him, to have
murdered him at the very Altar, but by the good providence of God he mist his
mark. Thus, having done some spoil, that they might render themselves not
altogether unprofitable to their party, and not daring for the present to do
any more, for fear of losing that party which they hoped to gain for that
season, they left the Church: but into what further outrageous Impicties, their
Schismatic fury has since transported them, or what else they have
practiced on this Church, to complete their Monstrous Reformation, is not yet
made known unto us.

The third Instance, which I shall give of the Rebels Sacrilege and
Profaneness, is in the Cathedral church of Chichester; Successor in the
honor of being the feat of the Bishops Residence to Sealsey^ for wilfrd
Archbishop of York, being driven into Exile by ^gfrid King of Northumberland,
retiring himself into Suffex, and finding the South Saxons wholely given up to
Idolatry, his spirit like Saint Paul's at Atbens was stirred with in him, and
knowing the unprofitable servants doom, that buried his Talent, he Preached
unto them the Gospel of Christ: and Edelwalch King of those parts (not long
before converted to the Faith, by the persuasions of wolfbere King of the
Mer^ians^) willing that the same saving-knowledge, which he himself had
embraced, should be imparted to his people, seconaed the pious endeavors of
wilfrid and therefore amongst other acts of bounty, he gave the Arch bishop
Sea^ey for the place of his ^sfidence. Not long after, Cedwilla Conquering
Edilwatch, built here a Monastery to the honor (as Mamesbury says) of S.
Peter, and erected the Episcopal Chair: where it stood fixed the succession of
22 Bishop, or as others say (reckoning wilfrid Archbishop of York for the
first) the succession of 23 Bishops; from the year 711. to the reign of
William the Conqueror 1070. at which time Stiganeus translated his Chair from
Sealesey to Chichester, and so became the last Bishop of Scalesey, and the
first of chichester, where the Eepiscopall power did flourish ever since,
until now; in these last, and worst days, wherein while the heads of a
Rebellious, Schismatic Faction, Vote down the Sacred Function and Order of
Bishops, their Emissaries are mad to deface, if not utterly to demolish their
Churches. To this purpose, the Rebels under the Conduct of Sir william waller,
entering the City of chichester on innocents day, 1642, the next day, their
first business was to Plunder the Cathedral Church; the Marshall therefore and
some other Officers, having entered the Church, went into the Vestry, there they
seize upon the Vestments and Ornaments of the Church, together with the
Conseerated Place, serving for the Altar and Administration of the Lords
Supper; they left not so much as a Cushion for tht Pulpit, nor a Chalice for
the Blessed Sacrament: the Commanders having in person executed the covetoms
part of Sacrilege, they leave the destructive and spoiling part to be finished
by the Common mon Soldiers: brake down the Organs, and dashing the Pipes with
their Pole-axes, scoffingly said, Hark how the Organs go. They break the
Rail about the Communion Table, which was done with that fury, that the Table
it self escaped not their madness, but tasted of the same fare with the Rayl,
and was broken in pieces by them. At the East end of the Quite, did hang a very
fair Table, wherein were written the ^en Commandments, with the Pictures of
Moles and Aaron on each side of the Table; possessed with a zeal, but not like
that of Moses, they pull down the Table, and break it into small shivers. 'T
was no wonder that they should break the Commandments in their representation,
that had before broken them all over in their Substance and Sanction: they
force open all the locks, either of doors or desks wherein the Singing-men
laid up their Common Prayer Books, their Singing-Books, their Gowns and
Surplices: they sent the Books in pieces, and scatter the torn leaves all over
the Church, even to the covering of the Pavement, but against the Gowns and
Surplices their anger was not so hot, these were not amongst the Anathemata,
but might be reserved to seculiar uses: in the South cross lle on the one
side, the History of the Churches Foundation, was very artificially pourtrayed
with the Pictures of the Kings of England; on the other side over against them,
are the Pictures of the Bishops, as well of Scalsey as Chichester, began by
Robert Sherborn, the 37 Bishop of that See and the Series brought down by him
to his own times at his own Charges, who as he made that of the Psalmist,
Dil^xi decorum domus tui domins, Lord I have loved the beauty of thy house,
his Imprease and Motto, so he made it his work, and endeavor. These Monuments
they deface and mangle with their hands and swords, as high as they could
reach: and, to show their love and Zeal to the Protestant Religion,
established in the Church of England, one of those Misereants picked out the
eyes of King Edward the sixt's Picture saying, That all this mischief came
from him when he established the Books of Common Prayer. On the Tuesday
following they had a solemn Thanks giving, for their success in gaining that
City. Men of cauterized Consciences, and given upto a Reproba^tesense, thus,
not only to take the Name of God in vain, but damnably to Blaspheme it, as if
he were the Patron of Rapine, Blood and Sacrilege. After the Sermon was ended,
as men not inspired by the holy Spirit of which they so much boast, but
possessed and transported by a Batchanalian fury, they ran up and down the
Church, with their swords drawn, defacing the Monuments of the dead, hacking
and hewing the Seats and Stalls, scratching and scraping the painted walls: Sir
William Waller, and the rest of the Commanders standing by as spectators, and
approvers of these Barbarous Impieties: yet for fear left in this
Schismatic frenzy, the sword in mad men's hands might mistake, Sir William
Waller, a wary man as he is and well known not to be too apt to expose
himself to danger, stood all the while with his sword drawn, and being asked
by one of his Troopers what he meant to stand in that Posture? He answered,
That it was to secure himself. you know, it is written, The wicked are afraid
where no fear is, for though the People made him an Idol in London, yet being
no Popish, but a Puritanicall Idol, (for they have their Idols, and their
Idolatry, as much as the Church of Rome) there was no danger to his person, to
be mistaken for an object of their Reformation at Chichester. The same Trooper
added also, That if his Colonel in the Low Countries were there, and commanded
in thiese, he would hang up half a dozen of the soldiers for examples sake:
it no: being the custom of the Low Countries, (though long time has made
their enmity inveterate, and added much to the animositie of the parties) to
Plunder Churches, it being amutuall stipulation between the Spaniard and the
Hollander, that what Town soever should by conguest pass from the possession
of one, Nation to the other, though the Conqueror hid the free Plunder of the
Town, yet churches with their Ornaments, and whatever was conveyed into them
should be invialable, the church being sanctuary to what sover was under ^is
Roo se, and, if they would have any thing thence, it was to be purchased at a
valuable price. These good intimations of moderations from a man of less
command, but more Religion then Sir William, prevailed nothing with him to
restrain the outraigous madness of his fellow Rebels. Having therefore made
what spoil they could in the Cathedral, they rush out thence and break open
a Parish Church, standing on the North side of the Cathedral, called the
Subdeanery: there they tear the Common Prayer Books, both those belonging to
the Church, and likewise those which were left there by devote persons which
did usually frequent Divine Service; and because many things in the Holy Bible
make strongly against them. one did contradict and condemn their impious
practices, they marked it in diverse places with a black coal; it is more then
probable, that the 13 Chapter to the Romans did not escape their Index
Expurgatorius, for certainly if that be the word of God (as undoubtedly it is)
they cannot so far withold the truth in unrightenusnesse, as not to read
their doom in that word, they shall judge them at the last day: here they
stole the Ministers Surplice and Hood, and all the Linen serving for the
Communion: and finding no more Plate but the chalice, they steal that too,
which they brake in pieces, to make a just and equal divident amongst
themselves; for an Engeneer of theirs, Robert Prince a Frenchman, with a
wooden leg, afterward showed the foot thereof broken off; and when complaint
was made of these barbarous outrages, Captain Keely replied, That he Know not
whether all this were not done by Order, or no. About five or six days after,
Sir Arther Haslerig demanded the Keys of the chapter house, being entered the
place, and having intelligence by a treacherous Officer of the Church, where
the remainder of the Church Plate was, he commanded his servants to break
down the Wainscot round about the room, which was quickly done, they having
brought Crows of Iron for that purpose along with them; while they were
knocking down the Wainscot, Sir Arthurs tongue was not enough to express his
joy, it was operative at his very heels, for dancing and skipping, (pray mark
what Music that is, to which, it is lawful for a Puritan to dance) he cried
out, There Boys, there Boys, Hark, Hark, it Rattles, it Rattles: and
being much importuned by some members of that Church, to leave the Church but a
Cup for administration of the Blessed Sacrament, answer was returned by a
Scotch-man standing by, That they should take a wooden dish: and now tell me
which was farthest from a Christian, either this impure Scot, or that
blasphemous Atheist, who seeing the masty Plate and rich Ornaments wherewith
the Christian Altars were adorned in the Primitive Church, in indignation and
scorn of Christ beltched out Enqua preciosis vasis filim Maria ministratur?
Behold with what costly vessels the Son of Mary is served: what further spoil
and indignitic they have since done to that house of God, And the habitation
where his honor dwelt, is yet uncertain.

Mercurius Rustius, etc. III.
The Rebels defying God in his own house: their Sacrilege, in stealing Church
Plate and goods: their irreverence toward the King, by abusing his Statue:
their heathenish barbaritie in violating the bones and ashes of dead Monarchs,
Bishops, Saints and Confessors in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, etc.

THe next instance which I shall give of the Rebels Sacrilege and
Profaneness, is in the Cathedral Church of Winchester: which City, as it
was the Royal Seat of the Kings of the West Saxons, in the time of the
Heptarchy, so was it the Seat of the Bishops of that people, after Kenwalshus
King of the West Saxons (not brooking the Barbarous broken expressions of
Agilbertus his Bishop) divided this large Diocese between Agilbertus and
Wina, and leaving Agilbertus to reside at Dorchester, caused Wina to be
Consecrated Bishop of Winchester. Before we tell you by whom, and in what
manner this Church was robbed and spoiled of its Ornaments and beauty, it will
not be impertinent (while it may serve as an aggravation of their impiety)
briefly to set down by whom this Church was built, and so richly adorned, as
lately we saw it. This magnificent Structure which now stands, was begun by
Walkelinus the thirty fifth Bishop of this See: which work left imperfect and
but begun by him, was but coldly prosecuted by the succeeding Bishops, until
William of Wickham (the magnificent Sole founder of two Saint Mary Colleges,
the one in Oxford commonly called New College, the other a Nurcery to this
near Winchester) came to possess this See: He amonst many other works of
Pletie, built the whole Nave, or body of this Church, from the Quire to the
West end, the Chapels on the East end beyond the Quire, had their several
Founders: The hallowed Ornaments and Utencills of this Church, being many,
rich, and costly, were the gifts of several Benefactors, who though their
names perhaps are not recorded in earth, have found their reward in Heaven.
This Church was first differenced by the name of Saint Amphibalus, who received
a Crown of Martyrdom under the persecution of Dioclesian: Next it exchanged
this name for that of S. Peter; and again, this, for that of Saint Swithine,
the eighteenth Bishop of this See: last of all, it was dedicated to the Holy
Trinity, whose blessed name is now called upon it: which Holy name, though it
could not but put the Rebels in mind whose possession and house it was, did
not at all afford it patronage, and protection from their accursed rage and
madness.

The Rebels under the Conduct of Sir William Waller, fate down before the
City of Winchester, on Tuesday the 12 of December, 1642. about twelve of the
clock, and entered the City that afternoon between two and three:being Masters
of the City, they instantly fall upon the Close, under a pretense to learch for
Cavaliers. They seize upon the Prebends Horses, and demand their persons with
many threatening words: That night, they brake into some of the Prebends Houses,
such houses as they were directed unto, by their Brethren the Seditious
Schismatics of the City, and Plundered their goods. But the Castle not yet
surrendered into the Rebels hands, something awed their insolency: which being
the next day delivered up to their power, did not only take away the restraint
which was upon them, but encouraged them, without check or control, to rob
and defy, both God and all good men. Wednesday therefore, and Wednesday night,
being spent in Plundring the City and Close, on Thursday morning between nine
and ten of the clock (hours set apart for better employments, and therefore
purposely in probability chosen by them, being resolved to profane every
thing that was C^nonicall) violently break open the Cathedral Church, and
being c^rred, to let in the Tide, they presently open the great West doors
where the Barbarous Soldiers stood ready, nay greedy to rob God and pollute
his Temple. The doors being open, as if they meant to invade God himself as
well as his prossession, they enter the Church with Colors flying, their Drums
beating, their Matches fired, and that all might have their part in so horrid
an attempt, some of their Troops of Horse also accompanied them in their march,
and rode up through the body of the Church and Quire, until they came to the
Altar, there they begin their work, they rudely pluck done the Table and break
the Rail: And afterward carrying it to an Alehouse, they set it on fire, and
in that fire burnt the Books of Common Prayer, and all the Singing books
belonging to the Quire: they throw down the Organs, and break the Stories of
the Old and New Testament, curiously cut out in carved work, beautified with
Colors, and set round about the top of the Stalls of the Quire: from hence
they turn to the Monuments of the dead, some they utterly demolish, others
they deface. They begin with Bishop Fox his Chapel, which they utterly
deface, they break all the glass Windows of this Chapel, not because they had
any Pictures in them, either of Patriarch, Prophet, Apo^^le or Saint, but
because they were of painted coloured-glasse: They demolish and over-turne the
Monuments of Cardinal Beaufort, son to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by
Katberine Swinsort, Founder of the Hospital of Saint Cross near Winchester,
who fate Bishop of this see forty three years. They deface the Monument of
William of Wainslet, Bishop likewise of Winchester, Lord Chancellor of
England, and the Magnificent Founder of Magdalen College in Oxford; which
Monument in a grateful piety, being lately beautified, by some that have, or
lately had relation to that foundation, made these Rebels more eager upon it,
to deface it: but while that College, the unparalleld example of his bounty,
stands, in despite of the malice of these inhumane Rebels, William of W^inslet
cannot want a more lasting Monument, to transmit his memory to posterity: from
hence they goeito Queen Mary's Chapel, so called, because in it she was
married to King Philip of Spain: here they brake the Communion Table in
pieces, and the Velvet Chair Whereon she fate when she was married. They
attempted to deface the Monument of the late Lord ^reasurer the Earl of
Portland, but being in Brass, their violence made final impression on it,
therefore they leave that, and turn to his Fathers Monument, which being of
Stone, was more obnoxious to their fury: here, mistaking a Judge for a Bishop,
led into the error by the resemblance or counterfeit of a square Cap on the
head of the Statua, they strike off, not only the Cap, but the head too of the
Statua, and so leave it. Amongst other Acts of Bounty and Piety, done by
Richard Fox the fifty seventh Bishop of this Sc^, he covered the Quire, the
Presbytery, and the ^sles adjoining, with a goodly Vault, and new glazed all
the windows of that part of the Church, and caused the bones of such Kings
Princes and Prelases, as had been buried in this Church, and lay dispersed and
sca^tered in several parts of the Cathedral, to be collected and put into
several Chests of Lead, with inscriptions on each Chest, whose bones lodged in
them: These Chests (to preserve them from rude and profane hands) he caused to
be placed on the top of a wall, of exquisite workmanship built by him, to
enclose the Presbytery: there, never to be removed (as a man might think) but
by the last Tr^^pe, did rest the bones of many Kings and Queens, as of
Alfredus, Edwardus Seni^n, ^adredus the brother of Athelstane, Edw^^us, C^^^tus
tus, Hardicanutus, Emma the Mother, and Edward the Confessor her Son,
kinigliss^s the first founder of the Cathedral of Winchester, Egbert who
abolishing the Heptarchy of the Saxons, was the first English Monarch, william
Ruf^s, and diverse others: with these, in the Chests, were deposited the bones
of many G^dly Bishops, and Confessors, as, of Birinus, Hedda, Swithinus,
Frithestanus, Saint Elphegus the Confessor, Stigandus wina and others. Had not
the barbarous inhumane impiety, of these Schismatics and Rebels ^hewed the
contrary, we could not have imagined, that any thing but the like Piety that
here inshrined them, or a Resurrection should ever have disturbed the repose of
these venerable, yet not Popish Relics. But these Monsters of men to whom
nothing is holy, nothing is Sacred, did not stick to profane and violate these
Cabinets of the dead, and to scatter their bones all over the pavement of the
Church: for on the North side of the Quire they threw down the Chests, wherein
were deposited the bones of the Bishops, the like they did to the bones of
William Rufus, of Queen Emma, of Hardicanutus, and Edward the Confessor, and
were going on to practice the like impiety or the bones of all the rest of the
west Saxon Kings. But the Outcry of the people, deresting so great
inhumanitie, caused some of their Commanders (more compassionate to these
ancient Monuments of the dead then the rest) to come in amongst them, and to
restrain their madness. But that dive^^sh malice which was not permitted to
rage and over flow to the spurning and trampling on the bones of all, did
^atiate itself even to a prodigious kind of wantonne^le, on those which were
already in their power: And therefore as it they meant (if it had been
possible) to make these bones contract a Pesthume guile, by being now made
passive Instruments, of more then heathenith Sacrilege, and prophanenefse,
those Windows which they could not reach with their Swords, Muskets, or Rests,
they brake to pieces, by throwing at them the bones of Kings, Queens Bishops,
Confessors and Saints: So that the spoil done on the Windows will not be
repaired for a thousand pounds: nor did the Living find better measure from
them then the dead: for whereas our Dread Severaigne that now is (the best of
Kings) was graciously pleased, as a pledge of his Princely favor to this
Church, to honor it with the gift of his own Statua, together with the Statua
of his dear Father King James, of ever blessed memory, both of massy Brass:
both which statua's were erected at the front of the entrance into the Quire:
These Atheistical Rebels, as if they would not have so much of the Militia to
remain with the King, as the bare Image, and representation of a Sword by his
side; They break off the Swords from the sides of both the statua's: they
break the Cross from off the Globe, in the hand of the Statua of our gracious
Sovereign now living, and with their Swords hacked and hewed the Crown on the
head of it, Swearing, They would bring Him back to His Parliement: A most
flagitious crime, and such, as that for the like S. Cbrysustome, Hom^ Adpopulum
Antioch. with many tears complains, he much feared, the City of Antioch, the
Metropolis and head (as he calls it) of the East, would have been destroyed
from the face of the earth: for when in a Tumult, the Seditious Citizens of
Antioch had done the like affront to Theodetius the Empetour, in overturning
his Statua's, how does that holy Bishop bemoane (...) how does he bewail that
City (...) which, fearing the severe effects of the abused Emperors just
indignation, of a Populous City, a Mother boasting of a Numerous Iss^e, was on
the sudden become a widow, left desolate, and for saken of her Inhabitants:
some, out of the sense and horror of the guilt abandoning the City, and flying
into the deslote Wilderness, others lurking in holes, and confining themselves
to the dark corners of their own houses, thereby hoping to escape the
vengeance due to so Disloyal, so Traiterous a Fact; because of this foul
injury offered the EmpeTours Statua, He (as that Father speaks) was wronged,
that was the Supreme head of all men, and had no equal on Earth. But what
wonder is it, that these miscreants, should offer such scornful indignities to
the Representation of his Reyall Person, and the Emblems of his Sacred power,
when the heads of this damnable Rebellion (who set these their Agents on work)
offer worse affronts to his Sacred Person himself, and by their Rebellious
Votes, and illegal Ordinances, daily strike at Substones of that power, of
which the Crown, the Sword, and Scepter, are but Emblemes and shadows, which
yet not withstanding, ought to have been venerable and awefull to these men, in
respect of their Relation? After all this, as it what they had already done,
were all too little, they go on in their horrible wickednesle, they seize upon
all the Communion Plate, the Bibles, and Service-Books, Rich hangings, large
Cushions of Velvet, all the Pulpit-Clothes, some where of were of Cloth of
Silver, some of Cloth of Gold: They brake up the Muniment house, and take away
the Common Seal of the Church, supposing it to be Silver, and a fair piece of
guilt Plate, given by Bishop Cotton: They tear the Evidences of their Lands,
and cancel their Charter; in ^ word, what ever they found in the Church of any
value and portable, they take it with them, what was neither, they either
deface, or destroy it. And now having Ransacked the Church, having desied God
in his own house and the King in his own Statua, having violated the Urns of
the dead, having abused the bones, and scattered the ashes of deseased
Monarchs, Bishops, Saints, and Confessors, they return in Triumph, bearing
their spoils with them. The Troopers (because they were most conspicuous) ride
through the streets in surplices, With such Hoods and Tippers as they found:
and that they might boast to the world how glorious a Victory they had
archieved, they hold out their Trepbies to all spectators: for the Troopers
thus clad in the Priests Vestments, rode carrying Common Prayer Books in one
hand, and some broken Organ Pipes, together with the mangled pieces of Carved
work but now mentioned, containing some Histories of both Testaments, in the
other. In all this, giving too just occasion, to all good Christians to
complain with the Psalmist. O God the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance.
^ by holy Temples have they defiled, The dead bodies of thy Servants have they
abused, and scattered their bones as one beweth wood upon the earth^ Help us, O
God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy Name, Psalm. 79.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc. IV.
The Rebels Profanation and horrible abuse of the Abbey Church of Westminster:
Together with their several Out rages and Abominations committed on the
Cathedral church of Exeter, etc.

IF in the Catalogue of Plundered Cathedralls, we in^owle the now Collegiat
Church of Westminster, I hope I shall not be thought to make my discou^se, no
more of kin to my Title, then Mountain does some of his ^ssayes: For if we
look back on the various condition of this Church (no place set apart for
Religions Persons, having so often shifted its owners)we shall find that among
it many changes, it had the honor of a Bishops See. On the dissolution of the
Abbeys, amongst the rest, Henry the Eighth suppressed this Monastery, and in
the place thereof founded a Deancry, An^^,1536. And two years after, added a
Bishopric to the De^ne^y. The Bishop sat here but nine years, and again
resigned his dilapidated Revenue into the hands of a Deanes Middlesex, which
was the Diocese of the Bishopric, being devolved to London yet though this
Bishopric of westminster, as it relates to the Saxons, was but of modern
Erection, yet in the time of the Ancient B^itons,it was no less then the Sea
of the Archbishop of London: and therefore it is more then probable, that,
that record which tells us, that the Archbishop of London See was planted in
Saint Peter's in cornhill, was either corrupted or mistaken, for S. Peter's in
^horney: for Sic olim^spinis, as Learned Cambden, and other Antiquaries affirm,
from the great crop of thorns which heretofore grew there, that which we now
call westminster, was then called Thorney. This Church so famous for it is
Antiquity, so admired for it is Elegancy of Structure, especially by the
addition of Henry the seventh's Chapel, a Pile of that polished magnificence,
Vt omn^m Elegantiam in illo acerva^am dicas, as if Art and Bounty had
conspired to raise it to a wonder of the world. Lastly, a Church so venerable,
as being once the seat of an Archbishop, and a Bishop, and now a long time the
place where the Kings of England receive their sacred Unction, and Crowns at
their C ronation, and where their bodies rest in honorable Sepulture, when
they have exchanged their Temporal for Eternal Crowns. This church, under
the eye, and immediate protection of the pretended Houses of Parliament, had
it is share in spoil and profanation, as much as those Cathedralls which were
more remote from them: for in July last, 1643 some Soldiers of weshborne and
cacwoods Companies(perhaps because there were no houses in westminster) were
quartered in the Abbey church, where (as the rest of our Modern Reformers)they
brake down the Rayl about the Altar,and burnt it in the place where it stood:
They brake down the Organs, and pawned the Pipes at several Alehouses for
pots of Ale: They put on some of the Singing-mens Surplices, and in contempt of
that Canonical Habit, ran up and down the Church, he that wore the Surplice
was the Hare, the rest were the Hounds. To show their Christian liberty in the
use of things, and that all consecration or Hallowing of things under the
Gospel, is but a Jewish or popish Superstition, and that they are no longer to
be accounted holy, then that holy use to which they serve, shall by the actual
use only, impart a transient holiness to them, they set Forms about the
Communion Table, there they eat,and there they drink Ale and Tobacco: some of
their own Levites (if my Intelligence deceive me not) bearing them company,
and countenancing so beastly Profanation. Nor was this done once to vindicate
their christian Liberty, as they call Profanation it self, but the whole
time of their abode there, they made it their common table on which they
usually dined and supped, though Saint Paul calls it despising the Church of
Christ, and asks his Corinth^ans, if they had not houses to eat and to drink
in 1 Cor.11. They did the ^fenients of nature, and laid their excrements about
the Altar, and in most places of the Church. An abomination which God did
provide against bya peculiar prohibition in the Law of Moses; and that, in
places not rendered so dreadful, by so peculiar a manner of the presence of
God, as in the hallowed Temples of his public worship: God would not permit
the Jews to do these offices of nature in the Camp, they must have a place
without the Camp, and a Paddle to dig and cover it; you have the Law, and the
reason of the Law both together, they must not do so; For the Lord thy God
walks in the midst of the Camp, therefore shall thy Camp be holy that he
see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee, Deuteronomy 23.12. If God, for
these reasons would not endure it in the Camp, how much more does his soul
abhor such beastly uncleanness in his House, and holy Temple? Nay, which is
the height of all Impiety, they familarly kept their whores in the Church, and
which I tremble to write (Prodigious Monsters as they are) lay with them on the
very Altar it self, and did in that place commit such things as are un^^t to
be done by christians

There remain yet two Prosanations more of this Church, not to be passed over
in silence. The hrst was committed by Sir Robert Harlow, who breaking into
Henry the seventh's Chapel, brake down the Altar-stone which stood before
that goodly Monument of Henry the seventh; the stone was Touchstone all of one
piece, ^ Raritie not to be matched that we know of, in any part of the world:
there it stood for many years, not for use, but only for Ornament: yet it did
not escape the freazy of this man's ignorant zeal, for he brake it into shivers.
The second was committed on the 13 of December, 1643. When the Careasle of John
Pym (as much as the Lice left of it) was brought into this Church, and after a
Scimon preached by Stephen Marshall, Arch-Flamine ot the Rebels, and the
Church Service Officiated by Lambart Orbaston, one of the Prebends of that
Church, it was interi'd under the Monumentall stone of one windsor, buried
about 200 years fince in the void space, or passage as you go to Henry the
seventh's Chapel, between the Earl of Dovers place of burial, and the
Monument of Henry the Third, Founder of that Church: usurped Ensigns of honor
displayed over him. It Was pittic, that he, that in his life had bin the Author
of so much bloudsned, and those many calamities, under which this Kingdom yet
groans, and therefore deserved, not only to have his death with the
transgreslours and wicked, but afterward to be buried with the burial of an
Ass drawn, and cast forth beyond the G^tes of the city, Jer, 22. 19. should
after his death make hit Sepulcher amongst the Honorable, and mingle his.
Vulgar, Low^ ashes, with those of Kings, Princes, and Nobles.

The sixth lnstance of the Rcbells Sacrilege and Preph^^e^esse, which I shall
present unto the world, is in the Ca^d^all Church of Exeter: which was once a
Monastery, Founded by Athelstane the eighth King of England, of the Soxon race,
and by him conscerated to Saint Peter. Edward the Confessor, removing all the
Monks from hence, and planting them at Westminster, which he had newly founded
and endowed, made it the Bishops See for Devon and Cornwall: That Pile which
we now see, owes it is being to many Founders. william Warlwast, the third
Bishop of this See, aftcr it was translated from cridington, or as it is now
usally called Kirlon, to Exeter, built the Quire which now is, but was intended
by the Founder for the Nave or body of the Church: but Peter Quivill, the 13th.
Bishop of this See, laid the foundation of that which is now the body of the
Church: but he prevented by death, left the work impersect: John Grandesson
therefore, the seventeenth Bishop of this See, thinking the foundation laid by
his Predecessor Quivill,to be faultic in Geometrical proportions, the length
not being answerable to the height, added two Pillars more to the length of the
Nave of the Church; of a distance, proportionable tothose laid before: he
closed up the end with a wall of most exquisite work, in which, he built a
Little Chapel, and in that Chapel a Monument, wherein himself was
intombed. He built likewife, the two side Isles, and covered the whole Fabric
with an Arch of exquisite work, and brought it to such perfection, that in
splendour and magnisicence, it gives precedence to few Cathedrals of the
kingdom:and which is very remarkable, though this Church was first began by
King Athelstane, and made many steps before it came to arrive at its
perfection, so that there arc numbered almost five handred years from the
laying the first stone, to the covering of the Roof; yet the wisdom and care
of the several Benefactors was so great, that the most curious Surveyor, must
confess, that the Symmetry of the parts, and the proportions of the whole, are
so exact, as from the Foundation to the Koose, had been the work, not of one
age only, but of one, and the same hand: and that the Ornaments of the Church
might be answerable to the beauty of the Structure it self, Bishop Grandesson,
bestowed upon it Vessels of Gold, and Vessels of Silver, Books, and all other
kinds of rich furniture, Copid lmmensd, Immensi pretii: in execeding great
measure, of execeding great price. All which, with many other things of
necessary use, and Public Ornament, became a prey to the Schismatic
Rebels; whose sin was so much the greater, because being neither imaged by
Opposition, nor made insolent by conqucst, (Apologies that may possibly be
taken up for other Rebels, in other places, as chichester and winchester) but
which was a maine aggravation of their crime, Citezens within their own wall,
in cool blood, not provoked, spoil, and lay wast their Mother Church: for
after this City (now most unworthy of those privileges, and honorary rewards,
once purchased by their Loyaltic, now forfeited by ingratitude and rebellion)
had once shut up their Gates against their Kings:it was not long before they
shut up the Gates 1ike wife of God's house, denying all accusse to devout
persons, there to make their Prayers and Supplications: so near bordering upon
Rebellon against the King, is Atheism and Contempt of God: for having demanded
the Keys of the Cathedral, and taken them into their own custody, they
presently interdict divine Service to be celcbrated:so that for the space of
three quarters of a year, the Holy L turgy lay totally filenced. Nor was the
restrainr upon the Reading Deske only, the Pulpit was made inacceslible to all
Orthdex Loyal Minister, and was open only to Factions: Schismatic
Preachers, whose Doctrine was Rebellion, and their Exhortation Treason, that so
the people might hear nothing but what might som^n^ their disloyaltic, and
confirm them in their unnatural revolt, from their duty and obedience. Having
the Church in their possession, in a most Puritanicall beastly manner, they
make it a common Jakes for the Exonerations of Nature, sparing no place neither
the Altar, nor the Pulpit, though this last finds a better place in their
cstimation then the former: yet profaned it was, may, so profaned, that it
remains a doubt yet undetermined, ned, which profaned it most in their kinds,
either the common Soldiers,or their Lecturers. Over the Communion Table, in
fair letters of gold was written the holy and blessed Name of Jesus: this they
expunge as Superstitious and execrable. On each side of the Commandments, the
Pictures of Moses and Aaron were drawn in full proportion: these they deface,
they tear the Books of Common Prayers to pieces, and as if this had bin too
final a contempt, and despite done to that form of Gods holy worship, they
use them, as if they had been a second sacrifice of Curious Arts, and burn
them at the Alter with exceeding great Exultation and exprestions of joy. They
made the Church their Storehouse, where they kept their Ammunition and Powder,
and planted a Court of Guard to attend it, who used the Church, with the same
reverence that they would an Alehouse, and defiled it with tippling and taking
Tobacco: they broke and defaced all the glass windows of the Church, which
cannot be repaired for many hundred pounds: and left all those ancient
Monuments, being painted glass, and containing matter of Story only, a
miserable spectacle of commiseration to all well-affected hearts that behold
them. They struck off the heads of all the Statues on all monuments in the
Church, esperally they deface the Bishops Tombs, leaving one without ahead
another without a Nose, one without a hand, and another without an arm. A sad
^mbleme of that Trunk of Baiscopacy, which the accursed Atheists of these
times have fancied to themselves, and endeavored: a poor deformed, mangled,
mutilated thing, having neither head of Pretetion, nor face of honor, nor
arm, nor hand,nor finger of power and jurisdiction: they pluck down and deface
the Statue of an ancient Queen, the wife of Edward the Confessor, the first
Founder of this Church, mistaking, it for the Statua of the blessed Virgin
Mary, the Mother of God; So she was styled by the haly Catholic Church, many
ycares before it was in danger to be voted Blasphemy in that Committee where
learned Miles Corbet sat in the Chair. They brake down the Organs, and
taking two or three hundred Pipes with them, in a most scornful contemptuous
manner, went up and down the streets piping with them: and meeting with some
of the Choristers of the Church, whose Surplices they had stolen before, and
employed them to base servile offices, scostingly told them, Boys, we have
'povled your trade, you must go and sing hot Pudding Pies. By the
absoluteness of their power, they send forth their Warrants to take away the
Lead off a Conduit and a great Cistern that stood in the midst of the Close,
giving plentiful supplies of water to many hundreds of Inhabitants; and by
virtue of the same warrant, they give their agents power to take a great
quantity of Timber, which was laid up and designed for the repairing of the
Church; such Timber as that it will be a very hard matter to procure the like,
all Timber not being sit for that use: and with these a great stock of Lead out
of the common Storehouse, reserved there for the same purpose; which warrants
were accordingly put in execution to the full. They did enter into a
Consustation about taking down the Bells, and all the Lead that covered the
Church, to convert them into warlike Ammunition, the Bells might be cast into
Cannon, the Lead into Bullets, both would serve toward the effecting their
Traiterous designs. They took down the Gates of the Close, which the Deane
and Chapter bad set up, and kept locked every night for their security: which
Gares they employed, to help forward and strengthen their Fortifications: They
lay intolerable Taxes on most of the Members of the Church, and whosoever
refused to submit to those most unjust illegal Impositions, were threstned to
have their houses Plundered, and their persons sent on shipboard; where they
must expect usage, as bad as at Argier, or the Galleys. Doctor Burnell, grave
Learned man, and Canon of that Church, refusing to submit to their Taxations,
they gave command (though he were at that time sick and contiued, not only to
his Chamber, but to his bed) to take him in the night, and bring him away to
Prison, though they brought him in his bed: but upon much importunity, some of
the best ^anke of the Citizens being tendered his security, to render himself
a true prisoner, for that time they (...) him. For the like re^usall, they
took Doctor Hutchenson, another Canon of the Church, a man of a weak and
infirm body, but of a vigorous knowing Soul; and violently carried him
toward the Ship, there to imprison him; by the way as they carried him along,
he was (not only by the permistion but by the encouragement of those that led
him Captive) blasted, and abused, and howted at by the boys, and exposed to
the affionts and revilings of the base insolent multitude: at twelve of the
clock at night they seized on Master (...) in his bed, and another Canon of
that Church, being, almost fourseore and ten years of age, and for the like
refusal, because he would not disburse such sums as they demanded, for the
maintenance of this horrid Rebellion, they carry him first to the prison, and
from thence to the Ship: In the way to the Prison, they throw dirt in his face,
and beat the good old man^o cruelly, that his roaring and outcries were heard,
and pitied by all his neighbors: and at last, not able to indu^e (byreason of
his extreme old age) the barbarous usage of the Rebels, he was forced to
redeem his liberty at eight hundred pounds: and now having dispossessed the
owners, the Rebels find new employments for the Canons houses: some of them
they convert into Prisons, and in an Apish imitation, call them by the names of
Newgate, King's Bench, Marshalsey; others they employ, as Hospitalls for sick or
maimed Soldiers: Some they use as Slaughter-houses and Shambles: and for the
Bishops Palace, they might have called it their Smith-field, for in, and about
it, they kept their fat Oxen and sheep, and all their Plundered Provision.
These houses, though foully abused, yet do still stand, as to upbraid the
Rebels injustice and oppression; so to give entertainment to their own Masters,
or their successors, unless some men, possessed with worse devils then ruled
in these children of disobedience, shall to their just damnation alienate them
from their Original use: but other houses belonging to the Church, they set on
fire, and burn down to the ground: for they burnt down the Guild Hall in Saint
Sidwels, belonging to the Dean and Chapter, and as many houses more of the
ancient Inheritance and Revenues as were worth 100 (...) per annum, making
likewise great havoc and spoil of their Woods and Timber, maliciously
intending to disable them from re-edifying what they had most barbarously burnt
down.

Mercurius Rustius, etc. V.
The Cathedral Church of Peterborough robbed, desac'd, and spoiled by Cromwell,
and his Schismatic Adherents, etc.

COuld we sooner have produced a certain and full relation of the observable
circumstances, about the ruins and desolations of the sometimes flourishing,
though now demolished Cathedral of Peterborough, the same might justly have
challenged to have been inserted before this time and place, both in respect of
the dignity of the Ancient, Religious, and Royal Founders, the same of the
irreligious and unworthy defacers, the admirable vicissisude of its own
condition, and reasons of its Fatal doom, having suffered not so much by the
sury of the Danes, be^^use a rich Monastery, as by the zeal of Cromwell,
because an Episcopal See: and (it his knowledge reached so high) for that it
had been so much and often honored by the Princes of this Nation in several
ages.

When Peada the first Christian King of the Mercians, to propagate the faith of
Christ, laid the foundation, but had a sudden period put to his life and pious
intentions by his unnatural and wicked mother, Wolpher his brother, albeit at
the first averse, yet afterward a convert to Christianity, (to expiate the
murder of his two sons, whom he had cruelly put to death for embracing the
Gospel before him) by the help of his brother Ethelred, and his sisters K
mburga, and Kinswith, having finished that work in the year of our Lord, 633.
consecrated it to the memory of Saint Peter (whence the place ever since has
been styled ^eterborough, which before was called Medeswel-hamsted, or
Medeshamsted) and it continued for the space of two hundred and fourteen
years, in such glory, that in the judgment of our Learned Antiquary,
Monesterium suit long Celebratissimum, till the Dan^s mastacred the Monks, and
destroyed that place of devotion, which was after an 108. years restored to
its former state, by Ethelwould Bishop of Winchester, assisted by King Edgar
and Adulph his Chancellor, about the years of our Lord, 960. in which it
remainded, until covetous Sacrilege began to get the upper hand of
well-meaning charity in his reign, who was as fitly, as truly said to have
had Ingentes virtutes, ^es minora vitia, though at the undoing of its Kindred,
this had least reason to complain, being then advanced to a Bishops See; But
this third woe has so much disfigured that Majesty, which till then this
building retained in its forefront, this Cromwell has so far our-vied in
acts of Piety his Precedent, that Cromwell in Henry the eighth's time, this
place has now suffered in so great a manner for its l^yaltic, as that we know
not where to enter upon the narration of the same, except at the great
West-window (where his Soldiers, made their first breach and entrance) which
was adorned with such variety of Ecclesiastical History, as will evidence them
to be deformers of that through Reformation in our blessed Queens time of
happy memory, whom notwithstanding they so highly cried up. From thence they
presently hurried to the Quire, where as soon as they had broken open the
doors, they, according to their trade and custom in other places, tell on
tearing in pieces the Books of Divine Service, and Sacred Anthems, yea (which
may seem more strange) they were so hot against Preaching or hearing Sermons,
that all the se^ts of the Auditors were plucked up, and the Pulpit, the place
of the Divine Oracle, and the Booke-seat pulled down, with that black-mouthed
cry, Down with that throne of A^tichrist, down with it even to the ground.
And when their zeal had driven them to that height of impiety, that some
standers by could not behold it without great reluctance, which moved one of
them to request cromwell, that he would please to stay his Soldiers from
further defacing and ruining that place, all the satisfaction he could get, was
but a provocation to further mischief, replying, That his gods were a pulling
down, and when the other answered, That the God he served was beyond the (...)
of Soldiers, Cromwell told them, That they did G^d good service in that action,
as if even in these days were fulfilled that Prophecy of our Savior,
Job.16.2. The time is coming, whosoever does the greatest Mischrese will
think he serve^h God. But observe the wages that Divine Justice repayed one of
them for their work, which may restifie how he accepted of the same; When they
had demolished the ^uire, the East End was the next they aimed at, where one
espying in the roof right over the (...) Table, our Savior pourtrayed, coming
in glory with his holy Angels, and at the sour corners four Evangelists (none
of which they will endure, as knowing how opposite they are unto them) he
charged his Musket to shatter them down, but by the rebound of his own shot was
struck blind; If he did his God good thereby, he did himself and ill turn,
his wickedness falling on his own pate; He lay a long while in a woeful
condition, and never recovered his former sight: His life by Gods mercy was
reprieved, that he might repent, but he was surely scourged, that he might take
notice there is punishment for Sacrilege, and bear witness of that truth unto
his fellows, although he found more favor then Calisthenes, who attempting to
burn the Temples, by setting fire on the Gates, was for that act himself
burned; or Alcimus, who whilst he was pulling the house of God down, was
struck with a Palsy, and dyed in torment. Some would have thought, that, that
remarkable judgment overtaking him so on the sudden sustlaminated their
running on, and that striking of him blind, should have opened their eyes. But
let favor be showed to the wicked, yet they will not learn righteousness in
the land of uprightness, they will deal unjustly, and will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord; but Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see,
as thou fore-toldest by thy Prophet, Esaias 26. 10, 11, 13. it should come to
paile, Whenother Lords besides thee have dominion over us; They were not at all
deterred, neither left any ways un-attempted to get down that roof which
Ladders failed, they cut the Bell-ropes ( which if rightly applied, might have
cured their Itch) to eke out their tackling, till they reached it with their
Pole-axes, and brake down the carved works, Psalm. 7. 4. Afterward, espying
the rare Structure of stone-workes over the Altar, admired by all travelers
for the excellent artifices, which was no ways guilty of superstitious
workmanship, they made all of it rubbish, breaking up also the Rayles of which
they compiled bonefires, tumbling the Communion Table over and over, they were
also, so offended with all memorialls of the dead, (knowing themselves in the
number of those whose memories at the best shall perish, as if they had never
been) that not one Monument in the Church escaped undefaced, no not of the
Pious Benefactors (whose accusation was sufficient, they had done good to the
Church) nor those two fair Tombs of Ka herine Queen Dowag^r of Spain, the
Repudiate of King H. 8. and Mary, albeit Quuen of Scots. It was great a crime
to have been Queens, the marble walls, and guards of irons wherewith they
were surrounded and incircled, could not preserve them in ^epose from all their
miseries, but they would add this one unto the rest, to lay the Em^lemes of
their honors in the dust, pulling away the Hearle of black Velvet, and carring
away whatsoever was vendible: When their unhallowed toylings had made them out
of wind, they took breath afresh on two pair of Organs, piping with the very
same about the market place lascivious Jigges, whilst their Comrades daunced
after them, some in the Coapes, others with the Surplices, and down they brake
the bellows to blow the coals of their further mischief, and left any should
ring auke for the fire they had made, they left the Bells speechless, taking
out their clappers, which they sold with the Brass they flaied from the graven
Stones, and the Tin and Iron from other parts of the Church and Chappells
belonging thereto, which were many, and richly adorned, but the daughters sared
no better then their Mother; there was not suffered any window to remain
unshattered, or remarkable place in them unruined, their intent being to leave
those consecrated walls as a room fitted for vermin to nestle in, or which was
worse for Cap. Ashwell to exercise his Soldiers in, where while he was in Town
he made his Rendezvous, and when they went away, set fire on some part of the
wood-work, to have burnt the remainder down, if it had not timely been
discovered; neither did the Cloisters attending, escape better then those they
were made to wait upon, though these, both in their roof and glazing, might be
compared with the chiefest Cathedrals, the first square being beautified with
the History of the Old Testament, the second of the New, the third showed the
whole relation of those by whom the Church was builded, the fourth presented us
with all the Effigies of our Kings since william the Conqueror: But it seems,
those unreasonable and wicked men care for Scripture, and Princes, and Pious
Monuments all alike, their wide throats were as open Sepulchers, their
Sacrilegious appetites (being yet unsatisfied with devouring) must needs
swallow up the Lands appertaining to that Church; to which, that they might
pretend the juster title, they broke open the Charter House, Plundered away the
great Charter, all the Evidences, Leases, and other Writings belonging
thereunto, manifesting their parties desires to have all Estates of others to
come, and be at their Arbitrary disposalls, and they unto whom in right they
are due, to lie as these places and persons at this day, mourning in sackcloth
and ashes.

TO THE READER.
ENgland lately gloried in being Mistress of 28 famous Cathedral Churches,
beautified with such magnificent Structure, that no Nation in Europe could
equalize them; and of these, the Impiety and Irreligion of the Schismatic
Reformers of these times, has hardly left any one undefaced, though for the
present the exact relation of the particulars are not come to our hands. God in
his good time will, we doubt not, pour down his judgments upon the Actors
of these horrid Prophanations.

A Catalogue of the Cathedralls in ENGLAND and WALES.
1 Canterbury. 2 Rochster. 3 London. 4 Lincoln. 5 Chichester. 6 Winchester. 7
Salusbury. 8 Exeter. 9 Bath. 10 Wells. 11 Gloucester. 12 Worcester. 13
Lichfield. 14 Coventry. 15 Hereford. 16 Ely. 17 Norwich. 18 Oxford. 19
Peterborough. 20 Bristol. 21 Landaffe. 22 S. David's. 23 Bangor. 24 S. Asaph.
York province
25 York. 26 Chester. 27 Carlisle. 28 Durham.
Besides,
1 Rippon. 2 Southwell. And, 3 Westminster. Abbey,
A General Bill of Mortality, of the Clergy of London, which have been
defunct by reason of the Contagious breath of the Sectaries of that City, from
the year 1641. to this present year 1647. with the several Casualties of the
same. London
OR, A brief Martyrologie and Catalogue of the Learned, Grave, Religious and
painful Ministers of the City of London, who have been Imprisoned, Plundered,
barbarously used, and deprived of all live^^hood for themselves and their
Families in these last years: For their constancy in the Protestant Religion
establish^ in this Kingdom, and their Loyalty to their Sovereign.
The Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's, the Dean, Residen^^an^ies, and other
members of that Church, Sequestered, Plundered, and turned out. -- Albans
Wood-street. D. Wats Sequestered, Plundered, his wife and children turned out of
doors, himself forced to fly. Alhallowes Barking. D Lafield Pursivanted,
Imprisoned in Ely house, and the Ships Sequestered, and Plundered, afterward
forced to fly. Alhallowes Bread-street. Alhallowes Great. Alhallowes
Hony-lane. Alhallowes Less. Alhallowes. Lumbard-street. M^^eston Sequestered.
Alhallowes Staining. Alhallowes the Wall. Alphase. D. Hayle shamefully abused,
his Cap pulled off, to see if he were not a shaven Priest, voted out, and Dead
with grief.
Andrew Hubbard. D. Chambers Sequestered. Andrew Undershaft 1. M Mason through
vexation forced to resign. 2. M. Prichard after that Sequestered. Andrew
Wardrobe. D. (...) Sequestered. Anne Aldersgate. D. Clewet Sequestered. Anne
Black-fryars. Antholins Parish. Austins Parish, M. V^al Sequestered, his bedred
wife turned out of doors, and left in the streets. Bartholmew Exchange D. Grant
Sequestered. Bennet Fynck. M. Warfield Sequestered. Bennet Grace-Church. M.
Quel^b Sequestered. Bennet Paul's wharse. M. Adams Sequestered. Bennet Sheerhog.
M. Morgan Dead with griese
. Bo^^lph Billingsgate. M. King Sequestered and fore't to fly. Christ-Church.
turned out, and Dead
Christophers. M. Hanslowe sore't to resign. Clement East-cheap. M. stone
shamefully abused, Sequested, sent Prisoner to Plymouth, and Plundered. Dionys
Back-Church. M. Hammes Sequestered and abused. Dunstans East. D. Childerley
reviled, abused, and Dead
. Edmonds Lumbard-street. M. Paget molested, silenced, and Dead
. Ethelborough. M. Clark Sequestered, Imprisoned. Faiths. D. Brown Sequestered
and Dead
. Fosters. M. Ba^^y Sequestered, Plundered, forced to fly, and Dead
. Gabriel Fenchurch. M. Cook Sequestered. George Botolph-lane. D. Styles forced
to resign. Gregory's by S. Paul's. D. Styles forced to resign. Hellens. M.
Miller turned out. Dead
. James Dukes place. M. Sequestered. James Garlick-hithe. 1. M. Preeman
Plundered, and Sequestered. 2. M. Anthony his Curate turned out. John Baptist M.
Walmesley Sequestered. John Evangelist. John Zachary. M. Eldlyn Sequestered,
Forced to fly, and Plundered. Katherine Coleman. 1. D. Hill fore't to resign.
2. M. Kibbuts Sequestered. Katherine Cree-Church. M. Rush turned out. Laurence
Jury. M. Crane Sequestered. Laurence Pountney. Leonard East-^neap. M. Calse
forced to give up to M. Roborow, Scribe to the Assembly. Dead for want of
necessaries.
Leonard Foster-lane. M. ward forced to fly, Plundered, Sequestered, and Magaret
Lothbury. M. Tabor Plundered, Imprisoned in the King's Bench, his wife and
children turned out of doors at midnight, and he Sequestered. Magaret Moses.
Magaret New-Fish-street. M. Pory forced to fly, Plundered and Sequestered.
Margaret Pattons. M. Megs Plundered, Imprisoned in Ely house, and Sequestered.
Mary Abchurch. M. Stone Plundered, sent Prisoner by Sea to Plymouth, and
Sequestered. Mary Aldermanbury. Mary Aldermary. M. Brown forced to forsake it.
Mary Le-bow. M. Leech Sequestered, and Dead with grief
. Mary, Bothaw. M. Proctor forced to fly, and Sequest^ed. Mary Cole-Church.
Mary Hill. 1. D. Baker Sequestered, Pursivanted, and Imprisoned. 2. M. Woodcock
turned out, and forced to fly. Mary Mounthaw. M. Thrall Sequestered, and
shamefully abused. Mary Sommerset. M. cook Sequestered. Mary Stainings. Mary
Wool-Church. M. Tireman forced to forsake it. Mary Woolnoth. M. Shute molested,
and next to death, and denied a Funeral Sermon to be preached by D.
Holdsworth, as he desired. Dead
. Martines Iron-monger-lane. M. Spark Sequestered and Plundered. Martins
Ludgate. D. ^ermin Sequestered. Martins Ogars. D. Walton Assaulted, Sequestered,
Plundered, forced to fly. M. Moss his Curate turned out. Martins Outwich. D.
Pierce Sequestered, and Dead
Martins Vintry. D. Rives Sequestered, Plundered, and forced to fly. Matthew
Fryday-street. M. Chestlen violently assaulted in his house, Imprisoned in the
Computer, thence sent to Colchester Jail in Essex, Sequestered and Plundered.
Moudlins Milk-street. M. Jones Sequestered Maudlins Old-fish-street. D. Griffith
Sequestered, Plundered, Imprisoned in Newgate, when being let out, he was forced
to fly. Michael Ba^h^shaw. D. Gifford Sequestered. Michael Cornhil. 1. D.
Brough Sequestered, Plundered, wife and children turned out of doors, His wife
Dead with grief
. 2.M. wild his Curate assaulted, beaten in the Church, and turned out. Michael
Crooked-lane. Michael Queen hithe. M. Hill Sequestered. Michael Querne. M.
Launes Sequestered. Michael Royal. M. Proctor Sequestered, and forced to fly.
Michael Wood-street. Mildred Bread-street. M. Bradshaw Sequestered Mildred
Poultry. M. Moden Sequestered, and gone beyond sea. Nicholas Acons. M Bennet
sequestered. Nicholas Coleaby. M. Chibbald Sequestered. Nicholas Olaves. D.
Cheshire molested, and forced to resign. Olaves Hart-street. M. Haines
Sequestered. Olaves Jewry. ^. Tuke Sequestered, plundered, and Imprisoned. Olaves
Silver-street. D. Bo^sye abused, and Dead with grief
. (...) S^perlane M. E^cop Sequestered, Plundered, forced to fly, wife and
children turned out of doors. Peter's Cheap. M. Vochier Sequestered, and Dead
with grief
. Peter's Cornhill. D. Fairfax Sequestered, Plundered, Imprisoned in Ely house,
and the ships, his wife and children turned out of doors. Peter's Pauls-wharse.
M. Marbury Sequestered. Peter's Poor. D. Holswerth Sequestered, Plundered,
Imprisoned in Ely house, then in the Tower. Stephens Cole-man-street. Stephens
Walbrooke. D. Howel through vexation forced to forsake it, Sequestered of all,
and fled. Diverse since turned out. Swithins. M. Owen Sequestered. Thomas
Apostle. M. Cooper Sequestered, Plunred, sent Prisoner to Leads Castle in Kent.
Trinity Parish. M. Harrison. Dead with grief. Dead. 16
.


In the 97 Parishes within the walls, besides S. Paul's, outed 85.

Parishes without the Walls.
Andrew Holborne. D. Hacket Sequestered. Bartholmew, Grear. D. Westfield abused
in the streets, Sequestered, forced to fly, and Dead
. Bartholmew Less. Bride^ Parish. M. Pa^^er Sequestered. Bridewell Precinct. M.
Brown turned out. Botolph Aldersgate. M. Booth sequestered. Botolph Asgate. M.
Swadlin sequestered, plandred, imprisoned at Gresham College, and Newgate, his
wife and children turned out of doors. Botolph Bishopsgate. M. Rogers
Sequestered. Dunstans West. D. Marsh Sequestered, and Dead in remote parts
.. George Southwarke. M. Sequestered. Giles Cripplegate. 1. D. Fuller
Sequestered, Plundered, Imprisoned at Ely house. 2. M. Hutton his Curate,
assaulted in the Church, and Imprisoned. Olaves Southwark. D. Turner
Sequestered, Plundered, fetch^ up Prisoner with a Troop of Soldiers, and after
forced to fly. Saviou^s Southwarke. Sepul hres Parish. M. Pigot the Lecturer
turned out. The Temple-church. D. Littleton forced to fly, and Sequestered.
Thomas Southwark. M. Spencer Sequestered and Imprisoned. Trinity Minori^s.
In the 16 Parishes without the walls, outed 14. Dead, 2
.

In the 10 Out-Parishes.
Clement Danes. D. Dukeson Sequestered, Plundered, forced to fly. Covent Garden.
M Hall Sequestered, and fore't to fly. Giles in the Fields. D. Heywood
Sequestered, Imprisoned in the Compter, Ely house, and the Ships, forced to
fly, his wife and children turned out of doors. James Clarkenwell. Katherine
Tower. Leonard Shore-ditch. M. Squire Sequestered, lmprisoned in Gresham
College, Newgate, and the Kings Bench, his wife and children Plundered, and
turned out of doors. Martins in the Fields. D. ^ray Scquestied, Imprisoned,
Plundered, forced to fly, and Dead in remote paris
Mary White-chappel. D. Johnson Sequestered. Mazdalen Bermondley. D. Pa^ke
Sequestered. Savoy. 1. D. Balcanquel Setquestred, Plundered, forced to fly, and
Dead in remote parts
. 2. M. Fuller forced to fly.
In the 10 Out-Parishes, cuted 9. Dead 2
.

In the adjacent Towns.
The Deane and all the Prebends, of the AbbyChurch Westminster, (but only
^ambart O^banston) Sequestered. Magarets Westminster. D. ^imberly Sequestered.
Limb^th. D. Featley Sequestered, Plundered, Imprisoned, and Dead ^ (...)
. Newington. M. Heatb Sequestered. Hackney. M. Moore Sequestered. Reddrisse.
Islington. Diverse Ministers turned out. Stepney. D. Stamp Sequestered,
Plundered, and forced to fly.
In the adjacent Towns, besides these of the Abby-Church, and ^slington, outed
7. Dead^
.

The total of the Ministers of London within the Bills of Mortality, (besides
Paul's and Westminster) turned out of their Livings by Sequestration and
otherwise, 115. Whereof Doctors in Divinity, above And the most of them
Plundered of their Goods, and their wives and children turned out of doors. 40.
Imprisoned in London, and the Ships, and in several Gaoles and Castles in the
Country. 20. Fled to prevent Imprisonment. 25. Dead in remote parts, and in
Prison, and with grief. 22. About 40 Churches now void, having no constant
Minster in them.
Vsque quo Domine?

Rev 6. 10.
2 Chronicles. 13. 9. Have ye not cast out the Priests of the Lord, the sons of
A^aron, and the Levites, and have made you Priests after the manner of the
Nations of other Lands? So that whosoever comes to Consecrate himself with a
young Bullock and seven Rams, the same may be a Priest of no gods. 2 Chronicles. 36.
16. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his Words, and misused
his Prophers, until the wrath of the Lord rose against his people, till there
was no remedy. Luke 6. 22, 23. Blessed are you, when men shall hate you, and
when they shall separate you, ((...). shall Sequester you) and shall reproach
you, and cast out your name as evil ((...), as Malignant) for the Son of
Man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for behold your reward is
great in Heaven, for according to these things did their Fathers to the
Prophets. Phil. 1. 28, 29. In nothing be ye terrified by your Adversaries;
which to them is an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and
that of God. For unto you the grace is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. 2 Timothy, 4. 3. For the
time will be, when they will not endure whole some Doctrine; but louving
itching ears, shall. be ape to themselves Teachers according to their own
private lusts. I Pet. 4.16, 17.18. If any man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this behalf. For the time is
come, that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at
us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the
just man be saved with difficultte, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? The end.

