The taking of TIVERTON, WITH THE Castle, Church, and Fort, BY Sir Thomas
Fairfax, ON THE Lord's Day last, October. 19. 1645.

Wherein was taken Colonel Sir Gilbert Talbot, the Governor. Major Sadler,
Major to Col. Talbot. 20. Officers of note. 200. Common Soldiers. Four Piece
of Ordnance. 500. Arms, with store of Ammunition, Provision, and Treasure.


ALSO The several Defeats given to Goring, by his Excellency, and all Gorings
Forces fled before him.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for R. A. October. 23. 1645.

THE TAKING OF TIVERTON, Castle, Town, Church, and Fort, By Sir Thomas Fairfax.
SIR:
IT has pleased God still to bless our endeavors above expectation, all the
glory be given to God. We have taken in Tiverton, both the Town, Castle,
Church, and Fort, a place of so great strength, that had not the Lord done
wonderfully for us, we might rather have admired their strength, than expected
to be Masters of it; the manner whereof, together with other passages since my
last, I have here informed you, since our advance from Chard until this
present. We advanced on Tuesday the 14 of October instant from Chard, and
marched to Honniton; and Gorings horse (through the carelessness of some of our
Guards) fell upon our out-quarters, and took some forty Dragoones and Foot,
and those horse of Gorings returned presently to their quarters about Exeter;
we quartered that night, and all Wednesday, and Wednesday night about
Honniton, and met with some of Gorings straglers and others, we have (diverse)
come in to us, and on Wednesday the 15. of October instant, we advanced from
Hunnington and marched that day to Columbton, where the Lord Miller was
quartered with two Regiments of Horse and one of Dragoons, the town being
slightly fortified: but immediately upon our advance, they quitted that place
and fled; We had then intelligence, that Greenvill was with about two thousand
foot that day viz. Wednesday October. 15. instant at Bow, and it was supposed
that the next day he would be in conjunction with Goring, most part of his
Horses then quartered in the villages on this side of Exeter, about Cliffe,
Silverton, Stoake, Rue, Hucksham, and all the Parishes thereabouts; The Foot
(which formerly did belong to Gerhards Brigade of old) then quartered most of
them at Broadcliffe. On Thursday October. 16. instant, Major-Generall Massey was
ordered to advance to Tiverton, and so to quarted beyond the River with his
Brigade, and there was the good effect of that took in the enemies Quarters,
and Major General Massey did soon possess himself of the Town of Tiverton,
the Enemy marched away, only those who were left in the Castle, and the
Church, to keep those places. It was then conceived hard for us, nay almost
impossible for us to hinder the Enemies Horse from marching Eastward, if he do
attempt it with the whole strength, except Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell (with
his whole Brigade) come up to us; And that day we began to extend our quarters
toward Broadminch, and so nearer to Exeter.

On Friday the 17. instant, our General Sir Thomas Fairfax sat down before
Tiverton-Castle and Church, to take them in, and summoned the enemy to deliver
them up, of which being denied, we planted our batteries against them, which
went forwards that day and the next.

On Saturday October. 18. instant, our batteries were finished by the afternoon,
and on this day being the Lords day October. 19. instant, the General caused
several great pieces to be planted on the batteries against the Castle very
early, so that they were ready to play by break of day, and all our Cannon
began to play about seven a clock in the morning, against the Castle, and the
Enemy from thence answered us with their pieces, but did no execution upon us.

And after many shot that we had made against them, a Cannonier by one shot
gallantly performed this business, for he broke the chain of the Drawbridge
with a bullet, which passes over to the entrance of the Castle, which falling
down, the chain being so broken, our Soldiers fell on without any further
order from the General, they being loath to lose such an opportunity, and
loving rather to fight than to look on when God gives them such occasion, which
took good effect, for they soon possessed themselves of all; they presently
entered the Castle and Church, in which we had four men slain: yet such is
the mild and gentle carriage of the General, and his desire to spare the
effusion of blood, as much as may be, that notwithstanding they took it by
storm, yet he himself gave command, that quarter should be given to all those
who were alive: we took in the castle Sir Gilbert Talbot who was Governor of
the place, 20 other Officers, 200 Soldiers, four piece of Ordnance, good store
of Arms and Ammunition, and abundance of treasure, which was divided amongst
the Soldiers. The castle was very strong, and the works all regular. The
General intends to march on Monday for the relief of Plymouth, and we hear
that Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell did intend to quarter at Dorchester as the
last night, and comes on very hard marches to join with the General.
Gorings Horse are marched toward Plymouth.

Tiverton, October. 19. 1645. at nine a clock at night.

A List of what was taken at Tiverton.
Colonel Sir Gilbert Talbot, the Governor. Major Sadler, Major to Col.
Talbot. 20 Officers of note. 200 Common Soldiers. Four Piece of Ordnance. 500
Arms, with store of Ammunition, Provision, and Treasure.
FINIS.

