ROMA RUENS.

Dagon falling before the Arc, OR, The Glory of Christ over-shadowing all
other glories.

As it was delivered in a Sermon before the Right Honorable Lord Major, and
the Right Worshipful Aldermen his Brethren, at MERCERS CHAPEL.

By Nicholas Rust, Chaplain to the Right Honourabl Lord Major.

Magna est veritas and praevalet.

MAL. 3.2. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. M.DC.L.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS FOOT, Lord Major of the City of London, and the
rest of the Honorable Senators of that Body.
IN obedience to your commands, I here publish the substance of what I
presented before you at Mercers Chapel; otherwise I should have been willing
to have lain dormant, being exceeding conscientious of mine own weakness and
insufficiency, (...).
for though I cannot deny (but must confess to the praise of the Lords super
abundant grace) that something of the light and glory of the Gospel in the face
of Jesus Christ, has dawned upon my dark heart; yet this I know, that the
candle of the Lord cannot burn with a more dim light then in my self, for
although truth (in some measure) lives in me, yet clouds and darkness are
round about it: So that I have but little of the spirit in abundance of
infirmity of the flesh, yet truth is powerful though I be weak, and the glory
of it does outshine all other glories, though in the meanest instrument:
Therefore if any of the glory of Christ break forth in this discourse, 1 Cor.
1.28.
let him have the glory who has chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the mighty.

Honorable Senators, God has made you instruments to make this City a quiet
habitation for his people, and to lay a restraint on those that would molest
and vex them: we take it kindly, Math. 25.40.
yea Jesus Christ does take it kindly at your hands, that you will allow his
Saints, to have a place to rest their heads on under your Jurisdiction: we wish
you well in the name of the Lord, and our God continue your hearts, in this
love unto his Peculiar inheritance, for you must be comforted by the spirit of
Christ in all your sorrows and counseled by it in all your streights, John
14.26.
and assisted by it in all the difficult affairs of the Sat, therefore you do
well to indulge love and tender that spirit though in those who are very
contemptible in the eye of the world, 1 Cor. 1.28. Romans 13.1.
and not to hearken to such who would have the powers that are of God engaged
against God. Honorable Senators: God has called you unto places of
eminency, and committed a great people to your charge, and truly you need more
then the wisdom of Man to manage such a trust.

But he who called Peter forth to walk upon the waters (saying come) gave him
that power, Math. 14.29. 2 Cor. 12.10.
whereby he was supported on the waters: therefore never fear to engage for
God, 2 Cor. 1.5. Sicut abundant passiones Christi, sic a(...).
if ye have a call from God: for the more oppositions ye meet withal, the more
encouragements, and divine assistances shall come from God, to carry you
through such difficulties and oppositions. You have had plentiful experince
hereof: for even to admiration God has appeared for you, in the mount he has
been seen, and in the maidst of all these storms, you and your Relations have
been under the protection of our Redeemer: yea the presence of God, has stood
round about your City, so that your enemies rock has not been as your rock,
themselves being witnesses. Oh how are ye engaged to the God of your salvation,
who has not given you victories to make your selves great, Isaiah 58.6. Psalm.
144 14 Isa iah 58.12.
or to exalt your own interest by them: but to exalt his name, in removing
every heavy burden and letting the oppressed go free, that there might be no
complaining in your streets. Then you shall be styled the Repairers of our
breaches, the Restorers of the paths to dwell in, and the blessings of many,
difficilima quae pulchra.
who are ready to perish would come upon you. I know (noble Sanatours) that in
the prosecution of truth, justice, and righteousness, Si Deus nobiscum quis
longa nos. 1 Pet 4. ult
you will meet with many adversaries: yet who can harm you while God stands by
you to keep all your bones? Oh both in doing, and suffering commit your selves,
your bodies and souls to him, as unto a faithful preserver: Psalm. 23. Exoe 33,
14.
Oh Remember how the glorious presence of the Lord of hosts has gone along
with your Armies step by step: that through Europe you have been famous for the
presence of God amongst you; therefore fear nothing, but the withdraw meant of
that blessed presence: for while it does continue with you, Joshewa 2.9.
you will be formidable to all the Nations round about you, and the Majesty of
heaven with you, and for you, will attract and draw forth the envy, and
indignation of the Nations against you: (who are very angry, and their wrath is
come) but Sanctify the Lord in your hearts, Revel. 11.18. Psalm. 3.6. Romans 8.
and make him your fear: and then you may bid defiance to them, and the worst
that they can do; for though ye had Nations, Kings, and Kingdoms, for your
adversaries, yet God would establish you: Esaias. 54. verse. 14. John. 10.29.
for the Lion of the tribe of Juda, who does defend, and save us, is stronger
then the roaring Lion, who seeks to devour us: In your poverty, and
weakness, Exodus. 14.13.
your eyes have seen the salvation of God: Oh therefore do not decline, and
Bauke, the cause of Christ, and his people, if itshould be low, and desperate
(in humane probabilities) you would utterly lose your glory, and become so
weak, impotent, and contemptible, if you should desert the power of God, and
seek to fortify your selves, with the arm of flesh: that all humane
dependencies should not support you. Straglers are taken by the enemy, when
those soldiers that follow their Captains, and stand to their Colers, are
safe. Look up to Jesus, the Author and finisher of your faith, Heb: 17.1. Heb.
2. Ephesians. 6.14.
keep close to the Captain of your Salvation. Buckle on your harness, gird the
sword of the spirit about your loins, and take unto you the Helmet of
salvation, and the brestplate of righteousness, and follow him, Rvel. 19.13.
who sits upon a white horse, clothed in a vesture dipped in the blood of his
sufferings, (whose name is the word of God) and ye will say that there is no
glory, like unto this glory: for it will continue with you, when all other
glory shall be over-shadowed, and out-shined. Thus (desiring pardon for my
boldness) I commit and commend ye all, your City, families, friends, and
Relations, to the grace, and goodness, of our Redeemer.

Your daily Orator at the Throne of grace NICH. RUST.

Mark 9.7. And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out
of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, Verse 2.
Jesus takes with him Peter, James and John, and went up into a high mountain
to pray (as Luke has it) for when we are to wait on God in such an ordinance,
Lukke 9.28.
we are to get into a mountain (that is) to be above the world; for you read
that Christ sent the multitude away when he was (thus) to converse with his
Father, Mat. 14.23.
so are we, to dismiss the multitude of earthly thoughts and cares, that we
may attend upon the Lord in such a duty without distraction.

Luke says, that as Christ prayed, Luke 9.29.
the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and
glistering: For the Lord leaves some impressions of his own glory upon those
that come to have communion with himself in those ordinances wherein he meets
their souls. Exodus 34.30.
Moses face did shine when he had been with God upon the mount. Oh it is good to
draw near to God. Psalm. 73. ult.


But as soon as Christ appeared: Verse 4.
Moses and Elias appeared with him in glory. By Moses, I do not understand the
person of Moses, but the ministration of Moses so far as it was Elementarie and
typical, Heb. 10.1.
a shadow of things to come, and so to be overshadowed, a glory which was to be
outshined by the glory of Christ. And by Elias, I do not understand the person
of John Baptist (who was Elias) but his ministration, so far as it was the
Baptism of water, (...). John 3.30.
an outward sign of the Baptism of Christ, a glory which was to be eclipsed by
the glory of Christ: I must decrease, but he must increase. Now these two
ministers (being put for the ministrations themselves) appeared with Christ:
for whenever Christ exalts his glory, other glories seek to stand up in
competition with it.

Peter is so satisfied with the vision of this glory, that he is content ta
take up his everlasting habitation in the mount: Master it is good to be here,
and to build tabernacles not only to Christ, but to Moses and Elias also, for
when creatures stand up in competition with Christ, we are ready to attribute
to them the glory of Christ, magnifying them as Co-adjutors and Concauses with
Christ, Habak. 1.16.
Sacrificing to our nets, building tabernacles to Moses and Elias, as well as
unto Christ.

But it is the design of the Father to honor Christ, Phil. 2.9.
and to give him a name above every name, that every knee may bow to him, and
all glory (below himself) abase it self before him; therefore Moses and Elias
shall not be able to endure the Luster of Christ's appearing who is the bright
morning star; Moses and Elias are overshadowed and darkened by Christ, their
glory is extinguised: no glory remained but the glory of Christ: Jesus was left
alone. For while Peter thus spoke: A cloud overshadowed them, and a voice came
out of the cloud, saying, this is etc. From the words thus opened we may
observe, That --

The glory of Christ does overshadow and outshine, Doct.
all other glories; that stand up against it, or in competition with it.

The Prophet Isaiah speaking of the light and glory of Christ which should
break forth in the time of the Gospel, Isaiah 40.
discovers the vanity of all fleshly glory, how it should wither, die and
fade before this glory, at the 5 verse. The glory of the Lord shall be revealed
etc. and at the 7 verse. The grass withers, the flower fades etc.

Daniel saw in a vision one like the son of man, Dan 7.14.
in his glory, Kingdom and dominion: and see there how the glory of those
great and powerful Monarchies did pass away and vanish before this glory (it
would have grieved the heart of any Royallist to have seen it) for the Thrones
were cast down, verse 9. Their glory utterly marred, their power quite broken,
and all by a little stone cut out of the mountains without hands, verse 26.
Dan. 2.34.
Their dominion is taken away; consumed and destroyed to the end, for the
handwriting was gone forth against them, MEAN MEAN TEKEL EUPHARSIN. They were
weighed in the balance, and found light, and their Kingdoms were departed
from them. Dan. 5.25
The Prophet Esaias in another place does display (most divinely) the
magnificence of this Transcendent glory, Esaias 2.10.
and see how the lofty looks, high thoughts and great imaginations of men are
humbled and brought down, verse 10. Great and mighty ones hide themselves in
the dust for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, yea, verse
11. the lofty looks of men shall be humbled, and the haughtines of men shall
be bowed down: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, the day of the
Lord of Hosts shall so be upon every one that is proud and lofty, that mighty
ones shall be cast from their seats, and the strongest oaks of Bashan will not
be able to stand against this mighty blast.

When the Angel came down from heaven who lightened the earth with his glory,
Rev. 18.1.
down came Babylon and all her glory, Verse 16, 17, 18, 19.
so bemoaned and lamented by her admirers and adorers: for in one hour so great
laches came to naught, for the glory of the new Jerusalem the City of God does
even swallow up the glory of creatures! Rev 21.24.
The nations do bring their glory into it. Thus you see the glory of Christ
does overshadow and outshine etc. But I shall no longer stay in Generals, but
come to particulars. First the glory of the wisdom of Christ does overshadow
the wisdom of the world; so that it is confounded by it, when it stands up in
competition or in contestation with it: for the wisdom, learning, Acts 6.9.
policy and sophistry of the world did stand up against (and contest with)
the wisdom of God in Steven; but they were all borne down by the Majesty and
power of it; for the truth of God is powerful, Romans 1.16.
yea it is the power of God to salvation and cannot be resisted in the meanest
and weakest instrument but it will bear all before it; the Libertines,
Cyrenians, and Alexandrians were not able to resist the spirit whereby he
spoke, Acts 6.10.
or with all humane abilities to maintain dispute against him, for the school
of tyranny is too weak for the school of Christ: The Lord Jesus at twelve
years old disputed with the Doctors, confounding them and amazing them with his
questions and answers; so powerful was the wisdom of God in the child Jesus:
Luke 2.48.
Now this wisdom of God (which dwelt in Christ) is in all the Saints, though
in a less measure, yet sufficient to deal with powers and principalities, 1
Cor. 1.27.
for God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
weak things to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the
world, and things which are despised, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that so the power of God being seen in weak
instruments, no flesh might glory in his presence, for this treasure is in
earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
that the praise might be of God and not of men: Thus the glory of the wisdom
of Christ does darken the glory of humane wisdom, for his glory does
overshadow all other glories.

Secondly, The glory of Christ's power does overshadow and outshine (that is)
does confound and bring to nothing the glory of all fleshly power that stands
up against it, or in competition with it, Zach. 4.7.
see a glorious discovery of this in the Gospel by Saint John, Judas comes
with a band of men and officers, John 18.4.
with weapons, lanthorns and torches to apprehend the Lord of life and glory;
but Christ meets them in the power and Majesty of the Godhead in him, and
said, whom seek ye? and they fell backward to the ground, notwithstanding all
their fleshly and worldly assistances they could not stand before him; the
power of the creature fell before the power of God in Christ: therefore no man
could take away his life, he laid it down of himself.

When Saul had naught but a creature-power to support him, and his kingdom, in
the absence of the power of God, which was departed from him; see how desolate
his house was left, see how the glory of it did fade and die away, (as any
form) wherein God has appeared) does perish and come to nothing when God does
withdraw from it.) And though Saul did seek to fortify himself with fleshly
power against the power of God with David, and to keep up his esteem and honor
in the hearts of his subjects, and to quicken in them an admiration of his
greatness (which he saw decaying) honor me good Samuel before the people, but
all was ineffectual; for to what purpose do we spice, embalme and preserve a
carcass when the life and spirit is gone out of it? oh how did his heart
meditate terror in the apprehension of the withdrawment of the divine
presence! his pulse did beat very low, and a cold sweat stood upon his limbs;
yea, all the symptoms of a dying glory: oh what strivings and struglings for
life! he ran to Ephraim, called to Assyria: to the World, to the Devil, to the
Witch of Endor. Oh his sad complaint! God is departed from me, and the
Philistines make war against me; but all these struglings were but the last
prongs and pangs: for his glory expired, and the glory of his house; the house
of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, and the house of David stronger and stronger;
the power of God with David did swallow up the power of the creature which was
with Saul, for the glory of Christ does overshadow and outshine all other
glories.

But that you may see further proof of this, viz. Isay 14.11.
that that glorious power of Christ does overshadow and confound all other
powers that exalt themselves against it: cast your eye upon that place in
Isaiah, where you read of the aspiring Tower of Babel, lifting up it self, and
seeking to overtop the power and kingdom of Christ, for Verse 13. Thou have
said in thy heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my self above the
stars of God; but this power that shoke kingdoms, and made the earth to
tremble, is brought down; this high and lofty Tower does tumble before the
power and glory of Christ's Kingdom: Thy pomp is brought down to the grave,
Verse 11. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer? see how strongly and
irresistably this power does act even in a weak form: there shall not any man
be able to stand before thee, said God to Joshuah (that is) before my power and
presence with thee, for as I was with Moses, Josh. 1.5.
so will I be with thee, etc.

This power was very dreadful when the Philistines cried out, let us flee, 1 Samuel 4.7. Deus venit in castra vae nobis vae nobis.
etc. for God is come into the camp of Israel: who can stand before these
mighty Gods? These are the Gods which smote the Egyptians, all the inhabitants
of the Land did faint because of the presence and power of God with his people
Israel, for that power breaks all powers that dash against it. The Kings of the
earth, Revel. 17.14. Joh. 2 11.
make war against the Lamb, but he overcomes, for he is the Captain of our
Salvation, the most mighty, high and victorious King of kings, Rev. 19.19.
and Lord of lords, and when the glory of his power breaks forth, Mat. 1.24.
it overshadowes the glory of all other powers.

Thirdly, The glory of Christ's rightousnesse does overshadow, darken and put
out the glory of man's righteousness: The Apostle Paul, before the revelation
of the glory of Christ's righteousness to his soul, did glory in his own
righteousness, Phil. 3.
viz. his obedience and conformity to the Law, for he knew no other name
wherein he should be saved; but thought his own works must commend him unto
God, and he esteemed himself in his self-righteousnesse, adorned with a
glorious robe; but afterward upon the knowledge of Christ, it did appear a
filthy rag, and it was a very loathing and abhorrence to his soul,
notwithstanding his legal privileges and blameles walkings touching the Law,
(...).
he counted all dung and dross in comparison of Christ; for as soon as the
Gospel came, his sin revived, his self-righteousnesse died: that was crucified
to him, and he to that, when the light of truth did shine into his heart, he
was so overshadowed with the glory of the Gospel, that the glory of the Law was
outshined; for it was no glory in respect of that glory, which was to be
revealed.

The righteousness of man is as an early dew, and as a morning cloud which
do pass away, the dew and cloud vanish before the Sun, Hosan.
and the righteousness of man is confounded and darkened by the Sun of
righteousness; nothing does so humble and abase the soul as the beholding this
glory of Christ's righteousness, nothing does so discover to the soul its own
unrighteousness, nor so pull down high thoughts and lofty imaginations in the
heart, as to have a vision of the purity and righteousness of God in Christ.
Job. 42.5.
I have heard of thee (said Job of this Divine glory) but now mine eyes see
thee, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. Oh how low does the glory of
Christ lay the glory of man! for when the glory of God appeared unto Isaiah, he
was so astonished and confounded, Isay 6.5.
that he cries out, woe is me, I am undone, I have seen the Lord, I am a man of
polluted lips; I am a sinful man (said Peter when he had seen the Lord Jesus)
nothing does so manifest to the creature its emptiness and insufficiency, as a
sight of that eminency and fullness that is in Christ; then we see that we are
nothing, that we have nothing, and can do nothing when the Lord discovers
himself to be all in all, for his glorious righteousness does overshadow and
eclips the glory of all earthly righteousness.

Fourthly, The glory of Christ's truth and worship does quite blast and
overshadow the glory of man's worship, that is to say, a will worship according
to the commandments of men: Oh how have we lived upon this worship, and fetched
all our refreshment from it! speaking peace to our own souls, for the
perfunctory and formal performance of any particular act of this worship, Isay
50. ult. 29.13.
though according to the commandments of men: But when that glorious Sun of
Divine truth has arisen upon us, and caused his light and glory to dawne upon
our dark hearts; 2 Pet. 1.19.
this well of our former refreshment, has been utterly exhausted, we could no
longer find comfort or satisfaction in men's formalities; we might famish for
any soul-nourishment that we could find in them, they have appeared to us, so
void of the presence of Jesus Christ, Luke 24.5.
that we should seek the living among the dead, to seek him there: so that the
discovery of Christ in his truth, and Gospel, has disovered the emptiness,
Isay.
and destroyed the very being of those things whereon we have lived: for the
glory of Christ does overshadow all other glory.

Now Divine worship cannot but darken the glory of Will Worship, for the truth
of God must needs overcome and vanquish the devised worship of men: many are
the devises of men, but the councels of God must stand: the word is powerful
for the subversion of strongholds, and bringing down humane imaginations:
therefore this may comfort us in the midst of all the errors of the enemies
wherein we live; truth shall get ground of error, but error shall not get
ground of truth, for truth is armed from heaven against opposers: therefore we
are resolved in this cause of Christ's, to put it to the utmost trial, which be
strongest, the lies and falsehoods of men, or the truth and Gospel of Jesus
Christ: Heb. 1.
surely the brightness of this glory will outshine all other glories, for can
darkness stand before the light? if the day break the shadows must fly away,
Cant. 4.6.
the Kingdom of the beast was ruined by the preaching of the Gospel, because
it was full of darkness; that kingdom is an effect of darkness, Revel. 16.10.
and a cause of darkness, brought forth by darkness, Ex quibus nascimur ex
iisdem nutrimur. Luke 2.32. 2 Pet. 1.19. Rev 2.28.
supported by darkness, it maintains darkness, and is maintained by
darkness; now Christ is a light to lighten the Gentiles, a light shining in a
dark place, the bright morning star, that very light and glory of the Father,
which must needs be destructive to the kingdom of darkness, which cannot
abide the brightness of his coming, for the luster of it is above all other
glory. 2 These. 2.8.


Yea further, Will Worship is set forth (in way of comparison) by wax which
melts before the fire: the doctrines and traditions of men melt and dissolve,
when the Sun of Gospel Light and truth waxes hot. Rev. 9.2.
Will Worship is the smoke of the bottomless pit: now smoke does vanish, clouds
are scattered and dissipated when the Sun arises. Let God arise, Psalm. 68.1.
let truth break forth, and what shall be contrary to truth, and God, will be
scattered: even as smoke vanishes, so it will be driven away, and as wax
melts at the fire, so it will perish at the presence of the truth of God: so
that hay and stubble will not endure the fire, 1 Cor. 3.12.
which must try every man's work of what sort it is. The Prophet Malachi says
of Christ, Mal. 4.3.
Who shall abide his coming, for his coming is as a refiners fire, and fullers
soape: He alludeth to the custom of the refiners of subterraneal treasures,
who by fire purify the silver and gold ore, separating the dross from it: so
this refiner, the Lord Jesus, will cause all the dross of humane inventions in
the worship of God to pass away, to go forth as that scum and filth which will
not abide the purity of his coming; for no mixture of humanity will endure the
refiners fire: for the truth of God carries all before it, dashing the brats
of Babylon against the stones, breaking not only her Idols of courser
materials, as of wood and stone, but even those of purer matter, as of gold and
silver and precious sto^es; Rev. 18.12.
dlso vering not only the mystery of iniquity in gross forms, For the man
of sin has various forms, and though he acts in a new form, yet he is the
old serpent.
but even that which is more specious and spun with a finer thread, for the word
of the Lord is quick and powerful, sharper then a two-edged sword etc. Thus
the glory of Christ's truth and worship, does overshadow and put out the glory
of al humane and carnal ordinances: for the Angel which comes down from heaven
(with the everlasting Gospel) has great power, and the earth is lightened with
his glory. Rev. 18.1.


Lastly, the glory of Christ's promises and prophesies of his will and councels
do overshadow and outshine all the devises and wills of men (that is) the
devises, councels, and wills of men are not able to stand before the will and
council of God; Isay 46.10, 11
for first, the promises and prophesies of God must be fulfilled, and must take
place, Isay 14.24.
maugre all the actings, and conncels of men. Glorious things are prophesied of
the Church of Christ, in time of the new Testament, that her foundations shall
be laid with Saphirs, and Carbuncles, Isay 54.11.
her gates shall be made of Agats, and all her borders of precious stones: all
which are of high esteem, and value, with our Lapidaries that know the virtues
of these stones: now the enemies of the Church of Christ, Isay 54.15.
gather together, to hinder this glorious work, and to keep off the fulfilling
of these blessed Prophesies; for they had rather see Sions stones, Psul. 102.14.
lie scattered in the dust, then compacted together, to become a holy temple in
the Lord: but all their engagements are in vain, for when they rise up thus
against the work of God they fall; Verse 15.
when they gather together against it they are scattered; Verse 17.
and no weapon formed against this work does prosper; all these (says God to
Sion, concerning the Churches adversaries (shall gather together against thee;
but they shall fall for thy sake, for God rebukes Kings and Kingdoms for his
peoples sake; thus ye see when God does work, Isay 43.13.
none can let him: Tobiahs and Sanballats may scoff at the ways of God, and
set themselves against them: Nehem. 4.1, 2.
But the Temple shall be built, for not a title of the promises and prophesies
of God shall fall to the ground; Mat. 24.35.
they shall be verified though all men be found liars.

Then secondly, the councels of God do even baffle, and confound the devises of
men, therefore let them associate, and they will be broken in pieces; Isay 8.9.
let them take council, and it will come to nothing, for says the holy Ghost,
many are the devises of men but the councels of God shall stand: Isay 46.
for it is impossible they should be frustrated, by all the wisdom, and policy
of creatures. Oh man, Non est consilium contra dominum. Romans 9.
who art thou, that do contend, and contest with him that is mighty?

Thirdly, the designs of God, do bear before them even to the dust, all the
conspiracies, and combinations of men and devils, against them. The design of
God (in the second Psalm) is to exalt his son, Psalm. 2.8.
and to give him a name above every name: Phil. 2.
Now nothing does more dethrone man, and take away the glory of all flesh, then
the setting this Crown of glory upon the head of Christ, Isay 40. Psalm. 2.1.
therefore (at the first verse) The Heathens rage, and the Kings of the earth
stand up, and take council against the Lord and his Christ. But he that dwells
in heaven does laugh them to scorn, for they imagine a vain thing, when they
think to hinder the design of God from being carried on: now this is the
design of God, Verse 6.
even to set his Son upon the holy hill of Sion.

Fourthly, the will of God does frustrate all the wills of men, Psalm. 46.3.
in the 46. Psalm; men seek to exalt themselves, and their own wills, which is
the ground of those commotions there spoken of: but God writeh vanity upon all
their endeavors: the will of none but God can take place. Verse 10. and ult.
Bestill (says he) and know that I am God, and I will be exalted in the earth.

They fight, Psalm. 46.6, 7, 8, 9.
war and contend even until they fill the world with combustions, and
distractions, and all to set up their own crooked will; but God exalts himself
and makes them all come in and lick the dust before him: Know that I am God.
Verse 10. Oh brethren, from whence comes wars and fightings? James 4.1.
even from our lusts that war in our members: we lust to have our own wills,
and interest, set up and advanced: Royallists would have their will, and way,
else no peace: Papists also would have their willworship established; and the
little horn of the beast would have all the other horns knocked off, Dan. 7.8.
to set up it self: well brethren, this is our comfort, in the midst of all
these clashings, no will but the will of God, shall, or can take place. Oh that
we could see all these various workings, and contextures of providence, all
transactions in our Commonwealth, as so many lines meeting in the will of the
Lord: then we should all cease from tormenting our selves in the prosecution of
our own wills, Mat. 26. Verse 39. Psalm. 37 7.
and lie down satisfied in the will of the Lord, as in the Center of our rest:
Dear hearts, there is sweet repose.

Thus much for the Confirmation of the Point, I now come to Use and Application.

First, If the glory of Christ does overshadow and outshine all other etc. then
this will inform us why carnal hearts do so oppose the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
even because it does eclips and darken all natures glory.

So that if you will allow creatures to rise up against and oppose that which
is destructive to their beings, you must not wonder why natural men (who have
their life and glory in fleshly wisdom, fleshly strength, and fleshly
righteousness) should rise up against the ministration of the Spirit and
Gospel, which does so darken and put out all these. Nature you see (in all)
does seek to preserve it self, and to resist whatsoever may procure her
destruction and annihilation, therefore nature in us does quake at the thought
of death. Oh beloved the Gospel in its glory, does confound and annihilate all
fleshly excellencies; it does cause their glory to fade and die; Therefore you
may cease your admiration, why in City and Country there should be so much
enmity against Christ, his truth and Gospel: Men that would exalt themselves
and be something in the esteem of their own parts and gifts, something in their
own wisdom, glory, strength, Gol. 3.11.
righteousness, cannot but set themselves against him who will be all in all.

First, you shall see how men that exalt themselves in an earthly glory, cannot
bear nor brook the glory of Christ's kingdom and Gospel, their knees do smite
one against another, Dan. 3.5.
their thoughts are troubled when many run to and fro, Mat. 2.3.
and knowledge is increased, when many come to join unto the Lord, and to give
up their names to Jesus Christ; their hearts, I say, do meditate terror, as if
the Saints gathering together would be their scattering; as if their glory
would be their shame: this did trouble Herod, and those tidings out of the
North (in the book of Daniel) did perplex Babylon; Dan. 11.44.
therefore Herod sought to slay the child Jesus; therefore the Kings of the
earth made war against the Lamb, Rev. 17.14.
before whom they thought the honor, pomp and dignity of their Kingdoms
could not stand, and that is the reason why so many Princes and Rulers, Psalm.
2.2.
have so endeavored to suppress the kingdom of Christ, and to hinder it from
taking place in their Dominions: have any of the Rulers believed on him?

Secondly, they who magnify humane wisdom and humane worship, how they set
themselves against the Lord and his Christ: the learned Greeks esteemed the
preaching of the Gospel foolishness; the learned Rabbis could not receive it,
but oppose it; it did so confound the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27.
and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent: the adorers of Diana
filled the City of Ephesus with confusions, Acts 19.27.
tumults and insurrections against the Gospel of Christ, because it laid the
magnificence of their great Goddess in the dust.

Thirdly, men that exalt fleshly righteousness, making a fair show in the
flesh, glorying in their duties, external conformity, Gal. 3.
and qualifications, as if by their actings they could do something in order to
their justification and salvation, are much offended at the preaching of the
righteousness of faith, the glory whereof did cause the righteousness of
Ephraim to vanish like a morning cloud, or like an earthly dew. The Scribes and
Pharisees, men zealous of the Law, Phil. 3.
were great adversaries against the Gospel, and many of Christ's hearers were
offended, and turned their backs upon his doctrine when he exalted the Fathers
free grace and power in the dethroning of the creatures freewill and ability.
John 6.6^.
No man (says Christ) can come to me except my Father draw him, or except it
be given unto him of my Father: Upon this many of his disciples went away, and
walked no more with Jesus; this was an hard saying, they could not bear it. Oh
nothing does so stumble nature as that which destroys nature: they exalted
themselves in the conceit of a power, will, ability by nature to come to God,
and to life and salvation by God: and now to have the glory of al these
blasted, for no truth does so discover the inability of the creature as this,
that no man can come to Christ except it be given unto him of the Father, it
brings down high thoughts of our selves, or any thing in our selves;
therefore said they among themselves, this is a hard saying, what? are we
nothing? have we of our selves nothing? and can we do nothing? Upon this many
departed, and made a recesse from Christ, they walked no more with Jesus: thus
you see the ground and reason, of all opposition against the Gospel: it
overshadoweth and out shines all other glory.

Now people may manifest their enmity and opposition against the Gospel either
by a fleeing hatred, or by a pursuing hatred, now the gospel is hated both
these ways because it outshineth all other glory. The Papists and others did
hate it with a pursuing hatred when they hunted after the blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of Jesus; but (blessed be our God) they are now under the hatches
who a long time sat at the stern; for God has made you Honorable Senators,
Cant. 2.15.
in struments to chain up those Foxes who preyed upon the Lambs of Christ, and
the Lord requite your love into your bosoms, that we can have a palce to rest
our heads, and set our feet upon, in the Land of our Nativity. We wish you well
in the name of the Lord, and we remember you in our addresses to the Thron e of
grace, that God would stand by you and be your glory, and your strength:
therefore rouse up your spirits like men that have God with you and for you,
and take courage to suppress that bloody and turbulent spirit of persecution
that fills the Commonwealth with so much combustion and distractition; that you
may not rest until you have banished it out of your dominions, Isaiah 11.6.
Isaiah 65.25. ult.
that so a more quiet and peaceable spirit may dwell with the lamb, and the
child may play upon the hole of the Asp, and there may be no devouring beast in
all the Lords holy mountain.

Secondly, enmity against the Gospel is manifested by a fleeing hatred: if you
observe the enemies, and secret Antipathies, among the creatures, you shall see
weak creature, flee from those creatures that are offensive to their nature, if
they cannot overpower them: qui mali aget odit lucem.
so when men are not able to hinder the breaking forth of the light of truth,
they shun it, and will not come unto it. In the second of Isaiah this fl eing
hatred is fully set forth, the whole Chapter speaks of the downfall of the
glory, power etc. of man, Isaiah 2. chap
yea all Idols shall utterly be abolished verse, 20. Yea so unable shall they be
to look the light in the face, or lift their head, before the wisdom and
truth of God; that at the, 21. verse they shall go into the holes of the rocks
and caves of the earth, that is, into dark and Subterreanean places; so
offensive is the light unto them, so unable are they to endure the luster,
Isaiah 2.21.
glory and Majesty of the Lord; which are so destructive to corrupt and carnal
ways, that they creep into the clefts of the rocks, and holes of the ragged
rocks, for fear of the Lord and glory of his Majesty: The words seem to be an
allusion unto the usual custom of those feeble creatures, who when they are
not able to deal with creatures stronger then themselves, who would destroy
them; they retire into such places, where they may best pro^ect themselves from
the power of their antagonists: as coneys will get into their boroughs for fear
of the dogs; thus meant when they cannot endure the pure and powerful preaching
of the Gospel in the place where they live, it does cast such contempt and
shame upon them and all their ways, they will get into the dark places of the
land, even into the borders of Zebulon and Neph-thali, the Regions and shadow;
of death, where people perish for want of knowledge; that so they may there
settle themselves upon the stool of traditions, and preserve their carnal
worship and ways from being blasted and overshadowed by the glory of the
Gospel. Thus men oppose and hate the Gospel, because it outshineth all other
glory, and they hate it either with a pursuing hatred, Revel. 22.15.
as dogs (for so the Scripture calls them) barking at the people of God and
ways of Christ, yea which is worse, they will bite also, and that when they do
not bark, crying peace, peace, and yet bite with the teeth: as the Prophet
says like those dogs we read of in a strange land; that barkewhen the Sun
rises, or like the dogs here with us: that fall a barking when the Moon
shines; thus many fret and fume, vex, perplex and torment themselves when the
Sun of righteousness arises with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2.
shines forth upon the souls of Saints with beams of light and refreshment.
But the Sun whichmelteth wax, does harden clay, for that which is our comfort,
poor wretches it is their torment; and you see also they hate the Gospel with a
fleeing hatred, like Bats and Owls, who cannot abide the light, retire into
holes and thickets, and like some beasts get into their dens when the Sun and
light break forth, they go into the caves of the earth and the clefts of the
rocks for fear of the Lord and the glory of his Majesty, when he arises, etc.

If the Glory of Christdoth outshine al other glories that stand up in
competition withit, Use 2.
then Honorable Senators, set not up any earthly glory in competition with
Christ, for it will be darkened and overshadowed. We set up gifts in
competition with Christ, when we admire them, and not Christ the author, and
donor of them, when we attribute more to them, then to the grace of God; we set
up humane wisdom in competition with Christ, when we make it absolutely
necessary for the dispensation of the Gospel, yea such an essential
qualification, as if without it none could be enabled for the holding forth the
word of life: now this does detract from the alfufficiency of Christ, 2 Cor.
12.9.
as if he could not furnish his Saints with the tongue of the learned to speak
a word in season to those that are weary without acquired arts and Sciences: I
do not speak against gifts and learning, they are excellent ornements unto
nature, and (for ought I know unto grace also, for the gold did beautify the
Temple, though the Temple did Sanctify the gold; but I speak against the
axalting them before Christ you know a candle is of good use in a darkeroome,
but when you light it up before the Sun, it is outshined and made useless. God
makes foolishness the wisdom of this world, confounds the understanding of
the prudent, and does destroy and blast the glory of all humane excellencies;
yea does power contempt upon them when they exalt themselves before him:
therefore if Christ does begin to overshadow these creature-glories, let us not
cry them up for though we should never so endeavor to quicken the admiration
of them in the hearts of men; yet we shall not be able to keep up their esteem,
and preserve their glory when they begin to die and fade, the spirit of the
Lord blowing upon them. We have had experience of this, 1 Samuel 5.2.
for we set up the Dagon of man's invented worship before the Ark of God, but
the power and Majesty of the truth of God made him lick the dust, for down he
tumbled before the Arc, and though the hand of God was exceedingly against us
in this desinge, yet such was our blind zeal, that we would not desist, but
lent Dagon our hand again, and gave him the other lift, and helped him into his
seat again; yea we fasted for him, and prayed for him until we had set him up,
but in the morning this Dagon was fallen unto the earth again, and had broke
his neck and hands, and nothing but the stump of Dagon remains, for nothing
does so deface and deform man's worship as the light of truth shining forth.

Truly we would have healed Babylon but she would not be healed, even let us
give her over as incurable. And honorable Senators, 1 Kings 18.
if Baal be a god let him plead for himself, lend him your power no more, for
he lays claim to a Jus Divinum, now if he be (as he pretends) of the stock
and lineage of David, if he be as John's Baptism) from heaven, he is armed from
heaven, and strengthened with a divine power against all ways that do oppose
him, and therefore need not be afraid to look the light in the face, or lift
up his head before the Arc. Also let us not set up humane power in competition
with Christ, let us not depend upon it as if a man could be delivered by much
strength, let us not glory as if our hill were made so strong, that it could
never be moved when the arm of flesh is with us; but especially take heed of
setting up humane power against Christ, least it be broken like a potters
vessel. You have seen these powers of the beast and Dagon fall before the Arc,
and if Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews before whom Hamon has begun to
fall, Esther 6.13.
he will fall and rise no more. Oh let all proud Hamans cease persecuting poor
Mordecai, least they bring an odium upon themselves before the Lord, for let
them engage their wisdom, power and greatness against the ways of Christ,
Magna est veritas and praevalet.
the power of Christ, even in babes and sucklings, persons mean and
contemptible, will bear them down before it; Psalm. 8.2.
for great is the Lord, and his glory does outshine all other glories.

If we would not be troubled at the breaking forth of the light and glory of
Christ, Use 3.
let us be willing this bright cloud should overshadow us, willing to be abased
and decrease, John 3.30.
that Christ may be exalted and increase. Beloved, I do discover the cloud
arising, and it will overshadow us, for though for present it appears about
the bigness of a man's hand, 1 Kings 18.45.
it will increase until it overspread the heaven, and darken all the glory of
man. Beloved, if my Astrology fail not, the glory of flesh will suffer a great
eclips, Isay 40.6.
and it will be visible with us if the air be clear: indeed for present it is
somewhat darkened with the smoke of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.3.
but there is hope that darkness will be dispelled with the beams of the Sun
of righteousness; Mal. 4.
now this prognostication though calculated properly for England, yet it may
serve indifferently for the whole world; for all the Nations round about us,
though they be stout and lofty, must bring their glory unto him who is to be
all in all. Rev. 21.26.
This prediction is grounded upon that 24 of Matthew, which place though
understood of Christ's last coming, Mat. 24.29.
yet is true also of his coming in the ministry of his Gospel, which does
darken the Sun, Moon and Stars; all these inferior luminaries of earthly glory
wax pale and dim, when the Son of man appears in his glory: but although the
Moon of earthly glory (which is subject to increase and wane and many changes)
be thus eclipsed, yet our glorious Sun shall never be eclipsed from the soul of
his people; yea it shall never go down, Isay 60.19.
for the Lord shall be their everlasting light, and God their glory, but from
others it will be eclipsed; there may be an interposition of thick clouds, and
darkness being upon them, they cannot see the King in his beauty, Jer. 17.5.
or as it is in, Jeremiah 17. they shall not see good when it comes, Mat.
11.25.
the grace, love, glory, and goodness of God in Christ shall be hidden from
them; or the Devil may interpose the body of the earth betwixt their souls and
the Sun of righteousness, and so depriv them of the joy and comfort of his
enlivening and in lightening influence. Mal. 4.2.


Therefore to conclude: your opposition will be against the Gospel, if your
glory and life be hid in creatures, because your very life is destroyed when
creature-glory is overshadowed, if you live and glory in things below the Lord
Jesus, Mat. 2.3.
with Herod, you will be troubled to hear of a Christ, with those in the
Revelations, Rev. 16.10.
you will be found to gnaw your tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of
heaven because of the prevailing power of truth, and breaking forth of
Gospel Light; and with the Merchants of Babylon, Rev. 18.16.
to weep and wail, crying, Alas, alas, because of the downfall of the Kingdom
of the Beast: But if your life be hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
you will rejoice when he appears: and you will be found in the number of
those that did shout until the earth rang again, when the Arc came into the
Camp of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.5. Rev. 19.1.
or of those that cry Hallelujah, Hallelujah, for the Lord rejoices: So
welcome will the appearance of Christ in his Gospel be unto your souls, that
this will be your joyful acclamation: John 12.13
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna to the Son of
David. Christians, study these truths, I leave them with you, and I commend you
to the grace and goodness of our Redeemer. Luke 19.38,


FINIS.

