A brief DISCOURSE Of the present power of Magistracy and Justice Occasioned
upon the trial of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn.

TOGETHER With several perticulers concerning his charge and out of the
Speeches of the Judge.

ALSO Some Arguments and conclusions drawn up out of Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburns, pleadings and defense, made to his charge on Thursday the 25 of
October. 1649.

COllected at the request of some friends for general satisfaction

LONDON Printed by B. Alsop, and are to be sold near Criplegate, 1649.

A brief DISCOVRSE OF LAW and JUSTICE, OCCASIONED Upon the Trial of Lievt.
Col. John Lilburn, and certain observations drawn from the speeches of the
Judges, and Mr. Lilburns Pleadings.
WHen we see one go or do amiss, though his feet or hands be the cause or next
actors and instruments of this error, yet we seldom say, are you lame, but
where are your eyes, or can you not see? what eye srwarvings or stumblings any
part of the body pollitique makes the blame lights not upon the Commonalty (the
immediate Delinquents) but on the principal lights in Magistracy or
Ministracy, which being as Guardians and Tutors of the rest, should either
prevent or reform their aberrations, for they are the Physicians of the soul,
body, and Commonwealth, which have the Therapeutic^, preservative Physic, to
heal and cure the maladies of the mind and body pollitique.

And herein miserable is the condition of these two opick pieces that they are
more subject, and that to more distempers then other inferior parts, yet
herein more, hat being hurt they are more impatient of cure not only of
searching acrimonious waters, but fearful of the most soft and lawny touches,
but most of all in this, that being once extinct, they have a void darkness to
the whole body, exposing it to the pits of destruction: As exceeding great on
the other hand is the honor happiness and use of th em ((...) and single,

For this our National body, It will little avail, either to applaud the one,
or to bewail the othet, I rather look about for Eye Salve, which may help to
descry and redress (if any thing be amiss:) and behold here a confection
tending thereto. It was prescribed first by Iethro, whom Moses calls the Eyes
of Israel, Numb, 10, 31. Then he said, I pray thee leave us not, for thou
know our camping pl^ces in the wil^ernesse, therefore thou may be our
guide. It is beyond all controversy, that Iethro was a godly and religious
man, and such a, himself, was his advise, sage and holy, allowed by God and
practiced by Moses, and so of good policy becomes sound divinity, his
private counsel became a public Oracle, ruling for the substance of it, all
Ages and persons.

Memorable and lovely it is for the very antiquity thereof, what price do men
set upon old Records, Coyns, and Statues? which passes by a charitable
fountain, bearing some ancient name, or date; yet how are defaced Copies, and
disfigured pictures better amended, then by reducing them to their original;
If the pipe fail, go we not to the head? Here is the rise or first draught of
Magistracy, Exodus 18.21. etc. And place over them to be Rulers; of thousands,
of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens.

The Office of Magistracy (as you have heard) being prescribed and allowed,
they are to judge the people, and the fruit and benefit of this judgment is
set down in these words, So shall it be easier for thy self. and they shall
bear the burden with thee, and thou shall the able to endure, and all this
people shall go to their place in peace.

Having given you some grounds and use of Magistracy, come we in this place to
take a view of that Office. The Magistrate, especially the Judges, ought "to
judge the people at all times, and by their diligence in hearing, to prevent
the agrievance of delays, "that they and the people may go home in peace, sit
under their own Vines and Fig trees (follow their callings) and that which is
the most precious of all, lead their lives in all Godliness and honesty, that
the Gold, blue and purple Silk, might glister and shine under that tree, the
Supreme power of the Nation,

The Magistrate is to distribute justice according to the Law of God, of
Reason, of Nature, and that law which is not consonant to the Law of God, the
rule of Reason, and of Nature is not to be exercised among Christians, but as
it is well observed by a person of eminency (the first day of Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn's trial) the Fundamental Laws of England, are
agreeable both to the law of God, Reason, and Nature, therefore ought not to be
contemned by any: to be without a power, is little else then to be without a
Government, and Mr. Lilburn himself has confessed, that it is better to live
under the worst of Governments, then where is none at all. And certainly that
is the best Commonwealth, where the people are in best order, for there is the
Magistrate a living law, and the law a dumb Magistrate, however the Stoics,
the Epicures, and Sectaries do diversely judge of that matter, and into several
opinions have divided the world, yet if any man dehort from vice, and exhort to
honesty, and virtue, let him not be adjudged an Enemy to Liberty and Christian
piety.

Those people therefore do live in great liberty and freedom, in deed who are
persuaded that to live according to law is perfect freedom, well then might Mr.
Lilburn be reprehended to be of a turbulent spirit, when whilst he pleaded so
much for Law, seemed to be ignorant by what Law he is tried, until one of the
Commissioners very learnedly, told him that they sat by authority of
Parliament, and that this was not by any new Law or custom, but excised in all
ages, both before, and since, the time of the Saxons.

Lilburn names a kind of appeal in all cases to a trial of a Jury of twelve
sworn men of the neighborhood and commended for a legal (as undoubtedly it
is) way of trial, which is now his own case; a grand Inquest of above twenty
grave Citizens, men of worth and integrity, find the indictment of high Treason
Billa vera and this by the Law, reduced to the purity, as in the time of our
Ancestors, and grounded on pure reason, the Law of God.

This being granted that the Laws of England have this foundation great care
ought to be taken that they be not altered, for as the disposition of men is
apt to innovation: so as soon as on Law is altered they desire the alteration of
the rest, the ancient Laws therefore ought to be observed, and sometimes (as
the Historian says) wisely corrected or amended. Amongst the Locrenses it was
ordained that if any man should invent a new Law, he should first propound the
same to the people wearing a halter about his neck, to the end that if it were
thought pernicious or unprofitable, as an author of evil, he might forthwith
suffer death. and Diodorus wrireth of a cerrain Law amongst the Egyptians
whereby every subject was compelled to give his name to the Magistrates,
declaring what kind of life he liked, how he lived, and what Art he exercised
and if any did tell untruly or not perform his duty sufficiently he was put to
death, but it not my intent to trouble you with any longer degression,
intending only to insist on what is most pertinent in the present purpose, and
therein a word or two more of the Law of England, which proceeds from true
reason, viz. to live honestly, to hurt no man, and to give to every one that
which is his own, who so therefore does abandon Laws is at least to be
suspected, and to contemn them is no less evil then to despise Nature,
Virtue, Reason God himself.

There was a saying amongst the Ephesians, That freemen ought as manfully to
defend the Laws, as the Walls of the City, for without walls the City might be
preserved, but without laws it could not, and where virtue and reason preserve
not men wi hin the bounds of Law, justice ought to be extended to the
punishment of evil, for the foundation of judgment is the Law, proceeding
from wise and just men, and before the skill of writing Laws was invented,
Justice had her habitation in the breasts of such men, and had such preheminece
there that it admitted not any thing to be done wickedly, or to disturb the
public good and peace of others, one principal part of justice. tending as
well to the settling peace in a commonwealth, as bringing the Offender to
exemplary and condign punishment.

Natural equity commands us to abstain from iniquity, and therefore we ought
to do nothing whereby another may be oftended

That ancient age of the world the Poets call Golden, through the benefit of
justice, no deceit, fraud, nor injury was known, then were no seditions, no
tumults, no hate, yet had Master Lilburne lived in that time (as in sundry
revolutions since) if one may judge a tree by its fruit, without prejudice to
the stock) he would not have found content, but have buzzed in the peoples ears
some inconveniences to bring them to a dislike with what they enjoyed, which
is the easier done in all times, seeing it is natura homine to commend the time
past, hope for the future, and find fault with the present.

He is only to be accounted a good man which imbraceth all kind of virtue, and
fears not to dye for his country, but men that are endued with a false kind
of wisdom, having their tongues but not their minds instructed, do commonly
endeavor to alter, and not to amend the public policy, there is not in a
Commonwealth a worse mischief then such men, for by subtilty, deceit, and
sedition, they labor to be thought somewhat.

But as man of all creatures in his perfection is the best, so if he forsake
Law and goodness he is of all other accounted the worst Mr. Lilburns bold and
peremptory language, this day at the Bar of that humble Court before whom he
must be tried must not bear him out, its the law must take place, he is ordered
to appear again to morrow, what the event will be I have not to dowith, time will
manifest. A learned Author says that a man may be permitted wice to speak his
sense, though doubtfully, but if the third time he fail, he shall not after be
admitted to speak more in that cause.

I conclude with a word or two concerning the reverent Judges and the rest of
the Commissioners of that honorable court they are men that aim at the glory
of God, the promoting of Religion, and safety of the Commonwealth, yea why may
I not say of them with St. Paul? they are sent of God for the praise of the
Godly and the punishment of evil doers, they sit in the Judgment seat in as
great (though not so slavish) a fear as Olaves when he looked upon the flead
skin of his father nailed up by Cambises, to conclude where I began, what can
we think wanting where Iethro's advice is raken to fear God, love the truth,
and hate covetuousnesse.

By L.R.

