NEWS FROM DENNINGTON CASTLE OR A true Copy of Major William Rives his Letter,
in VINDICATION of himself and others.

Wherein is related the Condition of the Leaguer before it, and the manner of
the late Sallie from the Castle, With what loss was on Both sides.

Licensed and Printed according to Order.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device

Printed for Henry Twyford, at the sign of the three Daggers in Fleetstreet,
near the Temple. April the first 1646.

News from Dennington Castle, or a Copy of Major Rives his Letter, etc.
SIR,
IT was my fortune yesterday to be very much engaged, but it pleased God to
give me deliverance. On Tuesday last we drew forth of this Town, and faced
the Castle on the Hill next Shaw, where we sent them a Summons, which was not
totally refused, but they desired three days time to send to his Majesty. This
was taken as dilatory, and that night to begin the siege, I had orders with
three Companies of mine, which were my own, Captain Doves and Captain
Knowles, and with Major Blagraves four Companies to begin the works, and to
raise a redoubt on the side of the May Pole hill, which was performed that
night without loss of one man. The next morning we began to heighten our
Work, but about seven of the clock the Enemy observing our Horse-guard drawn
off, fell out on us most desperately with all their Horse, and near all their
Foot, and beat in our by-guard, which was to discover clear to the Castle.
Our guard was scarcely in to give us all arm, but their Horse were in with
them, and ere we could have any notice fired their Pistolls on our men in the
pit where they were, which I had stickadoed round, to prevent the falling in of
their Horse. At the same instant their Foot fell on on the other side o^ us,
and beat in our Pyoniers, who retreating in some disorder to their Arms,
caused some distraction amongst our men. But of my own Company of Gray-coates
being next hand, I rallyed some suddenly, thinking to have manned our imperfect
redoubt, but ere I could do it, their Horse were in it; out of which I drawing
my self some Musketeers to the corner of it, beat them out, and killed one
of their Horses. As Soon as my Ensign saw that, he fell on the man with his
sword, and either killed or wounded him; But their Horse and Foot coming on,
he was forced to retreat to his Colors, And the Enemies Foot possessing the
trench of our Redoubt next the Castle under shelter of our Work, fired on us
in the pit, where their Horse could not break in. These did I by about twenty
Musketteires of my own Company beat back, but they being well seconded, came
on again, and fell in from the hill side of the pit, whiles their Horse fired
on the other side which was open. This put our men in such a maze, being so
suddenly, that they in the reere run away in confusion, which occasioned my
men being diserted to run also. My own Company which were formerly of the
Kings party fought very well, knocking it out at Musket stock, till they broke
many of their Muskets. And one of my Corporals beat a Trooper from his Horse
With his Musket, and took his Sword, but the man was rescued ere he could kill
him; we got two Carbines, and some Pistolls of such as were killed, or wounded
by us. And since I understand by some of my wounded Soldiers prisoners (came
off since) we killed and wounded as many of theirs, as they of ours, only the
loss of our Colors. Which might well have been saved, had there been any
Horse-guard, or that Major Blagraves men (though I cannot impeach him in his
person) had seconded me as they ought, but run first. At the cross Lane near
Dennington town I forced some men to stand and fire, which forced* the Enemy
to retreat in haft. And as soon as my men got more Ammunition, having spent
their own on service, I advanced again to my post, and almost finished the
Redoubt ere night. This night Colonel Martin finished it, and drew a line from
Dennington Lanes to shelter our approach, and this night or to morrow we plant
our Cannon and great mortar. And although we have a desperate Enemy, who the
first night shot, and one fally fought like devils, yet I hope we shall be able
suddenly to give a good account of the place. And had all done like the
gray-coates (however some say they run away to the Castle) they never durst
attempt us. And truly my Ensign with them fought gallantly; And of six only of
them taken, there are four wounded, and yet prisoners in expectation of
exchange. Ere long I presume you will hear that we shall repair our honor,
which is greater then our loss. I am

From the Leaguer before Dennington the 26. of March, 1646. Your humble
servant, WILLIAM RYVES.

FINIS.

