A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES at THETFORD IN THE County of NORFOLK the 15th
Day of March 1692/3.

By J. R. M. A. Rector of Brundal in Norfolk.

Published at the Special Instance and Command of the JUDGES.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, for Samuel Oliver
Bookseller in Norwich. 1693.

Aprilis 6. 1693.
Imprimatur,

Geor. Oxenden, Procan. Joh. Spencer. Nath. Coga. Ja. Johnson.


TO The Right Honorable Sr. JOHN HOLT Knight. Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND, AND
One of Their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council. And to the Honorable Sr.
THOMAS ROKEBY Knight. One of Their Majesty's Justices of Their Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas.
My Lords,
I Thought it so very incongruous for one in my humble Station to offer any
thing to the World, that indeed nothing but the Command of your Lordships could
have obliged me to publish the mean Discourse I presumed to preach before You.
But since You were pleased to give me leave to prefix your Great Names to it, I
humbly Present it to You again, assuring my self, that by that Means it will be
the more likely to promote the Design I had in Preaching it, and which I
believe You had in Commanding it to be Printed: Which if it may in any measure
obtain, I presume to say I shall so far be a Benefactor to my Country and to
the Church of God, and be always Thankful to Your Lordships for giving me the
Advantage of being so; ever remaining

My Lords, Your most Obedient Servant John Russell.

I Corinth. X. 10. Neither Murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the Destroyer.


WE have a great deal of reason to believe, that Wisdom and Goodness is the
constant rule of Providence in ordering the Affairs of the World; But yet it
often happens that we do not perceive that Wisdom, nor resent that Goodness
well; for the Truth is, we are too short-sighted to see the bottom of the
Counsels of God, and there is so great a variety and contrariety of Humors and
Interests in the World, that the most benign Dispensations, are necessarily
cross to some: But yet it is very reasonable that God should rule the World;
and unless Men will learn to submit to his Will, a great many are like to be
very uneasy and troublesome in it.

But to prevent this, that Great Lover of Mankind, who left no way unattempted
to do us good, has by his own Example recommended to us, the Duty of
Resignation, and the prudence of a Patient conduct in all things: And his Holy
Religion has something peculiar in it, to promote such Temper in Men, as may
create no Disturbance in the World, but yield glory to God, and ease to
themselves, under all the Vicissitudes of that which we call Fortune. And
herein we have very little reason to suspect him of so unkind a Design, as to
dispirit Men, and make them content to be Miserable; for he propounds the most
rational means for Redress, under real Afflictions, and that is, to apply
themselves to him who has the management of all things in his own hand, Phil.
4.6.
and by prayer and supplication to make known their Requests unto God: But
then, on the other side, he has too great a sense of his own, and his Fathers
Honor, to countenance quarrelling at the order of Heaven, and especially in
evident designs of Mercy and Goodness, although they do not just suit their
Interests or Wishes. And as in such cases, there is something in men that will
not suffer them to make their complaints unto God, so there is also something
that will be exciting discontent; and if not suppressed, will ferment and sour
their Minds, till it break out into open Disgusts, and dishonorable and
unworthy Reflections.

But then as Almighty God is not so much concerned, in such cases to grant
redress, as he is to observe and resent the affront to his Wisdom and Goodness;
so when such unreasonable Discontents, do break out into expressions of
Contempt, it seems both necessary and just that he should show his Displeasure
upon such great Provocations: And some very remarkable Instances we have of
these things in the Children of Israel, which our Apostle refers to in the
Text; Exodus 2.23, 24, 25.
when they sighed by reason of their Bondage, and cried, their cry came up unto
God; and God heard their groaning; and God looked upon the Children of Israel
and had respect unto them. But when Heaven by miracles had rescued them out of
it, a little unavoidable trouble set them a murmuring, it was taken as a great
Affront: When they, weary and glutted with Manna and Quails, were so distasted
at the bounty of God, that they could not but sit down and sigh for their
Garlic and Onions again: When they grew weary of their Deliverance, Exodus 11.5.
and out of a peevish and unreasonable distaste at the Instruments of it, and
because of some tolerable difficulties, they groaned to be in Egypt again, it
was esteemed too great an Offense to be passed by, without some extraordinary
Judgments.

These things our Apostle observes to the Corinthians, were written for the
admonition of others: Ver. 11.
And therefore among other things, (well knowing the most likely consequences
of such practices) he gives them that friendly Caution in the Text, Neither
murmur ye, etc.

In Discoursing whereof I shall I. First, enquire what the Apostle cautioneth
against; II. Secondly, show how little reason any have to admit such things
into Practice; III. Thirdly, show how likely they are, if admitted, to produce
such Effect as is here pointed at; and IV. Lastly, make some improvement of All.


Now that which the Apostle cautioneth against is, Murmuring; the Murmuring he
intends, is such as the Children of Israel were guilty of in the Wilderness;
And the effect it had, was Destruction; which I hope will give me the Advantage
of making a good Improvement of the matter.

I. First, That which the Apostle gives caution against in the Text, is
Murmuring; which seems to be in general a Discontent at the Dispensations of
Providence, and a Quarrelling at what happens to come to pass in the World:
This I say, is in general, but the Apostle in this place seems to referr
particularly, to those Murmurings of the Children of Israel, which brought such
grievous destruction upon them in the Wilderness; And therefore, in order to a
just Information, we must a little look into the History of that People, during
their continuance therein: And that we may the more plainly see the ill nature
of the Offense, we will briefly take notice by the way, of the state of that
People, because indeed it was the Circumstances that did so highly aggravate
their Sin.

Now you must know the Children of Israel, even the whole Stock of them, were
Strangers and Bondslaves in Egypt, where they continued Four hundred and thirty
Years, and for a great part of that time, but especially toward the last, they
were very grievously oppressed; Exodus 1.13, 14.
for says Moses, The Egyptians made the Children of Israel to serve with
rigor, and made their lives bitter with hard bondage; and all the service,
wherein they made them to serve, was with rigor. And this was not all, but
there was besides, a Design on foot, to extinguish the Whole Race of them; for
to that end there was an Edict past at Pharaoh's Court, Exodus 1.16.
that every Man-child of theirs should be murdered, as soon as it was born: So
that their Condition was truly deplorable, and so desperate, that a Deliverance
upon any Terms, could not but be a most welcome Blessing, and an unviolable
Obligation of Love and Thanks both to the Author and instruments of so great a
Mercy; as also of the humblest submission, to the methods of accomplishing it,
tho not in every point so easy as might be wished.

In that most seasonable time, God heard their Cry, and delivered them, and not
only so, but also gave them an Assurance of one of the richest and most
fertile Countries in the World, Exodus 3.17.
the land of Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; It should be theirs,
and their Childrens after them, there they should dwell, Exodus 29.45.
and God would dwell among them, they should be his People, and he their God.

This was so great a Deliverance and Favor, that the Remembrance of it, ought
for ever to have stifled the resentment of little Troubles, and sweetened their
Minds into the most obliging cheerful Temper; But yet in the midst of these
Circumstances, we find them Murmuring; And

First upon the account of the Water at Marah, because it was bitter: Exodus
15.24.
The People murmured against Moses saying what shall we drink? Water they had
enough; and yet they cry out, O what shall they drink? They had forgot that
their Lives were bitter but a little before, with hard Bondage, and now they
stomach the Bitterness of the Water, as a most grievous thing, that they hardly
knew how to forgive Moses for it, tho, God knows, it was none of his Fault.
Next we have them murmuring for want of Bread: Exodus 16.2, 3.
The whole Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and
Aaron, and said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in
the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the Fleshpots, and when we did eat Bread to
the full; for ye have brought us forth into this Wilderness, Exodus 17.2.
to kill this whole Assembly with Hunger. We find them also Murmuring for want
of Water at Rephidim, and chiding with Moses, and wishing, Would to God they
had died with their Brethren of the Plague. Numb. 20.4. compared with 11.33.
But yet tho their Disgusts were risen very high, yet God had Compassion on
their infirmities; here was Want of Bread and Water, the necessary Supports of
Life; Hunger is sharp, and Thirst intolerable, and those Discontents that arose
from thence met with Pardon and Pity; for God gave them Bread to the full, and
Water in abundance; here is no Destruction for this, and we are not yet come to
the Murmuring the Text seems most expressly to relate to.

Further therefore they murmured plainly at what God had done for them in
Delivering them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage; and most
unaccountably wished for Egypt again, for their old Slavery, out of which the
Mercy of Heaven had delivered them by Miracles: And the occasion was this; the
Spies that went to search out the Land, gave a very bad and false Account of
it; Numb. 13.
they whispered strange things into the Peoples ears, as if the Land they were
going to, did starve or eat up its own Inhabitants, and yet that at the same
time, there was abundance of Giants in it, Men of such great Growth, that they
were but as Grasshoppers in comparison of them. And tho these Stories did not
hang together at all, yet that Discontented People took the opportunity of
Murmuring again, Would to God they had died in the Land of Egypt, Numb. 14.2,
3, 4.
or in the Wilderness; And why (say they) has the Lord brought us into this
Land, to fall by the Sword, that our Wives and Children should become a Prey to
the Giants? Were it not better to return into Egypt? And they began to say to
one another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt.

This seems to be some of the Murmuring pointed at in the Text; for at the time
of the Writing of this Epistle, the progress of the Christian Faith was
retarded, by the practice of some busy Heretics, who had brought up an ill
Report of it, which made a great many begin to think, they were as well before;
and therefore some were for Judaism again, and others for the old Gentile
Courses, from whence the blessed Conduct of the Gospel had delivered them: And
we are sure, that for this Murmuring, the Israelites smarted much; being not
only kept Forty years from a settlement in their land, but also, all that
Generation disinherited and destroyed, as I shall have occasion further to show.

Further, there was a murmuring upon the account of the Rulers God had set over
them, even against those very Instruments God had raised up to deliver them out
of Egypt, and to settle them in their own land: For Corah and his company
gathered themselves together, and very malepertly tell Moses and Aaron, they
took too much upon them; and say they (when they knew that nothing but the hand
and power of God, could put them into those posts) Wherefore lift ye up your
selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Numb. 16.3.
And when God himself had asserted their Mission and Authority, by a miraculous
destruction of some, (in prosecution of the vengeance he was inflicting, for
their dissatisfaction at their deliverance out of Egypt, and for their desire
to return) others fell a Murmuring in a more impudent manner, and most
slanderously tell them, Numb. 16.41.
They had killed the people of the Lord.

This seems to be a second Murmuring pointed at in the Text; First, because
these Murmurers were destroyed, Numb. 16.35, 49.
viz. by the fire of the Lord, and by the plague; and further, because, that by
reason of the Schisms that were then in that Church, there were great
Commotions against their present Governors.

In the last place, they Murmured at the unavoidable Difficulties and
Inconveniences they met with in their way to the Promised land; and
particularly, after they had overcome the Canaanites at Hormah, The soul of the
people was much discouraged because of the way; Numb. 21.4.
and instead of the more proper method of Patience and Prayer, The people spoke
against God, Numb. 21.5.
and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the
wilderness; for there is no bread, neither is there any water. Now indeed, it
is very probable, the way was not so pleasant, as they would have had it, and
how could it be otherwise, it was a Wilderness, and they must now march through
it, if ever they would get to Canaan; and as for their other Complaint, that
was more perverse and unaccountable; for they eat Angels food, and as it is
said, the water out of the Rock followed their Camp, but yet (to see what
perverseness and discontent will prompt men to speak, even against all Truth
and Modesty) they cry out they have neither bread nor water: but to say the
Truth, they were grown Effeminate and Nice, and lusted for flesh, which as the
Psalmist interprets it, was for meat for their lusts; Psalm. 78.18.
and that was indeed the true cause of their Murmuring; for being grown so
exorbitant and ungovernable in their Appetites, they knew not how to bear the
Fatigue of the Journey, but murmured at the necessary and unavoidable Troubles
they met with, although it was from a wearisome Bondage in Egypt, to a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, and in order to their Settlement and Establishment
therein.

And this seems also some of the Murmuring the Apostle refers to in the Text;
for there were at that time most pernicious Heretics in the Church, that
piqu'd against the Severities that Christianity exposed its Professors to; for
finding fault with the Hardship of Persecution, Self-denial and Mortification,
they were clearly for Indulgence and an easy Life, as if God were too severe
to put such things upon Men, though it were in the way to everlasting
Blessedness; And we find also that this brought Destruction upon the Children
of Israel, and a very Remarkable Vengeance, whereby much People died. Numb.
21.6.


These are the Murmurings which we may well suppose the Apostle intends and
cautions against; they being those the Israelites were guilty of, and for which
so many of them met with Destruction in the Wilderness; and such as there was
great Cause the Corinthians should then be expressly warned of. My next work, is
to show how great Reason there is that none such be admitted into Practice,
especially among Christians.

II. The more gracious Dispensation we are under, does not give us the greater
Liberty to pique at Providence, or capitulate with Heaven; we have no
Toleration to be Humoursome or Froward, though things do not just jump with our
Interests or Wishes; But when we fall into Circumstances in any thing like
those of the Jews under our present Consideration; As they had the least Reason
in the World to resent things as they did, so have we: And this will be easily
discerned by a bare Stating of the Case in the forementioned Respects.

First, Suppose the Good Will and Pity of Heaven (in compassion to any
Distressed Church or People, groaning under Oppression and Fears) should, by
some Surprising Providence, deliver them, and put them into a hopeful prospect
of being yet Happy, of a Secure Enjoyment of all the Blessings of Government,
and the Comforts of the Gospel: And suppose all things in that Revolution and
Hurry, should not just agree with every man's Expectation, Fancy or Interest (as
it is impossible it should;) Is that a just Cause to forget the Mercy, and to
set down and mutter Discontent? to murmur at what is done, and try to provoke
Almighty God to break all in pieces again? Is this a good Reason to contemn the
Deliverance, and with the perverse Israelites, to be for making Captains to
carry them back, through Blood and War, by Confusion, Conspiracies and Tumults,
into the Bondage, out of which they lately cried so loud, Good Lord deliver us?
The bare Stating of the Case seems to make the thing very plain. It is very
probable that some of the Dissatisfied among the Corinthians, might think they
had some Cause to be Discontented; the Leading Heretic among them might (like
the Spies) tell them, that the Establishment they looked for in the Church, was
not like to be of that Advantage they expected; they must encounter the Pagan
Fury, and the Jewish Zeal; And if they could make way through those
Difficulties, yet the strict Discipline they must submit to would make that
desired State, an Uncomfortable one; and that therefore, they had as good
settle back again, to Paganism or Judaism or as they were inclined. As they
might represent things, the Discontented and Unstable among them might think
they could justify their Complaints, and that they had Cause upon these
Accounts, to throw off the Blessed Design of their Bishops and Pastors: But
says the Apostle Murmur not: The Establishing of the Church of Christ among
them, was so Blessed a thing, that to murmur at the Method, and rather than
submit to the Difficulties in the way to it, to fall back to Idolatry again,
would be both irrational and base, and no doubt extort Vengeance from God (as
the Jews experienced) for so great an Offense, and Contempt of his Goodness.

Secondly, As to the next Case; Suppose some Extraordinary Person should be
stirred up, in a generous Compassion or Zeal, to relieve any such Distressed
People, which had no way left in Humane Judgment, for an Escape out of their
imminent Troubles and Fears, as Moses was: And suppose, such an One, should in
a Way, as it were Miraculous, accomplish his honorable Undertakings, and in so
surprising a Manner, that the Hand of God may be visibly perceived in it: And
further, suppose that in a grateful Sense of such generous Love, and in
acknowledgment of the Deliverance, as well as through Necessity, such an One
thus recommended by Heaven, should be desired to undertake the Government and
Protection of them, and He (when there is no Body else to do it) should
undertake it: Is there any Cause for any to say, as some of the Jews did to
Moses and Aaron, Wherefore lift ye up your Selves above the Congregation of the
Lord? Numb. 16.3.
When it is apparent, that nothing but the Hand and Power of God, can put any
One into such a Station, how little Reason is there to say, You take too much
upon you.

Corah and his Companions were as stiff against Moses, as if they would neither
allow Heaven to set up a Ruler over them, nor give way to any Government, but
what was according to their Scheme; though doubtless their Brethren thought it
was as Reasonable they should be pleased; and especially when they apparently
concurred with the Will of God: But the Example of those Men is not to be
followed, 1 Cor. 10.5.
forasmuch as, with them God was not well pleased, and they were overthrown in
the Wilderness: And that it seems was designed by God himself to be a
convincing Argument, that none, in such a Case, ought to pique against the
Advancement or Conduct of such Extraordinary Persons, when He sets them up, nor
be offended that He is pleased to rule the World according to his own Will, and
not theirs: but

Lastly, The Children of Israel murmured that they met with some Difficulties,
upon their Escape out of Egypt, in the way to the Holy Land: Of which, I shall
observe here by the way, that they brought them upon themselves, and
particularly for Disgusting their Deliverance, and the Advancement and
Management of Moses: For their Forty years Pilgrimage, and all the Hardships
they met with in the Wilderness, were purely by way of Punishment, and on
purpose to consume all that Stubborn Generation, that had Murmured at their
Deliverance, and piqu'd against their Savior: But waving this, Suppose the
case as Natural as we can; we cannot well conceive how great Revolutions can be
brought about, without a considerable Ruffle of Affairs, (though sometimes
indeed we are convinced that nothing is impossible with God:) It is no wonder
the Wind that wafts the Ship to Harbor should discompose the Waters, and raise
some Billows to beat upon it: But then that Passenger is too peevish, that
complains that the Working of the Vessel makes him a little more uneasy than
he is used to be, and the Mariner that frets at the Wind for wearing his Sails,
is too basely Selfish; and he that rather than comply with these Unavoidable
Inconveniences, is willing to return or sink, seems abundantly worthy to be
gratified.

Suppose a Man fast asleep in a sinking Ship, should by a kind Friend be
snatched out of his Cabin, and set upon a Plank to save his Life; how very
unreasonable would it be, that he should be Angry that he was disturbed in his
Rest, and must be at the pains to swimm to Shore. Had it not been a very
absurd, as well as an unworthy thing, if when the Angels took Lot, and his
Family by the hand, and lead them out of the reach of Sodom's Fire and
Brimstone, they should have murmured at the trouble of Walking two or three
Hours in the night, to Zoar to save their Lives? And if it were such a
discontented humor (as it is very like it was) that made that woman, Genesis
19.26.
that was turned into a pillar of Salt, look back, and was the occasion of that
Punishment, Then, Luke 17.32.
as our Lord says, Remember Lot's Wife.

III. This brings me to the Third thing propounded, which is to show, how
likely such Practices as are here forbidden, are to produce such an Effect as
is pointed at.

And to this end I shall only hint the ill Nature of the Sin, as it is here
Circumstantiated, and the ill Consequences of it amongst those our Text and
Matter relates to; and I think this will be enough, if we do but suppose that
Heaven has the same Resentment of Things now, it had of old: Only this by the
way, may be objected, that the Things that now come to pass in the World, are
not so apparently the immediate Operation of Gods Hand, as those that the
Children of Israel were concerned in, in the Wilderness; nor such marks of
Favor or Displeasure, but only Things that fall out in the Common way of
Providence.

To which it may be answered; it is true, God did never so visibly appear in the
Behalf of any People in the World, as he did for them, so that to disgust what
he did was doubtless the more Provoking: And what if some among them had been
pleased to say, that all that Great Revolution, was only some Excentrick
Motion of the Wheel of Fortune, and offer Arguments, that all was contrived and
wrought by that Designing and Ambitious Man Moses, who would never rest till he
had made himself a Prince over them; Numb. 16.13.
Yet this was not likely to lessen the Provocation, or evade the Punishment.
And as to other People, by what Outward Means soever, or by whatsoever
Management or Intrigue, things may seem to be ordered and accomplished, yet it
must be supposed that God rules the World still; and if we have not Faith
enough to believe, that he takes the same Care of his Church now that he did of
old, if there be evident Impressions of a Divine Care and Goodness upon what
comes to pass, the Murmuring at it upon by Accounts, must needs be of as ill
Consequence now as ever, and especially in the Cases under our present
Consideration. And to make this the more evident, I will briefly run over the
three Heads of Murmuring the Text refers to.

The First was at Deliverance, when some unavoidable Troubles and Difficulties
were suggested: And if the nature of any one Offense, may be supposed to have a
greater Influence upon the Displeasure of God than others, this seems to be of
that sort: For to Murmur at Gods Hand, whatsoever it does, does not become poor
Worms, that are liable to all his Wrath; though things really grievous and
severe befall Men (which was poor Job's Case) yet there seems to be some Danger
in Murmuring at them; and when that unfortunate Man's Wife, Job 2.9, 10.
bid him curse God and die, I suppose it was, because she thought it an
effectual means to that end; but his Answer was much more becoming, What! says
he, shall we receive Good at the Hand of God, and not evil? thou speak like
one of the Foolish Women: This may well be supposed, when People labor under
real Grievances; but to groan under the Burden of Deliverance, seems to carry
all the Marks of ill Nature in it, and to be a very effectual Method of
Courting Confusion; and if the Humor have but leave to work, it will need no
other Hand but its own, to procure the greatest Mischief; What can we think of
the Children of Israel, that would needs have been for Egypt again? Had they
made themselves Captains as they talked of, to conduct them back again,
whatsoever kind Thoughts they might on a sudden have had of their enraged and
Implacable Enemies, in all likelihood, they would soon have been cut in pieces,
or at least they and their Children must have been Bondslaves for ever: And
certainly it would have puzzled the most Critical Spy of them all, to have made
his own private Fortune, whatever had become of the Public, in that Horrid
Revolution they were so very Covetous of.

God Almighty did indeed prevent that Fatal Project the Murmurers were upon,
for the Glory of his own Great Name, and consequently the Mischief that would
have ensued: But yet he had such a just and high Resentment of their Sin and
Folly, that he would not pass it by; and as if his Anger had known no Bounds
(the Provocation was so great) not only the Murmurers themselves, but the
Whole Congregation smarted for it; For, for forty Years together they were
kept in an unsettled State, in a ruefull Desert, where that whole Generation
was destroyed, there being not a Man of them that was above Twenty years old at
the time of the Provocation, save only Caleb and Joshua, but what was
Destroyed, and never lived to see the Promised Land, as may be fully seen,
Numb. 14. as also with what Heat and Indignation, God denounced that Sentence
upon them.

Secondly, The next Murmuring our Text refers to, is, Against those Rulers,
(and their Conduct) which God is pleased by his Grace and special Appointment
to set up: And if we do but suppose this, That is is by God that Kings Reign,
Psalm. 75.7.
that it is he that pulls down One and sets up Another, and that Rulers
are the Ministers of God; Romans 13.4.
To pique against Them, is but to quarrel with Him that appoints Them; and
therefore Moses asks the question, What is Aaron that ye Murmur against him?
Numb. 16.11.
he was but the Minister of God, as Moses was, and their Pique against them,
was interpreted to have a further Reach, and to be a disgust at God, who had
appointed Them: And when it comes to this that Men can say to those that are
Commissioned of God, Ye take too much upon You, the Affront seems too Great to
be passed by, without some Remarkable notice of Indignation.

And indeed this sad Effect this Sin had among the Children of Israel; Numb.
16.20, 21.
for says God to Moses and Aaron, Separate your selves from among this
Congregation, that I may consume them in a moment. It is true indeed, this
general Sentence, upon their Supplication, was Reversed. But yet the Heads of
their Faction were destroyed by a most Remarkable Judgment; Verse 23.
for the Earth opened her Mouth and swallowed them up; they and all that
appertained to them, went down alive into the Pit, and the Earth closed upon
them, and they perished from among the Congregation. This was not all, Verse 35.
but Fire came out from the Lord and consumed Two hundred and fifty more; and
besides this, God sent the Plague among them, which as it were in an instant
swept away Fourteen thousand and seven hundred more. And this was the sad
Consequence of their Murmurings against their Deliverers, whom God had sent and
set over them.

Thirdly, the last Murmuring our Text refers to, is, At unavoidable Troubles
upon Deliverance from far greater, and in the way to great Happiness; of which
I shall only say, that it is very strange that any People should be come to
such a pass, that they cannot endure to bear a little, especially in such
Cases; and it is very hard to know what Terms such would exact of Heaven to be
Content. If we are not willing to set the Good against the Evil, or at least to
take one with the other, as the state of this World requires, yet we have great
Reason to place our Sufferings to the Account of our Sins, so far forth as not
to Murmur at them, lest it prove a means to double our Sorrows; for there seems
to be so much Perverseness and Folly, such Provocation and Affront to the
Divine Goodness, in murmuring at the Necessary Methods of Accomplishing any of
the Designs of his Mercy, that we cannot readily try a more fatal Experiment to
incense his Wrath: And this we are assured of that for such unworthy
Resentments of the unavoidable Inconveniences they met with in the way to
Canaan, after they were escaped out of Egypt, God was much offended at his own
People, and they found it of very ill Consequence; For upon this very Account,
the Lord sent fiery Serpents among them, Numb. 21.6.
and they bit the People, and much People of Israel died.

Having thus shown the Unreasonableness of what the Apostle warns us against in
the Text, as also the ill Nature and most likely Consequences thereof;

IV. The last thing which remains is to make some necessary Improvement of the
Matter. And that which in General I would make thereof is (if I might) to
prevail with every One to set down under his own Vine, and bring forth and
enjoy the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, Heaven having given us such an
Advantage in this Case, over the greatest Part of the World.

There are surely a great many Countries would esteem themselves very Happy, if
they were in our Condition, and would think the rest of the World would account
them the most unworthy People and unwise, because they have no Foreign Enemies
within their own Bowels, to be quarrelling at Gods Dispensations, and piquing
against their Governors and one another, whilst they might enjoy all the
Blessings of Peace, and all the Advantages of the best Religion and Government
in the World.

Surely it is strange that any should follow their unreasonable Disgusts so
far, as at once to reproach and forfeit their Religion, their Reason and Peace
too! and not only their own, but the Peace of their Country, and what is more,
that of the Church of Christ; and for the sake of their own Resentments to
expose all to Confusion, and the Vengeance of the Almighty: For certainly,
whatsoever we may wish or hope for, or whatever Ends others may pretend or seem
to have in their Active Zeal, such perverse unwise Practices carry in them all
the Presages of Mischief and Ruin: And though this be what some covet (as we
may verily believe without any Breach of Charity) yet what Satisfaction can it
be to any, to set the World on Fire about their own Ears? or to be blowing the
Coals of Sedition and Discontent, till it break out into a fire not to be
quenched, so long as there is any thing left for it to devour? What strange
vizard has Fate put upon Quietness and Peace, that all their Charms cannot
prevail with Men to embrace and enjoy them when they are put into their Arms?
Or rather what unlucky Powers govern this Age, that the most desirable
Blessing is become a Nuisance? Liberty and Property use to be great Darlings,
and a quiet and secure Enjoyment of True Religion is deservedly esteemed the
Greatest Blessing to any People, but now that Confusion should be preferred
before them all, is very Unaccountable and Ominous.

In Spiritual Concerns indeed this Folly, this brainless Madness is frequent;
Men can and do disdain Virtue and Purity, whilst they embrace Abomination and
Filthiness; they can contemn Immortality and Glory, passionately choosing Death
and Hell, as if they were in love with Fire and Brimstone, and the Torments of
the bottomless Pit: But that Men should be no Wiser in their Generation, Luke
16.8.
and have no better Sense of their Secular Advantages, argues intolerable
Delusion, and too great a Reproach to be wiped off: If we cannot be content to
be Happy, nor know how to rest, till we have changed our Fortune, the World
will deride us, our Enemies will triumph, and we our selves will sadly repent
it, and see, too late, that we were besotted to our own Destruction.

But there are two or three Particulars the Text enjoins me to recommend, it
being very usual in Holy Scripture for Negative Precepts to include and intend
their contrary Positive Duties. And

I. First, That ye have Honorable Thoughts of the Goodness of God, and believe
that what he has done for us, was well intended: And doubtless we may appeal
to all the World, whether it be not very reasonable we should, nay if it be not
very unworthy if we should not: We may be sure that God is Wise and Good, and
because he is our God, we ought to have honorable Thoughts of what he does in
reference to us, and especially when his Providence are marked, with the most
visible Tokens of his Love and Care; and though in the doing of it he chose
rather to follow the counsel of his own Will, than to please one Party of Men
rather than another; yet those that are Modest will conclude that God is Wiser
and Better than they, and those that are Ingenuous will be Thankful.

And though some look so far before them as to be uneasy at their foresight,
(without a due Trust in God,) yet for present Mercies we ought to give him
Praise: It was great Grace in the Master of the Vineyard, Luke 13.6.
to spare his fruitless Fig Tree one Year more, and greater still that it
should be dressed and manured, and those that foresaw its downfall at the Years
end, instead of reflecting either upon the Owner or Dresser of the Vineyard,
ought to have admired the Patience and Bounty that was expressed to it, The
truth is, respite for a season from deserved Ruin, however Heaven brings it
about, ought to be thought well of; And if neither the present Enjoyment of
Good, nor the prospect of Evil a coming, will reduce us to temper, nor procure
a due regard to our Duty, he that runs may read our Fate.

II. Secondly, I am to recommend to you a Submission to Government, and
particularly to the Powers that be, because they are of God: And not only so,
but to seek the Peace of the Land, and every one in his Place to endeavor to
assist that Establishment, wherein we hope Heaven designs to make us yet happy.
Obedience to Rulers does use to be accounted a distinguishing Mark of the
Better sort of Christians, Romans 13.2.
and it has been said of old, that those that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation; That we must not revile the Gods, Exodus 22.28.
nor curse the Ruler of our People; 1 Pet. 2.17. Prove. 24.21.
that we must fear God and honor the King, and not meddle with those that are
given to Change. All which carry such Authority in them, as Good Men will
reverence and observe, and not suffer any ill Resentments to hinder the
Discharge of the Duty they are so strongly obliged to; And though the
Observance of our Duty in this case, as well as others, may be defeated of its
natural Reward in this Life, yet we are sure, that when we have done living
here, it will be our Comfort.

But this is not all we are concerned in, in this Case; but that also every one
in his Place seek the Peace of the Land, and endeavor to assist the
Establishment, that through the Mercy of God, we now enjoy: And there is this
Reason for it, viz. That we know what our present Condition is, and that it
promises well, if our ill Management and our Sins do not obstruct it; but what
Condition another Revolution may put us into we cannot tell; but have great
Reason to fear it will be a very sad one.

And in the first place, Those that bear a share in the Government, and
especially such as are in the Highest Orbs, ought not only to be true to it,
and (with all Reverence be it spoken) just to the Offices they fill, but also
by their active Motions to set the lesser Wheels a going, that an Universal
life and vigor may run through and be seen in all the parts of the
Commonwealth. It is indeed a most unhappy and no less wicked thing, if those
in eminent Posts especially, keep their places only for the Profit of them; but
much worse, if they do it to make an Advantage of the Government, and destroy
it together. Doubtless such have sad cause to remember their dismal Accounts,
whilst the Unfortunate Nation laments its hard Fate, praying Heaven to deliver
it from such Plagues. If the Life of any Politic Body be only perceived by
that sacred Hunger in its Ministers, it is just such another fatal Symptom, as
that of excessive Greediness in some sick People a little before their Death;
but then this ought to be remembered, that when the flourishing Ivy, by its
close embraces has sucked away the life of the sturdy Oak, when that falls, it
cannot stand, but becomes a prey to the devouring Fire: And as I am this day
the Orator of God (though a most Unworthy one he knows?) so I will presume also
in behalf of the Land, to put up one Petition with all Veneration to our
Terrestrial Gods, and that is, That they would remember, Psalm. 82.7.
that they shall die like Men, and stand before that Great Judge, with whom
there is no Respect of Persons. 2 Chr. 19.7.
And as for those in inferior Stations, I heartily pray, That the Fear of God
may so rest upon their Minds, that they be found Faithful, and may give up
their Accounts with joy at the last and great Day.

And here it may not be amiss to consider a little, wherein especially the
Endeavors of Men are most likely to be Advantageous and Successful, for the
Establishment and Peace of any People: And without being tedious in proving it,
I will presume to say, that the Protection of Heaven is the best Defense, and
Religion its best Establishment; and therefore to secure these is the greatest
Policy and the wisest Practice. That Justice and Judgment be executed; that
Atheism, Blasphemy, Profaneness and Perjury be discouraged and punished out of
the World; that Oppression, Violence and Murder receive their just Reward; that
the Fear and Worship of God be promoted, and that Virtue, true Religion and
Good Men be cherished, encouraged and rewarded, is the best part of Politics,
as it is the most important Concern of Government: for this, as it is the most
natural and rational Security of Society, so it will also interest us in the
care of Heaven; Romans 8.31.
and if God be for us, who can be against us?

The most active and cautious Management, the most critical Contrivance and
Execution of Laws, for the Security of our Interests and Conveniences, are but
the trying of so many Experiments, which we cannot tell, whether they will do
or no: Many times we see the wisest Counsels defeated, the most rational
Designs frustrated, the best Contrived Laws doing no good, and that potent
Armies cannot so much as fight, much less be Victorious. It is not very unworthy
our Observation, that notwithstanding that necessary and improved Law was most
industriously executed for mending the Roads, A great Snow.
yet within a very little time, they became utterly Unpassable; and that
notwithstanding the most prudent Management of Affairs, and the vast Expense of
Treasure and Blood, we are yet subject to the Insults of our Enemies, both at
home and abroad; by which and many other Instances, Eccles. 9.11.
we may be convinced, that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the
Strong; but that the great Dependence is upon him that orders all things,
according to the Counsel of his own Will; And that indeed our help stands in
the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth. Psalm. 124.7.
And till we can complete the Atheist's design, and usher God Almighty out of
the World, we must by no means leave Him and his Glory out of our care and
concern, unless we think we can stand upon our own Legs, or else are willing to
sink into the utmost Ruin and Confusion. Gods Laws therefore must be observed,
his Commandments regarded, and his Will done; his Holy Name must be revered,
his Majesty adored, and his Mercy and Favor implored; his Worship must be duly
and devoutly celebrated, his Sabbaths sanctified and his Goodness acknowledged:
This is the laying of a good Foundation, and happy is the People that is in
such a Case; because, blessed is the People who have the Lord for their God.

And because this is the Product of true Religion, that is it that must be
advanced and encouraged above all things, by the unanimous and joint Endeavors
of all, both Governors and Subjects; and not only so, but most zealously
practiced by every one; For indeed so long as our Religion and our Lives do so
strangely contradict and reproach one another, and our Practices are a
continual Affront to Heaven, every thing else will be but as Pumping in a Ship
without stopping the Leak. There is a certain Magic in sin and wickedness that
baffles all Arts, that countermines all Policy, that undermines Kingdoms, ruins
States, overturns Empires, and above all, has a most direct and fatal
Influence upon Christian Societies: And that Deluge of Vice which has almost
ruined us already, in spite of all the Mercies of God, and has weakened us
more than all the Expense of Men and Money we have been at, will certainly not
fail, if we still continue it, to accomplish his Wrath upon us. Our crying
sins, which we are not yet so wise as to part with, methinks sound like those
Woes that the Man so passionately uttered day and night in Jerusalem, a little
before its Destruction, and speak the same thing, that the flaming Sword meant
that hung over the Temple; and therefore to stem the tide of Debauchery, which
runs so very high, and to stop the raging deluge of Vice, is the nicking
Concern of every one: And whosoever heartily engage in this Work, whether they
be Magistrates, Ministers or People, the Blessing of the Righteous rest upon
them, and we wish them Good luck in the Name of the Lord.

III. But to conclude, there is yet a Third thing the Text enjoins, and which
indeed the state of this World exacts of all that would be easy in it, and
Prudence as well as the blessed Counsel of Jesus Christ recommends as a great
piece of Wisdom as well as Duty; and that is, to be Patient under unavoidable
Troubles, and not quarrel and fret at what we cannot help, till we leap out of
the Pan into the Fire. It had been indeed more Glory to have suffered Fire and
Faggot, and Confiscation of Goods, for the sake of our Religion, than to bleed
a little in our Purses, and suffer the Mortification of some of our Excesses;
but we may justly fear, that there are very few so truly Christian and
Magnanimous, as to have undergone such Trials, and have gained that Glory, that
are offended at much more tolerable Afflictions now. Although therefore we cannot
grow rich so fast as we would, nor spend so much upon Luxury and Riot as we use
to do, let us be Content; and if Heaven could find out any, or make the present
an effectual means to substract the fuel of our Lusts, and oblige us to pare
off our Extravagancies and Intemperance, it would be happy Providence, and
would do us more good than all the Money in our Purses. But

Finally, Since very few are like to be so easy in the World as they would be,
let us all remember, that the world is really a Wilderness, and was never
designed for a Paradise; that it is great folly to stand wrestling and
contending with every thing that justles us, but that he is the wisest Man that
makes the best of his way through it, toward the Promised Land. The harder
things set upon us here, let us be the more in love with the Heavenly Mansions,
and the more sollicitous to obtain a Lot amongst the Saints, that we may once
be Happy; Heb. 12.3.
Let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is now set down at the right Hand
of the Throne of God. With whom I pray that we may for ever dwell; And to whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Glory, Honor and Praise for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

