NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM The Soldiery under the Command of His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax; concerning the preservation of His Majesty's Royal Person the
Liberty of the Subject, and the Discipline of the Church of England.

ALSO, His Majesty's Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace together
with his Majesty's coming to Newmarket (being guarded by two Regiments of
Horse) and several Quaeries propounded, touching the Independent Government.

LONDON: Printed for E. Rushton, June 11. 1647.

HIS MAJESTY'S PROPOSITIONS To the Honorable Houses of Parliament, assembled
at Westminster, concerning the speedy settling of a firm and lasting peace in
all his Majesty's Dominions.
HIs Majesty having taken into serious consideration the calamities of this
distressed Kingdom, and the great and wearisome Burden which thousand and
thousands of his Majesty's loyal subjects has deeply and unexpressably
groaned under, occasioned by the late unhappy war, within the bowels of this
Kingdom, His Majesty has therefore further declared, to the high and
honorable Court of Parliament assembled at Westminster, his great willingness,
to comply with both his said Houses, to the end, a firm and lasting peace may
be settled within all His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and that it may be
speedily effected, and brought to a period, His Majesty does declare, as
follows:

FIrst, that He will freely and willingly give His Royal Assent, for the
confirming of the Government and Discipline, now established within the
kingdom of England, during the time set down by the two House, desiring that
His Majesty and His Household be not hindered from that sorme of Gods Service.
Desiring also, that a free consultation and debate may be had by a competent
number of Divines appointed by his Majesty and both Houses, whereby it may be
determined, how the Church shall be governed, after the expiration of the said
time appointed, etc.

Secondly Touching the Covenant, His Majesty does declare, that He is not yet
therein satisfied, and desires to respite his particular Answer thereunto,
until his coming to London, etc.

Thirdly, that his Majesty will give his consent to the Act for the due
observation of the Lords Day, for the suppressing of Innovations, etc.

Fourthly, That an Act of Oblivion may be past, His Majesty conceiving it the
best bond of Peace, and that after intestine troubles, the wisdom of this and
other Kingdoms has usually and happily in all Ages granted general pardons,
whereby the numerous discontentments of many Persons and Families otherwise
exposed to ruin, might not become sewell to new disorders, or seeds to future
troubles.

His Majesty therefore desires, that his two Houses of Parliament would
seriously descend into these considerations, and likewise tenderly look upon
his condition herein, and the perpetual dishonor that must ce ve to him, if
he shall thus abondon so many persons of condition and fortune that have
engaged themselves with and for him, out of a sease of duty, and propounds as a
very acceptable testimony of their affection toward Him.

These, and diverse other particulars, have been lately communicated to both
Houses of Parliament; but sor brevities sake, I shall conclude with what I have
already insisted upon.

In the next place I shall (briefly) intimate unto you the sense of the Army,
concerning the disposal of his Majesty's person, and the proceedings of the
Souldie tie thereupon, VIZ.

Worthy Sir,
TO give you the prrticalars of the state of the army, since my last, it is
thus: I find the Soldiers to have many things to present this day, those which
are most general amongst the Regiments, are these which I have sent you here
enclosed.

The Kings Majesty has no desire to go back to Holmby, but either (so far as
I can learn) to go to London, or be hereabouts: His Majesty has had some
discourse about Independants (as some call them) and some queries were made
what they would have, or whether they would have any government, which his
Majesty thought they would not have admitted of:

The Commissioners are come from the Parliament, two Lords, and four Commoners
who are going to communicate their Message to the army at a general
Randezvonze, for their receivin whereof, the soldiers are in great expectation.

But before their meeting, the General called a Council of war, and the
Officers received Instructions, for the more orderly carriage of the business.

The Commissioners are received with much respect and honor, and I perceive a
great respect had toward them. God grant, that such a composure may be made,
as may settle this poor distracted Kingdom in peace.

The Kings Majesty is now gone to Newmarket, be ing guarded by two Regiments of
horse, commanded by Colonel Whalley, for He has often declared, his
unwillingnesse to go to Holmby, unless by compulsion constrained to it. There
was great preparations made by diverse of the Cantabrigians, who expected his
Majesty's coming that way, there was hundred of Bone-sires made, and great
junketings by the malignant Party, but at the last, their tryumphant mitth were
turned into a mournful dittic, who hearing that his Majesty were gone another
way, immediately betook themselves to the Town, bewayling each other.

PROPOSITIONS.
1. THat the Parl. do speedily send down some moneys for their present
subsistence, for keeping of the Army in good order. 2. That his Majesty's
person may be still secured from danger, and all designs and attempts prevented
for the raising of a new war in this Kingdom. 3. That a safe and well grounded
peace may be settled through the whole Kingdom. 4. That the liberties of the
people may be cleared, and their persons and estates secured by a safe and
firm peace, according to the many Ordinances and Declarations, by which the
Army was invited so engage in the late war, 5. That all things may concuree
to a cheerful and unanimous disbanding of the whole Army together. 6. That no
prejudicato opinion may be had of the Army, to have any purpose to oppose the
settling of Preibytery. 6. That the army may be believed, that they do not
desire to have the Independent Government set up to up hold a licentiousness
in Religion. 8. That none be encouraged in the great affairs of State, to
advance any particular party or interest whatsoever, but that the great matters
of the Kingdom, be wholly lest to the wisdom of the Parliament, 9. That
Justice may be done. 10. That all such who have served the parliament
faithfully, may be protected for the same.

Vale, Yours R. Rushton.
Newmarket June 10. 1647.
FINIS.

