RATTS Rhimed to Death. OR, THE Rump-Parliament Hanged up in the SHAMBLES.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THis Collection of excellent Ballads on the late RUMP, who called themselves
the Parliament, when they were formerly Printed in loose sheets, might not
unfitly be called the Picture of the Members of the Rump dissolved, and
stinking singly apart. Being now bound together, they may as fitly be called
the Picture of the said Rump assembled, and stinking in Consort. If you think
this second Edition might be spared, I must borrow my Apology from their
Sermons, who were Preachers to the Rump; which, for the most part, were nothing
but Repetition and Tautology, or a Rump of staler Mutton hash'd by ill looks,
where all the parts being minced exceeding small, lost their order and
distinction. And where that which was the Preface would as well have served for
the Conclusion; and both the Preface and Conclusion would equally have past for
the Middle of the dry Discourse. If you ask me, Why being dead and rotten, the
unsavory remembrance of them is preserved by these Papers: It is, because
whilst they lived, they were a kind of Purrezes, whose business was to suck the
blood of the Nation, and to break our sleeps by stinging; and who never stink
more than when they are crushed, and squeezed; and who, in spite of all
perfumes, will offend the Nose even when they are dead. I hope you will pardon
the ill Tunes to which they are to be sung, there being none bad enough for
them; nor any voice so fit as their Speaker's, who, as long as he was the Rump
of this Rump, and sat in the Chair, it was a kind of a new Commonwealth, or
Mr. Hobs's Artificial Man made a Leviathan, still breaking wind, and speaking
backwards.

ARSY VERSY: OR, The second Martyrdom of the RUMP.
To the Tune of, The blind Beggar of Bednal-green.
1.
MY Muse to prevent lest an after-clap come,
If the wind should once more turn about for the Bum,
As a Preface of Honor, and not as a Frump,
First with a Sirreverence ushers the Rump.
2.
I shall not dispute whether Long-tails of Kent,
Or Papists, this name of disgrace did invent;
Whose Legend of Lies, to defame us the more,
Has entailed on us Rumps never heard on before.
3.
But not on its Pedigree longer to think,
(For the more it is stirred the more it will stink)
It Is agreed the Rump's first report in the Town
Did arise from the wooden invention of Brown.
4.
Old Oliver's nose had taken in snuff,
When it sat long ago, some unsavory puff;
Then up went the Rump, and was ^kt to the quick;
But it settled in spite of the teeth of poor Dick.
5.
Then the Knight of the Pestle, King Lambert and Vane,
With a Scepter of Iron did over it reign:
But the Rump soon re-setled, and to their disgrace,
Like Excrements voided them out of the place.
6.
It did now, like a Truant's well disciplined Bum,
With the Rod affliction harder become;
Or else like the Image in Daniel it was,
Whose head was of Gold, but whose tail was of Brass.
7.
It endured the first heat, and proved no starter,
But sung in the midst of the flames like a Martyr,
And whisk'd the tail like a terrible Farter,
And sounded most cheerfully, Vive Sir Arthur.
8.
But the next fire-Ordeal put into a dump,
Sir Orlando the furious chief joint of the Rump,
That he looked like the picture of Richard the Third,
Or like an ejected and frost-bitten t --
9.
It Is said that his Durindana he drew,
And a Wight on the Road most manfully slew;
But, pardoned by Charles, made good what they tell us,
How ill it is to save a Thief from the Gallows.
10.
Being now to be burnt, he soon did expire,
For he was but a flash and would quickly take fire;
So that their fuel upon him to spend,
What was it but Coals to Newcastle to send?
11.
To bring 'em to th'stake as in order they lie,
Harry Martin the next place must occupy;
'Twas expected in vain he should blaze, for he swore,
That he had been burnt to the stumps before.
12.
Tom Scot for the Bum most stiffly did stand,
Though once by a Bum he was foully trapand;
But Time and his Office of Secretary
Had learnt him his business more private to carry.
13.
Some thought he arrived at his dignity first,
By being so well in iniquity verst;
The mystery of which he has practiced of late
In his function, which was, to be Bawd to the State.
14.
Hob Morley in silence did suffer the loss
Of his Rump, and with patience took up the Cross;
That to see him so sindg'd and so scorcht you would swear,
No Camel more meekly his burden could bear.
15.
The Speaker was thought to the Rump to be true,
Because like a Fart at the first he burnt blew;
But straight he was cunningly seen to retire,
For fear to endanger the Rolls in the fire.
16.
St. John a mortal of flesh and of bloood,
Swore by St. He has a great kindness for that Saint, not because of his Key,
(which he knows he shall never make use of) but in reference to Peterborovgh
Minster, the stones of which built his new House.
Peter the example was good:
So facing about, and shifting his station,
He turned over a new leaf in St. John's Revelation.
17.
Harry Nevill that looks like a Mahomet's Pidgeon,
Accused to be of a State-man's Religion,
Is left to his choice what Process he will have,
To be burnt for an Atheist, or hanged for a Knave.
18.
Now stop thy nose, Reader, for Atkins does come,
That shame to the Breeches as well as the Bum:
To wish he were burnt were an idle desire,
For he comes provided to shite out the fire.
19.
But lest he without a companion should be,
Here Is Lisle that comes next stinks worser than he;
So foully corrupt, you may place't in your Creed,
Such a Rump could alone such a Fistula breed.
20.
Poor Ludlow was bogg'd in Ireland of late,
And to purge himself came to the Rump of the State;
But gravely they told him he had acted amiss,
When he sought to betray the Rump with a kiss.
21.
Ned Harby was sure an herb John in the pot,
Yet could he not escape the dysasterous lot:
Scarce Church'd of the Gowt was the trusty old Squire,
But he hopt from the drying pan into the fire.
22.
Robin Andrews was laid on last, as they tell us,
For a Log to keep down the rest of his fellows;
Though he spent on the City like one of the Roysters
Each morning his Some Authors hold it was but three halfpence, but poetry
will not admit of broken numbers.
twopence in Sack and in Oysters.
23.
Next Praise-God, although of the Rump he was none,
Was for his Petition burnt to the Bare-bone:
So Praise-God and Rump, like true Joseph's together,
Did suffer; but Praise-God lost the more Courteous Reader, he is a
Leather-seller.
Leather.
24.
There Is Lawson another dag-lock of the Tail,
That the fire to avoid to the water did sail;
And in godly simplicity means (as they say)
To manage the Stern, though the Rump's out of play.
25.
But Overton most with wonder does seize us,
By securing of Hull for no less than Christ Jesus,
Hoping (as it by the story appears)
To be there his Lieutenant for one thousand years.
26.
Lord Monson? Oh Venus! what do you hear?
I little thought you were a Rumper I swear:
But an impotent Lord will thus far avail,
He will serve for a cloak to cover the tail.
27.
To burnish his Star Mr. Salsbury's come,
With the Atoms of gold that fall from the Bum;
Sure 'twas but a Meteor, for I must tell ye,
It smells as 'twere turning to the Alderman's jelly.
28.
Brother Pembrook comes last, and does not disdain,
Though despised by the world, to bear up the train;
But after new lights so long he did run,
That they brought him to Not Bethlehem in Judea, (for he is none of the Magi.)
Bethlehem before they had done.
29.
Thus the Foxes of Sampson that carried a Brand
In their tails, to destroy and to burn up the Land;
In the flames they had kindled themselves do expire,
And the Dee'l give them brimstone unto their fire.
RUMP RAMPANT, Or, The sweet Old Cause in sippits: Set out by Sir T. A.
Perfumer to his late Highness.
To the Tune of, Last Parliament sat as snugg as a Cat.
IN the name of the Fiend, what the Rump up agin!
The Delk, and the good old cause!
If they settle agin, which to think were a sin,
Goodnight to Religion and Laws.
First, Tithes must go down like a sprig of the Crown,
Although John Presbyter grumble;
Already they tell's our Lead and our Bells
They Will sell, next our Churches must tumble.
This poor English Nation, by this Generation
Has been grieved 11. years and more,
But in that season, and not without reason,
They have thrice been turned out of door.
Which they please to call ^orce, yet themselves can do worse;
For this Parcel of a House
Dare keep out of door, thrice as many more,
And value the Law not a Louse.
First by Owl-light they met, and by that light they set:
The reason of it mark,
Their acts and the light, do differ quite,
Their deeds do best with the dark.
Esquire Lenthall had swore, he would sit there no more,
Unless in with Oxen they drew him;
That he once might speak true, they picked him out two,
Sent Pembrook and Salisbury to him.
When these Gamsters were packed, the first gracious act
Was for pence for their friends of the Army:
Who for any side fight, except't be the right;
Sixscore thousand a month will not harm ye.
Yet many there be, say The House is not free,
When I am sure of that,
TO one another they 're so free, that the Nation do see,
They 're too free for us to be fat.
Religion they waved, now they had us enslaved
And got us sure in their Claw:
They pulled off their mask, and set us our task,
Which is next to make Brick without Straw.
The next Act they made, was for helping of Trade,
So they settled again the Excise,
Which the City must pay, for ever and aye,
Yet might have chose had they been wise.
To pull down their King, their plate they could bring,
And other precious things:
So that Sedgwick and Peter's, were no small getters
By their Bodkins, Thimbles, and Rings.
But when for the good of the Nation 'twas stood,
Half ruined and forlorn,
Though It lay in their power, to redeem 't in an hour,
Not a Citizen put out his horn.
They had manacled their hands, with King's and Bishop's Lands,
And ruined the whole Nation,
So that no body cares, though they and their heirs
Be Cornute to the third generation.
May their wives on them frown, but laugh and he down,
To any one else turn up Trump:
To mend the breed, as I think there is need,
Be rid like their men by the Rump.
And may these wise Sophies, pay again for their Trophies,
For I hope the Parliament means
(Now they have been at the costs, to set up the posts)
To make them pay well for the Chains.
THE RUMP DOCK'T.
TIll it be understood
What Is under Monck's hood,
The City dare not show his horns:
Till ten days be our,
The Speaker's sick of the Gout,
And the Rump does sit upon thorns.
If Monck be turned Scot,
The Rump goes to pot,
And the Good Old Cause will miscarry;
Like coals out of embers,
Revive the Old Members;
Off goes the Rump, like Dick and Harry.
Then in come the Lords,
Who drew Parliament swords,
With Robes lined through with Ermin:
But Peers without Kings
Are very useless things,
And their Lordships counted but Vermin.
Now Morley and Fagg
May be put in a bagg,
And that doughty man, Sir Arthur,
In despair for his Foil
With Alderman Hoyle,
Will become a Knight of the Garter.
That Knave in Grain,
Sir Harry Vane,
His case than most men's is sadder;
There is little hope
He can escape the Rope,
For the Rump turned him over the Ladder
That precious Saint Scot
Shall not be forgot,
According to his own desires;
Instead of Neck-verse,
He shall have writ on his Hearse,
Here hangs one of the King's Triers.
Those nine sons of Mars
That whipped the Rump's Arse,
I mean the Commanders warlick;
If the Rump smell too strong
With hanging too long,
Shall serve to stuff it with Garlic.
That parcel of Man,
In length but a span,
Whose wife's eggs always are addle;
Must quit the Lifeguard,
As he did when skar'd
By Lambert out of the saddle.
Lambert now may turn Florist,
Being come of the poorest
That ever did man of the Sword:
The Rump let a fart
Which took away his heart,
And made him a Squire of a Lord.
His Cheshire glory
Is a pitiful story,
There the Saints triumphed without Battle;
But now Monck and his Friars
Have driven him into the Briars,
As he did Booth and his Cattle.
For the rest of the Rump,
Together in a lump,
It Is too late to cry Peccavi;
Ye have sinned all or most
Against the holy Ghost,
And therefore the Devil must have ye.
But now valiant City,
Whether must thy Ditty
Be sung in Verse or in Prose?
For till the Rump stunck
For fear of Monck,
Thy Militia durst not show its nose.
Base Cowards and Knaves,
That first made us slaves,
Very Rascals from the beginning;
Only unto Monck's Sword
The Nation must afford
The Honor of bringing the King in.
A NEW-YEARS-GIFT For the RUMP.
YOu may have heard of the Politic Snout,
Or a Tale of a Tub, with the bottom out,
But scarce of a Parliament in a shitten clout.
Which no body can deny.
'Twas Atkins first served this Rump in with Mustard,
The Sauce was a compound of Courage, and Custard;
Sr. Vane blessed the Creature: Noll snufled, and Bluster'd.
Which no body can deny.
The Right was as then, in Old Olivers Nose,
But when the Devil, of that did dispose,
It Descended from thence, to the Rump, in the Cloze.
Which no body can deny.
Nor is it likely there to stay long,
The Retentive faculties being gone,
The Juggle is stale, and Money there is none.
Which no body can deny.
The Secluded Members made a Trial
To Enter, but them the Rump did defy all,
By the Ordinance of Self denial.
Which no body can deny.
Our Politic Doctors do us Teach,
That a Blood-sucking Red-coat's as good as a Leech,
To Relieve the Head, if applied to the Breech.
Which no body can deny.
But never was such a worm as Vane;
When the State scoured last, it voided him then,
Yet now he is crept into the Rump again.
Which no body can deny.
Ludlow's Fart, was a Prophetique Trump:
(There never was any thing so Jump)
'Twas the very Type of a vote of this Rump.
Which no body can deny.
They say, it is good Luck, when a Body rises
With the Rump upward; but he that advises
To Live in that Posture, is none of the wisest.
Which no body can deny.
The Reason is worse, though the Rhyme be Untoward,
When things proceed with the wrong end Forward,
But they say there is sad news to the Rump from the Nor'ward.
Which no body can deny.
It Is a wonderful thing the strength of that Part,
At a Blast, it will take you a Team from a Cart;
And Blow a man's Head away with a Fart.
Which no body can deny.
When our Brains are Sunck below the Middle,
And our Consciences steered by the hey Down-Diddle,
Then things will go round without a Fiddle.
Which no body can deny.
You may Order the City with a Hand-Granado,
Or the General with a Bastonado,
But no way for a Rump like a Carbonado,
Which no body can deny.
To make us as famous in Council, as Wars,
Here Is Lenthal, a Speaker for mine --
And Fleetwood is a man of Mars.
Which no body can deny.
It Is pity that Nedham's fallen into Disgrace,
For he orders a Bumme with a mavelous Grace,
And ought to attend the Rump by his Place.
Which no body can deny.
Yet this in spite of all Dysasters,
Although he has Broken the Heads of his Masters,
It Is still his Profession, to give 'em all Plasters.
Which no body can deny.
Let 'em cry down the Pope, till their Throats are sore,
Their design was to bring him in at the Backdoor:
For the Rump has a mind to the scarlet whore.
Which no body can deny.
And this is a Truth at all hands confessed,
However unskilful in any of the rest,
The Rump speaks the Language of the Beast.
Which no body can deny.
They talk that Lambert is like to be tried,
For Treason, and Buggery beside,
Because that he did the Rump bestride,
Which no body can deny.
The Rump's an old story if well understood,
It Is a thing dressed up in a Parliament's Hood,
And liked, but the Tail stands where the Head should,
Which no body can deny.
'Twould make a man scratch where it does not itch,
To see forty fools heads in one politic Breech,
And that -- Hugging the Nation as the Devil did the Witch,
Which no body can deny.
From rotten Members preserve our Wives,
From the mercy of a Rump, our Estates and our Lives:
For they must needs go whom the Devil drives,
Which no body can deny.
The Re-Resurrection of the RUMP: Or, Rebellion and Tyranny revived.
The third Edition.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
IF none be offended with the Sent,
Though I foul my mouth, I Will be content,
To sing of the Rump of a Parliament
Which no body can deny.
I have sometimes fed on a Rump in Sowse,
And a man may imagine the Rump of a Lowse;
But till now was never heard of the Rump of a House,
Which no body can deny.
There Is a Rump of Beef, and the Rump of a Goose,
And a Rump whose Neck was hanged in a Noose;
But ours is a Rump can play fast and loose,
Which no body can deny.
A Rump had Jane Shore, and a Rump Messaleen,
And a Rump had Anthony's resolute Queen;
But such a Rump as ours is, never was seen,
Which no body can deny.
Two short years together we English have scarce
Been rid of thy rampant Nose (Old Mars)
But now thou have got a prodigious Arse,
Which no body can deny.
When the parts of the Body did all fall out,
Some Votes it is like did pass for the Snout;
But that the Rump should be King was never a doubt,
Which no body can deny.
A Cat has a Rump, and a Cat has nine Lives,
Yet when her Head's off, her Rump never strives;
But our Rump from the grave has made two Retrives
Which no body can deny.
That the Rump may all their enemies quail,
They Will borrow the Devil's Coat of Mail,
And all to defend their Estate in Tail,
Which no body can deny.
But though their Scale now seem to be the Upper,
There Is no need of the charge of a Thanksgiving Supper
For if they be the Rump, the Army's their Crupper,
Which no body can deny.
There is a saying belongs to the Rump,
Which is good, although it be worn to the stump,
That on the Buttocks I Will give thee a Thump,
Which no body can deny.
There Is a Proverb in which the Rump claims a part,
Which has in it more of Sense than of Art,
That for all you can do I care not a Fart,
Which no body can deny.
There Is another Proverb gives the Rump for his Crest,
But Alderman Atkins made it a Jest,
That of all kind of Lucks, shitten Luck is the best,
Which no body can deny.
There is another Proverb that never will fail,
That the good the Rump will do when they prevail,
Is to give us a flap with a Fox-tail,
Which no body can deny.
There is a saying which is made by no fools,
I can never hear on it but my heart it cools,
That the Rump will spend all we have in Close-stools,
Which no body can deny.
There Is an observation wise and deep,
Which without an Onyon will make me to weep,
That flies will blow maggots in the Rump of a sheep,
Which no body can deny.
And some that can see the Wood from the Trees,
Say, This sanctified Rump in time we may leese;
For the Cooks do challenge the Rumps for their fees,
Which no body can deny.
When the Rump does sit we will make it our moan,
That a reason be 'nacted if there be not one,
Why a Fart has a Tongue and a Fyest has none,
Which no body can deny.
And whilst within the Walls they lurk,
To satisfy us will be a good work,
Who has most Religion, the Rump or the Turk,
Which no body can deny.
A Rump's a Fag-end like the baulk of a Furrow,
And is to the whole like the Jayl to the Borough;
It Is the Bran that is left, when the meal is run thorough,
Which no body can deny.
Consider the World, the Heaven is the head on it,
The Earth is the middle, and we men are fed on it,
But Hell is the Rump and no more can be said on it,
Which no body can deny.
Flectere si nequeunt superos Acheronta movebunt.
A VINDICATION Of the RVMP: or, the RVMP RE-ADVANC'D.
To the Tune of, Up Tails all.
FUll many a Ballad has been penned
and scoffing Poem writ
Against the RUMP; but I intend
to speak in praise of it.
Come Jove and Apollo, come Venus and Mars,
And lend your assistance: to speak of the A --
Will require a prodigious wit.
There Is scarce a Lady to be found,
that loves either Pear or Plum
One half so well, if she be sound,
as tabering at her B --
It may be, you will say, I Am wide of the case,
Since that Musick's made in a distant place,
I answer, The breadth of your thum.
When Alderman Atkins did bemarre
his Hose through a panick fear,
And Captain Rea, that Man of War:
On! what a Hogo was there?
If you ask me, What praise is this? at a word,
The Captain so fenced himself by a T --
that his enemies could not come near.
There is not a Lawyer in Country or Town,
whose Rhetoric does prevail
Although he has purchased Fee-simple by the Gown,
but loves to be dealing in Tail.
And I may well swear by Apollo or Mars,
That at a place called the Oven's Arse,
Oft-times I have drunken good Ale.
And when you are dallying with a young Maid,
would you not her buttocks bethump?
And I have been often well apaid
With a Goose both fat and plump:
The body being eaten, we strive for the tail,
Each man with his Kan'kin of nappy brown Ale,
does box it about for the RUMP.
The Rump of a Cony I often have seen
most pitteously clawed by a Ferret,
And a Capon's Rump is a bit for a Queen,
Although she is a person of merit.
In preaching and praying who spends the whole day,
At night keeps a Rump wherewithal for to play,
be he never so full of the spirit.
I wonder who first called the Parliament Rump,
some say, that it was Jack Hobby,
And some, fiery Pryn: good wits will jump;
now I write not this to bob ye,
But only to tell ye, that good Mr. Pryn,
For all he is cropped, yet he could not get in,
but was fain to remain in the Lobby.
The other day I was going in haste,
(to think on it, it grieves my heart)
I saw a poor fellow all naked to the waste,
and whipped at the Arse of a Cart:
His Rump ('it is true) suffered the rout. But I would
Fain know who it was that durst be so bold,
as to call Mr. Speaker Sir F --
He might as well have styled him Anus,
since he was the mouth of the Rump,
As cunning a Fox as Rome's Sejanus:
but I do not love for to frump;
Or else I could tell ye, my friends, to an Ace,
What good can accrue to the Land by a Mace,
as long as the Knave's the greatest Trump.
Our zealous sticklers for Reformation
will edify on the Rump of a sister;
And it will never grow out of fashion
to physic the Tail with a Glister.
But beware that Monck does not come with a bitter
Purge to our Rump, which will make her beshit her,
for she has already bepist her.
RUMPATUR.
THE RUMP ULULANT, Or PENITENCE per FORCE; Being the Recantation of the old
rusty-roguy-rebellious-rampant, And now ruinous rotten-rosted RUMP.
To the Tune of Gerrards Mistress.
FArewell
False Honors, and usurped Power Farewell,
For the great Bell
Of Justice rings in our affrighted Ears.
The Gripes,
Of wounded Conscience far exceed all Stripes,
Yet are small Types,
Of those sharp Pains Rebellion justly fears,
See how,
The unmasked People hiss us out of Doors,
And call us Knaves,
Because though we, Their Servants be,
We made them but our Slaves.
For since
We laid the Country wast like ravenous Bores,
They seek our Bloods,
Because we prize their Liberties,
But to devour their Goods.
Our Hands
We dipped in Royal Blood, to have his Lands
At our Commands,
And made three Kingdoms headless at one Blow,
The Strife
We caused was chiefly to cut off his Life,
With cursed Knife;
He that was Virtue's Friend, must be our Foe.
We made
Religion do our Drudgery to base Ends,
But now we find,
They that do sow Pretenses, mow
A Harvest of the wind.
And now
When clamorous Vengeance Calling for Amends
Begins our Grief,
Our friend the Devil, with his Evil,
Can give us no Relief.
Go search
All Lands beneath the Sun's Star-spangled Perch,
You Will find no Church
Like ours, whilst Reverend BISHOPs held the Chayr.
But those
We knew with our designs would never close;
And therefore chose
In their steads to set up Extempore-Prayer.
Poach'd eyes
And words twang'd through a whining Lecturer's Nose,
Did fill our Purses,
That many gave Rings, and better Things,
Which now give only Curses.
And thus
Hell was our Text, though Heaven were our Gloze,
And Will our Reason,
Religion we made free of Hocus trade,
And voted Loyalty Treason.
Since we
With wicked Arms have made the Crosier flee,
Error is free,
To lay her Nets, to make weak Minds her Prize.
All Sects,
Schisms, cursed Heresies with stubborn Necks,
Corrupt our Texts,
And Crane up Scripture to maintain their Lies,
You see
The Crop-ear'd Anabaptist sowing Tares
In every Ground,
Though the Plagues of War, wherever they are
The Church and State Confound.
So do
The Roman Noses vend their Popish Wares,
By Twylight still;
And the Quaker half-mad, though he looks so sad,
Grinds in the Jesuits Mill.
Our Drums
Did drown your Process, and your Writs; our Plums,
Bid kiss our Bums,
We sent your Laws and Persons to the Tower:
From whence
To be delivered, 'Twas in vain to Fence
By talking Sense;
No Habeas Corpus in the Court of Power.
The Gown
Did stoop his Reverend Velvet to a Crew
In short Red Coats,
Who many a Day, Have made you pay,
For cutting your own Throats.
We robbed
The Whole of Food to pamper up the Few,
Excis'd your Wares,
And taxed you round, Six pence the Pound,
And massacred your Bears.
But now
Dispair's black clouds do hang upon our Brow,
For all do Bow,
Their Hearts, to their true Shepherd, Charles
And we
Their Wolfish Rulers now must Subjects be their King.
To Destiny,
And end our Juncto in a fatal String.
Then learn
All future Traitors by our Tragic Doom,
E're it is too late;
Lest when you make, Kingdoms to shake,
You Copy out our Fate.
We know
Our high affronts to Church and State make room
For Us in Hell;
But yet We Will hope, till the sad Rope
Says, Bid the World Farewell.
-- Facit Indignatio Versum.
The BREECH Washed, by a Friend to the RUMP.
IN an humor of late I was,
Ycleped a doleful dump.
Thought I -- We Are at a fine pass;
Not a man stands up for the Rump,
But let it be lashed over and over,
While it lies like a senseless Fop --
'Twould make a Man a Whore,
To see a Tail tew'd like a Top.
Though a Rump be a dangerous bit,
And many a Knave runs mad on it,
Yet verily, as it may hit,
An honest man may be glad on it.
To abuse a poor, Blind Creature --
I had like to have said, and a Dumb;
But now it has gotten a Speaker,
And Say is the Mouth of the Bum.
When Besse ruled the Land there was no man
Complained: and yet now they rail:
I beseech you what differs a woman
From a thing that is all Tongue and Tail?
Though a Rump, etc.
The Charter we have sworn to defend,
And propagate the Cause.
What call you those of the Rump-end
But Fundamental Laws?
The Case is as clear as the day,
There had been no reformation,
If the Rump had not clawed it away,
You had had no Propagation.
Though a Rump, etc.
As a Body's the better for a Purge,
Though the guts may be troubled with gripes:
So the Nation will mend with a scourge,
Tho'the Tail may be sick of the stripes.
Ill humors to conveigh,
When the State has taken a Loosnesse,
(Who can hold what will away?)
The Rump must do the buis'nesse.
Though a Rump, etc.
The bold Cavalier in the Field,
That laughs at your Sword and Gunshot,
An Ordinance makes him to yield,
And he is glad to turn Tail to Bumshot.
Old Oliver was a Teazer,
And waged war with the Stump;
But Alexander and Caesar
Did both submit to the Rump.
Though a Rump, etc.
Let no man be further misled
By an Error past debate.
For Sedgwick has proved it the Head,
As well of the Church as the State.
Honest Hugh, that still turns up the Tippet,
When he kneels to Administer;
Says -- A Rump with Skippon's sippits
Is a Dish for a Holy Sister.
Though a Rump, etc.
Through pride of Flesh or State,
Poor Souls are overthrown:
How happy then is our Fate?
We Have a Rump to take us down.
In matters of Faith, it is true,
Some differings there may be;
But give the Saints their due
In the Rump they all agree.
Though a Rump, etc.
It Is good at Bed and at Board;
It gives us Pleasure and Ease;
Will you have the rest in a word?
It Is good for the new Disease,
(The tumult of the Guts;)
It Is a Recipe for the King's Evil.
Wash the Members as sweet as Nuts,
And then throw them all to the Devil.
Though a Rump be a dangerous Bit,
And many a Knave runs mad on it;
Yet verily, as it may hit,
An honest man may be glad on it.
St. George for ENGLAND.
To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
THe VVestminster-Rump has been little at ease,
Of which you have heard enough, one would think;
And therefore we will lay it aside, if you please,
For the more we do stir in it the more it will stink.
The County resolves for a Parliament free,
Makes the Rump smell worse than it did of late;
For now it runs down their heels, you may see.
You may call them our Privy-Members of State.
But why should this Rump deal so roughly with Kent?
When England was conquered they were Scot-free;
Must they, for declaring, of all men be shent?
But Long-tail and Bob-tail can never agree.
It Is much disputed who Antichrist is;
I think it is this Rump, nor am I in jest:
For indeed, although of the Number it miss,
Of this I am sure, 't has the mark of the Beast.
I cannot believe that our General Monck
Intends to protect it, he is not such a fool;
For if he were rightly informed how it stunck,
He never would join with such Grooms of the Stool.
Though It be not whole Antichrist, it is the worst part,
By it both the Pope and the Turk are outdone;
If it be not the head, nor the feet, nor the heart,
It Is the Rump of the Whore of Babylon.
So pocky, so stinking, so cheating to boot,
That he that has got but an eye or a nose
Would never bestride it. Then why should you do it?
And make the poor Devil his stationship lose.
If I might advise him, he should not come near it,
The scent of that House is naught for his Gout,
And for his Army too; he well may fear it,
It Is enough to infect both his Horse and his Foot.
Nor would I wish him to come to White Hall,
For that has been an unfortunate place;
From thence Noll was fetched, and Dick had his fall:
And George may take heed that it be not his case.
I remember the time when you fought for the King,
And the Cause was good, though you did not prevail.
O let not the Boys in the streets now sing,
He was once for the Head, but now for the Tail.
Then George for England strike up thy Drum,
And do thy devoir this Rump to destroy,
That noble King Charles the Second may come,
And our streets may echo with Vive le Roy.
And if He shall come by thy Valor and Might,
In that brave exploit thou wilt have more to brag on,
Than e're had Saint George that valiant Knight,
Who rescued the Maid by killing the Dragon.
Then lay by the thought of a Parliament free,
But first bring the King in, if you be wise;
For without King and Lords there none can be,
'Twill be but a Rump of a bigger sise.
You know how to do it, and need not much schooling,
All that you need to say, is, Let it be done.
Then why should you stand delaying and fooling?
You fought for the Father, why not for the Son?
If you do not do it, much honor you will lose,
Which he and we mean you; for this we do know,
That in spite of the Rump and all other his foes,
He will be brought in whether you will or no
The Parliament-Complement, Or, The Readmission of the SECLUDED-MEMBERS to the
Discharge of their long retarded TRUST.
SInce sixteen hundred forty and odd,
We have soundly been lasht with our own rod,
And have bowed our selves down at a Tyrant's nod,
Which no body can deny.
We have seen a new thing called a Council of State,
Upheld by a power that is now out of date,
Put to the question, by the Members of forty eight;
Which no body can deny.
We have seen what we hope, we shall never see agin,
Now Lambert and Desbrow are snared in the gin,
The Tail cunningly pieced unto the Skin,
Which no body can deny.
A Sword that has frighted our Laws out of door,
A Back-sword I wot, that must cut so no more,
By the Honor of Monck, now quitting that score,
Which no body can deny.
A Vote lately called, The judgment of the house,
To be esteemed and reputed not worth a Louse,
And the Grandee of Portsmouth made a fine Chouse,
Which no body can deny.
We have seen an Assessement, a Thing for Taxes,
Though the Commonwealth waine, the Private waxes:
Swords into Plowshares, and such bills to axes,
Which no body can deny.
Another new story of Qualification,
That belonged to no honest man of the Nation,
Like the ill contrived Authors, quite of Fashion.
Which no body can deny.
Original sin, was damned by that Law,
The son of a Cavalier made a Jack-straw,
To be chewed again by their ravenous jaw,
Which no body can deny.
To fill up the House, and to shuffle the deal,
New writs issued out, for their new Commonweal,
But it is not worth asking who is it pays the seal,
Which no body can deny.
I wonder who pays the late Parliament Printers,
That place they may hold as many Summers as Winters,
And wish their Presses were broken in splinters.
Which no body can deny.
A great many Traitors by them lately made,
Makes Treason be thought a common Trade,
Sir George Booth, and Jack Lambert, a while in the shade.
Which no body can deny.
We shall now sure give over that word Sequester,
Now the Tail is cured of their ranckling fester,
The twentieth of April is much about Easter,
Which no body can deny.
How many Thanks of the House have been idely spent
Upon People that still have been malcontent,
But they must fast from those dainties in this shriving Lent.
Which no body can deny.
That honorable favor no more shall be given
To the factious merit of a party Hell-driven,
For now our twenty years odds will be even,
Which no body can deny.
Then room for our Prisoners detained in the Tower
And away with the new Lieutenant's power,
Who Is minting the widdowed good old cause's Dower,
Which no body can deny.
Sir George Booth, shall not think this is a hit of fate,
Nor excuse his keeper, whose warrant's out of date,
We shall see them all cry Peccavi too late,
Which no body can deny.
Eleven years mischiefs, tumults and rage,
Are the only memorialls of this Commonwealth's age,
And all to be thank't, be Hazelrigg the sage,
Which no body can deny.
Let our Liberty-keepers be changed to Restorer,
Let our Peace carry Truth and Duty before her,
He Is a Fool and a Knave that else will adore her,
Which no body can deny.
This Janus-like Freedom, though it please not us all
And aversly does look on the Scepter and Ball
Will shut up its Temple at next Common Hall,
Which no body can deny.
Then let us pray to great Jove, that made Monck so kind
To our desperate estate, to put him in mind,
With the rest of our Worthies, of the Great Thing behind,
Which no body can deny.
A Proper New BALLAD of the Devill's Arse a Peak, or Satan's Beastly place. Or,
in plain terms, of the Posteriors and Fag-end of a LONG-PARLIAMENT.
To be said or sung very comfortably. To the Tune of, Cook Laurel.
O Foolish Britannicks, where are your hearts fled?
What Fiend does the Nation bewitch,
That since you like Rogues cut off your own Head,
Your Noses close in with the Britch?
The Britch! such a bit, Noll's paunch could never brook,
For it put him still to his dumps;
And though full-meals of Hell-broth he often took,
Yet alwas he spewed out the Rumps.
Till Lambert the Knave, and Fleetwood the Fool,
(Though Dick persuaded them from it)
Did over-turn the Devill's Close-stool,
And, like Dogs, return to their Vomit.
No sooner the Council Table was spread
With many a vomited gull;
But the Army grew squeazy, and turned their head,
For they soon had their belly full.
The Red-coats could never this Rumpling digest,
Till advised by old Nick and his train,
(Who good unwittingly often may suggest)
They spewed up their Vomit again.
Their Sirreverence was for a while out of sight,
Till Whettam began to deplore 'em,
And Arthur the Knight of the Spur, a bold Wight,
The Rump of a Rump did restore 'em.
Then a pox light on the pitiful Rump,
That a third time above-board vapers,
Which old Nick blew out, but now turns up Trump,
As Joan farted in and out Tapers.
The House by this Legion was long time possessed,
But at last they were cast out of door;
Yet finding it swept, returned a new guest
Seven-times more a Fiend than before.
Away then ye pitiful Citizen-slaves,
Who let such enormities pass;
Were you but true men, or nor errant knaves,
Fools durst not you ride like an Ass.
Then dare to be honest, and beat up your Drum,
For when the Rogues hear of your power,
You Will smell what a scent proceeds from the Bum,
From White Hall at least to the Tower.
S'soot! what if these Arse-worms with gifts of our gold
Great George to defend them should move,
Our goods and our liberties then would be sold,
And the Devil a Monck would he prove.
Then pluck up your Spirits, and draw out your Swords,
It Is force that must only prevail,
We have long enough stood out in bare words,
Let Us now make a Rod for their Tail.
Then Vive le Roy let us merrily sing;
Can any man well in his wits
Think worser of Charles our noble good KING,
Than those who do govern by fits?
Search round the great City what ill you can see,
Which the rascally Rump has not done,
And then you will wish with the Nation and me,
That CHARLES had his Heritage won.
For Swearing, Sacrilege, Murder, and Lies,
KING-killing, Hypocrisy, Cheats;
They make no more of these sins than of Flies,
HELL is almost out-damn'd by their Feats.
Then fight ye like men for the good of the Nation,
As ye hope to be civilly drunck
On free-cost at blessed CHARL'S Coronation,
Pray hard for the trueness of Monck.
Heaven bless our good Sovereign, the best of all men,
Let the KING of our Hearts be Trump,
That peace and prosperity may come again,
Squire Dun and old Nick take the Rump.
Then let the Knaves shuffle three Kingdoms a while,
Till each Curr at his fellow snarls;
Ere long they will cut, and after the broyl,
The dealing must fall to KING Charles.
This Flap with a Fox-tail shall have the same lot,
That unhorst his Tumble-down Highness;
For since the rest of the Members are not,
The Rump must shortly have FINIS.
Bum-Fodder, or Wast-Paper, proper to wipe the Nation's RUMP with, or your own.
Free Quarter in the North is grown so scarce,
That Lambert with all his men of Mars
Have submitted to kiss the Parliament's Arse,
Which no body can deny.
If this should prove true (as we do suppose)
It Is such a wipe as the RUMP and all is foes,
Could never give to old Oliver's Nose,
Which, etc.
There Is a Proverb come to my mind not unfit,
When the Head shall see the RUMP all be-shit,
Sure this must prove a most lucky hit,
Which, etc.
There Is another Proverb which every Noddy
Will jeer the RUMp with, and cry Hoddy-doddy,
Here Is a Parliament all Arse and no Body,
Which, etc.
It Is a likely matter the world will mend,
When so much blood and treasure we spend,
And yet begin at the wrong end,
Which, etc.
We have been round, and round about twirl'd,
And through much sad confusions hurled,
And now we art got into the Arse of the world,
Which, etc.
But it is not all this our courage will quail,
Or make the brave Seamen to the RUMP strike sail;
If we can have no Head, we will have no Tail,
Which, etc.
Then let a Free Parliament be turned Trump,
And never think any longer the Nation to mump
With your pocky, perjured, damned old RUMP,
Which, etc.
But what does Rebel- Rump make here,
When their proper place (as Will. Pryn does swear)
Is at the Devill's Arse in Derbyshire,
Which, etc.
Then thither let us send them a tilt,
For if they stay longer, they will us beguilt
With a Government that is loose in the hilt,
Which, etc.
You Will find it set down in Harrington's Moddle,
Whose brains a Commonwealth do so Coddle,
That t'as made a Rotation in his Noddle,
Which, etc.
It Is a pitiful pass you men of the Sword
Have brought your selves to, that the Rump's your Lord;
And Arsie-Versie must be the word,
Which, etc.
Our powder and shot you did freely spend,
That the Head you might from the Body rend,
And now you are at us with the But-end,
Which, etc.
Old Martin and Scot have still such an itch,
That they will with the Rump try the other twitch,
And Lenthal can grease a fat Sow in the Brich,
Which, etc.
That Is a thing that would please the Butchers and Cooks,
To see this stinking Rump quite off the hooks,
And Jack-daw go to pot with the Rooks,
Which, etc.
This forward Sir John (who the Rump did never fail)
Against Charles Stewart in a speech did rail,
But men say it was without head or tail,
Which, etc.
Just such is the Government we live under,
Of a Parliament thrice cut in sunder;
And this has made us the world's wonder,
Which, etc.
Old Noll when we talked of Magna Charta,
Did prophecy well we should all smart-a;
And now we have found his Rump's Magna Fart-a,
Which, etc.
But I cannot think Monck (though a Soldier and Sloven)
To be kin to the Fiend whose feet are cloven,
Nor will creep in the Rump's arse to bake in their oven,
Which, etc.
Then since he is coming, e'ne let him come
From the North to the South with Sword and Drum,
To beat up the quarters of this lewd Bum,
Which, etc.
And now of this Rump I Will say no more,
Nor had I begun, but upon this score,
There was something behind, which was not before
Which etc.
A HYMN To the Gentle-Craft, Or, Hewsons Lamentation.
To the Tune of the Blind Beggar.
LIsten a while to what I shall say
Of a blind Cobbler that is gone astray
Out of the Parliament's High way,
Good people pity the blind.
His name you wot well is Sir John Hewson
Whom I intend to set my Muse on,
As great a Warrior as Sir Miles Lewson,
Good people, etc.
He Would now give all the Shoes in his shop
The Parliaments fury for to stop,
Whip Cobbler like any Town-top,
Good people, etc.
He has been in many a bloody field
And a successful sword did wield,
But now at last is forced to yield;
Good people, etc.
Oliver made him a famous Lord
That he forgot his Cutting Board,
But now his Thred's twisted to a Cord,
Good people, etc.
Crispin and he were near of kin,
The gentle Craft have a noble Twin,
But he would give Sir Hughs bones to save his skin,
Good people, etc.
Abroad and at home, he has cut many a Hide,
A Dog and a Bell must now be his Guide,
They Will lash him smartly on the blind side,
Good people, etc.
Of all his warlike valiant feats,
Of his Calves leather, and his Neats,
Let him speak 'um himself when he repeats,
Good people, etc.
I Will only mention one exploit,
For which when he begs, I Will give him a Doit,
How he did the City vex and annoy't,
Good people, etc.
He marched into London with Red-coat and Drum
During the time we had no Bum,
Being right for the Army as a Cow's Thum,
Good people, etc.
And there he did the Prentices meet,
Who jeered him as he went through the street,
But he did them very wel-favouredly greet,
Good people, etc.
Bears do agree with their own kind,
But he was of such a cruel mind,
He killed his brother Cob. before he had dined,
Good people, etc.
He strutted then like a Crow in a Gutter,
That no body durst once more Mutter,
The Capon-Citizens, began to Flutter,
Good people, etc.
After he had them thus defeated,
To his old quarters he retreated,
And was by Fleetwood nobly treated,
Good people, etc.
He is for this I hear Indicted,
Though the Week before by them Invited,
But Wise Men say they had as good as Shited,
Good people, etc.
He cares not for the Sessions a Lowse,
They reach not a Peer of the other House,
He Is frighted to see that he is a Parliament Chouse,
Good people, etc.
And now he is gone the Lord knows whether,
He and this Winter go together,
If he be caught he will loose his Leather,
Good people, etc.
H'ad best get in some Countrey-Town,
And company keep with Desbrow the Clown,
You see how the World goes up and Down,
Good people, etc.
His Coach, and his Horses, are gone to be Lost,
He must vamp it and cart it and thank thee mine Host,
There Is no more to be said of an old Toast,
Good people, etc.
Sing Hi Ho Hewson, the State never went upright,
Since Cobblers could Pray, Preach, Govern, and Fight,
We shall see what they will do now you are out of Sight.
Good people, etc.
Vanity of Vanities, or Sir Harry Vane's Picture.
To the Tune of Jews Corant.
HAve you not seen a Barthol'mew Baby
A Pageant of policy as fine as may be,
That Is gone to be Shown at the Manor of Raby,
Which no body can deny.
There was never such a prostitute Sight,
That e're profaned this purer Light,
A Hocus Pocus juggling Knight,
Which no body can deny.
He was taken for a Delphick Tripus,
Another doubt-resolving Oedipus,
But the Parliament made him a very Quibus,
Which no body, etc.
His cunning State-tricks and Oracles,
His lying wonders and Miracles,
Are turned into Parliament Shackles,
Which no body, etc.
Goodly great Sir Onesimus VANE,
The Anointed King of Saints not Reign?
I see all Godliness is not Gain,
Which no body, etc.
John a Leyden that Munster's Jing,
Was a Fool and an Ass to this pretty Thing,
But the Parliament hated the name of a King,
Which no body, etc.
This holy Saint has prayed till he wept,
Prophefied and Divined while he slept,
But fell in a T -- when aside he stepped,
Which no body, etc.
He sat late in the House so discontent,
With his Arms folded and his Brows bent,
Like Achitophel to the Parliament,
Which no body, etc.
He durst not speak of a Concubine,
Nor gave more Counsel to any Design,
But was musing on a Hempen Line,
Which no body, etc.
He see Mr. Prin take a great deal of Pain,
To get in with the rest as Members Again,
But they were Voted as use-lesse as VANE,
Which no body, etc.
They gave him a Congee with such a Vote;
'Twas thought they had learned it by Rote,
Ever since he went down to Graves end by Bote,
Which no body, etc.
For all his Ceremonious Cringing,
He shall undergo a notable Swindging,
There is now no more need of his Engine,
Which no body, etc.
When first the English War began,
His Father was a Court Trepan,
And 'rose to be a Parliament Man,
Which no body, etc.
So from the Father came unto the Son,
Whom woe and misery now do wait upon,
For Counselling Protector John,
Which no body, etc.
A Gemini they were, Pollux and Castor,
One was a Teacher the other a Pastor,
And both like R -- betrayed their Master,
Which no body, etc.
The Devil never see such two Sir Harry's,
Such a pest'lent pair nor near nor far is,
No not at the Jesuits Sorbon of Paris,
Which no body, etc.
They talked of his having a Cardinall's Hat,
They Would send him as soon an Old Nun's Twat,
For turning in pan there was never such a Cat,
Which no body, etc.
His dainty project of a Select Senate,
Is Damned for a blasphemous Tenet,
It Was found in the budget, ('it is said) of Monck Bennet,
Which no body, etc.
Of this State and Kingdoms he is the Bane,
He shall have the reward of Judas and Cain,
And it was he that overthrew Charles his VVain,
Which no body, etc.
Should he sit where he did with his Mischievous brain,
Or if any his Counsels behind do remain,
The house may be called the Labor in Vain,
Which no body can deny.
Chipps of the Old Block; or, Hercules cleansing the Aegaean Stable.
To the Tune of, The Sword.
I.
NOw you, by your good leave, Sirs,
Shall see the Rump can cleave, Sirs,
And what Chips from this treacherous Block will
come you may conceive, Sirs.
II.
Lenthal's the first of the Lump sure,
A Fart, and he may jump sure;
For both do stink, and both we know, are Speakers
of the Rump sure.
III.
That Mine of fraud Sir Artur,
His Soul for Lands will barter;
And if you ride to Hell in a Wayn, he is fit to make
your Carter.
IV.
Sir Harry Vane, God bless us,
To Popery he would press us;
And for the Devill's dinner he, the Roman way would dress us.
V.
Harry Martin never mist-a,
To love the wanton twist-a;
And lustful Aretine's bawdy Leaves are his Evangelist-a.
VI.
Harry Nevill's no VVigeon,
His practice truly Stygian
Makes it a Masterpiece of wit to be of no Religion.
VII.
But my good Lord Glyn Man,
Pride is a deadly sin Man,
Cots pluttera nails few Traitors be like you of all your kin Man.
VIII.
If Saint-John be a Saint Sir,
He has a Devilish Taynt Sir,
While Straffords blood in Heavens High Court of Justice makes complaint Sir.
IX.
Doctor Palmer's all day sleeping,
And into his Heart never peeping,
It Is ill he that neglects his own, should have All Souls in keeping.
X
Will. Bruerton's a sinner,
And, Croyden knows, a Winner,
But O take heed, lest he do eat the Rump all at one Dinner.
XI.
Robin Andrews is a Miser,
Of Cobblers no despiser,
And could they vamp him a new head, perhaps he would be wiser.
XII.
* But Baron VVild come out here,
Show your Ferret face and Snout here,
For you being both a Fool and Knave are a Monster in the Rout here.
XIII.
Nich. Lechmere Loyalty needs still,
And on Weather-cocks he feeds still,
If Heathen, Turk, or Jew should come, so he would change his Creed still.
XIIII.
There Is half-witted Will. Say too,
A right fool in the Play too,
That would make a perfect Ass, if he could learn to Bray too.
XV.
Cornelius thou were a Link-boy,
And born it is like, in a Sink boy,
I Would tell thy Knavery to the World, but thy Pitch sticks in my ink, Boy.
XVI.
Baron Hill was but a Valley,
And born scarce to an Alley,
But now is Lord of Taunton-Deane and thousands he can Ralley.
XVII.
But if you ask the Nation,
Whence came his Elevation,
They Will say he was not raised by God, but by our inundation.
XVIII.
Lord Fines he will not Mall men,
For he likes not Death of all men,
And his Heart does go to Pit to Pat, when to Battle he should call men.
XIX.
Perfidious VVhitlock Ever,
Has mischief under's Beaver,
And for his ends will put the World into a burning Feavour.
XX.
Ashely Cowper knew a Reason,
That Treachery was in Season,
When at the first he turned his coat from Loyalty to Treason.
XXI.
And gouty Master Wallop,
Now thinks he has the Ballop,
But though he trotted to the Rump, he will run away a Gallop.
XXII.
There Is Carew Rawleigh by him,
All good Men do defy him,
And they that think him not a Knave, I wish they would but try him.
XXIII.
Luke Robinson that Clownado,
Though his heart be a Granado,
Yet a High-Shooe with his hands in's Poke, is his most perfect shadow.
XXIIII.
Saloway with Tobacco,
Inspired, turned State Quacko;
And got more by his feigned zeal, then by his what de'e Lack ho.
XXV.
But VViddrington how came you there?
A wise man and a true there!
You are an Athanasius among a Knavish Crew there.
XXVI.
But Lisle is half forgotten,
Who often is over shotten,
For just like Harp and Gridiron, his Brains with Law do Cotton.
XXVII.
Lord Monson's next the Bencher,
Who waited with a Trencher,
How his tail is jeck'd at home and abroad, for he is a feeble Wencher.
XXVIII.
We hear from Sir John Lenthal,
Though this gouty Lord has spent all,
His Rump's placed wrong, but it is his face, that is right fundamental.
XXIX.
What Knaves are more to be vexed Sirs,
You Will here when I sing next Sirs,
For now my Muse is tired with this abominable Text Sirs.
Ridentem dicere verum, Quid vetat?
A PSALM sung by the People, before the Bone-Fires, made in and about the City
of London, on the 11th. of February.
To the Tune of, Up tails all.
COme let us take the Rump
And wash it at the Pump,
For it is now in a shitten case:
Nay if it hang an Arse,
We Will pluck it down the stares,
And roast it at Hell for its grease.
Let the Devil be the Cook
And the roast overlook,
And lick his own fingers apace;
For that may be born,
(If he take it not in scorn
To lick such a privy place.)
Though we are bereft
Of our Arms, Spits are left,
Whereon the Rump we will roast;
We Will prick it in the Tail,
And bast it with a Flayl,
Till it stink like a Cole-burnt Toast.
It has lain long in brine,
Made by the people's eyne,
So it is salt through unsavory meat;
We Will draw it round about
With Welsh Parsley, and no doubt
It will choke Pluto's great Dog to eat.
We will not be mocked
This Rump has been dock't,
And if our skill does not fail;
To fear it is good,
Or else all the blood
In the body, will leak out at the Tail.
Then down in your Ire,
With this Rump to the fire,
Get Harrington's Rota to turn it;
If paper be lack't,
The Assessment Act
You may stick upon it lest ye burn it.
But see there my Masters
It rises in blisters,
And looks very big on the matter;
Like a roasting Pigs ear
It sings, do ye hear?
It Is enough, come quickly the Platter.
Lay Trenchers and Cloth
And away bring the Broth,
Did the Devil o'th Fag end make none;
But hold by your leave
Napkins we must have
To wipe our mouths when we have done.
Come Ladies pray where?
Will you none of our cheer?
Are ye of such a squeamish nature?
Pray what is your reason,
Are Rumps out of season?
But it is an abuse to the Creature.
Come we will fall on
Pray cut me a bone
The Meat may be healthful and sound;
Fogh! come let us bury't
To the hole we must carry't,
This Rump it stinks above ground.
This fire we will style
The Funeral pile,
The Grave shall be under the Gallows;
The Vane shall be the scull,
Of some Trayterous-Fool,
And the Epitaph shall be as follows.
Underneath these Stones
A Rump-Corporate's bones,
Are laid full low in a sink,
And we do implore ye
Let them rest, for the more ye
Do stir them, the more they will stink.
LONDON'S true Character.
To the Tune of, Cuckolds all-a-Row.
YOu Coward-hearted Citizens,
what is your Damned pretense,
To keep your selves within your Beds,
and not Fight for your Prince?
Whose Majesty should you behold,
your shames would breed your woe;
And then (like Fools) you will cry out,
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
There Is some of you, whose Bishops Lands
do so much clogg your heels,
That now you cannot stir, where as
else, you would Run on Wheels:
But yet I hope a time will come,
when you shall be made know,
And told to your faces, that you are
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
But yet for one most Reverend Act,
you are to be commended;
That through your Rams-head zeal you have
your Brother RUMP befriended,
To seat them in the Parliament House,
their Wisdoms forth to show;
But they (and you) are all a-like,
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
Yet I advise you, set this Rump
in Salt, for fear of Stinking;
'Twill fall unto the Devil's share,
because it is his by drinking:
In spite of all their Acts, and Laws,
He Will carry them down below;
Then Hell, and City, like to like,
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
I doubt, your Lambert is undone,
and now he may go Preach;
For it is the English all-a-moad,
for every Rogue to Teach:
He Will Nose it bravely in a Tub,
to let the City know
That they will be Damned, unless they Dipp,
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
But where is your mighty Fleetwood now,
his Honor's worn to the Stump;
He Will serve Ambassador to Hell,
to make way for the Rump.
And thus King-killers, one by one
will to the Devil go,
Upon the City Asses backs, like
Cuckolds all-a-row.
And now Cow-hearts, look to your Shops
the Red-Coats will you fright;
And Plunder you, because they know
your Horns hang in your light:
No matter, for You have been the cause
of all the Kingdoms woe,
And do deserve still to be called
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
But if that you would honest grow,
and do a glorious thing;
Which is, to Rowse and take your Arms.
and Fight for Charles your King:
Which Act your Credits will regain,
and all the World shall know
That you no more, shall then be called
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
A Display of the Headpiece and Codpiece Valor, of the most Renowned, Colonel
Robert Jermy, late of Bafield in the County of Norfolk, Esquire; with his son
Captain Toll by his side; now on their way for New England. Or, the lively
description of a dead-hearted fellow.
To the Tune of a Turd, or the Blacksmith.
DId you never hear of the Baby of Mars,
That charged Tom Fox's wife with a Tars,
For his valor lies all in his Arse,
Which needs must be very strong.
A sanctified Colonel in beaten Buff,
With a Scarlet Jump that is Cudgelled by Mr. Armiger at Wells in Norfolk,
November. 4. 1654.
Cudgel-proof;
And his son Ran away six miles at Crowland Siege, and never looked behind him.
Crowland Coward of the self-same stuff,
Who got the wench big with young. Probatum est.
He Is a journey-man Soldier to the State's Army,
And it is in his terms, When you fight you must spare me:
So runs the Commission of Colonel Jermy,
If I be informed true.
Upon a mock-Larm he is sure in the Van,
Where he takes none, and does no more hurt than he can.
He Is a pitiful Soldier, though a cruel man,
Let Us give the Devil his due.
To sacrifice to his fears and his pride,
He caused a He caused Parson Cooper to be hanged by Judge Iermy, for fear he
should beat him.
Church-Champion be murdered and tried
By the Judge of his name, and the Rope on his side;
It Is pity they ever were parted.
Yet you cannot but say, 'twas very well meant,
When he went to the House of Parliament,
In love to his Country before he was sent,
In a Coach, when he might have been Carted.
You must always take the good will for the deed,
Though at He corrupted twenty free Burghers at Risen, to give their Votes for
him in the last Election for Parliament.
Risen he had not the luck to speed;
Yet some other place may have very great need,
If the Devil release but his hire.
So dear was his love that he He hired 100 men to come with him from Lyn with
swords and guns, for fear Mr. Howard and his two men should beat him.
purchased a throng
Of Seamen, in Lice and Lungs very strong.
Sure he will be some body ere it be long,
If he be not laid in the mire.
How the Sailers did hollow and throw up their hats,
And the men with wide mouths that used to cry Sprats;
But the brave spark of Arundel made them look like drowned Rats,
When he Mr. Howard gave him a box on the ear with the back of his hand, and he
fell to the ground with fear.
humbled Tom Toll for his sin.
That highborn Hero had cudgel'd their Swords,
Had they not almost expired at his words;
But the whole design was not worth two half-turds,
Though you throw the Justice Cremar, Justice Peddar, and Justice Life.
three Justices in.
In his last good service he He took the City of Norwich when the Gates were
open, and no opposition.
took the City,
By an order from the mistaken Committee,
Where he escaped a scowring, the more was the pity;
For 'twas foul when you have said what you can.
He marched into the Gates with an hundred more,
O brave! he never did the like before;
For he used to sneak in at the Mrs. Foxe's back door.
back door,
As becomes a right modest man.
When they entered the Town they beleagur'd the Mayor,
And with wonderful courage they stormed the Chair;
But they soon were all foul, and ran very fair,
As if they would been bred for the Course.
For the The Bells were rung backward, which alarmed the City, who came in and
had beat him, if he had not run away upon the noise of it.
Bells were rung backward, as he says his prayers,
And his head went forward with his haste down the stairs,
Like a man of dispatch in the State Affairs,
Thank Fortune it was no worse.
It Is much to be wondered he should leave the Rump,
Though his love to that end has received a Law-frump,
But that is his god what ever is Trump;
Yet his spirit now was blind.
Had the Rump but once fizl'd, 'twas the strongest side,
But a Fart has so routed his Troop in their pride,
Though infallible Iermy's Chaplain, that prays, and swears, and fights, and
lies for him in ordinary.
Butler was his guide,
That they are both blown down the wind.
Yet that would be thought a true Let us show our selves true Englishmen, is
his usual saying,
Englishman,
Let him make true Latin if he can;
Yet learned men's lives this Rascal will scan,
And when he has done it deny it.
This is Jermy's Forlorn when brave Jacks appear.
He has little of wit, and less of fear,
And swears for his Colonel by the year;
And when he is in, he will ply it.
When the Nation was Jaded with a He that dranck so much Asses milk, as,
without the Parliament's mercy, he is like to be a fool for ever.
Quaker,
This Jippoe for-sooth was a great undertaker,
And amongst other Trades a Justice-maker,
Two Justices in Norfolk.
Brewer, Tirrell, and Gaffer Life.
Were made and created by his stinking breath,
To sit on the Bench upon Life and Death.
We'd as good have had a turd in our teeth,
Without any further strife.
I thought this Colonel would fail,
When he was upon his Codpiece-bail,
He got such a flap with a Fox tail,
As more at large in your Master Armiger has the exemplification of a Verdict
in a Box, wherein Iermy's baudery with Foxe's wife, is set forth.
Box, Sir.
But now if we may believe common fame.
At present they say he is fled for the same,
How poorly this fellow has played his game!
But let him not escape without knocks, Sir.
Yet he is such a Coward that I dare say,
He neither dares fight, nor yet run away,
And yet he would be glad to stand at a stay,
If he might but have his Quietus.
For tell him his baseness but once to his face
Y' are sure enough he dies on the place,
If he hangs not himself upon this disgrace,
It Is One to a Thousand he will beat us.
A New BALLAD,
To an Old Tune, Tom of Bedlam.
MAke room for an honest Red-coat,
(And that you will says a wonder)
The Gun, and the Blade,
Are his Tools, -- and his Trade
Is for Pay, to Kill, and Plunder.
Then away with the Laws,
And the Good old Cause,
Never talk of the Rump, or the Charter,
It Is the Cash does the Feat,
All the rest's but a Cheat,
Without That there is no Faith, nor Quarter.
It Is the Mark of our Coin, GOD WITH US,
And the Grace of the Lord goes along with it,
When the Georges are flown,
Then the Cause goes down,
For the Lord is departed from it.
Then away, etc.
For Rome, or for Geneva,
For the Table, or the Altar,
This spawn of a Vote,
He cares not a Groat --
For the Pence, he is your Dog in a Halter.
Then away, etc.
Though the Name of King, or Bishop,
to Nostrils pure may be Loathsome,
Yet many there are,
That agree with the Mayor,
That their Lands are wondrous toothsom.
Then away, etc.
When our Masters are Poor, we leave 'em,
It Is the Golden Calf we bow to:
We kill, and we slay,
Not for Conscience, but Pay;
Give us That, we will fight for you too.
Then away, etc.
'Twas That first turned the King out;
The Lords, next: then, the Commons:
'Twas that kept up Noll,
Till the Devil fetched his Soul;
And then it set the Bum on's.
Then away, etc.
Drunken Dick, was a Lame Protector,
And Fleetwood a Backslider:
These we served as the rest,
But the City's the Beast
That will never cast her Rider.
Then away, etc.
When the Mayor holds the Stirrup,
And the Shreeves cry, God save your Honors:
Then, it is but a Jump,
And up goes the Rump,
That will spur to the Devil upon us.
Then away, etc.
And now for a fling at your Thimbles,
Your Bodkins, Rings, and Whistles,
In truck for your Toys,
We Will fit you with Boys:
('It Is the Doctrine of To the Butchers Wife.
Hugh's Epistles.)
Then away, etc.
When your Plate is gone, and your Jewels,
You must be next entreated,
To part with your Bags,
And strip you to Rags,
And yet not think y' are cheated.
Then away, etc.
The truth is, the Town deserves it;
It Is a Brainless, Heartless Monster:
At a Clubb they may Bawl,
Or Declare at their Hall,
And yet at a Push not one stir.
Then away, etc.
Sir Arthur vowed, he will treat 'm,
Far worse than the men of Chester:
He Is Bold, now they are Cowed,
But he was nothing so Loud
When he lay in the ditch at Lester.
Then away, etc.
The Lord has left John Lambert,
And the Spirit, Feak's Anointed:
But why, Oh Lord,
Have thou sheathed thy Sword?
Lo, thy Saints are disappointed.
Then away, etc.
Though Sir Henry be departed:
Sir John makes good the place now,
And to help out the work
Of the Glorious Kirk,
Our Brethren march apace too.
Then away, etc.
While Divines, and Statesmen wrangle,
Let the Rump-ridden Nation bite on it,
There are none but we
That are sure to go free,
For the Soldier's still in the right-on't.
Then away, etc.
If our Masters w'ont supply us,
With Money, Food, and Clothing:
Let the State look to it,
We Will find one that will do it,
Let him Live, -- we will not damn for nothing.
Then away with the Laws,
And the Good old Cause,
Never talk of the Rump, or the Charter,
It Is the Cash does the feat,
All the rest's but a Cheat,
Without That, there is no Faith nor Quarter.
A Relation of a Quaker, that, to the shame of his profession, attempted to
Bugger a Mare near Colchester.
ALl in the land of Essex,
Near Colchester the zealous,
On the side of a Bank
Was played such a prank
As would make a Stone-horse jealous.
Help Woodcock, Fox, and Nailer,
For brother Green's a Stallion;
Now alas what hope
Of converting the Pope,
When a Quaker turns Italian.
Unto our whole profession,
A scandal 'twill be counted,
When it is talked with disdain,
Amongst the profane,
How Brother Green was mounted.
And in the good time of Christmas,
Which though the Saints have damned all,
Yet when did they hear
Of a damned Cavalier
E're played such a Christmas Gamball?
Had thy flesh, O Green, been pampered
With any Cates unhallowed;
Had thou sweetened thy gums
With pottage of plums,
Or profane minced pie had swallowed.
Rolled up in wanton Swines flesh,
The Fiend might have crept into thee;
Then fullness of gut
Might have made thee rue,
And the devil so have rid through thee.
But alas, he had been feasted
With a spiritual Collation,
By our frugall Mayor,
Who can dine with a Prayer,
And sup with an Exhortation.
'Twas mere impulse of spirit,
Though he used the weapon carnal.
Filly Foal, quoth he,
My Bride thou shall be:
Now how this is lawful, learn all.
For if no respect of persons
Be due amongst the sons of Adam,
In a large extent
Then may it be meant,
That a Mare's as good as a Madam.
Then without more Ceremony,
Nor Bonnet veiled, nor Kissed her,
He took her by force
For better for worse,
And he used her like a Sister.
Now when in such a Saddle
A Saint will needs be riding,
Though I dare not say
It Is a falling away,
May there not be some backsliding?
No surely, quoth James Naylor,
'Twas but an insurrection
Of the carnal part;
For a Quaker in heart
Can never lose Perfection.
For so our Hist. of Jesuitism.
Masters teach us,
The intent being well directed;
Though the Devil trapan
The Adamicall man,
The Saint stands uninfected.
But yet a Pagan-Jury
Still judges what is intended;
Then say what we can,
Brother Green's outward man
I fear will be suspended.
And our Adopted Sister
Will find no better quarter;
But when him we Inroule
For a Saint, Filly Foal
Shall pass at least for a Martyr.
Now Rome that spiritual Sodom
No longer is thy debtor;
O Colchester now,
Who Is Sodom but thou?
Even according to the Letter.
Help Woodcock, Fox, and Nailor,
For Brother Green's a Stallion;
Now alas what hope
Of converting the Pope,
When a Quaker turns Italian?
The Four-legg'd Quaker,
To the Tune of the Dog and Elder's Maid; Or, The Lady's fall.
ALL that have two or but one Ear,
(I dare not tell ye half)
You of an Essex Colt shall hear
Will shame their very Calf.
In Horsley fields near Colchester
A Quaker would turn Trooper;
He caught a Foal and mounted her
(O base!) below the Crupper.
Help, Lords and Commons, once more help,
O send us Knives and Daggers!
For if the Quakers be not gelt,
Your Troops will have the Staggers.
RALPH GREEN, (it was this Varlet's name)
Of Colchester you will swear,
For thence the four-legg'd Elder came,
Was ever such a Pair!
But though 'twas foul, 'tween Swash and Jane,
Yet this is ten times worse,
For then a Dog did play the Man,
But Man now played the Horse.
Help, etc.
The Owner of the Colt was nigh,
(Observing their Embrace)
And drawing nearer did epsy
The Quaker's sorrel Face:
My Foal is ravished (then he cries,
And fiercely at him ran)
Thou Rogue, I Will have thee halter'd twice,
As Horse and eke as Man!
Help, etc.
Ah Devil, do thou tremble? now
It Is sore against thy will;
For Mares and preaching Ladies know
Thou have a Colt's tooth still:
But mine is not guilty of this Fact,
She was by thee compelled;
Poor thing, whom no man ever Backed,
Thou wickedly have Bellied.
Help, etc.
O Friend, (said GREEN, with sighs and groans)
Let this thy wrath appease!
(And gave him then eight new half-Crowns
To make him hold his peace)
The man replied, Though I for this
Conceal thy Hugger Mugger,
Do think it lawful for a Piece
A filly Foal to Bugger?
Help, etc.
The Master saw his Colt defiled,
Which vexed his soul with doubt;
For if his Filly proved with Child,
He knew all would come out:
Then he afresh began to rave,
(For all his Money-taking)
Neighbors, says he, I took this Knave
In The very act of Quaking!
Help, Lords and Commons, once more help,
O send us Knives and Daggers!
For if the Quakers be not gelt,
Your Troops will have the Staggers.
Then to the Pinfold (Gaol I mean)
They dragged him by the Mane,
They called him Beast, and called her Queen;
As if she had been Jane.
O stone him (all the Women cried)
Nay, Geld him (which is worse)
Who scorned us all and took a Bride
That Is Daughter to a Horse!
Help, etc.
The Colt was silent all this while,
And therefore 'twas no Rape,
The Virgin-Foal he did beguile,
And so intends to escape.
For though he got her in a Ditch
Where she could not revolt,
Yet he had no Scot'sh Spur nor Switch
To ride the willing Colt.
Help, etc.
O Essex, Essex, England's pride,
Go burn this long-tail'd Queen,
For though the Thames runs by thy side,
It cannot wash thee clean!
It Is not thy Bleating Son's complaints,
Hold forth such wanton courses,
Thy Oysters hint the very Saints
To horn the very Horses.
Help, etc.
Though they salute not in the street
(Because they are our Masters)
It Is now revealed why Quakers meet
In Meadows, Woods, and Pastures.
But Hors-men, Mare-men, all and some
Who Man and Beast perplex,
Not only from East- Horsley come,
But from West-Middle-Sex.
Help, etc.
Alas you know by Man's flesh came
The foul disease to Naples,
And now we fear the very same
Is broke into our Stables;
For death has stolen so many steeds
From Prince and Peer and Carrier,
That this new Murrain rather needs
A Physician to the Earl of Pembroke, who is no Quaker nor Quacker.
FARRAR than a Farrier.
Help, etc.
Nay if this GREEN within the Walls
Of Colchester left forces,
Those Cavaliers were Caniballs,
Eating his human Horses!
But some make Man their second course,
(In cool Blood will not spare)
Who butcher Men and favor Horse
Will couple with a Mare.
Help, etc.
This Centaur, unquoth Other thing,
Will make a dreadful Breach:
Yet though an Ass may Speak or A new Sect of young Men and Women, who pray,
eat, and sing extempore.
Sing,
O let not Horses Preach!
But Bridle such wild Colts who can
When they will obey no Summons,
For things begot 'tween Mare and Man
Are neither Lords nor Commons.
Help, etc.
O Elders, Independents too,
Though all your Powers combined,
Quakers will grow too strong for you,
Now Horse and Man are joined:
While Cavaliers, poor foolish Rogues,
Know only Maids Affairs,
Shee-Presbyters can deal with Dogs,
And Quaking Men with Mares.
Help, etc.
Now as when Milan Town was reared,
A monstrous Sow untamed
With back half-Hair half-VVool appeared,
'Twas Mediolanum named:
So Colchester must have recourse
To some such four-legg'd Sister,
For sure as Horsley comes from Horse
From Colt 'twas called Col-chester.
Help, Lords and Commons, once more help,
O send us Knives and Daggers!
For if the Quakers be not gelt,
Your Troops will have the Staggers.
St. GEORGE and the DRAGON. ANGLICE MERCURIUS POETICUS.
To the Tune of, The Old Soldier of the Queens, etc.
NEws, News: -- Here Is the Occurrences, and a new Mercurius:
A Dialogue betwixt Hazelrig the Baffled, and Arthur the Furious:
With Ireton's readings upon Legitimate and Spurious,
Proving that a Saint may be the Son of a Whore, for the satisfaction of the
Curious.
From a Rump insatiate as the Sea,
Libera nos Domine.
Here Is the true reason of the City's Infatuation:
Ireton has made it drunck with the Cup of Abomination:
That is, -- the cup of the Whore, after the Geneva Interpretation:
Which, with the juice of Tichburn's Grapes, must needs cause Intoxication.
From a Rump, etc.
Here Is the Whipper whipped by a Friend to George, that whipped Jack, that
whipped the Breech,
That whipped the Nation, as long as it could stand over it: -- After which
It was it self Re-jerk'd, by the sage Author of this Speech:
Methinks a Rump should go as well with a Scotch spur, as with a Switch.
From a Rump, etc.
This Rump has many a Rotten and unruly Member:
Give the General the Oath, cries one; -- but (his Conscience being a little
tender,)
I Will Abjure you, with a Horse-pox, quoth George, -- and make you remember
The 'Leaventh of February, longer than the Fifth of November.
From a Rump, etc.
With that -- Monck leaves (in Rump assembled) -- the Three Estates.
But oh, -- how the Citizens hugged him for breaking down their Gates,
For Tearing up their Posts, and Chains, and for Clapping up their Mates,
(When they saw, that he brought them Plasters for their broken Pates.)
From a Rump, etc.
In truth, this Rufle put the Town in great disorder;
Some Knaves (in Office) smiled, -- expecting 'twould go further;
But at the last, -- my Life on it, George is no Rumper, -- said the Recorder:
For there never was either Honest Man, or Monck of that Order.
From a Rump, etc.
And so it proved, for Gentlemen, says the General, I Will make you amends:
Our Greeting was a little untoward, but we will part Friends,
A little time shall show you which way my Design tends,
And that, besides the good of Church and State, I have no other ends.
From a Rump, etc.
His Excellence had no sooner passed this Declaration and Promise,
But in steps Secretary Scot, -- the Rump's man Thomas,
With Luke, their lame Evangelist, -- (the Devil keep 'um from us,)
To show Monck what precious Members of Church and State the Bumm has.
From a Rump, etc.
And now comes the Supplication of the Members under the Rod,
Nay, My Lord, (cries the Brewers Clerk) -- good my Lord, -- for the Love of
God,
Consider yourself, us, -- and this poor Nation, and that Tyrant Abroad;
Don't leave us, -- but George gave him a Shrugg, instead of a Nodd.
From a Rump, etc.
This mortal Silence was followed with a most hideous Noise
Of Free-Parliament Bells, and Rump-confounding Boys:
Crying, Gueld the Rogues, Sindg their Tails, -- when with a low Voice,
Fire and Sword, by this Light, cries Tom, let us look to our Toys.
From a Rump, etc.
Never were wretched Members in so sad a Plight:
Some were Broyld, -- some Roasted, -- others Burnt outright,
Nay, against Rumps, so Pitiless was their Rage and Spite,
That not a Citizen would kiss his wife that Night.
From a Rump, etc.
By this time, Death and Hell appeared in the ghastly Looks,
Of Scot, and Robinson; (those Legislative Rooks)
And it must needs put the Rump most damnably off the Hooks,
To see, that when God has sent meat, the Devil should send Cooks.
From a Rump, etc.
But Providence, their old friend, brought these Saints off, at Last,
And through the Pikes, and the Flames, un-dis-membred they Past,
Although (God wot) with many struglings, and much Have.
(For -- Members, -- or no Members, was but a measuring Cast.)
From a Rump, etc.
Being come to Whitehall; -- there is the dismal moan:
Let Monck be damned, cries Arthur, in a terrible tone:
That Traitor: -- and those Cuckoldly Rogues that set him on:
(But, though the Knight spits Blood, it is observed that he Draws none)
From a Rump, etc.
The Plague Bawle you, cries Harry Martin, you have brought us to this
condition,
You must be canting, and be Pox'd, -- with your Bare-bones Petition,
And take in that Bull-headed, splay-footed Member of the Circumcision,
That Bacon-fac'd Jew, Corbet: that son of Perdition.
From a Rump, etc.
Then in steps Driv'ling Mounson, to take up the Squabble:
That Lord, which first taught the use of the Wooden Dagger, and Ladle,
He, -- that out-does Jack Pudding, at a Custard, or a Cawdle:
And were the Best Fool in Europe, but that he wants a Bawble.
From a Rump, etc.
More was said, to little Purpose: the next news, is -- a Declaration
From the Rump; for a Free State, according to the Covenant of the Nation,
And a Free-Parliament, under Oath, and Qualification,
Where none shall be Elect, but Members of Reprobation.
From a Rump, etc.
Here Is the Tail Firk'd; a Piece acted lately with great applause,
With a Plea for the Prerogative Breech, and the Good Old Gause:
Proving, that Rumps, and Members, are antienter than Laws:
And that a Bumm Divided, is never the worse for the Flawes.
From the Rump, etc.
But all things have their Period, and Fate,
An Act of Parliament dissolves a Rump of State:
Members grow weak; and Tails themselves run out of Date:
And yet thou shall not Dye; (Dear Breech) thy Fame I Will celebrate.
From a Rump, etc.
Here lies a Pack of Saints, that did their Souls, and Country Sell
For Dirt; The Devil was their good Lord: him they served Well;
By his Advice, they Stood, and Acted: and by his President they Fell,
(Like Lucifer) making but one step betwixt Heaven, and Hell.
From a Rump insatiate as the Sea,
Liberasti nos Domine.
A Dialogue betwixt Tom and Dick, The former a Countryman, the other a
Citizen, Presented to His Excellency and the Council of State at Drapers-Hall,
in London, March 28. 1660.
To the Tune of, I Will never love thee more.
Tom. NOw would I give my life to see,
This wondrous man of might.
Dick. Do see that Jolly Lad? That Is he;
I Will warrant him he is right.
There Is a true Trojan in his Face:
Observe him over and over.
Chorus.
Dick. Come Tom; If ever George be base,
Never trust good fellow more.
He Is none of that Fantastique brood,
That murder while they pray:
That trusse and cheat us, for our good;
(All, in a godly way.)
He Drinks no Blood, and they no Sack
Into their gutts will pour.
Chorus.
But if GEORGE does not the knack;
Never trust good fellow more
His quiet Conscience needs no guard;
He Is brave, but full of pity.
Tom. Yet, by your leave, he knocked so hard,
H'ad like t'awak'd the City.
Dick. Fool, 'Twas the Rump that let a Fart,
The Chains and Gates it tore.
Chorus.
But if GEORGE bears not a true heart,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. Your Citty-blades are cunning Rooks,
How rarely you collogue him?
But when your Gates flew off the Hooks,
You did as much be-rogue him.
Dick. Pug'h. -- 'Twas the Rump did only feel,
The blows the City bore,
Chorus.
But if GEORGE be'nt as true as Steel,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Come, by this Hand we will crack a quart,
Thou Wilt pledge his health I trow.
Tom. Tope Boy, Dick -- A lusty Dish my heart,
Away w'ot; Tom. -- Let it go.
Drench me you slave in a full Bowl,
I Will take it, an 'twere a score,
Chorus.
Dick. Nay, if GEORGE be'nt a hearty Soul,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. But hark you, Sirrah, we are too loud,
He Will hang us, by and by.
Dick. Me 'thinks, he should be vengeance proud?
No more then thee, or I.
Tom. Why then I Will give him the best Blade,
That ere the Bilbo wore,
Chorus.
Dick. If GEORGE prove not a Bonney Lad,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. 'Twas well he came, we'd mawll'd the Tail;
-- We Have all thrown up our Farms.
And from the Musket, to the Flayl,
Put all our men in Arms.
The Girls had taken the Members down,
Never saw such things before.
Chorus.
Dick. If George speak not the Town our own,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Dick. But prithee, are the Folk so mad,
Tom. So mad, say; -- They 're undone,
There Is not a penny to be had;
And every Mother's Son
Must fight, if he intend to eat,
Grow valiant, now he is poor.
Chorus.
Dick. Come -- yet if George don't do the Feat,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. Why Richard, it is a Devilish thing.
We Are not left worth a groat.
My Doll has sold her wedding-ring,
And Sue has pawnd her Coat.
The Sniv'ling Rogues abused our Squire,
And called our Mistress Whore.
Chorus.
Dick. Yet -- if George don't what we desire,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. By this good day; I did but speak,
They took my Py-ball'd Mare;
And put the Carri'on wench to the squeak.
(Things go against the Hair.)
Our Prick-ar'd, Cor'nell looks as bigg
Still, as he did before.
Cho.
Dick. And yet if George don't humme his Gigg,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Faith Tom: our Case is much at one;
We Are broak for want of Trade;
Our City's baffled, and undone,
Betwixt the Rump, and Blade.
We Have emptied both our Veins and Baggs,
Upon a Factious Score.
Chorus.
If George Compassion not our Rags,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. But what do think should be the Cause,
Whence all these Mischiefs spring?
Dick. Our damned breach of Oaths and Laws;
Our Murder of the King.
We have been Slaves since CHARL'S his Reign,
We lived like Lords before.
Chorus.
If George don't set all right again,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Tom. Our Vicar -- (And bee's one that knows)
Told me once, -- I know what: --
(And yet the Thief is woundly Close)
Rich. It Is all the better; -- That.
Has too much Honesty and Wit,
To let his tongue run over:
Chorus.
If This prove not a lucky hitt,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Shall's ask him, what he means to do?
Tom. -- 'Good faith, with all my heart;
Thou make the better Leg of the Two:
Take thou the better part.
I Will follow, if thou't lead the van.
Rich. Content; -- I Will march before.
Chorus.
If GEORGE prove not a Gallant man,
Never trust Good Fellow more.
My Lord: -- in us the Nation craves
But what you're bound to do.
Tom. -- We have lived Drudges. Ric. -- And we Slaves;
Both. We would not die so too.
Chorus.
Restore us but our Laws again;
The unborn shall thee adore:
If GEORGE denies us his Amen;
Never trust Good Fellow more.
FINIS.

