To my honored kinsman, Mr. William Rooke*
SIR,
YOu know the occasion of my meddling with this controversy: It remains that I
give account of my permitting these rude papers to the public view; which is,
first, because all good Christians are not satisfied herein: if I may hereby
undeceive some of them, I have so much of my end; next I conceive it the duty
of every good son of our sacred Mother the Church of England, to defend her
rites and holy decrees against the calumnies of turbulent spirits, possessing
so many in these times: whose study is to cavil at all, but the vain Minerva's
of their own brains. If my endeavor may happily contribute any thing to peace,
I shall think my labor well bestowed. Lastly, the candid Reader may be
advertised that the satisfaction which he receives herein, he owes to you. The
God of peace compose all our unhappy differences, which is the constant prayer
of

Your affectionate Kinsman, I. R.

An answer to certain Crudities and frivolous Objections made against the
observation of a day in memory of our Savior Christ his Birth.
A true copy of the objections.
THe Question concerning the Observation of a day in memory of Chri^^'s birth,
is the same which our Savior put to the Pharisees, Whether John's Baptism were
of heaven or from men? Luke. 20.

So the observation of this day, if it be of God, it is a duty and a sin to
omit it. But if it were set up by man, all men do acknowledge, That what man
shall set up, man may take down. Therefore first.

1. Have we any command in scripture for it? if not, then 2. Did the Apostles
or Disciples ever observe it? 3. Would they have omitted it, if it had been a
duty? 4. Was it observed in the Primitive Church for fifty years after the
Apostles were all dead? search the Scripture and Ecclesiastical history. 5.
How came it to be Christ's day? tell us the Original of this duty, that we may
know, whether it be Divine or humane. Is it like to be a duty and no footsteps
at all left in the word, either Precept or Example looking that way? 6. Whether
the Papists may not say as much for all their heaps of Traditions, as we can
say for this? And if we once follow traditionall Divinity, where shall we stop?
7. Give us a definition of that sin which the Scripture calls Will Worship.
I suppos^ these Queries duly weighed, will satisfy any ingenuous spirit, That
man was the founder of this Festival.

Object. Do we not celebrate days of thanksgiving at the appointment of the
Magistrate (as the 5. of November.) and may we not this day as well as those?

Answer. 1. Wherever the Magistrate appoints such days, it is lawful for him
to forbid them again when he will.

Answer 2. If God had not appointed what memorial he would have of his Son
Christ, man had the greater liberty. But where we are directed how and when to
celebrate the remembrance of our blessed Savior, for us to superadd, we have
cause to fear, lest we become guilty of that sin which Scripture calls
Will Worship. Like whereto is that sin taxed, Ezekiel. 48. 8. setting our
threshold by his threshold, and our posts by his posts, which is there called a
defilement.

Besides, consider the constant a buse of this solemnity; and though I know,
abusus non tollit usum; yet where it is never otherwise, but the devil has
more service at this time then God, I think it concerns the Magistrate to
look to it. He that would read more on this Subject, let him read Mr Cawdrys
book against Dr. Hamond concerning holydays and Superstitious *worship.

Consider that there is nothing more often blamed in Scripture then this, to
follow the inventions of man in the worship of God, which is the case in hand.

I would ask that man who blames the neglect of this Festival whether he that
will not keep this memorial, does break any of the ten Commandments in so
doing? and if not, then sure it is no sin to omit it.

Sect. 1. THe Question concerning observation of a day in memory of Christ's
birth, is the same which our Savior put to the Pharisees, Whether John's
Baptism were of heaven, or from men? Luke 20.
In all orderly di^putes, the Question should necessarily be stated* now by
your strict prohibition of our solemn commemoration of our Saviors nativity,
it seems the question is, Whether it be lawful on any day to remember our
Saviors birth, and therein to meet in holy assemblies, to preach and hear the
word of God, to sing Psalms, pray, give thanks, administer and receive the holy
Saeraments? we affirm, your sect deny it, as if some Act of amnestie had
passed upon that day as, Job 3. (...) etc. and it were resolved upon the
Question, The day of Christ's birth shall be no more had in remembrance.

This Opponent not so much as repeating the question, as in some sudden passion
when furor ar^a minist^at, snatcheth up that which first comes to hand, and so
precipita^ely rusheth on to the encounter, that he stumbleth in his onset
saying, The Question concerning the observation of a day in memory of Christ's
birth, is the same which our Savior put to the Pharisees, etc. We answer 1. in
the Scr^pture which you cite, Luk* 20. 1. there is no mention of the Pharisees,
neither Math. 21. 23. Mark 11. 30. where the same history is recorded: We read
(...), the Chief Priests, and (or with) the Elders of the* people: Consider
whether you do well translate that, the Pharisees, etc. 2. We say, that the
lord answered their question by another question, which was concerning the
Baptism of ^ohn; there is not a word concerning the day of his nativity; now to
say that things so much differing are the same, consider what you would call it
if another had said so? what a filly animal would you deem him who would admit
such conclusions? In many respects this pretended parallel runs uneven. 1.
^hrists dilemma was necessary to show that if they had believed John Baptists
testimony, they would have known by what authority Christ did those things* but
your objection is unnecessary, as will appear. 2. That was an holy refutation
of Jewish u^beliefe; but yours a Schismatical caption, to the contempt of the
Christian Churches customs. But to pass by these first over-sights of yours;
we may use Goliahs sword to cut him shorter, and thus retort the point of your
argument* The prohibition of our observation of a day in memory of Ch ists n
tivity, is it from heaven, or of men? if from heaven, show us an^ place of holy
Scripture forbidding the same: If you say, that prohibition is of men; we shall
with good conscience follow venerable an^iquity, rather then*trouble the Sacred
peace of the Church about things of such nature.

Sect. 2. SO the observation of this day]
What supplement is here necessary for your elliptical speaking? we would
rather that you should consider, then we determine, being unwilling to injure
you. So the observation, etc. Do you mean, ho^ dato, that Christ's forementioned
question and yours, are the same? you have no^ much reason so to beg the
question* and we should have as little to ^rant you that which you shall never
be able to prove.

Sect. 3. If it be of God, it is a duty etc.]
Deal syllogistically, and your assumption will be, But it is no sin to omit
it, which your better informed conscience, we hope will show you is false, when
you shall know that contumacy against the lawful decrees and customs of the
Church of Christ, disturbance of her peace, breach of holy unity, uncharitable
censuring and condemning your brethren, offense of weak consciences, bringing
an odious scandal on the Church, opening a wide and dangerous window to sects
and perni^ious heresies and other mischeivous consequences hereof, are a sin
whose name is Legion.

Sect. 4. All in ^n do acknowledge, that what man shall set up, man may take
down]
It is very troublesome handling such dis-joynted arguments, but their infirmity
may not excuse their falsehood -- That all men acknow^edge, or ought so to do,
is very false; for some better understand, and so we hope will you.

Sect. 5. THat what man shall set up, man may take down]
We are very willing to think that these lame expressions vail some more solid
and sincere meaning: if your proposition be, Man may lawfully take down that
which man seteth up (which you must mean if you dispute, (...), and to any
purpose) then we may justly enquire concerning the quantity of the
proposition, viz. Whether you universally affirm it; your sense being thus,
Whatsoever man seteth up, he may lawfully take down; if it be but indefinite,
as (some things which man sette^h up etc. suppose an house, barn etc. he may
lawfully take down) if it be to no other man's pr^iudice, we shall willingly
grant it: but if you universally affirm, in a determinate Subject, subordinate
to the service and glory of God, your second thoughts will enform you that your
assertion is false and erroneous: for it will not hold in things dedicated to
God. The Centurion built a Synagogue for the Jews, L^ke. 7. 5. he might not
after dedication thereof have taken it down. Again by Setting up, we conceive
you use a translatitious manner of speaking borrowed from builders, founders,
appointers, or authors of things, to customs* or rites appliable; as if you
said, Whatsoever man foundeth, determines, appoints or brings into use or
custom, may lawfnlly be annulled and taken away by man; which is very false,
if the instance be in things subordinate to the Service of God, whether we
consider circumstance, or thing: for example; there are two circumstances to
every action of man appertaining. 1. place, concerning which a due
consideration of the forecited instance may satisfy: it was lawful for the
Centurion to design that place for a Synagogue on which he did build it, but
not lawful, thence to take it being consecrated or dedicated to the Service of
God, Durante usu:

2. It was lawful for a man to appoint or determine his days of Nazaritship
for a certain time, concerning which he might vow, or set up that resolution,
but not lawfully take down or annull the same: See Numb. 6. So the vow of
Jonadab son of Rechab, commanding his posterety to drink no wine, build house,
sow seed etc was at first, arbitrary, and so it was but an appointment by man;
yet they might not annull or take it down. See Je^em. 35. 6, 7, 8, 18, 19. and
there are now some temporal vows binding.

3. A thing determined by man in Subordination to Gods Service, however
arbitrary it be for the proprietor to ordain it so, or otherwise to dispose of
it as he pleases; yet after he has so ordained, and set it up, he may not
lawfully take it down or impropriate the same, lest he bear his sin, as
Ananias and Saphira too late knew. Act. 5, 3, 4. etc. whence the falsehood of
your ground appears, and what your Superstructions are like to prove, may
easily be conj^ctured.

Sect. 6. Have we any Command in Scripture sor it?]
If you mean in terminis terminantihus, thus, Is there any express Scripture
which says* on the 25. of December* keep the feast of Christ's nativity? we
affirm not, neither were it needful, seeing that in Christ, God freed us from
the band of l^gal ceremoni^s as well concerning detemined times by the
Levitical law appointed and limited, as places: we are not now bound to go to
Je^usalem to worship: John. 4. nor to the 14. day of the first month (Exodus 12.
6.) but for circumstances of time and place, it is left to the authority of the
Church, orderly* and convenie tly in things public to determine for the
government of the Church, in which the ^eremoniall law left no such liberty:
But God never did, never will permit the publi^e government to the fancies or
judgments of private spirits: for what order or peace ever was, or can be in
such a confused liberty* yet we must know that God never*lefr it arbitrary,
whether man would worship hiw or no; or whether they might at their pleasures
contemn the authority of the Church, and disturb her sacred peace, the
Apo^^le saying -- But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. And again, Despise ye the Church of God?
what shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. 1. Cor.
11. 16, 22. If you wo^ld here Syllogistically dispute, your arguement would be
to this purpose. That which has no command in terminis in Scripture for it,
may not be done or may be left undone, though the Church otherwise determine:

But the observation of a day in memory of Christ's birth, has no command in
termin*s in Scripture for it. Ergo etc. Who perceives not the falsehood of the
first proposition? seeing that we have no express command in terminis in
Scripture for any thing indifferent (for were it expressly commanded or
forbidden there, it were not indifferent) those things being left to the Church
to determine: we have not express command in Scripture for some things
necessary, as administration of the Lords supper to women, etc. And if you will
allow payment in your own coin, may not the Anabaptis^s say as much for their
denial of poedobaptism? if you say women are included in the general
precepts, as also infants of beleiving parents, which is true; then allow us
the same liberty of concluding, and we shall satisfy those who will understand.
Lastly we say (concerning the observation of a day in memory of Christ's
birth) have we any command in Scripture against it? you will not affirm that:
being then neither expressly commanded nor forbidden, you grant it of its own
nature adiaphorous or indifferent; and we are sure that in things of that
nature you must acknowledge that the Church of Christ has power to determine,
if at least you will allow her any.

Sect. 7. DId the Apostles or disciples ever observe it?]
We answer, does it appear that they did not observe it? further we say that
all that which our Lord Jesus did, is not recorded in Scripture, John. 20. 30.
John. 21. 25. And can we reasonably think that all things which the Apostles or
disciples did, are written in holy Scripture? we read not that all the Apostles
were baptized, where, when, and by whom; will you therefore conclude, that they
were not at all baptized? In things simply necessary to Salvation, the general
precept was sufficient to show it so; and for things subordinate to decency,
unity, and order, it was left to the Church to determine conveniently in respect
of times, places, and persons: hence appears a sufficient answer to your
next. Quaere.

Sect. 8. Would they have* omitted it, if it had been a duty?]
To dispute ex non concessis, either presupposes much igrance in the
Respondent, or bewrays it in the Opponent; Who ever granted you that the
Apostles etc. omitted it? or when did you, or ever shall be able to prove that
they did? what vain trilling use yo u in such a frequent begging of the
question?

Sect* 9. Was it observed in the Primitive Church for fifty years after the
Apostles were dead? search the Scriptures and Ecclesiastiall history.]
We answer again; that you found us in possession of many hundred years
prescription, and therefore it rests on your parts to show us that it was not
observed in and from the Apostles times (except until now of late days) which
when you attempt to do, or to show that any consent of the uniuersall Church
ever annulled the observation thereof, we shall begin with you upon a new
score. If your argument lie thus, It is not found in Scripture nor in
Ecclesiastical history, etc. Therefore in the Apostles times and Fifty years
after the Apostles were dead, it was not observed; The consequence is l^me;
for, A non Scripto ad non factum, non valet argumentum: how absurd is it to
say, It is not found written; therefore it was not done? all is not written
which Christ did, as has been said before: if therefore you find any thing to
the contrary in your search of the Scriptures, etc. proclaim your (...) in
open streets, and sacrifice to your invention: We find that good and ancient
authors spoke of the observation of that day, as of a thing long before their
times accustomed and in use. See Ammianus Marcellinus. l. 21. who lived about
Three hundred and sixty years after Christ. Gregory Nazianz* Orat. 32. who
lived about the same age, Augustine and many others. And we further say, that
the reason why little or no mention of this days observation, not only for
Fifty but many more years can be found in the ancient Ecclesiastical writers,
may be, and most probably is, because so long, none opposed that rite and
custom of the Church: So was it in case of paedobaptisme, unto Cyprian time
and the Conncils of Carthage and the Milevetan. An. 416. 417. (in which
Pelagius and Caelestius were condemned) because no opposition did before that,
for some hundred years, give the Orthodox Fathers occasi^n to dispute or write
in defense of it: indeed, to what end should any write in defense of that which
none opposed? But when some pretenders to Christian religion opposed the truth,
or raised schisms dangerous to the unity of the Church, or the wholesome Rites
and customs of the same, then the Orthodox wrote, and many of their works are
yet extant, and so are diverse of their Sermons and godly Or^tions delivered to
the people on the same day, which sufficiently testify* the custom of the
Church of Christ concerning the observation of the day in memory of our
Saviors nativity: Lastly, it is well known, that there were some obscure ages,
wh erein few or none writ, or none so eminent and known, as that there writings
were transmitted to posterity.

Sect. 10. HOw came it to be Christ's day?]
If you believe that which the Angel told the shepherds. Luke. 2. 10, 11. that
Christ was on that day borne, this quere is superfluous; mark the words, The
Angel said unto them, fear not, for b^ hold I bring you good tidings of great
joy which shall be to all people* for unto you is born this day in the City o^
David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord. You pos^ibly will say, what is that
to us? what cause of joy or commemoration have we? Certainly the same that all
the people of God then had, if hrist were born your Savior: for in that he
says, which shall be to all people, he includes us Gentiles as well as the
Jews, for he is not only the Savior of the Jews, but of the b^l^iving Gentiles
also, Rom 3. 29 neither of those only who lived that day, but of all ages: you
may say, how know we whether he were born on that day which we observe? we
answer, how know you the contrary? One day of the year he was born; you that so
obstinately deny the day which we observe to be it, assign us one other which
you will affirm, was the day of his nativity, except you think he was not born
in any time: You will say again; ^ut why should we yearly observe a day? we say
first, for the same reason which Moses gave Israel for the yearly observation
of the Passover; When your Children shall say unto you, what mean you by this
service? you shall say, As this day (by the computation of the Church of
England) was our Savior Christ born, whom God sent into the world to deliver
us, not from a temporal bondage but from the e^ernall misery of hell and
damnation, to which sin had inslaved us. Again Secondly, you may as rationally
say, Why should we at all, or any time be thankful to God for this his greatest
mercy conferred on the elect, considering the end of his incarnation, his
suffering and man's redemption, which Paul recites under the mot ion of a
faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance. 1. Tim. 1. 15. and our Savior
recounteth as a principal specimen of Gods love to mankind, John. 3 16. indeed
it was the chief; non enim prodesset nasci, nifi redimi profuisset. Ambros. And
is it not worth thanks in your sense?

Sect. 11. ^ell us the original of this duty]
They who will not learn of Christ (the only Mediator between God and man,
through whom, and by whose merits only, they can be heard) to say, thy will be
done in earth, as it is heaven, etc. may possibly doubt concerning the
original of this duty, not knowing, or not beleiving the practice of an holy
Angel, or a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God on the day of
Christ's nativity, Luke. 2. 10. 13. to be a sufficient warrant (without consent
of Pharisees) to prescribe a duty to men on earth; but believers, whose hearts
and tongues do indeed accord in prayer, neither question the original of this
duty, nor whether it were divine and from heaven, or of men; guided by Gods
Spirit they were. The ground of your doubt is a mere caption and begging of the
question, sufficiently refuted in that which has been said. that you say, no
footsteps at all are left in the word, either precept, or example looking that
way; consider better and know that the gospel (Luke. 2.) is the word of God,
and the practice of a multitude of holy Angels example sufficient for them who
desire ind^ed to do the will of God on earth as it is done in heaven: Lastly,
we say, show us before Mr Calvin's time any footstep or example, I say not of
holy Angels, but of any true Christian for your new discipline.

Sect. 12. Whether the Papists may not say as much for all their heaps of
traditions, as we can for this?]
They may, and do say (as you do) some things untrue. But for satisfaction in
this behalf, you must know, 1. That some traditions were Apostolical. 2. These.
3. 6. and they were either written, as the dogmata, doctrines of holy
Scripture, which Jr^naeus calls veritatis traditionem l. 3. c. 4. or sine
charactere vel atramento* of which, says he, many nations of the Barbarians,
who believe in Christ, diligently holding the old tradition, beleiving in one
God the maker of the heaven and earth* and all things that are therein, by
Christ Jesus his son, through faith please God* etc. Therefore some traditions
Apostolical, were not written but delivered viva voce, to the Churches which
hey planted, as rites for o^der and convenience of the same. The ground of this
d^sti^ction, the Apost^e himself lay^th down 2 Th^s. 2 15. saying, (...), Hold
fast the traditions, which ye have been taught, whether by word, or by our
Epistle: And we must remember that the Apostles committed not all to writing,
but only those things which appertained unto the ground and essence of faith
and sanctification, or thereto nearly subordinate* Again it is ne^essary to
distinguish ri es of the hurch from doctrines, and things necessary from
indifferent; also things perpe^ual, from changable, which are not universal, as
some of the others are: for some of the Apostolical traditions were
acc^mmodated to times, places and persons, and so not to be esteemed
universally binding, a^ all times, places, and all persons; as for example,
saluting with an holy kiss* anointing the sick (Jam 5. 14.) abs^inence from
blood. Act. 15. 0, 29. Also, as it is necessary to distinguish in these things;
so, to know that in things of their own nature indifferent, thou art bound to
give no offense to the brethren with whom thou live, but to observe such
their rites; there being necessary to all men ever, and in all places, as one
faith, so one love, but not one rite or custom, though these are not rashly to
be violated by any person, the institution whereof was from its beginning in
public authority of the Church, not any private spirits.

Moreover by traditions, good writers sometimes understand any thing concerning
rites, doctrine and discipline Ecclesiastical, not expressly written in
Scripture, but that which is by good and necessary consequence, thence to be
concluded, as paedobaptism, observation of the Christian Sabbath, etc. wherein
it is observable that Christ condemned the Sadduces of error, through ignorance
of that Scripture, whose consequence they knew* not or would not acknowledge.
Moses said, I am the God of Abraham, etc. here was no express word to prove the
resurrection of the dead; but necessary consequence here is, because God is the
God of the living. Thus understand in holy duties, that though we must ever be
regulated by the holy Scriptures, yet is it not always necessary to have
express Scripture in terminis for our warrant therein, where a necessary
consequence from the general rule is sufficient; for example, we find no
express word commanding us to pray in the English tongue; you cannot hence
conclude, that praying in English is will worship, because we have no express
word of God for it; because the general rule is sufficient, omnis lingua laudet
Dominum, and the sense of Scripture, that we should pray in a known tongue,
viz. in that tongue which we, and those with whom we pray, do understand: we
read not in any express Scripture that we must preach the Gospel in England, or
that the Apostles ever did so; yet you will not say that it is will worship, or
Popery so to do; because the general rule is sufficient warrant, which says,
Go into all the world* preach the Gospel to every Creature. Mark. 16. 15. but
this is a tradition and practice of the Church since religion was planted among
the Eng^ish; though we sinde no express mention of England in holy Scriptures,
yet we know no cause to doubt whether we ought to preach in England, or may
lawfully so do, without danger of being guilty of will worship, because we have
no express Scripture for it; and if it be lawful to preach in this place upon
the general warrant, why not also to preach, pray, praise God, on the 25. of
December? the general warrant concerning the circumstance of time being,
rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, in every thing give thanks. See Ephesians.
1. 16. and 5. 20. 1 These. 5. 16, 17, 18. 1 These. 2. 13. 2 These. 1. 3. Phil 1.
3. Col. 3. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Hebr. 13. 15. In what Scripture find you your
exception to the 25. of December? may we not on that day give God thanks for
our meat and drink with your good leave? and why not for the greatest of
blessings, the bread of life bestowed upon us on that day?

To conclude, hence it may appear that the Church may appoint and use external
rites and orders for convenience and decency tending to edification; though we
hold that no tradition be^^des holy Scripture is simple necessary to salvation;
yet as Augustine says, ^ p. Casulano, In his rebus de quibus nih^l certi
statuit Scriptura divina, mos populi Dei vel instituta maiorum pro lege tenend
sunt, that is, In those things concerning which divine Scripture determines
nothing certain, the custom of Gods eople, or institutions of our Ancesters are
to be held instead of a law: provided that th re appear nothing therein
constituted* accustomed, or used, contrary to the word of God: so much be
spoken concerning Apostolical and holy traditions.

2. Apostolical traditions are tares of the envious man's scattering, mere
inventions of men, not subordinate to faith, sanctity and edification, nor
consonant to the holy word of God; many such crept into the Jewish Church
before our Saviors incarnation; whereof see Math. 15. 2. 3. 6. Mark 7. 13.
Gal. 1. 14. Paul before his calling, says, that he was more exceedingly
zealous of the traditions of his fathers. With these we may arrange that same
faraginem of the Talmudists, and if you will so call them, heaps of traditions
which crept into the Church of Rome, to the corruption of doctrine and truth;
for which traditions the Papists so eagerly contend; see their long Council of
Trent; and consider the vast difference betweeen their traditions, and our
rites. Popish traditions are generally against express Scriptures, or necessary
consequences thence to be deduced; and of them, some against the fundamentals
of religion; which none but the very ignorant or malicious can object against
the rites of the Church of England. Popish traditions (properly so called) are
points which generally were never received by the Church or orthodox fathers,
thereof but rather generally opposed by them of the purest ages; but ours, for
instance this concerning the observation of a day in memory of our Saviors
nativity, was never opposed until of late years: Popish traditions, as also
the Pharisaicall, did make void the doctrine of God; which none can justly
object against us: now we speak of Popish traditions properly so called; for we
are not of their number who call all that Popery, which either they understand
not, or which agrees not with their fanatical opinions; for when they speak
for truth and Apostolical traditions, they do no more speak their own, then
the Devil did speak his own words, or sense when (in hope thereby either to
gain credit to his lies, or to bring a suspicion on the truth of the Gospel) he
affirmed Christ to be the holy one of God, Luke 4. 34. Mark. 1. 24. Nay but
when he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own, John. 8. 44. All is not
devilish which the devil said; so neither count we all Popish which the
Papists say: when therefore they speak for those traditions whereby they slid
away, and continued not in the truth of Christ, then speak they for their heaps
of traditions, such as their Council of Trent equalled with the dictates of
Gods spirit in sacred Scriptures; and such other inventions of man may hereto
be added, as the old Pharisees did, or the modern now do obtrude upon their
deluded hearers for doctrines, whereby they elevate the commandment of God,
and as much as in them is, make then of less power and authority with men; and
so force Gods commands to give place to old traditions, as Papists do, or to
new, as some, therein as bad, or worse, now do. And now bona vestra cum venia,
we would gladly be satisfied, whether you (who would fain pin your fancy of
will worship upon our sleeves) do not you in your Classical traditions, fall
into a more just censure, or suspicion of will worship and depowering the
commandments God, who expressly says, endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephs. 4. 3. and Heb. 10, 24. 25. let us consider
one another to provoke unto love, not forsaking the assembling our selves
together, but your tradition (not so much valuing the unity and peace of
Christ's Church as your own wills) will not admit any to communicate with you,
except he can reach his conscience so wide as to subscri^e to your new
discipline. Gods word ^aith (Romans 14. 6.) be that observes a day, observes it
unto the Lord; and ver. 10. why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou
set at naught thy brother? and ver. 13. let us not judge one another, and ver
15. if thy brother be greived, now walk thou not charitably; destroy not him
with thy meat for whom Christ died: And ver. 17. for whosoever in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable unto God* let us then follow those things which
concern peace, and wherewith one may ^dify another: but you would have all
follow your rigid opinions, or else you will neither hold communion nor charity
with them; bnt brand them with that bloody name of malignant, then which you
can say no worse, but only reprobate.

Sect. 13. ANd if we once follow traditional divinity, where shall we stop?]
What will not unskilful confidence venture on? Had you been well informed
to^distinguish between traditions, you might have spared your selves this
trouble. Certainly they that follow the Apostolical traditions or doctrine of
the Gospel only, shall safely stop, and rest satisfied therein, which ^uide
and constancy we heartily wish you, but as yet know not that in ^our late-born
discilpine vou follow either, who have so many off-sets of several Sects sprung
from you, as are often to seek where to stop, or of what religion to be; I speak
things too well known; witness the miserable divisions which have torn in
sunder the late happy unity of the Church of England. Lastly, you vainly
trifle, and would imply, that we observing a day in remembrance of our Saviors
nativity, do therein follow traditionall divinity in your sense, which is a
parologism and silly begging of the question, which a junior Sophister would
account very absurd and ridiculous.

Sect. 14. GIve us a definition of that sin which the Scripture calls
will-worship]
If you know not what that is, why take you up a medium to prove your opinion
with, which your self understand not? could you teach, who understand not what
you say, nor whereof you affirm? if you do indeed know what (...) is, why are
you not theticall in laying down your own sense and definition thereof? you
that would catechize us concerning will worship; rather dispute fairly; and
your argument will thus lie.

Whatsoever the Scripture calls will worship, is a sin: But, The Scripture
calls observation of a day in rememberance of Christ's nativity will worship:
Ergo. Observation of a day in remembrance of Christ's nativity, is a sin.

We answer; until you show us where the Scripture so calls it, we shall
laugh at your bold weakness, who durst undertake this q^arrel: yet to do you a
curtesy, we tell you that will worship is any thing brought into the worsh p of
God, without his commands or by the wi l of man only, which has not its ground
in ho^y Scripture. As for our parts, we worship neither time nor place (though
we cannot worship without these circumstances) we worship God through Christ
(by whom he made both time and place, Heb 1. 2. Genesis 1. Joh. 1. 2. Col, 1. 16.)
we worship him by prayer, thanksgiving, preaching and hearing the holy word on
that day; which being according to the will of God, and the express word of
God, bewa^e that you bespatter not with your dirty terms of will worship, and
the like: we suppose you will not blame the Angels for coming from heaven,
that they might sing and praise God for Christ's nativity on the d^y thereof,
and preach the same unto men: O but say you, you count it a holy day; why not?
seeing according to the Custom of the Church of Christ, we set it apart to
Gods s^rvice. But say you then, Is not that will worship? we demand; Is
dedicating of a thing to Gods service, in that act, a making it holy? or is a
counting a consecrated thing holy, concluded will worship in your Schools? nay
but it does not universally conclude any worship: we suppose that you will
grant the elect Angels are holy; that supposition concludes no adoration of
Angels at all due.

Sect. 15. I Suppose these Queries duly weighed will sati^fy any ingenuous
Spirit, that man was the founder of this festival.]
To argue by such often queries may breed doubts rather then resolve them: how
you come to lay claim to ingenuous, or witty, who are satisfied by these
questions, we wish that we were satisfied; seeing that the more we weigh them,
the lighter and more frivolous we find them: your consequence from your
supposed ingenuous sense is another begging the question, which wise men
account the most foolish of all fallacies.

Sect. 16. Ans. 1. WHere ever the Magistrate appoints such days, etc.]
we remit you to the former answer, Sect. 5. to which we only add, Was the
Magistrate or Power appointing that half the day, Novem. 5. should be kept holy
(in memory of Gods great mercy that day showed in delivering us from eminent
destruction of our bodies) authors of will worship? or the due observation of
that statute, such? which you seem ingenuously to suppose; if not, why had not
former Magistrates, and Parliaments as much power in the days of old to appoint
or consecrate unto the same Lord, days of thanksgiving and solemn commemoration
(for their deliverance from eternal destruction of body and Soul) as they had
for the other in these last times? and why may not we without offense, observe
them still? our consciences being not satisfied, how any authority or consent
of men may lawfully recall, impropriate, or, in your phrase, take down that
which they have with a general and unanimous consent of lal parties interessed,
once dedicated to the service of God, the same reason, end, and use thereof,
still remaining.

Sect. 17. Ans. 2. But where we are directed how, and when to celebrate the
remembance of our blessed Savior, for us to sup^radd etc.]
How and when? If you mean in praising God by Christ, preaching him, hearing
his word, adminstration and receiving the holy Sacraments, which represent, and
remember us of our ever blessed Savior; we are so far from superadding, that
we only desire free liberty of doing those very things which Gods word
evidently directs us to do in his service: consider well, whether it be not a
superaddition of yours to permit remembrance of our blessed Savior, adding
this exception, only upon the 25. of December it is a sin so to do: and
whether in your sense, this be not like that sin taxed Ez^k 43. We understand
not why we may not remember our Saviors birthday and coming into the world
(without which he had not suffered for our salvation) or why it should be
esteemed good on any day of the year, but evil on the 25. of December, if you
can solidly teach us, we shall indeed think you ingenuous, and our selves your
debtors; but in the mean time we confess, that a day prohibited time and place,
we cannot understand.

Sect. 18. LIke whereto is that sin taxed Ezekiel. 48. 8. etc.]
We suppose you mean Ezekiel. 43. 8. which is as much unlike this business, as
your self to a sound Interpreter; show us that there is any abomination (which
in that place is charged on Israel) in remembering that we had a Savior born on
the 25 of December, in preaching on those texts of holy Scriptures, which
either foretold, or declared the truth of God accordingly fulfilled concerning
the same, or to praise, pray, sing ^salmes, and read Scripture, or to
administer the holy Sacraments; this is all we desire should on that day be
permitted us: if your weak stomachs cannot bear the smell of superstitious
pyes, or pottage, we will forbear them, rather then lose your company at
Church. But to the matter, That place of the Prophet, teaches how Isreal
sinned in defiling the temple of the Lord, by setting up idols therein, or in
places and chapels near to the place which God had set apart to his own
service, this is jdolatry is there and else where called whoredom, which he
said, ver. 7. should be no more, which was literally fulfilled after their
return from their Babylonish captivity; and to so this day they have no idols,
though they worship not the true God aright because they believe no^ in Christ,
whom they do not think yet to be born, and therefore would willingly accord
with you in forbidding a day in remembrance of Christ's nativity: But to your
parallel, like whereto etc. it is easily and truly refuted, by saying unlike
whereto is that sin taxed etc. for there Israel defiled Gods house by idolatry;
is it so when we preach, pray, or communicate? your ingenious application is
admirable, and it is strange that whatsoever you think, the bells must ring.

Sect. 19. YEt where it is never otherwise, but the devil has more service
that time etc.
We answer concerning this Cup put into Benjamins Sack, with whomsoever it be
found, let him die, and bear his sin: but we desire the calumniator to read and
well consider Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 17. etc.

Sect. 20. I Think it concerns the Magistrate to look to it.]
It does so, if you mean the abuse of it; but that you say, is never otherwise,
is a calumny which would suit with the accuser of the brethren, but such
untruths ill become a Christian: here your own concession is answer enough,
were your assumption true, abusus non tollit usum: you may know howmuch prayer,
preaching, etc. are abused; should they therefore be used no more?

Sect. 21. LEe him read Mr* Cawdryes etc.]
Let him for us, who knows no no better use of preceious hours.

Sect. 22. WHich is the case in hand]
Still begging the question? it is not the case in hand: here is no following
the inventions of man in the wors^^p of God; what a silly combatant would you
judge him, who inst^ad of using his arms, would only entreat his Antogonist to
give him that which is contended for?

Sect. 23. ANy of the ten Commandments in so doing etc.]
We retort your argument, and shoot your bolt back again, asking you Who blame
the observation of this festivial; whether he that keeps this day in memory
of our* Saviors nativity, does thereby break any of the ten Commandments* and
if not, then sure it is no sin to observe it; and what ground then, have all
your clamors against so constant a custom of the Church of Christ? but to come
nearer to you, this your Quaere is not much more rational then that ridiculous
question, What part of speech is Qui ante non ^avet, post dolebit? what if one
should ask you; does he that violateth charity and the unity of the Church of
Christ, break any of the ten Commandments, would you not readily answer, that
he breaks them all? because you know that Charity is the sum and end of the
law. Math. 22. 36, 37. 1 Timothy 1. 5. without which whatso^ver else we do, is
nothing worth, 1 Cor. 13. 1. etc. and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 14. 1,
2. etc. (speaking of things in their own nature indifferent, whereof he
instanceth in two, choice of meats, and observation of days) that God may be
glorified on this ground, that he gives God thanks, ver. 10. and earnestly
blames judging or censuring a brother in such things. ver. 15. concluding
that, if thy brother be greived etc. now walk thou not charitably, or
according to charity; and if I by thanksgiving am partaker of Christian liberty
and freedom to serve God and to give him thanks and praise him on any day, why
is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? and why am I evil spok^n of
for that for which I give thanks? Have you for these and other like respects so
much rent the sacred unity of the late happy Church of England, that we now
seem like those dry and scattered bones in the Prophets vision, Ezekiel. 37.
whereof the question may be, Can these dry bones live? have these quarrels
caused the English to be a scorn and derision to foriagn nations? has the
contempt of the holy Churches authority opened the door to so many ridiculous,
irrational and impious heresies, which all know were at first but your
off-sets? has the bloody sword so often disputed these unhappy questions,
undone so many noble and good families? and Sed praestat motos componere
fluctus;
I say no more, but do you question whether they by whom these offenses come,
do therein break any of the commandments? please your selves, conclude, Sure it
is no sin: for our part, we look upon these prodigious divisions with grief of
heart, and fear of the issue, being truly sensible that these breaches are too
wide already, and heartily desire their happy closure, as for many reasons of
greatest moment, so for that which the holy Ghost records, Genesis 13. 7. to
mark the dangerous importunity of that strife, between Abraham's and Lot's
pastors, The Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land. Let us
therefore entreat all in the Apostles words Phil. 2. 1. etc. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, be like^ minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of
one mind etc. And now join in petition with us, unto the God of peace that he
would be pleased to breath the Spirit of unity and life upon our divided parts,
and to give a right understanding to all parties, that with one heart and
tongue we may glorify him, and live to him, that we may be saved by him.

Amen.
FINIS.

