Little Benjamin OR Truth Discovering Error:

Being a clear and full Answer unto the Letter, Subscribed by 47 Ministers of
the Province of LONDON, And presented to his Excellency, January 18. 1648.

To Inform the Ignorant of the concurrent proceedings

To Satisfy the desirous of the Parliament and Army.

IN Taking away the life of Charles Stuart, late King of England, together
with, etc.

By a real lover of all those, who love peace and truth.

Go in dethrone sin.

Psalm. 149. 9. Execute upon them, the Judgment written: this honor have all
the Saints.
Job 32. 22. I know not to give flattering titles: In so doing My Maker would
soon take me away

February 17. 1648.
Imprimatur

GIL. MABBOT.



Printed at London, for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornehill,
near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader, etc.
I Doubt not but this, like Benjamine, although the least and last brought
forth, May nevertheles be much desired, embraced, and have a portion with his
Brethren, not to say a double one, he comes in a plain dress, and speaks in a
home, clear, and genuin sense, with faithfulness to the matter in hand: with
Arguments well grounded upon Scripture and reason; and all Scripture is given
by inspiration of God, and is profitable, comprehending all truth in the Letter
of the written word, whereunto we do well to take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place (to wit, our understandings, darkened through the
ignorance that is in us) until the day (of the light of the Lord) dawne, and
the day Star (of the spirit of life) arise in our hearts. Then shall we not
think more highly of our selves then we ought to think, but think soberly,
according as God has dealt to every man, the measure of faith, but for those
whosoever they be, that will walk in their own way pretending truth, Judge.
12 1. etc.
where none is, and like * proud Ephraim reproach, and provoke that supreme
Authority, which God has honored, and the Nation chosen, let them take heed
they no more pierce at their heart, through the sides of the General, and his
Council, who act by their authority. But let them fear, and remember that
justice may, and must reach them, if they persist, as those Ephramites did,
(which God forbid) and lost 42000 of that Tribe by so doing in that War. And
now I recommend you to the ensuing Treatise, and to the spirit of truth, to
discover and to guide us into all truth. And rest a hearty lover of every son
of Truth.

J. R.

Truth discovering Error.
FOr as much as diverse Ministers of the Gospel (as they style themselves) in
the Province of London, in their Letter to the Lord General and his Council,
presented to his Excellency Febr. 18. 1648 did neglect the grace of truth and
soberness, contrary to their duty, as appears in St. Paul, who when
reproached by Festus, answered, I am not mad most noble Festus, but speak
forth the words of truth and soberness; Therefore according to the gift of the
Spirit, and measure of grace that is given to me, the weakest of Christians, I
shall proceed to answer the untruths and manifest reproaches cast upon his
Excellency and the General Council therein.

First, Minst. 1.
therefore unto page 1. 2. whereas you acknowledge, You were invited, but did
refuse any such meeting as was proposed unto you by the General Council; and
that you do give his Lordship and his Council the reason of that refusal,
etc. To this

I answer, Answ.
That the reasons of this your refusal are mere pretenses, grounded upon your
own wills, and upon a bare opinion of some of your Brethrens dislike of their
late actions, etc. you not considering that your Brethren are as fallible as
your selves: And that you have done contrary to the Gospel practice, in
refusing any such meeting as was proposed unto you; to inform and instruct
them clearly by reason, well grounded upon Scripture truth; also by your
carping at, and traducing their honest, just, and faithful proceedings,
legally grounded upon their Commissions, and their Authority derived from the
Parliament, for the welfare and safety of this Nation, besides your reproaches
cast upon them; whereas you ought to have dealt with them in all humility and
love, much more then Act. 26. 24. etc.
Paul did to F^st^^, (for that you were much more obliged unto them) also to
King Agrippa and Bernice.

And thus St. Luke presented his Gospel unto most excellent Theophilus, Luke
1. 3, 4.
which you have not done; and therefore it is evident that you have passed your
own bounds, and acted beyond your sphere, the which you have most injuriously
and unjustly applied unto them, not only in this, but in many other
calumniations in the rest of your Letter, as shall be clearly proved.
Therefore to proceed.

Secondly, Minist. 2.
whereas you tax them of injustice, page 3. saying: But as if the justness of
your way were already granted by us, we were only invited to contribute our
assistance, in prosecution of what you had undertaken, which we conceive to be
out of your sphere; and for us to have joined in any consultation of this
nature, would have made us accessory unto them, and guilty of the evil which
is in them, and even partakers of other men's sins, contrary to the Apostles
rule, who bids us abstain, even from all appearance of evil, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather.
Answ.
I answer:

Friends, had you any reason to cast this odium upon them, except to exasperate
the malignant spirits of the people to sedition, by persuading them, that the
General and his Council are the vilest of sinners? acting without their
sphere, in the unfruitful works of darkness. And do you not in this make way
to the malignant multitude to think that the General and his Council are in
as evil a capacity as themselves, in acting according to their own wills, for
that you do persuade them, that they act without their sphere; and that their
consultations and concurrence with the Parliament, in execution of justice upon
the King and his adherents, might have been opposed by them; not considering
with your selves, that his Excellency and his Council are authorized and
empowered by their Commissions from the Parliament, for the defense of the
People, from which they ought not to decline; and in which thing God has
helped them against all his and their enemies, in the greatest exigencies of
distresses, from time to time, as much as any Army since the days of Gideon.
And are they not also bound by their Covenant to bring Delinquents to condign
punishment, of whom the King was chief? O that you had seen, and pulled the
beam out of your own eye first, else how can you see clearly to cast the
mote out of your Brothers eye; but I spare, etc. only Judge not, that ye be
not judged.

Thirdly, Minist. 3.
again, whereas you allege, It is already sufficiently known (besides all
former miscarriages) what attempts have of late been put in practice against
lawful Authority, especially by the late Remonstrance and Declaration
published in opposition to the proceedings of Parliament, as also by seazing
and imprisoning the Kings Person without knowledge and consent of Parliament. I
answer:

Men who are authorized and entrusted by the Parliament, Answ.
to act for the Nation in general, as the Lord General and his Officers are,
may not be able at all times to stay for particular directions, and yet attempt
nothing against lawful Authority, so long as they act only for the good and
safety of the People, as they did, and therefore are now cleared by the
Parliament for their so doing. You might also very well re-mind how they
remonstrated to the Parliament, what they would do upon good grounds, long
enough before they proceeded to action; all which time there was no Ordinance
or Act of Parliament made to restrain them, as there is now made to justify
them in all their proceedings.

Fourthly, Minist. 4.
and whereas you accuse them, of their late actions toward many of the Members
of the Honorable House of Commons, forcibly hindering above one hundred of
them for sitting in Parliament, and imprisoning many of their persons, calling
it an unparalleld violence, many of them being known to be men of eminent
worth and integrity, who have given most ample (...) of their real affections
to the good of the Parliament. I answer:

That if they did seclude so many, Answer.
and imprison many of their persons, yet their worthiness, either as Members of
the House, or men of eminency and integrity, who had given most ample testimony
of their real affection to the good of the Kingdom, was not the cause thereof,
as you say, but their persisting to do an unworthy act after they were
admonished, pursuing their design in behalf of the King, against the safety
of the People; and some other unworthy actions of some of them, preceding that
one act. You have the like case in As in 1 Kings 1. 52. and chap. 2. 12. etc.
to ver. 35. is very apparent, and in the former part of the first Chapter.
Ad(...)jah, Joab and Abiather, men of eminent worth, and two of them of great
trust and integrity, who had suffered with David in all his afflictions, Joab
exposing his life in all David's and the Peoples wars, for the safety of the
Kingdom all his days, save only in this last action, consulting with and
helping Adoniiah, David's eldest Son alive, and not yet declared against, as
Heir apparent to the Kingdom: Nor had David then declared for Solomon, whom
God had designed to be Ruler of his People; and yet upon this occasion, not
only Joab must have his other personal transgressions put into the Balance
with this National one, and be put to death, but Abiather also; although the
Lords Anointed, having by this one offense forfeited his Authority, and
deserved to die, must be thrust out of the High Priesthood, and be sent to
Anothoth, to his own Lands, as a peculiar favor showed to him, in that his
life was spared, because he bare the Ark of the Lord before David; and yet his
father and all his family, save only For that Abiather escaped away.
himself, were destroyed by Saul for David's sake, and Abiathers Sons, did also
hazard their lives, to give David intelligence when he fled from Absalom.

Fifthly, whereas you say, page 4. Remember the advice of Solomon, Minist. 5.
Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change, etc. And then say, The fear of God therefore (whose Ordinance is
violated when Magistracy is opposed) makes us afraid of meddling with those who
without any color of legal Authority, merely upon presumption of strength,
shall attempt such changes as these are, etc. I answer:

That what you have peremptorily asserted, Answ.
is not proved, and may be retorted; for St. Paul, Romans 13. 1, 2. having laid
down every Christians duty, to the end that they knowing these Higher Powers
(when lawful) Kings, Rulers, etc. may not resist them; he sets them forth by
their constitution (viz. that) Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
the evil. Wherein he implies this Doctrine, That what Rulers soever, Kings or
others, who decline their duty, and contrary to their constitution, become a
terror to good works, and justify the evil (viz.) wilfully and publicly
perverting the Law, and do ordinarily introduce an Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and
unjust course, acting against the public good and safety, to the ruin of the
People, who have entrusted them; such do thereby lose their power, and cease to
be Rulers, and ought to be declared In this case the Tyrant Nero was by the
Senate of Rome sentenced to be whipped through the City, and thrown down the
Tarpeian Rock, so then even nature it self concurred with St. Paul in those
very people to whom he had written etc. the Athe^ians and Lacedaemonians were
full of these examples, Act. 22. 4, 5. and 23. 3, 5.
and proceeded against for such. For these Tyrants calling good evil, and
evil good, are abomination to the Lord, and do forfeit their Authority
thereby, by the testimony of the Gospel. St. Paul, Acts 22. 45. appealing unto
Annanias, as High Priest in the Jewish acceptance, and as he had esteemed of
him, when he was a persecutor, and received Authority from him, being one of
the Estates of the Elders of Jerusalem, St. Paul's saying, I persecuted this way
(to wit which he now professed) unto the death, binding and delivering unto
Prison both men and women, as also the High Priest does bear me witness; but
within a few days after he denies his Authority and Rule, calling him the
accident, whited wall, a color that makes fair show, but has no substance;
for in truth Ananias had forfeited his Authority and Rule. And St. Paul gives
the reason, saying, For sit thou to judge me after the Law, and command
me (to wit arbitrarily and tyrannically) to be smitten contrary to the Law. And
therefore he affirmed, That he knew not that he was the High Priest, (although
in the Jewish acceptance, he both knew and had appealed unto him as High
Priest) and confirms it with Scripture, saying, It is written, thou shall not
speak evil of the Ruler of the People. This truth considered, how then could
you charge his Excellency and the Council* It have violated Gods Ordinance, by
opposing Magistracy, without any color of legal Authority, seeing they have
concurred with, and are justified by the Parliament in all their proceedings
against the King; and for that he long since had forfeited his Power and
Authority, much more than Ananias, detesting himself of all, and dis-obliging
this Parliament, Army, and People, of their Allegiance to him, and also
subjected himself unto the power of the Parliament, and Justice of the Laws
of this Land, for the following reasons:

First, because the Kings of the Gentiles were always by humane institution,
entrusted for the safety of the People, and are no sacred anointed Types of
Christ, King of the Church, as the Kings of Judah and Israel were, and received
their institution to that end from God.

Secondly, because our King has been a terror to good works, and justified
the evil, and evil doers, for many years before he raised war upon the
Parliament and People) by forcing Ship Money and Loanes by his Privy Seal,
and Monopolies of all kinds, oppressing and persecuting his Subjects in an
Arbitrary way, by Star Chamber and Counsell-board Censures, loss of member and
blood, and stigmatizings, etc.

Thirdly, Parliament Declaration 20 May, 1642.
Persisting in full opposition to the Parliaments humble Suits and Declarations
made unto him, showing that whenever the King makes war upon the
Parliament, it is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his People, contrary
unto his Oath; and tends to the dissolution of this Government; which truth
fully appears at this day. They further declared, that whosoever shall serve
and assist him in such war, are Traitors by the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom; ^. Rich. ^. ^Hen. 4.
and have been so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament, and ought to suffer as
Traitors.

Fourthly, he afterward did endeavor with a high hand utterly to subvert
salus populi, and to destroy this Nation, by setting up his Standard, and
waging open war upon the Parliament, and against all his good and loyal
Subjects.

Fifthly, by his prosecution of two wars, in destroying the precious lives of
very many, together with the rapines and ruins of millions of people, in these
three Nations.

Sixthly, for that the King despising good and faithful counsel, when
seasonably given him by the Parliament, of whom he ought to have received it;
wholly adhered unto, animated and followed, perverse, foolish, slanderous,
wicked, proud, malicious, haughty, deceitful, and murtherous men's counsel,
who endeavored utterly to root out, extirpate, and extinguish the very name
and being of all those who were the faithful of the Land, and endeavored a
through Reformation; of all wicked and unrighteous practices in the King, his
family and Kingdoms.

Seventhly, by betraying his Subjects into the Enemies hands abroad (to wit) in
the Isle of He, and in neglecting to relieve his Subjects in Ireland, against
those most barbarous and bloody Enemies, and in bringing of them, and other
Forraigners from other Witness the Iermine Horse, Spanish Fleet, and the Scots
invasion.
nations in upon us.

Eighthly, for that the King with all his traiterous Forces, did continue to
resist the Parliament and this Army raised by their Power and Authority, for
the defense of this Nation, until they had subdued them, and made the King
their conquered Prisoner, after which time he ceased not to persist in his
former designs.

Ninthly, by his transgressing transcendently, more than Saul did, for he only
spared Gods enemies, for which his Kingdom was taken from him, Josh. 15.
and given unto David; but our Saul destroyed the Lords dearest friends, Exodus
4. 22. and 19. 5.
his first borne, his peculiar Treasure and Jewels, most dear and tender unto
him; Zach. 2. 8.
he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye; Psalm. 105. 14, 15.
these are his truly anointed ones, he has reproved Kings for their sakes;
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

Now, forasmuch as the Powers that be, are ordained (or ordered) of God, and
God has so ordered it, that this Army, contrary to the endeavors, strivings,
and expectations of their Enemies multiplied plots and practices, openly
perpetrated against them in all parts of England, Wales, Ireland and Scotland,
etc. besides all the in-workings and secret plots in the Parliament and City,
and in all other places against them, as also by many of them who call
themselves Ministers of the Gospel. I say, seeing God has so ordered all,
that this Army should prevail against all, and subdue all unto the Immediate
Supreme Power of the Parliament, and by their Authority and Commissions given
to them. How is it then, that ye who are teachers of others your selves, are
not yet ashamed to violate Gods Ordinance, by piercing and wounding of that
Authority which God has set up in the Parliament: through the sides of the
General, his Council, and this Army; you having presumed upon the fluid and
vulgar opinion, of your Authority with the rude multitude of Malignants, to
countercheck and control all, and with one breath to have cried up the Kings
life into safety, and to have freed his person from Justice, saying, The Lord
has said it, as those 400. Prophets said to Ahab. Zedekiah smiting Micaian on
the cheek, 1 ^^a. chapter 22.
because he declared Gods will for Ahabs death.

Sixthly, whereas you say, We have not forgotten those declared grounds and
principles, ^inist.
upon which the Parliament at first took up Arms, and upon which we were
induced to join with them, from which we have not hitherto declined, and we
trust through Gods grace never shall, etc. I answer to page 5, 6.

That it is well known, Answ.
the first grounds and principles of the Parliament were for Salus Populi; and
it had been well if you your selves, and every Member of the House also, had
not declined, but acted upon that principle ever since: And although I grant
you, The Kings practices upon the Parliament was an high violation to their
Privileges, and an act so injurious and destructive to the good of the
Kingdom. Yet I answer:

It was but while the Parliament, and those five Members were fixed for the
public good and safety of the People, but since that, many of the Members
declining that Principle, desired the King rather than the safety of the
People, by whom they were entrusted for the good of this Nation. Therefore upon
that occasion they were very justly secluded and imprisoned, without that, that
the Army did act any violence upon the Parliament, or made any breach of their
privileges, as you have inferred, and for that the foresaid members were not
seized upon, when they were assembled in the house, but without doors, and for
acting, against the safety of the people. And without that, that the Parliament
is not now free, and full, and as really, as when the King would have seized on
the five Members; for the Parliaments being free, and full, does not consist in
a multitude, who are contrary minded, Note (...).
and principled, but the Parliament is free, and full, because they now do act
unanimously for the safety of the people, and the good of the Nation, blessed
be God for it, and blessed be the repairers of the breach, and the restorers
of paths to dwell in. I say 58. 1^.
And without that, that his Excellency or the Council of War, are but
private persons, in referrence to the power of Magistracy, or have usurped an
Authority over King and Parliament, or have meddled with affairs which belong
not to them (as is suggested by you) but have only performed their duty, to
that end for which they were entrusted, and authorized by the Parliament, in
defense of this Nation: and therefore they could not have neglected what they
have done; without breach, of public trust, reposed in them. And most
repugnant, to the Laws of God, nature, and Nations, together with the dictates
of reason, and neglect of their Commission.

Seventhly, And to page 7, 8^ together with the rest of your Letter tending to
that purpose. I answer, and retort the matter, falsely surmised by you, against
the General and his Council. That the King alone, did divest himself, and by
his own doings subvert and overthrow the whole frame and foundamentall
constitution of the Government of the Kingdom, according to the Parliaments
forecited Declarations of May 20 1642. And therefore it was, and is now high
time (after so long an interruption of enemies) for the Parliament and Army,
concurrently, to appear to do their duty, not only by executing justice upon
the person of the King, and his adherents, but also in new moddling and
settling such a frame and fundamental constitution of Government in the
Kingdom, as God shall put into their hearts, to be most convenient, and
useful, for the welfare and safety of the people. And for the maintenance of
Religion, their privileges, Laws, and Liberties, against all Malignant
counsels and designs, for introducing of an arbitrary and tyrannical power,
and against all irregular proceedings of private persons (tending to the
subversion of the Parliament Army or people) whither pretended ministers of the
Gospel, or others, by what soever falacious device presented, to delude;
deceive, and pervert the people, by persuading them that his Excellency, the
Council, and the Army, have failed in performing of their duty to the Here you
wilfully forget that part of the Covenant viz. to bring delinquents to
concligue punishment, and was not he the chief?
King in the several Oaths and Covenants generally taken, throughout the
Kingdom; and in the protestation of May 5. 1641. I further answer.

You have not considered that the King did since that time refuse all the good
and faithful council, of the Parliament, and by setting up his standard,
waging and persisting to wage an open War upon them, and against all his good
and faithful Subjects, whereby he did head all the heads of the Malignants,
and became the chiefest, and did thereby divest himself of all royal majesty,
splendour, power authority, honor, and estate, and did disoblige the Parliament,
Army and people of their protestations, oaths; Vows, and Covenants made in his
behalf, by his said wilful opposing and rejecting of them, when seasonably
offered unto him, without that, that (as you have alleged in page 9.) there
was any similitude of agreement in their Oath, and Covenant taken, toward the
King, and that which the people made with Zedekiah, or that the Army did
despise, or break any such Oath and Covenant, and thereby violated Gods word,
and more righteous Oath, to provoke the wrath of the Lord against them, at is
untruly suggested; therefore to use your own words of reproof. It is not high
time that you would commune with your own hearts, consider the evil of your
own ways, and turn from them? and have you not done to the General and his
Council, as the Prophet Shemiah, and the Prophet N^adia, and the rest of the
Prophets did unto Nehemiah, when he enquired of them, to put them in fear? and
have you not feigned these things out of your own heart, to weaken their hands
from the work (of the Lord) that it might nor have been done? and is not this
a strong motive to the General, and every one of his Council, and Army, who
love the Lord with all their heart, to be very courageous, and to pray as
Nehemiah did, now therefore, O God strengthen my hands? And for Instruction, I
shall take your own words, entreating you to remember from whence you are
fallen, and repent, and do your first works, etc. and also how has the
Parliament (and Army) which sustained the force, and opposition of professed
enemies for many years, been made contemptible, and torn in pieces, by (you
their) professed friends in one day? how is the golden cord of Government
broken in sunder, and the honor and the authority of Magistrates laid in the
dust? by your misapplications in this one letter, as if you were ignorant, that
the supreme power is in the Parliament, and that the Army, have their power
from them, and do act together with them, for the safety of the people. And
was not this a declared ground, and chief principle, upon which, the Parliament
first raised arms, and upon which we were induced, to join with them, and
from which the now Members, and those who adhere to them, have not declined
from the beginning. And Oh, that you had not brought against them a exyling
accusation, whereby you speak evil of those things, you seem not to know, but
what you only seem to know by natural brutish reason, grounded upon outward
honor and profit, Jude.
like those filthy dreamers, whom Jude speaks of (who taking their own
opinion for the Oracle of God, do spiritually) defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities, woe unto them for they have gone in the
way of Caine (swelling against their brethren whom God has preferred, and
accepted,) (and to obtain corruptable, honor, riches, and greatness of the
world have) ran greedily, after the error of Balaam, for reward, And
(swallowed up with earthly-mindednesse, have) perished in the gainesaying of
Core. You like these are murderers, complainers, walking (not after Gods
written truth, even as they also -- dreamed, but) after your own lust, your
mouth speaking great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration, because
of advantage, the Parliament and General with this Army, even those Moseses,
or Moses, whom ye have refused, saying who made To wit, the Parliament and his
Excellency.
you a Ruler, and a Judge, the same did God send, to be our Rulers, and
deliverer.

Take heed therefore of levelling your selves with them, * Their own words
retorted
saying, you take too much upon you; nor be not mutineers like Corah, Dethan,
and Abiram; Lest a more spiritual judgment do consume you, and your names be
written in the Earth, whilst ye your selves call justice and righteousness,
murder, in those who did proceed to execute judgment upon those against whom
they were bound to do it by the Covenant. And whereas you do affirm, That the
O most shameful presumption and pride, for they are all quite contrary to you,
t. c. Alstedius, etc. remember the Scribes and Pharisees, 10. 7. 47, 48, 49.
Tenure of the Scriptures, constant judgment, and Doctrine of Protestant
Divines, both at home and abroad, do fully concur in their judgments with you.
How can that be, when as there was never like example of any King before this,
who did so wilfully diminish, and totally divest himself of all his Majesty,
just Power, and Greatness, by adulterating himself and spending his strength
with strangers, against his cordial, faithful, and espoused People? was it
not then high time for his Espousals to have a Bill of divorse? And did not
this grand pretended father of this Nation, destroy a multitude of his best
children? And would he not gladly have slain all the rest, upon further
opportunity? was it not then high time the Parliament should execute judgment
upon him? that God and all the world may be witnesses, they would give him no
further opportunity or means, either by cohabitation or communion to destroy
them? and did not the Peoples spirits groan in them, and their backs bow under
the burden of their irrepairable loss, until they were in some measure eased?

Therefore Examine your own hearts as in the sight of God (to retort your own
words) and make the case your own, as Nathan made the parable David's, in that
you have Jesuitically, under pretense of Religion and conscience, raised false
and reproachful imputations upon the General and his Council, traducing and
aspercing them with evil, that you may the more easily divide the Peoples
affections from them, and sowing sedition in their hearts, beget in them an
evil opinion of Authority, and make them ready to rise up in rebellion against
the Parliament and Army, upon any opportunity from the Enemies at home, or from
abroad? Are not these your own New Retorted.
modelized dividing, destructive Principles, contrived against the safety of
the People, and tending to the dissolution of the Parliament and Army? making
way to all kind of ignorance, error, superstition, and licentiousness. By
wedding the People to your own dreams instead of Gods lively Oracles, and the
plain, free, and powerful dispensation of the Scriptures, which is the way of
Gods Spirit, Gal. 6.
to guide his People into all truth; be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap; God will render to every man
according to his works, for there is no respect of persons with him.

Eighthly, Minist. 8.
whereas you say to the General and his Council: We desire you would not be
too confident in your former successes, if God have made you prosper while you
were in his way, this can be no warrant for you to walk in ways of your own.
etc. I answer,

This is one of your former pretenses, Answer.
multiplied by supposition, and cannot be proved by truth of Scripture, and
reason well grounded thereon, and therefore to this, with the rest of your
general charge, in the last part of this your Letter, I shall by Scripture and
reason, prove, that the General and his Council are now in Gods way, as much
as ever, and may expect success, and a blessing from God therein.

First, because the General and his Council, do, and have performed their
duty, in all their proceedings, concurring with the Parliament, to execute
justice upon the grand Delinquent, and also upon some of the chief of his
Styled Parliam. Decl. 20 May, 1642.
wicked Counselors and adherents

Secondly, for that the King, their conquered and captivated Prisoner, by the
rule, Lex talionis, ought to be done unto as he did unto others; Judge. 5. 6, 7.
and this Adoni-bezek, a Heathen King, acknowledged, saying, As I have done, so
God has done unto me; and they brought him to Jerusalem (the place of public
Justice) and there he died; and although Agag said, Surely the bitterness of
death is past, Sam. 15. 32, 33
yet Samuel in this very case said, As thy sword has made women childlesse, so
shall thy mother be childlesse among women; and Samuel hewed Agag in pieces
before the Lord in Gilgall.

Thirdly, in that the King with all his Heathen Adherents, took counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Psalm. 2.
Let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast their cords from us; Rev. 20. 9.
and making war upon them, they compassed the camp of the Saints about, even
the beloved City Mount Si^^ where the Saints receive their Commission from the
great King, King of Kings; to have a two edged Sword in the^^ hands, to execute
judgment upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind their
Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, to execute upon them
the Judgment written, Psalm. 149.
this honor have all the Saints. Is there not then a strong tie of holy writ,
upon our Parliament and Army to prosecute, and execute Judgment, not only upon
the head Malignant, the King, but also upon others, the heads of his wicked
adherents, although none others, have been so exemplary before them?

Fourthly for that the King did use false dealing, in pretending the Kingdoms
welfare and safety, sealed with most solemn abjurations, and execrations In
some of his Declarations praying God to deal with him and his, according to his
integrity, when he disquite contrary to what he had avowed.
against himself, his Throne, and Posterity, thereby to hide his iniquity from
the eyes of the people, that he might the more easily seduce them to belief,
and to join with him? and was not this the highest cruelty, and means that
could be, to bring Gods heavy wrath upon his Which God has already fulfilled,
Prove. 28. 15.
own head, and to dethrone his posterity? for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain. Yet he was an anointed tipe of
Christ, as all the Kings of Israel were. 2 kin. 24. 25, 26.
As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over his people,
And are not such destructive beasts to be taken and destroyed. Also it is
written, a man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall fly to the
pit, let no man stay him, God makes no destinction of King or Beggar, he is no
respecter of persons, but the soul that furneth it shall die, no man ought to
stay him from it. King And was not the first blood shed in, ^r near the Place,
where the King died, countenanced by himsel^e (...) his own (...)ement?
Ahab and Queen Jezabell must dye, because Nabeth is unjustly cut off, and his
Vineyard taken from him. Moreover, the dogs must eat her flesh, and lick up
his blood, and also, his Son King Joram being slain, must be cast * into the
very same plat of ground. And was not the King the occasion and contriver, of
the first bloodshed? And did he not persist to destroy multitudes of his most
faithful peoples lives and estates, many years together? and can we think
God has forgot to be just? Ahab and Jezabels sin, was covered over, with as
much piety as might be, but God will not he mocked, for whatsoever a mansoweth,
that shall he also reap. God will (...) through Kings in the day of his wrath.

Fifthly, for that it was the Parliament and Armies duty, when God had
delivered the King into their hands, and left him at their dispose, Psa. 14. 9.
to execute judgment upon him, and to secure themselves and the People, who
have always stuck close unto them, in their greatest distresses? has not the
King been a corrupt fountain, poisoning every stream and rivolet he had
access unto? and would he not have done so still, if he had not been cut off?
and is not justice executed, a good means to establish the faithful of the
Land, in rest and peace, with their lives, Estates, Laws, Liberties, and
Privileges, anciently and inherently in themselves? and have they not with
much expense of blood, loss of friends, and hardship, now through Gods
singular goodness regained all, upon a Note this well
good, just cause, and title, by right of conquest? is it not then their duty
to keep their own, Judge. 11. 19, 20.
which God has possessed them of? did not Jephthah and Israel do so, with that
which was the Amorites by original right? they only won it by the sword, and
did wear it.

Sixthly, did not the eminency of the Kings person, agravate his sin and
judgment, Ier. 22. 24. 30.
and make him successelesse? and was it not Coniah King of Judahs case? As I
live says the Lord, though Coniah the Son of Je^^^akim King of Judah, were the
Signet upon my right hand, yet will I pluck him thence. And again, Write ye
this man childlesse, To within respect of Kingly Government, else not.
a man that shall not prosper in his days; for no man of his seed shall
prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.
Wisdom is better than weapons of War, but one sinner destroys much good. And
is it not great wisdom, that they have executed speedy judgment upon the King
and his adherents; and thereby endeavored, as much as may be, to preserve the
Kingdom from further war?

Seventhly, has not the Parliament the Power and Authority for making, and
executing Law? and is it not most righteous and just for the reasons foregoing,
that the King, and other the heads of his adherents, should be subject unto the
Power, Authority, and unto Law and Justice*

Now upon all the foregoing considerations, Conclusion.
and conclusions of Scripture and reason, is it not abundantly prov^^ that the
General and his Council, are now in Gods way, and may expect success, and a
blessing from God, and are safely guided by the Spirit of truth? that the
means they ^^e are justifiable, with in their sphere, charge, and duty,
agreeable to the Laws of God, nature, and Nations, together with the dictates
of reason.

But as for you, you have murmured, reproached, and traduced them very much, in
this your Letter, and have most highly provoked the Lords wrath against your
selves, by opposing of those unto whom the Lord has manifested his own power,
love, and goodness, and therefore you have added this evil unto all your
sins, to ask you such a King to rule over you, one who was corrupted, stained,
and rejected of God, in point of Government, and not without blemish, as Saul
was, when desired by the people, And yet God says, in so doing, they had
rejected him. And the people did very sensibly confess the Lords Justice, and
wrath against them, for that they had added this evil (of asking them a King)
unto all their sins: In creating Samuel to pray unto the Lord for them, that
they dye not.

O that you and all the people in this Nation who are guilty in this kind,
were but as sensible of Gods wrath against you all, and that you would confess
and forsake your sin, that ye may find mercy but if ye will not walk in Gods
way and counsel, according to the truth, (...) Sam. 12. ult.
plainly and sincerely set forth unto you, If ye shall still do wickedly, ye
shall he consumed, both ye and your King, but I hope better things of you for
the future, and that you will keep your selves within your own sphere, preach
wholesome doctrine, and not meddle injuriously with State-matters, but if at any
time you are thereunto called or invited, I beseech you to speak and publish
nothing, but the words of sobernels and truth.

FINIS.
Febr. 17, 1648. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.


