REASONS Most Humbly Offered To this Honorable House, for Passing the Bill for
the Parish of Christ-Church.
John Marshall by his Will gave 40 l. per Annum to the Minister of the said
Parish, until Moneys should be raised out of his Estate, sufficient to Purchase
60 l. per Annum (free of all Reprizes) And then the Profits of his Estate (not
otherwise disposed of) should for Two Years be employed to Redeem Poor
Prisoners, and after that to buy Rectories Impropriate.

Sixty Pounds per Annum (free of all Reprizes) will cost 1700 l. at Note, This
Bill Excuses the Poor from paying any thing to the Minister.
least, which must be raised before the said Charities can be put in Execution.
Which 1700 l. if never raised (as in all probability it cannot) the said
Charities will be lost, (viz.)

For the Profits of the Donor's Estate has amounted but to 400 l. in Eighteen
Years; And proportionable (as the Estate now stands) 1700 l. will be Forty
Years a Raising. But considering the said Estate consists of small and old
Tenements, they will Thirty or Forty Years hence be worth little or nothing: So
that neither the Purchase, nor the Charities in Redeeming Prisoners, etc. will
ever be executed.

Whereas if this Act pass, by which the 400 l. is to erect a Steeple, etc. the
Church will be completed, a better Provision made for the Minister, and the
Redeeming poor Prisoners, etc. be immediately put in execution.

And why the Two Trustees, who oppose the Steeple and Bells, (and do not live
in the said Parish) should oppose the Inhabitants being rated Threepence in
the Pound, when they themselves are willing thereto, seems very unreasonable.

For, it appears the Inhabitants in general are willing, by their petitioning
for it, and even several of those who Signed the Petition against it, declared
before the Honorable Committee appointed to inspect this Matter, They were
induced to Sign the same by the Misinformation of the said two Trustees, but
since they understood the Reasonableness of the Intended Rate of Threepence in
the Pound, they were very well satisfied therewith.


