REASONS humbly offered against some Clauses in the Present Bill for
Encouragement of Privateers.
WHEREAS It is the Intent of this Honorable House, That Privateers shall pay
no Tenths for any Prize Ship or Goods except French Goods, yet in Page 37.
where all Goods except French are exempted from Tenths, the word Ship is left
out, and nothing in any other place to help it.

Therefore it is prayed the word Ship may be there added.

That it often falls out, that Enemies Ships are driven into our Ports, Rivers
or Havens by contrary Winds, and other times they come in as Spies and to Trade
with ill affected persons contrary to Law, and get out again unmolested by any
but Privateers; wherefore His Majesty by His Commission to Privateers, as an
Encouragement to them to annoy the Enemy, has given them what Prizes they
shall take in Ports, etc. as well as at Sea, which Encouragement is by this
Bill in Page 38 taken from Privateers, and not only so, but a further
discouragement added, for by this Clause, if a Privateer Chases a French Ship
into any of our Harbors and there seize her, Their Majesty's shall have the
sole benefit thereof.

Page 43. By this Bill its Enacted that if an English Ship retaken, shall
appear to have been, after the taking by the Enemy, by them set forth as a Man
of War, she shall be restored to the former Owners, paying one Moiety for
Salvage, whereas before by the Law of Nations, such a Ship retaken belonged
wholly to the retaker as a Lawful Prize, and therefore this Clause will
discourage English Privateers from Engaging French Privateers, which above all
ought to be encouraged.

And in Page 45 this Bill gives but one half of such Owlers and Wool Boats as
the Privateers shall take, to them, whereas before they had the whole.

Wherefore it is humbly prayed that the said three Clauses may be left out of
the said Bill.

And Whereas by this Bill, the selling and disposal of French Prize Goods is
given to the Commissioners of Prizes, It Is humbly prayed that, that part of the
Bill may be altered, so that the parties concerned in Privateers may have the
management and disposal of their own Estates, for few will be willing to run
the risque and charge of Privateering when what they take, shall be put into
other peoples hands and management.


