REASONS WHY THIS KINGDOM ought to adhere to the Parliament.
HOw soon do men forget the by-gon time of their affliction? or if they
retain a dark and misty remembrance of the time past, they want the
discretion by comparing it with the time present to foresee and prevent evil
times to come. And this seems to be now the condition of us the people of
England, who have almost forgot how our Religion, Laws, liberties, and
properties in our estates lay bleeding almost to death at the feet of a
Malignant party of Papists, Prelates, and Court Priests, Innovating
Counselors, corrupt Judges, with their dependents, Petty-Foggers, Solicitors,
Projectors, Monopolisers, and other Prerogative Parasites: How unjust and
destructive a war was projected by the said Malignants between us and our
brother Nation of Scotland? wherein we were sure, if we were conquered, to
loose our selves and all we had to the Conqueror with whom we fought; and if
we did conquer, to the Malignant party for whom we fought: How (to secure our
bondage) the old English Souldiary of Protestants being disbanded in Ireland,
an Army of 8000. Irish Papists, (the conductors at this day of the bloody
rebellion there) were raised by Strafford, and kept hovering over our heads,
ready to fall upon us (weakened with an unhappy conquest) and to lay that Iron
yoke upon our necks to which we should unworthily have subdued our brethren.

But what our oppressions and grievances were in particular, who were the
Authors, what aims they had, and what means they used, how far they
proceeded before this Parliament, and since; what the faithful endeavors of
this Parliament are, and what they have done already for us, and at how little
a charge, considering the great burdens and slavery they have freed us from,
what dangerous oppositions, attempts, and designs (distructive to the being of
Parliaments and to their own persons) they have (through the goodness of God)
overcome, and are still environed withal: How faithfully to our benefit they
have disbursed the public money, and upon what just, necessary, legal
grounds, and with what respect to the King and Kingdom they have managed all
our affairs. How (as Christ was led aside into the Wilderness to be tempted)
his Majesty is led aside from his great Council the Parliament (in whom there
is strength) into a Wilderness of errors and weaknesses: And what the points
of difference between his Majesty and the Parliament are at this time. He
that is capable of satisfaction, and desires withal to know what share he is
likely to have in the public calamities (if not prevented) and how to carry
himself therein, let him read the third Remonstrance, the several
Declarations, the general accounts of the Kingdom published by the
Parliament, together with those most excellent Observations; the one upon his
Majesty's answer to the Lords and Commons of the 19. of May, 1642. The other
upon some of his Majesty's late Answers and Expresses.

Likewise the Answer to the Summer set shire Petition, and a good plain Paper,
called Some more new Observations concerning King and Parliament, containing
20. considerations. Another Paper entitled Jesuits plots: And a Paper called a
short discourse tending to pacification of differences between his Majesty
and his Parliament; where these truths appear as clear as the Sun, in
despite of Envy and her black mouthed daughter, Slander, which always
attends good deeds in a bad age, as the shadow attends the body.

But that after so many prayers and petitions to God for a Parliament, we
should so much forget his mercies, our own sufferings and complaints, and the
Parliaments faithful, wise, and effectual endeavors, as to hearken to the
voice of a Malignant party, who flatter us, calumniate them, and abuse all;
this shows us to be the Sons of Adam, apt to be tempted, even with an Apple.
But let us examine the causes of this our inconstancy and ingratitude, which
may be partly inward in our selves, and partly outward in others.

1. Inward in our selves, as, First, long discontinuance of Parliaments has
filled this Kingdom so full of diseases, that we grow weary of Physic before
our Physicians can perfect the cure, and had rather venture a relapse then
confirm our healthes by stirring up more humors. Secondly, because the
Parliament did not seasonably satisfy our anger with punishment of
Delinquents, we are now tired with expectation, and as angry with the.
Parliament as with Delinquents. But if we consider how, and by whom they are
protected, where they take Sanctuary: and how the multitude of offenders, their
friends and abetters is such, that -- Hos defendit numerus, junctoque umbone
phalanges; They are too many, too strong to be brought to punishment, unless
the Parliament found more ability in themselves and more constancy in the
people then they have yet met withal, the Parliament is to be excused.


Secondly outward causes of our unconstancy and ingratitude proceeds from the
subtlety and industry of the malignant party; who with all diligence in
their reports, discourses, writings and publications, nay in Churches and
Pulpits set fair glosses upon their own foul actions, and with foul
paintings, stain the fair merits of the Parliament. Let us examine some of
their calumnies, for all is impossible.

First, the Malignants observing us to be freed from painful Symptoms, and
willing to take our rest and ease (upon the advantage of our sloth) persuade
us to take this for a cure (though the disease lie yet lurking in our Bowels)
and to grow angry with, and suspicious of our Physicians, as if they kept us in
an unnecessary course of Physic to continue their power and government over
us. But their delays proceeded partly from the throng of great and weighty
businesses, which (like waves continually falling in one upon another) hinder
themselves in the crowd; And principally from the slights of the Malignants.

Secondly, the Malignants object, that this Parliament is a burden to the
Commonwealth, that they free us from Taxations of Shillings, by impositions of
Pounds, by Subsidies, Polemoney, Loanes, etc.

First, In desperate diseases (such as the Malignants had infected this
Commonwealth withal) Blood-letting is necessary, the veins will fill again
if the vital parts be preserved; if we contribute part of our particular
wealth to free the Commonwealth from slavery and superstition (the parents of
repining sloth and dejected Cowardice) we shall encourage industry, and renew
our stock: but if we stoop under an Arbitrary government, who will work
that others may devour the fruits of his labors? Liberty is the fountain of
industry, and industry of wealth.

2. Besides, the Parliament has already paid us liberally for all the Taxes
they have made us pay; and our payments are but for the present; their benefits
and good Laws are perpetual. The abolishing of superstition and reforming our
Religion. The vindicating our Laws, Liberties and Properties are inestimable.
Shipmoney did yearly cost the kingdom above 200000. pound, Coat and Conduct
money, and other military charges (besides the trouble and terror) almost as
much. A few Monopolies did yearly prejudice the Subject a Million. Soap
100000. pound, Wine 300000. pound, Leather almost 400000. pound, Salt 400000.
pound; all these, with many other Monopolies this Parliament has taken away.
Besides what infinite damage those discouragements of trade brought invisibly
upon the Commonwealth, as well Lucro cessante, as Damno emergente. And (which
is the benefit of all benefits, the Quintessence, the Elixer, the spirit
extracted out of all their endeavors) the root of all these wrongs is
declared to be against law by an Act of Parliament, being an arbitrary power,
which (for their own benefit more then his Majesty's) the prerogative
parasites pretended to be in the King) of taxing the Subjects and charging
their estates at pleasure, without limitation, and without consent in
Parliament.

3. This Parliament had not been so chargeable to the kingdom, had not the
Malignant party continually multiplied their troubles, charges and dangers,
and retarded the remedies.

Thirdly, this Parliament is more hated then any former Parliament has been:
First, because it has found more Delinquents, and has gone farther in
searching and curing wounds and diseases, and establishing a perfect
reformation both in Church and State, then ever any did. Long intermission of
Parliaments having filled this Commonwealth so universally with ill humors,
that (in this old doting age, wherein it draws to its period) we can neither
endure its diseases, nor the remedies. And herein this Parliament is most
unhappy. Secondly, because it cannot be broken without their own consent: Ever
since which act past, all ways have been taken by the Court faction, to
disolve or destroy it; before those quarrels about Hull or the Militia were
thought of.

All which plots failing, they now attempt (what no age will ever believe,
unless it be as wicked as this) to render odious and suspected to the people
this only Sanctuary of their Religion, Laws, Liberties, and properties. The
representative body of the whole Kingdom.

Fourthly, they labor to make this and all other Parliaments invalid and of no
authority or reputation with the people, by infusing such opinions and
doctrines into them as are inconsistent with the nature of Parliaments, and
will strike dead the very root of them, if they be generally believed. First,
that if the King desert the Parliament, it is a void assembly, and without
power to defend the kingdom, even from open violence. A Right, not denied to a
private person assaulted. Secondly, that Parliament privileges are no where to
be read, and so the Representation of this whole kingdom gives them no
privilege nor authority. Thirdly, that the major part in Parliament is not
considerable, when many are absent or dissent. But to stay until all, or
almost all are present and assenting, and not to acquiesse, in the Majoritie,
is never to bring any thing to conclusion, nay to bring all to tumults and
confusion. Fourthly, that the major part is no major part, because the fraud of
some few misleads them. This Position divides the Parliament into two unworthy
sorts of men, Deceivers, and Deceived. Fifthly, that Parliaments may do
dishonorable, nay treasonable Acts. And that this Parliament has been so
blinded by some few Malignants, as to abet Treason in Sir John Hotham. (Answer
to the 19. Propositions p. 2. See the Answer to the Declaration May 26. p. 1.
2. 11. and 28. 29.) Here you see Treason charged upon the representative body
of the kingdom, and consequently, by reflection, upon the whole body of the
kingdom represented. If therefore his Majesty take Arms, it must be against
us all (Parliament and People) involved in one common crime of Treason. And yet
the maxim of the law is, that no dishonorable thing is to be presumed of
Parliaments. And (I believe) neither reason, nor example can show any thing
against this rule. Sixthly, that the Parliament has trampled upon all Law, and
the Kings Prerogative, and sought to inslave the whole Kingdom. During the
long absence of Parliaments, the Prerogative had swallowed the Law, which this
Parliament caused to be vomited up again, and restored to the people, when the
Malignant party thought it had been digested and converted into the very
nature of the Prerogative. And this is one dangerous effect of the long want of
Parliaments, that whatsoever the Prerogative devoures, though it digest and
incorporate not with it, but break forth into Wens and other unwholesome
excretions; yet (because they are of some continuance) both Prince and people,
but especially evil Counselors (who only thrive by the abuse of exorbitant
power) take it for a part and member of the Prerogative, and make it a matter
of scandal and quarrel, that after so long a sufferance, the Parliament
should lance or pare away those tumors. But that the Parliament (so small a
body armed only with a derivative power of representation, having an Active
Anti-parliamentary faction of Monarchists in the heart of it, and which has
been put to labor for its preservation ever since the Bill passed for
perpetuating of it) should trample upon the Law, and inslave the whole
kingdom, seems wonderful; it being the only fountain and foundation of our
Laws, the Sanctuary whither the people fly for succor when they are
oppressed in their Laws, Liberties, and Properties; and which so lately has
redeemed the People and all they can call theirs, out of bondage, and the
members thereof being sure to suffer amongst the multitude, whenever our
Laws fail us. Seventhly, that the Parliament sought the betraying of Church
and State; and to effect the same, had erected a new upstart authority in the
Militia, and levied war upon the King. They may properly be said to betray
Church and State; who corrupt the doctrine and discipline in the one, and
subvert the Laws and form of government in the other. And if any man be so
great a stranger in our Israel as not to know who they are, I will tell him.
First, the Prelates, and Court Priests brought many alterations into our
Liturgy and Rubric (contrary to the Act of Parliament, whereby the Common
Prayer book is established) vain Ceremonies, Altars, and many new doctrines
into our Church (to make us more consonant to the Church of Rome) as Episcopacy
and Tithes, Jure Divino. That the King has a Divine Prerogative paramount to
all our Laws. That the Church of Rome is a true Church and erres not in
fundamentalls (and then we are Schismatickes at least) That Auricular
confession is of necessity, etc. These are a few of their corruptions in
Doctrine: Discipline follows: They enlarged their jurisdiction against Law.
The High Commission used the Temporal Sword by fining, imprisoning, as well as
the spiritual. They used an independent jurisdiction, not derived from the
King (which they claimed Jure Divino) in their own name, and under their own
seals, contrary to the Stat. H. 8. C. 17. 1. Ed. 6. C. 2. still in force: In
the State, The attempts of the Malignant party to subvert our Laws,
Liberties, and Properties, and to reduce this well tempered Monarchy into a
mere Arbitrary Government have been sufficiently proved in the trial and
attainder of the Earl of Strafford; yet I will not omit the testimony of the
Lord of Faulkland, who wittily tells us: The King was persuaded by his Divines,
that in conscience, his Counselors, that in Policy, and his Judges, that by
Law he might do what he list: And if this be not a conspiracy to, introduce
Arbitrary Government, and change our State, I know not what is.

For the Militia, they desire not to remove it from the King, but from his
subordinate Ministers, and place it upon other Ministers whom they suspect not;
and to satisfy the fears of a whole Nation in time of danger, is wisdom.
Besides, extraordinary diseases require extraordinary cures; the High
distempers and dangers of the Kingdom compells the Parliament (That supreme
Court and Counsel now deserted by the King) to have recourse to the supreme
Law, Salus populi; Whose immediate rise is from the Law of Nature, which
teaches every worm, much more a man, and most of all a whole Nation to
provide for its defense.

Besides, it neither belongs to the person, nor calling of the King to expound
the Laws: But that the Parliament has a power to declare Law without the
Kings consent, nay, against it, (though not to make it without him) is
apparent; for all inferior Courts have the same. And what Counselors and
Interpreters of the Law his Majesty has now about him, to be put in balance
with the faith and learning of a whole Parliament? What Expositions of Laws
and Stat. they have made, Let his late publications and Commission of Array,
against the petition of Right, and their opinions and judgments given since
that was enacted upon Ship Money, Habeas corpora, etc. testify. 8ly. That
Parliaments cannot declare Law, but in particular Cases, legally brought before
them. It should seem by this, that Parliaments have no Conusance of Causes,
but upon complaints ab extra: But the House of Commons, being the great Enquest
of the Kingdom, may, and ought to take Conusance of Causes, of public
concernment, ex officio: and is accounted misconusant of nothing. 9ly. That
Parliaments are questionable and triable elsewhere. The Parliament is the
supreme Court, and has the last appeal; Anciently errors in other Courts
were tried there: Therefore no other Court can have Conusance of their Actions
nor persons; which were to appeal ridiculously, upwards and downwards. And if
a Parliament be triable and arraignable before the King himself: Then has the
King an unlimited declarative power of Law above all Courts, in his own breast;
and the last Appeal must be to his discretion and understanding, and
consequently, the Legislative power His alone. And yet his Majesty is pleased
to confess himself not skillful in the Laws. I know no third trial to which
a Parliament can be liable, unless it be the trial by the Sword: from which,
and from those that counsel it, the God of Battles defend us; and grant us
courage to defend our selves. (These last recited) Doctrines and positions have
received Answers of another nature at large, In the Observations upon his
Majesty's last Answers and Expresses.

5. But the Bug-beare which works most upon the people, is, Least these
differences between his Majesty and Parliament should entangle us in a civil
War. It seems they have little belief in his Majesty's protestations and
imprecations, to govern peaceably and legally, who fear this: and they less
faith, who threaten them with it. But take heed you do not draw on a War, by
fearing it: Courage is the best Antidote against it.

Wherefore I shall admonish you, that no War can be more destructive to you,
and all that is yours, then your own Cowardice, if it should so far fright you
from your constancy, faith, and gratitude, as to make you desert this
Parliament:

For,

First, you cannot forsake this Parliament, and leave it to the mercy of the
Malignants, but you shall forsake your selves, and your Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and properties open to the spoil and oppression of an Arbitrary
Government (more remediless and not less wasting then a war.) And either
have no more Parliaments (for, when they may take what they list you shall
never be called to give) or (if by virtue of your trianniall Act) there should
be another Parliament summoned, what faith and courage can you expect from
such Members as must either offer up your Laws, Liberties and properties that
sent them, or (being destitute of your Protection) become themselves a
Sacrifice? Such a slavish Parliament will lay the sure foundation of all our
slaveries: For as our Laws protect us and all that is ours, and Parliaments
protect our Laws, so we must protect them and their privileges from violence.
Next consider how foreign kingdoms are governed, where (for want of
Parliaments) the will of the Prince and his Favorites is the Law of the People.
And how this kingdom was governed during the long intermission (when honest
men were out of hope, and knaves out of fear) of Parliaments?

Secondly, He that thinks a Parliament can be forsaken, knows not the power
of Parliaments; for if the Parliament please to imitate your unconstancy and
faithless cowardice, and, deserting your interest, pursue only their own, and
comply with the King, They are able to do him more service in one week, then
Joseph did to Pharaoh in twice seven years. They can make him more absolute
then any Prince in Christendom, nay then the Turk or Muscovite. They can
repeal all the good Laws they have got for you: They can revive the
Star Chamber, High Commission, etc. and set the Pillory upon your necks, and
little Laud upon your ears again: They can bring in and naturalize the
Excises of the Low Countries, the Gabels of France, the Alcavales of Spain,
and all the Taxes of Florence, and make England the Map of all the oppressions
in the world, they can give away your Laws, Liberties, and Properties by a
Statute, and establish a perpetual Tyranny by a Law, which shall stop your
mouths for ever, when you shall be told that the Act of the Representative
body is the Act of the whole Kingdom, and you are bound by the Laws of the
Land; Complaints against illegal Taxes shall then no more be heard in your
Streets for want of Laws. Neither think this plot so shallow, that the
members of this Parliament, or their posterity shall draw in the same yoke with
you: No, they may entaile their several Votes and Seats in this already
perpetuated Parliament to themselves and their heirs Males for ever: And (as
the Fable says, that the Lion proclaiming a general day of hunting, all
beasts of prey waited upon him for their shares) so these may have a
subordinate share, according to their several capacities, in your spoils and
booties. The L. Treasurer Burleigh was wont to say, He knew not what a
Parliament could not do; And truly I know not what a Parliament (concurring
with his Majesty) cannot be. They may be the only favorites and Privadoes, and
strike all others into the Box, and lie in their rooms. Bishops shall not
strain their Consciences nor brains to invent a Theological engine, called a
Divine Prerogative for battering your Laws, Liberties, and Properties; the
Votes of the Parliament shall shake them in sunder: They shall be the Kings
Cavaliers, and subdue you and all yours (fear not a Civil War) without blow
stricken, and with a most permanent victory. And this whole Kingdom shall
consist only of a King, a Parliament, and Slaves. What King will reject such
servants, or neglect such a Compendium of power and profit upon any conditions?
Mistake me not: I do not say or think they will do this, they have showed
themselves more pious, just, faithful, then to deserve such a suspicion. But
take heed you do not cancel the obligation your election has laid upon them,
by an undeserved, ignoble mistrust: Many a man has provoked his wise to
lewdness, by thinking her lewd; Teach them not by your example to be, what
you would not have them to be: If either indignation or fear should prepare
their minds to make a politic use of your faithless cowardice; what might
not they get, and you lose? Who will not rather forsake then be forsaken, and
sacrifice himself for the safety of a company of ungrateful, unfaithful
cowards? Honor is the reward of virtuous actions, and protection is due to
them who protect your Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties. Give it them
for their sakes and your own, or blame them not if they follow the dictates of
nature, and provide for their own safety, by deserting you who would deliver
up them. Be true to your selves, that they may be true to you; for who will
stick to him that abandons himself? Let not fear betray those helps which
reason offers you. And God send us all minds prepared for peace, hearts fit
for War, and no cause to use our hands in such a service: yet if so sad an
occasion do come, let us meet it with the manly alacrity of Christians;
Knowing that all things work together for the best to them that love God. I
conclude with Seneca, Leve est quod far possum; Breve est quod far non
possum.

FINIS.

