Reasons for the Continuance of the Process of ARREST, for the good of the
Commonwealth.
1. BEcause attaching the person does secure the Plantiffs debt, either by
present payment, or causing other satisfaction, which the proceedings by
summons does not; and as a man will give all for his life, so he will do much
for his liberty.

2. When men are detained upon the Arrest (which is but seldom, for few are
arrested in comparison) and then it is ordinarily but for a short time, until
they have given security to answer the Action, or some Warrant to appear.

3. If men may not proceed by Arrest, it will much hinder Trade, and other
dealings; for men will not adventure to trust, where there is much liberty for
the Debtor to stand out; and Merchants, and Tradesmen, many times look upon the
person as the best security, and the remedy by Arrest the speediest to gain
their debts: without which Trade will necessarily decay.

4. The Process to arrest, does end most Suits before the person be attached,
and before appearance, as experience does show; for when men will not regard a
summons, they will take course before they will suffer an Arrest.

5. Men will take occasion from the summons (as formerly they have done) to be
gone from one Country to another, 2. H. 3. ca. 23.
and to make away their Estates, and though the Plantiff know it, yet he cannot
help himself, which the Arrest does prevent: and the Lawmakers of this land
have ever held it more reasonable, to provide for the satisfaction of the
Creditor, then the liberty of the Debtor.

6. England is an Island compassed about with many Port-Towns, where there are
many Merchants, and men that go abroad, and trade by sea, who buy Wares upon
credit? and there will be continual occasion of Suits against diverse persons of
this sort, who will not much regard the summons, but will betake themselves,
and their Estates to Sea again, and the Creditor can have no remedy? whereas if
the parties be attached, they will make satisfaction,

7. Whereas diverse Tradesmen subsist upon their credits, and take up great sums
of money, for which they can give no other security then their persons, and by
advantage thereof, many times attain to great Estates; but if the process of
Arrest be taken away, they can hope no more to be entrusted, which apparently
tends to their ruin.

8. Iath. 5. 25.
And that proceedings by Arrest may not seem at all cruel, or unjust; we find
both Presidents and Approbation of the like, and greater severity in the Old
and New Testament: Iath. 18. 25. 9.
as selling the Debtor, his Wife and Children, and all that he had to make
payment, and of taking, and casting into prison for debr, until the utmost
farthing were paid? and yet this course was not condemned among the Romans (so
much they loved Justice) nor by Christ himself in the New Testament, who bids,
agree with thy Adversary quickly, King 4. 1. 7.
before thou come to the Judge; and God, who will have that which is right to
be done among men, was very carefall that his own people should pay their
debts; evir. 25. 39.
and therefore if any were indebted, though they were poor, and could not pay,
yet the Creditor might take the Debtor, and his Children to be his bondmen,
rov. 10. 16.
or servants; and might take men's garments from them, and the bedding whereon
they did lie, from under them, which was a far greater punishment then our
light Arrests: rov. 22. 27.
and the prison with us is but a gage, ot pledge until the Defendant take
course to answer the Action according to the Law.

9. Men ordinarily begin Suits upon necessity, and Debtors generally are called
upon before any Suit is commenced: which indeed is in the nature of a summons,
but yet neither this, nor the lawful summons does drive men to take any course,
until the process of Arrest issue forth, being more compulsory, and a more
speedy remedy for the Creditor, then the summons was found to be, as appears by
sundry Statutes, which are more provisional for the Creditor who is always out
of his money, then for the debtor, who seldom well spent it, ^. H 7 cap. 9.
nor has care to repay it.

10. And if by any new way upon mere summons only, and default, Judgment shall
be had before appearance (which course the Law does not countenance) then the
grand pillar of our common Law, the trial by twelve men (which the Law does
much honor and favor) will fall to the ground; for much business will rest
wholly upon the Affidavit of a summer, or the like, which will be a means to
multiply Suits, and is in an unsure course, and will induce more perjury into
this nation, then our Law would ever fore this time give an inlet unto; and
therefore former Parliaments providing against delays by Summons, did not give
Judgment upon default, but found out a speedy remedy by Arrest to bring the
Defendant to his answer.

11. By the Law a Capias ad satisfaciend. does not lie, but where there is a
Capias ad respondend. first: and there is as great reason and enquity for the
Arrest to answer before Judgment, Rep. fol. 12.
as for the Arrest to satisfy after Judgment, because the Capias ad
respondend. does compel the Defendant to take notice of the Action, to which he
may plead if he will, and does secure him that he shall not start, so that when
the Capias ad satisfaciend. does issue forth, there is left no color of just
exception for the Defendant: but on the otherside, if Judgment shall be
entered upon a supposed summons, there will be many grievous complants, and the
succeeding evils will hardly be redressed, many will be undone, and Suits will
be multiplied.

12. Experience does show that the benefit of the process of Arrest has been
very great to this Commonwealth: and all the Statutes which have mentioned it
from time to time have given a larger extent unto it, then before it had, and
none have abridged it in any thing, which is now of great antiquity, having
been for many ages the best remedy (for the people to recover their debts, and
to compose other differences) that our Ancestors could divise.

13. The subtilty and subterfuges of debtors having made the process of Arrest
now more necessary then formerly, (...)dditional.
there will be reason rather to add to the remedies provided for the creditor
in former Parliaments then to dimish them: (...)easons.
and if any inconvenience by this so necessary a course happen to the Debtor,
yet will the taking it away prove more prejudicial to the Plantiff, who is the
party injured, and in reason, his case to be prefered and favored.

14. If men's persons be exempted from Arrest, it will wrong multitudes, who
have taken already the persons of men for their best security, which cannot be
remedied, except warning aforehand had been given to the nation, of this great
alteration of the Law, and except men have sufficient notice some good time
before this great change come, that so they may (if possible) altar, and obtain
other security, then now they have: the losses and complaints will be very many
and great, for the person is commonly the best, and in many cases the only
security, so that this sudden intended alteration, will not only weaken all
men's security, but quite destroy all the security that many have.

15. If the person may not be attached, the Plantiff will be put to find out
the Defendants Estate, which will be a great trouble, and in many cases cannot
be done.

16. A very great part of our Lands are Copy-hold-tenure, and not liable to pay
debts, nor can be without manifest, wrong to the Lord of the Manor; and
another great part is Land, either intailed, that the Heir is not liable, or
else is made over to others upon consideration; and if the person may not be
attached, the Creditor can have little, and where there is Land, and the
Plantiffe have a Judgment, he can have but the moity, which does seldom
satisfy.

17. It is injustice to protect any man's person from paying a just Debt, for no
man may protect another from making good his own bargain, and contract without
sin: and it is against the Law of Nature and Nations.

18. It will easily appear that Arrests for Debt, and for other things, were
granted upon the peoples Petition, for the common good, finding a necessity of
it for the promoting of Trade, and avoiding of Collusion among themselves.

19. There is no Process that will so much keep the people to their Contracts
and Promises, and that without delay, and before Judgment can be obtained, as
the Process of Arrest does, being the most co-erceive way, and that which does
overawe the worst of men.

20. To exempt the person from Arrest, will much gratify that sort of people,
who want honesty to pay their Debts, and will be glad that their persons may be
free, they will be sure to have nothing beforehand, lest the Creditor should
find any thing, whereas the fear of a Prison, or Arrest would make them follow
their Callings, spend less, and save something to pay their Debts.

21. If the person may not be attached, servants will grow licentious, men will
have liberty to quarrel, fight, and commit trespasses, and despise the
Magistrate, and all good government, more then ever they had, whereas the Law
did never protect any man's person that did not keep the peace.

22. By exemption from Arrest, a very great part (if not the half) of this
Nation that have neither Land nor other visible Estate to answer their
under-taking, can neither borrow money, nor Trade, nor be compelled to do what
the Law requires of them.

23. At Gen^va, (...)aws of New (...)ngland print(...) at London, 1641.
and in all Foraign Nations known to us, the Body, Land and Goods, are liable
to pay Debts, and if the Creditor have seized upon all the Estate, and have not
satisfaction, he may keep the Debtor in Prison if he will, nor is the present
government in New England without Arrests, where every Court has Ministers of
Justice to attach and fetch persons before the Magistrate.

24. There was never any Nation that did with more vigor and zeal endeavor the
expulsion of Tyrants, and the maintenance of the people in their Liberty, then
the Athenians and Romans, and made the best Laws, yet the Athenians did Arrest
for Debt before Judgment, as may appear by diverse passages in some of their
Authors yet extant, and the like was done by the Romans after the expulsion of
their Kings, as may appear by the laws of the twelve Tables, and collections
of diverse Civilians and Antiquares, and the same practice was used among the
Romans in aftertimes, as may appear by some old Lawyers in the digests of the
Civil Law.

25. In 2. R. 2. Robert de Henley Esquire was Arrested at Westminster, at the
time of Mass, and went into the Abbey for protection, the Officers followed
him, and upon resistance, he and his men were both slain, the Clergy made a
great complaint in Parliament (as appears by the Parliament Roll) that the
privilege of the Church was infringed; and that a great affront was given to
the Popes holiness; upon this the King being moved, the Lords and Commons
alleged and called the Judges to witness, and vouched Records, that it was
against the Law of the Land to protect any from paying their Debts, and the
great Divines and Lawyers of those times being called, resolved the King upon
their Oaths, that neither God himself, saving his perfection, nor the Pope
saving his holiness, nor any King could protect any man from paying his Debts
and at that time they judged it a sin to protect such, because it was a sin for
a man not to pay his Debts.

Object. If it be objected that it is a great trouble to get men's persons
attached, and therefore the intent is but to take away the Arrest before
judgment only, and not after.

Answ. Experience is the wisest guide in this matter, which tells us that it
will be much more difficult after Judgment to Arrest then before, and more
unsafe for the Plaintiff to rest upon that, because the Defendant has notice
of the Judgment, and may (having time) easily absent himself, and therefore
upon the first Arrest (which commonly is not known before hand) for the good of
the Plantiff the Common Law does provide that the Defendant shall (if the
Plaintiff and the Cause require it) give sufficient Bayl, that if Judgment
pass against him, then he shall either pay the Debt, or yield his body to
Prison, or else his Bayl are to make it good, without any Arrest after
Judgment, so that it is of great consequence for the Plantiff to have liberty
to attach the person before Judgment, for by this means he has a double
security, and is more encouraged to proceed to Trial, otherwise he might lose
all the fruit of his Judgment, which is by this means prevented.


