blazon of the City of London
REASONS humbly Offered, for the BILL to Enable the City of LONDON to Pay their
ORPHANS by Sale of 3000 l. per Annum of Their Lands, by a Revenue from
Hackney-Coachmen, and by a Duty on Coals.
AS to that Part of the Bill that concerns Hackney-Coachmen; It is humbly
Offered, Why they should be under the Government and Regulation of the City of
London, and Pay to the City, rather than Middlesex or Westminster.

The City of London has Time out of Mind made Bylaws, for regulating
Disorders and Annoyances within the said City and its Liberties; And on this
account did very Anciently limit the Numbers of Carrs to be used in
London-Streets, and give them Licenses yearly, (Which has been often allowed
in Westminster Hall:) And likewise the Common Council of London did of Later
years, after the expiration of the Act of Parliament touching Hackney-Coaches
(by Advice of the best Council) make an Act, to prevent mischief to the Streets
and Inhabitants of the City, and damage to Trade by the multitude of
Hackney-Coaches, Restraining them to a Number, and regulating their Standings.

If the other Bill for Reviving the former Act, and Licensing Hackney-Coaches
by Commissioners, take place, One part of it is directly repugnant to the
other: For by the former Act, The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London are
appointed Commissioners, 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 2. Sess. 31.
for putting that Act in Execution within London. But by the Bill, Seven
Commissioners, appointed by their MAJESTY'S, only are to License and Regulate
Coaches in London: By which the Mayor and Aldermen of London are to be
perfectly ousted from their Government in London in that particular, and will
be disabled to prevent or redress any Annoyances that may be occasioned thereby
to the Streets.

By the former Act of Parliament, the Rent of Hackney-Coaches was appointed for
Enlarging several Streets as well in London as Westminster: And although there was
Raised thereby 34000 l. it was all applied to Westminster, Except 1000 or 1500
l. for Rebuilding Temple Bar; which was as well for the Convenience of
Westminster as London, being the common Boundary of them both. So that to give
London an equal Advantage (the Streets whereof are as much at least used and
broken by Hackney-Coaches as Westminster;) It is conceived, LONDON ought now to
have the benefit of that Revenue, as Westminster had it before; either to make
good their Streets, and reimburse their Charge in Enlarging some of their
Streets, (particularly that over London Bridge, which they have lately caused
to be enlarged at a great Expense) or for some other Public use.

As to the Academy propounded to be supported by the Hackney-Coachmen, That
being designed for Noble men's and Gentlemen's Sons; It might be presumed,
Persons of their Quality should Endow and Maintain such a Foundation
themselves, rather than enforce a Provision for it by an Imposition on
Hackney-Coachmen, who no way Relate to it: And the City of London (where great
part of them are Employed) have no compensation for the Damage it suffers by
them.

The Loss is exceedingly great the City of London sustained by means of the
Dreadful Fire in Anno 1666, considering then Houses burnt down, a vast quantity
of Goods and Merchandises destroyed, the great Charge of Rebuilding, the
Interruption of their Trade, and the carrying it in great measure out of the
City: Whereby the Losses and Calamity that befell London, have been a very great
Gain and Advantage to Westminster, and the adjacent Parts in Middlesex, in the
Improvement and Increase of their Trade.

The City of London is Charged in all Taxes much higher than Middlesex and
Westminster, and had pressed for a considerable Abatement in the last Aid, had
it not been for Retarding the Act; And that they were in hopes of the
Parliaments further Assistance, in enabling them to pay their ORPHANS.

The City of London provides Sheriffs for the County of Middlesex, and excuses
the Gentlemen of the County from that Charge, maintains the County Gaol for
Middlesex and Westminster, and is at the sole Charge of keeping all Sessions
(which are many every year) of Jail-deliver for all their Felons.

And the City of London lies under a very great Charge from diverse Charitable
and Public Works, which the Inhabitants of Westminster and Middlesex are free
from. For Instance, (amongst others) their several Hospitals, which cost them
many Thousand Pounds per Annum to maintain, being all for the service and
benefit of the Public, either in Educating and Providing for Poor Children, or
Harboring and Providing for Disabled Seamen and Soldiers.

The City has been at great Expenses in Raising a Months Tax yearly, ever
since the Militia Act, 14 Car. 2. (which in Westminster and Middlesex has been
but a Quarter part;) And the raising and keeping up their Trained Bands upon
several Public Occasions, and particularly on occasion of the late Popish
Plot, has cost the Citizens of London (over and above the said Tax) 500000 l.

They have also been at great and constant Expense in Maintaining an Artillery
Company, for Martial Exercise and Discipline.

London also contributes toward Supporting the Poor of diverse Parishes in
Middlesex and Westminster.

In Reference to the Coal Revenue desired, It was concluded by former
Parliaments, to be the most Equal and Indifferent way of Raising Money for
building the Churches, and other like Public Uses in London; And it is humbly
hoped, This Parliament will bestow it now upon the City, for Relief of their
ORPHANS: The burden whereof will not be great, and will lie principally on
London and the Parts adjacent, which make no small Advantage by their
Neighborhood to London, and may well (for that and other Reasons
beforementioned) contribute so small a part toward the Cities Support: And
even those Parts without the City of London are inhabited by great Numbers of
its Citizens.

The Government of the City of London, (unless delivered from the Pressure of
this great Debt) can never Subsist; And it may be considered, That the City is
useful and serviceable to the Nation in diverse respects, particularly by the
great Sums raised Yearly to the Crown by its Trade; the Cities supplying Money
by Loans, on all public Emergences; and the great part it bears of the
Kingdoms Tax. But the Nations Honor is concerned (and perhaps, at one time or
other, its Safety may be so too,) That the Government of its Capital City
should be maintained, and Assistance given them for the discharging a Debt
(wherein so many poor Persons are concerned) Contracted only by the many,
great, and unavoidable Calamities that have befallen the City, and by Payment
of Interest from time to time; And not (as has been suggested) in Extravagant
Expenses, or to maintain the Mayor and Sheriffs, who Serve the Government at
their own great Expense; And some of them have had their Estates greatly
exhausted thereby.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


