TWELVE HUMBLE PROPOSALS To the Supreme Governors of the three Nations now
assembled at Westminster, concerning The Propogation of the Gospel, New modling
of the Universities, Reformation of the Laws. supply of the necessities of the
poor;
And many other things of great moment, which may conduce to the honor of God,
and the comfort and joy of his people.

By M. R. an admirer and adorer of the good providence of God, in making such
happy changes in these Nations.

Prove. 29.2. When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice, but when
the wicked bears Rule, the people mourn. Judges 5.9. My heart is toward the
Governors of Israel, who offered themselves willingly among the people. Prove.
28.16. The Prince that wants understanding is a great oppressor, but he that
hates covetousness shall prolong his days, Prove. 22.16. He that oppresses
the poor to increase his riches, and he that gives to the rich shall surely
come to want. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, for R. C. and are to be sold by
Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle, at the West End of Paul's 1653.

To the Right Honorable the Supreme Governors of the three Nations now
assembled at Westminster.
Right Honorable,
WHen I read and consider those sacred Chronicles of the Kings and Governors
of Judah and Israel, how variously they acted in their several affairs toward
God and man; sometimes finding that the Kings and Governors of those times
were not upright with God, but turned aside from him, and consequently, they
were of profane and carnal hearts, and then the worship of God was laid aside,
and Idols were set up, and their actions were profane and unjust, and every one
loved covetousness, and none called for justice; And sometimes again, finding
as it were the tide turned, and a good Joash, succeding a wicked Ahaziah, and
Athaliah, and a good Josiah succeeding the most wicked reign of Manosseth, and
then a most blessed and glorious change is made in the Nation, and O how
greatly is the Lord honored by such Governors? and how are the hearts of his
people made glad? and how does Justice and Righteousness flourish? and the
Nation in General, fare the better? I say, when I consider these things, and
compare them with the present proceedings of God toward these Nations, in
laying aside the late Tyrannical King that reigned over them, and putting the
Government into the hand of a Parliament, among whom there were many good men,
(though too many bad also) who brought in a blessed change, (though not such a
reformation as was expected) and gave free liberty to the people of God, to
worship God according to his will, and protected them from the oppositions and
malice of foreign enemies (though not from the oppressions of some intestine
inmates, I mean the Lawyers, and wicked men that oppressed by the Law;) And
consider withal, how God has removed that mixed Parliament, and convened
together a company of men, of whom it is to be hoped, that every individual
member of them have their hearts upright with God; I do comfortably hope, and
am persuaded, that God will now grant such days to these three Nations, as
they enjoyed in Judah in the days of David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Ioash,
Hezekiah, and Josiah; when Judgment did run down as water, and Righteousness
as a mighty stream, and the people were called upon every where, throughout
that Realm to cleave unto the Lord, and to walk in his ways, and Justice was
duly administered; I will instance but in that good King Iehosaphat, of whom it
is said, 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9. that he did set Judges in all parts of the land,
giving them a charge in these words, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for
man, but for the Lord, who is with you in Judgment, Wherefore now, let the
fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

And having this hope, that things will now be carried in such a current among
you, I am encouraged to present unto your Honors, these few proposals; being
persuaded, that all things of this nature will be acceptable unto you, and that
you having the Spirit of God in you, which presses after Righteousness and
Holiness, all motions tending thereto, will be welcome, and also useful unto
you, from whomsoever they come; and as for me, I could not choose but
communicate those few things, that were upon my heart, by way of proposal to
you; though I should have been glad if others had been more forward, and
prevented me herein: for so it had been done, I should have been satisfied, and
I could wish, if any others had any other thing upon their Spirits, that may be
of public advantage, that they would all present them to your confiderations:
for it being done only by way of proposal, it can be no way prejudicial, but
may be several ways advantageous, to you: (if your Spirits be humble, as I
hope they are, and will not slight any thing because it is propounded by
another) for if it should be so, that the same things are propounded to you,
upon sollid and good grounds; which you had in your hearts before to do; or if
it should be so, that what is, or shall be propounded to you by any of Gods
people (though a great number should make proposals to you) should come short
of what you have already in your heart to do, the Spirit of God, being powered
out upon you, to fit you for Government, as it was upon the seventy Elders:

Yet this advantage you would have by their proposals, that you would be
encouraged, to go on vigorously in the doing of those things, which both God
and his people do persuade you to.

And thus leaving you to the consideration of the following Proposals, I only
desire you (if there be any thing herein that suits not with your inclinations
or intentions) to remember they are but Proposals: and may be either waved or
improved as the Lord shall guide your hearts.

The first four proposals shall be concerning General, and the rest concerning
particular things.

The first Proposal

1. Proposal. That the Supreme Governors always would remember that they that
Rule over men must be ^ust, Ruling in ^he fear of God.
And the first thing that I do propound to you in general is, that you labor to
keep always fresh upon your Spirits, those last words of David, the Son of
Iesse, the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob,
and the sweet Psalmist of Israel, mentioned 2 Samuel 23.1.2.3.

The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue, the God of
Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me.

He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: and he shall
be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises; even a morning without
clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after
rain. Wherein ye that are called to be Rulers over men, have your great duty,
and your very great encouragement thereunto laid down; your duty being to be
just, and to Rule in the fear of God, which I hope you will seriously consider
daily; for your encouragement thereunto is exceeding great, for if you so be
and do, you shall never be put out in obscurity, not but your light shall be
glorious: and the fruits that you bring forth in that light shall be precious,
for you shall not be unfruitful, (if you be just, and Rule in the fear of God)
but you shall be as the tender grass, springing out of the earth by clear
shining after rain, which is exceeding desirable to all whom lt concerns. Oh
therefore let this precious word be always sounding in your ears, and make
deep impressions in your hearts! HE THAT RULES OVER MEN, MUST BE JUST, RULING
IN THE FEAR OF GOD.

2. Proposal. That they would always remember that Jesus Christ must now
reign, and so act as those that are officers deputed by him.
2. Prop. That you would consider, that the time of the reign of Christ is at
hand; either personally, or by the glorious powrings out of his Spirit upon his
people, which will as visibly demonstrate that he is King and reigns, as if
he were personally on earth, and when he reigns, he will Judge the world with
equity, and the people with his truth. Oh therefore do you strive to be his
forerunners! and to give the world a taste, what it is to have Jesus Christ to
reign over the Nations of the earth (either immediately in his own person, or
mediately by his Saints, making them Princes in all Lands) by doing such Just
and Righteous things, as you do know, or may know, Jesus Christ will do when he
reigns on earth; so will you do as much as in you lies to set up the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ on earth, and to hasten that glorious time for which the
Spirit, and the Bride, the Spouse of Jesus Christ has so long waited, Saying,
come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

3. Prop. that you would take up holy resolutions in the strength of the Lord,
PLACE="marg" 3. Prop. That they would make it all their care to do service for
Christ in their place, and leave the care of themselves, and their posterity
wholly to him.
and not your own strength, to lay aside all your own interests, and outward
advantages, and to be in a manner careless of your own outward estates, not
caring what becomes of them, so you may advance Christ: but resolving with a
holy indignation to trample upon any worldly advantages, when they come in
competition with doing service for Christ, not taking care to lay up great
estates for your posterity, or to gain great estates for your selves, aiming at
being accounted great and honorable among men (leave you that to others that
believe not, for how can you believe that seek honor one of another) but
knowing that the more careless you are of providing estates for your children,
and of seeking the honor of men; upon the account of doing service for, and
the honoring of God, whose great name you have taken upon you, and whose
servants you profess your selves to be, the more care will God take for you,
and yours, and the more honor shall ye receive from men, said I from men
only? I might say from God also, for they that honor God, God will honor. Oh
theresore make it your work to honor God! and trust him for estates,
PLACE="marg" 4. Proposal. That they would be speedy in doing the work of Christ
made have an^ delayed not (...) keep thy righteous judge ments. Ps. 11^
and whatsoever shall be good for you and yours.

4. Prop. That you be quick and speedy in doing the work of the Lord, being
diligent in business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. I say be speedy
(though not without seriousness and consideration) for hope deferred makes the
heart sick, and the tedious delays of your predecessors in authority, made the
Commonwealth sick and weary, and (with reverence be it spoken) God himself
weary to the spuing them out; They spending commonly but sixteen hours in a
week, for the disphatching of those great and weighty things which God called
for at their hands, and which they had no heart unto, whereas they had more
need to have sitten 16. hours in a day, to have dispatched their work, that so
there might have been no complainings in our streets. But they accounted only
three or four hours sitting in the forenoon, only of four days in the week,
sufficient for the doing the work they had to do; as if there were nothing now
to be done, but to spin out the time of a perpetual Parliament from age to
age, and therefore they would do but a little now, and a little then, consider
of an Act for the relief of the poor, or for paying public faith-money one
day, and then lay it aside for three, six, twelve months together, and do no
more in it this year, than they did the last. But oh that by how much they have
been negligent and careless of doing the work which they ought to have done, by
so much the more you would be diligent and resolved, and unwearied in your work,
and labor of love for God, and for his people, and for the Commonwealth of
the three Nations! I say not this as if things could be all done in a moment,
for they will deserve to be blamed that shall be too pressing upon you, and be
by and by offended if you make not such have as some hasty Spirits may expect.
But I only propound, that you take up resolutions to be speedy, and if you so
resolve, and endeavor it, as you can approve your hearts in the sight of God,
you need not care though some troubled and hasty Spirits should be offended,
only impute it to their zeal and ignorance: And their zeal being good,
therefore despise them not, because of their ignorance of the greatness of your
work, and the obstructions that may possibly be sometimes in your way.

And thus much for the general Proposals, and now I come to propound some
particular work, which may tend very much to the honor of God, and the joy of
his people being done by you.

5. Proposal. That they would zealously endeavor to propagate the Gospel.
5. Prop. That it be your earnest endeavor to propagate the Gospel; and this I
propose to you not so much as you are Magistrates, but as you are Christians,
that is to say, as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, and so are become
indeed the Sons of God: for it is the duty of every such soul as is indeed
not only a Professor, but a Possessor of Christ, to do all that in him lies in
his particular place and Station to propagate the Gospel these four ways.
First, in praying that the Gospel may run and be glorified. 2. In improving
what talents he has for publishing the Gospel; for no man ought to hide his
Talent or Talents, but to improve them for his Masters advantage. 3. In
exhorting others whom he finds to be gifted, and fitted to that work, (if he
see them to neglect it) to improve their Talents for the honor of their Lord.
4. In administering to the necessities of such as do make it their work to
preach the Gospel, but have not any outward estates for the supply of
themselves and their families, but what is communicated unto them for that
work: for such must live of the Gospel.

And these four things Right Honorable, I propound to you, as your duty, not
as you are Magistrates, as I said before, but as you are Christians.

1. That you incessantly pray to the great Lord of the Harvest, to send forth
Laborers into his Harvest, that so the Gospel may be gloriously published
abroad in the world,

2. That although you are Magistrates, and have other great affairs in your
hands, yet remember you are also Christians and Saints, and you ought to
improve your gifts and Tallents this way also to your masters honor as often
as you have opportunity. David was a Magistrate and a Saint, and he did the
work of a Magistrate in his place, and the work of a Saint also. He ceased not
to publish the glorious truths of God in the great congregation.

3. That you do not only so your selves, but that you exhort and encourage
others whom you know to be gifted (but of themselves are shie and backward) to
improve their gifts, and this to do as you are Christians; and you being not
only Christians but Magistrates, have a greater advantage in doing of it than
other Christians have: for First, you have power to protect those whom you
exhort to this duty from the violence of any enemies, if there be any that
should dare to oppose them, though it is to be hoped that there are none in
these three Nations under your Jurisdiction, at least none that will openly
show themselves to be such enemies of Christ. And Secondly, you have power to
command that the doors of the public meeting places be set open, and free to
all that are known to be godly and faithful dispencers of the word of Christ,
whether Presbyterians, or those commonly called Anabaptists, or Independents,
whereas some Presbyterian Ministers have taken upon them very lately, to keep
the doors of some public meeting-places shut against all but themselves, or
whom they pleased, and would not suffer godly Ministers to preach in those
places, 8. Particular things necesary to be done in order to the propagation of
the Gospel.
no not at such times as themselves did not preach, nor any others for them.

4. That you administer to the necessities of such as out of love to Christ do
feed the Lambs and Sheep of Christ, with wholesome food, and make it their work
so to do, not having any outward estate for the supply of themselves and their
families, but what is administered unto them for that work; and this likewise
you may do as you are not only Christians but Magistrates, with a far greater
advantage than other Christians may. But under this head I have these eight
particulars to propound unto you.

1. That tithes be abolished.
1. That you resolve with all possible speed to repeal the Law of Tithes, which
is a great oppression not only to the estates, but to the consciences of many
good people.

2. That blind Priests may have no encouragement to mislead poor souls.
2. That idle droans that have no acquaintance with Jesus Christ, and know only
how to fleeze and not how to feed the Sheep of Christ, may receive no
encouragement from you in that work; but rather you should encourage them to
leave that work, by inviting of them to some other employment if you think that
any of them may be fit for it. But if other private men that are like unto
themselves will support them, or maintain them they may, but they should have
no encouragement from you in that work.

3. That the Pastors and gifted brethren of all the Churches of Christ in the
Nation be desired to preach in public meeting places.
3. That such Preachers of the Gospel as are Pastors of particular
Congregagations baptized or others, be desired by you to bring their people
into each public meeting place that is most commodious for such a
congregation, and nearest their habitations, both in the City and Country, that
so the people of that parish, and as many as shall desire to hear the word
there, may be made partakers of it freely without any charge. The Church in the
primitive times did meet in such places where unbelievers might come to hear
them, and by that means be convinced of them all, and converted to the faith, 1
Cor. 14.24.

4. That in the City of London, two or three parishes that have but few people
belonging to them, 4. That two or three Parishes be reduced to one 5. That
godly Presbyterians and all other godly Preachers may have free liberty alike
to preach.
may be reduced to one, that so there may be so much the less charge required
for the maintenance of Gospel preachers, whereas now one man takes a
maintenance from a Parish, where scarce 40. or 50. usually come to hear him.

5. That no Minister, Presbyterian or other, that is of a Godly conversation,
be taken from any people that do love and desire his Ministry, unless it be
to remove only to the distance of two or three Parishes at most, so as the
people that are affected with his Ministry, may hear him if they please:
provided that at other times when he does not preach, the same pulpit may be
free for any other godly man to preach there: for there may be other Godly
people of the same parish, or Corporation, that may as much desire the
Ministry of another, as they of him, and when it is so, the one minister
should have liberty in the fore-noon, and the other in the afternoon, and so
both parties may be satisfied.

6. That such a are Magistrates, and all others that are gifted, and of holy
and godly conversations, be desired to Preach.
6. That for the supply of the peoples wants of some to dispense the word unto
them, you do not only desire Pastors of Churches to preach the word in public
places, but you do also desire those great men, and good men that have great
estates, that have been shy of going into the Pulpits hitherto (though they are
better furnished with gifts, and fitted with abilities; for that work than many
that call themselves ministers and Clergy men) to go and preach the Gospel
freely, according to those Talents they have received; for it is their duty to
do so, and as they are the Servants of Christ (as every one hathreceived a
gift, so he ought to minister, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God)
they ought to improve their Talents, and in improving they may increase them.
And being sensible of the great blindness people are in for want of teachers,
you ought to encourage and invite them thereunto, and for this you have the
example of that good King Iehoshaphat 2 Chronicles 17.7, 8. Who in the third year of
his reign sent to his Princes, even to Benhaill, and to Obadiah, and to
Zachariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the Cities of Judah,
and with them Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, etc. and they taught in
Judah, and went throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. That
good Kings heart being lifted up in the ways of the Lord, ver 6. that is
wonderfully enlarged, and raised up toward God, he therefore went on in the
ways of the Lord vigorously, throwing down the falfe priests, and false
worship practiced in those times, and knowing that the generality of the
multitude of the people were ignorant of the ways of the Lord, He therefore
sent to his Princes to go up and down, and teach in the Cities of Judah, not
that it may be supposed that all the Princes of Judah were fit for that work,
but he sent to such of them as he knew to be holy men, and men having the
Spirit of the Lord in them, and therefore they are singled out, and mentioned
by name even Benhail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethan^el, and Michaiah, and with
them those Priests and Levites also that were fittest for that work, (for many
of the Levites might be as bad as the worst* of others) even such and such by
name. Thus do you desire those that are men of estates, whom you know to be
gifted as aforesaid, of whom it may be there may be ten or twelve, or more or
less, in a City, or County, to ride abroad into the Country, and improve their
gifts among those people (...) want teaching.

7. That the Universities be new mod'led.
7. That (for further supply of the people with gospel Preachers, and ^or supply
of maintenance for such as are willing to preach the Gospel, but have no
outward estates) the Universities be new modelled, And that those estates which
were intended by the Donors of them to supposed pious uses, may be wholly
converted to such uses as are indeed pious, that is to say, a part thereof, to
be for the supply of such Preachers as are able and faithful Ministers of the
New Testament, and have not outward estates of their own for their supply; And
another part of those University estates, for the supply of such godly Scholars
as are to be brought up at the Universities (and their godly Tutors,) and of
such of those Scholars only, as whose parents ^re not able to maintain them
there themselves, and that others who desire to put their children to the
Universities, to study any of the liberal Sciences, do always do it at their
own proper charge, and not that things be so corruptly carried as they have
been, and yet are; That many Scholars that are men's sons of vast estates, must
have fellowships (as they now call them) and those that are mean (though their
children are godly) cannot have any thing toward their maintenance, if they
should send them thither; Yea and many of those that they call fellows for love
of their fellowships, continue in the Universities all the days of their
lives, (some of them being ancient gray headed men) living there an idle life,
and never coming abroad to set themselves to any employment wherein they may be
useful to Church or Commonwealth.

8. That some ways of maintenance out of the public Treasury be provided for
Gospel Preachers, but none by way of compulsion from the people.
8. That besides the maintenance which may come out of the University lands, you
take care to provide some other maintenance for the supply of all godly and
able Preachers of the Gospel, whether such as are commonly called
Presbyterians, Independents, or others who do attend that work, or shall attend
that work of Preaching the Gospel, and have not outward estates of their own to
live upon: for you have power to employ the public treasure for the public
benefit of the Nation, and if for outward benefit, much more for spiritual
benefit, which you ought in an especial manner to take care of as you are
private Christians, and have the better opportunity to do it as you are
Magistrates.

But still remember this, that you ought never to presume to take any more
authority upon you to do any thing in the Churches of God, in ordering Church
affairs, than you may do as private Christians, wherein you may only advise,
and desire things may be so and so, but may not impose any thing upon the
consciences of Saints by force, for that were to do as the Beast has done,
which I am confidently persuaded you will never do, nor suffer any other under
your Jurisdiction to do, by authority from you (though they may desire it of
you.)

But this let me add further as a caution; that as you take care that tithes be
taken away, so that by no means you impose any law upon the people, to pay such
or such a rate, for the maintenance of Ministers, for of that course several
inconveniences will follow, 1. The consciences of many faithful Preachers will
scruple to take that maintenance of you, which you compel from others, who are
persuaded that they ought not to have any thing, but what is freely ^^en,
neither directly or indirectly: And 2. The consciences of many people do
scruple to be tied to give so much, or so much to such a use, but are persuaded
that what they give to that use, they ought to give freely. 3. Some that are of
such particular Churches as meet not in the Parish or Town wherein they live
(if you should rate people severally) would be compelled to pay the rate,
although they do contribute to their own officers, which will be unreasonable;
for what God makes them willing and able to give of their temporals, they will
desire to give it to those that do administer to them in Spirituals, therefore
by no means compel any contributions of this kind from any sort of people: for
several sorts of people are several ways affected, and will desire liberty to
give what they give in this kind, to such as they ^^and most affected to,
whether Episcopal, Presbyterians, Independents, or any others, and this liberty
they should have, and not be abridged of it.

But when I propose it to you to take care to contribute to the maintenance of
Godly Ministers, I mean (as I said before) that you do herein but as your duty
is to do, being private Christians, viz. to contribute bountifully of your own
estates; and the public treasury being in your hands, to dispose a part
thereof to this public good work, but by no means (as I said before) by virtue
of your authority, to impose any thing upon the consciences of particular
people.

And thus by inviting those that now preach only in private to their Churches,
to preach in public, and encouraging and desiring men of estates to preach the
Gospel freely, and by reducing two or three Parishes into one, and abolishing
tithes, and silencing idle dreans, and making provision for the maintenance of
those Gospel-Preachers that have not estates out of the University lands and
otherwise, you will do that which may very much tend to the propagation of the
Gospel.

6. Prop. That the poor be seriously considered of, and speedily provided for,
being a work the Lord requires special care should be taken of it.
6. That you seriously and in good earnest lay to heart the condition of the
poor, and make it your care to provide for the supply of their wants, and that
consideration be had of their Condition before any rich man's case whatsoever be
taken into consideration, how nearly so ever related to you, or any of you,
(for I hope you will lay aside your selves and your relations, and regard them
rather less than more than others) for certainly the crying of the poor, and
the sighing of the needy, makes a louder noise in the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath, than the complaints of any rich man whatsoever; and his ear is more
open to their cries, and why should not yours? Those passages Deuteronomy. 24. from
the 10. V. to the end of the Chapter, wherein there are several Laws made by
God, in which he makes provision for the poor and needy, have taken great
impression upon my heart, especially considering that it is he that requires
his people to do so and so in the behalf of the distressed, and tells his
people, that when they are compassionate, and show acts of mercy and goodness
toward the poor, that he will bless them for it in all the work of their
hands, V. 19. and that it shall be righteousness unto them before the Lord
their God, V. 13. which passages are worthy the serious consideration of every
Saint, and especially of those that have most power to help the poor, as your
Honors have; for certainly this great duty of compassion, and bowels of mercy
and tenderness, and doing good to the distressed and needy, is more strongly
and eminently pressed in the Gospel, than in the Law: but O how little is it
practiced (not to say in general in all Nations, but particularly) in England!
it being a great scandal to religion in general, and a dishonor to the Nation
also, that so many beggars go up and down in all parts of this Nation as there
do, some whereof may do it for necessity, because they cannot otherwise live,
though most do it out of idleness, because they will not work: wherefore if
this course were taken, that every one that goes up and down begging were
taken, and presently carried to some workhouse, where they might be made to
work, and allowed but some short allowance for their work, it would make them
that are able to work to refrain going a begging, and to set themselves to some
work or other whereby they might get more than possibly they may have at such a
workhouse. And for such as are poor, and withal known to be weak and sickly,
and unable to work, or have more children than their labor can afford bread
for, it is a sad thing, that among such as profess themselves to be Saints,
they should be exposed to want bread. It is true; the Churches do make
provision for all their poor, but must none but those that are of Churches be
provided for? as there are many godly people that are not in Church Fellowship,
so there may be many goodly poor also that are not in Church fellowship, which
should be provided for, and not only they, but others also, for we are to do
good unto all, though especially to those who are of the household of says; and
for this end it were necessary that some way were found out for the setting of
all poor people a work, even such as do not beg (but will near starve rather)
but yet do want work, which they would willingly set themselves unto, if they
had but work to do, and then for others that cannot work, some ways should be
found out for their supplies, and this might be one way.

That the benefit of portage of letters may be converted to the use of the poor.
That on the portage of all inland letters a price should be fixed at 3d a
letter, or as your Honors shall think fit, and that some faithful men be
employed to manage that business, who should be allowed such a certain
stipend, for such an employment, and true accounts should be kept of what is
received weekly for letters, and what is disburst quarterly or otherwise for
the paying of such as are employed in several places, about the carrying up and
down of letters, and the remainder should come in for the use of the poor. And
this being a public thing, the benefit of it should not go into any private
men's purses, and none of those that are employed about it should have more than
they deserve for their pains, and time spent about doing the business that
concerns it, and so some thousands of pounds might come in yearly to the poor
that way.

Another way might be that a seal might be made in every City, Town, and
County, wherewith every considerable contract, bargain or agreement, between
man and man, should be sealed, for the Ratification of it, and without which it
should be of no force, for which seal 6d. should be given which might be of
great use to the public, and bring in an insensible income, for the use of the
poor, faithful men being appointed to be those Seal-keepers, and to register
all persons names, by whom such bargains are made, and sealed, and the time
when.

Other ways your Honors may also find out for the supply of the poor, as you
see occasion.

7. Proposal. That the meaner sort of people may have as much or more favor
shown them in Courts of Justice or other wise than the richest sort.
7. Prop. That you having first provided for the very poorest sort, then next
that you consider the conditions of such as are next them and are in a mean
condition, though not in so mean a condition as to want bread, and to stand in
need of alms. And the consideration you are to have of their condition, is to
provide that if they be wronged or defrauded by any, that you do them right, or
appoint some to do them right, before you do such acts of justice for persons
of greater estates.

The ground of this proposal is, because it is ordinarily so carried, that the
rich man's cause is heard before the poors; but O do you extraordinary things
and let not such corruptions be in your proceedings! and according to the
peoples poverty or meaness, wealth or riches, let care be taken for their
relief, wherein they are wronged, and let the richest of all be relieved last
of all, because that ordinarily they have had relief first formerly: But if
this reason be not sufficient then this is, Because the richest are better able
to bear delays than meaner people are. But it is sad to consider how contrary
to this rule things have been formerly carried. As for instance, several sorts
of people did contribute out of their estates in money and plate for the
defense of the late Parliament, and the richest were first paid, for they
having money by them did double what was due to them, and had all their
disbursements in lands, in which many of them had such good penyworths as it
was better to them than ready money: But the poor that had not to double it,
they could not have their money to this day, only there was an Act that all
whose debts were under ten pound, should be satisfied, by virtue of which Act,
there were indeed a small number of poor people whose debts were satisfied. But
alas there were many godly poor people that were so zealous for that good cause
that then was prosecuted; that they disburst, some above ten, others above
twenty, thirty, fifty pounds for the Parliament, that it now may be, by reason
of the wars, and of their great sufferings, have far less estates than many
covetous persons that lent but 5 or 10. l. so that satisfaction should be made
unto persons, sooner or later, not according to the sum they disburst, but
according to the present condition of meaness, and necessities in which they
are.

8. Proposal. That Commissioners be appointed to dispatch all businesses and
redress all grievances of people in the ^espective Counties where they ^^ve.]
8. Prop. That a certain number of persons be authorized by you to sit as
Commissioners in every County, to hear the grievances of people, and to
dispatch all business for them, that they be not enforced to come to London for
every occasion, as they have hitherto done, and yet do (which is exceeding
chargeable to all, but especially to those that live in remote parts) to wait
upon Commissioners here 3 months, 6 months, and sometimes 12 months
together, but that those people may have their business done within a days
walk of their own habitations, as it may very well be in some little Counties,
if the Commissioners do sit in the most commodious place for situation in such
Counties, not so much aiming at the bigness, or largeness, of such a Town or
village, as the Situation of it, and in other Counties that are larger, there
may be Commissioners appointed to sit in two, or three several places in those
Counties, according to the largeness of them, that so it may be as easy for
them to dispatch business, as for those that are in less Counties; and
business might be thus carried on with less charge to the Commonwealth in
general, and be less burt hensome to the particular members of it, than now it
is, As for instance, The Commissioners for compounding, and the Commissioners
for removing Obstructions, and the Commissioners for sale of Lands, do all sit
here, and all that have any business in either of these cases, must attend them
here, though they live as far as Cornwall and York shire, and here wait several
months before their business can be dispatched, whereas were there
Commissioners authorized to fit in every County, to dispatch the same
businesses, The rules which are prescribed to these here to proceed by, would
also serve for all the Commissioners in every County, and business might be far
better carried on; for they sitting in every County, would be better enabled to
take cognizance of every particular man's case, than these here can; for here
they take the oaths of they know not whom, and acording to those oaths whether
true or false they pass the business; whereas in each particular County they
might have more clear knowledge what the persons are that swear to such or such
a thing, and be able to judge of what credit their oaths are, which here they
cannot do: and then for the worth and value of Lands, they might be beter, and
more fully informed than these Commissioners here can; for they trust to their
Surveyors, and these Surveyors may be and sometimes are bribed, and lands are
and have been undervalued, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth. In
these and several other respects, great inconveniences come, for want of
Commissioners sitting in every County, for the relief of the people, and the
righting of the Commonwealth.

9. Proposal. That all unprofitable and stris-increasing and
substance-devouring laws, and Lawiers be abolished and abandoned.
9. Prop. That you do wholly abolish and repeal those great and tedious volumes
of Law, that are either in a strange tongue or otherwise (which serve for no
other end, but to enrich the Lawyers, and impoverish others) and prepare
instead thereof only some plain brief general rules, which all men may be
acquainted with, and appoint only such pious, faithful and discreet men, for
the administration of Justice, as never knew what those old laws meant, leaving
them to do in matters of justice what the Law of God, and nature guides them
to; very much whereof is contained in this, that men do as they would be done
unto: for the happiness of a people will never consist in good laws, but in
good Magistrates, or administrators of Justice, and you need not fear to
abolish those old ambiguous, strife-increasing, and substance devouring laws,
for fear that you shall not find men enough fit, and able to judge with more
righteous Judgment, then those laws of themselves can guide them to; for
blessed be the great God he has poured out his spirit upon many already, and
without all dispute, he will pour out of that spirit of his more and more, upon
his people in these our days; for the Kingdom and appearing of Jesus Christ,
is now near at hand, it is even at the door My ground for this are laid down a^
large in my Book entitled, New Jerusalems Glory.
, and be you strong and of good courage, and do his work, and your Lord when he
comes will bless and reward you, if he find you so doing.

10. Proposal. That none be henceforth constituted Justice of the Peace or
administrators of Justice but ^uch as are ^en fearing God and hatting
covetousness.
10. Prop. That you pick out the choicest men in each County for holiness of
life, and freedom from covetousness, and for wisdom, prudence and
understanding, whether rich men, or mean men, for the mannaging of your
waightiest business, as to be Commissioners, and doers of justice between man
and man, and put down these old customs, of making the richest men of the
places where they live, Aldermen, and Justices of the Peace, though they be
very Dunces, and very profane in their lives, who cannot chastise swearers and
blasphemers, because they are such themselves, nor drunkards, because it is a
vice they are guilty of themselves; the like may be said of other vices; but
let it be your special care that faithful and discreet men be appointed to
administer justice throughout the Nation; and then for other employments, as
the Custom offices, and the like, if there be not godly men enough to be found
for them, they may be disposed of to others, that are of most civil and
blameless conversation; but if Godly and conscientious men may be found for
all, then such should be chosen before others, and things should not be carried
as they have lately been, that enemies and men of vicious lives should be
employed, when honest and faithful men that have suffered much for their
faithfulness to the Common wealth, could never yet be employed, because they
had not so many friends to speak for them, nor did not so eagerly seek after
places as others did.

11. Prop. That no officer that serves the Common wealth in such ^mployments as
are not ha^ardous to their lives or ^ealths be al^owed more ^han 200 l. ^er
annum.
11. Prop. That moderate and reasonable stipends, be allowed unto all those that
are employed, that they may have no temptation to do the work grudgingly, or
sparingly, but may dilligently attend it, as they ought to do, provided it be
no such stipend as may enrich men, but that it may be accounted a dishonorable
thing for to have it said that such a man was but in a mean condition the other
day, and now is enricht by the public treasure, I mean for such men as live at
home and in ease, and do not at all hazard their lives, or health, or limbs,
for the public welfare; but as for such as so do, it would be ingratitude in a
high degree, if they were not well rewarded; but it is no ingratitude to give
those men but mean rewards, that do but mean and easy services; for to be
Commissioner of the Customs is easy service, and to be a Treasurer or the
like, is easy service, and ordinary rewards may suffice for them, so that no
man for the discharge of such offices, should have more than 150 l. or 200 l.
per annum, even they that have most, and are in the most honorable of such
employments, and others but 40.50.60. or 100 l. per annum, according to the
quality such persons have lived in, and the employment they shall be fit for:
for some men of mean parts, may be fit only for mean employments; whereas
other employments require men of better parts, learning and abilities for the
mannaging of them, and such men as have been so brought up, and are so
quallified, will deserve greater stipends answerable thereunto; but any man
though he has five or six children, may maintain his family very comfortably
with 200 a year, though not in outward state and pomp, and needless vanities,
in maintaining music and dancing-Masters to teach their children, and decking
of them in silks and silver, and the like; men that have estates of their own
before, may do in these things what they please, but it should never be said
that the public treasure should be so expended, for there are many other more
necessary things to be done therewith, and not to bestow a thousand, or five
hundred, or three hundred a year either, upon any man that is employed in easy
and peaceable employments at home.

And some Gentlemen of noble and public spirits, who are men of great gifts
for understanding and prudence, and have withal a holy heart, and zealous for
God, who have great estates of their own, will be found no doubt ready and free
whenever they shall be desired to officiate in Honorable employments (as in
being administrators of justice and Commissioners in other cases, etc.) and
will not take any reward at all for it, but do it out of desire to be doing
service for Christ, and to be improving their Talents for his use, but will be
unwilling that ever it should be said that they were made rich by the
Commonwealths Treasure, (as to the Honor of many noble Gentlemen in the Land,
it may be yet said of them they have not meddled with it) even such as Abraham
as would not take of the King of Sodom the worth of a thread even to a shoe
latchet, lest it should be said he had made Abraham rich. But other men of mean
estates being men of large abilities, and of great Wisdom and Prudence, and
Piety, being employed in such offices (for want of rich men enough so
qualified) should be allowed as aforesaid.

12. Prop. That no more of the lands belon^ing to the Commonwealth be
henceforth sold, but reserved to ea^^ the people Taxes and Excise and custom
12. Prove. That you sell no more of those Lands that are forfeited to the
Commonwealth, either in England, Scotland or Ireland, than of mere necessity
you must, at the least that you do not sell them wholly, but sell them only
for seven or ten years time, that so afterward they may come into the public
custody again, and serve to defray public charges, that so taxes, excise, and
customs, those great burdens of the people may be taken off.

And thus I leave these few Proposals to your Honors serious-considerations,
having great expectations that the Lord will make of you repayers of breaches
and restorers of paths to dwell in.

And that to this end he will power out his Spirit upon you, even the Spirit of
Wisdom, and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, and the Spirit of
Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord, that so you may be of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord, and may judge with Righteousness the
poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the Earth Isa. 11.2.
, as it is said your Lord and Master Jesus Christ shall do when he comes, is
the fervent prayer of.

Right Honorable, The unworthy servant of Christ and his people, M. R.
London, July 7th 1653.

