Strange News of the sad effects of the fatal Eclipse happening the 29th of
this March, 1652.

ALSO A PREDICTION OF The future Fate of the King of SCOTS:

Likewise An old Prophecy (never before extant) referring to the Prince of
Conde ( now in arms against the King of France) positively determining what
will be the issue of the said Princes attempts.

With the direful effects and Prodigies (probably) to be expected in the Air
on Monday 29 March, 1652. With other remarkable things never before Published.

By N. R. Student in Astrology.

Bright Sol's eclipsed the nine and twentieth day;
Of March, and we black-Monday call it may,
To King, and Prince, to Peer, and Potentate,
Within few months, it shows a dismal fate,
It also in a doleful tone does sing
The Prince of Conde's actions against his King.
LONDON Printed for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield. 1652.

Strange news of the sad effects of the fatal Eclipse happening the 29th. of
this March, 1652.
OR, The direful effects and prodegies (probably) to be expected in the Air
on Monday March 29. 1652. what time the Sun shall be almost totally Eclipsed.
Also a Prediction of the future Fate of the King of Scots and a prophecy
(never before extant) referring to the Prince of Conde, and positively
determining what will be the issue of the said Princes attempts, etc.
AS the Stars of Heaven, are the most excellent Characters of the Divinity,
Power, Wisdom, and glory of their Creator, in that they are written and
engraven by the finger of God himself (the father of lights) so the least of
Gods works are very considerable, and worthy of our chiefest regard, David
infinitely admired at them, and declares the doom of those that despise them or
dis-regard them, Psalm. 28.5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor
the opperation of his hands, the Lord will destroy them and not build them up,
Did not God make the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars? did not he set them to
rule the day and the night? did he not appoint them for signs, and seasons?
and can that be a sign which signifies nothing? St Origin tells us, Coelum
instar libelli expansi est notis Syderum omnia futura in se Scripta
continentis, the heaven (says he) is like to a book laid open containing all
future events written in those glorious Characters of the Stars: But to the
business.

Solar Eclipses have been ever fatal to Kings, Princes, and States and their
Dominions, and to all manner of Authorities and men in power, setting one King,
one Prince, one State, one Great or Nobleman at variance with another: this
Eclipse that we are to expect on Monday March 29. 1652. falls out in the fiery
triplicity in Aries, the ascendent of England, in the very degree of his
exaltation: Our present Gubernators (who have transmografide Monarchy into a
Free State) must not esteem themselves exempted (more then other States) from
the effects thereof, that remarkable Eclipse of the When the Son of
righte^usnes suffered on the cross.
Sun (when there was darkness over the face of the whole earth (may fitly be
paralelled with this; many gods (for so the holy Ghost is pleased to style
Rulers) shall suffer infamous deaths: Soon after this Eclipse we shall
generally find men mad to undo themselves; the Prince of Planets, the eye of
the world, and the glory of the heavens is Eclipsed, just upon his throne, the
fight whereof will terrify all mortal eyes, for we shall see the Stars shine
as in a winters night, and (in all probability) strange and wonderful signs
(such as our forefathers never beheld) in the Air, to the astonishment of all
mankind.

Bella sonat, sonat arma, minas sonat, omnia martis. All the evils the sword,
sedition, famine or pestilence can do to Europe, may be expected from the
effects of this Eclipse; it is the greatest that we have had in England this
many centuries of years.

The Sun's eclipsed in's Throne, and ^ryes aloud
O Kings, why being mortal are ye proud?
Your Scepters gone, Democracy takes place,
Your Hoasts shall fall by the sword before your face,
As if that all the furies did conspire
To set the rude Plebeians hearts on fire,
Against sacred majesty, and to pull down,
Each royal head, that's circled with a crown.
There are many (I believe) that would willingly give half their lives, to
know the future Fate of the Scots King (at present, as it were an exile from
his native clime) I am sure no man more compassionates the infortunities of
that Star-crossed Gentleman, then my self, let his condition be a lively
example to those, whether Soldier or Magistrate, who rule over their
Fellow-Commoners, and let them know that their greatness being built only upon
the uncertain breath of that suspicious, humorsome, and skittish beast, the
People; is very uncertain, and subject to various vicissitudes. But it were
extreme arrogance in me (at least I should be sure of such a censure)
positively to predict his future condition, and therefore I shall only give you
an old prophecy (fathered upon Baudensis and attributed by him to the present
King of Scots) which is this,

Great K James.
J. thou peaceful King, thy first issue
Inclines to War, Plague does the next subdue:
A Charles 2.
Lion feirce, sprung from the Northern shore
Shall bring from deepest hell, and waves that roar.
A blasing Army, he shall men ore* run,
Cities and cattle; yea the Moon and Sun
Shall be remove, and (father-like) the least,
Make highest, and give laws to the weak West.
The famous Ambrose Merlin (as is observed by our English Merlin (as he calls
himself) Mr. Lilly) Nine hundred years since (though of many wise men approved
no better then the story of the Knight of the Sun, or him of the Red Rose)
prophesied of the Second Charles, thus, Nidificabit in sum rupe totius
Britani: He shall build his nest in the chiefest Rocks of all Britain;
Importing, that he shall betake himself to some mountainous Island, or Country
belonging to his lost Dominions. But I shall pass from him, to him, viz. into
France, and a while converse with the Prince of Conde.

Were I intended to dilate my self in relating the woeful calamity, which
shall within this half score years seize upon the French Nation, I might
write a large Volume thereof, and tell them that present Prince of Conde (whom
some report as religious as a Turk) shall (vexed for the loss of his
Generalship, and not being countenanced by the King equally with his ambition)
attempt to ore-turn and alter the whole frame of Government, the unruly
Nobility adhering to him, shall by their civil dissension occasion the ruin
of that famous French Monarchy, it was prophesied long ago that the time of
this mutation should be, when a certain Capistranum D. of Florence is of late
turned Protestant
Duke of Florence turned Protestant, pray peruse this Prophecy (by some
thought to be Grebners) the words are very ominous and these.

REx Franciae depelletur a suis finibus a propriis subditis, exercebit enim in
eo tyranidem in gentem and contra Ecclesiam Christi, instigatus ab Episcopis
and pontificibus etc. -- Verum cum fuerit amotus and falsus solus, relinquetur
in exilio, ab his in quibus erat confisus in fine autem secundi incursus hoc
fiet sic pendet clipeus in stipite.

In English thus. THe King of France shall be driven from his own Coasts and
Confines by his own Subjects, for he will exercise very great Tyranny against
his Subjects and the Church of Christ, being instigated and stirred up thereto
by the bishops and Romanists, who shall seduce him, and betray him traitorously
with bribery of money, but those misdemeanors he does, shall seem to be done
in favor of his Kins-men or Allies, but when he shall be removed, and (false
man) shall alone be banished, or all alone in exile, apart from those he
confided in, these things shall come to pass etc.

I shall give you one Prophecy more, (more dreadful and more positive then
the former, never yet extant) which is this.

A Prophecy of the fall of Monarchy in France, occasioned by the Rebellion of
the Prince of Conde, etc.
FRance, hear and tremble when thou see,
Thy young King dote upon a Mazarine
Priest,
And in each City, and each Town
The Miter perch above the Crown
Then wring thy hands, and weep, and cry,
For thy destruction draws nigh,
Then Conde.
C. shall with outrageous force,
Make himself strong with foot and horse,
And though self ends do thrust him on
(And not a Reformation,
As some shall think) he will give that blow
Shall lay thy Pomp and pride full low
He but begins a work which shall
Find its perfection in his fall
Jehovah means for to translate,
Thy power (O King) into a State
Paris shall run with streams of blood
And Shrubs grow, where once Cities stood.
All this (the Prophet does divine)
Shall hap to thee ere fifty nine.
This inevitable destiny attending fertile France, and so many mutations
hanging over the heads of mankind, we may justly conclude, that the day of
Doom is not far off, and every day expect, when one Orb shall contend with
another, and the fixed Stars in motion run faster then the wandering
Planets, the Seas rising level with the mountains.

Till night, destruction, ruin, calamity, and eternal darkness, conclude all
these miseries.

FINIS.

