THE REASONS OF THE Dissenting Brethren against the Third Proposition,
CONCERNING PRESBYTERIAL GOVERNMENT.

Humbly presented.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corne-Hill. 1645.

Die Lunae, 23. December. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That three hundred and no
more, of The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren against the third Proposition
touching Presbyteriall Government, and The Answer and Solution of the Assembly
to the said Reasons, be forthwith Printed; And that the care of the exact
Printing thereof be referred to Mr Byfield: And the Printer is enjoined (at his
peril) not to Print more then Three hundred of them.

It is further Ordered, That no man presume to Re-print, Divulge or Publish the
said Reasons and Answers, or any part of them, till further order be taken
herein by either or both Houses of Parliament.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

REASONS against the Third Proposition, concerning Presbyteriall Government,
and the Proofs thereof: Viz. The Scripture holds forth, that many particular
Congregations may be under one Presbyteriall Government. Humbly Presented.
If many Congregations having all Elders already affixed respectively unto
them, may be under a Presbyteriall government: Then all those Elders must
sustain a special relation of Elders to all the people of those Congregations
as one Church and to every one as a Member thereof. But for a company of such
Elders already affixed, etc. to sustain such a relation, carries with it so
great and manifold incongruities, and inconsistencies, with what the Scripture
speaks of Elders in their relation to a Church committed to them, and likewise
with the Principles of the Reformed Churches themselves, as cannot be admitted.
And therefore such a Government may not be.


The first Proposition.
THat according to the Scriptures, such a Presbyteriall Government necessarily
draws such a special relation, is evinced by parts thus.

1. They must have the relation of Elders to all and every one of the Members;
for Church and Elders are Relatives. And the Argument for the Presbyteriall
government is taken by the Presbyteriall Divines from this; That many
Congregations in Scripture, are made one Church, and the Elders thereof Elders
of that Church.

2. That relation they have, must be a more special relation, as is evident
from the practice and principles of this government. For when the Congregations
in Shires are divided into several Presbyteries or Deanries, the Elders
(though Neighbors) of a bordering Presbytery, intermeddle not with the
Congregations under another Presbytery, and yet Neighbor Elders. It is
therefore a special relation puts the difference, that those of these
Presbyteries do judge the Congregations under them, as having a special
relation to them, such as not to other Congregations.

The minor Proposition.
For the proof of which, we present these incongruities as follow.

First, this breeds many incongruous disproportions to the Order set by Christ,
about the Officers of the Church.

1. To extend a Pastors power of ordinary ruling beyond the extent of his
ordinary teaching, is against the order which Christ has set (and all extent
of power must as well have an Institution of Christ, as the power or office it
self, the difference of Evangelists and ordinary Pastors lay in extent of
power,) but the extent of a Pastors ordinary ruling power, is but to that Flock
as his whole Flock which he is able to feed. The first Proposition is
confirmed, first by Scripture, secondly by Reason.

First by Scripture, Acts Chap. 20. Verse 28. Take heed to your selves and to
all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the
flock of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Whence first we see
the special limitation of their extensive power and relation [ to a flock] and
[ all in that flock] is by the Holy Ghost, and not by man, and therefore is not
to be extended by man, further then the Holy Ghost has appointed.

2. The extent of that relation to that flock, and the whole flock they feed,
and to feed all that flock alike. And if they be preaching Elders, then to feed
by preaching, and therefore are Overseers to them to feed them, and this
because they feed them.

3. He speaks to preaching Elders especially, that feed by doctrine: for he
propounds his own example to them, Verse 20. That he had revealed the whole
counsel of God. And Peter seconds Paul in this, 1 Peter, Chap. 5. Verse 2.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof. The
flock (...) among you: is that flock any of them had relation to as his flock
respectively. Peter here writing unto the Churches in several Nations Chap. 1.
Verse 1. whereas in Acts 20* and Verse 28. the charge is to the particular
Elders of Ephesus to that whole flock; therefore that note of respectivenesse
is here put (...) among you: that is, that flock which respectively belongs to
you, as Colossians Chap. 1. Verse 17. Who is for you a faithful Minister, that
is, your proper Pastor: So the flock (...) is your several proper flocks that
belong to you. And hereby it appears that their oversight is not extendible
beyond their feeding. Thus also Heb. 13. Verse 7. Remember them that have the
rule over you, and have spoken to you the word of God; which he speaks of
preaching Elders, and of ruling Elders (of whom he speaks Verse 17.) Obey them
that have the rule over you, for they watch for your souls, as those that must
give an account. And whether these places note out two sort of Officers,
Preaching Elders, ver. 7. and Ruling Elders, ver. 17. or but one sort, and so
but several acts of the same Office, however if but one, yet still the
ordinary rule over them was not farther extendible then their ordinary
preaching; if two sorts of Officers, they being Officers together in the same
Church, if the Pastors power of ruling extends no farther then his preaching,
then the mere ruling Elders power, or his that is assistant to him, must
extend no farther then the Pastors also; this is the natural obligation to
obedience, and so is the measure to set the bounds of the extent of ordinary
Church power. It Is one argument used against Episcopal power, that they are
enforced to obey him that speaks not the word to them, nor watches over their
souls; And this holds as well against these Presbyteriall Officers, when a man
to be excommunicated comes before such, if he says I am not bound to obey you
in such authoritative way, nor do I owe a subjection as to a power of censure
in you, for many, yea most of you, never spoke the word unto me, nor did watch
over my soul; nay, perhaps the man can say, he never saw their faces before.

And it availes not to say that they may occasionally preach; for take two
places more, the 1 to the These. chap. 5. ver. 12. speaking of respect to their
Officers, Know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and
admonish you: These two labor, and are over you, are commensurable; that is,
who make it their calling to have the care of you, which the many Pastors and
Elders in a common Presbytery cannot. And labor, in what? Tim. Epist. 1.
chap. 1. ver. 17. expounds it, That labor in the word and Doctrine: The Elders
that rule well, are worthy of double honor, especially those that labor in
the word and Doctrine. And expound this latter known place, whether of Teaching
Elders only, or ruling and teaching both (as the Reformed Churches do) however
it affords this to us; that the extent of ruling in either the one or the
other, is but as large as teaching: And if it be meant of Teaching Elders only,
that both rule and labor in the word and Doctrine, yet if they be limited in
laboring in the word (as they are being fixed Pastors to their own
Congregations) then in ruling. And if it be meant of ruling Elders (as distinct
from them) yet their ruling is but of the same extent, that the others
laboring in the word is, and that is extended but to one Congregation.

And secondly, Reason is for this; For in a Pastors Office in which Preaching
and Ruling are joined, yet his power of ruling flows in him from, and is the
adjunct of his power to preach, and to be sure it is not extendible further;
and however yet there is the same proportion of either, and then by just reason
the extent of the Church which is the subject of his ordinary ruling cannot be
extended larger then what is the ordinary subject of his preaching, and so
these relations are of equal limits; If a father has the power of governing,
as a father, then it is extendible only to those he is a father to. And that a
Pastor has his ordinary ruling power annexed to his ordinary power of
preaching, is proved by these reasons.

First, If not upon this ground, then upon some other, not by any special
faculty or Office, over and above this of preaching, for then he should be
ordained a ruling Elder over and above his being first a Preaching Elder as a
new faculty given him, or by being made a Ruler first, and then this of
preaching superadded, as the Bishops first made Deacons then Presbyters. But

Secondly, All the keys are given him at once, the keys of ruling with the
keys of knowledge, the power of the staff intrinsecally follows, his being a
Pastor or Shepherd; and though the one is a power of mere order, namely that
of Preaching, and that of his Ruling be a power of jurisdiction (to be
exercised with others and not alone) yet still his receiving power to join
with others in those acts of Rule of jurisdiction is from this his power of
Order, and the ordinary extent of his authority therein, is extendible no
farther then his ordinary call to preach. Yea

Thirdly, The extent of the power of the Apostles themselves, in ruling in all
the Churches was founded upon, and extendible with their commission to preach
in all Churches, and their very call and obligation being not to preach in a
set fixed relation, as ordinary Pastors calling is, but to all Churches in all
Nations: Hence their power of ruling was answerable; It was their very call to
be universal Pastors, and therefore universal Rulers; yea and in reference to
those that are without, their authority of ruling was narrower in the extent of
it then of their preaching. The Apostles might preach to Heathens, and their
call was so to do, to convert them, but they had not power to rule all men:
what have I to do to judge them that are without? But in this way of
Presbyteriall government, though they also may occasionally preach where they
may not rule, yet the proportion of their ordinary ruling, is extended beyond
the proportion of their ordinary preaching, which it was not in the Apostles
themselves.

Secondly, It breeds an incongruous disproportion between the Offices of Ruling
and Preaching Elders compared among themselves, for this Government makes the
Extent of the Ruling Elders Office and relation, to be larger then that of
their Teachers or Pastors; For the Pastor, qua Pastor, is limited to his
particular Congregation he is fixed to for the ordinary performance of his
Office, as the Deacons also are; but the Ruling Elders Office, qua Ruling
Elder, is extended over all these Congregations in this Presbytery. The Ruling
Elder performs his Office in the highest perfection of it, as to admonish,
excommunicate in all these Churches, but the Pastors are limited in the highest
work of their Callings, Preaching being more excellent then Ruling, yea then
baptizing unto one Congregation; That in the first Epistle to Tim. Chap. 5.
Ver. 17. (interpret it as you will) justifies this.

Thirdly, It perverts the order and distinction of Teaching Elders, and mere
Ruling Elders (as the reformed Churches call them) or Church Governors (as the
Assembly) That whereas Christ has made some Teaching Elders, and some Ruling
Elders, and these distinct in this, that the Preaching Elders Office is to
preach and rule, the Ruling Elders Office only to rule: this frame of
Presbyteriall government, makes one person not only to do both these works,
(which in a particular Congregation every Pastor does) but formally to be both
those Offices, in respect of a double relation he does sustain, namely, a
Pastor to be a Preaching Elder to the Congregation where he is fixed, and a
mere ruling Elder to the rest of the Congregations of a Classical Church: for
it is demanded, when a Pastor in a particular Congregation is in this common
Presbytery, what sort of Officer he is to that Presbyteriall Church? An Elder
he is, because he does the work of an Elder; A Teaching Elder to that Church he
is not, for to that whole Church he labors not in the word and Doctrine.
Timothy, Epist. 1. Chap. 5. ver. 17. Therefore a mere ruling Elder he must be,
and so the same man bears two sorts of Offices, and by this means there are
two sorts of mere ruling Elders, whereas in a particular Congregation, a
Pastor though he rules, yet he rules as a Pastor to that Congregation. And
this disorder and confusion is further set out, in that, by this means the
same Officer has a full relation to one Church, and but half a relation to
another, and causes him to perform the whole of his Office to one Church (the
particular Church) he has relation to, and but the half thereof to the other.

Fourthly, It makes an incongruous disproportion between the Extent of the
relation of those two Offices of Elders and Deacons unto a Church. If the
Scriptures had intended many Churches making one Church, and the Elders of
those many Churchers to have been Elders in common to those Churches as one
Church, then in like manner the Deacons of all those Churches should make up a
common Deaconrie, and be Deacons in common unto all those Churches in an
ordinary way as the other are Elders: But this is contrary to the practice of
the Reformed Churches, though subject to the Presbyteriall Government, in which
the Deacons have the ordinary relation of Deacons in no respect extended
further then to a particular Congregation, nor do they exercise Acts of that
Office in an ordinary way to other Congregations, nor otherwise to neighbor
Congregations then to any other; much less is there a common Deaconship of
them all, and why should not the later be erected over all those Churches as
one Church, as well as a common Eldership? especially if in matters of this
nature, par ratio should carry it; every Church, qua Church, being a body, has
relation to all its Officers as Organicall members thereof; So. Romans 12th. and
the 4th. And the Apostle writing to Philippi, a Church in a City, he writes to
the Bishops [ the Elders] and the Deacons as both alike Officers of that
Church. And Acts Chap. 6th. The Deacons of the Church of Jerusalem (if there
were many Congregations as our brethren suppose) were chosen by the whole
multitude when gathered together by the 12. And therefore were Deacons of that
whole Church as well as the Elders, Elders thereof. Now if the Deacons Office
should thus be extended to all the Congregations as the Elders is, then why
should not each Church be bound to bring contributions to the Deacons of each
Church, and to be distributed in common? and so our purses should be subject to
the Deacons in common, as far as our persons to the Elders in common, and
they might challenge the same power in their Office over the one that the
Elders do over the other, and then also each Congregation were in an ordinary
and standing obligation bound to releeve all the Poor in those Churches, as
well as those in their own Parishes, not only by the common law of Charity, but
by virtue of special relation of their being one Church, which relation in all
these things, does beget the like Obligation that it does in government, and so
all things of this nature should be alike common to all and each, and there
should be a common Treasury for this one great Diaconat Church, as we may in a
parallel allusion to that other name of Presbyteriall call it.

A second head of Incongruities and Inconsistencies which will follow upon it,
are in the mutual duties required, and that do necessarily follow upon this
standing relation for a constant government of these Elders to all this people
of these Churches, and of the people to these Elders.

1. From the People to all these Elders, according unto what the Scripture
speaks of as due to standing Elders, they owe at least honor and esteem;
yea, maintenance to all their Elders, whether those that ordinarily rule them
or preach to them, and they owe it for both, Tim. Epist. 1. Chap. 5. ver. 17.
and 18. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially those that labor in the word and Doctrine. Which honor is
expressed by the Analogy of that law, ver. 18. not to musle up the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn. And this is certainly due to Elders, for
all, that is the work or Elders, whether performed apart or together by way of
jurisdiction in a Presbytery; And it cannot be denied, but that their constant
ruling as in the Presbytery, is one great part of the work of Elders, and so
must be here intended, for which an especial honor is due. And as they are to
feed all and every one in the flock, as Acts 20. ver. 28. so maintenance and
honor is due from all this people to all and every one of these Elders, as
well to those that rule, as those that labor in the word and Doctrine. And in
reason, if the Elders that rule well (and perform the lesser acts of ruling)
in their particular Congregations, and the Presbyteries thereof are to have
this honor in their relations, then all those Elders that rule well in the
common Presbytery (and perform the greatest acts of ruling) are to have the
like from all that Classical Church, the emphasis being put upon ruling well,
and in those acts done by them the excellency of ruling consists, and the
precept is not to honor Presbyteries in some abstract notion, but Elders:
because the particular persons of the Elders are to be the object of it, and
those most who excel most in that rule, that rule well or best; but when there
are many Congregations that have their proper fixed Pastors and Elders whom
they maintain for performing one part of the Elders work (for they perform
but one part of it) how shall they perform this due to all the rest for that
other part of it? and it is due from every person as he is able, or he cannot
perform his duty, how burdensome, how confused would this be? And then how to
proportion this, suppose it should not be maintenance, but honor and esteem,
this people will not be able to judge, not only for that they cannot be present
at their work and so cannot judge of it, but because either it must be
proportioned to them as constant Preaching-Elders, or as Ruling; not as to
Preaching Elders, for they labor not to them as such; the ground upon which it
is required is, That they tread out their Corn, and to honor and esteem them
as Ruling Elders only, were to honor preaching Elders below the rank and
degree of their Office. So

Secondly, It brings the like Incongruities upon the performance of those
duties of Elders, which the New Testament indifferently requires of all those
that it acknowledges to be Elders unto a people, and therefore no such
constant relation of Elders to so many Churches may be. As first, Praying with
the sick, Send for the Elders of the Church to pray for them, James chap. 5.
ver. 14. What, are these Elders of a Presbyteriall Church bound hereto? this
duty lies in common upon Elders of Churches, and how shall we distinguish when
the Scripture does not. Secondly, Visiting from house to house, as Paul in his
example instructs the Elders of Ephesus, Acts chap. 20. ver. 20. Thirdly,
Watching over men's souls, as those that must give an account, Heb. chap. 13.
ver. 17. To watch, is not to stay till causes are brought by appeals or so
from the Congregations, but personally to observe and oversee them, as souls
committed to them, which they must give an account for. Fourthly, Of Preaching,
If Preaching Elders in season and out of season. The Bishops, they said the
flock was theirs, and the whole care committed to them: and to salve the
incongruity of not being able to preach themselves to them, they professed a
derivative delegated power to inferior Pastors, whom they called their Curats.
This was plain dealing: but these Elders make all the whole flock theirs, and
this from those Scriptures that speak of Elders and flock, and themselves not
Curats, and so personally obliged according to the rules in Scripture, and yet
cannot perform it, which is a worse Incongruitie.

If it be said, that they may part these duties among them, ubi Scriptura non
distinguit, nec nos debemus distinguere. Now all those duties that are spoken
of Elders to the flocks, they are without distinction, as in respect of the
object to whom they are extended. Paul says to those of Ephesus, Feed the
flock. Peter the like to those he writes to, The flock, (...) respectively, To
feed and to take the oversight of them. The author to the Hebrews, To watch
over their souls; And to the Thessalonians, he describes them to be those that
are over them, and labor and admonish them. When those Injunctions are thus
laid upon all, how shall the conscience of Elders be able to part and
distinguish their discharge of them, and to say, though I am an Elder in common
to all in these Congregations, yet I am bound but to govern them in greater
matters, and to admonish them as with others, when publicly met in a
Consistory, and am bound to no other acts of Eldership; and yet to this
particular Congregation, I am obliged to private admonition, rule,
watchfulness, etc. Where has the Scripture set these bounds, or thus parted
them? And therefore certainly all these places hold forth singly, only the
Elders and their duties of a particular Church fixed thereto, as knowing no
other: 'Twas necessary Christ should have set the bounds and given the
distinction, and not indifferently lay all these upon all. And either in these
places the duties of Elders in a common Presbytery are contained, and that,
under the notion of Elders to those, or they are not to be found in the New
Testament; And all these may be brought in several Arguments alone by
themselves against the maine Proposition, though here they come in only as
branches of the Minor.

Lastly, This is inconsistent with the ordinary way of the Call of Elders held
forth in the word, and the Principles of the Reformed Churches.

There are two parts of this Call. First, Choice. Secondly, Ordination.

First for Choice, Chamier in the name of all the Reformed Churches, allows
the people this, the approbation of their Elders, and so in Scotland. And if
the Apostles themselves allowed them the choice of the Deacons that had the
charge of the Church treasury, and took care of their bodies; then much more of
their Elders that have to do with their consciences. Look what ever right of
the people is in the choice of them that should preach to them, there is as
much reason they should have the exercise of it in the choice of those Elders
that in a common Presbytery do rule over them, for they perform one part of
the Elders duty, namely Ruling, as the Preaching Elders do the other; and
therefore by the equity of the same law, that speaks of Elders indefinitely,
if they choose any Elders as Elders to them, they are to choose these also,
there being no distinction put of choosing Preaching Elders only, but Elders
indefinitely* And further, the greatest and highest acts of power over them,
are committed in an ordinary way unto them, as of Excommunication, of all
punishments the most formidable, there is put as much, if not more then every
man's life (that is a member of that Classical Church) into their hands, the
enjoyment of all Ordinances for ever: And so the power of deposing their
Ministers already fixed to them, and of refusing to ordain them, they shall
approve; And therefore in antiquity, of all other the persons of the Bishops,
who had the power of all those, were chosen by all the people, and by
Panegyricall meetings* And it is strengthened by this further parallel; A
Ministers Call has two parts, first, Ordination, which belongs to the Elders.
Secondly Choice, in which the people have some interest: These Elders as Elders
in common, and these Congregations as one Church be relatives, and so that
interest which a Church, qua Church has, is commensurable to the interest of
these Elders, qua Elders: If therefore in ordaining, all the Elders in a common
Presbytery, do join to ordain an Officer, then all the people, qua Church,
must join in choosing or approving him; neither can their common right of
choosing be swallowed up by the interest of their Elders ordaining him. And if
it be said they all choose by virtue of the general law of combination, as in
the Shires Parliament men; The constitution of the State makes the one, if the
like be found in Scripture it will be sufficient; but if not, but that this
interest must be common to the people of the Classical Church, it is asked
when a fixed Pastor is to be chosen to a particular charge, what Office he
shall be chosen to by the people of the other Congregation? Not to a Pastors
Office, he is not to be such to them; if to be a Ruling Elder only, then
besides that he has two Offices as before; so now he must have two choices and
two Ordinations: We choose him for our Pastor, says the particular Church he
belongs to, and we, say the other, to Ruling. And besides, in his Ordination,
the people have an interest of presence and joining in the fasting and prayer
at his Ordination: and this therefore must be performed, either in a
panegyricall meeting of all, which cannot be, or in all the several Churches,
which will multiply the Ordination of them.

The major Proposition confirmed.
IN regard that the maine Argumentation of such as contend for a Presbyteriall
government (as in their writings and otherwise appears) is from the mention
of the Elders of such and such a Church as, Jerusalem, etc. having many
Congregations (as they suppose) the consequence of the Major was taken so much
for granted as on all sides agreed on, as it was less insisted upon the first
day; but being denied and answered thus, that they bear not the relation of
Elders, but of a Presbytery, because, quod convenit toti qua toti non convenit
cuilibet parti; And that if Elders, yet in sensu composito non diviso, As a
Colonel is a Colonel to a particular Regiment, but in a Council of War, not
so to all Regiments: A head of a particular Tribe is an head to his own Tribe
divisively, but not so to all the Tribes, and the like.

For that Logical Axiom, it is true, quod convenit toti qua toti non convenit
cuilibet parti, and so here, that which does competere toti, to the whole of
these Elders, belongs not to every part; for take them all as met together,
they are a Presbytery, and accordingly each Elder is not a Presbytery to all
these Congregations, nor does the Argument suppose it, but only that if they be
a common Presbytery to all these Congregations, that they then bear the
relation of Elders. As take an heap of stones, it is true each stone is not an
heap of stones, but each stone is a stone in that heap. So this Company of
Elders, must be supposed both a Presbytery, and also Elders to this whole
people and every member of them: which is farther proved thus;

1. The Scriptures would have the people look at them and honor them as
Elders in all acts of ruling as well as in preaching, and especially wherein
the most and chief of ruling lies, and wherein the excellency of their ruling
is seen; They rule most and best when met in this common Presbytery; upon that
relation we are to honor them, as performing this rule, and under that
relation they must be said to perform it: The Elders that rule well, are
worthy of double honor, especially those that labor in the word and Doctrine.
Tim. Epist. 1. chap. 5. ver. 17. And besides, otherwise we destroy the relation
of Elders, qua Elders, in the highest acts of governing, which are exercised
only in a Presbytery.

2. The New Testament does indifferently and promiscuously use the word
Presbytery and the word Elders, of the same persons in relation to the same
people; and therefore to whom these Elders are supposed to be a Presbytery,
they must bear the relation of Elders, Matthew chap. 21. 23. those that are
called Elders of the people, are called, Luke 22. (...), the Presbytery of the
people: so as if they related as a Presbytery to the people, to the same
people they related as Elders.

Secondly, For that distinction of their being Elders only in a community to
all those Congregations as one Church, in sensu aggregato, but not in sensu
diviso, to every person thereof, as was instanced in Burgesses, etc. First,
This Church as it is totum aggregatum, is but an abstract notion, but the rule
and government of the Elders in a Presbytery, falls upon persons in
particular, and every member of that Church; if therefore they be Elders in the
Presbytery to that Church, it must be that they are Elders to every person
therein. Again it must be remembered where we are, namely upon what the
Scriptures hold forth, so the Proposition runs. And if there had been those
differing relations of Elders, which from those similitudes in Commonwealths,
Armies, and the Universities are given, it were necessary the Scripture should
have held it forth by like differing names and respects, or by differing
charges whereby it might appear that this relation obliges them to this duty,
and this other relation to that, which being not done is therefore to us a
fiction. That it was necessary appears from the instances themselves, As in
that of the Tribes, there were general Elders of all the Tribes, and there
were (and perhaps some of them the same men) that were Heads and Elders of the
particular Tribes. But as this was a differing relation and respect in the
same, or diverse persons, so they had names and titles of difference and
distinction: For the Heads general as we may call them, were called Elders of
the people. The particular Elders of particular Matthew. 21. 33.
Tribes, were called by way of distinction from them, Elders of such Cities,
Families, etc. And there were as distinct laws given in such cases, the Elders
of the several Tribes did such and such particulars in their Tribes
respectively, and the general Elders had reserved cases of Blasphemy, etc. set
down by the Law. So in that instance of the Heads of Colleges, and Heads of
the University, there is as a differing, so a distinguishing Character: the
names are changed, the particular bodies are called Colleges, the general
Body the University, and their several special relations to their Colleges
is expressed by the Title of Masters of such and such Colleges, and the other
by the title of Heads to the University. Yea, and accordingly there are
differing statutes, the local statutes for each College a part, or for
Colleges as Colleges, and the duties of Masters in their special relations,
and there are statutes for the University and their duties as Heads thereof:
and this distinction and difference was necessary, if there were this differing
relation. But for the case in hand, if we come to the New Testament to find
out these several jurisdictions and relations of Elders, therein we still
read but simply and singly Elders and Churches as Relatives, no such note of
distinction. And also speaking of the duties of Elders to the people, and
people to Elders, it speaks simularly and univocally: so as whoever will take
upon them to be Elders, all those duties fall upon them, let them distinguish
how they can. And to confirm this, the Instances in the Minor serve. And where
the Scripture does not distinguish, we are not to distinguish. And if the
Elders of a particular Congregation are Elders to that Church, both in sensu
diviso and every member thereof, and also in sensu composito, in their
Presbyteries unto the whole, then those general Elders must bear the like
relation to that Classical Church and every Member of it, else the difference
is so vast, and the consequent difference of duties thereupon depending such,
as it was necessary a distinction should have been made in Scripture, that each
might know their duties.

If all the Records, Laws, and Ruled cases of this Kingdom, should in setting
down the ordinary government thereof, have made mention only and singly of
Burgesses (as the Rulers) and of Corporations (as the Correlate to them) and
used no other distinguishing word, and there were undeniably Burgesses of every
Incorporate Town continued from antiquity: if any would afterward pretend
that this word Corporation was intended by our Ancestors to import an
Association or Community of many of these Corporations into one Shire, and that
by Burgesses of those Corporations were meant a community of all those
Burgesses in one body for government, and so pretend the same names without
distinction, and say they were also meant: yea, and further, if the Laws and
Charters concerning such Burgesses in each Corporation, the duties given them
in charge by the laws in their relations to their Corporations, did run
without any distinction of what the Burgesses in the supposed greater
Corporation should do, in that relation and community from what the same
Burgesses in their lesser Corporations in a more proper relation: Yea, and if
the Duties set down in those laws mutually between Corporations and those
Burgesses should argue an inconsistency with the government of Burgesses over
many Corporations in common (as the minor here shows it to be in our case) but
all naturally fall in with that of Burgesses over single Corporations: In this
case to say that therefore this Kingdom did hold forth, there might not be
(that is according to the laws thereof) such a government of the Burgesses of
Corporations over many, were not this a right way of arguing to overthrow such
a pretense.

And if in answer to such arguments it should be said, that both these might be
consistent: For that in foreign States, and Kingdoms, and Societies, there are
Burgesses of particular Corporations, and there are Burgesses in an Assembly of
Parliament, so called by way of distinction, met in common, for the ordinary
government of all those Corporations in common, and therefore the like may be
here in this. The reply were easy, that what ever such distinction there is in
other States, yet the question is of such Burgesses as the Laws of this State
hold forth, the question is of such Burgesses as this Kingdom has set up,
where there is no distinction of Burgesses of Corporations, and Burgesses in
Parliament mentioned. But on the contrary only, one single uniforme style and
title in the laws, namely, Burgesses of the Corporation, and duties suited
thereunto. Now parallel to this case are our Arguments, and the Answers given
thereto. Lastly, if they be Elders only in sensu aggregato, yet so far as
they are acknowledged thus Elders, so far will many of the incongruities in
the minor follow them, and fall upon them, as that still they are but merely
ruling Elders, and that there be Deacons in sensu aggregato.

Reasons against, and exceptions to the first proof of the first Assertion.
viz. That the Church of Jerusalem consists of more Congregations then one
from the multitude of Believers.
FIrst Reasons to show there were not more then could meet in one place.

The Holy Ghost has from first to last as on purpose showed this, as if his
scope had been aforehand to prevent and to preclude all reasonings to the
contrary.

1. In the beginnings of that Church, their meetings are set out to us by two
Adjuncts. First, that they met (...), with one accord in the same duty of
prayer, Acts Chap. 1. Verse 14. And secondly, (...), together in one and the
same company, Verse 15. Which therefore is there and usually translated in one
place. And that here by these words the intent of the Holy Ghost is to show
their meeting in one and the same Assembly, is evident. For whereas in the 15
Verse it is said, Peter stood up in the midst of them, as therefore being
present together in one company, he adds, And the number of them that were
(...), that is, Present together in company, were an hundred and twenty.

2. Then Chap. 2. Verse 1. Another meeting of theirs for worship at Pentecost
is continued to be expressed in the same phrases a second time, They were all
with one accord in one place.

3. Then when about three thousand, yet still some of their meetings then for
some acts of worship are recorded to have been as before with one accord, as
joining unanimously in the same duty, and in stead of that former expression
(...) used of the former meetings, there is the mention of the place it self,
where they met, set down to supply it, and so to interpret it, and shows it
was still in one Assembly, Verse 46. They continued daily with one accord in
the Temple, as mentioning the very place where they had their most frequent
meetings which were for hearing, as being there altogether in one Assembly; and
not as coming thither only for Jewish worship: For it is said of these as of
the former meetings mentioned, which were proper to themselves, That they
continued with one accord. And though they held these meetings in this place
for preaching, that the Jews might be present to hear, etc. Yet that hindered
not, but it was a Church meeting to them, wherein they continued with one
accord; which expression is still used of al their Christian meetings throughout
this Story, Acts 1. 14. Acts 4. 24. Acts 5. 12. Acts 15. 25.

4. When there was a further addition to these, Chap. 5. Verse 1. (whether to
five thousand or no is spoken to afterward) yet in that Chapter, he making a
description of their State, in almost all the very same particulars by which he
had done it before, Chap. 2. from Verse 43. unto the end (as by the parallel
comparing of these two passages of the Story will appear;) he lastly speaking
of a meeting of theirs (which is the point in hand) as carefully puts in, as in
the former. Verse 14. And they were all with one accord in Solomon's Porch, the
same words he had used Chap. 2. Verse 46. Their union and joining together with
one accord being carefully indigitated, and the place named in stead of (...),
as was observed before. And that the [All that met] were not the Apostles only,
appears not only by the forementioned parallel of this with Chap. 2. Verse 46.
where their being with one accord in the Temple, is spoken of all the
multitude, and so here. But secondly, that all the Apostles should be met with
one accord in any duty, and not the people who are said to continue in the
Apostles Doctrine and Prayer, and (...) or with one accord still in the story
of this Church referring to communion in some holy duty, as Chap. 1. Verse 14.
and Chap. 4. Verse 24. is most unlikely. And Solomon's Porch was a place large
enough to hold them, and fitted for preaching and to hear, which in John 10.
Verse 22. is called the Temple; and so is the place intended in Acts 2. Verse
46. They met in the Temple, that is, in the Porch of Solomon. It was the outer
Court as Josephus lib. 20. cap. 8. It was the place where CHRIST used to walk
and preach, and the Apostles also, Chap. 3. Verse 11. The multitude ran to
Solomon's Porch.

5. When again upon mention of this multiplication of Disciples, the Deacons
are to be chosen, the Apostles called the multitude Chap. 6. Ver. 2. and not
persons selected, but all; for Verse 5. they are called the whole multitude,
and they are spoken to as together, For the saying pleased the whole, and the
whole chose seven men out from among them, and set them before the Apostles,
Ver* 6. as being in one place together, and they prayed (in which the multitude
had an interest to join with them) and laid on them hands. And this meeting
was certainly a Church meeting, and yet still in some one place; and therefore
though it might follow that always they should not have met together in one,
yet they both did and could.

6. After that great dispersion mentioned Chap. 8. ver. 1. Then as they might
more conveniently meet in one place and assembly, so that they did so, it is as
carefully recorded, that so the Holy Ghost might hold forth this from the first
unto the last mention of this Church, Acts 15. Acts 21. 22. The multitude must
needs come together. And to interpret (...), or with one accord, which the Holy
Ghost carries through all, to be intended of the joining of the same persons in
the same act of worship (for which they still did meet) is genuine; for it
imports that which is the spirit and life of public worship, which of all
other actions done by a multitude is to have the nearest union of spirits, as
that wherein the Communion of Saints in worship consists. And then naming the
place where they met also it must needs import Oneness of Assembly, which also
holds forth in this example this duty* That as Saints when met in worship
should join with one accord, so living in a place together, should as far as
possibly may, join themselves to one Assembly; and this carries with it such
an appearance as is not in the other sense. And that the Holy Ghost should in
the same Story of the same Church set forth the unity of their first meetings,
as in one and the same individual Assembly, by this expression of being in
one, and with one accord, Acts* Chap. 1. Chap. 2. and in the next mention not
far off, carry along one of the same expressions, namely [ with one accord]
and together therewith shall name the place of their meeting, and yet in the
latter intend not One, but meetings in several companies in that place. This
we humbly submit to better judgments.

Secondly Exceptions.
1. For the mention of five thousand, Chap. 4. Verse 4. This cannot be evinced
from that place that the five thousand were a new number added to the three
thousand. The words are these, Howbeit many of them that heard the word,
believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand. But that this
number of five thousand should refer to them that believed, is not certain;
seeing both the Greek will bear it and favor it, as well to be meant of the
number that heard, as of the men that believed; and of the two, that former is
the more probable, that he should say of the men that heard they were five
thousand, and that of them that heard many believed, this sounds well, and is
no way forced; but five thousand men to be converted at once, is that which was
never before nor since. And the great conversion that our Divines have instanced
in, is the three thousand, Acts Chap. 2. and not in this five thousand. And if
the scope of the Holy Ghost therein, why the number of the men that heard
should be here reckoned to be five thousand be asked after, it was to show what
had occasioned the persecution which he had spoken of in the Verse before.
Namely this, that such a multitude of the people should be taught and preached
to; this fretted the Pharisees that came upon Peter and John; and with this
agrees Beza in 2 Cor. ^. ^3 Steph. Budeus, Eu^^ath.
the second Verse, that they were grieved they taught the people; the effect
whereof is, that many of them that heard believed, notwithstanding this
persecution, but how many of these is not certain. And Beza and Calvin and
many others of our protestant Writers judge this number not to be of this new
accession of Converts, but the total number including the former, and the
(...), although translated men, is when put alone (as there) all one with (...)
Females, as well as Males, which especially may be so taken, because it is
spoken of such a promiscuous auditory. And if any should affirm it meant of
Males only, and them now converted, it would make a greater Miracle then any
other recorded, especially when the people are said to be converted, Verse 2.
that did alike run to see the Miracle.

2 Exception is, That it may be supposed that all that are mentioned to be
converted remained not constant members of that Church abiding at Jerusalem
until the dispersion; and so, though the Holy Ghosts scope may be to show the
increase of Converts to the faith, yet not of such as continued all that while
at Jerusalem; and our reasons for that are these.

First those three thousand who were converted, Chap. 2. were not settled
dwellers at Jerusalem, but strangers, Commorants of the ten Tribes, which were
dispersed in all those Countries mentioned in the 2 Chapter, Verse 9. who came
up to the feast of Pentecost, as the manner of the Jews was, Acts 21. 20, 27,
28. Jews that lived in Asia came to the feast of Pentecost as Paul also did,
compared with Acts 20. 16. And the word which is translated Dwellers at
Jerusalem, is interpreted by an eminent Critic, Sojourners at Jerusalem during
this Feast, although the word Mede Diatribe.
signifies both, and to that end quotes the Septuagint in 1. Kings 17. 20.
where Elijah cries unto the Lord, saying, O Lord my God have thou also brought
evil upon the Widow, (...) with whom I sojourne only? and that which
confirms it is, that they are said to be dwellers or inhabitants of
Mesopotamia and Judea, and Capadocea, Verse 9. They could not fixedly belong as
dwellers to both, they were therefore rather sojourners in Jerusalem now at the
Feast, though fixed dwellers in all those places: For if they were fixed
dwellers in Jerusalem, to what end whilst they were at Jerusalem should the
Evangelist tell us they were sojourners in Mesopotamia; and they must needs
rather be dwellers there, because they are said to understand every one his own
language. And that which strengthens this is, that in the Greek there is this
difference in the words in Verses 5 and 9. in that they are said (...) in
Jerusalem. As for the present there, yea, and as to come (...) from out of
every Nation: but in the 9 Verse he changes it, and says, (...), as
inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and those other Countries where their fixed
possessions were. And therefore Verse 14. he calls them Men, Jews and Dwellers
at Jerusalem, as two sorts, and Verse 22. Men of Israel; the style given those
of the ten Tribes scattered, Men devout, as Verse 5. who came up at those
solemn times, having wives and children and their families at home, to whom
they used after a time to return. Now although these were added and made
members of that Church, and are said to continue in the Apostles doctrine: yet
that will not necessarily imply that they continued all the time till the
dispersion at Jerusalem; but whilst they were there, they were (...), that is,
they cleaved to the Apostles: but to think that many of them coming as
strangers should not go down to their wives and children, which Nature taught
them to provide for, and religion taught them to take care of their souls, or
fetch them up to them: so as this might well be a fluid Church, ebbing and
flowing as touching the residence of its members: yea, some of these were of
Judea, Verse 9. and so of the Country about; and of them might be Churches
erected in their proper dwellings is rationally supposable. For in that
persecution in Acts 8. 1. it is said that Paul persecuted Disciples in other
places then at Jerusalem, Acts 26. 10. Which things I also did at Jerusalem,
(says he) and in other places at Damascus. And also it is confirmed by this,
that upon the ceasing of Paul's persecution it is said Acts 9. 31. then had the
Churches rest through Judea and Galilee, and are said to be at rest in
distinction from the persecution raised, Chap. 8. 1.

3 Exception is, that they in those Countries and times had often great
Assemblies consisting of many thousands hearers at once, that did and could
hear, Luke 12. 1. Christ preached to Myriads, many thousands; and Acts 13. 45.
almost a whole City came to hear the word of God by Paul. And at Charenton,
how many thousands may and do hear, is well known; and so in many places of
England. And Moses sometime spoke in the ears of all the people, and so Ezra
Chapter 10. Verse 9. and 10. And it is known by experience, that as in hot
Countries they may see as far again, through the pureness of the air, so
they may hear at a far greater distance, then in our colder Climate.

4 Exception is, that this being the first Church, and whereof all the Apostles
were the Officers, those therefore that dwelt there would certainly abide
together as one Church without parting or dividing, even till they came to the
utmost proportion that the constitution of a Church was capable of; and so
Maximum quod sic, And continue together in one, for the more united strength
and glory of holding forth the name of Christ in one body, united for the
honor of Religion and communicating in Ordinances together.

5 Exception is, that they had during all this time of their multitudes until
the persecution of Paul arose, the greatest freedom and liberty even to the
utmost; for the people magnified them, Chap. 5. Verse 12. they had favor with
all the people, Chap. 2. Verse 47. Insomuch, that although the Rulers fell upon
two of them, John and Peter, yet they were enforced to let them go, finding
nothing how to punish them, because of the people, Chapter 4. 21. Besides that,
it was no new thing amongst the Jews for Sects to have great multitudes to
follow and cleave to them, and to preach in any place, as in Spain and Italy,
and to baptize openly as John and Christ did.

Reasons and Answers to the Appendix added to the former Proofs, viz. That the
dispersion mentioned in Acts 8. 1. does not simply prove such a scattering, as
that there might not remain more Congregations then one in that Church, Acts
9. 31. Acts 12. 24. Acts 21. 20.
THus having showed the multitudes not arising to that number, but, that they
might meet in one, now after the dispersion much less, and to that end let the
greatness of the Persecution be considered to demonstrate the greatness of
this dispersion; Its called not a Persecution only, but a great Persecution,
both extensively and intensively, for the extent of it to all sorts of persons,
entering into every house, verse 3. and for the height of it, it being to
imprisonment, even unto death, Chap. 22. 4. Acts 26. 10. It is also called, a
making havoc of the Church, verse. 9. The object of this Persecution was not
Preachers only but Christians of all sorts indifferently, for it is said
indefinitely to be upon the Church, verse. 1. and verse. 3. It is called an
entering into every house, hayling men and women: and in Chap. 26. Paul speaking
of this very Persecution (wherein he had a special hand) says verse. 10. that
he imprisoned many of the Saints (not Preachers only) and ver. 9. his aim was
promiscuously against the Name of Jesus, and so any that professed his Name:
Unto this end compare the varying the expression used by the Holy Ghost, when
speaking of this Persecution, and of another mentioned Acts 12. 1. there it is
said, Herod stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church; but here
it is against the Church in Jerusalem, Men and women in every house, and all
except the Apostles; the word (...) [ except] there is to show, that none of
the Apostles were scattered, though the generality of others were; if men
guifted fled away, then others also, except we suppose the people more
courageous to stay by it then the Teachers. And whereas it is said, that these
that were dispersed, went about preaching the word, verse. 4. First, It argues
not that Preachers only or chiefly were dispersed; for (as Calvin says) it
comes in to show what was the fruit of the dispersion; and we may well suppose
women and whole families to have been scattered abroad, who yet preached not:
And secondly, It was ordinary in those times, for men that were not by Office
Ministers, occasionally to teach the word in private ways of converse, yea and
otherwise; And that is not called teaching, which is by way of Sermon to a
multitude, for verse. 25. of this chap. Philip in private conference taught the
Eunuch, as Aquila and Priscilla taught Apollos; and they are not called (...),
as having an Office, but (...), as referring to the act, the work they did; And
that the word seems to sound as if they made it their work. It may well be
attributed to the zeal of those days to gain Proselites, and not to an
Office committed to them; they went not forth by mission but persecution; And
here the many Congregations are brought but to an (it might be) and the grand
Proposition it self, is but an (it may be,) And how can it may be, be proved
by an it might be? especially in such things as need have a strong foundation
for matters upon which so great alterations are like to be made: But it is
said, that it appears that there were multitudes of believers there after that
time, by Acts 9. 31. Acts 12. 24. Acts 21. 20.

First, For Acts 9. 31. (...), signifies not ordinarily a great number made up,
but an increase ( Matthew. 21. 12. and 1 Pet. 1. 2. Grace be multiplied, it is
the same word) not in number, but in measure. Again they are the Churches of
Judea, Galilee, and of Samaria; But what is all this to prove that there were
so many in the Church of Jerusalem as could not meet in one? For Acts 21. 20.
(...) how many thousands does not argue it; For first it was the Feast of
Pentecost, when Paul came now up to Jerusalem in Acts 20. 16. it is said of
this journey, that he ^asted if possible, to be at Jerusalem upon the day of
Pentecost: When the Jews out of all quarters came to Jerusalem, and the great
concourse that then would be there at the Feast, moved him to aim to be there
at that time; And by the journall of Paul thither, from his first setting out
from Philippi, chap. 20. ver. 6. which was when the Passover was ended, eight
weeks before this ensuing Feast of Pentecost, and also by computing the days
of his travailing, which the Holy Ghost has recorded, verse. 16. 21. Acts 21.
2. it appears he came in few weeks unto Tire, but 40. miles off from
Jerusalem, time enough to come to the Feast; and no wonder if at the Feast he
found thousands of the Jews, and this is confirmed by the 27 verse, for the
Jews which laid hold on him in the Temple, were as it is said, Jews of Asia,
not of Judea. Secondly, The word (...), being put without any other word of
number, signifies no more then a great multitude; as (...), or a greatness, as
(...) as Plato has it; and being put indefinitely, is all one to say
thousands, or many; as the Latins also use a definite for an indefinite, as
Sexcenta possum proferr^ decreta, as Tully speaks.

To the second Proof of the first Head.
By the many Apostles and other Preachers in this Church of Jerusalem; For if
there were but one Congregation, then each Apostle preached but seldom, which
will not stand with Acts 6. 2.

First, For the Apostles.
THey took all opportunities to fill their hands with work, preaching daily
in the Temple and in every house, Acts 5. 42. Chap. 2. 46. Paul also taught in
Ephesus, as publicly in the Congregation, so from house to house, Acts 20. 20.
Also when any in the places abroad in Judea, or else where, were converted (and
many Churches were then erected in Judea) the Apostles went abroad, as Chap. 8.
shows; and besides, how were the twelve employed, when for forty days they
met in an upper room, Acts 1. and had but an hundred and twenty for their
flock.

Secondly, For the many Teachers.
In those times there were many guifted men that were not Officers, who
occasionally instructed others, as Aquila did Apollos, yea those gifts were so
plentiful, that in that one Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. 23. almost all of
them had Doctrines, Prophesying, speaking with tongues, and yet these were not
Officers, so as if Congregations should be multiplied according to the number
of such guifted men, then there would have been almost as many Teachers as
members of Congregations. And the pouring out of the Holy Ghost, which was more
ordinary then, did not make every man a Teacher by Office, for then all those
in Samaria should have been made teachers, Acts 8. And that not any of those
were in Office, seems evident by this; That when the Deacons were chosen,
Chap. 6. there is no mention made of Elders in their Ordination, in which if
any Elders had been, they had had an interest: We read Acts 15. When there
were Elders, though Apostles were also then in that Church, both are mentioned
together. And it appears the Apostles had managed all the affairs of that
Church until then; those Deacons being the first choice of any sort of
Officers, the work of Administration of all sorts having layen on the Apostles
hands.

To the third Proof of the first Head.
The diversity of Languages amongst the Believers, Acts 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. and
Acts the 6. does argue more Congregations then one in the Church of Jerusalem.

FIrst, It Is true, there were in that second of the Acts, Out of all Nations
that heard the Apostles speak in the several Languages of the Countries they
were borne in; but yet these were all either Jews or Proselites, (...),
worshippers, as ver. 5. who came up to worship, and some parts of the worship
were audible; and though borne in other Countries (the Jews being dispersed)
yet all were generally learned, and understood the Hebrew tongue, the language
of their own Nation, even as to this day the Jews and their Children do;
which seems evident from the story in the 20, 21, and 22. Chapters of the
Acts, Paul came up with diverse Grecians to the Feast of Pentecost, Chap. 20.
ver. 4. unto which the Jews out of all quarters came, and being all at a
solemn meeting in the Temple, chap. 21. ver. 27. The Jews out of Asia,
strangers, stirred up all the people against him, and when, chap. 22. ver. 2.
He made a speech to them, and they heard he spoke the Hebrew tongue, they kept
silence and heard him patiently: And further those mentioned Acts 2. did
understand all of them Peter's Sermon; and though others spoke besides Peter to
them in their own language, the wonderful things of God, yet that was but a
preparatorie sign to them; as 1 Cor. 14. 22. making way for their Conversion,
verse. 11, 12, and 13. but the means of their Conversion was Peter's Sermon
after; and it was he also, that gave direction to them all what to do to be
saved: and therefore it must be spoken of some one common tongue, they all
understood, and those gifts of languages given to the Apostles, were not out of
a necessity to instruct those new Converts only, but to fit them when they
should go abroad into all the world, and to be a sign to the Jews at present
to convince them.

Secondly, for the Grecian Widows, Acts 6. the Hellenists that lived amongst
the Jews, might well be supposed to understand Hebrew; and that these had not
several Congregations from the rest, appears by this; That the whole
multitude together met, and chose the Deacons, It was a joint act, and if of
differing languages, wherein the one understand not the other, occasioning such
a distinction of Congregations (as the Proof would hold forth) how could they
all have agreed in one meeting on the same man? but the argument as well holds
against the Presbyteriall Association of those Congregations into one Church,
people and Elders, unto which and in the communion and exercise whereof such
Correspondencies and Intercourses are needful, as they require one common
language.

To the second Branch of this Argument.
That all these Congregations were under one Presbyteriall GOVERNMENT.

PROOFS.
1. Because they were but one Church.

Though it be one, yet they not being more then could meet in one, the
Argument concludes not.

2 Proof. The Elders of that Church are mentioned.

There is no mention of any Elders in this Church, until after the aforesaid
Dispersion, Act. 8. And so the weight of this Argument will depend upon the
proof of this; That after the dispersion there were many Congregations, which
the Reverend Assembly does not so positively affirm. The proof of their being
such a Presbytery as the Proposition intends, does depend upon this their being
called Elders to that Church, we no where read them called a Presbytery, and
that therefore they are Elders, but they are therefore a Presbytery (as here it
is argued) because they are Elders to that Church; Now if they be Elders in
common, because a Presbytery, (as was said in answer to the first Argument)
then they are not to be argued a Presbytery only, because they are Elders in
Common; For then the Argument runs in Circulo; And the chief and first
reason of their being Elders (for no other is mentioned) is accordingly held
forth in their being Elders to that Church in common, whereas according to
Presbyteriall Principles, there is a primary relation of Elders, qua Elders, to
their particular fixed Congregations.

Reasons against the third Proof of the second Branch, viz. That the Apostles
did the ordinary Acts of Presbyters as Presbyters in the Church of Jerusalem,
does prove a Presbyteriall Government in that Church before the dispersion.
The Proof of the whole depends upon this Proposition: for though before the
dispersion there had been many Congregations, yet not under Elders, but
Apostles: Now it is granted that the substance of Ministerial Acts were one
and the same in Apostles and Evangelists who were extraordinary, and in other
ordinary Ministers. But first, though for the Act of Ministerial power, it was
the same in the Apostles, and them, yet in the extent of power (which is the
point in question) therein the Apostles Jurisdiction over many Congregations is
not the pattern of Presbyteriall Elders over many, for the Apostles power was
universal over all Churches, and upon that was founded their power over those
Congregations supposed many; And Episcopacie may as strongly argue and infer,
that because in Crete (by Apostolical warrant) One man [Titus] did ordain
Elders, etc. That therefore there may be one man [ a Bishop] that has power
to ordain, etc. in and over several Churches. And this Argument will be
stronger from the instance of an Evangelist, for Episcopal power then this of
Apostolical* government, for the Presbyteriall, by how much it is the more
inferior Office, but that of the Apostles is more immediate and transcendent,
and so the power of an Evangelist is nearer to an ordinary succession, and it
will as well follow, that any one Presbyter alone might govern many
Congregations, because one of these Apostles might, as that because the
Apostles did govern these jointly, that therefore many Presbyters over
several Congregations may.

Secondly, each of these Apostles, as he had by virtue of his Apostolical
Commission the power of them all, so he had relation of Ministry unto all
these supposed Congregations unto every person thereof for the performance of
all sorts of duties, of preaching to them, admonishing them, etc. But thus in
the Presbyteriall government over many Congregations fixed, and their Pastors
and Elders fixed to them, the several Elders are denied to have the relation
of Elders to each Congregation, but make up only an Eldership in common as
united over all these. But the Apostles here have the relation to both, and
therefore if this Apostolical frame be made a Pattern, then it follows that
all the Elders of these Congregations were directly and immediately Elders to
each Congregation and every member of them, and not only of a common
Presbytery, for so the Apostles were.

If it be alleged that those acts of government, performed by them in that
Church, were for the substance of them ordinary Acts, such as Presbyters
perform, and that therefore answerably their persons themselves are in them to
be considered as Elders, because that the Apostles were not only Apostles,
but Elders also, as John Epistle 2. Verse 1. And Peter Epist. 1. Chap. 5. Verse.
1. and therefore might and did act as Elders in ordinary Acts of Church
government, and are therefore therein to be looked at, as a just pattern to
us, and to have ruled these Congregations of Jerusalem as a College or body of
Elders united, conedscending so to act as common Presbyters taking the consent
of the Church, as Acts. 6. as likewise they did in every Church where they came
joining with the Eldership thereof, as Elders, and not as Apostles, and
therefore that they might give a pattern, and Example of an ordinary
Presbytery, especially seeing that what they thus did, they did as an united
body to many Congregations considered as one Church.

It is answered to the first, that although the Apostles are called Elders, yet
they are so called virtually, not formally, and but because Apostleship
contains all Offices in it, so as they are Elders but upon this ground, that
they are Apostles, and therefore John in that very Epistle where he styles
himself an Elder, he yet writes Canonical Scripture as an Apostle, and takes
on him to threaten Diotrephes as an Apostle, to remember him, which as a
formal Elder he could not have done; and surely those Offices which Christ
distinguishes, Ephesians 4. He gave some Apostles, some Pastors and Teachers,
the same person is not formally both, though virtually he may be; All that
they did in that Church of Jerusalem they are said to act as Apostles, their
preaching is called the Apostles doctrine, their bringing their moneys to them,
as to the Officers of that Church, is to them not as Elders, but as Apostles,
They laid it down at the Apostles feet; yea in that Act of ordaining the seven
Deacons, it is said, They set them before the Apostles, (Chap. 6. Verse. 6.) and
they laid on their hands; And it is very hard to distinguish and say that the
men were Apostles, but the power they acted by was as Elders, when the name of
an Apostle imports the Office; Yea in that very Act of government about Deacons
they must needs act as Apostles, for they do not simply ordain the men, but
do anew, by virtue of Apostolical authority, institute the Office of Deacons
by declaring Christ's mind, which none but Apostles could immediately and at
first have done, so as the same persons in this same Act instanced in, must act
partly as Apostles, and partly as Elders, and by what infallible rule shall we
distinguish.

To the second, viz. that they acted here as it were in a joint body or in
Collegio over these many Congregations. It is answered, that an Association of
Elders in an Eldership over many is not argued from hence. For first, they had
all singly the same power which they exercised jointly, and that they should
exercise it jointly here to that end to give a pattern for Eldership, is not
easy to prove; they exercised it together, because it fell out that they were
together, and it was fit none of them should be excluded, but it depended not
upon this union of all in a body, as Acts of Elders in a Presbytery do, as
Parliamentary power is not the result of Parliament men, but as assembled in
Parliament; yea and the authority of Jurisdiction thence arises, not so here;
Our Apostle might have done that which all here did, yea may it not be said
that because two Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, ordained Elders in every Church,
Acts 14. as joined in the same Act, and so acting not as Apostles, but jointly,
that therefore two Elders associated may do the like? Secondly, it is hard to
suppose that these Apostles, when all together, should act with an inferior
power to what they put forth in a like case alone. If Peter had been himself
alone in a Church new planted then and there, he must be supposed to act as
an Apostle, because he alone governed; And shall these Apostles, when they are
all in one and join all together in one Act, be yet supposed to fall lower in
their power under the formal exercise of it? Thirdly, if they had acted as
Elders in a College, they might miscarry as Elders do; and so the minor part
of them have been subject to Excommunication of the greater. And what power was
there on earth to have excommunicated an Apostle who held his Office
immediately from Christ, and who whilst he was in that Office had power over
all Churches?

To the third, viz. That they in their Proceedings did join with others.

As in this choice of the Deacons they did join with the multitude, as also
when they came to any other Churches they used to do. Neither does that argue,
that they acted not as Apostles but as Elders. For first, they joined in Acts
with others, and joined others with themselves, wherein they yet acted as
Apostles; thus in writing Scripture they joined others with them, as Paul
joined Silvanus and Timotheus in his Epistle to the Thessalonians; and not
merely in the salutation, for the expressions run in their names also in
that Epistle, and Act. 15. The Apostles, Elders, yea and Brethren joined in a
Letter to the Churches; But these as Apostles (therefore so called in
distinction from the Elders) and the rest according to their several
interests, as the Brethren did all according to their interests, so the Elders
and the Apostles in theirs. So in ordaining Timothy the Presbytery laid on
hands, yet they as a Presbytery and Paul as an Apostle, for else a Presbytery
had not had power to ordain an Evangelist. Yet secondly, the Apostles did
where ever they came leave the Elders and people to the exercise of that right
belonged to them, although they joined with them; neither did therein lie their
Apostolical authority, to do all alone; for then they seldom or never acted
as Apostles in Churches: Paul alone excommunicated not that Corinthian, and yet
as an Apostle wrote to have it done by them, (for it was Canonical Scripture)
and therefore although that this Church of Jerusalem should choose their
Deacons, is a just example of the privilege of a Church (for if the Apostles
when they were present allowed this interest to Churches, then Elders should
much more) yet what the Apostles did by an Apostolical power in these
Congregations* cannot be drawn into example for Officers in that thing wherein
their power Apostolical lay, which was to exercise acts of jurisdiction in
several Churches*

Neither fourthly, will that help it, That they exercised this Government in
these Congregations (supposed many) as considered to be one Church. For if
they acted not as Elders, then the correlate to it, namely, Church, could not
be considered as Presbyteriall.

Reasons against the fourth and last Proof of the second Branch. Viz. That the
Elders did meet together for Acts of Government, Act. 11. ult. Act. 15. 4. 6.
22. Act. 21. 17, 18.
First, the Argument from Acts 11. ult. lies thus, There were Elders in Judea
that received Alms, verse 29* 30. compared; Therefore the Elders of Jerusalem
did meet together for Acts of Government. In this Argument, as the persons are
mistaken, so the Act for the Elders of Jerusalem are not mentioned, but of
Judea, as by comparing verses 29, 30. it appears. And by this it might be as
well argued, that the Elders in Judea met for Presbyteriall Government, as that
the Elders of Jerusalem, seeing their Alms were carried to the Elders of
Judea, as it is there said. The receiving Alms (which is the only Act that is
mentioned) was not an Act of Government, for Deacons may meet to receive Alms,
and yet meet not for Acts of government. For that second place mentioned, Acts
21. 20. where it is said, Paul came in to James, and all the Elders were
present: although we read that all the Elders were present, yet that they met
for Acts of Presbyteriall government, appears not; the occasion of the meeting
was Paul's entertainment, whom some of the brethren had received at his first
coming, verse 17. and now the Elders meet to receive him also. A Christian
duty of love and respect due to so great and famous an Apostle, and Paul went
not as cited, but to visit and salute them, as verse. 19.

Secondly, The Acts that passed were none of them Presbyteriall, for Paul gave
them an Historical relation of what things God had wrought by his Ministry,
the matter of which relation was intended to provoke them as Brethren and
fellow laborers, to glorify God (as ver. 20. is said they did) and not to give
them an account, as to a Consistory, that met for Government. Such narrations
the Apostles made even to whole Churches, as Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, Act.
14. 27. When they had gathered the whole Church together (which Church was of
no more then to meet in one Assembly) they rehearsed in like manner, as here,
all that God had done by them; and how he had opened a door of Faith to the
Gentiles. Neither will the advice they gave to Paul to prevent the scandal and
offense the people would take at him, argue authority, much less government:
Neither was there any Act of Government put forth over their own Churches if
supposed many.

Reasons against the alleging, Act. 15. for the meeting of the Elders of
Jerusalem, for Presbyteriall Acts of Government.
1. If it were a meeting of Elders for Acts of Government, then it was a
Presbyteriall meeting for Acts of Government: But that it was no such meeting
appears, because there was nothing done in it, that may seem to have any bond
in it, but such as bound the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Cilicia, as much as
Jerusalem, but this cannot be in any Presbyteriall meeting, for Acts of
Government: For such meetings have only authoritative power over their own
Church.

2. The scope and end of this meeting was to give satisfaction to the offended
Brethren of Antioch, and dogmatically to declare their judgments in a
difficult case of Conscience, not to put forth any Act of Juridicall power upon
any, as appears in the matter of their debate, and the issue of all. Of which
more fully afterward. And if it be said that Peter reproved some of their own
Members present, such as had taught the necessity of the Ceremonial Law, Why
tempt you God, etc. This was not delivered as an Act of Government formally, by
any vote of the Presbytery, but in the way of Discourse.

But it was affirmed to be sufficient to confirm the Proposition, if it be a
Synodicall meeting. Presbyteriall and Synodicall, both it cannot be; for
Synods, they are or ought to be extraordinary and occasional, Presbyteries
are standing and ordinary, Synods are made up of Commissioners sent from
Presbyteries, and Presbyteries are made up of the Elders of particular
Congregations. The Members of Synods are Elders of such Churches which are
(according to the principles of Presbyteriall Government) complete Churches,
having full power of jurisdiction for all Acts of Government within themselves;
but the members of Presbyteries are Elders of such Congregations which are
neither complete Churches, nor have within themselves full and complete power.
And these cannot be one. The Elders of the Presbytery of Jerusalem, (when this
once became a Synod by the addition of the Elders of other Churches) ceased to
be any longer a Presbytery to that Church, and must become with them a new
body to all the Churches, these other Elders did come from. And then to argue
these Acts done by these (because the Elders of Jerusalem were present and
Members of this Synod) were Presbyteriall Acts of the Elders of Jerusalem, is
all one as to go about to argue from the Acts of Government put forth by a
Parliament at Westminster, to the power of the Burgesses and Common Council of
the City of Westminster, because there the Parliament sits, and the Burgesses
of that City are parts and members of that Parliament. Or, as if the Kingdom
were governed by County Courts, and out of those County Courts, Knights, and
Burgesses should be chosen to make up a Parliament, when the Parliament is
met, there can be no Argument drawn from the power of a Parliament to prove the
power of a County Court. Or from the power of a County Court to prove the power
of a Parliament. Thus Synods are made out of Presbyteries, therefore we cannot
argue from the power of Synods to the power of Presbyteries; or from the power
of Presbyteries to the power of Synods.

But secondly, we deny it to have been such an ordinary formal Synod. The
jurisdiction of Synods is founded upon this necessary requisite thereunto, That
there be Commissioners from all those Churches representing them, present, or
called to be so. And the power of the jurisdiction cannot reach nor extend
further then to such Churches as have sent Commissioners thereunto. The weight
then of this Synodicall power depends on the proof of this, That all those
Churches sent Commissioners to this Assembly, which if either it be not
proved, or the contrary thereunto found true, the authority of those decrees
(as from those Elders here) will prove not to have been Acts of Government,
further then the Apostles authority, who joined in it, was stamped on it; to
affirm that Commissioners from them all were present, because the decrees did
bind them, is to beg what is denied, when another just reason may be given
of their binding, if any such authority were in them: and our reasons to the
contrary are these.

First, We find a deep silence about it: For we read but only of two
Churches between whom it was transacted, they of Antioch sending to Jerusalem,
and their Elders there, Chap. 14. 27, 28. compared with chap. 15. 2, 3. and the
Messengers which were sent from this Assembly going only to Antioch, ver. 30.
31. as those who were chiefly troubled; only the benefit redounded to all
they wrote to, yea, although Paul came through Phenice and Samaria, ver. 3. yet
we read not a word of any of the Churches of those parts, their sending of any
Commissioners unto this Synod, as had it been intended such certainly they
would, and there was this special reason, why those of this Church were thus
electively sent unto, because they were the Mother Church from whom the Word of
God came, and from whom those men that troubled them had gone forth, and had
pretended to teach what they had received from them; and besides they were in
an especial manner versed in this question, it being about the observation of
their law; and there also some of the Apostles were present, (how many we know
not, for dispersed they had been long before) and if any number of others out
of those other parts of Judea, had come up hither, it would have been said, as
Act. 11. ult. The Elders of Judea, not only of Jerusalem; yea, it is not so
much as said, that they that were sent from Antioch were of the Elders of that
Church, but that they sent Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of them.

And secondly, the contrary seems clear, namely, that those Letters and
Decrees were written and sent only from the Elders of Jerusalem, and not from
all those Churches: For first, the Decrees are every where attributed to the
Elders in Jerusalem, So Chap. 16. 4. The Decrees of the Apostles and Elders in
Jerusalem. (...). Now the usual style of the New Testament, is by way of
distinction of Churches to say the Church in such a place, the Elders in such a
place, as the Church of Antioch, Act. 13. 1. and the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor.
1. 1. and by the like reason the Elders in such a place do signify the proper
Elders of the Church in that place or City, whilst but one, and therefore, if
by the Elders in Jerusalem, had been meant in this place only the Elders met
from all Quarters at Jerusalem, as the place of that Assembly, there had been a
great ambiguity, seeing the more usual and proper import of that expression is
to note out the fixed standing Elders of a place, and the Church in a place.
Again, secondly, in the fourth verse Paul and Barnabas are said to be received
of the Church and Apostles and Elders, namely of Jerusalem, as in particular
relation to it. Yea, thirdly, the standing Elders of that place assumed to
themselves to have written the Decrees, Chap. 21. 25. As touching the Gentiles
we have written and concluded. Fourthly, and accordingly the conclusion of
their Letter is made the special Act of that Church, and the Elders thereof,
ver. 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church (that is) of
Jerusalem, as verse 4. to send chosen men, and the Letters run thus, The
Apostles, Elders and Brethren. Fifthly, the matter of the Letter argues it,
ver. 24. Forasmuch as certain that went out from us have troubled you with
words, to whom we gave no such Commandment. How could this be said by a
Synod of the Elders of those Churches, which were themselves troubled by them?
It is manifest therefore they came out from this Church of Jerusalem, who wrote
this, and they pretended the Apostles Doctrine; which is called a Commandment,
because the Apostles taught no other, then what Christ commanded, as Matthew. 28.
ult. And to say the Denomination was from the more eminent part, namely, the
Elders of that Church had been derogatory to the Synod, if it had been such a
meeting. And sixthly, if the Elders of all those Churches had been present,
there had been less need for the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem to have sent
chosen men to carry the Letters, and withal to show the grounds of those their
judgments by word of mouth, ver. 23. 27. 31. This needed not, if their own
Elders had been present, and so had been to have returned; and if they were
sent as Messengers from the Synod, then to all the Churches as well as to
Antioch, and why do they then go no further then unto Antioch? ver. 33. Yea,
and although Paul and Barnabas delivered those results to all the Cities, yet,
as it should seem accidentally and not principally intended, they go not on
purpose chiefly to deliver those decrees, but ver. 36. of chap. 15. it was
Paul's motion upon other grounds to go visit the Churches in every City, where
they had Preached, and so but occasionally delivered these Decrees, Chap. 16.
4. So as they came to them not as sent in a mandatory way, as to Churches
subject to that Synod by a Synodical Law, (as such Canons are used to be sent)
but as the judgment only of this Church, and the Apostles delivered them for
their edification.

And in the third place, If there were any further authority or jurisdiction in
their Decrees, it was from the Apostles, who were present and concurred in it,
and who had power over all the Churches; and accordingly though the Elders in
the whole Church were present and joined with the Apostles, Quantum in se, to
consent and approve their Decrees with that several respective kind of
judgment proper unto them, yet all the authority put forth over these Churches
was that transcendent authority of the Apostles, which is not now left in all
the Elders of the world joined together; and that therefore these Decrees made,
and the decision of these questions here, were by infallible Apostolical
authority, and to that end they subjoyned that Apostolical Seal, It seemed
good to us and the Holy Ghost. And although the ordinary Elders, yea, and the
whole Church joined in this, yet but according to their Measure, Analogy, and
Proportion of their faith, even as in writing some Epistles Timothy and
Silvanus joined with Paul, but yet Paul only wrote Apostolically, and the
authority in them is looked at as his; or else because perhaps they having the
Holy Ghost fallen on them through the Apostles Doctrine then delivered (which
was then usual) persuading their hearts unanimously (though before dissenting,
as ver. 25.) to accord, in that respect they might speak this in such a sense,
that no assembly of men wanting Apostolical presence and instruction, may now
speak. And although it may be objected, That then this Letter and these
Decrees should be formal Scripture, and so bind us still, it is answered;
That they are Scripture, and written for our learning; and if the case were the
same upon which they obliged them then, ( viz. matter of offense) that then
they would bind us now: but the things being enjoined, but as (...), things of
a superadded casual necessity and not absolute, in case of offense only and
not simply for the things themselves, therefore now the necessity being ceased,
the obligation cease, yet so as the equity of the rule and ground these were
commanded upon, to abstain from things that will offend our brethren, does hold
in like cases to the end of the world.

And last of all, there is no act of such authority and government put forth in
it, which the Proposition intends; which will appear, if we either consider
the occasion and rise of it, or the issue and result of it.

It was not a set or stated meeting by common agreement of the Churches, but
Antioch sends to Jerusalem unknown to them; there are no summons sent to send
up Delinquents, nor can we find these disturbers are sent to Jerusalem to be
censured by those Ecclesiastical pupunishments in which, Government does
properly lie and consist; The subject matter sent to them for their decision
was merely matter of Doctrine, about this question, verse 2. and about this
word, verse 5. Namely, whether the Ceremonial Law was to be observed?
Concerning which they wrote their judgments dogmatically, which they were
called to do, being thus sent unto; Neither does it argue that it was more
then to determine this question doctrinally they came up for, because that Paul
and Barnabas could have decided that before, being themselves Apostles, and
that therefore their coming up was for discipline against Delinquents; for as
the case stood, they listened not to Paul and Barnabas as Apostles, but
pretended the judgment of the other Apostles; For indeed Paul and Barnabas did
declare their judgments, the (...), or contention, ver. 3. being attributed
unto them as contending against the false Teachers for the Truth; and so as
even the Church of Antioch rested not in their decision: Otherwise Paul and
Barnabas might have as Apostles censured those Delinquents without coming to
Jerusalem, as well as by Apostolic authority have decided the question. For
Apostolical power extended to Discipline as well as Doctrine. If it be said
That even doctrinally to deliver the truth when it is done by a company of
Elders has authority or power in it, as when Christ said, Go and teach, all
power is given unto me: It is granted an Authority exercised in doctrine and
so to be in Synods, but yet not Jurisdiction, which the Proposition intends,
which is when doctrines are delivered sub paena, under the penalty of that
Ecclesiastical punishment of Excommunication if not received. One Minister
alone has a dogmaticall authority as a Minister to rebuke, exhort, and yet
acts of Jurisdiction are not his alone, but of others conjoined with him.

Neither, secondly, does the titles given to these results of theirs argue a
Jurisdiction in that they are called (...) and (...), Act. 16. 4. For although
the word (...) is used for an Imperial decree Luke 2. 1. yet but rarely, and
more commonly (as Stephanus and Budaeus observe) for doctrine and opinion in
matters moral or speculative, as Platonis Dogma, etc. and thence is translated
to import the Judgments of Divines given in matters Theological although
delivered with certainty. And so the using of this word implies the subject
to have been doctrinall only and so delivered. And further the subject matter
of this decision being about rules and ceremonies, and the not observation of
them, the [ Dogma] is elegantly, and perhaps on purpose, given to these
Apostolical Canons by way of opposition and contradiction to those that taught
and observed such rules, who are said (...) in so doing, Colossians 2. 20.
being led away by the false Dogmata, or Heterodox theses of false Teachers that
enjoined them. And for that other word (...) translated [ ordained,] it
plainly notes out but this, that these doctrinall Theses were the joint
declared and avowed Judgment and conclusions of these (and so answers to
those other words in their letters (It seems good unto us, being with one
accord, etc.) Apostles and Elders thus met with one accord agreeing therein,
and particularly and unanimously so judging; and therefore when James gives his
judgment he uses the same word (...) (Verse 19. of this 15. Chap.) This is
my judgment, which being voted and agreed upon by the rest they are called
(...). Neither does this argue any act of authority that the things here
declared to be observed are indifferent, for some of them come under a moral
consideration, and all come under the case of offense.

Neither does the language they commend those to them in, sound of that
Jurisdiction or government intended in the proposition; for although they seem
to speak as guided infallibly in their resolution, [ it seemed good to us and
to the holy Ghost] yet their expressions are carried so as to avoid
Jurisdiction, those words, To lay no other burden, if any, must import this
Jurisdiction; but these words, as Ludovicus de Dieu has well observed, are (as
they may be) taken passively, therein agreeing with the Syriack translation;
It seemed good to and the holy Ghost, that no other burden be laid on you,
that whereas these Teachers of the circumcision had gone about by their
doctrine to bind the Law of Moses upon men's consciences, and to put on them a
burden too heavy for them to bear, as Peter speaks Verse. 9. and had taught
this to be the commands of Christ and his Apostles, and the judgment of the
Church of Jerusalem; They disclaim this, and profess they would have no such
burden put upon them, and that they gave these Teachers no such commandment,
that is, never delivered or uttered any such Doctrine to be commanded. And if
it be taken actively, yet the declaring it to be the command of Christ is the
imposition here intended, for the same words are used of the Teachers who yet
had not assumed by virtue of an Ecclesiastical authority to impose these
things but by way of Doctrine, So Verse the tenth, Why tempt you God to put a
yoke upon the neck of the Disciples? Verse. 5. And it is well known that in
the Scripture phrase to teach and to declare, though by way of Doctrine, and to
press men's consciences with things as the commands of God, is said to be a
binding and imposing a burden on them. So of the Pharisees (and these were of
the sect of the Pharisees, of whom, and to whom that was spoken, Verse 5.) it
is said, Matthew. 23. 4. that the Pharisees bind heavy burdens and grievous to
be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; which is spoken but of a doctrinall
declaring and pressing men's consciences with the rigor of the Law; and this is
so well known to be the Language of the Jews, that it need not be insisted
on.

Neither does it follow that if they may lay these burdens by way of Doctrine,
they may censure for the neglect of them, for every Minister in his Sermon
imposes those burdens whilst they urge and declare these duties to men, and
yet have not power Ecclesiastically to censure them, for though it being a
command of Christ they could not but hold it forth as such and so urge it; yet
not by way of Jurisdiction, but with these soft words, which if you observe you
do well.

Lastly, although these false Teachers had subverted their faith, and against
their own light, had avouched their Doctrine to be the doctrine of the
Apostles, which deserved the highest censure being a sin so scandalous, yet
they proceeded not to censure them by way of admonition or excommunication
(which are acts of government) but only do declare their sin and error, and
give their Judgment of it. Whereas in the close of the proof from the Church
of Jerusalem for many Congregations to be under one Presbyteriall government,
it is asserted whether these Congregations be fixed or not fixed it is all one
to the truth of the proposition; this reason is offered against it. There is
this difference, every Congregation having Elders fixed to it is a Church; for
the relation of Elders and Church is mutual, Acts 14. 23. They ordained Elders
in every Church; This relation of Elders to a Church is a special distinct
relation to that Congregation of which they are Elders, so as they are not
related to other Congregations, and these Congregations are Ecclesiae primae,
Churches formed up though uncompleat, as being according to our Brethrens
opinion, members of a more general Presbyteriall Church.

But if Congregations have no fixed Officers they are not Churches according to
their Principles. Now it makes a great difference as to the truth of the
Proposition, whether many Churches may be under the government of one, or
whether many Congregations which to them are no Churches may be under the
government of one? Whatsoever our Brethren show of diverse Congregations to be
under the government of a Church Presbyteriall, yet they no where show any one
pattern or example in Scripture wherein many Churches were under the power of
one, nay nor where any one Church was under the power of another.

And lastly, if there were many Congregations in Jerusalem, having their
Officers fixed to them, and not in common, then during the time before the
dispersion the Apostles must be those Officers that were thus fixedly disposed
of to those several Congregations, some over one, others over another, as
ordinary Elders now are. Now suppose this number of Believers to have been as
many thousands as is argued, at 10. or 12000. souls, and these to be divided
into as many Congregations as might be divided to twelve Apostles severally to
watch over; Or suppose the several Congregations made up of 2000. (which is an
alotment small enough to be set apart for the pains of two Apostles.

Hereupon great incongruitie does follow, that Apostles are brought to the
state and condition and work of Parish Ministers, to whom yet it was
committed, and inseparably annexed to their Office, yea and constituted it, as
Apostles, to have the care of all Churches; and if when the Churches were
multiplied and dispersed into several Countries, they were to have the care of
them, then much more when they were in one City. Some of the writers against
Episcopacie, (when those that write for it alledg the instance of James abiding
at Jerusalem, as the Bishop of that Church) have judged it a debasing of the
Apostolical power to limit it to one Diocesan Church: but this position does
debase all the Apostles at once, much more it makes them not Bishops to many
Churches, but ordinary Elders, in that one or two of them perhaps, are over one
single Church; yea, and which is yet more incredible, if these Churches and
their government were like to those under the Presbytery, and no material
difference between them and ours, these Apostles were in their several
Parishes not only subordinate in their government to the common Presbytery of
all the Apostles, but limited to lesser Acts of government, for so the lesser
Elderships in the Churches under the Presbyteriall government are confined
only to examine, and admonish, and prepare for the greater Presbytery, and
therein not enabled to ordain Elders over the Congregation, or excommunicate a
member: Peter and John joined together were by this principle not enabled to
it. And yet if we do not suppose such a limited government in those several
Congregations, here can be no pattern for the Presbyterian government as it
is practiced. Or if otherwise we should suppose them fixed Officers for
teaching only to one of those Congregations, and to have no government at all
over it, but to bring all to the common Presbytery of Apostles, that is a
greater incongruitie then the former; for this casts them below the condition
of our Parish Elders, for unto them the greater Presbytery does allow some
measure and part of the Government, but such a supposition would allow Apostles
none in their several Congregations.

The Scripture holds forth that many Congregations may be under one
Presbyteriall Government.
Sect. 1.
BY particular Congregations either first an Assembly of Christians meeting for
worship only, as to hear, pray, etc. or secondly, an Assembly so furnished
with Officers as fit for Discipline having a Presbytery, is meant; in the
latter sense, which is that the proofs are brought to confirm, and that that
is practiced where this government is set up, the proposition is equivalent to
such an assertion as this* Many Presbyteries may be under one Presbyteriall
government, as thus, many Parochial Presbyteries may be under one Classical,
many Classical, under one Provincial, etc. which is the same as to affirm
that one Presbytery may be over another, as the Bishops affirm. That one
Presbyter may be over another, this is evident, if you assert a Presbyteriall
government may be over a Congregation that is composed of a Presbytery and
people: for it cannot be said to be over a Congregation, if it be over the
people only, that is not over their Presbytery also, for then the Presbytery
will be Independent, and the people under two Presbyteries coordinate and not
subordinate, which stands not with common reason.

Sect. 2.
This then being the Assertion, it is thus argued against. A Presbytery over a
Presbytery, or power over power necessarily implies two sorts of Presbyteries,
or Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, specifically distinct or at least more then
numerically. A greater or lesser vary not the kind in a Physical or
Theological consideration, but in a Political it does; He that has a
greater power then I have, that is a power over my power, a power to order,
direct or correct the power I have, this man's power and mine differ as two
sorts or kinds of power. And although this superior Presbytery be made up of
Presbyters sent as Commissioners from the congregationall or parochial
Presbyteries, yet this hinders not at all but that they may be thus distinct;
For some Cities and towns corporate their Officers are sent up, and sit as
Members of Parliament, yet this Honorable House has a power distinct* and
superior to that which is in London or York, though the superior Presbytery
be made up of Presbyters from several Congregations, yet it is not made up of
Presbyteries, it has the persons materially considered, but not that power
formally considered: for as while the Parliament sits and certain Burgesses
from Borough towns sit as Members in it, these Towns notwithstanding still
retain all the power those Corporations were ever invested with; so particular
Congregations whilst some of their Elders sit in the Classical Presbytery,
have Elderships or a Presbytery still. Now that it is very probable the
Scripture holds not forth two sorts of Presbyteries thus specifically distinct,
may be thus argued.

Sect. 3.
First, where the Scripture holds forth distinct sorts in any kind, there will
be found either distinct and proper names and titles, or at least some adjunct
or difference added to that which is common or general; In the Apostles times
there were Presbyters over Presbyters, Apostles were superior to Prophets, and
Prophets a distinct order from Teachers* Therefore in 1* Corinth. 12. God has
set some in the Church: First Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers,
after that Miracles, then gifts of Healings, etc. They have not only
particular names and titles, but special notes of distinction added, (...), as
in Genesis 1. where no distinction in names is given, The Sun, Moon, and
Stars of Heaven, are all called Lights, yet there are terms of difference
added, they are called first great Lights, and then the greater to rule the
day, and the lesser to rule the night.

Throughout the New Testament we find this word (...), but in three places,
whereof there is but one that holds out the Government in hand, and in that
place you have the naked word only without the addition of any such
expression, greater, lesser, superior, inferior, or any kind of adjunct, that
can possibly put a thought in us, of more Presbyteries then one.
Notwithstanding so useful are peculiar distinct names where there are distinct
sorts or kinds of administration, as it is not omitted by any Church in their
Ordinances for Government; in Scotland the lowest is termed a Consistory, the
next a Classis or Presbytery, the third a Provincial Synod, the fourth a
General Assembly. The French in these terms, Consistories, and Colloquel, and
Synods: so in the Episcopal Republique there was the like variety.

Sect. 4.
Secondly, As the Scriptures hold forth nothing in any title or name to
distinguish, no more can we thence discover any sorts of Government different
in nature; for trial of this, let it be supposed there is a Parochial or
Consistorian Presbytery for one sort, there is another sort we call
Classical, what Scripture gives light by any kind of reasoning to warrant the
setting up one of those above, or over the other? Do you read any where God
has set in his Church, first Presbyteries, secondarily Classes, then
Consistories? Or is there any thing in the word directing a different
composition or constitution in these?

Sect. 5.
First, For the materiale, the Persons that these Presbyteries are made up of,
are the same; The Consistory has gifted men set apart to the Office of the
Ministry; Those that are in a Classical Presbytery are no otherwise
qualifyed, nor indeed does the Scripture require any thing but a Presbyteration
to qualify men for any sort, if there were sorts of Presbytery.

That there is a greater number of Presbyters in the one then in the other,
this alters not the state in respect of the matter; for if the number be
competent, that is, so many as two or three may agree, Matthew. 18. it suffices.
The Honorable House of Commons, is to all Parliamentary purposes as much a
House, when but two or three above forty, as when four hundred. Nor does this
always fall out that all Classical Presbyteries have a greater number then
some Parochial. Scriptures have determined neither how few will constitute a
Classical Presbytery, nor how many may be in a Parochial: Practice many
times makes them equal.

Sect. 6.
Secondly, Now for the Formale, the uniting of this matter into a Consessus or
Caetus, Presbyters become united into a Presbytery in the Classical, by having
Pastoral charges in such a division, whosoever comes so to be disposed of,
he is no sooner Pastor to such a Parish, but he is eo nomine, Member of such
a Classis. The Presbyters of a Parochial Presbytery are as nearly united and
more: They are united in the choice and call of the same Congregation they
govern, and united in the whole work of the Ministry over the same people; so
that they are not only fellow Governors, but fellow Laborers in the same
Vineyard. There is therefore no just ground for such a distinction or
difference between Presbytery and Presbytery in respect either of the matter or
the form.

Sect. 7.
Thirdly, Nor thirdly, do we find any thing in the Scriptures making them, as
from different employments, or functions, to differ; first, we pretend and so
it is in the proposition, the one is superior, the other inferior; But how
can you say the Scriptures have made this difference, when there is not a word
spoken this way in any place. Presbyterian Writers themselves in some
expressions seem to take away utterly such difference as this; in one place you
shall read the Classis can do nothing, renitente Ecclesia, but it is null and
invalid; Thus the Assertion for Discipline, and avouches Zepperus, Zanchy, and
others as of this opinion. The Congregation, though but minima Ecclesiola, yet
may reform, that is, suspend, excommunicate, etc. Renitentibus
correspondentiis. So Voetius in his Theses, and desperata causa Papatus, lib.
2. Sect. 2. c. 12. Surely according to what these Reverend Divines have
expressed, it is hard to be said, which of these Presbyteries has the greater
or superior power.

Sect. 8.
Secondly, the employment or work of a Presbytery is to ordain, excommunicate,
suspend, admit Members, appoint times for worship and the like. The Classical
Presbytery reserve ordination, and excommunication to themselves, but the other
are left to the Parochial Presbytery: Thus some Presbyterians divide the work.
Others possibly otherwise. But how can we affirm any such designment from the
Scriptures, if you have not two sorts, either in name or nature to be found
there? and none of these Acts or Administrations but may be done by that one
the Scripture mentions, which doubtless they may, seeing Ordination seems
to be specifyed in the Text; if the greater, then doubtless the lesser. The
Pastor in one place is said to exhort, in another to comfort, in another to
visit the sick, this will not warrant distinct sorts of Pastors, for there
being but one sort spoken of in Scriptures, we must interpret all these
several Administrations to belong to that one.

Sect. 9.
It was not found an easy work in this Assembly to find two sorts of Elders,
teaching, and ruling. Notwithstanding all the Scripture has said of these, and
in some places, so plain, as if of purpose to distinguish them* If it be so
hard a matter by Scripture light to hold forth two sorts of Presbyters, it must
needs be more difficult to find out two sorts of Presbyteries, especially
seeing (as it is generally granted, and this by the Presbyterians themselves)
that for above fifty years after Christ, and in the Apostles times, there was
but one kind of Presbytery.

Sect. 10.
It has been the wisdom of States to keep and preserve the bounds and limits
of their Judicatures evident, and distinct, and as free from controversy as
may be. If Laws and Ordinances about matters of m^um and ^uum, and such
inferior claims should not be so evident, the authority of these Courts will
be in a readiness to relieve wrongs and injuries through such mistakings. But
Controversies and clashings about these high and public interests are no
other in the issue then the dividing of a Kingdom within it self.

Is man wiser in his Generation then Jesus Christ? He is our Lawgiver, the
Government is laid upon his shoulders; he is the wonderful Counselor, the
Prince of Peace. And therefore surely though other matters of practice and duty
should have obscurity in the rule. Yet it is most probable he has ordered
Authority and Jurisdiction with the Officers and Offices, for the managing of
it so evident, as not to put us to search in a dark corner for directions. We
cannot be said to be clear in our rule when we are thus enforced out of one
word, and but once used, to raise so many Thrones, or Forms of Government,
especially it being foreseen by Christ that such is the nature of man as
nothing occasions more bitter contention then that lusting which is in us to
have Authority and jurisdiction over others.

Sic subscribitur: Tho. Goodwin, Philip Nigh. Jer. Burroughes, Sidrach Sympson.
William Bridge, William Greenhill, William Carter.

Concordat cum Originali.

Adoniram Byfield, Scriba.




