MOST EXCELLENT And approved Medicines and Remedies For most Diseases and
Maladies Incident to Man's Body, Lately compiled and extracted out of the
Originals of the most Famous and best Experienced Physicians both in England
and other Countries,

By A. R. Doctor in Physic deceased.

And since revised by an able Practitioner in the same Science, and now
Published for the universal good and benefi of this Commonwealth.

Vita sine Valetudine Odium est, non Vita.

Eccles. 38.1, 2, 4. Honor the Physician with that honor that is due unto him
because of Necessity: for the LORD has created him. For of the most HIGH
comes healing. --

The LORD has created Medicines of the Earth, and he that is Wise will not
abhor them.

LONDON, Printed by J.C for George Latham Junior, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bishops head in St. Paul's Church-yeard 1652.

THE EPISTLE To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
It Is a very sad and lamentable thing, even against the Course of Nature, and a
way to tempt the very GOD of Nature, wilfully to impead and hinder our Health,
or not to seek Means to continue it when we have it, or not to recover it when
it is lost and gone. God sends several Diseases and Sicknesses, and has
appointed several Medicines or Remedies to encounter them; Therefore honor
the Physician, and with Ezekiah, Lay a plaster upon the Boil. Say not, Man
has his period as well as the Sea it is bounds, which it cannot pass. What God
has decreed, is already done in Heaven, and shall also undoubtedly be done in
Earth. Who has ever resisted his will? Romans 9.19. Say not, Life and death is
not in our own hand; for some seek death in misery, yet find it not; others
meet with it at Feasts and Gaudies, and where they would feign forget it. Say
not, When the Glass is run, do what we can, we can stay no longer, and the
Clock will strike when the minutes be past. That which must be, shall be, what
shall means do? For, by the like reason thou may excuse thy wickedness, and
be desperately careless. But in matters of Hope where the End is not known, use
Means with Asa, though rely not upon them, (as he did:) Although many times
they avail not, yet notwithstanding take we all the fairest ways of all
lawful Remedies, when Gods Determinations and Purposes are concealed from us.
Thou have (Courteous Reader) in this little Book, most exquisite Medicines and
Remedies presented to thy view, for diverse (if not all sorts of) Diseases and
Maladies incident to Man's frail and weak Body; It Is therefore thy duty to make
a right and dexterous use thereof. Here is a Price (a precious Jewel) put into
thine hand, God grant thou want not an heart, to lay bold of it. Thou need
not waste thy Estate, or spend all thou have upon Physicians, and yet be never
a whit the better for it, as she in the Gospel is said to have done, Mar. 5:16.
Lo, here is Physic for every Patient, a Salve for every Sore, a Cure for every
Wound, a Medicine for every Disease, and a Receipt or Remedy for every
Malady; and it to be had at a very cheap and easy rate: So that even the
meaner and poorer sort of People, who for want of ability, cannot go to the
Physicians for cure in time of Sickness and Visitation, may find eaese and
comfort by perusing this small Treatise, as well as those that are of greater
abilities. But to what purpose do I spend time, or waste paper in praising or
commending this little Book? The thing is able sufficiently to speak for, and
to commend it self. It was truly and wisely said of one that was a most
learned Physician, That Morbi non curantur eloquentia, multo minus loquentia:
Diseases are not healed with Eloquent speeches or Rhetorical flashes, much
less with vain babbling or multiplicity of words. Therefore not to insist too
long upon Introductions or Preambles, lest it should be said to me as once a
flouting Cynick said to the Citizens of Myndus, a little City with great Gates:
Shut your Gates lest your City run out; I take my leave, and rest

Thine in all Offices of Love and Service T. A.

An Alphabeticall TABLE Directing to the Principal Matters contained in this
Book.
A
FOr an Ach in the Back. Page 59. For the Headache. p. 27, 88. For the
Toothache. p. 72, 111 For an Ague. p. 67, 79. For a Tertian Ague. p. 60. For a
Quartan Ague. p. 86. An Almond-milk to cool and induce sleep. p. 68. For an
Apoplexy. p. 45.65, See Palsy How to make Aqua-vitae. p 63.
B.
FOr the heat of the Back. p. 77 For Pain in the Back. p. 59 A soverain Balsam
for 22. several diseases p. 86 How to make a Barley Cream. p. 68. A Bath to
cleanse the skin of Scabs, Scurf, Maunginesse. p. 28. A Bath for cold Diseases
or Palsies. p. 30 To bind the Belly in Fluxes, or to stop or stay the loosenes
of the Belly. p. 32, 43, 51, 81. See Looseness, Scowring. To loosen the Body of
one that is hard bound in the Belly. p. 36, 39. See Loosen. For young children
that are hard bound in the Belly and troubled with Worms. p. 100. To ripen and
supporate Biles and Tumors. p. 33 See Fellon, Swelling, Whitflaw. Against the
Biting of a mad Dog. p. 87. 95. Against the Biting or stinging of any Venomous
Beast p. 95. For one that Bleedeth inwardly. p. 104. To astringe in Bleeding,
or to stay and stanch Bleeding. p. 44, 94. To stanch the Bleeding of any
VVound. p. 44, 94. To stanch Bleeding at Nose. p. 44, 94, 104, 105. Tor those
that spit Blood. p. 93, To restore good Blood. p. 1 Against congealed Blood. p.
15. To cleanse, temper, and purify the Blood. p. 52. r53, 54, 55, 59, 84. For
the Bloody Flux p. 67, 74. For cold Diseases of the Brain and Sinews. p. 57. To
comfort the Brain. p. 14, 15. To cleanse and purge the head or Brain by the
Nose. p. 45, 128. To make a sweet Breath, and to cure a stinking and unsavory
Breath. p. 14, 15, 36. For short- Breathing. p. 56. For a Woman that has
great Breasts. p. 125. For a VVomans sore Breast. p. 126. To increase or procure
Milk in a Woman's Breast p. 49, 126. To dry up Milk in a Woman's Breast. p. 49. For
Bruises p. 15, 33, 87. 99. For a Burning or scalding. p. 74, 87, 110. For one
that is Burst in the Belly or Cods. p. 96.
C.
FOr the Canker upon a Man's Yard. page 100 For the Canker in a Woman's Breast. p.
129. For a Canker in the Mouth. p 130, 131. For a Canker in any part of the
body. p. 88, 130. To purge Choler. p. 1, 9, 10. 43. An opening and cooling
Julip for Choler, and burnt humors. p. 11. To draw down Choler. p. 45. The
Carminative or Collick-Glister. p. 40. For the Colic and Stone. p. 115, 116.
For the Wind Colic. p 76, 88. To help or amend Concoction. p. 14, 15, 21, 65.
For weak and Consuming bodies. p. 61. For a Consumption. p. 118, 119, 137, 138,
139 To Cool the Liver. p. 26, 27. 68, 81, 123 Cooling Medicines. p. 11 12, 20,
26, 27, 38, 68 81, 123. A Cordial against Melancholic vapors and palpitations
of the heart. p. 49. A Temperate Cordial Julip. p. 50. Cordials to be taken
after Physic. p. 52. For Corns on the feet or Toes. p. 134: For the Cough. p.
56, 78. For the Cough of the Lungs. p. 116. To provoke or bring down Women's
monthly Courses, Terms, or Flowers. p. 23, 25, 51, 85, 89. For the Cramp. p.
68, 79. How to make Cynamon-water. p. 66.
D.
FOr the Deafness of the Ears p. 90, 133. To hinder Dinting. p. 29. For cold
Diseases or Palsies. p. 26.30. For cold Diseases of the Brain and Sinews. p. 57
A Cooling Glister in hot Diseases. p. 38. A Diet-Drink to open and temper the
Liver. (p. 61. A Diet-Drink to cleanse and temper the blood. (p. 54. How to
make the Salsaperilla-Drink, which is marvelous good for the French Pox. p. 82
An Excellent Drink for diverse Diseases, viz. Dropsy, Yellow Jaundice, Itch,
Scabs, Maunginess, etc p. 84. A very cooling and pleasant Water to Drink in
Summer. p. 123. A Posset Drink to cool the Liver. p. 81 A grateful Drink or
Potion to purge or cleanse the Spleen. p. 56 A precious Diet-Drink against any
desperate disease that is curable. p. 85. For the Dropsy. p. 51, 81, 84. For
Dysenteries. p. 42.
E.
FOr the Epilepsie p. 14. See Falling-sicknes. For Sore Eyes. p, 22, 69 For the
Rheum in the Eyes, and the Redness of them. p. 72. To clear and preserve the
Eyesight, and to recover it being gone. p. 22, 69, 70, 71 For a Weft or Pearl
in the Eye. p. 71. To take away a Weft from the Eye. p. 134.
F.
TO make the Face fair and clear. p. 84, 127. To take away red spots, freckles
and pimples in the Face. p. 44, 127. For heat in the Face. p. 78. For the
Falling Sickness. p. 14, 57, 89, 113. See Epilepsie. For Fatness about the
Heart. p. 117. For a Fellon. p. 108, 128. See Swelling, Whitflaw. For the
Burning Fever p. 16, 26. For hot pestilent Fevers. p. 16. For a Tertian Fever.
p. 60. For a Fistulo. p. 88. To purge Fleam. p. 3, 8, 43, 52. To purge both
Choler and Fleam. p. 10. A Gargle to draw Fleam. p. 35. Liquid Nasals for
Fleam. p. 45.
G.
Diverse sorts of Gargles for diverse Diseases. (page 35, 36, 127.) Diverse sorts
of Glisters for diverse Diseases. p. 37 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. For the
Gowt. p. 80, 88, 102, 113. For the Gravel or Stone. p. 75. For the
Green Sickness. p. 19, 20, 84, 89 For a Green Wound: p. 85, 87.
H.
TO purge the Head or brain by the Nose. p. 45, 128. For fatness about the
Heart. p. 117 To put away Venom from the Heart. p. 123 For the Gnawing about
the Heart p. 123 For the Heart-burning p. 105 For the Palpitations, beatings,
or tumblings of the Heart p. 49, 106 For the Heat of the back p. 77 To allay
Heat and Inflammation in any part p. 11 12, 20, 26, 27, 33. See Cool. To
restore the spirits consumed with Heat, in hot pestilent Fevers. p. 16 For Heat
in the Mouth or Throat p. 77 For Heat in the face p. 78 For the Hemorrhoides.
p. 62, 105. See Piles. For the Hickup p. 80
I.
FOr the black and yellow Jaundice, page 84. 113. For an Impostume. p. 132
Against the Inflammations and Obstructions of the Liver p. 26, 27, 53, 55, 61,
68, 81- For an Inflammation in the Throat or parts thereabouts p: 34 To make an
Issue p. 80 For the Itch, Scabs, breaking out, Maunginess, etc. 28, 73, 74, 84,
108. Diverse kinds of Julips p. 11, 12, 20, 27, 50, 60
K:
FOr the Kings-Evill. p. 131
L.
FOr the Legs that do rankle or fester. p. 110 For the Lethargy or sleepie
Disease p. 45, 65 To destroy Lice p: 96 For a hot Liver, and to cool and temper
the Liver, and to open the obstructions of it p. 26, 27, 53 55, 61, 68, 81. To
preserve the Liver p. 75 To Loosen the body of one that is hard bound. p: 36.
93. See Belly: To stop or stay a Looseness p. 32, 43, 57, 81. See Belly,
Scowring. To open the Lungs stopped with soil p: 12, 13, 84, 117:
M.
FOr the Measels. p. 91. Against Melancholy and Melancholic vapors. p. 18,
49: To purge and draw down Melancholy p. 7, 9, 44, 46, 52. For the Morphew p.
81, 109 For the Mother p. 23, 25, 76. For a sore Mouth p. 35, 77, 112, 127. To
cleanse the Mouth p. 101.
N.
Diverse kinds of Nasals p. 45, 46, 128 To purge the Head by the Nose. p. 45,
128 Nourishing Glisters for weak persons p. 37
O.
OPening Medicines p. 11, 12, 13, 20, 27, 61, 81, 117. To Open the Obstructions
of the Liver, p. 27, 55, 61, 81, 84. For Oppilations or Stopping of the Breast.
p. 84, 140.
P.
TO cease Pain p. 37 For Pain in the Back p. 59. For the Palsy p. 30, 57, 77.
See Apoplexy. For the Piles, p. 28, 62, 92, 93, 105. See Hemorrhoides. Of the
Pills called de tribus Fernelii p. 67 Of the Pills of Rosetta, for quitting the
stomach of soil, etc. p. 21 For the Plague p. 89, 90, 120, 129, 141. For the
Pluresie p. 88, 136 For the French Pox p. 82. 117, 135 For the Smallpox p. 29,
91, 114. How to make purging Pruines, Raisins, etc. p. 61 Several Purgations
for several Diseases. 1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 39, 43, 44, 45, 52, 53, 60, 128.
R.
REstoratives for weak persons p. 30, 49, 61. For the Running of the Reins. p.
89.
S.
SAlves or Ointments curing any wounds or Sores. p. 105, 121, 122 For a Scald
head p. 80 For the Sciatica. p. 89, 101. 114. For a greevouus Scowring p. 43.
See Belly, Loosenes. For the Scurvy p. 52 For the Spraining of the Sinews. p.
88, 99. To cause or provoke Sleep. p. 28, 30, 68, 78, 89. For an ill Smell
coming from the Nose. p. 49 For foul and eating Sores. p. 34 For the Spleen p.
54, 56, 82, 89 Against the Stinging by Waspes or Bees. p. 95 For the Pain or
Stitch in the Side. p. 17, 125 To clear the Stomach of soil p. 21, 75 To
comfort and strengthen the Stomach p. 57. 77. For a cold and weak Stomach. p.
16, 18, 26 Against wind in the Stomach p. 21 For the Stone or Gravel. p. 40,
41, 59, 75, 88 115, 11^ For the Stoppings in the Breast p. 84, 140: See
Oppilations, Tisick For the Stoppings of the Lungs p. 12, 13, 84, 117 For the
Strangury p. 98 For the Swelling of the Legs p: 108 To soften the hard Swelling
of the Liver and Splen p. 32 For all manner of Swellings p. 88 For the Swelling
of the Yard or Cods p. 103 Diverse sorts of Syrops for diverse Diseases. p. 18
55, 57. Diverse sorts of Suppositories for diverse diseases p. 36, 37.
T.
FOr a sore Throat p. 34, 35, 77, 112, 127. For the Tisick p. 140 For a hollow
Tooth p. 112 To fasten he Teeth p. 101.
V.
TO put away Venom from the Heart. p. 123 For an Ulcer p. 88 How to make
Unguentum-Nutritum. p. 122 Receipts for Vomits, p. 24 A Vomiting-Water p. 51
W.
WArming Medicines for cold Diseases p. 26, 38. To take away Warts, p. 107 For
those that cannot hold their Water, p. 125 For those that cannot void Water. p.
97. 98, 125. For weak and convalescent persons p. 30, 37, 49, 61 For young
Children that are Weak in their Limbs, etc. p. 124 To heal a Whitflaw p. 108.
See Biles, Fellon. For Wind p. 14, 15, 21, 31, 36, 58, 76, 77. For the
Wind-Collick p. 76. 88 How to govern a Woman with Child before, in, and after
the great work or Travel, and to cause an easy and quick Deliverance. p. 46
For the Worms. p. 13, 42, 88, 100 For a Green-wound p. 85, 87 To our all
manner of Sores and Wounds. p. 105, 21
Y.
FOr the swelling of the Yard or Cods p. 103 For the Canker upon the Yard p.
100 To incarnats the skin of the Yard within p. 104.
Most Excellent and approved MEDICINES AND REMEDIES For diverse Diseases and
Maladies.
Of Medicines that purge Choler.
ALoes is the Juice of an Herb, The Dose is from one dr. to two dr. in
Substance; but in Infusion from one dr. to three dr. It purges Choler and
Fleam, and helps the Diseases of the Stomach and Head: but hurts the
Hemorrhoides and Fundament.

Cassia is a long, black, fistulous, round fruit, having a black substance
within, it must by freshly extracted when it is used: and it is given to all
Ages, to the weaker in one ounce and a half, to the stronger in 2. ounces, or
10. drachmes in the morning, and before Supper, in Bolus or Potion. It purges
gently without any offense, Choler and Fleam from the stomach, in the first
ways; and is good in hot Fevers.

Manna is a dew falling on Herbs, Trees, Stones: the best is of Calabria. The
Dose is from 6. drachmes to 2. ounces, or 3. ounces. It purges very gently
fleam and yellow Choler.

Cytrine Mirabolins is a Fruit of the Arabians: the Dose is from 2. drachmes to
half an ounce in substance; but in infusion from half an ounce to 2. ounces.
They purge Choler from the Stomach, and are good in Fluxes, when moderate
Astriction after purging is required. They are naught in obstructions; and
their obstruction is let, if they be rubbed with Oil of sweet Almonds.

Scammony is the Juice of an Herb, the Dose is from 5. grains to 12. grains.
It works upon all humors strongly; but especially upon Choler and water. It
hurts the Heart, Liver, Stomach, out of his innate property; but is corrected
with Anise-seeds, Dragant, Mastick, the juice or infusion of Damask Roses, and
the Conserve of it is given from 1. ounce to 2. or 3. ounces. It purges Choler.

Rhubarb is a thick Root from the Indies, dying like Saffron. It is corrected
with the sixth part of Spica Indica, or Cynamon; and is safely given without
any Corrective. The Dose is in substance from 2. drachmes to 3. and 4.
drachmes. It purges gently Choler from the Stomach and the Liver, and takes
away Obstructions.

Tamarindes are tart Dates, the Fruit of a wild Palm Tree in the Indies, the
newest are the best. The Dose in infusion or decoction in Whey is from 2.
ounces to 5. ounces. It purges yellow Choler, quenches Thirst, and cures
acute Fevers.

Whey is a Lenient and Laxative Medicine. The Dose is 4. ounces to half a
pound, and a pound.

Of Medicines that purge Fleam.
AGarick is growing on the Trunks or Bodies of Trees, as Toadstooles. It is
averse to the Stomach by reason of his lightness. It swims uppermost, and so
will provoke to vomit: But this ill quality is bridled by adding a third part
of Ginger or Salgem. It is taken either in substance or in infusion. In
substance it is taken from 1. drachme to 2. dr. And in infusion from 2.
drachmes to 3. dr. It purges gross roping Slyme, and tough Fleam, as also
yellow Choler.

Mechoacan an Indian Root, a kind of Bryony Root, which some call White
Rhubarb. It is taken in powder, or grated from one dram and a half, to 2
drachmes: It purges Fleam and watery humors without griping. It is good in old
Headaches, Fevers, intermitment Cholicks and Astinatical dispositions.

Jalap is a kind of Mechoacan, and has the same virtues. The Dose is from one
scruple to 2. scruples in strong bodies. If one scruple or half a dram be
finely searced, it purges very pleasanty without griping, and has no taste.
When any other purge works slowly, give 1. scruple of this after it, and it
will forward the other plentifully and safely.

Turbit is a Gum, and white Root, given in substance, and in infusion, as
Agaricks. His Correction is a third part of Ginger. It purges tough and thick
Fleam, and cures long Phlegmatic Diseases, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Madness,
etc.

The Seeds of Carthamus or Lincus is given from 2. drachmes to 5. drachmes. It
purges Fleam and Water. It is a friend to the Stomach.

Colocynthis is the Fruit of a wild Gourd: his Pulp which is in use must be
white, and fresh. It is corrected with Ginger, Cynamon, Cloves, Mastick,
Dragant. It is seldom given alone, but in infusion with other purging
decoctions, or added to Pills. It purges Fleam, Choler, mucous humors. It is
good in great and inveterate Headaches, Megrims, Epilepsies, Apoplexies,
Vertigoes, or Giddiness, Gout, Sciatica, Asthyma, Phlegmatic Cough, and
difficulties of breathing.

Harmodactils is a known Root. The Dose is one dram, or one dr. and a half;
his Corrections are Cynamon or Ginger. It is more used with Decoctions, with
other Purges, then alone. It purges gross Fleam from the Joints.

Elacerium is the Juice of Wild Cowcumber. The Dose is from one grain, to one
grain and a half, or 2. grains or 3. grains in robust bodies. It purges Water,
Fleam and Choler strongly, but churlishly. It is corrected with Tragacanth,
Mastick, Cynamon.

Euphorbium is a Gum: the Dose is from one grain to a dram, and in mixtures
with Pills to 10. grains. This is rarely used alone, but in Pills called Pills
of Euphorbium. The Dose is one dr. It helps Cholicks, and very cold Diseases of
the Belly, Head and Joints.

Mirabolana Chebula draws away Fleam. The Dose in substance is from 2.
drachmes to 4 drachmes; in infusion from 1. dr. to 6. dr. They purge Fleam, are
good for the Sinews, and against Viturnas, and sleep-Diseases: they whet the
Wit, and comfort the Stomach.

Mirabola Bellerica must be used as Emblica.

Apopanas is a Liquor ferule: the best is white within, and yellow without. It
is given from 1. dram to 2. drachmes. It is corrected with Mastick and Spike.
It purges rough Fleam from the Brain, Sinews, and Breast.

Vitrum Antimonii the Glass of Antimony, purges and vomiteth and avoideth
Water and Fleam very much; besides other humors. It is given in substance
finely powdered from 1. grain to 2. grains rubbed in a Mortar with Oil of
Nutmeg: in infusion from 4 grains to 7. grains, in White wine, Claret or Sack.

Of Medicines purging Melancholy.
Sena is the best from Alexandria, with green Leaves and thin, and a little
whitish. The Dose in powder is one dram, in infusion or decoction half an
ounce or 6. dr. It is corrected with Ginger, Cloves, and a sprig of Time,
Anise-seeds, and sweet Fennel-Seeds.

Epithymum is given in powder to 2. dr. in decoction, from half an ounce to 2.
ounces. It must be but little boiled, nor given in the heat of Summer. It is
corrected with Salgem, and purges black Choler, and Hypocondriacal winds.

Black Helebore, it should have a black root full biting. The Dose is in powder
from half a scruple to a scruple, or more. It purges black or yellow Choler
from all the body, and that strongly.

Fumitary evacuates melancholy humors. The juice is given to 2. ounces in
decoction. The Herb is put from 3. ounces to 5. or 6. ounces in Whey: you may
strengthen his operation with a little Wormwood put to it.

Mirabolans Indian so called, it purges black Choler and burnt. The Dose is in
substance from 2 dr. to 4 dr. in infusion from 4 dr. to 10 drachmes.

Lapis Aramenus purges black Choler, and all gross, thick, clammy, muddy
humors. It is given from 1 dr. to 3 dr.

Lapis Lazuli astillatus is prepared as Lapis Armenus, which must be by washing
them 20 times with water in a Mortar: after being powdered, rub the same, and
wash it 10. times with Rose Water. The Dose of Lapis Lazuli washed is from 1
dram to 2 dr. It purges Melancholy plentifully; but troubles more the body
then Lapis Aremenus.

Polipodie of the Oak fresh gathered, moves the Belly, but flows. If the
Roots be boiled, it purges burnt Choler and Fleam.

This Polipodie is corrected with Anise-seeds, Ginger, Cloves and Cynamon. The
Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce.

An Infusion Purging Fleam.
TAke of the five opening roots of Polipody of the Oak, of each 2. drachmes, of
Hysop, Camphery Flowers, of Rosemary, Stachadoes, of each 2. little handfuls,
of Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Carua-seeds, of each 1. dram, Licorish 3.
drachmes, Rasins stoned 2. drachmes: boil them in a Pint of water; to half of
this take 4. or 6. ounces Agarick 1. dra. and half, or 4. scruples of Ginger 1.
dr. of Salgem 5. grains: Infuse it all night warm, in the morning strain it out
hard, and put to it 2. drachmes of Diaphenicon, half an ounce of Syrrop of
Violets, or Syrrop of Roses, of which Agarick 1. ounce mingle, make a Potion,
this will purge Fleam plentifully.

An Infusion purging Choler.
TAke of Damask Roses 2. ounces, of Rhubarb 2. dr. and half, of Spikenard 1.
scruple, of Orcyn 1. scruple: Cut all small and infuse them in a Quart of
Clarified-Whey, all night; and in the morning strain it gently, and put to it
1. oun. of the Syrrop of Roses or Violets.

An Infusion Purging Melancholy.
TAke Fumetary, Epithymum, Flowers or Leaves of Burrage and Buglosse, of each
half a good handful, Polypodie of the Oak 1. ounce, Sena half an ounce, Fennel
seeds 2. d. Whey three Pintes: Infuse, and boil it to a Quart: whereunto add 2.
ounces of the Syrrop of Roses solutive. The Dose is half a pound: you may
quicken a draught with 1. dra. of Electuary of Roses.

An Infusion Purging both Choler and Fleam.
TAke of Rhubarb 1. dra. of Agarick freshly trochiscated 2. scru. Cynamon 1.
scruple Ginger half a scruple: Infuse them all night in 2. ounces of
Endive-water, and 1. ounce of White wine: In the morning strain it out hard,
and add Cassia, or the Lenitive Electuary of Diacatholicon, or Diaphenicon half
an ounce, Syrrop of Violets, 2. drachmes: mingle them and make a Potion.

An Infusion Purging all Humors.
TAke of Sena 3. drachmes, Ginger, Epithymum, of each 1. d. Fennel-seeds 2.
scruples, Mary-gold-Flowers a small handful: infuse them in 6. ounces of
Water: after boil them to 4. ounces, and strain them: In which infuse Rhubarb,
Agarick 4. scruples, Cynamon, and Ginger, of each 1. scruple: after a gentle
Symphering on the fire, strain them again, and add thereunto Manna half an
ounce, Syrrop of Roses with Agarick 1. ounce: mingle them and make a Potion.

An Opening and Cooling Julip, for Choler and burnt Humors.
TAke of Barley 2. small handfuls, Savory with the Roots, Maidenhair,
Liverwort, Sorrel, of each half a good handful, of Roots of Grass, and
Fennel, of each half an ounce, of the Flower cold Seeds of each 2. drachms:
boil them in Water unto 16. ounces; in which infuse Sena, half an ounce,
Tamarinds, Polypodie, of each 3. drachmes, Mechoaean, Jalop and Hermodactils,
of each 2. drachmes, Fennel, Anise-seeds and Licorish, of each 1. dram,
Currents bruised half an ounce, of Burrage, Buglosse and Rosemary-flowers a
small handful: infuse these warm; then boil them until 5. ounces of
Succory-water be consumed: then strain them, and add the expression of 4.
scruples of Rhubarb infused in 3. ounces of Manna, and Syrrop of Roses, of each
1. ounce, of the Christalls of Tarter 1. dra. mingle them: The Dose is 4. or 5.
ounces every morning.

A Cooling Opening Julip.
TAke 4. ounces of Succory-water, 2. ounces of Rose Water, of Syrrop of
Violets, and Syrrop of Roses solutive, of each half an ounce, Oil of Vitriol
two or three drops; to make a Julip of a grateful tartness: take hereof two
or three spoonfuls at a Time.

For the Lungs stopped with Soil.
TAke Elycampany Roots well dried, Licorish and Anise-seeds, of each an ounce,
Flowers of Brimstone half an ounce, Sugar Candy 6. ounces: make it all into
powder, and eat half a spoonful or more thrice a day. Also take this direction
as follows: Boil in a Pottle of water, of Hysop, Maidenhair, Scabeous,
Foal-foot, Horehound, of each a good handful, of Anise seed bruised, Licorish
sliced, Rasins stoned, and Dates, of each 3 ounces: boil it to a Quart, and
sweeten it with Sugar, whereof take a little draught warm three or four times a
day.

Another for the same purpose.
TAke half a Pint of Hysop-water, and as much Aquavitae, which put in a dish
over the fire, on a Chafindish of Coals; whereunto add 1. ounce of Sugar Candy
beaten, and stir it often with a spoon; and take thereof a spoonful in a day
warm:

A Mead for the same.
Boil one Gallon of Honey with half a Pint of Water, and skim it; then with
four Gallons of Water, still skiming for two hours gently; and with it Rasins
stoned 4. oun. Elycampany-roots 2. oun. Fennel-Roots, Althea, Polypodie, of
each 1. ounce, Maidenhair, Foal-foot, of each a like quantity, Sage, Betony,
Scabious, Hysop, of each a good handful, Anise-seeds 1. oun. If an Eg fall to
the bottom, it is strong enough; Cool, and turn it into wooden vessel.

A Powder to kill and purge forth Worms.
TAke of Wormseed 2. ounces, of Sena half an ounce, of Corianders prepared, and
Hartshorn of each 1. dra. Rhubarb 2. drachmes, dry Rue 3. drachmes: mingle
them together. The Dose is 2. drachmes at a time.

A very good Powder to be taken Evening and Morning and at Bedtime against the
Epilepsies.
TAke Pyony-seed, and Mistletoe of the Oak, of each 1. dra. of the great beast
an ounce and half, Red Coral, Nutmegs, Mustard Seed Clarified, and the Root of
white Dictamne, and Corianders prepared, of each 1. dram: mingle them and
take a little at a time.

A Powder or grossly prepared Dredge to be taken in the Morning, and after
meals, to help Concoction, to comfort the Brain, to break Wind, and to make a
sweet Breath.
TAke Licorish cut small, Anise-seed-Comfets with one skin of Sugar, of each 2.
ounces, Comfets of sweet Fennel-seeds with one skin of sugar, Coryanders
prepared and Carua-seeds, of each 1. ounce, White Ginger, Cynamon, Calamus
Aromaticus, Nutmeg, of each 1. dra. cut very small, of the Lozanges of
acomaticum rosarum, of Manus Christi with Chemical Oil of Cynamon and Cloves,
and Lozanges of Dyambra, of each alike cut into small pieces half an ounce, to
be taken about a spoonful at the times aforesaid.

A Confection for the same.
TAke Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Carua-seeds, Coriander-seeds, White Ginger, of
each 3. Drachmes and half, Calamus aromaticus, Nutmeg, of each 1. dram,
Cynamon, Licorish, small cut, of each 2. drachmes, White-sugar dissolved with
Rose Water one pound and half, Musk 2. grains: Make hereof a Confection to take
in little morsels.

A Powder for Bruises and against Congealed blood.
TAke Mummy and Dragons blood and Terra sigillata or Lemnia, of each two
drachmes, Sperma Caeti 1. dra. Rhubarb half a dram. Make hereof a Powder. The
dose is 1. dram, 4. scruples.

A good Conserve in hot Pestilent Fevers restoring the spirits consumed with
heat.
TAke the tart flesh of Cytrons quite from the seeds with a wooden Instrument
3. pound, Water 1. pound, Sugar well refined 3. pound and a half: Boil it in a
glazed Pipkin, stirring it with a wooden Spatter until it comes to the
consistance of a Conserve.

A Physical Bag to dry up and stay Rhumes.
TAke Milletseed half a pound, Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Carua-seeds,
Comin-seeds, Camomile-flowers, Tops of Dill, of each 1. oun. make them hot in a
pot, and put them into a Bag, and apply it hot to the head, or any part that
has a cold Rhume to trouble or Palsy it.

A Physical Bag or Quilt for a cold Stomach.
TAke dry Wormwood, Mints Anise-seeds 2. ounces, Rynds of Cytrons half an
ounce, Galange, Cipporus, Cloves, of each alike, Mastick Coral,
Anise-seed-rootes, of each 2. drachms: make a Quilt for the Stomach.

For a Pain in the Side.
TAke one Pint of the Carminative Decoction, of Diacatholicon half an ounce, of
Kitchen Sugar 3. ounces, of Oil of Camomile 2. oun. of Salt a small handful:
wherewith make a Glister; at night, take half an ounce of London-Treakle,
dissolve it in a draught of Camomile or Carduus-Posset, so drink it bedward,
and sweat after it: In your sweating now and then drink a little Mace-Ale; also
anoint the pained side with oil of Dill hot, or make a quilt of Camomile or
Mellilot-flowers, also the herb of Camomile and Pellitory of the wall, of each
3* good handfuls, of Dill-seed 4. ounces, of the seeds of Anise, Fennel, Comin,
of each 2. ounces: make a quilt about the bigness of two Trenchers square.
Then boil this quilt in milk for half an hour; after press it very well
between two Trenchers; so apply it as hot as may be endured to the pained side
all night.

An Excellent Syrrop for a weak Stomach.
TAke Cynamon grossly bruised, Sea-wormwood, of each a quarter of a pound,
Red-Roses 1. ounce, the Juice of Quinces, and Sherry Sack one pint and 3.
quarters: put them into a stone-bottle close stopped, and set them to infuse in a
pot of warm water four and twenty hours: then take them out and give them one
boiling or two: then strain them, and after boil the same into a Syrrop with a
pound and a quarter of fine Sugar. Take hereof every morning two or three
spoonfulls; so likewise in the Evening, either alone or in a little Mint-water.
This Syrrop is very effectual to strengthen a weak Stomach and Liver, to
excite a dejected Appetite, to make the Bowels hardy and strong, and to take
away their weak wearish tenderness, and comfort their retentive faculties.

A comfortable Syrrop to be taken against Melancholy.
TAke the clear juice of Burrage, Buglosse, and Pippins, of each half a pound.
The Juice of Sorrel, Endive and Hops, of each 2. ounces; Cynamon and yellow
Sanders, of each 1. drachme: clarify them with the white of an Eg, and boil
them into a Syrrop with a pound and half of fine Sugar: then hang therein this
tied in a Button, Saffron half a dram, of Scarlet-Dye one dram, 6. grains
of Ambergrease, of Lignum Aloes one scruple.

For the Green Sickness.
TAke of Sena half a pound, Polipodie 4. ounces, Epithymum 2. ounces, Agarick,
Rhubarb, of each one ounce, sweet Fennel and Anise-seeds, of each an ounce and
half, Salsaperilla 5. ounces, Sassafras one ounce. Make a Bag for three Gallons
of new Ale; and about 2. or 3. days after it has done working, drink of it
both evening and morning, without intermission, the quantity of 5. ounces:
about 2. or 3. days after the ending of this, bleed in the Arm; then rest one
day; after take the Steel-wine for a fortnight: then rest for 2. or 3. days.
Lastly, take the Pills de tribus Farnelii, the quantity of half a dram or
somewhat more at a time, one hour at least before Supper, thrice a week.

Another for the Green-sicknesse.
FIrst vomit; then for four or five days take Worm-wood-beer, and Conserve of
Wormwood; afterward purge as before once; then take the Steel-Electuary, or
Steel-wine, using after that great exercise; after the Electuary use
Worm-wood-beer, or Wine: and once in five or six days purge with the Extract
Rhudius, a Pill so called; or otherwise as before; and seven or eight days
before the time of the Courses, or toward the new Moon, bleed in the foot; use
the Steel-wine set down in London-dispensitory, taking from half an ounce to an
ounce, or the Steel-wine thus: In a quart of White Wind put half an ounce of
prepared Steel, and 1. drach. of Cloves and Mace, and more of this, take 2.
ounces at the first according by degrees unto 6. ounces.

A Cooling Julip.
TAke Barly-water, Sorrel-water, of each half a pound, Julip and Syrrop of
Violets, Syrrop of the Juice of Cytrons, of each 1. ounce, Oil of Vitriol two
or three drops: mingle them, make a Julip very pleasing to Cool.

To make the Pills of Rosetta for Quitting the Stomach of soil, and for helping
Concoction.
TAke one pound of pure Aloes powdered and searced, and put it into an Earthen
vessel glazed, whereunto put so much Juice of Damask-Roses, or Rose Water as to
make it of the consistance of Honey: Then set it upon a gentle fire of small
coals, in a glazed Pipkin: So let it vapor away til it be too thick to stir
with a Spatter: Then put more Juice of Damask-Rose, or Rose Water to it, and do
as is already said; still reiterating the same till seven pounds of the Juice
or Rose Water it self be spent, and the Mass at last conduced keep for use.
The Dose is from 1. scruple, to 2. or 3. scruples.

Against Wind in the Stomach:
TAke a pound of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Anise-seeds, and the like
quaintity of Coriander-seeds: beat the seeds to a powder, and sift them through
a fine searcer: Then take four or five spoonfuls of Rose Water; and boil these
to a Paste: so make them up in the manner of Lozenges.

A Water for Sore Eyes.
FIll a shell with white or Red-rose-water, and therein dissolve four grains
of white Copperas over the fire, and put therein ten seeds of Comin, and keep
it for use, dropping now and then two or three drops in the Eyes.

A Physical Course for Sore Eyes.
TAke of the Pills of Aureae Lucis, and Cochiae, of each 1. scruple, mingled
well together. In the Morning and Evening eat the powder of Olibanum, and
Mastick in the ^ap of an Apple, or Olibanum with the Conserve of Roses: Also
wash the Eyes with Eye-water, made with Tutty, quenched in Eye-bright-water,
and a little Sugar Candy.

Another approved Water for the Eyes.
TAke half a quarter of Red-rose-water, and five Kirnels of a Quince sliced
very thin. Let them lie in the water two hours: then strain the water, and put
therein half a dra. of Tutty prepared, and two spoonfulls of Woman's Milk: Drop
a little now and then into the eyes.

A Receipt for the Mother.
TAke 2. ounces of Bayberries, the outward rind being taken off, and being
dried reduce them into a fine powder, which mingle with half a Pint of honey,
and so take morning and Evening a spoonful at a time.

A Physical Course for provoking the Courses.
FIrst purge thus, Take of the Powder of Hiera Picra simplex, of the Pills de
tribus Fernelii, of Agarick trochiscated, of each 1. scruple, of Castorium half
a scruple, of Chemical Oil of Time four drops; make these up into Pills with
the Syrrop of Mogwort, to the number of six or seven: Let the Patient take them
immediately after her first sleep; Then sleep again; The next day after let her
take this Decoction: Boil in Ale and white wind, of each a Pint, half unset
Hysop, unset Time, Penny-royall, Mugwort, Germander, of each a good handful,
Madder, Smalledge, Parsley and Fennell-rootes steeped in wine, of each an
ounce, Juniper and Cynamon, of each half an ounce. After they be well boiled,
strain them hard, and sweeten the same with 3. ounces of the Syrrop of Mugwort,
drink of this twice a day in the morning, and after noon about four of the
clock, and four days after their accustomed time of flowing, open the Saphaena
vein, and bleed the quantity of three or four ounces, to incite them downward;
The Saphaena vein is running about the Inner Anckle; upon the foot toward the
great Toe.

Receipts for Vomits.
TAke of the Glass of Antimony, pounded as small as may be 5. grains: Infuse
the same all night in 4. ounces of White Wind, shaking it diverse times, early
in the morning pour out all the clear part, whereunto add one ounce of Oxmiel
Julinizans: so take it, drinking after every vomit a draught of Posset-Ale: Or
take of Mercurius Vitae 5. grains in a spoonful of White Wind: Or take 2.
ounces of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum: or take Warm-water wherein a
Reddish-root has been boiled, adding to it a little Sallet-oyl, also a little
Oxmiel of the squill may be added. This vomit is taken specially for the
weakness of the Stomach and for four or five days together; it is taken for
expelling the Phlegmatic, and Malign humors.

A Receipt of a Pessary for the Mother.
TAke Benjamin, Storax, Cloves, of each 1. dr. Musk 6. grains, Civet 4.
grains, powder them, and with Bumbast make a Pessary, anointing with oil of
Mase.

A Fomentation to provoke the Courses.
TAke the Roots of Madder, Eringus, Fennel, Smalledge, Parsley, Grass,
Lillies, and Marsh-Mallowes, of each 4. ounces, Penny-royall, Fetherfew, of
each a good handful, of Parsley, Smalledge, Cessely, Feunegreeke, Althea, of
each one ounce of Comin, Flowers a good handful: boil these in two parts, one
part Water, and one part Wine, Foment the region of the Womb very well.

An heating Fomentation for a cold Stomach.
TAke Red-roses, Mints, Wormwood, Time, Sage, Marjorum, of each a good
handful, Ginger, Cloves, Cynamon, of each 2. ounces, Citron-Pilles half an
ounce: boil these in a quart of Red-wine, and foment the Stomach with it hot,
dipping in the same a piece of scarlet-cloth, pressing out the Liquor with two
Trenchers. Also this may be made more comfortable by putting to it 1. dram of
the Spices of Aromaticum rosatum.

A Cooling Fomentation for an hot Liver.
TAke of Oil of Roses 2. ounces, Oil of Camomile 1. ounce, Juice of Succory and
Orenges, of each 1. ounce and half, Claret-tart-wine 1. ounce: mingle these,
and with a sponge or linen clout foment the region of the Liver; it is good in
hot Fevers.

An Epithem for the forehead to drive away headaches.
TAke Rose Water four ounces, Oil of Roses (...). ounce, Rose-vineger half an
ounce, the white of an Eg beaten in the same, wherein dip Linen clothes cold,
or but milk warm, and apply them to the forehead to assuage headaches, and
repel hot vapors.

An Epithem to Cool and open Obstructions of the Liver.
TAke Agrimony, Endive, Succory with the roots, of each a good handful,
Wormwood half a handful, Succory-Flowers 2. small handfuls, of the four cold
great and lesserseeds, of each 1. dram and half, Lupines 3. drachmes, Copper
as all the Saunders of each 1. d. Vnicusodoratus 1. scruple: put these into a
Bag, and boil them in half a pint of Endive-water, add 2. ounces of each
Vinegar, and Wine, and apply it to the Liver, lukewarm, pressed with your hand.

An Epithem to cause Sleep.
TAke Henbane, Lettice-leaves, Flowers of Water Lillies, Violets, of each a
good handful, seeds of Poppy, Lettice, Dill, Henbane, of each half an ounce:
bruise all, and sow them between two linen clothes, and apply them to the
forehead.

An Incesse for the Piles, swelling hard and painful.
TAke Henbane-Leaves 4. good handfuls; Mullet and Plantane, of each two good
handfuls, Linseed 2. ounces: boil it in a Gallon of Milk, strain it, and set
the Fundament to bathe in it upon a close-stool; afterward apply dubble
clothes dipped therein.

A Bath to cleanse the skin of Scabbs, Scurse, and such like.
TAke Red-dock-roots, Bryony-roots, Elycampany, Wake Robbin-roots, Serpentary
or Dragon-roots, of each a pound, Mallows, Violets, Branck urcyn, Mercury,
Beets, Scabius, Fumitary, Burrage, Sapomana, Hastalaregis, Succory, of each a
good handful, Centary-flowers and roots, of each a good handful, Lupines,
Beans and Pease, of each 2. ounces, Barley two good handfuls, Sena 4. ounces:
boil all in Water, for a Bath to bathe in, and give the Patient half a pound of
each of Lupine Flower, and red Cycers into the Bath to rub himself withal.

A Receipt to bring out the Small Pox.
TAke two Figs sliced, a spoonful of Hartshorn steeped, a few
Mary-gold-Flowers, and Tops, one Leaf of Carduus Benedictus, and a little
Saffron: boil them in Posset-Ale, and give the Patient to drink thereof.

To hinder Dinting.
TAke Beef-broth, and bathe the Scabs therewith; after take the Fat of
Calves-Feet boiled and beaten white with May-dew and Rose Water: anoint the
face withal: Or take white wind, and Butter, of each a quarter of a pound,
boil them together, and use to bathe the Face often, or melt salt-butter put
into cold-water, and so anoint the Face withal.

A Bath for cold Diseases or Palsies.
Boil Juniper Berries, Broom-seed 20. good handfuls, Penny-royall, Origanum,
Hysop, Time, Sage, Satureia, Bayberries, Rose-mary, Camphery, Pellitory of
Spain, of each 2. good handfuls, Guaicum, Sassafrass, of each 1. pound: boil
them in water enough to bathe them.

A Lotion for the Feet to induce Sleep.
TAke Malloes, and Lettice, of each 2. good handfuls, Poppy-heads, in number
ten, the rindes of Mandrake-roots, Baum, of each 1. oun. Flowers of
Water Lillies, Mellilot, of each a good handful, Dil-seed half an oun: boil
them in water; wherein wash and bath the feet bed-ward; but do not dry them,
and wrap them up in a cloth wet in the same.

A good Restorative for weak Convalescent persons after a long and tedious
sickness.
TAke Pine-Apple-Kirnels, Pystaches, of each 4. ounces, fine White-Sugar half a
pound, Red Coral 1. dram and half, Cynamon 1. dram, species de gemmis
Frigide 2. drachmes, Nutmegs half a dram, Mace 5. grains, Conserve of
Burrage, Cytron-Pils preserved, of each 1. ounce and half, Pearl 1. dram and
half, white Burrage-water; make paste, and ice it over with Sugar, and Cynamon.

To make a Caudle for restoring good Blood.
TAke white wind and water, of each a like quantity, Rose Water one spoonful,
two Yelks of Eggs sweetened well with Sugar together with some Cynamon: boil it a
while, so drink thereof.

A Powder against the wind in the Womb.
TAke Cynamon 1. dra. Saffron half a dram, Cassia Lignea 2. scr. white Amber
1. scruple: mingle them, make a Powder, and give it in white Lillie-water or
Lark Spur.

Another for the same.
TAke Cynamon, Saffron, of each 1. scruple, Borax 4. scr. give it in
Mugworth-water.

A Pultes to bind the Belly in Fluxes, proceeding from a cold Cause to be
applied to the Belly.
TAke Tostes of bread steeped in Vinegar 6. ou. beat it in a mortar, and add
Mace, Mastick, Mirtle-berries, Stones of Rasins, Cloves, Galany, Flowers of
Pomgranats, of each 1. ounce, Oil of Wormwood, and Mints, of each 2. ounces:
make a Cataplasm.

A Pultes to soften the hard swelling of the Liver and Spleen.
TAke Marsh-Mallow-roots, of each 3. oun. Malloes, Violets Holy-oaks, or each 3
good handfuls, Flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, of each 1. good handful, Figs
six, Tops of wormwood 2. small handfuls: boil them in water until they be
tender, and strain them in a course searce; then add Flower of the Flowers of
Camomile, Anise-seeds, of each 1. ounce, Flowers of Lin-seed, Fenny-greeke,
Goose-grease, and Oil of Camomile, Lillies, Fresh-butter, Marrow of a Calf, Oil
of Flowers de Luce, of each 1. ounce: mingle them, make a Pultes, whereunto add
a little Vinegar.

A Pultes to ripen and supporate Biles and Tumors.
TAke Marsh-Mallowes and Mallow-Roots, half a pound, Mallows 1. good handful*
Bread 1. pound: Boil them in water, and strain them through a searcer, and with
4. oun. of Barrowes-grease make a Pultes.

A Pultes for Bruises.
TAke of both the Camphery-roots of each 3. ounces, Camomile and Mellilot, of
each 2. good handfuls, Saffron 1. scruple, Bean^-flowers 2. ounces, Fennegreek
1. ounce: boil them in water and add Wormwood and Comin-seed of each half an
ounce: make a Pultes.

A Pultes to allay heat and Inflammation in any part.
TAke Marsh Mallow-roots 3. ounces, Mal^lowes with the roots, Violets, Blank
V^s^^, Chick-weed, of each a good handful, Flowers of Camomile, Violets
powdered* and Bo^^ 1. small handful: boil them in fat Mutter-broth, or water,
and add Hoggs-grease half a pound, make a Pultes.

A Gargle for inflammation in the Throat, etc.
TAke Plantine, Cinque-foil, Bramble-Leaves, Columbine, Straw-berry-Leaves,
Honey-suckles, Red-Rose-leaves, Jewsears, Sage, of each half a good handful,
Barley one ounce, Licorish half an ounce* boil them in water, and to one pound
ad Melcosatum four ounces, Allom one dr: make a Gargle to be used lukewarm.
And for sore throats you may put to the aforesaid one dr. of Salpruneliae to
cool, cleanse and dry more. This Salpruneliae in Ale with Honey will cure
Sore-throats very well: If the sore in the Mouth, or Throat be foul and Sordid,
to this Gargle you may add Aegyptiacum allayed first with Vinegar, and Honey of
Roses, or take Plantine water half a pound, Syrrop of Mulberries 3 ounces, and
a little Oil of Vitriol, to make it a little tart.

For foul and Eating Sores.
TAke Sublimate 4 grains, Plantine and Rose Water, of each 3 ounces: dissolve
it, and touch the place and Gargle sometimes lukewarm.

A Gargle to draw Fleam.
TAke Sage, Rose-mary, Time, Origan, of each one good handful; boil them very
well, and to half a pound put Oxmiel three ounces, Mustard one or two good
spoonfuls; or else boil Sage in Vinegar, and put to it Mustard and Honey.

A Gargle for Sore Throats, called in the shops Mouth-water made but once for
all the year, in the spring.
TAke Woodbine-leaves, and Flowers half a peck Salendine* Laurel, or Spurge,
Sage, Rue, Mary gold-tops, Cytron, Rose-mary-tops, Cinquefoile, Valerian,
Agrimony, Perry-winkle, St. John's Wort, Veronica, or Speed-well, white
Collumbine leaves, Scabious, Scrophulania, of each a good handful; Boil them
in a Galon of running water to the East, into two parts, standing first one
night in infusion; then being boiled strain them hard, and add one ounce of
Alom of the Cork, and four ounces of Honey; Then boil it again, and skim it as
long as any that rises, afterward let it settle one night; In the morning pour
out the clearest, which keep for use, putting thereunto about 4 ounces of
Vinegar.

A Gargle for an unsavory breath.
TAke Rose Water, Myrtle water, Orenge-Flower-water, of each 2. oun; Musk 3.
gra. Amber-grease 6. grains, Salt a little more; Musk and Amber-grease you may
put in for greater persons.

A Moderate suppository to loosen the Body.
TAke Honey thickened 1. ounce, hieriae species, Hierae picrae and aloes, or
Agarick 1. scruple, Salt half a scruple, or add Salgem, or Mustard 2. scruples:
make a Suppository.

A stronger Suppository.
TAke Honey thickened half an ounce, Scamony, Salt, of each 1. scruple: or take
Honey concrete 2. ounces, Euphorbium half a scruple, powder of Colloquintida 5.
gra. powder of white Hellebore 2. ounces, Salt 1. ounce, Hierae picrae half an
ounce: make a Suppository.

A Suppository for Wind.
TAke Honey congealed 1. ounce, seeds of Fennel, Rue, Comin, Anise, Carua, of
each 1. scruple, Colloquintida half a scruple, Salt 1. dram: These will make
a good Suppository for wind.

A Suppository to cease Pain.
TAke Opium, Saffron, Castor, of each half a scruple, with boiled Honey or Wax,
and Oil of Water Lillies; make Suppositories with long strings to them, to draw
them out at pleasure.

Nourishing Glisters to be given to weak persons, or when they cannot swallow
by reason of some impediment; or when they vomit up all they eat to the hazard
of their starving. They must be given after another Glister has washed away
the excrements, and toward bedtime. They are as follows.
TAke Capon-broth, or distilled Capon-broth 1. pound and half, Sugar of Roses
2. ounces Mingle them, make a Glister; Or take Barly-Creame 1. pound and half,
Claret or White Wind 4. ounces: mingle and inject, or take Chicken-broth, or
thick Barly-water 1. pound and half, three yolks of Eggs, Wine 4. ounces:
Mingle and inject. These will nourish weak persons exceedingly.

An Heating and warming Glister for cold diseases of the Head or Guts.
TAke Mercury, Origan, Calamint, Rue, Penny royal, of each a good handful,
Flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, Dill, Stecado's, of each a good handful, of
Fenne-greek, Carua Comia, Anise, Fennel of each half an ounce, Agarick tied
in a clout 2. drachmes: Boil it in Tripe-broth or Sea water, dissolve it in a
pound and half of this Decoction, Benedicta Laxativae an ounce, Oil of Dill.
3 ounces, Canar^-sack, make a Glister.

A Cooling Glister in hot diseases.
TAke Mallows, Violets, Lettice, of each a good handful, of the four could
seeds, great seeds, of each half an ounce: Prunes, 20. Violet, and Buglosse
Flowers, of each a small handful, boil them to a Pint, and put in
Kitchin-sugar, 1. ounce, and Oil of Violets 3 ounces, or take Barley and
Lin-seed, of each 2 ounces, boil them, and to 1 pound, put Sugar 1 ounce and
half, one yolk of an Egg, common Oil 3 ounces, Salt one handful, take Milk
warmed one pound, Sugar and Syrrop of Violets of each two ounces: Make a
Glister to cool.

An Emollient Glister.
TAke the Common Decoction of Glisters one pound, Common Oil, Butter, or
Barrowes-grease three ounces; make etc. The Common Decoction for Glisters is
this; Take of Mallows, Violets, Pellitary of the wall, Beets and Mercury, of
each a good handful, of Fennel seeds half an ounce, boil all these in a
sufficient quantity of water to a Pint.

An Emollient purging Glister:
TAke Lilly and Mallow-roots, of each one ounce Mallows, Marsh-Mallowes,
Orah, of each a good handful, Lin-seed, and Fen-greek of each an ounce, Flowers
of Mellilot, Violets, of each a little handful, Figs, Anise-seeds 2 drachmes,
Prunes five; boil these in water or fat broth, and to a pint put Cassia
extracted for Glisters 1 ounce Hieraepicrae half an ounce, Butter, Oil of
Violets and Lillies of each 1 ounce and half, inject this Glister three hours
before Meat; To make this Glister more Stimulating and purging, put one ounce
of Benedicta Laxative, or Diaphenicon, with a scruple, or half a dram of
Salgem, and a dram of common Salt,

A Carminative or Collick-Glister.
TAke of the Carminative Decoction 1. pound, Canary-wine, and Oil of Dill, of
each 4 oun. inject the same. The Carminative Decoction is this: Take
Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Caroway-^eeds, Commin-seeds, Carrot-seeds; of each
2. drachmes, Flowers of Camomile half a good handful, Raisins an ounce and
half, boil them in 2. pound of water to a pound.

Another Glister for the aforesaid purpose.
TAke Mallow-roots half a pound, Branch Vrein, Mallows, Penny-royall,
Hore-hound, Calamin^, Origan, Wormwood, of each half a good handful, Figs 12.
Lin seed 1. ounce, Com n, Anise, Fennel, and Carua seeds, of each half an
ounce, Flowers of Comin, Mellilot, Lavender, Ste^ado's, of each two small
handfuls: boil these in water and old wine to a Pint, add Benedicta Laxativa 1.
oun. Electuary of Bay berries half an ounce, Oil of Comin, and Rue, of each 3.
ounces: make a Glister.

A Glister for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder.
TAke the roots of Althea, Grass, Sparagus, Licorish shaved, Pedis Columbini,
of each 1. ounce, Betony, Linaria, Fennel, of each a good handful, Malloes with
the Roots a good handful, Figs, Raisins, of each 10. a piece, Seeds of Parsley,
Malloes, Alhakengi, Grummel, Smalledge, Linseed, of each 2. ounces, Bayberries,
and Juniper Berries, of each 2. ounces, Flowers of Broom, Camomile, and St.
John's Wort, of each 2. small handfulls, boil them in Water and White Wind: and
to a pint put Oil of Lillies, bitter Almonds, Scorpions and Honey, of each 2.
ounces, Turpentine 1. ounce: make a Glister for the Stone

A Glister to break the Stone.
TAke Roots of Grass, Smalledge, Parsley, Sparagus, Althea, Licorish, of each
2. ounces, Leaves of Betony, Saxifrage, Sea-Fennel, of each a good handful,
Seeds of Grummel, Winter-Cherries, of each one ounce: boil them, and in a pint
dissolve juice of Raadish or Pellitory of the Wall, one ounce, Oil of Scorpions
3. ounces: make a Glister.

A Deterging or washing Glister.
TAke Barley-water one pound, Red Sugar or Honey 2. ounces, etc.

A Consolidating or healing Glister in Dysenteries.
TAke Barley torrified two small handfulls, Plantane, Mirtles, of each half a
good handful, Comfery-roots, and Mullet, of each two ounces, Red Roses, a small
handful, boil them in Steel-water, or Smiths-water, to ten ounces, then add
juice of Plantine and Purslein, of each one ounce and a half, bole Armoniack,
Dragons-blood, Starch, Trochiscarum albarum thasis, of each one dr. Goats sewet
two ounces make a Glister.

A Glister to kill Worms.
TAke Roots of Gentian, Torrid Aristolochia a small handful and half,
Tilochia one ounce, Wormwood, Fetherfew, of each a good handful, Peach-leaves,
half a good handful, Flowers of Centry two small handfuls, Lupines one
spoonful; boil them in Conduit-water to a pound, and add Oil of bitter Almonds
three ounces, make a Glister, and inject this twice in one hour for the small
Worms in the Guts.

A Glister for Worms in the Stomach.
TAke of Barley two small handfuls, Figs ^o Anise-seeds 1 drachme, boil them
thick, make a Glister without Oil or Salt, to invite them down-ward.

An Astringent Glister in a Lientary Diarrhea or Scowring.
TAke Roots of Bistort, Tormentil, Mullet, of each a good handful, St. John's
Wort, Myrtles, Tops of Brambles, of each a good handful, sower wild Pears to
one Cypress-Nut, Red Roses a good handful, boil them in Steel water, or
Smiths-water, and Red-wine to a pound, and Hipocislis or Acathia, Ladanum, of
each half an ounce; inject this after a deterging and astringent Medicine given
by mouth of Rhubarb, and Mirabolans.

A Glister to purge Choler.
TAke in any cooling or emollient Glister, Cassia one ounce, Syrrop of Roses
Solutive three dr. make a Glister.

A Glister to purge Fleam.
TAke one pound of the Common Decoction; whereunto put Benedicta Laxativa one
ounce Diaphenicon one ounce, Honey of the Squil one ounce, Salt one dr. make a
Glisters Also the Corminative Decoction has the same effect.

A Glister to purge Melancholy.
TAke one pint of the Common Decoction, wherein boil Burrage, Buglosse,
Fumitary, flowers of Camomil, Mellilot and Dill; to the which put Diacatholicon
1. ounce, Hamech half an ounce, Oil of Dill, Violets, and Lillies, of each 1.
ounce: make a Glister.

To stay bleeding at Nose.
PUt up Tents of Towe in powdered colcated Vitreol burnt red, with the white of
an Egg, which does presently cauterize the vein, and sear it up.

A Powder outwardly applied to bind and astringe in Bleeding.
TAke of Frankincense 1. dr. Aloes half a dr. make them into powder, which
temper with the white of an Egg, to the consistance of Honey: Then put
thereunto the soft hairs of a Hare, and apply it to the bleeding wound, Sore or
vein, plentifully, and tie it on.

To take away red Spots, Freckles, and Pimples in the Face.
TAke of Mercury Sublimate powdered 1. dr. the which dissolve in half a pound
of fair water upon hot embers in a Pot; put to it the ^uice of Lemmon; so use
it.

Of Nasalls deterging, these are used to purge the Head by the Nose, and are of
excellent use in Apoplexical Diseases, Lethargies, or dead sleep.
TAke Barley-water a pound, Honey, Roses, or Syrrop of Stecados, 4. ounces:
mingle them, and snuf into the Nose a moderate quantity at a time.

Liquid Nasalls for Fleam.
TAke the distilled water of Hysop, Sage, Marjoram, Betony, Piony half a pound,
White Wind 2. ounces, Juice of Mercury, Anagalis, of each 1. ounce, Honey or
Oxmiel, Scilitium an ounce and half: for a Nasall to be snuffed up warm, will
bring down Fleam in abundance; and to increase more the drawing down of Fleam,
you may boil in the waters 1. drachme and half of Agarick trochiscated.

A Nasall to draw down Choler.
TAke Barley-water, wherein you may put. 1 dr. of Diagredium, and 2. ounces of
the Syrrop of Roses.

A Nasall to draw down Melancholy.
USe the Nasall for the Fleam, wherein you may boil Sena or black Hellebor, or
Polipody, or Epithymum:

A Nasall against an ill smell proceeding from the Nose
TAke the juice of Marjoram, Rose water, of each 2 ounces, of the flowers of
Orenges one ounce Honey of Roses strained half a dram, Musk 1 grain,
Amber-grease two grains mingle these together, and snuf them up into the Nose.

Directions how to Govern a Woman in her first conception, before, in, and
after the great work of labor, that she may know how to foster it, and hold it
fast, till time of Maturity; then how with ease, and good speed to bring it
into the world; and after how to reduce her self to her wonted state of health.
THerefore to preserve her Infant, and prevent Abort or miscarrying, this
ensuing Remedy is commended to be taken.

Take of Coriander seed prepared 2 drachms, of the root of Bistort, the
shavings of Ivory and red Corrall, of each a dram, of White Amber, Crystal,
or each a scruple, Alkermes half a scruple, Sugar dissolved in 4 ounces of
Rose Water: make Tabelets, each of them weighing a dram. Let the patient take
one every other day in the morning and in the Evening between whiles: Let her
sup up a rear new Egg, thickened a little with Magisterium of Pearl, or fine
Powder, or red Corral: But if her Breasts after their filling should begin to
lessen and fall, it is a presage of future Abort, she must then apply these
sear-clothes hereafter following.

Take the Root of Bistort, of Corianders, of each t o dr. of unripened Gales,
of red Sanders and Hipecistidos, of each one dr. of Ladanum a Gum, Mastick of
each half an ounce, of choice Frankincense, of Bdellium (the Gum of a Tree in
Arabia, of each two dr. of Coral, Amber, of each one dr. powder these which are
to be powdered, and with Oil of Mastick Turpentine, and Wax, make two or three
Searclothes: Apply them sometimes to her Loins and sides, and sometimes too
under the Navil: she must avoid all sudden and violent motions both of the mind
and body, as Coughs, Sneesings, Frights, also Spices and strong Wines, and thus
much before labor.

In Labor to procure ease and speed, take of the Powder as follows.

Take of the root of white Dictamne, of the Stones of Dates, of Borax, of each
2. scruples, of Cynamon, Cassia Lignea, Amber, Fine Pearl, of each 1. scruple,
of Saffron half a scruple: make a small powder; which divide into two equal
parts; and let her take one part in a draught of the Water of white Lillies or
Posset-Ale, made with Renish Wine, and the other part let her take about six
hours after, if need require, if she should be subject to fainting or swouning
before or after Labor, take now and then a spoonful of this excellent
Cordial, as follows. Take of Borage-water, Rose Water, Strawberry-water, and
Renish-wine, of each 2. ounces, of the Species of Diamargaricum Frigidum 1.
scruple, make a warm infusion for the space of an hour; then strain and add
thereunto Manus Christi made with Pearl 4. ounces, of the Syrrop of Baum 1. ou.
of the Syrrop of Lemons, and the Syrrop of Gilley-flowers, of each 2. ounces,
of Oriental Besar, Vnicorns-horn and amber-grease of each 6. grains: make a
Cordial Julip.

After Labor. Many times great pains and panges do follow women newly
delivered, for which this plain simple Remedy is very good. Drink a good
draught of bear boiled with a spoonful of Camomile-flowers, and in greater
pains let her drink 6. ounces of the Oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn.

To dry up Milk, a quick and safe Remedy is neu sponges wet in vinegar
(wherein a handful of comin-seed bruised is boiled) tied close to the Breasts,
also anointing them with Vnguentum populeum.

To procure store of Milk, use Posset Drink made and boiled with Fennel, and
the sweet seeds of Anise seeds, and Fennel. Also to cause speedy Labor, take 3
or 4 drops of the distilled Oil of Nutmegs in a spoonful of white wind. These
Remedies are approved to be safe, sure, and forceable to effect what is desired.

A Restorative-broth for weak persons.
TAke an ounce and half of very good Salsaperilla, and half an ounce of China
sliced, a spoonful of Hartshorn scraped, and a spoonful of Ivory: Infuse them
3 or 4 hours in 3 pints of chickin-broth upon hot embers and close stopped; then
boil it to a pint and a half with a few Rasins stoned, and two or three Dates:
whereof drink every morning a glassefull. Add toward the end of the boiling,
half a spoonful of Marigold-flowers.

A Cordial against Melancholy vapors, etc.
TAke of Baum-water half a pound, of Burrage, and Rose Water, of each 2 ounces;
make it a little tart with a few drops of the oil of brimstone, in which infuse
cold 1 scruple of Saffron for 4 hours: then put to it half an ounce of
Burrage, and Buglosse; which let stand for 4 or 5 hours more: then let it run
through an hipocras bag, whereunto put dulcified Magisterium of pearl 2
scruples, East-Indie-Bezer 6 ounces, as much Unicorns horn, Syrop of Baum fresh
made 1 ounce, Syrop of the rindes of cytrons, and good syrop of Gillyflowers,
of each half an ounce, confection of Alkirmis 1 dram Aqua caelestis one
spoonful; so make it a Julip very cordial; whereof take a spoonful now and
then as occasion requires. Dissolve in this Julip 1 ounce of Manus christi.

A temperate cordial Julip.
TAke of Burrage, Sorrel, Scabious, and Rose Water of each 2 ounces and half,
of the species of Diamargarater frigidum, 1 scruple; give it a warm or two over
the fire; Then turn it in an hipocras bag, to which add Manus christi with
pearl, 3 ounces, or 4 ounces, of syrop of Baum and Lemons, of each 1 ounce:
Dissolve the Manus christi on the fire, then take it off, and add to it
Bezer-stone, and Vnicorns-horn, of each 4 grains, so make it into a Julip.

A distilled purging water to be used in Dropsies.
TAke the berries or seeds of Elders of Danewort, being ripe in the Autumn, a
good quantity, press out their juice; then bruise the stones or kirnels, and
pour on the juice, and distill it: This water purges plentifully waterish
humors in Dropsies given from 1 ounce to 2 ounces, being aromatized with
Cynamon, and Corianders prepared.

A Vomiting Water.
TAke of Crocus metallorum 1 ounce, of Carduus Benedictus-water 2 li. Cynamon
half a ounce: infuse them for 3 or 4 days, then ^train them, and keep it for
use. The Dose is from 1 ounce to 2 or 3 ounces.

For provoking the Courses, and curing Vapors histericall
TAke Pills of Castorium with a little Nutmeg, Castor powdered as much as will
^ye upon a Groat taken often in Beer, provo^eth women's Courses, and cures
Vapors histe^icall.

Cordials to be taken after Physic.
TAke of Alkermes, 1 dram, and mingle it with 2 ounces of the Syrop of
Gillyflowers or take the Conserve of Gillyflowers 2 drachms and mingle it with
Alkermes; Or take of Diacodium half an ounce, and Alkermes half a dram,
dissolved in Strawberry, or Lettice, or Carduus benedictus, or Rosewater. Of
take of Mitridate, or old Conserve of Roses, of each the quantity of an hazle
Nutt; Take it toward bedtime.

A Purging Ale or Bear to clear Melancholy, Fleam, Choler, and all muddy and
terrestrial humors, to purify the Blood, and quit the Scurvy, and the like.
TAke the depined juices of Apples, Fumitary, Agrimony, Succory, Burrage, Baum,
Scabius, Liverwort, Scurvy grass, Tops of Hops, all stamped together 2 pound,
Roots of Polipody of the Oak, 2 ounces, roots of Grass, Asparragus, Sorrel,
Buglosse, Succory, red Dock, Elycampany, of each half an ounce, rindes of
Capers, Tamarisk, the inner rind of young sprouts of Ash, of each 3 drachms,
Licorish, and Epithymum, of each 1 dram and half, Maidenhair, Agrimony, of
each 2 good handful, Broom-flowers, Violets, Burrage, and Buglosse of each a
good handful: the four greater, and four lesser cold-Seeds, of each 2
drachms, Sena 5 ounces, or half a li. Rhubarb 1 ounce, Mechoican 1 ounce and
half, Seeds of Fennel, Carua, Anise, of each 6 drachms, Ivory, Hearts horn,
Yellow Sanders, Sassafrasse, of each half an ounce, Ginger 2 drachms, 1 Nutmeg,
prepare all according to Art, and make a Bag to foment, and work in four
Gallons of Eight shillings Bear; and after it has wrought put in the juices.
Let all the Herbs be of equal quantity. Also this purges a dust, burn,
atrabilarious humors, opens obstructions of the Liver, and Spleen.

Another Purging Ale.
TAke of Sena 6 ounces, Polipody of the Oak, 4 ounces, Epithymum 2 ounces,
Agarick, Rhubarb, of each 6 drams, Ginger 1 ounce, Anise seeds, sweet
fennel-seeds, of each an ounce and half, Sasaparilla sliced half an ounce,
Dockroots, Madder roots, Succory, and Fennel roots, of each 1 ounce: and if
green Fumitary, Agrimony, and Succory be come up, take 2 good handfuls of each,
of Hartshorn, Ivory, of each 2 ounces; yellow sanders 1 ounce, make it into a
Bag of 4 gallons of Ale, to which add one pint and a half of the juice of
Succory, scurvy-grasse: Let all work 3 days, and then drink of it twice a day.

A Dyet-drink to clear, and temper the blood.
TAke Scurvy grass half a peck, Brooklime, Watercresses, Agrimrny, Maidenhair,
Liverwort, Burrage, Buglosse, Bettony, Sage, Sweet marjorum, Sea-wormwood, tops
of green hops, Fumitary, of each a good handful, Ivory, Hartshorn, and yellow
Sanders, of each one ounce, Red dock-roots, 2. ounces; Persly, Fennel,
Asparagus-roots, of each 1. ounce, Rasins half a pound: boil these very well in
a gallon of Beer, then stamp, and strain them, and put it into three gallons
more of Beer, to work together.

A Cerote for the Spleen.
TAke of Amoniack, Bdellium, Apapanax, of each 1. dram, of the flowers of
Mellilot, Camomile, Scolopend, Maidenhair, the Rindes of the roots of Tamarick,
Capers, Plantin-seed, Lin-seed, and Fennegreek, of each two scruples: Of the
oil of Capers 2 ounces, of fresh Butter an ounce and half, of Ship-pitch 1
ounce, mingle them, and make a Cerote to be applied to the Region of the Spleen.

A Decoction to be taken against the Inflammations and obstructions of the
Liver.
TAke of Burrage, Buglosse, Agrimony, Succory, Violets, Endive, Fumitory, of
each a good handful: of the roots of Parsley, and Fennel, of each 1. ounce, of
Rasins stoned 4 ounces, of Dates 3 ounces, of Anis seeds 2 ounces, of
Fountain Water, and White Wind, of each 3 li. of sugar 1 li. of Licorish 1
ounce. Mingle all, and boil to the consumption of half, and strain it very
well. Take hereof every morning six ounces at a time.

A Syrop to cleanse and temper the Blood.
TAke of the Juice of Scurvy-grasse, Brook-lime, Watercresses, Buglosse,
Pippins or Pear-mains, of each half a li. of the Rinds of roots of Capers,
tamarisk Ash, of the roots of Elicampany, of red dock-roots, of Polipody of the
Oak, of each half an ounce, of Epithymum, Baum, Agrimony, Maidenhair, Broom
Flowers, Burrage, of each half a handful, of the seeds of Cucumber, of Millions
bruised, of each half an ounce, sees all to a li. and half, strain and boil it
into a Syrop with a sufficient quantity of Sugar.

A grateful Potion to purge and cleanse the Spleen.
TAke of Sena 6 drathms, of Strawberry-water made sharp with the Juice of
Lemons half a li. a little stick of Cynamon: Infuse it 24 hours, then boil it
gently, and strain it hard; to which expression, add an ounce and half of the
Juice of Pippins, or Pearmains, of Sugar Candy half an ounce, clarify it with
the white of an egg.

A good Decoction against the Cough, and short-breathing.
TAke of Baum, Maidenhair, Scabius, Hore-hound, Hysop, of each a good handful,
of the flowers of Violets, Buglosse and Burrage, of each a good handful; of
the roots of Longdebeef 2 ounces, of Damask-Prunes, Junibes 1 ounce and half;
Sebesten, Barley, Dates, dry figs, of each 1 ounce, of Licorish 10 ounces,
Penedies 2 ounces and half, of Fennel 4 ounces, of Honey half a li. Sees all
in sufficient quantity of water till half be consumed, so use it.

A very good Syrrop to be taken against cold diseases of the Brain and Sinews,
as the Palsy, Falling-sicknes, the Cramp, and water distilling out of the head
lying.
TAke of the Flowers of Stechados 4 ounces, of Time, Calamint, Origanum, of
each 1. ounce and half, of Sage, Bettony-flowers, and Rosemary of each half an
ounce, of the Seeds of Rue, Pyony, Fennel of each 3 drachms. Boil them in 10
pound of water till half be consumed; When the decoction is strained, boil it
again to a syrrop with sugar, and honey, of each 2 li. and candie it with
Cynamon, Ginger, Calamus aromaticus, or Nutmeg, of each two drachms, which
being bound up in a course cloth with open threeds, must be hanged in the
syrope.

To bind in Fluxes of the Belly, and to comfort withal the Stomach.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of Ising-glasse, which lay to steep in water 12.
hours, after boil the same in a quart of milk, whereunto put a slack or two of
Mace, two Dates sliced in the middle with the stones; keep it stirring till the
one half be consumed: take hereof 7. or 8. spoonfuls morning and evening: use
to take the same for a week or ten days together, if occasion so require; you
may therefore provide a better quantity of the aforesaid things, as 1. ounce
of Ising-glasse, half an ounce of Dates, 3. or 4. penyworth of Mace. So long as
you may use hereof, take withal these Waters mixed together as follows.

Of Baum-water half a li. and a like quantity of Hysop-water; dissolve therein,
a quartern of Sugar over the fire; strain, and take thereof five spoonfuls one
hour after dinner, whereunto put 4. or 5. drops of Cynamon-water. If the
aforesaid do not sufficiently bind, put a little Cynamon, or the cups of
Akhorns powdered therein.

Against Wind in the Body.
TAke of Ginger half a ounce, Anise-seeds 2 drachms, Coriander prepared 1.
ounce and half, Mace, Galingale, Cabebes, of each a dram, make all into fine
powder, well searced, adding as much sugar as you please. Take 1 dram of this
powder in four ounces of sweet wine, either Muscadine or Malmsie in the morning
fasting, and afterward walk awhile.

Against Pain in the Back.
TAke the slimie substance of the Camphery root in posset drink, and take the
same 4. or 5. days together: Or take Knotgrasse, shread it, and mix it with
butter; make a tansey with all. It much profits for the said Cure.

For the Stone in the Kidneys.
TAke the distilled water of Parseley what quantity you please for one draught,
whereunto add half a spoonful of the whitest Snail-shels finely powdered, with
4. or 5. drops of the Oil of Turpentine; drink it fasting, and walk after it
for an hour or more.

For cleansing the Blood.
TAke the leaves of Sena, Polypody, of each 3 ounces, seeds of Fennel and
Anise, of each 1. ounce, Hermodactils 2. ounces and half, Salsaparilla 3
ounces, Sassafrasse thin sliced 2 ounces, Agarick sliced 1 ounce, Rhuberb half
an ounce, Ginger a quarter of an ounce, Scurvy-grasse, Brooklime, Watercresses,
of each 3 good handfuls; Red dock-roots 2 ounces, put these into a
Boultering-bag, and boil it in 4. gallons of Ale, or Bear, and let the bag hang
in the vessel. Take every morning the quantity of 4 ounces or more, according
to the nature and condition of the body.

A Julip for a Tertian Fever.
TAke Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Strawberry-leaves, violet-leaves, of each a good
handful, French barley a good handful, Rasins stoned half a pound, Aniseseeds
1 ounce, one stick of Licorish: decoct these in a pottle of fair water, to the
consumption of half. Take hereof 7 or 8 ounces in the morning at a time.

A Purge for the same.
TAke the Pills of Cochi aureae, of each half an ounce, mix these together, and
make a Mass, and take the weight of nine pence for the Dose.

A Diet Drink to open and temper the Liver.
TAke the Roots of Fennel, Parsley Dock, Coroch, Knee-holm, of each half a good
handful, the leaves of Endive, Buglosse, Fumitary, Hart's-tongue, Agrimony,
Garden wormwood, Cetrach, of each a good handful, the back of the roots of
Capers, half an ounce. Boil these in a convenient quantity of Whey, till a
third part be spent, then clarify the same, whereof drink in the morning
fasting, at the least half a pound at a time.

A Receipt to make purging Prunes, Rasins, and Currents.
TAke of Prunes half a li. of Sena 1 ounce, Mechoacon 3 drachms, Turbeth 3 dr.
of Borage-water, Baum water, and Rose Water of each 4 ounces: boil them a
little, then strain them; whereunto add Manna 2 ounces, and Sugar a sufficient
quantity, to make the Liquor into a Syrope.

A Restorative Broth for weak and consuming Bodies.
TAke half an ounce of the best China thin sliced, infuse the same the space of
four and twenty hours in four Pintes of fair Spring Water, in a Pipkin close
stoped, standing upon hot Embers; Then put therein a small Chickin, or a little
piece of the Rack of Veal, and so set it over the fire made of Charcoals, to
boil gently, and put therein a Succory-root, the pith taken out, of the Leaves
of Agrimony, Buglosse, Cetrach, and Edive, of each a good handful, of
Hartshorn a quarter of an ounce at the least scraped, and a crust of White
bread; the which boil, till half the Liquor be consumed; then strain it, and
with a convenient quantity of fine Sugar, make the same fit for the taste.
Hereof let the party take in the morning early, and in the afternoon about four
of the clock, at every time the third part of a pint warm, and so every day
for the space of three weeks.

Remedies for the Hemorrhoids.
TAke the third part of a pint of Milk, and so much of Smiths-water, wherein
quench Gads of Steel: Oftentimes put into the same 2 ounces of the juice of
Clary; so inject luke warm. Take a pint of Milk and boil it, in boiling slack
it often when it rises with Plantine-water, so continue doing till a pint of
Plantine-water be put in, about the slacking of the Milk; Then take it off the
fire, and put thereunto 3 ounces of Mel rosarum, whereof drink at your pleasure.

Take the white of an Egg, 4 ounces of Fresh Butter out of a Chirne well
washed, and of Saffron a scruple, work these together, whereof at times put up
a little into the fundament for ceasing pain; but if the pain continue, to the
aforesaid add 2 good handfulls of Nightshade, and then it will be much more
effectual for the said purpose.

Also take Mastick, and Frankincense, of each a good handful, powder and straw
it upon coals of fire in a Chafindish, put it into a close stool, so fit over
it to take the fume thereof, and apply an Hagtaper-Leaf to the place.

Also take the Roots of Pilewort, and Mutton-suet, and shred them both together
small, then boil the same and strain them, so keep them for use to anoint the
Piles withal.

A special Receipt for the making of Aquavitae.
TAke of Tops of Rosemary, Sage, Marjorum, Origaum, Time, Wormwood, Sparemints,
Baume, of each a good handful, of Ginger scraped clean 1 ounce, of Nutmegs and
Cynamon, of each half an ounce, of Cloves, Mace, Pepper, and Grains, of each a
quarter of an ounce, of Galleangle-Roots sliced 1 ounce, of the Rasins of the
Sun cut through the middle 1 pound, of Fennel-seeds, and Annise-seeds, of each
2 ounces of Licorish scraped clean, and cut into thin slices, half a pound.
Bruise the Spices, and the Seeds a little, and break the Herbs between your
hands; then put all together into a Gallon or two of Muskadine, Sack, or such
like strong Wine; and so let them infuse in a Limbeck-pot close stopped, 24
hours upon hot embers, and the next morning distill them, with a very temperate
fire, and take special care that the head of your Limbeck be kept cold
continually, with fresh Water, and that the bottom thereof be fast Luted, that
none of the Vapors breath forth. Out of a Gallon of Liquor you may draw a
quart of excellent Aquavitae, and if then to the Fleeces in the Pot, you will
add a Gallon of strong Ale, or Lees of Wine, or of them both with half a pound
of Licorish, four ounces of Aniseseeds, and one ounce of Grains, and distill
it again, you shall draw an Aquavitae good for your Families, and poor
Neigbours in their necessities.

There is not a Water in use which can better fortify Life, then the aforesaid
Aquavitae: for it greatly comfort a weak stomach, expels Wind, puts
off Melancholy passions, preserves the humors from Corruption, and exceedingly
prevails against sownding. But the use thereof is not alike wholesome and good
for all Bodies: for unto them that are Lean, and of a dry Nature, and in the
Summer it is rather hurtful then good; because it dries too much the inner
parts, especially the Liver, and radical Moisture: But to old men, to gross,
and moist Bodies, it is very profitable, for it fortifieth the Stomach,
comfort excremental humors; discusseth Wind, and defends them from the
Lethargy, Apoplexy, and other cold diseases, unto which by reason of their
moist habit of Body they are very subject. Wherefore the moderate use thereof
is to be permitted to cold and phlegmatic bodies, especially in cold and moist
seasons, upon taking too much meat: and when the Stomach shall be troubled with
Wind, the quantity of a spoonful or two at a time, well sweetened with Sugar,
and if it be taken with an equal portion of Wormwoodw-ater, as a spoonful or
two of the one, and so of the other with Sugar also, comfort the Stomach
exceedingly, helps the Concoction, and discusseth Wind, without causing any
manner of hurt to the Liver. And being taken in this manner after a great Meal,
or whenever the Stomach shall be ill-affected by reason of Windiness, or
otherwise. It is not only good for the Phlegmatic, and such as are cold by
Constitution, but agreeable and wholesome for all other Bodies: But such as are
intensively hot and dry in their state of Body. If they stand in need of the
help thereof, it is best to take two parts of Wormwood water, and one of
Aqua-vitae mingled with Sugar, and so they may securely and profitably use it.

A Receipt for making of Cynamon-water.
TAke of Cynamon grossly beaten 1 li. of white Sugar 1 li. one Gallon of Sack,
and a quart of Rose Water steeped together four and twenty hours: of this
aforesaid is drawn by distillation a Water of singular efficacy against
sownding, debility of the Spirits, and principal parts. Physicians do advise
all that are respective of their healths, especially such as are of weak
Natures, never to be without it, and take now and then a spoonful or two,
especially when occasion shall invite the use of it.

A Receipt for making the Pills called de tribus Fernelii.
TAke of Mastick, Rhubarb, of each 2 ounces, Aloes 4 ounces, Agarick
t^ochiscated Powder of Hidra, of each 1 ounce and half, Cynamon half an ounce,
with Syrop of Succory, and Canary Wine, make it into a Mass of Pills.

A Receipt for curing the Bloody Flux, and for healing the Ulcers in the Guts,
caused thereby.
TAke the inner Rind of a sapline Oak, about 20 years growth, and put 2
handfuls of the said Rind being cut into small pieces in a quart of Milk: Boil
the same till it be ready to run over, then slake it with cold Milk, and
Plantine-water: So boil and slake it five or six times, which makes more
astringent. Let the Patient take half a pint at a time, adding to it a little
gross Pepper: Put the same back in water, and boil it with a little Cynamon,
and drink at Meals together with the aforesaid.

An approved Remedy by many for an Ague.
TAke of Smalledge one handful, and bruise the leaves by it self, then take of
white Frankincense 1 d. and break it small with one handful of Bay Salt, the
which mingle together with the Herbs, and make a Plaster thereof: And a little
before the Fit comes, apply it to the wrists of each Arm, and likewise to the
bowing of his Arms, so let them lie on till they be dry: continue so doing four
or five times, and it helps.

An Almond-Milk to cool and induce sleep.
TAke sweet Almonds blanched 5 li. beat them in a stone-mortar by sprinkling
them now and then with a little Barly-water, at last put a quart of Barly-water
to them, and four ounces of fine Sugar; Then strain it, adding two ounces of
Rosewater: this may be drawn out with Chickin broth, and sweetened with
Sugar Candy, instead of other Sugar.

To make a Barley Cream.
TAke 3 ounces of Barley boiled till it break off, blanched Almonds 2 ounces,
draw it out with half a pint of Barly-water, and strain it: And put so to it 1
ounce of the Julip of Roses, and a little sugar. Make a draught of Barley Cream
to be taken bedward to bring sleep in Fevers, and to cool hot and sharp Urine.

An excellent approved Water for Sore Eyes, to preserve the Eyesight, and to
recover it being hindered by any cause or means whatsoever.
TAke 3 dr: of Tuttia beaten into small powder, and as much Aloe Epaticum, 3
dr. of fine Sugar, 6 ounces of Rose water, and as much White wine: Mingle all
together, and put them into a glass, and stop it close, and let it stand in the
Sun for the space of a month (stirring it together once every day) then take
the same and distill it, and when you will use it, take the quantity of 5 or 6
drops at a time of the same Water, and drop it into your eyes both morning and
evening, and so continue it for a short space, and it will preserve your sight,
and cause it to come again being hindered and gone, and to be as clear, and as
perfect as ever it was before. This has been truly proved by diverse that have
lost their Eyesight for a good while together, and by using this means (by the
blessing of God upon it) have recovered the same again, and seen as clearly,
and as perfectly, as ever they did before.

Another approved Medicine to clear the Eyesight.
MAke a Powder of Fennel, Anise, and Elicampany, and temper them with
Aquavitae, and then dry them again, and eat hereof every morning and evening a
pretty quantity, and it will not only clear your Sight, but also purge Wind,
and make one that is old seem young a long time after.

Another excellent Remedy for the Eyes.
TAke pure new White Wind, and infuse therein the herb called Eyebright, and
Wood betony, of each a small handful, and so let it remain for the space of 3
days together, then sees it with a little Rosemary in it, and drink hereof a
good draught both morning and evening, and it will help you, and cause you to
have your sight both perfect and good. Accustom your self also to eat every
morning a new laid Egg rear roasted, and put therein some of the powder of
Eyebright, and that will likewise do you much good to the clearing and
perfecting of your sight.

An excellent Medicine to preserve the sight, and to clear the Eyes.
TAke a handful of Eyebright bound together, put it into a gallon of Beer,
when it is newly cleansed, let it hang in the midst of the drink, and let all
work together, until the drink be clear and ripe to be drunk, according to the
common use; and then drink as often as you will. It were not amiss to every
handful of the herb (to avoid windiness) to add 2 drachms of Fenel-seed well
dusted, and a little bruised. This has been truly proved.

For a Web or Pearl in the Eye.
TAke the White of a new laid Egg beaten to an oil, and the juice of
Dasie-roots and leaves, and of the juice of the roots and leaves of brown
Fennel, and of the juice of the leaves and roots of the white Honey-suckle,
with the 3 leaves: take of these joices two good spoonfuls, and put it to the
White of the Egg, and a little spoonful of pure honey, and a spoonful of
woman's milk, and one spoonful of Rosewater, and a half penyworth of
Spermacaeti, and as much White-sugar-candy beaten, and as much white Coporas as
a good Nutmeg made into fine Powder: labor them all well together with a
silver spoon, and scum off the foam, and put it into a glass, and keep it close
stopped, and lying on your back with a feather drop 2 or 3 drops at a time into
your Eye, use it 3 times a day till it be well.

For the Rheum in the Eyes, and to cure the Redness of them.
ANoint the Eyes 3 nights together with thin Cream, and then anoint them other
three nights with live Honey, and it helps.

A mavelous good Remedy for the Tooth Ach.
TAke a little Honey, and set it on the fire, and put there into some of the
bark of a tree called a White Bullace-tree, or else the bark of the Elder-tree,
either of them will serve being cut into very small pieces; take also a little
quantity of Ginger, and some Bay Salt: Mingle these together, and apply it
warm to your Tooth, and you will find present Remedy.

A mavelous good Medicine to drive away the Itch.
TAke, something to make you sweat 2 nights, one after another, viz: Mithridate
with water of Carduus Benedictus Afterward purge your self with this Purgation
following, viz: half an ounce of Diaphenicum and Hamech, mingled with Honey or
Syrop of Roses, also with a little Flesh broth (as the Broth of a Chickin, or
knuckle of Veal, or the like) taken in only in the morning, and so continue
your going to stool by often taking in some warm broth or caudle. Afterward
use this cooling Drink, viz: Take 2 good handfuls of Sorrel, of the herb called
in the shops Fumus terrae, Agrimonie, Scabius Cinquefoil, Endive, Succory,
Hearts horn, of each a good handful; boil them all in some quantity of
Buttermilk or Whey; and when it has well boiled, take it off from the fire;
and to make you purge well, take a pint thereof, and add to it half an ounce of
Sena. Take hereof every morning a good draught, and it will give you every day
a small purge; and by this means (with the blessing of God thereupon) you shall
in a very short time be cured.

A present Remedy for the Itch.
BOil the Roots of Elicampany, boil them very soft, and mix them in a Mortar
with fresh butter, and with the powder of Ginger, of these make an excellent
Ointment against the Itch, Scabs, etc.

To take out a Burning.
TAke Lambs-blood if you have it, or Chickins-blood, warm from the Lamb or
chickin if you can; and if not, warm it, and so bathe the place burnt therewith.

Another excellent Remedy for a Burning.
TAke Cassel-sope, and stir it on the fire until it be as thick as Salve, and
make plasters thereof and lay them on the place that is burnt, or anoint the
same therewith, and it will take away the heat or burning.

For the Bloody Flux.
STill Frogs as you do Herbs, or Flowers, or any thing else; but you must put
nothing unto them but the Frogs: take 2 or 3 spoonfuls of this Water in any
thing that you will drink, and you shall find present case.

An excellent Medicine for the Stone or Gravel.
TAke some quantity of White wine, Nutmegs, a small quantity of Oil and sugar,
also Limons (if they may be had) mingle these together, and take it in. It is
also exceeding good for the Colic.

An excellent Mead, to cleanse the Stomach, preserve the Liver, and very good
against the Stone.
TAke fair Spring Water, and put as much honey to it, that when it is warm and
well stirred together, it will bear an egg the breadth of a groat above the
water: let it stand so all night close covered, the next day set it on a clear
fire and boil it, still scumming it as long as any will rise: then put into it
3 handfuls of Agrimony, and 2 handfuls of Pellitory of the wall, Cynamon 3
ounces, Ginger 2 ounces, and 4 or 5 Nutmegs grossly bruised: put the Spice into
a little bag, with a bullet of lead or a stone to make it stick: put the herbs
and spice in a kettle together, and let them sees about half an hour: then
take out the herbs when you take off the Mead from the fire: let the bag of
Spice be put into the barrel with it, but it must stand till it be quite cold
before you tun it. This quantity of herbs and spice will serve 10 or 12 Gallons
of Mead, which is an excellent thing to cleanse the Stomach, preserve the
Liver, and wonderful good against the Stone.

A sovereign Remedy for the Mother, and Wind about the Heart.
TAke Licorish, Fennel-seed, Anise seed, Alexander-seed, of each a like
quantity, beat them together; then take Cynamon and Saffron, and beat them to
powder and temper it with clarified Honey or Sugar, and make thereof an
Electuarie, and eat thereof morning and evening.

An excellent Medicine for the Wind-Collick.
TAke Sassafrasse, Parsley, Lime, and Archangel, of each a like quantity, boil
them in stale Ale, from a quart to a pint; then strain them, and let the
Patient drink thereof morning and evening, and fast an hour after it.

Another approved Receipt to expel Wind, and to comfort the Stomach.
TAke Cynamon, Ginger, Mace, Cubes, Gallingall, Anise-seeds, Comin-seeds, and
Parsley-seeds, with powder of Bays, Camomile-flowers, Wormwood, Mints, and Rue,
mix them together, and put them in a cup of Beer, drink hereof morning and
evening, and you will find speedy remedy.

A mavelous good Remedy for the Palsy.
TAke the distilled water of Daffodils, bathe and rub the Patient with the said
Liquor by the fire, and it will cure him.

An approved Remedy for heat in the Mouth or Throat.
TAke a quart of Spring Water, and put it into a Pipkin, and put thereto 2
sticks of Licorish, and some Violet-leaves: then boil it to a pint, and strain
it, and gargle therewith often.

For the Heat of the Back.
TAke Oil of Roses 6 ounces and an half, and put to it a little Wax, and 4
drops of Vinegar, and anoint the back therewith.

An excellent Receipt for the heat in the Face.
TAke Campher, and lay it in fair water 4 or 5 hours, then take a piece of
Campher, and some of the Water which it lies in, and a spoonful of Capons
grease, and stir them well together half an hour, then anoint the face therewith
20 times a day, and it will drive away the heat.

An excellent Receipt to cause sleep.
TAke 1 ounce of Conserve of red Roses, half a dram of Alkirmis, and one
dram of Diuscordium: mingle these together, and eat them when you go to bed,
the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time.

An approved Remedy for the Cough.
TAke Brimstone beaten to powder half an ounce, put it in a new-laid Egg soft
roasted, mingle it well together: then drink it in the morning at your
breakfast, make as much again at night when you go to Bed, and you shall be
well at the second or third time, but if the Cough has holden you long, you
must take it so much the oftener.

A soverain Medicine for the Cramp.
TAke the little bone of the knee-joynt of the hinder leg of a Hare, and touch
^he grieved place therewith, and it does straitway help the Cramp.

An excellent Receipt for an Ague.
TAke Dragon, Salendine, Burrage, Buglosse, Angelica, Succory, Endive, Sorrel,
Betony, Pimpernell, Scabius, Agrimony, White honey-suckles that grow among the
graft a and Red honey-suckles of the same sort, of each of these a handful, of
Carduus Benedictus 2 handfuls dried or green; shred them and boil them very
small, then set them to steep in a pottle of White Wind over night, and still
it the next day in a dry still, the first is the best, and the small Water is
very good though not so strong; then give it to the sick party 1 hour before
the fit does come, 6 or 7 spoonfuls, warming it first, and let the sick go into
a warm bed to sweat presently, and he will find help hereby. This has been
truly proved.

To make an Issue.
TAke Rie-flower, and Mustard Seed beaten to powder, and with water make a
little paste, and lay a Ring upon the place made of a rush, and apply it.

An approved Receipt for a Scaled Head.
TAke a Candle and let it drop upon it as hot as you can, in so doing it will
scale off, then take the Stale of a Cow, and the furring of a whole
Chamber Pot, boil these together, and wash the place, and it will straightway
cure it.

For the Hickup.
STop both your ears with your fingers, and the hickup will presently leave you.

An excellent Medicine for the Gowt.
TAke Ivy that grows on a Wall 2 handfuls, and put it into raw Milk, and put
thereto Bores-grease, and Oatmeal, and boil it together, and apply it to the
part grieved.

For the Morphew.
USe to drink the Water of Strawberries distilled, and it will kill the root of
any Morphew that is within the body.

A Posset Drink to cool the Liver.
TAke Milk, and put therein a Succory-root well bruised, and boil them, then
make a Posset thereof, with two spoonfulls of Vinegar, and boil therein
Currents, Raisins of the Sun, and Cynamon.

To open the Obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the Dropsy.
TAke every day half a dram of fine Rhubarb thin sliced, with a spoonful of
Currents steeped and washed in White Wind 2 hours, then chap them finely with
the Rhubarb, and eat them fasting 9 mornings together, at the Spring and Fall.

To stay a Looseness.
TAke a Pint of Milk of a Red or black Cow, set it on the fire; and when it
Boils up, pour in a spoonful of Spring Water: then let the Milk boil up again,
and do in the same manner 9 times, drink hereof when it is boiled, in the
morning, after dinner, and in the evening.

A special Receipt for the Spleen.
TAke 3 or 4 handfulls of the Leaves and Flowers of Melilot, and put them into
a pottle of Water, (but let the one half of the water be Smiths-water, and the
other hal^ the party grieved his own water, and let it sees till it come to a
quart; then take both Herbs and Flowers, and put them into a bag and then lay
them to the Patients side, a^ hot as he is able to endure it: let him use this
for 9 or 10 days together every day once, and it will cure him.

How to make the Salsaperilla-drink, which is very good for those that are
troubled with the Foul Disease, otherwise called Morbus Gallicus, or the French
Pox.
TAke 4 ounces of Salsaperilla, and let it soak in 10 pound of Water a whole
night, then take the Salsaperilla out of the Water, and cut it into small
pieces: then put the Salsaperilla so cut into the same Water again, and take 1
ounce of China-roots, grate or cut them very small: take also 1 ounce of
Licorish, beat it with an hammer, and cut it also into small pieces: then take
1 ounce of Anise-seed, and bruise it a little, and take 1 pound of Raisins of
the Sun (the stones being taken out of them,) put altogether into the said 10
pound of Water, and put all into a large pot or Pipkin, which must be so large
that the foresaid Commodities with the Water do not fill the Pot above half
full, lest it should run over in the boiling* keep the said pot close stopped,
boiling some 8 or 10 hours together, until half be boiled away: then put into
it again as much Water as you conceive was boiled away, and let it boil for the
space of 3 hours longer: then take it off from the fire, and put therein half
an ounce of Sena, and drink thereof in the morning a good draught to go to
stool, the rest of the drink when it is cold strain through a linen cloth, and
boil again the rest of the substance, as before, for the space of 8 hours with
Fresh water, fresh Licorish, and Raisins of the Sun: half an hour before you
take it off from the fire, put into it these Herbs following, viz. Fumiterie,
Violet-leaves, Succory, Strawberry-leaves, Sorrel, of each a handful; put
these into the pot and let them boil half an hour; then take them off from the
fire, and strain them as before. This second drink you must use in the day time
when you are a dry, bui you must close up your Stomach both after Dinner, and
after Supper with the former drink. This is a soverain Medicine to cure the
foul Disease, or French Pox.

An excellent Drink or Potion for sundry Diseases.
TAke the Roots of Munks Rhubarb, and Red Madder, of each half a pound, Sena 4
ounces, Anise seeds, and Licorish, of each 2 ounces, Scabius, and Agrimony, of
each 1 handful, slice the roots of the Rhubarb, bruise the Anise-seeds and
Licorish, break the Herbs with your hand, and put them into a Stone-pot called
a Stean, with 4 Gallons of strong Ael, to steep or soak for the space of 3
days, and then drink this Liquor as your ordinary Drink, for 3 weeks together,
and the longer you take it, it is the better; provided you have always one
Stean under another, being always careful to keep a good diet. It cures the
Dropsy, the Yellow-Jaundice, all manner of Itch, Scabs, Breaking-out, and
Maunginesse: It purifieth the Blood from all Corruption, prevails against the
Green-sicknes very greatly, and against all Oppilations or Stoppings, makes
young Wenches look very fair and Cherry-like, and brings down their Courses,
the stopping whereof has caused the same.

An excellent Remedy for a Green-wound.
THe coals of a Burch-fire made into powder, and put into the Wound or Sore,
heals it presently, without any other thing in few days.

A Diet-Drink for any desperate Disease that is curable.
TAke of Hermodactiles 2 ounces, of Salsaparilla 4 ounces, of Sena Alexandrina
4 ounces, of Sassafras 2 ounes, of Licorish 1 ounce, of Aniseseeds 1 ounce, of
long Pepper half an ounce, of the leaves of Scabius a great handful, of
Watercresses and Brooklime, of each one great handull, Sea-scurvygrass 2 great
handfuls, Nutmeg 1 ounce, let all the Weeds be slit and cut small, and the
Herbs shred, and put it into a bag, and hang it in a barrel with 6 Gallons of
new Ale, and let it stand and setle 8 days, then drink continually of it, and
no other drink while it lasts, and eat Bakers Bread with Corianderseeds, and
keep a good diet use this 6 weeks together, and doubtless you will recover.

For a Quartane Ague.
TAke Red-Wine, and new-Milk, of a Cow that is all of one Color, of each of
them a pottle; then take 3 or 4 handfuls of Mouse-ear, of Lettice, and
Strawberry-leaves, of each 2 handfulls, well picked and washed, strip them into
the Wine and Milk, and temper them all together, and let them stand so for the
space of one night; then put them into a fair still, and so distill them with a
soft fire, then take the Water and put it into a Glass, and set it where it may
stand in the Sun for the space of five days, and let the Patient when he is
dry in his Ague, drink thereof 3 or 4 times, and he shall be rid of his Ague,
and this drink will quench his thirst be he never so dry.

A most sovereign Balsam for 22 several Diseases, with the Virtues.
TAke five Pints of Sallet-Oyl, one pound of Venus-Turpentine, half a pound of
Virgins-Wax, six ounces of Red Sanders, half a Pint of Damask-Rose water.
First put your Oil with six spoonfuls of the Rose Water, into a clean skellet,
or new Pipkin, and let it boil a quarter of an hour, wash the Turpentine with
the rest of the Rose water, pare the Wax clean, and cut it into thin slices;
and put it into an other clean Skellet, or new Pipkin, with the Turpentine; Let
them be well melted and mixed together: then pour the water from the Oil (if
you can see any) and put it into the Wax and Turpentine, and let them boil upon
a gentle fire, a dosen Walms: Then take it off, and put in the Saunders by two
ounces at a time, mingling and stirring it well: Then let it boil a dosen walms
more, stir it to avoid burning, then strain it into a Basin, and fill it into
Gally Pots.

The Virtues.
Green Wound. Warm it, and pour it into the Wound, lay a dubble Cloth on it,
dipped in Balsam.

Burn* or Scald. Apply it hot if the Skin be not broken, and bathe it well: but
if the Skin be broken, then not so hot; bathe it well, and lay on a dipped
Cloth.

Dog-Biting. Warm it and boil the place well, and lay on it a dipped Cloth.

Bruise. If the Breast or Stomach be bruised, eat the quantity of a Nutmeg, and
drink a little Bear after it, and lay a dipped Cloth on the place.

Swelling. Bathe it well and warm, and lay a dubble dipped Cloth to it, bind it
up.

Aches in the Head. Anoint the Temples warm, and apply to the Nape of the Neck
a hot dipped Cloth, when you go to Bed.

Joints or Sinews. Eat in the morning as much of it as a Nutmeg.

Gowt. Bathe the place scalding hot, and lay a dubble dipped Cloth, and bind it
up.

Wind-Collick. Eat as much of it as a Nut, and bathe the place very hot, and
lay on it a dubble dipped Cloth, and bind it up.

Pleuresie. After Blood-Letting eat so much of it as a Nut, and bathe the
Left-side very hot.

Surfeit. If you be Surfeited or have any poisonfull Disease, eat so much of it
as an Nutmeg.

Ulcer, Fistulo. Pour it into the Sore, as hot as you can endure it, and lay a
dubble dipped Cloth, to it, and bind it up.

Canker. Warm it, and rub the place very well that is grieved with a Rag.

Stone. If it be in the Kidneys, take a Pint of White Wine and make it boil
(but not burn) brue it with Sugar, and drink a quarter of a Pint of it morning
and evening warm, and eat so much of it as a Walnut before you drink.

Worms. Eat so much of it as a Nut in a poonful or two of Milk, and eat a
Mess of Milk after it, anoint the Navell with it, you may administer it to
Old-folks, or Children.

Flowers. Eat so much of it as a Nutmeg.

Provoke sleep. Eat so much of it as a Nut, and anoint the Temples warm.

Spleen. Eat so much of it as a Nutmeg, and anoint the place very hot.

Running of the Reins. Make a Caudle of Eggs and Ale, and put in Sugar,
Cynamon, and Nutmeg beaten to powder, and so much of the Balsam as a Nutmeg;
drink it warm, and anoint the Reins of the Back very well, and hot, and lay to
it a dubble dipped Cloth.

Sciatica. Bathe the place very hot, and lay on it a dubble dipped Cloth, and
bind it up.

Plague. Eat so much of it as a Nutmeg every morning, and put a little of it in
your Nose.

Green-sicknes. Eat so much of it as a Nutmeg every morning, and walk a good
while after.

Note that when you apply a cloth dipped to any Wound, Swelling, or Bruise, you
must do it very hot.

A special good Receipt for the Falling-Sicknes.
TAke of Boxleaves 3 handfulls, of Pionie-roots small and thin sliced 2
handfulls, of Pionie-seed pilled 6 ounces: Boil these in 3 Gallons of Ale or
Bear to 2 Gallons, then give of this drink to the Patient, every day twice a
good draught warm, and by Gods blessing he shall recover.

A marvelous good Medicine for the Deafness in the Ear.
TAke of the pulp of Colloquintida, the seeds clean picked out and (...) ^t
away, 1 scruple: infuse it 6 hours in half an ounce of Oil, of Bitter Almonds,
and 5 grains of Civit, being well incorporated: let it stand in a Glass in
Warm-Water 6 hours as aforesaid. Reserve this, and when you have use of it,
with a feather, drop when you go to Bed, thrice a week two or three drops into
your ear, lying upon the contrary ear, and so sleep, that ear being stopped
with Wool.

An approved Remedy for the Plague, and to prevent infection.
TAke three Pints of the best Malmsey, boil therein one handful of Rue, and
one handful of Sage, till one Pint be boiled away: then strain it, after set
it over the fire again, and put thereto Long-Pepper, Ginger, and Nutmegs, all
these three beaten together one ounce: then boil all these together a little
more: after take it off from the fire, and put therein 1 ounce of the best
Mithridatum, and 2 ounces of the best Treakle, and a quarter of a Pint of the
best Aquavitae: So keep this as thy life, above all other things or Medicines,
and make use thereof, viz. Note this well:

If thou think thy self to be at any time infected of the Plague, take every
Morning and Evening one spoonful at a time lukewarm; if not infected, take
this but once or twice a week at the most, and but half a spoonful at a time.

In any Plague-time trust in God, and next under God trust to this, for there
was never Man, Woman, nor Child, that ever this Drink deceived, if the heart be
not clean mortified, and drowned with poison too long before.

It is not only good against the common Plague; but also the next kin to the
Plague, as the Swelling-Sicknes, Smallpox, Measels, Surfeit and such like,
taking a spoonful of it when thou first fallest sick, and at all other times
as need requires.

Assure your selves, this is better then Beazer-stone, to draw away all
infection from the Heart.

Where any sick Party drinks thereof, they must lie down and sweat, two or
three hours in Bed, and after be very well dried, and very warm kept, drinking
nothing but warm drink and Caudles; so shall the sickness keep from thy Heart,
etc. This Drink will keep half a year good, being well covered. An Aquavitae
Bottle will keep this Drink very well. This has been proved of many, and never
failed, but did good with Gods help.

An excellent and approved Medicine for the Piles.
TAke two handfuls of Souhern-wood, and strip the leaves from the stalk then
take new fresh Butter, (as it comes from the Churne unsalted) and a little
Saffron Bruise the Herbs, and fry them in a Drying Pan, with the aforesaid
Butter, until they are become tender: then take and spread them upon a fine
linen Cloth, and lay them to the sore place, as hot as possibly it may be
suffered, and doubtless this will help.

A special Receipt to stanch the bleeding of the Piles.
TAke a good quantity of the Juice of Milfoil, and put thereto a pretty
quantity of the powder of burnt Garlic, and let the party grieved drink
thereof, either in Ale or Wine, and the Piles will dye in a short space.

Another for the same.
TAke Leaves of Mullet, and Leaves of an Elder-Tree, and stamp them very well,
and mingle them with a Butter that is unsalted, and anoint the place grieved
often therewith before a good fire, and this will cure you.

To Loosen the Body of one that is hard Bound.
TAke a Chickin, and a pretty quantity of Cassia Fistula: Boil these in fair
running-Water, and drink the Broth there of, and it will immediately procure
loosenes without pain.

Another for the same purpose.
TAke the Juice of Southernwood, and anoint your Belly well therewith, and it
will loosen your Body very gently.

A special Remedy for those that spit Blood.
TAke Betony, Mints, Smalledge, Yarrow, and Rue, of each a like quantity: Boil
them all together in new Milk, and let the Patient sup it off as hot as he can
endure it, and it will help him.

An approved Receipt to stanch the Bleeding of any Wound.
TAke a linen cloth and burn it; then take the powder thereof, and spread it
thick upon another cloth, and lay it to the Wound, and it will stanch the
bleeding of it immediately.

Also take Pimpernel, and hold it between your Teeth, and you shall not bleed
any more whilst you hold it there.

Another excellent Remedy to stanch Bleeding.
TAke a Toad, and dry him very well in the Sun, then put him into a linnen-bag,
and hang him with a string about the Neck of the party that bleedeth, and let
it hang so low that it may touch the Breast on the left side near unto the
Heart, and this will certainly stay all manner of Bleeding at the Mouth, Nose,
Wound, or otherwise whatsoever.

A special Remedy to cure one that is bitten of a Mad Dog.
TAke Night shade, Betony, and Wild Sage, of each a handful, and a pint of
fair Running Water: Stamp the Herbs, and strain them with the said Water, and
then put thereto one peny-worth of Treakle, and so give it the party to drink 3
or 4 mornings together fasting, and apply the Herbs strained to the Wound, and
this will shortly help.

Another excellent Medicine for the biting of a Mad Dog, Adder, or Snake, or
any other Venomous Beast.
DRink in Dragon-water, the powder of Crefish shells, with Mithridat^: and apply
to the Wound Garlic, and powder of Crefish-shels, mixed and strained together.

To avoid the stinging or biting either by Wasps or Bees.
TAke a good quantity of Mallows; stamp them, and mingle them with Oyl-Olive,
and whatsoever part of your Body is anointed therewith, neither Wasps nor Bees
will touch there.

A special Receipt to destroy Lice.
TAke Frankincense, and beat it into fine powder, and a good quantity of
Bores-grease: Boil them together in an Earthen Pan, and when it is boiled,
anoint therewith the place where the Lice are, and you shall be suddenly rid of
them

Another for the same purpose.
TAke two peny-worth of Staves-acre, beat it into very fine powder, then searse
it, and mingle the same with Soap, and Tobacco Ashes, and so make an Ointment
thereof; use this often, and it will speedily destroy them all.

A singular approved Medicine for one that is burst in the Belly or Cods.
TAke a handful of Camphire, a handful of Polypodium, (otherwise called
Oak-Fern,) a handful of Knot-worth, a pottle of White Wind, Knot-gras, and
Solomons-seal, of each a handful, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, Mace 3
drachms, Dates 4 drachms: Put all these together in an Earthen-Pot, and stop it
close: then take a Kettle of five or six Gallons, and fill it with Water, and
set it on the fire, then take the said Earthen-pot, and stop it very close with
a little Paste, and put it into the Kettle of Water aforesaid, and let the
Water boil continually, the space of 5 or 6 hours at the least, with the
Earthen-Pot therein; and keep another Kettle still boiling with Water, to
supply the want of that which boyleth away, then take the Earthen pot out of
it, and take out all the things that are therein, and beat them in a Mortar,
then strain them, and give the patient of this Liquor to drink both first and
last, and it will cure him.

A marvelous good Medicine for those that cannot void Water.
TAke Wood-Betony both the Roots and Leaves of it, wash them very clean, and
dry them in an Oven, then beat them into fine powder, and drink the same in
White Wind, Posset-Ale, or any ordinary drink, and it will cause you
immediately to void water with ease, although you were much troubled therewith
before.

Another for the same purpose.
TAke Ivie-berries, and beat them to powder, and let the Patient drink it in
White-wint, or in stale Ale somewhat hot, and it will cause him forthwith to
make Water that often could not.

A singular good Medicine to cure the Strangury.
TAke red Bramble-berries, (but take them before they become black) and
likewise Ivie-berries and Acorns; put these into two several pots, and let
them stand in an Oven to dry until they be fit to be beaten into powder: Then
take Sitia Alexandrina, Persley-seeds, Grommelseeds, Broom-seeds,
Coriander-seeds, and of the inward part or pith of Ashen-keyes, of each of
these a like quantity, add thereunto twice as much Licorish finely scraped, as
the weight or substance of all these comes to: Afterward beat them all into
powder, and mix them all together, and use to drink hereof both morning and
evening in Posset Drink, made with White Wind or else with Renish wine. Use
this drink twice or thrice a week at the least, and you will find great ease,
and comfort thereby.

An approved Remedy for a Bruise.
TAke Wall-wort, Smalledge, and Balm, of each a handful, stamp them altogether
well in a Mortar, then add thereunto a pound of May-butter, and mix them all
well together, afterward make them into round Balls, and let them lie by you
for the space of 7 or 8 days; then stamp them again as you did before, and
after you have done so, take it and fry it, and strain it, and put it into an
earthen Pot, and souce it, and this will cure the bruise, be it never so black.

A singular good Receipt for all manner of Bruises, and sprainings of the
Sinews.
TAke a pottle of Neats-foot-Oyl, and a quart of Ox-gall, a pint of Aquavitae,
and a pint of Rose Water, likewise Bay Leaves, Rosemary stripped from the
stalk, Strawberry-leaves roots and strings Lavender-cotten, of each a handful:
beat them very small, and put thereunto the aforesaid stuff, and let it boil on
the fire in a Pot or Pipkin that holds two Gallons: and at your peril see
that the flame touch not the stuff: Let it boil very well, then take it off,
and let it stand until it be almost cold: then strain it through a course
linen cloth, (but not the grounds or botom of the said Liquor) then put it
into a Glass, and so keep it; and when occasion serves, anoint the place
grieved therewith, and it will help you.

A very good Medicine for young Children that are bound in the Belly and
troubled with Worms.
TAke one scruple of the pulp of Colloquintida: Infuse it in pure Sallet-Oyl
for the space of 24 hours; or else infuse 2 scruples of Aloes-Cicatrina pounded
in warm Sallet-Oyl: Anoint the Child's Navill when he goes to bed, with either
of these, and it will give him 2 or 3 stools, and destroy the Worms in the Body.

A singular good Receipt to cure a Canker upon a man's Yard.
TAke Roch-Allom one ounce, and half an ounce of Verdigrease; Mingle them well
in Smiths-water, and put altogether into some Glass or other Vessel close
stopped, and when they are well soaked, boil them for the space of 2 hours,
then strain them, and put it in again into the Glass or Vessel aforesaid, and
stop it very close: Anoint your Yard often therewith, and it will speedily
destroy the Canker.

A mavelous good Remedy to cure the Sciatica.
TAke the Oil of Neats-foot, and Aqua-Composita; Mingle and incorporate both
well together, when you have done so, anoint the place grieved well therewith,
then take Wool that is newly plucked off from the Sheeps back, and lay it
thereupon, and keep it close wrapped in with warm clothes, and this will afford
present ease and comfort.

A wonderful good Medicine to cleanse the Mouth, and fasten the Teeth.
TAke Woodbine-leaves and Sage, of each a good handful, and a spoonful or more
of pure English Honey, and a piece of Allom of the quantity of a big Wallnut:
Boil all these together in a quart of fair Running-water, and boil them until
the one half be consumed, or boiled away, then strain it through a fine
Linen-cloth, and wash your mouth and teeth well therewith, (lukewarm) and it
will both cleanse your Mouth of all corruption, and filth, and fasten your Teeth.

A marvelous good Remedy for the Gowt, which never fails.
TAke half a pound of unwrought Wax, half a pound of Rosin, and one ounce of
Libanum, a quarter of a pound of Lettargie of Gold, and 3 quarters of a pound
of White-Lead beaten to powder: searse it through a Searser; then take a pint
of Neatsfoot-Oyl, and set it over the fire, in some small Vessel, and mingle it
with the Wax, and Rosin, and when it is melted, put all the other powders
therein: then stir it as fast as ever you can with a stick, and put a little of
it into a Pewter sawcer, and if it be hard (being so tried in the Sawcer) then
take it from the fire, and anoint some fair even board with some of the
Neatsfoot-Oyl, and as soon as you are able to handle it by reason of the heat,
work it as it were Shoemakers wax, and so make it into great Rolls, or Balls.
Make plasters hereof with a Chafindish of Coals; spread it upon a piece of
Leather, apply it warm to the place where the pain or Grief is, and renew it so
every morning and evening, until the pain be clean gone, or until it be drawn
into some other joint, and then apply your plasters in like sort where the
grief is, and beware of cold or hot Wines, and questionles this will help you.
It has cured many whom Doctors and Surgeans have given over as incurable.

An approved Receipt for the Swelling of the Yard or Cods.
TAke Agrimonie-water distilled, and add thereunto a pretty quantity of
Roch-Allom: Set them over the fire to soak, and let them remain there until
they be ready to boil, then take it off from the fire, and with a fine
Linen Cloth anoint the Yard well under the skin with the same Water, (but let
it be warm when you use it) and it will assuage the extreme Heat of the Yard,
and also of the Cods, if they be washed with the same, and take away the
Swelling thereof.

Another excellent Remedy or Medicine to heal the hot Swelling in the Yard.
TAke Wax, Oil, and the Juice of Purslane, of each a pretty quantity; Mingle
them all together, and apply them to the Yard that is swollen, and you shall
find present help.

A special Receipt to incarnate the skin of the Yard within.
TAke Fumitary-water, and steep therein a good quantity of Licorish pared, for
the space of one night: then put of the same Water into the Yard with a Sponge,
or with a Tent made of Linen Cloth, and it will do the deed.

A sovereign Remedy for one that Bleedeth inwardly.
TAke a pretty quantity of the juice of Neep, and likewise of the juice or
powder of Shepherds-purse, mingle both together, and let the party grieved
drink thereof, and it will cause the blood to be cast up immediately.

To stanch Bleeding at the Nose.
TAke of the powder of Bole-Armoniack, and with a Quill or some other
Instrument, blow some of the same powder into the Nose of the party that is
given to much bleeding, and it will stanch the Blood immediately.

Another approved Receipt to stanch the bleeding of the Nose.
TAke Inckle, and bind the patient about the Temples of the head very hard
therewith, and let the knot be in his Neck, and this will stanch bleeding
without any more ado.

An excellent Receipt to cure the Heart-burning.
TAke 5 or 6 Corns of the best Pepper, bruise or chaw them in your mouth, and
then let them down your throat, and it will ease the Heart-burning.

A very good Medicine to cure the Hemorhoids.
TAke the Leaves of Mullet, and likewise the Leaves of an Elder-tree; stamp or
beat them both very well together, and mingle them with fresh Butter: Anoint
the place grieved often therewith before a good fire, and it will cure you
without all doubt.

A special good Salve or Ointment to cure any Wound, or Sore whether new or
old.
TAke half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, 4 ounces of unwrought Wax, 1 ounce of
Turpentine, 4 ounces of Rosin, and 1 ounce of Mastick; Item of Smalledge,
Woodbine-leaves, Plantane, and Marigold-leaves, of each one handful, and of
the tops of Hysop, half an handful, wash them all very well, and then dry them
in the Sun for the space of half a day together: then stamp them in a Mortar,
and strain them, and take the juice thereof, and boil it with all the other
things before mentioned, (except only Turpentine) and stir it continually
until you find all the juice to be dried up; then put in your Turpentine, and
let it boil a walm or two, then take it off from the fire, and when it has
stood a while, strain it through a course Linen-cloth, and keep it in Boxes or
Gally-pots, until you have occasion to use it. This salve cures all manner of
Sores both new and old.

A special and approved Medicine for the Palpitations or Beatings of the Heart.
TAke a pottle of the best Claret Wine, that is to be had for money, and add
thereunto an handful of Balm, an handful of Burrage, 6 tops of Rosemary, half
a quarter of an ounce of English-Saffron whole, and a quarter of a pound of the
best fine Sugar: mingle all these well together, and put them into some close
Vessel well stopped, and let it so stand for the space of a day or more before
you use it. Drink hereof a good draught at a time both first and last, and
continue so doing for 7 or 8 days together, or more (it will not be amiss) and
you shall find comfort and help thereby.

To take away Warts out of the hands or any part of the Body.
TAke the Heart or Pith of a Red Colewoort: stamp it well, and temper it well
with a little Honey, and rub the Wart oftentimes well therewith, and it will
take it away.

Another excellent Remedy to take away Warts.
TAke 3 or 4 handfuls of wild Tansie, 2 peny-worth of May-butter unsalted, and
2 peny-worth of Quicksilver: Mince the Tansie small, and then put it into the
Butter, and set it on the fire, and let them boil well together; afterward take
it off from the fire again, and strain it through a fine linen cloth, but put
in your Quicksilver first, before you strain it, and let it be well mingled
and incorporated with the rest, and then anoit the place therewith, where the
Warts are, and this will take them clean away.

A special Receipt to heal a Whitflaw, or Fellon.
TAke a little Bay Salt, stamp it very small, and also a little Leven, or sower
Bread, mingle these well together with the Yolk of an Egg, and apply it to the
Sore twice a day, and it will draw pain from the Arm, cease the swelling (if
there be any) and heal it presently, and with speed.

A very good Remedy for the Swelling of the Legs occasioned by cold, or
otherwise.
TAke 2 White Herrings out of the Pickle, open them, and lay the insides of
them to the soles of your feet, when you go to bed, and so let them remain all
night, and in the morning apply new ones again; use this five or six times and
it will help you.

A very good Receipt to heal the Itch.
TAke eleven or twelve Dock-roots of the yellowest that can be gotten, and
scrape them very clean, then cut them very small, and stamp them well in a
Mortar, then set them over a Chafingdish of Coals, and put a pound of sweet
Butter therein, and let them boil until the Roots be ready to strain, and when
they are sufficiently boild, strain them, and put into the juice a spoonful of
Brimstone, finely beaten to powder, and stir it well together, then let it
stand till it be quite cold, and it will be a pure Salve. Anoint your body
therewith before a good fire, and let it soake into the Skin: Use this Medicine
morning and evening for 6 or 7 days together, and it will quite take away the
Itch, be it never so great.

An approved Remedy for the Morphew.
TAke of the juice of Selandine: mingle it with powder of Brimstone, and lay it
to the place where the Morphew is, (all cold) use this 4 or 5 times, and it
will assuredly help you.

Another for the same purpose.
TAke Mustard Seed and Salt, and stamp them well together in a Mortar with
Wine-Vineger: Anoint the place grieved well therewith, and in a very short time
it will cure it.

A wondrous good Receipt for Legs that do ranckle or fester.
TAke Smallage, Southernwood, House-leek, Violet-leaves, and Roots, and
Waybroad-leaves, of each a good quantity, and a good quantity of Honey. Temper
all well together, and strain it through a fine linen cloth: Make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the Sore, and renew it twice every day, and always
before you lay on the plasters, wash the Sore well with White Wind, or with
Oil of Roses, and as long as you continue this Medicine, use to put 5 or 6
Leaves of Sage in your drink and in a short space your Legs will be sound and
whole.

A soverain Medicine for a Burning to Scalding.
TAke a Brake-root, and stamp it well in a Mortar, then strain out the juice
thereof clean; anoint the place burned or scalded well therewith, and it
straightway helps.

Another for the same purpose.
TAke of the Parings of new-liquor'd Shoe-makers-leather, boil them in Water,
and let them stand till they be cold: then scum off the Fat or Oil on the top
of them: Mingle t with a little juice of Housleek and Rosewater: Beat these
together, and make an Ointment thereof; anoint the place burned or scalded well
therewith, and it will heal it in a very short space.

A singular good Remedy for the Toothache.
TAke Red-sage, and Betony, of each a like quantity, add thereunto a little
Roch-Allum; Boil these in White-wine-vneger, and rub your Teeth that ache well
therewith, and you shall incontinently feel ease.

Another excellent Remedy for the Toothache.
TAke Vinegar, Honey, Aqua-vitae, Henbane-roots, Long-pepper, and Round-pepper,
Camphire, Gum and Ivy, of each a like quantity: Boil them all together until
they be hard, and let the Patient put some of it between his Teeth, and this
will speedily ease him. But if his Teeth grow sore by reason of the extreme
pain, let him take a pound of Henbane-roots, and boil them in a quart of
White-wine-Vineger, and a pint of Rose Water, and when it is well boiled put
into it a little fine Sugar to sweeten it withal, then strain it, and wash
your mouth often therewith, and it will assuage the pain without all doubt.

If your Tooth be hallow, take 2 or 3 drops of Aqua fortis, and dip a little
lint therein, and stop the hollow place therewith, and for the space of an hour
or thereabouts, it will put you to some pain, but in a very short space after
it will give you ease: use this twice or thrice, and it will quite expel the
pain for ever after, without perishing the tooth any thing at all.

To heal a sore Mouth, or Throat.
TAke a good handful of Sage, and a pretty quantity of Rosemary, a good
handful of Honey-suckle leaves, and of Roch-Allom the quantity of half a
Wallnut, and a spoonful^ of pure English-Honey: Boil them altogether in a quart
of fair running Water, for a good while together: then strain forth the Wate^
from the Herbs, and the other Dregs into some fair Glass, and stop it very
close, and when you will use it, wash your Mouth or Throa^ both morning and
evening well therewith and it will speedily help it.

An excellent Medicine for the Falling Sickness.
TAke Pionie-Roots, and dry them well, then cut them very small, and give it
the Patient to eat in his Pottage at meals, and let him also drink it
continually in his drink, especially in the morning fasting, and also last in
the evening, and by Gods blessing this will cure him.

A special Remedy for the Gowt.
TAke a good quantity of Flint-stones, break them into small pieces, and heat
them well on coals in the fire, then put them into a Stillitory, and put
therein a good quantity of Wine-vineger and Aqua-vitae, and distill them, and
with this Water often wash the place grieved, and it will take away the pain.

An exceeding good Receipt for the Yellow Jaundice.
TAke a handful of red Nettle-tops, Plantane and Saffron, and boil them well in
a pint of Ale, then strain it, and drink thereof for 4. or 5. days together,
and you shall find help.

An Approved Medicine for the Small Pox.
TAke Milk Saffron and English Honey: boil them together, and give it the
Patient to drink, and let him be kept warm, and the Pox will come forth very
speedily.

Another excellent Receipt for the same purpose.
Take Dragon-water, White Wind, and Mithridatum, or Treacle of Jean, of each of
them a pretty quantity, and put some Unicorns horn therein. Boil all these
together, and give it to the Patient, and let him be kept warm, and it will
help him.

A singular good Remedy for the SCIATICA.
TAke Ivy, Mugwort, Walwort, and the inner rind of an Elder-tree: boil them n
fair water, with a good quantity of Salt: bathe the sore place well therewith,
3. or 4. times in a day, for 9. days together, and questionless it will ease
it.

An approved Medicine for a Stitch in the Side.
TAke the Urine of him that is sick, Wormwood, and Comin; sees them well
together, and by the fire anoint your side therewith, and after with the Oil of
Bay. Also Endive water, Water of Devills-bit, Water of Mallows, and Cardun
Benedictus-water, are all exceeding good for the Stitch.

Another approved Remedy for the Stitch in the left Side.
Take a pretty quantity of Comin, and steep it in a Pottle of Malmsey, then
take and fry it in a Pan, and put it into a linen bag, and lay it hot to your
fide, and it will help you.

A singular good Receipt for the Colic and Stone.
TAke Parsley-seed, Fennelseed, Anise-seeds Comin-seed, Plantane-seed, of each
a quarter of an ounce, 1. ouce of Nutmegs, 4 ounces of fine Sugar: beat all the
Seeds into powder, and searce them, and let the Sugar be beaten with Ale: then
take of the said powder the quantity of an hazel-nut, and let the Patient drink
thereof morning and evenning 4. times a week warm with Wine or Beer (but Wine
is best) and when the pain comes drink it with Malmsey, and you shall find
great ease and and benefit thereby.

Another excellent Receipt for the same purpose.
FRy Pellitory and Butter together, and bind them to your Navil, and this will
suddenly cease the pain. Or take a Lapwing, and burn her in the fire feathers
and all, then take the Ashes of her, and give it the Patient to drink with Wine
somewhat warm, and this will ease the Colic.

For the Cough of the Lungs.
TAke a handful of Figs, and sees them in Ale or Beer until they be somewhat
tender; then slit them asunder, and put them in a linen bag, and so lay them
on your stomach warm; and when they be cold, warm them again in the same
liquor, and apply them to your stomach as formerly; do this several times, and
by Gods grace you will soon find ease.

A special Medicine to open the LVNGS.
Take Hysop-water, and drink thereof twice a day, evening and morning, at every
time 1. ounce and a half, or 2. ounces, and you will find help.

A soverain Medicine for Fatness about the Heart.
TAke the Juice of Fenel and Honey and sees them all together, until they be
hard; then eat thereof evening and morning, and you shall be whole.

A marvelous good Remedy for the French Pox*
TAke 6. Gallons or more of the purest White Wind that may be gotten, and the
like quantity of stale Ale, 1. pound and a half of Salsaperilla, Licorish and
Sena, of each 1. l. of the Bark of Guairarum, 2. l. Colloquintida 1. ounce:
Boil all together for the space of 24. hours over a soft fire in Balneo Mariae;
and when it is well boiled, put therein 1. ounce of Mithridatum; then take it
off, and put it into some earthen pot, and stop it up close; and when you will
use it, take a good quantity thereof at a time twice or thrice a day, and this
will cleanse both the inward and outward parts of your body, and make you very
sound ever after.

A special Receipt for a Consumption.
TAke a pottle of Rose Water, and the like quantity of Goats or Asses Milk, if
it may be had, or else of the Milk of a Cow, that is all of one color, and put
therein 50. or 60. Yolks of new-sayd Hen-Egs; Temper the yolks, the milk, and
the Rose-waters all well together (but let none of the Whites remain among
them:) Distill a water hereof, and give it the Patient that is in a Consumption
to drink first and last warm, with a Cake or two of Manus Christi, which is
made of Gold or Pearls: let him use this, and he shall find great comfort and
ease by it.

A precious and wonderful good Drink to be used by one that is troubled with a
Consumption.
TAke Longwort, Liverwort, Hart's-tongue, and red Sage, of each a handful,
Parsley half a handful, Licorish one handful, Anise-seeds one ounce, Cynamon
finely beaten to powder one ounce, two penyworth of white Ginger, two penyworth
of white Sugar Candy two Nutmegs, and a penyworth of Cloves: and if the Patient
be bound in the body, then put a little Sena, and a dram of Rhubarb therein; if
not, leave these two things out: Boil all these together in a pottle or
somewhat more of the best new Wort that can be gotten (but it must be brewed
without any Hops at all) and let it boil until it come to three pintes: But if
you put any Sena therein, then put the quantity of three quarts of the same
Wort, and boil it to a pottle, then put it to stand, and strain it, and so use
it.

A special Remedy for the Plague, and how to make any kind of Swelling or
Plague Sore to break.
TAke a pint of strong Beer, and crumbs of Rye Bread, one handful of Mallows,
white Lillie-roots a great lump or knob: Beat all these together with some
quantity of Linseed until it become a Cataplasm or thick pap, and spread it
upon a linnencloth, and lay it on the Bile or sore. If the Swelling or Sore be
ripe and continue a long while before it break, then lay some Corrasive upon
it, especially upon Plague-sores. When the Bile or Sore is broken through, or
the Corrasive has wrought and produced a Core, then lay thereon this
Tent-salve or Ointment, as follows. Take Honey and Turpentine, but let the
Turpentin be set on the fire in a little Pipkin, and stir it continually, and
mingle with it a small quantity of Honey, and when it is melted* take it off
from the fire, and stir it still until it begins to wax somewhat stiff, and
then mingle therewith the yolk of an Egg with a little flower, then spread it
upon a flat tent very thick as broad as the hole or wound is: then lay upon it
the aforesaid Cataplasm or Pap, until all the corruption or filthy matter be
quite drawn out, then heal it with the hard Salve, of which we shall treat
anon: if there be any heat in or about the sore, anoint it round about with a
white ointment called in the shops Vnguentum Nutritum, of which also we shall
give directions anon how to make it. If any Plague-blains or sores do appear,
you must lay the aforesaid Tent-Salve thereon, and anoint it round about with
Vnguentum Nutritum. Afterward take Sorrel and roste or boil it in a pan in the
Embers with a little butter wrapped up in a Cabbage-leaf, lay it a little warm
thereon. But when you at first feel the said dangerous disease coming upon you,
use Mithridatum with the Water of Carduus Benedictus, or take of Bezoar-stone,
the quantity of 6. or 7. grains mingled with Beer or Wine, and sweat upon it.
This is a wonderful excellent Remedy for the Plague.

Directions how to make the hard Salve, which is a soverain Medicine to cure
all manner of Sores or Wounds.
TAke Rosin, Turpentine, Beeswax, Muttonsue of each a quarter of a pound: Boil
them together in a Pipkin with 3. handfuls of Lyn-seed Oil, and stir it
continually, til it is quite melted, and if it should chance to run over, set
the Pipkin in water, and when it is quite melted, take it off from the fire, and
put into it of Frankincense the weight of a groat, then strain it through a
cloth, and when it begins to be cold, put therein Lapis Calaminaris very small
beaten to powder, and stir it till it be quite cold.

How to make the White Ointment called in the shops Vnguentum Nutritum.
TAke Letargie of Gold about a thimble-full, put it into a Mortar, and add
thereunto as much Oil as will quite wet or moisten the same: then pour into it
2. or 3. drops of Vinegar, and stir it well round about, then pour in Oil
again, and twice Vinegar to once Oil, and stir it so continually, till it be
quite white, that no red spaecks any more appear. This is wonderful good to
anoint round about any sores or swellings where any heat appears.

A special Receipt to put away Venom from the Heart.
TAke Bole Armoniack, and Sanguis Draconis, of each 3. ounces, and of the best
Cynamon 4. ounces: Mingle them all together in powder, and so receive it, it
will expel and remove Venom from the heart.

A Soverain Remedy for the Gnawing about the Heart.
TAke Sage-leaves a pretty quantity, and as much Yarrow; grind them together,
and temper them with Ale; then strain them, and drink thereof, and you will
find present aeliefe.

To make a very cooling and pleasant Water to drink in Summer.
TAke a Gallon of Spring Water, or as much as you will, a pint of Strawberries,
two ounces of Cynamon, 3. or 4. Cloves, one gram of Musk: Still these with a
soft fire, and it is a very cooling and pleasant drink, and very fit to be used
in Summer.

A wonderful good Remedy for young Children, that are exceeding weak in their
Limbs, and can neither go nor stand.
TAke Sage, Sweet Marjoram, of each a like quantity: beat them a long time
together, and strain out the Juice, and put it into a double Vial Glass: fill
the Glass as full as it can hold; then stop it with Paste very close, and cover
it with thick Paste all over: then set it in an Oven; and there let it stand so
long as a great Loaf requires time to be thoroughly baked: then take it out, and
let it be cold; then break the Paste round about it, and if the Juice be grown
thick, break the Glass, and take it in a dish, and keep it in a Gally-pot. When
you will use it, take the quantity of two spoonfuls at a time, and as much
Marrow of an Ox-Leg, melt them together, and mingle them well; and both morning
and evening anoint therewith, as warm as can be endured, the tender parts of
the Child's thighs and legs, and also the knees, chafing them well with your
warm hands, and so in a short time (through Gods blessing) it will be able to
stand and go. This has been truly proved.

An approved Remedy for those that cannot hold their Water.
Roast a slain Mouse, or make it in powder, and drink it off at one draught, and
it will presently help you, especially, if you use it 3. mornings together.

A soverain and approved Receipt for those that cannot void Water.
TAke Sassafrass, Persley, and Archangel, of each a like quantity: boil them in
stale Ale from a quart to a pint; then strain them, and let the Patient drink
thereof morning and evening, and fast one hour after it.

An excellent Remedy for a Woman that has great Breasts.
IF a Woman anoint often her Paps with the Juice of Succory, it will make them
round and hard: if they be hanging or bagging, it will draw them together,
whereby they shall seem like the Paps of a Maid.

A singular good Medicine for a Woman's sore Breast, occasioned by cold or
otherwise.
TAke a Cole-wort-leaf, and cut away the veins of it, and then anoint the leaf
it self with May-Butter, first boiled with Rose Water, and then lay it to the
Woman's sore breast, and it will assuage both the swelling and pain in a short
time.

How to increase Milk in a Woman's Breast.
TAke Crystal, and beat it into fine powder and mingle it with as much
Fennel-seed, (likewise beaten into fine powder) and a little fine Sugar: let
the woman use to drink hereof often somewhat warm, with a little White Wind,
and this will cause great store of Milk to increase in her Breasts; yea, it will
restore her Milk again, although it be clean gone away from her.

An excellent Remedy to take away Freckles in the Face.
TAke the Blood of a White Hen, anoint your Face therewith, and after three or
four times dressing, it will take away all the Spots and Freckles.

A most precious and approved Medicine to make the Face both fair and clear,
even as white as Milk.
TAke Blossoms of VVhite-Thorn, and of Violets, Blossoms of Beans, and Blossoms
of an Elder-Tree, of each a like quantity, and a Lemon thin sliced, distill
them, and put the water into a Glass; and stop it close; and when you will use
it, take two spoonfulls thereof, and wash your face with it twice or thrice a
day for 4. or 5. days together, and your skin will be exceeding clear and fair.

An excellent Gargle for a furred Mouth or Throat.
TAke Barley-water, Strawbury-leaves, Cinquefoile, a stick of Licorish, and
half a pint of VVhite-wine-Vineger, and let it run through a double Linen
cloth twice or thrice, after (...) has been well steeped the rein: take this
and you will find present help.

A solid form of Nasals.
TAke dry Wormwood, Marjoram, Morsu^ Galinae, Betony, Sage, Dictamne, of each
two drams, and the seed of Nigella, Mustard, Rue 1. dram, trochishes of
Athandall 4 scruples, with the Juice of Beetes and Mercury: Boil them till the
Juices be consumed; then Incorporate them with a little Turpentine, and make
Tents of a finger long, covering them with red silk and a thread at them: So
put it into the Nose, and it will cause a snotty Nose, and Sneesing, and
cleanse the brain very well.

An approved Receipt to heal a Fellon.
TAke the grounds of Ale, and a handful of Groundsel, with a piece of sour
Leven: Boil them together to a Salve, and apply it, and it heals the Sore.

A special Receipt to preserve one from the Plague.
TAke of Aloes Hepatica, and of pure Cynamon and Myrrh, of each 3 drachms, of
Cloves, Mace, and Wood of Aloes (usually called Lignum Aloes) Mastick, and Bole
Oriental, of each 1 ounce, mingle them, and make thereof a fine powder; and
drink thereof every morning fasting, either in White Wind allayed with water,
or in Ale, and this by Gods help will preserve you from being infected with the
Plague.

Another excellent Remedy to preserve one from being infected with the Plague.
TAke of the Powder Imperial one dram and an half, and one dram of Treacle,
of Dragon-water, and Sorrel-water, of each 1 ounce: Drink it with Ale in the
morning fasting, and by Gods grace you shall escape the danger of the Plague.

A special good Medicine to heal, and cure the Canker in a Woman's Breast.
TAke the Juice of Selandine, and Goose-dung of each an equal proportion; then
take Pellitory of the Wall, Garlic, and Rie-meal: stamp them in a Mortar, and
fry or boil them all together in good pure Wine vinegar, and let it boil until
it be thick like a Salve: then make a Plaster thereof, and apply it to the
Sore, and so let it continue until you perceive that it be white: then take a
good quantity of Pimpernel, and grind it very small, and add thereunto a good
quantity of English honey, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the
Sore, and it will heal it in a very short time.

A special Remedy to destroy a Canker in any part of the body.
TAke a good quantity of the Bark of a Slowe-Tree, chop it very small, and boil
it in some fair running Water, and let it boil till it be black, then temper it
with a little Rie-meal, a little burnt Allom powdered, and a little Honey: Make
a plaster thereof, and lay it to the place grieved, and it will speedily heal
it.

A wonderful good Medicine for a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke Penny-royall, red Fennel, red-Sage, Rosemary-tops, and Maidenhair, of
each a good handful, and a little Hysop. Boil them together in a quart of
White Wind, and put thereto the quantity of 2 Wallnuts of Roch-Allom, and as
much Honey as will make it sweet: then take it, and strain it through a fine
linen-cloth, and wash the parties mouth well therewith, and it will cure him.

Another approved Receipt for a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke a good quantity of White-wine-Vineger, and as much Honey: set them over
the fire to boil, with a little Allom, and when you think it is well boiled,
take it off, and wash your mouth often well therewith, and it will help you.

For the Kings-Evill.
TAke of pure Yellow Wax 1 ounce or better, also 1 ounce of Turpentine, and a
good quantity of Sheeps-suet clarified, ( viz. both pure and sweet,) Boil all
these together, and when they are well boiled, put therein 2 good handfulls of
the purest and finest Barley-flower, that possiby may be gotten, then temper
the same Flower and the other things together, and put therein 3 spoonfuls of
the Vrin of a Man-Child, (he being not above 3 years of age) then boil it again
with the residue of the things, before mentioned, and put it into some
Earthen-pot or Gally-pot, and so stop it and keep it close, until you have
occasion to use it, and as often as occasion serves for the use thereof take
some of the said Salve or Ointment, and spread it upon a fine Linen-cloth, or
upon a piece of Leather, and lay it plaisterwise upon the Sore, and it will
cure it.

For an Impostume in the Head.
TAke a good quantity of the Juice of Mints, put it into a Quill, and so let it
run into the patients ear upward, and this will cause the Impostume to break
suddenly.

Another excellent Receipt to destroy any Impostume.
TAke of the Roots of Flower-deluces, and Roots of Lillies, of each a like
quantity, stamp them together, and put therein a quart of Honey: Boil them all
together, either in Wine or Ale; and when they are well boiled then take the
Liquor thereof, and strain it through a fine linen-cloth, and when occasion
serves for use thereof, let the Patient drink thereof 2 or 3 spoonfuls at a
time, especially in the morning and evening first and last, and this will
speedily cure it.

A very good Medicine to cure the Deafness of the Ear.
TAke Bay Berries, Bay-laves, Betony, and Sticadoes, of each a handful: Boil
them in Whitewine, until the one half be consumed; but if it be for one that
is aged, it must be in Malmsey: then put it into a Narrow-mouthed-Vessel, and
hold your ears over it, the Vessel being unstopped as hot as you may suffer it:
then take Oil of Bitter-Almonds, and let 2 or 3 drops thereof fall into your
Ears; then take a lock of Wool that grows betwixt the Sheeps legs, and stop
your Ears close therewith, and if you put a little Musk in, it will be the
better. Use this, and you shall find cure.

Another approved Receipt to cure the Deafness of the Ear.
TAke an Ox Gall, and the Stale of a Male-Goat; mingle them together, and put
some of the same into the deaf ear of the Party grieved, and he shall forthwith
find help.

An excellent Remedy to take away a Weft from the Eye that is grown over it,
and darkneth the Sight.
TAke the Juice of Fennel, and pour some few drops of it into your Eye, and it
takes away the Weft immediately, and restores the Sight clear and perfect as
it was before, without all doubt.

A special Receipt for the Corns on the Feet or Toes.
FIrst pare away the Corn; then take a black Snail, and bruise it, and put a
drop or two of the Juice thereof into the place grieved, and put thereto a
little powder of Sandphere, and it will take away the Corn very speedily.

Another approved Remedy for Corns.
TAke a knife, and pare the Corn as near the quick as it may be suffered; then
take the inner part of a Fig, and a pretty quantity of Verdigrease: mix them
both together, and lay the same to the Corn, and bind it fast thereunto with a
linen cloth, and this will in a short time eat out the very root of the Corn.

A sovereign Receipt to cure the Foul Disease, or French Pox.
TAke half a pound of Guiacum Capium, 2 ounces of Salsaperilla, 2 ounces of the
Bark of Guiacum; Licorish, Annise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, and Sena, of each one
ounce; Betony, Scabius, Smallage, Pellitory of the Wall, Penyroyall,
Hart's-tongue, Maiden hair, Wild or Red Mints, Red Sage, Oculus Christi,
Liverwort, and the herb called Mercury, of each of them a good handful: Pick
them all clean and wash them; then take them and put them all together into
three Gallons of fair running-water to steep for the space of one whole night;
or else put it into 2 Gallons of pure White Wind, and one gallon of strong Ale,
and then boil them well together, until such time as the one half of the
Liquor be consumed: Then take it, and strain it through a fine linen-cloth, and
put it into a close Vessel, and so let it stand to settle, and when it is
settled, let the diseased person use none other drink, but this broth both
morning and evening and at meat: and into every three quarts of Water put a
quarter of an ounce of Colloquintida, and so let the patient use this, until
he has scoured his body marvelous well, and if it do not cause him to purge
well, then let him use this, or the like Purgation.

Take half an ounce of Sena, a spoonful of Anise-seeds, half an ounce of
Licorish, one spoonful of Fennel-seeds, and 20 Raisins of the Sun, the stones
clean picked out. Boil them altogether in a quart of fair water, and let the
same boil until the one half be consumed; then strain it, and put thereto an
ounce and a half of Diaphenicon, and shake the same well together, and let the
Patient drink a pretty quantity thereof every morning fasting (blood-warm) and
it will cause him to purge exceeding well. This Receipt is wonderful good for
the afore-mentioned Disease.

A mavelous good Remedy for the Pleurisy.
TAke Brook-lime, Sheeps-suet, and a little fair Water: fry them together in a
Drying Pan, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the side of the patient,
and it will draw forth all the corruption, and give ease.

A mavelous good Remedy for a Consumption.
TAke the best Raisins of the Sun half a pound, stone them, and put thereto 2
ounces of the purest brown Sugar Candy; then put them into a wooden or stone
Mortar, and beat and incorporate them together, and in the beating of them over
and again, put in the quantity of half a spoonful at a time of Oil of
Sweet-Almonds, until you have put in so much as will sufficiently moisten them,
and when the matter is beaten fine like a Conserve, take thereof the quantity
of a Nutmeg at a time first and last, and it will do you much good.

Another excellent Remedy for a Consumption, or for any decay in the inward
parts.
TAke 2 pound of Dates, pick out the stones and skins, and the white that is in
them, and beat them in a stone Mortar, as small as can be, then take a quart of
fine clarified Honey; also long Pepper, Mace, Grains, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each
a quarter of an ounce: Beat them fine to powder, then put your Honey and Dates
together well mixed on the fire, and let them boil together, always stirring
it for fear it burn too, and in your seething stir in your powder by little and
little till all be in; (you must not boil it so thick as you would boil
Marmalade, for then you spoil it) then take half an ounce of fine Ginger beaten
to powder, and strew it on, and always stir it till it be cold, put it in a
Box, as you do Marmalade, and use to eat the quantity of a Chestnut first and
last: it causes sleep, and refreshes health.

An exceeding good Receipt for a Consumption.
TAke a handful or two of Clary-leaves, and pick them clean, and 4 or 5 Yolks
of Hen-Egs, newly laid: Make a Tansie hereof, and use it 8 mornings together
with Nutmegs and Sugar; then take Saffron and dry it upon a Tile stone, or some
such thing, and grind it very small, and put all these together, and fry them
in Fresh-Butter, and let the Patient eat it first in the morning for 8 days
together, and it will do him exceeding much good.

Another excellent Medicine for a Consumption.
TAke a Cock that is of a reddish color, and about the age of 4 or 5 years:
kill him, and dress him very fair, and divide him into 4 quarters, and bruise
him; then pick out all the fat very clean, and take half a handful of
red-Mints, and a handful of Hart's-tongue, put them into a Pot, and cover it
close, then put thereto half a pint of fair Running-water, and as much pure
Malmsey, 6 crops of Hysop, one root of Parsley, one root of Fennel, one root of
Endive, dry red-Rose-leaves, Raisins of the Sun, and Pruines, of each 15. and
4 or 5 Maces: distill all these together, for the space of 12 or 13 hours, and
keep the Pot close covered with Paste, that none of the Liquor or Moisture run
out: Let the patient drink hereof every morning fasting, and by Gods help he
shall recover.

An experienced Medicine for the Tisick.
TAke Parsley-roots, Fennel-roots, Hysop, and Succory-roots, of each an
handful: pick all the piths clean out of them, and then wash the Roots well,
that there do no gravel or sand remain in them: then sees them in a pottle of
White Wind until they be soft, and if you can get any Ginger-berri^s, boil
them therein with the rest, and when it is well sodden, strain it, and put
thereto a little Pellitory of Spain, a spoonful of English-Honey, and a
pennyworth of Saffron: Let the patient drink it both morning and evening, for
the space of 8 or 9 days together, and this will help him.

Another approved Medicine for the Tisick, and stopping in the Breast.
TAke Rae and sees it in Eysel, and let the patient drink it; and let him also
drink Nettle seeds brayed, and it will cause him to avoid great store of gravel
from the Stone in the Reins of the Back.

A Physical Course to be observed in Plague-time, by those that are visited
with the Sickness.
SO soon as any apprehend themselves taken with the Plague, let them go into
their warm bed, and take this ensuing Medicine, viz:

Take of Verben with the Root dried and powdered 2 drachms, and of the Juice of
Verben 3 ounces, half a spoonful of White-wine-vineger, mingle all together,
and let them drink it warm, and sweat for 2 or 3 hours. But let them not sleep
during the time of their sweating: And whilst they sweat, let them hold under
their Armpits, and upon the either Enunctories, especially the Groyns, a
Radish-root, divided into 2 parts: the same Root is to be tied unto the Plants
or hollow of their Feet, when they have sweat well, for 2 or 3 hours, according
to the strength and age of the Patient: dry their bodies well with warm and
clean linen-cloths, beginning with the Armpits and Groyns, then the Breast,
whereon after the sweat is well wiped away, lay a fresh and clean linen Napkin
doubled. That done, let them wash their mouth, face and hands with water and
vinegar, and drink a good draught of Mutton-broth made with Rosemary, Thyme,
Sorrel, Cicorie. If their stomach will give them leave, they may eat a little
Mutton or Veal at dinner, but they are to forbear Flesh-meat at suppers.
Instead of broth, Water grewel with Rosemary or Burnet will do well, or thin
Pannada. For their drink, let it be small or 6. shill: Beer warmed with a
Toste; or water boiled with Carduus-seed, and Caroway seed, and the roots of
Scabius and Verben, with a crust of bread. Then let them rest, or sleep,
washing their mouth often with water and vinegar. They may likewise make a
Quilt with Balm, Mint, Rosemary, Sage, Sweet-marjoram dried: and sprinkling it
with vinegar of Worm wood or Herb-grace, or ordinary wine vinegar, apply it to
the region of the heart warm.

After 8 hours from the first invasion of the Plague, let them take another
sweating Medicine, viz: Take of the Powder of the Root of Dictamne, Scabius,
Gentian, of each half a dram, of the seed of Carduus Benedictus, 1 scruple,
the Juice of Marigold flowers, and Devils-bit, of each 2 ounces, half a
spoonful of Vinegar, of Rue or Wormwood, or, in want of them, of ordinary
White-wine-vineger. Let the sick parties drink this warm, and sweat again (as
at the first time) 2. or 3. hours, keeping in the mean time a Radish-root at
the Emunctories, as before. Then let them dry off the sweat, wash the mouth,
face and hands, and take some convenient nourishment, and carry themselves as
in the first interim of 8. hours.

Again the third time, after the like pause or interval, let them take another
sweating, and Cordial Medicine in this manner, viz:

Take of the Seed of Rue or Herb-grace a scruple and a half, of the roots of
Enula Campana, Valerian, Fullers Teasels, Aristolochia the round, of each half
a scruple, of the Juice of three-leaved Sorrel called Allebia two ounces, of
the juice of Rue, and Scabius, of each an ounce, and a little of the forenamed
Vinegar. Mix all these together, and let the sick parties take it warm, and
sweat as before; and let them demean and behave themselves in all points as
before, and continue this course for 4 or five days.

But if any be in that extremity of poverty, that they cannot procure these
easy and cheap Medicines, let them drink twice a day a draught of their own
Vrin, viz: in the morning, and at 5 a clock in the afternoon.

If in the first, 2d, or third day the Botches or Carbuncles appear, then
follow the direction given in page 120. and by the help of God you shall
undoubtedly recover, unless the poison have too much already possessed the
Heart.

But as a Corollarie and conclusion to the whole, take this caution along with
you: see that you tamper not too soon with the Botches or Blains, before they
be well come forth, and nature well cleared and relieved; but rather continue
in the taking of inward Cordials, and sweating Medicines. The over-hastie
applying of Topical and outward Remedies, especially if they be forcible and
sharp, (which is too usually practiced by some Physicians and Chirurgians, and
by Patients themselves) do oft-times by causing pain, increasing the Fever, and
weak'ning Nature, drive back and scatter the Venom into the inward parts, which
suddenly by a second assault, and encounter, surpriseth the Fort of Life, the
Heart, and carries away the Patient.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.

