REASONS for Establishment of Public Sale.
Humbly tendered, as well in behalf of the Commonwealth, as likewise of the
Purchasers of the Estate of Sir John Stowel, and all others, who upon the
Warrant and Authority of an Act of Parliament, and in service thereto have not
only engaged their Estates and money, but the price and blood of themselves and
nearest Relations.
1. IT is an absolute maxim, that no power can be of continuance unless
founded on the title of Land and that foundation cannot be laid without credit
to sell.

2. One President of Revocation, will make the credit of the State
excommunicate, none will buy or sell with it; For once forsworn, ever forlorn.

3. This will destroy the being of Soldiery, by making all got by the sword
unsaleable; Neither can the spoils and Conquests, though of the whole world,
be of use, if not vendible; But then the more victories the poorer.

4. There is no other permanent Bar against the King of the Scots, but sales
of land; And to destroy these, will reduce him.

5. If Articles may reverse sales, by the same justice ought perjury in
Witnesses, injustice in Judges absence of Witnesses or Parties at time of their
trial, new Discoveries since, and infinite others, which principle will make
questionable, or destroy all Sales ever made or to be made, and leave the
Parliament no power at all to warrant any.

6. Reversing Sales will make the Enemy potent and formidable, and Friend poor
and despicable.

7. The Friend lost, and Enemy not got, but made more fit for dissimulation
and dangerousnesse, neither is there any way to assure them, but transplanting
to other lands on the Parliaments title.

8. To unfreeze an Enemy, and be stung to death, is folly, not charity.

9. Touching Grants by Act of Parl. Necessity and the Law of the Land frees
them from being avoided by any error of Fact, Law, or Equity preceding.

1. Otherwise no Enemy could or would Article, Truce or League with the
Parliament, for fear of invisible error and preincumbrance on their Acts, and
want of power to warrant them.

2. Such a principle may not only destroy all Articles in general, but does
particularly those of Exceter; For at the beginning of the wars, all Adherers
to the Parl. were promised Indemnity therein, against the Delinquent and his
Party; which very Indemnity is clean contrary since by those Articles granted
the Delinquent against them; and that without any ceremony or hearing of those
innocent Adherers or their Friends, who had lost their Lives and estates in the
Service: And it cannot therefore be Reason or Justice to allow the Delinquent to
disannul the Act of Sale by a pre-promise of Indemnity in Articles, and not to
allow those Innocents to avoid his Act of Articles by those pre-promises of
Indemnity to them at the beginning of the wars.

3. All Acts of Indemnity to their own Soldiery might be avoided, by
admitting Reviewes for Error or Equity preceding.

4. All our ancient Parliament-Lawes, and Magna Charta it self may be avoided
on that ground.

5. As to Est^tes and Titles, if an Act of Parliament shall not be a Non ultra
of Controversies, the liberty of the People is destroyed; and there is no
Freehold in England, but all Tenants at will.

6. It is in vain in the regulation of the Law, to free inferior transactions,
from secret pre-incumbrances, if the Supreme are liable to the same, or worse.

10 It is unjust if Acts of Sale should be binding to Innocents, and not to
Delinquents: what a shame would it be if our Laws should be cords to one, and
cob-webs to the other?

11. It is unjust to prefer a pure Promise before property; For Rem Domino
vel non Domino vendente duobus; In jure est potior traditione prior.

12. Quod fieri non debet factum valet. If an Inheretrix happen to be married,
or Inheritance sold, though contrary to Articles; it is not lawful to perform
those Articles by committing adultery or robbery, for that were to do evil that
good might come thereby: But there is an honorable and just way left to
perform them, which is restitution in value, and may be more honorable too
then specie, for value may be sevenfold if Parties please; But specie can be
but single.

13. It is a known Rule, if Covenants happen by matter ex post facto, to be
either impossible in themselves, injust as to third persons, contrary to the
Laws, or inconsistent with public safety. It is unlawful to perform them
otherwise then in value.

14. No supreme power ought to repeal their own Bargains and Seals, though
they may their laws, for Regum Contractus non sunt leges.

15. By the very words of the Articles of Exceter, a Delinquent neither does
nor can claim to be in better condition then the residue of the subjects of
England. And they if their Estates happen to be sold by command of Authority,
either by a mistake in Parliament, or erroneous judgment at Common Law; or if
they have a Title to a Trust or Equity in Chancery, whereof Purchasers have no
notice, they must lose it, and be content with such recompense in value as the
Law allows, what an Abomination would it be, if two measures of justice should
be kept, a great at for the Enemy, and a small for the subject.

16. The Case in point is resolved and practiced to the Subjects of Ireland,
yet have they as good Articles as those of Exceter, as appears by the Act for
settling Ireland, dated 12. Aug. 1652. in the tenth Article and last Proviso;
for it is thereby expressly inacted, That they may be trans-planted from their
own Estates to remote Estates of like value, notwithstanding they have been
adjudged comprised within Articles.

17. Purchasers are for the most part undone, and incapable of Indemnity,
Tenants having drowned and forfeited their Estates, Widows, Wives, Orphans and
fatherless, having yielded up their portions; And the estate passed from hand
to hand, to so many manner of conveyances, uses, trusts and cross Covenants,
as is impossible to reconcile or accommodate with any value; whereas the estate
of the Delinquent is only the interest of a single person, who can allege no
reason why to avoid all these inconveniences, he should not accept an estate
equal or better then his own in value; But only that he scorns to take land
on the Title, either of Parliament or Army.

18. Touching Honor, it will reflect deeply on the Honor of the Parliament,
to retract their own Sales; on the Honor of the Protector, he himself being so
eminently named, and made a Party to the Act of Sale; On the Honor of the
Army, the people esteeming public Sales to be the military Market, and
planting of the Spear, where by the Laws of Nations all ought to have
security and protection in dealing, and the rights of buying and selling to be
observed inviolable. And the Honor of God not to justify Delinquents to
destroy Innocents.

By all which it is hoped it will appear to all just and intelligent persons,
that to reverse public Sales of Delinquents Lands, made by Act of Parliament
upon Articles or any cause preceding, whereof Purchasers had no notice, is
contrary to Wisdom, Justice, Honor and the Laws of God and man.

Reasons why the Purchasers of Sir John Stowels Estate, desire the late Vote
concerning the confirmation of the Purchases may be enacted.
1. A Great noise of terror is spread amongst the People by the proceeding of
the Committee of Articles; and men still remain fearful to bring in their money
to the State, unless satisfied with an Act.

2. The presumption of the Committee of Articles in those proceedings against
the Resolution of the last Parliament was grounded merely on this, That the
same was a Vote, and not an Act.

3. In the Intervals of Parliaments, on the same grounds men of impudent
spirits will slight a Vote not enacted.

4. It is usual and equal for Sellers to do Acts of further assurance

5. The Purchasers are menaced and threatened they shall not hold quiet long
what they have purchased.

6. They shall not be able to sell off their Purchases to others, but with
great loss.

7. An Act leaves Purchasers in no other condition as against the State, then
they were before, but only is to secure them against Sir John Stowel.

8 Many Acts of Parliament have been confirmed again by Parliament, though
sufficiently valid before, and particularly Magna Charta, though unquestionable
in its self has been confirmed above thirty several times.

Thursday the thirteenth of October, 1653.
An Act for confirmation of the Sale of the Lands and Estate of Sir John Stowel
Knight of the Bath.
BE it Enacted and Declared by Authority of Parliament, That all Sales made of
any Estate, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels of Sir John
Stowel Knight of the Bath, by virtue or appointment of any Act or Acts of
Parliament, are hereby confirmed and established: And accordingly all
Purchasers and Buyers of the same, shall and may have, hold, and quietly enjoy
the same to them, their Heirs and Assigns, according to their respective
Interest and Estates purchased or bought, and according to the Rules,
Conditions, and Limitations prescribed in the said Acts, Any Law or Judgment
to the contrary notwithstanding:

Hen. Scobell, Clerk Parl.


