The Complaint of many Freeholders, Famer, and others, of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND. Against the unlawful planting of English Tobacco. With an Act of
PARLIAMENT Prohibiting the same.
WHereas diverse great quantities of Tobacco have been of late years, and now
are planted in diverse parts of this Nation, tending to the decay of husbandry
and tillage, the prejudice and hindrance of the Plantations abroad, and of the
trading, commerce, Navigation and Shipping of this Nation; For prevention
thereof, Be it Enacted or Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the
Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, do or shall at
any time from and after the first day of May, one thousand six hundred fifty
and two, plant, set, grow, make or cure, or cause to be planted, set, grown,
made or cured, any Tobacco whatsoever as aforesaid, in any ground, field, place
or places as aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this present
Act, every such person or persons so offending shall forfeit the sum of twenty
shillings for every Pole or Rod of ground; and so after the Rate for a greater
quantity that shall be so used or employed, the one moiety of such forfeiture,
to the use of the Commonwealth, the other moiety thereof, for the discoverer
or Prosecutor, to be recovered by Action or Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information,
in any Court of this Nation, wherein no Essoyn, wager of Law or Protection
shall lie: And for the more effectual preventing the planting of Tobacco's as
aforesaid, That it shall be lawful to or for any person or persons whatsoever,
to enter into and upon all and every, or any place or ground within this
Commonwealth, where any Tobacco shall be planted* growing, curing or making,
contrary to this present Act, and to grub, cut up, destroy, and utterly to
consume all and every such Tobaccos: And the Commissioners, Sub-Commissioners
and Officers of Excise, are especially enjoined and required to look to the due
execution hereof.

The Weed.
ENgland is called by the Nations of the world, the Garden of the world, but in
it there is many weeds, and although diverse have been at work to pull them up,
yet still they grow, and more when they that endeavor to pull them up, seem
to take the greatest pains and care. Weeds grow faster then good herbs, yet
weeds are never planted, being they desetve not pains of planting but are
unprofitable unnecessary and unwholesome. I shall say little concerning the
allegory that may be upon weeds in general, but in particular, one weed that
cumbereth and anoyeth this garden of England is Tobacco: the which some who
have been and now are evil Members of this Commonwealth do endeavor to
plant; the only rise of it is coveteousness, a sin of high nature, and the
cause of much evil in all persons and places, and to be abandoned, the
continuance of it is, through the subtilty of a resolute people, who have no
regard to obey, neither fear any threat, nor regard any public good the end
of it will be the beggering of our foreign Plantations who have had, and do
depend on our Brethren natives for relief by traffic with them the great
hindrance of shipping and navigation, and the continuation of a long and
impoverished condition among diverse manufactors that might supply foreign
parts with needful things.

As for English Tobacco it is thus caractered.
A Subject of deceit, causing many quarrels and law suits, a destroyer of all
sorts of grain, by occupying the best ground, and using all the Dung they can
get to force their seed to plants, and after to enable the Fields for such a
stinking, rotten, unprofitable, unwholesome, unnatural stuff, an inhauncer of
Rents, a barrenner of good land, an expugner of lawful trades, an increaser of
idleness, distructive to health of a perishing condition, a thing not worthy to
have its being in our Nation, always by every power prohibited* not accounted
as a commodity, but as expeld exild and banished. That it does deterr and
hinder many thousand pounds a year to this Nation of Excise and Custom that
might be paid for other Tobacco, if this were not pernicious in the room of
Foreign, besides the employment of our ships and men, and other
inconveniences, it is also not fit to grow in our climate, it never comes to
maturity it was not on the list for Excise, but accounted as Docks or Hemlock.

Tobacco of foreign Plantations is on the contrary beneficial to Merchandises
and manufacture, profitable in the support of our Nation, it officiates as
money abroad, and gives content, to the buyer at home, and is accounted a
commodity that has sustained life upon the Seas in time of distress, as also
in Prisons and Garrisons when need has been, it grows in its proper place,
comes to perfect maturity, and of all that are affected with Tobacco, it is
loved and desired* and of all powers and people allowed in all Nations, being
of a sound quality, and fit for exportation to many places. The damage that
may grow by this English Tobacco (...) the decay of Merchandise, tillage,
Husbandry, the causing of Corn to grow dear, the discomforting of our
Merchants, the undoing of our Artificers, the increase of an idle and
disobedient and rebel lious people, the Plnaters of Collonies will be
discouraged, and the people that are abroad wanting necessaries must return
home for relief: and be forced to trade with other Nations that are our
enemies. I shlll refer all things else that may be said to your best skill.
And remain Your Friend.

Robert Read. Servant both to the Merchants of Bristol and London.


