REASONS Proposed for the Encouragement of all People to under-write to the New
Subscriptions, appointed to be made to the late East India Companyes Stock.
I. BEcause the said Company have been a long time a Corporation, for the
Honor and Profit of the Nation.

II. Because they have a great Estate, clear of all Debts and Encumbrances at
Home and Abroad, intrinsically worth more than 150 l. per cent. which is above
1100000 l.

III. Because all their Charters, as well their Old ones, as those two lately
obtained, are to be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

IV. Because their Stock will Rise considerably so soon as these Subscriptions
are completed, or any Ships Arrive, although it be not worth much, and that
the Company should not be confirmed by Act of Parliament; and then one may
easily sell out again to Profit.

1. Because the said Company have been a long time a Corporation, to the Honor
and Profit of this Nation.
But as all Generals are made up of Particulars, so it may not be amiss to give
some particular Instances to show how they have been a long time a Corporation
to the Honor and Profit of this Nation, which appears very plain by what
follows, viz.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, that they obtained the grant
of the sole Trade of the East Indies exclusive of all others, and exercised the
same, though the Subjects of England, could not, nor can be excluded from it
but by Act of Parliament, as may appear by the Kings Message sent to the House
of Commons, in November. 1692. and likewise by the Opinion of the Judges, which
has been given in this Matter.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, That they have obtained the
power of Seizing the Ships and Goods of their Fellow Subjects, for Trading into
the East Indies, and have actually put the same Power in Erecution, contrary to
Law.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, That they have procured Ships
outward-bound to be Arrested and Stopped in England, upon pretense of their
having notice, that they were Bound to the East Indies, though no Law hinders
them from going thither.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, That they have Obtained and
Executed the Power of Seizing, Imprisoning, and Fini^g the Persons of their
Fellow Subjects for Trading into the East Indies, which no Law Prohibits, or
makes Criminal; and it must not be denied, but that it is a Great Honor and
Profit to any Nation, where a few Subjects have arrived to the Exercise of such
Powers, which some of the Greatest Potentates in the World cannot pretend to.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, That they Commenced, and
Prosecuted several Suits at Law, in Actions of 100000 l. -- and 200000 l. --
each; against diverse of their Fellow Subjects, for Trading to the East Indies,
which by Law they might do; and thereby have put them to Great and Vexatious
Oppressions, without any other Remedy than Patience, the common Comfort of all
Misfortunes.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, That they Procured a
Commission to Execute Martial Law; and have Executed the same on the Lives of
their Fellow Subjects, contrary to Law.

It was for the Honor and Profit of the Nation, That they Caused the Subjects
of England to be Hanged; when on their Trials they were only found Guilty of a
Riot: -- Which is a greater Power than the King himself has; who can cause no
man to be Hanged, but by due Course of Law.

To the Honor and Profit of the Nation, They have Paid such vast Sums of
Money for Customs, although the Duties on all East India Goods are now so
extremely Low: For they have Paid in Two whole Years of their Trade, Twenty
Thousand Pounds; which upon the Trade they formerly used to drive, or might now
be driven, would have amounted to more than Ten Times that Sum.

To the Honor and Profit of the Nation, They have in a manner given this whole
Trade to the Dutch, who now supply all the World ( England not excepted) with
most sorts of East India Commodities.

But however they are Commended, as Honorable, and Profitable to the Nation;
yet some of their Actions have been Notoriously and Scandalously Fraudulent and
Immoral, as well as Cruel and Bloody. For the Hanging those Persons was Voted
Murder by the Honorable House of Commons, and the obtaining a Grant to
Execute Martial Law, and Signing Instructions to put the same in Execution,
were adjudged Crimes; for which some Men might justly be Excepted out of the
Act of Indemnity.

These are some few of their Proceedings toward their Fellow Subjects, but it
would require a very large Volume to give an Account of the rest of them.

And Their Actions abroad, toward the Natives of India, have been no less to
the Honor and Profit of the Nation, than what they have done to their Fellow
Subjects at home.

For, to the Honor and Profit of the Nation, After their Factors had run in
Debt Three or Four Hundred Thousand Pounds at Surat, their President got away
from thence without Paying it; and the greatest part thereof remains Unpaid
even to this day; besides the Restitution which they are to make.

To the Honor and Profit of the Nation, They gave Passes to the Mogul's
Subjects, for the secure Trading of their Ships; and afterward Took those very
Ships who had their own Passes, which were Plundered and Robbed. How this
agrees with the Faith of Nations, let all Men judge.

To the Honor and Profit of the Nation, They made a Cruel and Unjust War on
the Mogul 's Subjects; on purpose to Plunder them, and send home those Effects;
thereby to avoid Paying their Just Debts. --

And having thus given a short Account of their having been a long time a
Corporation, to the Honor and Profit of the Nation; I shall in the next place
consider Their Stock, both at Home and A broad, which they pretend to be
Intrinsecally Worth above 150 per Cent. which is 1100000 l.
You have the Companies honest Words, That their Stock is worth above 1100000
l. -- which it amounts to at 150 l. per Cent. and they asserted it it to be
worth Intrinsically more, in the Answer they gave to the Regulations of the
Lords of the Council last year. -- And certainly No Man will doubt the Truth of
what they say, when they value it but at 744000 l. -- For to be sure, They will
speak nothing but Truth; it being well known what care they have always taken,
to Assert nothing but what is So.

Their Estate at Home, is Visible:
1. By their having sent out in Three Years time, viz. 1688/89, 1689/90,
1690/91, in Seven Ships, containing about 3000 Tunn, such a Prodigious Sum as
26000 l.

2. By their having in England so Vast a Stock as 38901 l. 08 s. 08 d. to drive
so Small a Trade as that to the East Indies, (being not above One Quarter of
the Trade of the World,) as may appear by their own Accounts given in to
Parliament in 1691, (including therein 9920 l. for their Buildings,) though
they had sent out in Three whole Years time before about the full Sum of 26000
l. -- and had about 9000 Tunn ^f Shipping arrived home, between the Time of
their Accounts given in (...) Parliament in 1689, to that of 1691.

3. By their calling in 50 per cent. of their Stock before they could send out
the last Years Ships, which was a public Declaration to the World, they had a
sufficient Stock to carry on their Trade.

4. By their having so much Money left in England to carry on their Trade after
the 50 per cent. was called in, that they are necessitated to draw in 744000 l.
more this Year, to send out their 12 Ships, which they cannot do without it;
and therefore they procured to be appointed to be paid down at the Subscribing,
and at the 10th. January, and have agreed to allow 10 per cent, discount, to
have the whole paid presently, that so they may pay themselves the 50 per cent.
they paid to send out the Ships last Year, and what they have since advanced to
pay promiscuous and other incident Charges for secret Services.

Their Estate Abroad is as visible.
1. By their having sent home in a few years above 2000 Tuns of their Shipping
empty.

2. By their keeping their Ships so little a while in India, and sending them
home with such considerable Cargoes and part full, when Goods were so Plenty,
that they sold here for double or three times their usual Prizes. Two of these
Ships now lately arrived, having been only about five years out, and Two of
those sent out in 1689 and 1690 not yet returned, although Ships commonly stay
out on that Voyage Eighteen or Twenty Months; which plainly shows the Reason
that the Nation has not been supplied with East India Commodities, has been (as
they assert) because His Majesty would not let them have more Ships in 1689,
and 1690.

3. By their Farming out their Trade to Foreigners and others, to lade
East India Goods on their Ships on permission, and not Trading themselves, when
those Goods were so plentiful here, that there was scarce any to be had, and
that they sold them for double or treble as much as usual; which is a
convincing Argument of the large Effects they have Abroad: And with what has
been already observed, will fully make out their having there 828868 l. 00 s.
05 d. quick Stock, as was asserted by them in their Account given in
Parliament, in 1691.

4. By their having such a prodigious Sum of Money at Surratt, that their
General or President, and all their Factors there, by reason of their Debts,
are confined to the Town, and not permitted to stir out of it without a Guard
to watch them: And having so much Stock there, and so large a Credit, that they
are forced to borrow Money to pay for the Charges of their House keeping, when
by their Accounts in 1691. they only pretended to have there 180000 l. besides
all Debts and Demands paid.

5. By their having had home in two Years such a vast number of Shi^^ and
Goods, including this Ship now last arrived, makes together (...) Ships Burden
about 1400 Tun; and much of their Cargo so (...) and fine, that it will scarce
pay Custom, Freight and Demo(...) besides, that great part of the best Goods
have been on permission for private Accounts, and in that time the Dutch have
had home but Thirty-one Ships richly laden, containing about 15000 Tun, besides
Three cast away, which shows that Goods cannot be had in the East Indies
without Money.

III. And having thus given an Account of their great Estate at Home and
Abroad, I shall in the next place consider the Third Reason proposed, because
all their Charters, as well their Old ones as these Two lately obtained, are to
be Confirmed by Act of Parliament.
You have the Assurance of the Company's Word, which they have never yet broke,
and therefore it ought not to be mistrusted, that all their Charters shall be
confirmed by Act of Parliament, they having by their Behavior so well deserved
it.

1. Because the Company have asserted for Law, That the King can exclude his
Subjects from the East India Trade without an Act of Parliament, which makes
the Concurrence of the Parliament unnecessary; when His Majesty in his Message
last Sessions tells them expressly, That their Concurrence is necessary to make
a complete and useful Settlement of that Trade.

2. Because it makes the Trade so Diffusive and National, by giving so small a
share of it (as above 250000 l.) to Four or Five Men only, excluding none of
the Nation from coming in who are weary of their Money.

3. Because a Stock of 744000 l. will certainly drive a much greater Trade to
the East Indies, and will be more National and Diffusive, and will also cope
much better with the Dutch then so small a Stock as Two Millions raised by new
Subscriptions.

4. Because the Company by treating the Regulations of the Lords of the Council
with so much Respect, and for the good Services which they have done the
Nation, have obtained a new Charter according to their own Desire, which they
will make use of to ease those of their Money, who have a mind to come and
subscribe; therefore they presume on the like requital also from the
Parliament, by having their said Charters confirmed.

5. Because that this Company has been Established by Two new Charters, when
the Honorable House of Commons have twice addressed to have their Old Charters
dissolved.

And its very remarkable, the Company are now Established on the same
Regulations, which were formerly proposed to them by the Lords of the Council
(to which they gave the modest Answer which His Majesty sent the House of
Commons last Session) with little other difference than this only, viz.

That the Leading Men may keep their great Stocks, and have Liberty, ^^e they
never so great, each Man to write in 10000 l. more, and are to give no
Security, to make the Stock worth 744000 l. or so much as any thing, and may
divide out all again in six Months, if they please; and these Differences are
such small Trifles, that they signify nothing, considering their making so
honorable a War on the Mogul, and at the same time making such large Dividends
on purpose to put themselves out of the power of a Parliament, and to embroil
the Trade, giving it in a manner wholly to the Dutch, which are such good
Services as may well recommend them; and they ought to prevail with all well
meaning People, who are weary of their Money, not to delay one Minute in
subscribing; for they may be presently eased of it, without any trouble, at the
East India House.

The Company certainly deserve very well to have 744000 l. given them in that
Trade for nothing, seeing that if they have not some Advantage, they will have
great cause to complain of a bad Bargain; but they are resolved, that those who
come in shall pay the Fiddler: And yet if any of them will be so just and honest
as to help draw in the Simple and unwary, they shall be secured, especially if
they are of the adverse Party, or can talk the thing well up and down the Town;
for they shall have Dignified Men for their Security; that they shall loose
nothing; but have Principle and Interest repayed, if they please, in twelve
Months. And as for the loosing a good Name, that is a silly Thing, so as there
be a Penny to be got by it. What Is more common than to have decoy Ducks to
fetch in Game; such Men shall have the Honor to serve for Trappanners to help
deceive the unwary, whilst others will run away with the Benefit.

What remains, is lastly to consider the 4th. Reason proposed.

IV. Because their Stock will Rise considerably here, so soon as these
Subscriptions are Completed, or any Ships Arrive, although it be not worth
much, and that the Company should not be Confirmed by Act of Parliament; and
then one may easily Sell out again to Profit.
Doubtless some such Arguments were used formerly, to persuade some Persons to
Buy Stock at 300 and 250 l. then was the time to Buy Stock? and so it is now;
and the great Cause which they who followed that Advice, have to Thank them who
gave it, is Reason sufficient to induce them to follow it for the future; they
believed the Doctrine then promoted, viz. Every thing is worth what it can be
sold for; and therefore bought Stock at 300 per cent. But when they found their
mistake, they complained of a bad Bargain; though certainly they had more
Reason to Complain of those who advised them to buy, than they had of those
that sold, unless they did, as its said some others have done, persuade people
to buy; when at the same time they were selling themselves, and so sell their
own Stock in another Man's Name. If such things have been done, what security
is there that the same Men will not now again Christen their own Children
first, to be sure they wh^ have taken out all or more than their own, by the
large Dividends fo^merly made, can afford to sell much better Penny worths,
than they who are but now come in; and they will be glad of the first
Opportunity to slip out: Most People are persuaded to come in on this Prospect,
and some to be sure must be disappointed: What if the Subscriptions should not
be Completed? Or what if their Ships now Abroad, should any of them Miscarry?
Why then truly, they must make the best of a bad Bargain, and may again with as
much Reason Complain of a bad Pennyworth, and will have just the same Relief,
to be laughed at for their Pains, in meddling with what they did not understand.

By what has been already Observed, it may plainly appear, that the late
Company have been a long time a Corporation to the Honor and Profit of the
Vation, and that their Stock is worth 744000 l. nay 1100000 l. and hat they
will doubtless be confirmed by Act of Parliament, and that it will Rise
considerably. There might be much more added, if it were necessary, but this is
thought sufficient to induce all indifferent People, who are weary of their
Money, to join with them by new Subscriptions, without delay, upon such great
Encouragements as these are. I shall only add one thing more.

That it will serve to enable 2 or 3 men to pay themselves a considerable Sum
of Money for what the Company owe them besides the last 50 per cent. which is
now made a Debt, and to Pay their other Debts besides; which must likewise be
paid out of this new Subscription Money; and they shall have so much the more
Money paid them, if they will Subscribe it in the Stock. This is a very
profitable and national Design, especially for those who are to receive the
money out which is to be Subscribed in; and its worth observing how, that to
incline people to pay in 50 l. per cent. last Summer, they allowed 3 per cent.
discount, and raised the Stock above 100 per cent. that so the managing men
might draw in others, and get out what Money they had advanced, and that they
might also send out the six Ships which for want of money they were forced to
keep till June, which should have gone in February before; and now they have
ordered 10 l. per cent. discount for one months time, and they keep up the
Stock at 93 l. per cent. to incline people to pay in all their Money freely by
the 10th of December, that so they may be able to send out their 12 Ships this
Year, and also to Pay themselves what they have disbursed, together with the 50
l. per cent. they paid last year, and which is now to be Refunded; if people
will put out their Eyes, and always be thus bubbled out of their Money as well
as their Senses, they may go on till they are weary* and perhaps this is done,
that the old pretense might still be urged for their continuance, viz. That a
great many Widows, Orphans, and Innocent and Ignorant People might not be
Cheated and undone, if they should be Dissolved.

But let not these Gentlemen deceive themselves and others, Doubtless the
Parliament will not be thus affronted, but will take notice of these
Proceedings and Assert the Right and Liberty of the Subject to to the Freedom
of this Trade which has been thus violated, and not ^oose so^ great a Trade to
the whole Nation, by giving it it either to 2 or 3 particular Men to make them
as great as Dukes, or else to our Friends the Dutch, and therefore its to be
hoped they will provide that all the Subjects of England may Freely Trade to
the East Indies, according to the Right whch they have by Law so to do, until
this Trade be Settled by Act of Parliament; and thereby not only the Trade will
be secured to the Nation, but the Just Rights and Liberties of the People will
be maintained and preserved.

I suppose these Reasons will be sufficient to convince any uninteressed
persons, but if not, hereafter they shall have more: For the present I shall
conclude with the Honest Popes Blessing on all those who are still willing to
be deceived.

Qui decipi volunt, Decipiantur.
