A MEDITATION For the 30th. day of January, THE ANNIVERSARY OF The Murder and
Martyrdom OF K. CHARLES the I.
The best of Kings, Of Husbands, of Fathers, of Christians, and of Men; who was
decolated on that day, Anno Domini, 1648. and in the four and twentieth year of
his Sacred Majesty's most gracious Reign.
Cain rose up against Abell his Brother, and slew him, Genesis 4. 8.
HArd hearted nature! That being yet so young, should bring forth so cruel a
Monster? A Brother to kill a Brother, and that for no other quarrel, but for
his Righteousness, because his deeds were good, and Cains evil; what
malignity, did our first Parents fall, distill into all the succeeding Race?
Yet being questioned by the voice of Heaven, Cain, desperately evil as he was,
was not so impudently shameless as to own, though not so ingenuous, as to
confess the fact; but why should we remember Cain with so black a Character?
Cain, a Saint may seem, compared with the Sons of Beliall, whom this latter age
has produced; we have seen (as this day Englands direful Tragedy; England,
that most dismally, has committed felony upon her self, and with her own
bloody hands, cut off her own Royal head: Oh, it is a sad judgment that upon
the defect of our prayers, and the omission of our obedience, is fallen upon
us, a judgment accompanied with such lamentable consequences, occasioned by so
deplorable an action, so fatal a blow, as no hand can write the story of it,
for trembling, or if it could, no eye were able to read for weeping; no tongue
is able to speak it is grief, for stammerings and titubations, or if it
should, no ear were able to hear it, for glowing: Nay, we have seen that, that
is so far from being communicable to posterity in any credible relation, that
we our selves, can hardly believe our selves, to have seen a most gracious,
glorious King, settled in his Fathers Throne, by the Laws of God and of the
Land, confirmed in his Regal Power, by the Oaths of Allegiance, taken by his
very enemies, in the issue of a sharp tedious War, after the expense of many
thousands, of Noble, Generous, Loyal, Protestant Christians lives, in his just
defense, to be at length, by the power of a rebellious, treacherous crewe of
his own, Subjects, (and many of them his falfehearted, household Servants,)
born, and bred, and grown rich, under his happy Government, (and by his
liberal hand) brought to a solemn trial, under pretense of Law, formally
arreigned for his life, and adjudged by those that were his professed foes,
(and without being heard) as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer and a public Enemy
to be put to death, by the severing his Head from his Body; and that this
sentence should be executed, by the force of the Soldiery, on a Scaffold,
erected before his own Court? In the midst of Populous London and Westminster;
in the face of the Sun at noon day; God, Angels, Men, looking on; and to pass
through his Banqueting House, his house of State and Pleasure, to this
Mount-Calvary; and as a Lamb, before the Shearers not to open his mouth? Oh the
Heavens! I dare not enter into too serious a consideration of this unheard off,
unparalleled fact, least I drown my senses in the abyss of incomprehensible
sorrows; the whole world abroad stands amazed at it, England only being under
the stroke, remains, stupidly insensible of her own, both sin and misery: The
earth indeed at this day, was not felt to quake, but all men's hearts, (not more
hard, then the Adamant) trembled: The graves indeed did not open to let forth
their dead, but many tenderhearted, amongst the living, with grief dyed, and
went to their graves, the values of our Temples indeed, were not rent, but our
material Temples themselves, in this the head of our Church on earth, were
vertually destroyed in his Majesty's Dominions: More, I cannot tell more, on
this sad Theme; I dare not so much as think, least I thinking, dye: Much less
do I know what to do, (for since the Creation of the World, the like has not
been seen) but mine eyes; dear God? are toward thee.

EJACVLATION.
LOrd! How long will thou be angry? shall thy jealousy burn like fire for
ever? If this be done to the green and fruitful tree, what shall become of the
dry and withered? If a gracious King, whom thou have made so near thy self,
escape not thy hand of temporal punishment, what may a rebellious, a
monstrously sinful People expect? But in Judgment thou have promised to
remember mercy, have mercy then I humbly pray thee, upon the remnant of thy
People, preserve us under the shadow of thy wings, until this Tyranny be
over-past, and establish over us if it be thy holy will CHARLES the Second, the
undoubted Son and Heir of his fathers Virtues and Crowns, that Kings again
according to thy own ordinance, may be Nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing
Mothers in this our Israel, that Religion, Law, Liberty, Property, Commerce,
Love, and Unity, may return again to our bleeding and fainting Nations, and
all this for thy Sons sake, our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen.

Written and wept by M. de R. of the Middle Temple, Exq. 3. Printed in the
year, 1660.


