The Fiery Change: OR, ALMIGHTY GOD, His Melting and Refining of his people,
purging out their dross and drossy Metals, making them like unto Himself and
to his Son who is the pure Word.

Wherein is discovered, by the comparison of Metals, how the visible Church is
corrupted, consisting of men of all degrees and conditions and how God has
begun to Refine them:

Which have past in the world a long time for good Metal: But now is
discovering by fire.

By Robert Read.

When the Lord shall purge the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof by
the Spirit of Judgment and the Spirit of Burning. Isaiah 4.4.

Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because
it shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's work, of
what sort it is. 1 Cor. 3.13.

For even Our God is a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the
Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's, and by Richard Moon, at the Seven
Stars in Paul's Churchyard, near the great North door. 1656.

To the right Christian Reader.
MAny writings have been of late, in these distempered times, printed and
published; which have proceeded, from the several authors desires, to have all
men to agree unto them, which have, like as streams of water, run to and fro
these Nations: Had they come from the pure fountain, there would not have been
such difference; but issuing from the dirty, miry, and dreggy puddles of art,
wit, and humane invention, together with corrupt learning, and imagination,
wherein has been seen much Pride, Passion, Avarice, Ambition, Novelty, and
self conceit, it cannot be otherwise, but that instead of being medicinal, as
the pure word is, those writings have proved to be killing, and destructive.
True it is, where prevaricate and prejudicial complaints are made, out of the
carnal and sinister ends of vain men, there can be no remedy, or relief to
their satisfaction: But where complaints are, from just discoveries of God,
there is a power goes along, to remedy that that is is complained of: Some
would have the whole Orb guided after one manner, some after an other manner,
each man seeking chiefly his own honor, interest and profit, and what is
corruptly seen by them to be good, that they desire to be done; and conclude
all to be evil that seems against their Tenants. Whence it comes to pass,
that they revile, and persecute that truth; and that good thing, they see not,
which others purely see, and do declare: dealing with many as Balaam did with
his Ass, beating him because he stopped, and would not carry him along the way
where he was going, contrary to the Word of God; the Ass saw an Angel, with
his sword drawn, but Balaam saw not the Angel. It is even so, that many who are
accounted Asses, and Idiots see, (the Lord makes them see and complain against)
that, that many wise, and learned men of the world do not see; for the wisdom
of the world cannot see nor know God: they see no Babylon, but what is against
their jugdement: no Antichrist, but that of Rome: no Whore, but what keeps not
correspondency with the visible Church: no Beast but only the poor, profane,
and breaker of the Civil Law. They see not the impure purity, the dissembled
Christianity, the unsavory Salt, the covnterfet Diamond, the drossy silver: But
think that the late brustring of their own Garments, to be the Garment of
Christ, the new guilding of their base mettle, to be very gold; that they are
sufficiently changed, because Baptized, and Civilized; that they know the Lord,
if they can tell the report that they have heard of him: and know themselves,
if they can say, they are sinners. Here Antichrist, in the mystery, exalts
himself against Christ, in the mystery, and persecuteth him; laying stumbling
blocks before the people of God, loving the wages of unrighteousness, more
then the hidden treasure: The consideration of this, has, together with the
great fire that is kindled by providence, set more pens to work: for they that
bear good will to Sion, cannot for its sake, hold their peace, but must
declare, the things that they have heard and seen, and what will shortly be:
Even the fall of Babylon, and the destruction of the great Whore, which has
been spoken of by the Prophets, by riddles, and comparisons, so twisted that
the Clergy could not undo: as also the new Jerusalem coming down from God out
of heaven, Christ's final conquest and exaltation, over sin, death and hell,
the Saints spiritually and most purely refined, purified and sublimed, from
sinful and carnal forms, and will worship: Were it not, that that impurity
lodges with purity, and Antichrist found to be in the seat of Christ, there
would not have been such a fiery contention, but when curing compositions are
found to be destroying potions, if vessels of truth, and simplicity, are
changed to lies, and formality, what lamentation may be taken up, that our
guides and our counselors are fallen, in their wisdom, Surely the Lord is
departed from his people.

But thanks be to God, there is a still, and a soft voice, that rendeth the
Mountains, shakes the Rocks, divides the waters, and expels darkness
apace, that true Religion, and Righteousness, that the enemies thereof, (or
rather the seeming friends of it) would extinguish and bury, now begins to
get rooting, and to grow from dry Bones, to an exceeding great Army.

Should any one then be silent, whom the Lord bids to speak, waiting on the
Learned, the Aged, and the Honorable men to speak, fearing the revilings of
the Disputer, and Opposer: No, although he be the least, and the worst of his
Fathers house, being thereunto appointed and enabled, he must do his duty,
knowing that the Lord is risen and does great things, by small and contemptible
means, and that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, he ordains
strength.

Upon this account, was the ensuing matter presented to me, by that Imperial
hand, which swaieth all, having no power to wave the meddling with this subject,
that tends to the discoveries of a pure trimmed Whore, which gloriously
glittereth, like the Sun, that speaks so much of righteousness, and
integrity, that none, without high presumption and very great affront, dares
to question, especially without a learned tongue, and a gilded pen.

What here is spoken, is not to flatter any, neither is it unjustly to censure,
but to advise from the Lord, the painted face to brinish tears and sad cheeks;
the eleoquent and Oratory tongue, to silence in the glory of the flesh; the
raking and greedy hand, to Charity, Liberality, and Sobriety, the impotent and
lame feet, to walk according to their stage, and strength; yea, and the whole
man, to his purging, and refining change. Perhaps some may ask whether this
fiery Change shall be before the final Consumption of the whole world (having
been taught that it is not till then.) Most certain, it is before: Have you
heard and seen the late inventions, that men have had, in all nations by fire,
(presaging that God may by fire do more strange things): the one of guns, and,
that great slaughters, sudden batteries, speedy victories, and mighty
conquests, have been made by them, both by Land, and Sea: the other of Tobacco,
accounted to be as vital, to the support of the natural life of man, seeming
to overpoise bread, in the traffic of it; which inventions our forefathers,
never heard of; Has man found out these fiery ways, the one for destruction,
and the other for preservation? and cannot the great God, find out ways by
fire, the one to consume his enemies, Antichrist, the Whore, and the beast; and
the other to burn, and consume the dross, out of his Church, that they may be
preserved (being by it made fit Temples) to eternal life? Tophet is ordained
for the King; for that, that does exalt, in the Church, or in any particular
mind, against God: He will slay those, that will not he should reign over
them, and he will melt his own people, that they may be rid of all their
dross, he will consume their flesh, that he may be ever with them, in Spirit.

Reader, the Lord has manifested to me, that there is nothing more, that he
will make war against, than against the impure Saints, the drossy Silver, the
bad coin that has, filius Dei, on the outside, and dross within.

Would the Church visible of England, did but see, how they are cheated? a
little light varnish silvering or gilt without is nothing, to the massey body
of Brass, Tinn, Iron, and Lead within, which God will melt and take away: He
complains, and he will redress; his people shall not be his, only in name,
but as he is himself, Gold: and, as Christ the Word is Silver: What God has
accquainted me with, I am to acquaint, as many as love the Lord Jesus. Read it
in the Spirit.

The Fiery Change.
Psalm 47.6. When the Nations raged, and the Kingdoms were moved, God uttered
his voice, and the earth melted.

Psalm 102.13. Thou will arise, and have mercy on Sion, for the time to have
mercy thereon, for the appointed time is come.


THe State and condition, of England, in respect of Gods worship, and service,
the union and communion we ought to have with him, does appear at this day,
like as the Church of Laodicea Rev. 3.15. which was neither fast nor loose,
they did neither cleave to God, with all their hearts, nor forsake him, as the
words are, they were neither hot, nor cold: And yet there was both heat and
cold, confusedly lukewarm, talking and speaking much of their riches, gifts,
graces, goodness, and goods, and of the late increase of the said goods; But
know not they are wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked. One of these
conditions is misery enough, but to be in them all, not to have any sight, or
any feeling, but to be blind, Ephesians. 4.19.
and past feeling of their earthy, defiled, corrupted, drossie, and unrefined
condition, is to be lamented, and deplored. And so it is by Englands late
Converts, bewailed and bemoaned, who have past through the fire, and have been
refined, and have bought of the most pure Gold, of their Maker, being clothed
with the Garment of Christ, and have anointed their eyes with eye salve, that
they can see the filthiness, from which they are escaped purged and cleansed,
from complaining of it, and discovering it: Yea, uncovering the Whore, and
making her bare taking her veil away, showing the filthiness of her secret
parts: In prosecution of which, it comes to pass, that there is a very great
difference, among men in the world, Tot homines, sententiae, So many men, so
many minds; the corrupt Metal would seem to be, as good as that, that is
refined; there is both good and bad, there is that, that is refined, and there
is counterfeit. This is found to be among us in England: Hosea 7.8. verse 10.
We are a people that are mixed: we have adulterated our selves: The pride of
England does testify to their faces, that they do not return to the Lord their
God, nor seek him for all this that he has done; But do live in their own
wills, and not submit unto his will, neither have they any respect, to be
drawn up to a union with their God, nor with his people; All men having not a
^ike measure of the knowledge of him, neither do all men believe: for some have
no faith, therefore they can have no love to God, nor to his people, being
carnal; they are full of envying, strife, and divisions, and walk as men, (not
as Christians) 1 Cor. 3.3. Hence it comes to pass, that there is much
difference in judgment, and opinion, in matters of religion: Some walk by an
absolute and perfect rule, obeying the ight, God shines in them, being dead to
their own wills, living in the will of God; others are hurried, and carried by
the violent stream of their own wills, fleshly understandings and
imaginations, into all manner of contradictions, dissentings, oppositions and
dividings: owning a God, and a re igion too in show, but have no desire to
attain to any other perfection then that which is external, to the visible
sight of men, fearing to bring their deeds to the true light, to be tried there
by it; but love darkness more then the light reviling, reproaching, and
per^ecuting those that do ^o; and that endeavor to walk, according to the
light, who worship God, as he ought to be worshipped; inwardly in Spirit, and
in Truth: Genesis 6.22.
Yea such as walk with God, as Henoch did, and such as would, for God and to
him, part with their dearest child, as Abraham did, and such as walk before
God, 2 Kings 20.3.
with a perfect heart, as Hezekiah did. Yea, and such, as now meekly wait for
the appearance of the mighty God, and our Lord Christ, in the perfect
consummation, and fullfilling of those prophesies which are near at hand, to be
accomplished, and fulfilled to the overthrow of the Man of Sin, that
Antichrist; and to the complete setting up of Christ in his Kigdome.

The Apostles knew very well, what would come to pass, after their days: and
therefore, Saint Paul says, 2 These. 2.8.
Then shall the wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume, with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish, with the brightness of his coming;
Then, after that great Apostasy which should first come, which yet continues:
1 Pet. 4 7.
Saint Peter also says, Now the end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore
sober, and watch unto prayer: But above all things, have fervent love, for love
covers the multitiude of sins:

Be sober in your minds, be not drunk, for drunkenness makes men fit for any
evil: it makes men full of wrath, forgetful, sleepy, and ready to speak or do
any evil; it does infatuate the understanding, it weakens all the powers of
man, it makes him as a beast, as a dead man, and not to know himself, where he
is, or what he is. All these several evils, as to the natural sense,
conduces much to the undoing of the body and estate of man: But drunkenness,
in the spiritual ^en^e, in the in^isible and internal part of man, to be
drunk, and not with wine, to stagger and not with strong drink to be drunk with
the wine ot the fornication of the great Whore, Esa. 29 9.
to sleep in sin, to forget God, to be full of wrath against God his will, his
people, and his Word; to do e^ill and speak evil, to be infatuated, and to have
the powers of darkness rule over us, and in us and not to know our selves,
nor where we are, but reel, and stumble, and fall; This is misery: Be sober
in your invisible actings, Jer. 25.27.
in your thoughts, imaginations, understandings, affections, wills, passions,
that nothing break into outvvard act against Almighty God, or his dear
relations, either in revilings, reproachings, or persecutions; But be patient,
bearing all things, and abiding in the vvil of our God, although never so
cross to our wills:

Furthermore, Watch: Watch as a Sentinel does, both to destroy and to discover:
and by prayer call for help and assistance, against the potent Enemies of our
souls, who does continually assault us, by inward objects, injected into our
minds, and thoughts, and some visibly presented before our eyes, which we
cannot be freed from, so long as we are in the flesh, but are kept by the power
of God, through Faith unto Salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the
last time.

1 Pet. 115.
Again, Have fervent love, etc. Above all things, especially, and chiefly,
primarily, and in the first place, have fervent love, hot love, not cold, and
frozen, but fervent, earnest: the want of this love, makes all things to be out
of order, that we love not our superiors, inferiors, nor our equals, but
differ with them all, and speak evil of all: We should love all, for Gods
sake, and be tender hearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake
forgave us: 1 John 4.11.
Beloved, if God so loved us, then ought we to love one another. For this want
of love, all men are to be blamed; For those that are called Ministers, the
teachers of the people at this day, they do speak bitterly, and would act
cruelly, against diverse poor people of God, that are otherwise enlightened,
then themselves, and are led by the true light of God, living above the
ordinances of man, which they call the ordinances of God: And they that are so
highly enlightened, by the inward teachings of the Almighty, are full of
censuring and condemning of those, that have not attained, to the same measure,
nor yet come to that pitch and height, that they are come to; not considering,
that that which they now live in, being darkness, was once their own light,
and so seem to despise the small things of the Lord, which once they rejoiced
in: Zach. 4.10. Ephesians. 4.4.
There is but one body, that shall be saved; yet there are many members of that
one body; the Presbyter, and the Baptized Churches are of that body, if they
cleave to the Lord, with all their hearts, though they vary in the outward: Let
not one member, therefore, despise another; for love covers all: All
Christian believers are but one body, of which there are many members. The head
is the greatest and chiefest part of the body, the Spirit of God acts all one
and the same thing in every believer, in different forms. As the life of man's
body is three ways, so is the life of the mystical body three ways: In the
body of man the life thereof is, Animal in the brain, Vital in the heart,
Natural in the liver, sinews and arteries. As it is thus in the body natural,
so in the body mystical; yet but one life, though three distinct: for in the
body mystical there is God in you, Christ in you, and the Spirit of Christ in
you: where the Spirit of Christ is, there is God, be it in what opinion soever,
For our life is hid with God in Christ, Col. 3.3. 2 Cor. 3.17.
where there is both secrecy and safety. Resist not the Spirit; For the Spirit
is the Lord, and there is liberty: The Spirit is light, the Lord is that light:
let the members of the body sympathize; if one part suffer, and is not in its
perfection, let the other parts and members suffer with it, and lament for it.
In the primitive time there was scarce a brother did differ with a brother; but
now Churches against Churches differ, and are at great variance.

O let brotherly love be among us, yea, that fervent love that covers the
multitude of sins. Gods infinite and eternal love manifested to us, in the
fullness of it, even in the Lord Christ, covers all our sins: And our love
one to another, covers the sins and offenses committed one against another:
Let not our hearts burn within us one against another, because of opinions; but
rather wait, to be delivered out of this apostate state the Church of Christ is
now in: Matthew. 24.2^.
for God is beginning to gather his together, from the four winds, and to
scatter and consume all fleshly worships and service done to him set up by the
will of man, and to set up his King on the holy hill of Sion: let the heathen
rage never so much, it will be all in vain; for he will come, and reign, and
rule, over us and in us, he will be our guide, our counselor, and our
teacher, and will dwell with us; after we have past through the fire of his
indignation, and are purged, cleansed, purified, and refined. Therefore what
our God shall do unto us, or bring upon us, either by wounding, squaring,
sifting purging purifying cleansing, or refining; let us be patient, with
meekness of spirit, in it and under it, and rejoicing with gladness of heart,
that out of his great mercy he will take us into his own hands, being unclean,
filthy, impure earthy and drossie, and make us partakers of such and so great g
ory, by being made like unto himself.

Hear then the word of the Lord, you people of the Land, Romans 11.25.
who are succenturiated from Israel; that, that did concern them, does concern
you, being in the same posture the same di^ea^e must have the same cure: the
Lord will not ^et his people perish he will have judge mercy on them, and heal
them; for the Lord will judge with fire and his sword, Esa. 66.16.
all flesh: And the slain of the Lord shall be many.

Son of man, the hou e of I^rael is unto me as dross; All they are brass and
tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace they are e en the dross
of silver. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Because you are all as dross;
behold therefore I will gather you in the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather
silver, and brass and iron, and tin and lead, into the midst o the furnace, to
blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in mine anger, and my
wrath^ and will put you there, and melt you: I will gather you, I say, and blow
the fire of my wrath upon you, and you shall be melted in the midst thereof: As
silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall you be melted in the
midst thereof, and you shall know that I the Lord have poured out my wrath upon
you. Ezekiel. 22. verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Here is Gods complaint against Israel,
and his purpose what he will do to Israel: God is the agent, and his people are
the patient, he will melt them, and they shall be melted.

The Almighty God, who is the searcher of the heart and the trier of the reins,
Jerem. 17.9.
knows what his people are, although they think well of themselves, not
knowing themselves, nor God; but have backslidden, Revel. 3.
and fallen into grievous sins, he will not suffer them so to lie, but will make
them to know him, and that he is displeased with them, and they shall taste of
his displeasure. In the former chapter the Lord does threaten Jerusalem with
the sword, and that he would remove the Diadem, and overturn o^erturn, overturn
and it shall be no more the same, until he come, who^e right it is, and he wi
l give it to him. In this chapter he reckons up their several sins, shedding
of blood, idolatry, disobedience oppression uncharitableness, covetousness,
and fornication. In these verses he positively concludes what the hou e of I
rael is, The house of Israel is dross, unto God: Some re^d it, They are turned
into dross: Further, they are brass, and tin, and irons and lead etc.

First, here is I rael called a house, sometimes called the house of God.

Secondly, that they are to God as dross.

Thirdly, the denomination of the drossie metals, brass, tin, iron, and lead,
which they are.

Fourthly that God will gather them, and bring them into the midst of Jerusalem.

Fifthly, the receptacle that must contain them, the furnace, and the midst of
it.

Sixth^y, that he will blow the fire of his wrath upon them.

Seventhly, that he will melt them.

Eighthly, the end, they shall know that the Lord has done it in his wrath.

First, here Israel is called a house, the house of Israel: the people of God
are the true Israelites, Gal. 6.16.
Christ the true Israel, Esa. 49.3. Nathaniel a true Israelite, Joh. 1. This
hou e this people, they are corrupted, Esa. 1. their wine is become as water
their silver is become dross, Cant. 6.7. there are threescore queens,
fourscore concubines, and virgins without number, they are dross, they are
mixed and adulterated.

A strange and a sad thing, that this people, this house should be thus. 1 Pet.
2, 5.
What the people of God? that are in covenant with him? they to whom the
promises do belong? who are built up to God? who are cemented to him, by a
lively faith and hope? Rev. 19.18.
who are clothed with the garments of Christ? who obey the Gospel of God? who
hear the voice of Christ? Esa. 57.15. Heb. 3.6. Psalm. 144.15.
who have an humble heart? where God delights to dwell? who hold fast the
confidence in God? and rejoice in him? that have the Lord for their God? These
are the properties of Gods house: was Israel thus? and is Israel not so? is
Israel dross? how comes this house so to be?

When his house, his people cleaves not to him with all their hearts, Judge. 8.7.
but falls to idolatry, as they did, and embrace other lovers, abusing the
mercy, love, and grace of God, turning it to wantonness, when their
righteousness is become as filthy rags, as a monstrous cloth, when their
worship is barely external, when they draw near to God with their lips, and
their hearts are far from him, when there is more respect to the beautifying of
the outward man, than of the hidden man of the heart, when they commit
spiritual whoredoms; that they can lie down with God in an outside ordinance,
and the heart not there: and lie down with the world also in heart, agreeing to
all the worlds courses and fashions; when they have a religion, that they might
enjoy their own wills and lusts; when they are become unthankful, murmurers,
idolaters, oppressors, when they do forget God, and all his mercies, and
deliverances past and present, when they cause God to complain, as he did of
his Vineyard, Esa. 4.
and to say of it, What could I have done more for it, and it bring forth no
fruit, but wild fruit? Such demeanor under the grace, mercy, and love of God,
makes him not only to complain of them, but to punish them. For his people to
revolt, backslide, and turn rebellious, wicked, and transgressive, God cannot
bear it: therefore he says by his Prophets in diverse places, what he will
bring upon them, as in Ezekiel. chap. 14. ^ad 15. I will, says the Lord, set my
face against them: A fearful thing to have the face of the Almighty to be set
against a people. And when they call, As by the example of a great man.
I will not answer, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 20.31. And I will not be enquired of
by them, says the Lord, Amos 3.2. You only have I known, of all the families
of the earth, therefore will I visit you for your iniquities. Hence it is that
Sodom is called her sister, Ezekiel. 16.48. Should God keep his house, when the
Devils haunt it? No: Apostate people must suffer severely: where God has
bestowed much mercy and love, there he requires obedience, or else he will
sorely punish them.

Well, Israel is dross, Gods people are revoltets, backsliders, rebellious,
and yet the merciful God he owns them still: Jerem. 2.13. 2 Chronicles. 7.14*
my people has forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and dug
themselves pits, broken pits that can hold no water; My people, if they do
humble themselves and pray, then will I hear them, etc. God, he will heal their
backsliding, and be merciful to their sins: he takes occasion by the
greatness of his peoples sins, to show mercy, as in the second of Hosea: at
large the Lord speaks there, what he will do to his people in the 14 verse; I
will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak friendly to her.
How willing is the Almighty God to accept of, and to receive sinners, although
grossly sinful: notwithstanding his great mercy, when they were in their
blood. To call a people to himself, Ezekiel. 17.
and to adorn them, and beautify them, and after to fall from him, to recall
them again is an invaluable mercy: as in Jeremy the third, and first verse;
Though thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me,
says the Lord: as if he should have said, Bring the dregs of all thy wicked
life to me, I will receive it, I will pardon all.

The same that Israel was in her time, the same is the Church now, scattered
upon the face of the whole earth, the Gentiles being succedaneous to Israel,
whereof England is a particular. How has God dealt with this Nation from time
to time, and delivered it out of the hands of the Romish power, Antichristian
heresies and worship, and from all the tyrannical government, and lords over
our consciences; Heavy things were upon us, and some of us not sensible of it,
the innovations, bowings, and cringings at the name of Jesus, and to the Altar:
Jure divino: like to be long lived, reformation feared as much as vassallage:
yet Almighty God with his own arm saved us, and snatched us as brands out of
the fire, from the violence that was lately; and delivered us from our enemies,
and has wrought some reformation for us, he looked upon us as a people that
were dross, and has begun to refine. But we, like the Egyptians, love the
garlic and onions of our Country; that that has been vomited out, would we
willingly take up again: And these few years wherein God has showed us much
mercy and love, both to our spiritual and temporal beings, in much
tranquillity and peace, we have abused to our own lusts, and have not followed
that light which God has sent amongst us, but the dark and foggie mists of our
own carnal hearts, despising and persecuting the same; so that we have given
the Lord just occasion to complain of us, that we, we the church of England is
dross, as the house of Israel was; yet nevertheless take comfort, thy God
wilt melt thee, and thou shall be as the word, pure silver.

Secondly, The house of Israel is dross to me, says God: as dross, and the
dross of silver. Almighty God is a pure, a holy, and a good God; there is
nothing can remain, or dwell with God, but holiness and purity: holiness
becomes his habitation, Hag. 2.9.
the gold and the silver are his, the dross and drossie metals are ours. By
gold, is understood the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit; and by silver,
the word of truth, the word of God, yea the word, God. There can be no union
between gold and silver, and dross: for dross is that imperfect matter which
does accompany metals, and is to be severed from them at the first rise of them
out of the earth, and taken from the metal, as the scum and film of the
metal, by a refining and a purging fire. Dross likewise is found among metals
subject to rust, and apt to receive into it self corruption, being in vessels;
and this likewise by melting and refining is cleansed and made clear. Dross of
it self is worth nothing, yet it fixes and abides in metals, and may be by
the skillful refiner brought to something, being washed and purified.

Is England dross? see, are they not like the house of Israel, that were
Idolaters, and other kinds of sinners; what sin is there that is not committed
in England? Has not God lately, and now at present, made trial of us, Mark
12.1, and ^
as the Husbandman did of those that kept his Vineyard; he has sent his
servants to see what fruit we have for him, and we yield him none at all; but
beat, revile, reproach, and persecute his servants. That light that he has
sent amongst us, our fathers scarce heard of it, but never saw it, that
discovers Antichrist, the Beast, and the Whore: Antichrist to be man exalted in
the flesh, man and the righteousness of man, in us; the Beast to be the man of
sin, that is, man deceiving himself, Gal. 6.3.
thinking to be something, when he is nothing; for man of himself is nothing
without God, but as a beast: and the Whore to be, man, that seems to live with
God in the outward appearance, or Church; and lives on the traditions and
inventions of men, cleaving only to the wisdom and fashions of men, and not
desiring God to be all in all. Do we not hate the messengers of truth, and sin
with an high hand against the bounty and love of God? falling to spiritual
whoredoms and fornications, like the Concubines and Harlots, having a seeming
heart for God, but wholly yielding of it up to the service of the Devil, the
world, and the flesh, hating those that tremble at the word of God, casting
them out for his names sake, and say, Esa. 66.5.
Let the Lord be glorified; but mark the end, the one shall have the appearance
of God to their joy, and they the others shall be ashamed.

What is the demeanor of the people of England in their profession? Is it not
merely outside? The more mercy and love God does bestow on us, the more we lift
up our heels against him, when we should live and praise him in the admiration
of his bounty, beholding our great dignity in and through Christ: he has
called us to be his sons, heirs of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, and
fellow-heirs with Christ; in that Kingdom he calls us unto a union with
himself, my Tabernacle shall be among men, Ephesians. 1. ult. Col. 2.19.
as he has said. We are his portion, and he is our portion, we are his fulness,
having the increases of God; yet notwithstanding all this, we are wedded to
fleshly services and forms, and content our selves with the bare names of
Christians, denying the life and power of Christianity, and do hate those that
live in that power.

Our services and worship of God are as dead things, not being done by our
selves, but by an Attorney; we do not call on God by a dead Saint, but by a
living man, who may be as dead, having not the life of God in him, neither has
attained to the first resurrection, a poor service that is not in our own
persons, with our own hearts. Many there are that neither call on God
themselves, neither do assent to the prayer of another; but custom and fashion
causes them to bring their bodies to a public place, where the poor blind
heart cannot tell what he comes for; neither is he careful, being benumbed,
what the issues of his senseless coming will be. Is this the coming to Christ
for life? Is this the way to get acquaintance with God? No, this is that
dross, and more there is like to it that does accompany the good metal; but
it shall in time be cast out, and then we shall learn of Christ, for he is
meek, and not learn of those that are proud boasters, haters of God, inventers
of evil things, and despisers of the pure light and truth.

O that the Lord, would show men the deceitfulness of their own hearts, that
can be content, with the husk and shell of Religion, and be full of glorying in
that Righteousness, which they have gotten by outward means, in their own
wisdoms and imaginations, and utterly neglect, refuse, and abhor, the inward
binding of their souls up in union, by Christ with the Father, in the free
Covenant of Grace and life. Many will say, What, shall we we not pray? when
they neither know, what God is, nor what themselves are; such as presume to
pray, without knowledge, do break the command of God, in taking his Name in
vain, when the heart is not according to the tongue, and sound; yea, when
their Company, or their Congregation agrees not: for there is the hater and
the hated, the oppressor and the oppressed; the rich, that cares not for the
poor; and the poor, that curses the rich; What congregall prayer, can there
be, in this mixture, when men's hearts, are one aginst the other? The rich and
the poor goes together, but the Lord is the maker of them both; he knows their
hearts, and their ends, in coming to public places: every sound and noise is
not a prayer; then the Pharisee had been commended, for his long one; but it is
the inward and deep sighings of the heart, in the singleness thereof, and
being fervent: We are commanded to pray continually; and they that make long
prayers, are condemned, being in ostentation as in public congregations, once
or twice in a week, and have little converse with God all the rest of the week;
be not deceived, God is not mocked; Whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye reap:
Decipies alios verbis, vultuque benigno:
Sed mihi jam notus, dissimulator eris.


Be ashamed, and stand amazed, all ye that are under the great Light, that God
has caused to shine forth in this Nation. You will say, that you are the
people of God, and that you know him, but it appears by your actions, that you
know him not; for a man to know a thing, is to know the condition of it, as to
know a piece of coin. To know God, is another manner of business, than the
world makes it; to know God, is to have experience of him, and of all his
Attributes, his Mercy, his Love, his Goodness, his long suffering, etc. To
know God in Christ, is the true knowledge of him, to be in Union and Communion
with him, to obey him, love him, and fear him, to honor him, and glorify him;
this the world knows not, for the world seeks its own. Therefore many, that
do profess, that they know God, and in their works do deny him, are not only
Heathens, but they are worse then the heathens; Cato.
for they say, If there be a God, he ought to be worshipped, with a pure mind:
miserable is the condition, of many that think it sufficient to have the bare
name of a Christian, and say, Christ died for me, and rose again for me, and
never felt the power of Christ's death, killing sin in them, nor the virtue of
his Resurrrection, quickening, and raising them, to a new life, that cannot
witness a new birth, a separation; But live in the old nature, and the old man
of sin, remaining still. Deal plainly with your selves, ye sons of men, for
the case does require it; do not lose your precious time here, and say, I hope
to go to Heaven, whereas you know not, what heaven is, neither are you fit for
it: for heaven is a Condition, rather then a Local place, and the heavenly
condition, stands not in outward things, as to satisfy the flesh, neither is
it found, any otherwise, then in the Cross here in this World, but it does
appear in us, by Peace of conscience, and joying in the Holy Spirit of God,
being perfectly assured, and having a firm testimony, of our Resurrection;
being Adopted, and made the Sons of God, 1 John 1.3.
and having fellowship with the Father, and the Son.

Deceive not your selves, but strive to enter in at the strait gate; Go not the
broad way of the Worlds profession, but the strait and narrow way of the
Cross: Deny your selves, your own works, your own righteousness, and
whatsoever pleases, and agrees with your own wills, and wait at Wisdoms gate,
examining your selves, whether you be not that, that cleaves to the pure
Metal, and makes it the worse; whether you are not the corrupt matter of
Silver, and not Silver it self; if you be the corrupt matter, if you be the
dross, you must be purged out, you must be spewed out; if you come to the
porch only, and go no further, if you come not to the Holy of Holies, you were
better not come near, at all; Psalm. 119.119.
for the Lord will take away the wicked like dross: The Lord will not have to
do with such corrupt, impure, and unclean matter, Prove. 25.4. Take the dross
from the silver, and there will proceed a vessel fit for the refiner: when the
Almighty God, has purged and purified the silver, and ejected and cast out the
dross, then there is a vessel for himself, a temple for himself, to dwell in;
for the Lords delight is in his Saints, and among them, and silver is as his
Word is, when it is refined. Meddle not, nor have to do with the most Holy, and
pure God, upon any account, living in your own wisdom, wills and lust; for it
had been better for Cain, that he had offered no Sacrifice, then to account the
best too good for God, and to offer the worst; better not to come to any Table,
then to the Table of the Devils: the end of all Religion is to bring souls to
God, not to make a greater separation by it from God. You were once a far off,
but now ye are made nigh, by the Blood of Christ: that only brings us near to
God; draw near through his Blood, and he will draw near to us, look to your
hearts, and to the issues of all exercises, not what the exercise is, but to
what it tends; for it is either life or death; If you serve God in the flesh;
you shall have corruption, and death for your reward; if you live to the flesh,
you shall die; but if through the Spirit, you mortify the deeds of the flesh,
you shall live. God accepts no sacrifice done in the flesh, but as he is a
Spirit most holy, so he must be worshipped, in Spirit and in Truth, which was
the Legacy Christ Jesus left with his Disciples, when he left them. We cannot
come to the Lord with anything of our own, to be acceped of him, but what we
come to him with, must be his; he hears nothing but his own Spirit, and that
he will not deny. What says Christ, In vain do they worship me, etc. The Lord
(Esaias. 1.) says, What have I to do with your Sacrifices? and in the same first
of Esaiah, I hate your new Moons, and your appointed feasts, they are a burden
unto me, I am weary to bear them.

All the devices of men, all their art, all their invention, proceeding only
from them, in drawing near to to God, is nothing worth, for it cannot but
differ from the will of God; in Gods worship, the more of man's wisdom the less
of Gods respect, the more plainer, and simplier we worship him, the more hope
of acceptance. The ordinances of man, or of any Churches, if they differ in the
least from the will of God, must be cast out: For not only humane reason, but
divine reason, not sanctified, can may or ought to have any power, in the
ordering, placing, or disposing of any worship of God: The will of God only is
the reason of his own worship; and man's reason, can be no ground, for such a
structure, which his art and science defiles as separate from the will of God.

Non vox sed votum, non musica cordula, sed cor;
Non clamans, sed amans; clamat in aure Dei.
Much might be said concerning the dross, that is among the pure metal: In
plain terms; the corruption the filth and the uncleanness, that is among
professing people, that profess to be the people of God, and are civilized
exceedingly, that to the eyes of the World are almost spotless, but when God
comes to try by fire, then will their filth and dross appear. Prove. 7.3.
Solomon says, As the fining pot for silver and the furnace for gold, so the
Lord tries the hearts: The outward visible actions of professors, that is so
much accompanied with outward decency in the behavior, keeps off the inward
purity, that the soul should be exercised in in the sight of God: Curisity in
duties outwardly done in the sight of man, hinders the inward integrity,
invisibly to be done with God. Therefore it is, that the exercise of Religion,
which should cure, and eject our dross; by an addition of more filth and
impurity, in that which should speak purity and life, it does kill and brings
death. The shining beams of Gods most pure and holy Spirit, shining in us,
causes our actions and duties, through that most pure Light, to be living, and
become a living Sacrifice, acceptable to God; But duties done visibly, and
audibly, Romans 12.1^.
only in the body, the mind and will being carried on, to the satisfaction of
the outward spectacle, resting in the form, custom, use and manner, wounds,
and slays the spiritual, and invisible part, where the receptacle should be
for the living Sacrifice. For men to go about to make themselves like God, in
their own wills, does derogate from the nature of obedience, and does manifest
that they are the sons of emnity: but yielding themselves up, submitting unto,
and embracing that which is cross to their wills, desiring to be ruled and
guided by that good counsel, which is of God, makes the purest sacrifice.

It pleased God, by these comparisons of metals, to discover what his people
are, and how they are different in purity from himself, which is most pure and
holy: let therefore all men that live in a profession, not stand upon the
purity of it; for the Whore sits upon waters; there is many baptisms of water,
but the baptism of fire, is that that God will purify his people withal: and
that that has quenched this many years, Mat. 3.
must now be dried up by the fire of the Lord, and it will burn up all, and dry
up all, For our God is a consuming fire. Experience this ye that are called
godly, you cannot be God-like (which is the Old language) until the Lord God
has consumed all flesh within you, and there be nothing in you, but the Lord
God All in All.

Thirdly, God says that Israel is Brass, and Tin, and Iron, and Lead: What
Israel was and what England is, by these comparisons of metals, the Lord will
make known to us; These several metals, are of several natures, and
qualities, some by art, counterfeiting the richer metals, of Gold, and Silver,
which are figures of Himself and of his word:

These metals, are very apt to rust, and to receive and embrace the same, and
so are accounted drossy metals; yet very useful, as to the World, ordained by
the great Creator in their several kndes, for several necessitous
negotiations, in the world. They have their breeding, and their generation in
the earth; and being from thence and thereout, they must pass through a strong
blowing fire, before they come to perfection, and be fit to officiate the use,
service, and the end, the great Creator made them for, as to the use of the
world: wherein is seen, a great deal of the glory of God, in the excellency of
his creation, in the various qualities of them, as does also appear in all
other things created by God.

How is Israel Brass, and Tin, and Iron, and Lead? wherein, and in what are
they such metals?

The people of Israel here named, are thus, in diverse respects.

First, They are Brass, in their men of power, Rulers, Governors,
Magistrates, Justices, and Arbiters.

Secondly, They are Tin, in their Prophets, Teachers, Guides, and Ministers.

Thirdly, They are Iron, in the people of Traffic, Commerce, Trade, and
merchandise, and in them that exercise to the support of the Nation.

Fourthly, They are Lead, in the poor and mean, in people of low degree.

First, see what Brass is, and how it may be said, that Rulers, Governors,
etc. May be as brass:

Brass is a compound metal, made and contrived of Copper and Calamy, which
metal so composed, has a luster, like gold by its mixture, and the more
useful for it is mixture: So are those that are called to high places, of
Government; they are not barely naturalists, only men as borne simply
themselves naturally; But there is a mixture composed with other ingredients in
them, of natural endowments fit for their places, of learning, experience,
knowledge, understanding and rightly to censure, as also to execute, as to the
World, the things, matters, and causes that are under their dispensation, and
their determination; and herein, as brass has a luster like gold, so have the
Governors, etc. a luster beyond other men; Hence it is, that there is and has
been, at all times, an honor and a respect given unto them, being the greatest
instruments under the arm of God, for the peace, the welfare, and the good of
people, in the Nations under them.

I have said, You are Gods, and you are all, Psalm. 82.6.
the children of the most High; Christians have had at all times, respect to
their governors, for Gods sake, they are set up of God; By me kings reign,
etc. Romans 13.1.
There is no power but of God: wherefore resist not the powers; they that do,
shall receive to themselves judgment.

But whence is the complaint that the Lord makes, that Isreal's Rulers are
Brass, something is the matter; God Almighty expects, that they should not
only do, and execute the common and ordinary business, as to the World, but
that they should stand up like men, in the cause of God, to distribute justice
impartially, and as in his stead; to curb; and punish the evil doers, and to
defend and preserve those that do well, encouraging others also, to live in
their ways; that they should be as nursing fathers, and nursing mothers; Esa.
49.23.
they should defend the innocent, and acquit him, and execute justice on the
nocent.

The cause why, the Lord complains of them, and that he will melt them is,
that, as Brass will adulterate with Tin and with lead, with the false prophet,
and with the rabble; So the Rulers and Governors, have not walked singly before
God, but have mixed themselves, with that that has been against his pure, and
undefiled law, yielding to the Harlot, Iezabell; 1 King. 22.6.
and taking counsel of the multitude of false prophets, as Ahab did, embracing
flatterers, and flatteries, which has caused them to err; to do injustice, to
punish the innocent, and not let the oppressed go free, and do in their ways,
according to their own wills and fleshly lusts, walking according to their
fleshly desires and understandings, minding their own profit, pleasure, and
worldly advantages; and as the poor rabble of the world does for their reward;
so do they, out of their ambitious hearts, for further honor, and preferment
not doing the thing that is right.

Was it thus with Israel, and among their men of power and is it not so with
England? It is nor my business to reckon up the wickedness that was
heretofore, in former powers that are past and gone; But to the present being,
my duty is to stir up all Christians to a hearty thanksgiving, and to a
continual praising of God, for his mercies, that he has set over us, such a
valiant, and God-like Joshua; and for that, through the late passages of war,
and discord, wherein once we were in jeopardy to be dispeopled, and our
religion to be traduced, we are arrived, to the greatest liberty of any people
under Heaven, Religion, and godly people being much countenanced, and defended,
superstition and heresy extirpated in a great measure, no man's conscience
compelled, the designs of Antichristian plotters, and contrivers, not only
weakened, but confounded, to their ignomy, and shame for ever, subordinare
Magistrates in their pluces, more vigilant and knowing, and the professing
people of the Nation, much increased by it.

Has God begun to melt the brass, to refine the men of power; Let no man
murmr then, at the powers; for the effects, and issues of Christian and
God-like powers, we and our successors, may rejoice in; for it is of great
consequence, to our eternal, and everlasting peace; That when pure truth does
begin to appear in our days, no violent heat of persecution can wither it, for
upon all the glory there will be a defense: if God makes us his glory, he will
defend us, Esa. 4.3.
that neither the wild Bore of the forest, nor the little Foxes of the
wilderness shall hurt us, God will keep his Vineyard, Esa. 54.11, 12.
that he himself has planted; He will yet go forward, and be refining still,
until he has made the Pillars of his Church, like to the polished Saphirs,
and her windows of shining Emraulds; He will melt, and purify all that bear
his Name, Psalm. 12.
and are for the cause of his people, that they shall be as pure, as his Word
which is Silver. For God will not destroy his, but purge them; He will not lay
his Garden waste, but weed out that that is hurtful, to the growth of the
tender plants; he will not touch those flowers that have favor, but them that
have no savor, but color only.

Great hope have we, that the Lord will be gracious unto us, because he has
begun so to be; surely what God begins, he will finish, who can hinder him,
Job. 9.12.
or who can say, why do thou so. But what means the crying out against unjust
Judges, and Arbiers, who are concerned in this resemblance? There is in our
nation, a great number who are as brass vessels, (I would they were vessels
for God) But what are they? I fear that they are, as Saint Paul styles them
that were in his time, 1 Cor. 6. In the first verse he calls them unjust, and
in verse. 6, he calls them Infidels, how ever, they are such that he warnes the
Saints not to meddle withal, and questions whether there was a wise man among
them, or no: a strange thing. It seems none but fools has to do with them.
Thief men are called in our language Lawyers, some say they are necessary
evils, but they are such as hold evil to be necessary, and surely, if any evil
be necessary; this is, it is as necessary as a disease which pains so sorely,
that makes the patients cry to their God; for many thousands have bin
impoverished by their evil practices, and they still gainers. It is in their
hands, to compose differences more easier: But they are covetous, double
dealers, oppressors, exactours, and cruel. When matters come to them to view,
skan, order, and to prepare for the determiner, what horrible false dealing is
there? bribery, treachery, forgery, false testimony, underhand and partial
dealing, as if they were made of purpose to act the Devils part.

These are like unto the brass vessels that are used in and upon the fire; for
they are not only Incendiaries to strife, envy, malice, and contention, but
are nourishers and pleaders for the continuance of it. Did not Christ say,
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God?
Whose children are they then that set at variance, who love not peace? is it
against their profit? The vessels they are like to, are kettles and pans, which
as to the business of the world are very useful; as the kettle holds water,
so there is fire underneath it that makes it boil, and oftentimes the heat of
the fire boils away the water, sometimes the fierceness of the fire makes the
water to boil over, and put out the fire. It is so with this generation, that
the exercise of their cruelty makes the watery Client, I mean the man that
mourns to be in Law, to be the better, as water is by heating, for use. But it
usually falls out, that the water overcomes the fire, or the fire dries up the
water, and so the kettle or pan being washed, or scoured with some of Pilates
water makes it shine as it did before, Matthew. 26.
after the color of gold, and stands up for a show in many Country Churches
and Congregations, where the Minister there dares not speak a word, but smooth
him up for a good Benefactour, for fear of his place, his tithe, or something
he calls his dues, or fearing to have his ill will.

O what wretched, cruel, and foul enormities are committed by men of brazen
faces, that should in their actions endeavor to set forth the glory of God in
deciding controversies, and giving to every man his right; for that end were
they first ordained, and therefore called Arbiters: Ezra 7.25.
the right use and end of such as they were, heretofore ordained among the
people of God, was to do justice, equity, and right; that use is not among
Lawyers, but the abuse is and remains, and God will purge it out, this sinful
and abominable filthy dross, out of his Church and people, and will set up
such as shall administer true justice with godly prudency, in their room: the
time is come that their most horrid actions have made them to be in question,
and some abatements have been lately. Oh that they were wise, that they would
consider their latter ends, and have in mind that of Solomon and Paul, For we
must all appear (if all, then Judges and Arbiters) before the judgment seat of
Christ.

Numb. 21.9. 1 Samuel 17.5.
Brass is that which sets out the strength and fortitude, that the people of
God have among them by good Rulers and Arbiters; the brazen Serpent, a type of
Christ, 2 Chronicles. 4.1. Psalm. 107.16. Zach. 6.1. Jerem. 1.18.
overcoming the Devil, and vanquishing death, the helmet of brass, brass
armor, altar of brass, pillars of brass, gates of brass, mountains of
brass, and bars of brass, and walls of brass. How great good do the people of
God receive and enjoy by the gracious Governors and government? how are they
defended, protected, secured, and encouraged to all godly living? Ad exememplum
Regis totus componitur orbis: Most commonly as the Governors are, ^o are the
people: when good Laws, Edicts, and Institutions are set out by the good
Governors, what an increase does it make of good people? But when they are
slack, negligent, given to pleasure, pride, Eccles. 10.16.
wantonness, lust, and other vices, how soon will the people learn all manner
of evil, and mis-living; when subordinate Magistrates do not diligently look to
the cutting down of profaneness, nor put in execution Edicts concerning idle
persons, and helps not the poor in their necessity; but takes only the honor,
or grace, and credit of the place, as to their own ambitious humor, in their
outward deportment among men, having no respect to glorify God in doing acts
of righteousness; what defilements and irregular carriages is there among
inferior people? The Lord has cut down, and thrown down many that heretofore
have so walked, and he will melt and refine in his time, all the dross that
shall appear, he will scum it all off from the pure metal, then shall the land
rejoice in the Lord their Savior.

Magistrates may be resembled to Bells, which are made and cast of brass; the
sound of bells is heard far off, and near at hand; their warrants are like to
that sound, which summons in those they have to do withal, and as bells should
agree in the places of height, in a tuneable harmony, so should they all agree
together in the same high places they are seated in, not differing one with
another in matters of justice, but all jointly seeking the glory of God in the
welfare of the people whom they are set over, not respecting any man's person,
but keeping every man his place, ready to officiate and to do what shall be
required of them: not like to brass Andirons, which stand in the chimneys,
merely for show and not for any use at all; there they shine, but have no sound
at all, to give warning to the people to live peaceably, neither is there any
noise to give an alarm to the world, as to the destroying and cutting down of
sin and iniquity. Happy are that people who live under a godlike Magistracy, in
a Town or a City, who are continually stirred up to a god-like life, by the
example of their walkings, and also to abhor vice, by seeing justice done upon
it impartially. As men are naturally blind, that they cannot see the effect of
Gods dealing in the world, so neither can they see what the changes of times
and men in high places does produce: But he that is enlightened can see that by
this, God is setting up his Son Christ to reign and all the powers that seem to
stand for God and his, and does not in truth and sincerity of heart, shall not
stand; for the Lord will melt the brass, yea, he will blow the fire of his
indignation upon it, and melt it.

In the second place let us see what Tin is, and how, as before mentioned,
Isreal's Prophets, Priests, Teachers, and Guides are as tin.

Tin is first like to silver, in its luster, in its sound, and in its weight.

Secondly, it will adulterate with other metals.

Thirdly, it will beautify and color other metals, yea, the very earth.

Fourthly, it is a dry metal, and therefore when it is bended, it will creek.

Fifthly, it will receive any impression; yet not malleable.

Sixthly, it is a metal that fire will utterly consume to ashes.

The Prophets and Priests of old that were resembled to tin, the Lord much
complained of, by Isaih, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and other of his Prophets: so
that the Lord, when he says by his Prophet Isaiah, Esa. 1.25.
chap. 1. verse. 25. that he would take away all the tin, it is to be
understood, that he would take away all the Prophets, Priests, Ministers, and
Dispensers of his word, that were, as tin is to silver: for his Prophets that
were called, and sent by him, they were as silver, even as the word; but the
others were but counterfeit, false, and abominable, etc.

Therefore in the ensuing matter, being a very large complaint against the
picturall imagery, and similicall kind of Prophets, Priests, Teachers, and
Dispensers of the word, as they call themselves; as also against all proud,
covetous, boasters, inventers of evil things, all idle drones, Ignoramusses,
dunces, doters, illiterate, unexperienced, vain, profane, ambitious, envious,
and contentious persons, that have undertaken to teach, instruct, reprove,
comfort, pray for, and to visit, to stand in the gap, to mediate, and absolve,
being unacquainted with the mysteries of God, and have not their union and
communion with God and Christ; Let not those true Prophets, or Teachers, which
do declare the mind of the eternal God plainly, who tells Jacob of his sins,
and Israel of his transgression; let not them, I say, that are sent of God, and
speak not their own testimony, which do believe, Psalm. 116.
and therefore do speak without flattering, or fear of any man's person, or any
cross power misled, be exempted from their most inward and invisible calling,
to accompany these intruders, usurpers, and defilers of mankind.

First, tin is like to silver: it was the Devils policy, when he tempted our
first parents, Genes. 3.
to tell them that they should be as gods, or like God: To be like that we are
not, is still in the desire of the earthy and carnal mind: It is the only
thing profession does pursue, and rejoices in, to be like that another is; to
be like sil er, is to be like the pure word of God; for that the Word the Son
of God is resembled to, they that should teach others, should not be only the
image or the likeness of that they do teach, but they should be the very same
not like the oracles of God and not them; like the true Prophets, but are false
prophets; declaring the letter, either through their own practical art and
science, or else by stealing that from others, which themselves had not art to
compose. This cunning sophistry has been much in use, and it is got into that
garb that it deceives many, and they deceive themselves to speak and prate of
that that is not within them, but without them; they teach not the testimony of
Jesus, that should be the spirit of prophecy, but speaks out their lying
vanities to deceive, yet taken by the world for teachers of the truth. 2 Cor.
15.16.
But S. Paul bids other Apostles not to teach by another man's line, but to get
praise of God; for he that seeks his praise of men, or from himself, is not
allowed of God. Such Apostles are deceitful workers, 2 Cor. 11.12, 13, 14, 15.
that transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of life: therefore it is no great
thing, though his Ministers transform themselves as though they were the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works.

1. Tin is like silver in color, in luster; silver is of a very bright color,
and shines much, and tin does resemble it in the color and brightness as
much; for we may find by things made of tin being in shape and form of the
silver vessels, some are apt to take one for the other, b^ing not in their near
view; so the Minister he shines, and is a spectacle for his whole parish to
look on, and for others where he resorteth, observing all the rules of civil
carriage and behavior, a fair outside, good words, courteous, seemingly
thankful for courtesies, temperate sober, and ready to give advice, and every
way seeming to be of a godlike behavior, like the painted sepulchers that are
fair on the outside, but within nothing but dead men's bones.

2. Tin is like silver in its sound, silver has a very sweet sound to the ear
of man, and nothing can pass it; so the sound that the Minister does make,
Jer. ^.14.
is very sweet to the ear, for they sound out the great love of God, according
to the letter, and tell of his great mercies, like the sound of the pure word:
but where is the true sound of the word that sounds to us, the taking up the
Cross, the submitting and yielding of our wills to Gods will, denying our
selves, losing of our lives: this is bitter, Durus sermo to themselves, and
cannot say as Paul did, that he rejoiced in the Cross, that is the sweetest
sound to the soul, when the mystery of God comes to be revealed by the Cross.

3. Tin is like silver in its weight, herein is some difference, but yet many
times Tin has not been su pected by wait, when a piece of coin has been
counterfeited by it, it is near it in the weight of it. So are Ministers like
silver in the weight, they will speak of as weighty matters and as pressing, as
if the very power of the Lord went along with their voices, when it is nothing
but a mere pressure upon the mind for the present, and makes the melancholy
man or woman (it may be) sermon-sick. Where is the alteration and change of the
mind wrought? It cannot, though they press home with loud voices, terrible
words, dreadful and threatening quotations, all is nothing, it is but as the
weight of Tin. But the word it self figured to us by silver, is that that shows
its perfect and absolute weight, when that without (as to the outward) makes a
greater show; for when the Temple was builded, there was no noise of axes and
hammers, 1 King. 6.7.
nor any tool else, while it was building, so the inward work of the word is
not by outward hammering, but by a low and still voice into the inward part.

Fourthly, Tin will adulterate with other metals, and mix it self with them, it
will adulterate and mix with brass, and so it becomes hard, joining with a
hard severe metal. So does the Clergy, they mix and adulterate with the power
and authority, taking that upon them they are not called unto by the Lord:
witness these late times, wherein the Episcopacy had great power and authority
to do and undo, upholding by their power t e Beast and Antichrist, compelling
men to observe days and meats, and the Orders of their Rubrique, who did
punish with as severe a punishment, him that did deny Bishops to be Jure
divino, as he that should deny Jesus Christ, or the Father, to be God. Blessed
be God we are delivered from that horrible adulteration, and so far is tin
refined, or melted, nay, in that case taken clean away: yet the seed of that
power lies in the earthy mind; for the Clergy would (if possible) bear some
sway, but because they cannot, they are gotten to be Incendiaries to the
Magistrate against the Innocents, for that the mystery of Antichrist is by them
a discovering and laying open to the Believer, which they cannot endure to hear
of, because they are the chief concerned in upholding him, it is conceived that
they are the greatest hinderers of the growth of the pure and infallible truth.
But what can they do? their power, if they were so many Bishops, might be
restrained: their behavior concerning marriage heretofore did testify what
they were, Psalm. 76.10.
and now they rage: but the rage of man will turn to the praise of God, and the
rest God will restrain. Job says of his persecutors, Why persecute ye me, as
God, is not my flesh sufficient? let them take heed who they persecute, for
Christ is upon the earth, though not seen by them, nor heard out of the pulpit,
and God is shaking the heavens, they are chiefly to look to it for they are as
the pillars of that heaven that shall fade: It is said, when the Son of man
shall come, shall he find faith on the earth? It is to be doubted, whether
there will be any, or no; for the channel begins to be dried up: the Spirits
presence is not where some say it is, and therefore suspect your selves, you
that would mix with the authority, take heed of kindling any more fire, if you
do, you are like to be burnt in it.

Again, Tin will adulterate and mix with lead. This is a strange thing, that
tin such a shining metal should debase it self so to mix: yet so it is, the
Clergy will mix themselves with the poor rabble of the world, Hosea 7.8.
those that are ignorant, and though not openly profane, yet secretly vile,
making them the executioners of their designed purposes; what they will not be
seen to do themselves, they encourage and countenance the poor to do, as in the
persecution of the tongue, to mock and deride the poor Northern men, that goes
about, speaking words of the kingdom, such as Noah was to the old world, a
Preacher of righteousness. In this matter the Ministers of the land, show no
spirit of meeknes, 2 Pet. 2.5.
neither are they Ministers of the Gospel that do not obey the Gospel of our
Lord: he says bless them that cur^e, pray for them, that hate you, and
per^ecute you; and they neither bless nor pray, except they pray to have mi
chief fall upon such as would show them their blind^nesse and hypocrisy, which
they do discover by their converse with the poor: for what is said unto the
poor, weak, and ignorant by them, is voted for good, commended and applauded
they speak well of them that know them not; for many do live by the rule of
custom, and so the Minister is honored more out of ignorance and custom, or
for some preingagements, then any other way else but forsowing of pillowes
under the^e bows of men of higher degree, Ezekiel. 22.28. Jer. 6.14 8, 11 1 These.
5.3.
and speaking peace, when they have no warrant, from the Lord; this makes the
rich worldling also to hold with them, and plead for them.

3 Furthermore, besides Tin mixing with metals, it does also beautify other
metalls, it does put a fairer gloss and luster upon metals, then they have of
themselves, it becomes as a coat or a cloak on them, as for example, Tin
covering brass makes it very like Silver, as that we call Alkemy, how many
have been deceived by this sort of contrived metals, in vessels, instruments,
and in coin, taking it for good Silver when being Brass, it has only a coat
of Tin upon it. Thus does the Clergy, they put another hue and countenance,
upon the Magistracy, then they have of themselves: their associating with them,
their frequent conversing with them, their discoursing with them, and their
advizing, and counselling of them, makes the world, seeing their familiarity,
to judge them to be as they are, which suppose to be the pure metal of Silver,
and so as in their judgment they conceive well of the Minister, so do they of
the men in Authority, because are together often in converse, and in discourse;
Thus the world comes to be deceived, to build their confidence upon hay and
stubble, which the fire will consume, although the praise the minister gives,
makes the party the more in respect; it is but of the men of the world: but the
Almighty God knows the heart, and that one does spoil and corrupt the other:
Esa. 5.20.
for the Ministers, as well as the old false prophets, are apt to call evil
good, and good evil, and so there is a woe pronounced against them.

Again, Tin it does beautify iron, and makes it seem as Tin, by which iron, we
understand the worldling, he that is nothing but Iron, that regards nothing
but the world and the profits of it, it makes him seem to be that he is not, to
be as the Tin is, that is, like his Preacher, and his teacher, witness many
wretched worldlings, whose intimacy with their Preachers, Amos. 3.3.
their resorting to him, their familiar society, walking and talking with them,
as agreed, makes the people of the world to take them for no worse then their
Preachers, although like Iron, they be never so hard and cruel, lying as iron
in the earth, until the earth has turned them to earth; Thus does the
Ministry, for their worldly ends, keep company with the men of the world, as
long as they live, and sometimes before they die, like Ravens about a beast,
they visit him often for their prey sake; and when they are dead, they put an
eternal fame upon them, worth sometimes five pounds: This good man, this just
and upright man, this man that loved the word; a constant hearer, and
frequenter of the Church, and the Ordinances of God, and charitable to the
poor, as appears at his death: he is now in Heaven, after which, if a
monument of him pietas, virtus, sanctus, if not, sanctissimus, etc. must be
part of his Epitaph: and so the ministers do not only vernish, and color the
worldlings, and the corrupt minded here while living, but endeavor to
perpetuate, and eternize their fame, and all this for the succeding expectation
of the like reward: Saint Paul became all things, to all men, that he might
gain some, that is, some to Christ, into the house of God, into the Kingdom;
but shame it is that Ministers are become all things to all men, that they
might gain some of the world with them, but to gain them to God, to Christ, if
a sermon or two, once or twice a week will do it, well, if not what care they:
they look for their fleece, and therefore they do with their people of
eminence, as servants that flatter their masters, fearing their frowns, and
that they shall be losers, if they speak out their minds really, and not to
their masters affection, or to his gain being asked, is this well don; though
perhaps ill don; yea say they, it is well done or otherwise if they say it is
best, or may it be lawful for me, to do thus or thus, though perhaps
unlawful, says the servant knowing his masters affection, and the purpose of
his mind; yea, you may lawfully do it: if otherwise that the master be crossed,
away then; if they speak contrary to their minds and ways. Should a Minister
speak against a rich world^ing, and come to him as Nathan did to David, and say
thou art the man, it is as much as his place is worth: witness certain
places, and towns that might be named, where it is in the power of the chief
men of the place: there the preacher must be wary.

Lastly, it does color and set a gloss upon the earth, it makes that to
shine: for all the earthen vessels, Matthew. 6.
that are shining white vessels, they are made so with Tin very fair, clear^,
and pure to the eye, but the matter chiefly whereof they are made, is earth;
The Clergy does beautify and color the earth; and earthly minded people, who
as their Disciples do follow them, making them, to seem that they are not, for
they appear to men to pray, to hear, to live orderly among others, when they
are but only civilized, there is nothing within that is changed, the same that
came into the world, the same remains inwardly in their hearts; yet honest men,
good men: this is the Tinny approbation, they give them, when poor ignorant
souls, there is nothing in them but blindness of mind, darkness of
understanding, and clean contrary to God and his Word, mere earth: They are
told by their Minister, If they come and hear him, and pray and observe their
Church duly, they need not be so scrupulous, and so full of inquiry, after
things that do not concern them, tradesmen should not come from off their
shopboard and leap into Election and Predestination, Bishop Pearce of Wells.
but follow their callings, so holding them in the outward form, feeding,
cherishing and nourishing them in blind hypocrisy, they cannot percei^e what
the change means, John. 3.4.
like to Nicodemus, they wonder at a new birth, and yet they think themselves
to be as good Christians, as any in the world, they see themselves to be full,
Deuteronomy. 32.1. Isa. 34.1. Jer. 6.19, 22, 29.
and to need nothing, but more of the world, that they might provide for their
posterity, there is all the care they have, which made the Prophet cry; Earth,
earth, earth hear the Word of the Lord.

In their Exercises they call a Psalm, and either they or their Clarke, read a
verse at a time, not too much for fear of cloying them, and sweetened being
meter; and the people must sing to the praise and glory of God, That they love
the Lord with all their hearts, that Gods Comandments are better to them then
Gold and Silver, and sweeter then the Honey, and Honey Comb, and diverse such
words whereas it is not in their hearts. And thus the Almighty God is mocked,
by a company of poor souls, that know not what they do: Yet by the report of
their minister, they are good Christians, he dawbes with untempered mortar, and
lays a little of his Tin upon them and so they pass for current. O what a
reckoning will here be when the Lord comes to try, and refine the sons of Levi,
who are re^emb^ed to Tin, they will be clean taken away, God will have in his
temple no other vessels, but Gold and Silver, that they may bring offerings, to
the Lord in righteousness; then shall the offerings, both of Judah and
Jerusalem be acceptable unto the Lord, as in the old time.

Aagain, Tin is a dry metal, and by reason of its dryness, when it is bended
it will creek, those that are Mineralists know this, that Tin of all metalls is
dry: Shall it be said that the Clergy is so, it may be said they are dry and
thirsty too; their dryness appears that they have but little good within
them, and their thirst declares that they would draw what they could to them:
for their dryness, it appears by their charity, peace, contentation and
humility, let them examine themselves, I would none of them, were to be blamed,
but found to be Sions builders, yet being my duty, I must speak what I know and
have found them to be; I charge not all, that are or have, the name of
Ministers, but the corrupt ones they are uncharitable, contentious, greedy,
proud, and persecuting some there are; I would set down their goodness, if I
could perceive any, they are quite dry of all goodness. But this is not all,
they are thirsty, that is, they are covetous, their desire above all is large,
for they desire rich Benefices, fair houses, farms, dairies, land, living,
store of tithes, all men's good will, their servants, their cattle, their gold,
and silver, what not: if these be not like Tin in its dryness, then no men
are: But they are so, and therefore the Lord will melt-them. We may observe
that in the Temple, there was much Gold and Silver, Brass, and Iron used, but
no Tin: in the new heaven, Rev. 21.1.
and new earth that coms dowen from God, there will be no Tin: this Tin was
never found but where Apostasy was, and when Almighty God, removes away our
Apostasy, then will he take away all our Tin.

Again, Tin, when it is bended, it will creek, and cry, it makes a noise, and
by that sign many knows it to be Tin, and different from mixed metals; will
Tin, when it is bowed and bended creek and cry? And what do the Clergy, when
things goes contrary to their outward peace and welfare, how do they cry till a
deliverance comes, till a repair is made; this is sufficiently experienced,
what excellent shifts they use? above all men, that lost in the late wars,
they were soonest repaired; they will not ly long in a trouble, or in
adversity, but they will cry to their gods, whether favorers of Episcopacy, or
Presbytery, they are sure to speed, rather then not, they will pass upon them
a Romish sentence, which some poor Ignoramusses, stand in fear of, and helps
them; out of his tender mind: (says he) a minister of the Gospel! There be
many such canonized for Saints, that have done much for the worst Ministers,
which is to their further hardening. I must say of them, Matthew. 6.5.
as our Savior Christ said, verily they have their reward; they have it
already, it is in their possession, they have all they shall have; let them
look for no more, for the unrighteous, shall not enter into, the Kingdom of
Heaven.

What a do is there now, with the Clergy, there is news that their kingdom is
at end, that there is no need of them, that they are Seducers, and Deceivers,
that they preach for hire, here is a great matter to bow them, and bend them,
to make them creek and cry: and do they not? Survey their demeanor under this
strange Academy: they do cry out amain, they travel much, they spend their
spirits much more then they did; having mended their pace, they say we are all
undone, if this light do continue. If they cannot blow it out, they cry for
help, help Judge, help Magistrate, help Justice, help Lawyer, help common men,
help poor, help rabble and rascality: (I had almost forgot) they cry for help
to their God too, and that at all public occasions and meetings: (I cannot
assure them that the almighty God will hear them,) although some men of
authority do hear them: my advice is from the Lord to them, Let all flesh be
silent before the Lord, Zach. 2.13.
for he is raised out of his holy place:

Fifthly, Tin, it will receive any impression easily: Filius Dei was once stamped
on the clergy, when the sons of Levi: Since, was Jure Divino on some; and on
others, such a Lords Chaplain. They were at the beginning only Prophets, and
Priests, but of late, they have been (leaving out the Romish Catalogue)
Bishops, Doctors, Bachelours, and Masters; As Tin will easily receive any
stamp, cognizance, or badge, so will the Clergy, embrace any place or name, any
title whatsoever, to make their benefit great; Yet in all this, and
notwithstanding all other impressions, they claim the old stamp, Filius Dei:
although they be not Silver, but a mixed deceiveable metal, so that they are in
the world like unto bad coin: which when some see the stamp, they own the
piece for good; being afterward, upon better view, or advice of others found
to be bad, and that no experienced party will meddle with it for good, as it so
past before, then there is a stir and a mischief, being a loss and a detriment
to him, that received and took it for good: Even so the studied doctrines, and
speeches, which is squeesed through the corrupt brains of some called Divines,
and brought through multitudes of words of Art, Eloquence, and Philosophy,
which is not consistent with the mind of God, who is the Eternal, and most
holy God; make much mischief in the world, among the sons of men, now. Insomuch
that men that are truly and purely enlightened, will not meddle with it, and
likewise does forbid their brethren, to have any thing to do with it, knowing
and understanding, how formerly they were at a loss by it, and that shortly
all such, yea such base mixtures, and deceiveable coin, shall be called in by
the Great Supreme Commander, who will melt it, and refine it, (for there is
little base coin but Tin is in it.)

Again, as Tin will receive any impression, so it will not hold the hammering,
it is not malleable, it will not endure strokes, as other metals, but it will
break, and tear. So will the Clergy, when any stroke comes upon them, it rents
them from their people, they then forsake their flock; reduce a hundred to
fifty, they are gone: They will not be pliable to yield to the persuasions of
any, but of their own Tribe, and rather then they would turn, they would if
their power might, limit God, the Holy One of Israel; and do now breathe out
impossibilities of things, that will come to pass, pleading; That this
corrupted, defiled, and Apostate Church now being, Mal. 1.6.
is the very true Church of God, and that they are, as the Apostles in the
Primitive times were, and that whosoever does forsake them, forsakes their
mother, and that there is no happiness in departing away from them to be
expected; for that that is out of it, concerning Gods worship, is heretical,
and abominable, (Can the vote of a Synod, be such a vote, if there were one) I
doubt it? for the sober modest Preacher, and the rebaptized, conclude that the
Church visible, is not cleansed as it should be, or may be: if it were, then
Quorsum haec dispendia, what means all this stir, more then ever? what means
the complaints, such various Judgments and Opinions? what means so so much
burnings, one against another? enquire out the author, and the cause of it: Is
not God by this, beginning to refine his people is not he a gathering of his
people together, that were scattered, does not the great day of the Lord, begin
to dawn? But I am speaking to them, that care not to hear; for of all men, the
worst man, is a bad Minister, (the Schools will say that). I know not, wherein
they are the worst, except it be in matter of turning. It is a sad thing for a
Leader to retreat, for a Teacher, to unteach, for a minister to change, Oh no,
it is against his credit. The good Propher Jona was faulty in this, but what
became of him, you may read, a heavy punishment: the like sad things, may come
upon such, as now rail, revile, and persecute, those men that now say, that
the Lord will suppress all the teachings of men, and that there is a light, in
every man, that directs him to obedience: shall poor vile wretched man, say out
of his unbelief, God cannot this way bring men to himself: but it must be, by
the ancient Apostatized way? be silent for ever, and let God alone, in his most
wonderful Changings.

Sixthly, Tin is a metal that will consume by fire, and come to ashes contrary
to other metals, Gold and Silver will not consume; neither will Brass consume
by fire, waste it will. But Tin will suddenly be consumed, and then all the
luster, the glory and brightness of it is gone, and cannot appear any more,
happy were it, that the messengers of the Lord, as they call themselves, were
as Silver, that their luster might continue, as shall the luster and glory of
the Word, the Son of God: But there is a time of fading, perishing, and
consuming of all the glory of Tin, and so there will be, of all the Shinings,
Glossings, Glisterings, Soundings, Likenesses, Adulterations, Shadows,
Mixings, Coverings, and Impressions, which are not purely of and from the Lord:
but begotten in the corrupt mind, artificially, through the skill of vain man
beautified, adorned, and set out as the glory of the eternal God, seeming to
be as the Lords golden candlesticks; The ashes of Tin serves to scour iron,
stone, and other things.
but the Lord will consume all with the breath of his mouth, and make the ashes
of it, as the ashes of Tin serves, to clear and to make bright other vessels,
instruments and tools which may serve in his house for the future.

Hear then, all you that boast of your callings, that are not called of the
Lord, as Paul he says, that he was by the will of God, and not by the will of
man; you (I say) that are called by the will of man, and of men, to be
speakers, and teachers, or ministers, know this, that Jesus Christ is the
Minister of reconciliation, and the only teacher of his people, and you are
the intruders among his people, taking up that liberty to your selves that
belongs not to you; being you know not what you say, nor the word you speak,
nor the Gospel that you profess, and pretend you preach to the world; for the
Gospel is hid to them that perish, and if you be in that perishing and
consuming condition, woe be to you from the Lord. Deceive not your selves in
these last times, wherein God in great love comes to manifest himself unto his:
think not that the old vessels of Tin can now stand, that has held all manner
of most filthy poison for this many years, and that the boasting of bare
ignorance and hypocrisy can uphold them. Has not the outward visible Church,
since the primitive Saints, been apostatized and corrupted this many hundred
years? Do you conceive that the lopping of some boughs off the tree, that has
ever since brought forth bad fruit, will serve the turn? No, no, the tree it
self must be cut down and cast into the fire, the corrupt and drossie metals
must be refined. This the Almighty will do, he will gather his jewels and his
wheat, his Saints, he will gather them together, and there shall be one
Shepherd, and one sheepfold, there shall be no more hirelings that do forsake
the sheep when the woolfe comes, for fear of their own persons; but the Lord
God will be their everlasting light and defense, amidst all their enemies.

Is it Gods complaint, that his people are Tin? it concerns all to look about,
although by his Prophets he complains only against the Prophets that sinned
against him, and also the Priests for their behavior toward him and his
people, as by the resemblance of tin is at large set forth; yet other people,
inclining to the ways of the Prophets and the Priests, are herein also
concerned: Some there are that put their trust and confidence in the sayings
and doings of others for themselves, and not willing to romage their inner man,
to get a testimony of their own; but rely on the preaching, praying, and
praisings of God, by those Prophets and Priests lips, being content to hazard
their eternal welfare, not caring in their inward and invisible part, to
answer and obey the light that acquaints them with their condition, and so live
without the evidence and assurance of their eternal welfare. Fools and blind,
can you be content to lie down, and be satisfied with the bare name of
Christians, and not prove your selves to be so in very deed? You should work
out your salvation with fear and trembling; 2 Cor. 13.^
but, like Felix, you do not care for to tremble, you will hear of that another
time, and so put it off until you have no time left, and then your trembling
shall have no end; let not your religion be of that sort, that has no union,
or communion with God; Matthew. 5.13.
if it be so, it is like that salt that is unsavory, that is not good for any
thing, but for the dunghill: but let your religion be that of the Saints of
old, that could say, The Lord is my habitation. When we can truly say, I find
Christ lives in me, then shall we be able to draw conclusions of Gods love in
all conditions, either of prosperity, or adversity, and in it shall behold with
great joy, through the Cross, our dignity that we are called the sons of God:
then shall we find within our selves the pure salt that preserves us, being
in the flesh, as natural salt does keep flesh from tainting, so shall we be
kept holy and blameless, till the coming of the Lord.

In the third place, let us see how Israel is Iron, and how the people of
traffic, Merchants, men of commerce and trade, their exercise being to the
support of their Nation, City, Town, or place, where they dwell or inhabit, are
resembled to iron.

First, Iron is a metal that is very hard and strong, and is of very great use
to the main business of the world, officiating various and sundry kinds of
several services and uses.

Secondly, it is a metal, that notwithstanding its strength and
serviceablenesse, is subject above all metals to rust, to lose not only his
beauty and color, but to lose its strength; yea, utterly all, and its very
substance changed and turned into earth.

This metal of iron, there is no dealing with it without the fire, and with
the fire it is very yielding, to the bringing forth, or making of any
instrument, tool, or thing whatsoever is necessary for building, fencing,
framing, foiling, securing, drawing, cutting, hammering, delving, plowing, and
all kinds of working, insomuch that there is no business concerning the
world, but there, to the doing of that business, iron, and things and
instruments made of iron, both on the land and on the sea are attending.

The which does set forth unto us the great business and service that the men
of the world does, as in the world, and to and for the love and sake of the
world only: by them many great designs and enterprises are brought to pass
of merchandising, and trading, and commerce; as also much manufactory,
husbandry, tillage, and labors, wherein is seen to the outward, the great
providence of God in the world, in disposing of all the affairs of men, in
their outward adventures and their more hard labors; some men sitting still,
and living upon the adventures and labors of others, and others laboring and
endeavoring themselves with much hardship to maintain themselves.

Is iron a very hard and strong metal? So are the people of trade and
merchandise, and all other signified by iron; they are hard, not easily plied
and bowed, they are hard in their bargains, dealings, hirings, and paying of
wages; they are strong, for they have great substance, much art and cunning,
and do gain great profits, possessions, and inheritances, having the exercise
of buying and selling all commodities useful for men.

As the Lord does complain against them he sets up in authority, and against
his Prophets; so does he complain against others of his people, who were set by
him, and appointed in callings, to furnish the Nations with things convenient
for the outward necessity of man, and here says they are iron, they are as
hard as iron, they will not ply (says the Lord) nor bow to me, but are a
stiff-necked people, a stubborn and a gainsaying people, a people that have
deaf ears, blind eyes, hard hearts, as deaf as the deaf adder, that will not
hear the voice of the Charmer charm he never so wisely; that walk according to
the stubbornness of their own hearts, and their rebellious wills and
understandings; and such Christ spoke of in his time, They will not come to me
that they might have life: and others that will not come to the feast, they are
set and resolved, and firmly determine, they will not yield, submit, and bow.
And as they are hard and stiff, that they will yield no obedience to God, so
likewise they are hard and cruel to their brethren in their bargains and
dealings, especially to their poor; they have no respect to equity, but to
great gain, and herein they do use lying, deceit, guil, overreaching, and
oppression, the one to the other; and as the more hard iron does cut the soft
iron, and makes it to be fit instruments for uses and purposes, so does the
hard and cruel man, he cuts his neighbor not only in his outside, but in his
very inward, nay, to the taking of away the very marrow of his poor neighbors
bones: they are hard and cruel in their hiring of poor men, waiting and taking
all the advantages that may be, to screw them and bring them to work so low,
that they cannot maintain themselves, nor their families: they are hard in
paying of wages, concerning the time and the place, not when they most need, or
at the most convenient place, but putting them to the worst every way, to make
them the more serviceable and tendable upon them. Some there be that do abate
the poor man of his wages, or pay him in bad coin, or bad commodity. Thus, thus
do the people deal that are signified by iron, and resembled to iron, wherein
large complaints might be made against them.

Again, they are strong, they have great substance and much art; they are still
gaining great profits, inheritances and lands, having the exercise of buying
and selling. God made man righteous, but he has sought out many inventions;
herein, in the traffic, merchandise, and trading of the world, is seen much
of the wickedness of men: First, man makes himself strong by owning other
gods, he is strong in his own might, making his merchandise, his trade, or his
calling to be as his god; in it he puts his confidence and his trust more then
in God. I would I could not say it, but true it is, that the worldly man does
put his trust in his merchandise, in his trade, in his husbandry in his
manufactory, in his cunning, in his craft, in his deceit: hence it is, that
some places and houses, that are and have been, are called houses of deceit; it
is a very sad thing being well considered that any man should profess himself
to be a Christian, and rely, confide, and wholly put his trust in his outward
calling for the support and maintaining of his family, not trusting God in the
least, but to wall in, to himself, all possible things within his own reach, to
his visible eye, for to er e him not only from wanting, but to get an estate*
and to make himself great by deceit.

Secondly, man becomes strong when he has attained his own desires, and
brought to pass his own ends. Resolution to be rich (being accomplished) makes
the heart as strong as iron; for reason gives to man, that if once he has
gotten, he may keep what he has gotten, and so poor blind man, having gotten
a substance, does glory in it, and boast of it, it may be not without some
verbal expressions of the blessing of God to him in his trade, or his way that
he did exercise himself in: But he is strong, he is able for great
undertakings, and to give assistance to others; he is strong, fearing no
change, no alteration, he has enough to maintain himself and his, he is not
beholding to any, others are to him; he is strong concerning the noble
achievements, in bringing about great designs, whereby many poor is set on
work, much business, as to the livelihoods of many, is generated and born out
of his care and casting about in the several undertakings of himself, that it
is merit sufficient for him to do so much public good, crying peace to
himself, in the satisfaction of his earthly mind, that because of his
conceived public good he does, carrying a greater countenance then other men's
business does in the world, he blesses himself in his own imagination, and so
becoms strong, but not according as S. Paul says, Be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might.

Thirdly, man becomes strong in his own conceit, that after he has gained an
estate, and is the means of much employment of others to get their living, then
man comes to preferment, to honor and dignity, to have many friends, to have
all men to speak well of him, and to be friendly to him, to afford him any
service and respect, to praise him and to pray for him: Solomon says, The rich
have many friends, but the poor is hated of his neighbor: the worldly rich
man, what can he desire more: when he has gotten that that makes him strong,
he needs not to fear, nor to be afraid what evil can come to him; he is safe,
he is well provided for, (as the word is.) Thus we see how worldly men, rich
men, are of the strength of iron, strong every way to their hearts desire;
surely these strong men may be concerned in the speech of our Savior, Luke
11.22.
when the strong man keeps the house all things are at peace; but when a
stronger than he comes upon him, then he takes from him all his armor
wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils: when men come to attain, besides
the worldly contentments, some inward peace that nothing does disturb them,
disquiet them, or ail them, then they are strong and able in their own
imagination, to overthrow power, to vanquish all things that shall rise up
against them: Even then in the height of all this, there is sorrow in the midst
of laughter, weakness in the midst of strength. There is an overruling power
and strength that sees the folly and madness of men, to think themselves
strong, and wise, and rich, when they are weak, foolish, and poor; for God will
blast all the strength of men, and they shall know that the Lord is only
strong.

Again, as iron is a metal of great use and much strength, so it is a metal
that is very subject to rust, and to come to earth again.

Iron is a metal that will not mix with other metals, yet it may be gilded,
silvered, and tinned: workmen do make many sundry sorts of things of iron, the
which is gilded, and silvered, and tinned.

That iron which is gilded, does set out to us those worldly people, men of the
world that are very high in profession and in seeming practice, as if they were
the very sons of God, and of these men now, there is the greatest talk and the
greatest stir, and the greatest plague will fall upon them; for they are not as
the threescore queens that Solomon in the Canticles speaks of, but as the
four^core Concubines, they are in show such as are married to the Lord, that
are espoused to him; but in truth they love other gods besides, therefore they
are iron for its strength, and as gilded iron in re pect of their exceeding
fair show among men: I would our Nation had but a few of these, less than
fourscore, but I fear there are thousands speaking according to the capacity of
men. Would there were not thousands of them among the Presbyterians. But what
shall I name them? may not there be some among the Independants, among the
baptized Churches, and among the people called Quakers; these people compared
to gilded iron are not to be found otherwhere; for they have protested against
the common Protestant and Episcopalist, besides all other religions of that
sort. O woe, woe, woe from the Lord against all such that have such costly and
golden coverings, and mere iron within, that seem above other professors and
practisers, not only to be changed, but to be angelized; not only to be
civilized, but to be (as it were) deified. These, these are hypocrites with a
witness, which the Lord is now showing to the world, he is uncovering and
taking away their gilt, and they shall show and appear what their inside is:
These are the worst of all men, like to the Devil, that can transform himself
into an Angel of light; of these I will say no more, but what is said of them,
Heb. 10.26. For if we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking
for of judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the adversary. Heb. 6.4,
6, 7, etc.
Again, Heb. 6.4. there are terrible things for the Apostate.

Again, that iron which is silvered, are another sort of professors in the
world, who are not upon so high a strain as the other, but yet they are not
according to their show, they are as Martha was, that was cumbered with much
business, but Mary had chosen the better part, which shall never be taken
away, the gold and the silver, that is as a covering to iron, shall by means of
lying on the iron wear away; for the iron will show it self, and break through
its covering: These sorts of people are a worldly people but yet they are full
of the Word in their mouths, always, talking of God, his word, and of
religion; but they have not the power of it in their hearts, they are only in
show; for these do persecute people that live in the power and life of what
they do profess, which does manifest by that, that they are enemies to the
Cross of Christ. To be Silver without, and Iron within, is much like to that
foolish builder, not building his house on a Rock, but on the Sands; when the
winds came, and the rain fell, it blasted not only the glory of the
profession, but the very house it self fell, for when the weather of
affliction comes, it wears away the silvering, and then the Iron that rusteth,
and becomes earth, and so all is worth nothing?

Secondly, Iron is subject above all metalls to rust, and so looses not only
his beauty and his color, but also his strength yea his very substance, for by
lying in the earth, it is turned unto earth.

Iron, never so well cleaned and beautified, will lose his color, let it be
from the fire, the fire does preserve it standing, or being used near it. So
long as the fire of God anger is near the worldling, so long is he of a bright
hue, and countenance, and some appearance of God is in him: But when his
corrupt heart, joyneth it self to earth, or to the waters, that is to lie in
the earth, in his earthly and carnal mind, and not be brought out of it, but
there remains still, in its own element, it becomes afterward, to be very
earth it self, by rusting in it.

How is the worldling by loving the world, cleaving to it, and delighting in
it, loving it with all his heart, with all his mind, with all his soul, with
all his strength exercising all his understanding, art, cunning, and wisdom,
in the prosecution of it, adding more and more to his desire, and to his
endeavors still unsatisfied? so that in the end, he becomes infinite in his
desires being without bounds, or limits, no word or counsel can restrain him,
but colors the unmeasurable desire, of still obtaining, with the show of good
husbandry, and thrift, and therein thinks he does God good service, in the
exercising of his talent, and pleads for his most covetous and wretched
practices, which is the height of all wickedness, to plead for it, and to defend
it, against all the persuasions that can be urged: So that the lying in this
earthly mind and will, without any remorse at all, makes him to be very earth,
he is eaten up and devoured of his own earthly, sensual, and worldly
pursuings, that there is nothing of God in him, neither of Religion, being thus
centured, hence it comes to pass, that being present at any meeting, where any
thing of God is spoken, though he be present in body, he is absent in mind,
and either his mind wanders, and his thoughts runs out into the world, or else
heavy, and sleepy, in such places, and at such exercises, declaring plainly,
that he has no love at all to God, his Word, or Religion; the talk of it is
tedious to him, he cannot bear it; it is to him, as an unsavory, or an
unrelishable dish of meat, being offensive to him, it must be taken from him;
or else he will depart.

Lamentable is the case of worldlings, in respect of their loving the treasure
of the world; whereas being men made with a face directed to look upward, they
look downwards, always grovelling in the earth like beasts. And this is not
all; but there are some, who live and center themselves, in the pride and
pleasure of the world: what the world affords them, they do embrace it, and
make their chief delight and joy in it: the proud man that is proud of his
estate, means, lands, livings, friends, or his place or office is here
concernd, in this resemblance of iron, and he living here, in the only service
of his voluntary and high mind, ad^ancing himself above others, and thinking
himself, in his proud conceit, to be better then others, staveth off from
himself all good, counsel to humility, that in the end he is swallowed up,
into such an extreme deluge of pride, being hardened in it, that nothing will
work upon him; his rust and filth of his proud mind does devour him. The like
may be said of such as give themselves up wholly to pleasure, and can see no
benefit at all to themselves, but only the pleasure; yea, the pleasure that
the world yields them, that they take as their portion, and dreams of a
Heaven that is of such like condition. Beware oh ye that love pleasure more
then God, for your end is damnation, and while you live thus, not owning God,
or the pleasure: and pleasantness of His countenance, you are so rusted with
lying in pleasure, that nothing but earth, and the transitorinesse of that
pleasure shall be your reward, and are devoured by that wherein your flesh
delighted.

Does God complain that his people are Iron, great cause there is for it, for
the greatest part of the world are as Iron, hard and stiff cruel and strong,
worldly, covetous, proud, and living in pleasure; consider this ye that do
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you,
although you are as strong, and as hard as Iron, the Lord can find away to
weaken and soften you, the fire of his wrath will do it, there is nothing too
hard for the Lord: has he said and shall it not be done. Break off therefore
your sins by repentance, and your iniquities by showing of mercy: be liberal
and bountiful in the distribution of what God has given you to the poor make
not the earth your own, it is the Lords, and he gives it to the sons of men,
Boast not of any worldly thing, it is all vanity, your wisdom, your strength,
your riches, honor and dignity, and all shall pass away as a vain thing.
Eccles. 2.
Solomon had all his heart could desire, of all the pleasurable things of the
world, and when he had considered all, he saw all to be vanity, and vexation of
spirit, and that there is no profit under the Sun.

Fourthly, and lastly, let us see how Israel is said to be Lead, in the poor,
mean, and people of low degree.

Lead is a metal that is soft and weighty, it is pliable, and will receive any
impression, and it has silver contained in it, not to be seen: it is also
malleable:

Of all the former metals, this has the least esteem yet the best metal,
considering the good qualities of it, being soft, and pliable, and retaining
something of silver.

1 Is Lead soft and pliable, so are the poor of the world, they are soft in
their answers, as Solomon says, A soft word appeaseth strife: it is not for a
poor man to stir up strife, his care is to peace, gi^ing good words, diligent
attendance suffering wrong; he is soft, being gentle, and submissive, he is
soft, in being friendly and serviceab e every way a poor man is soft, not
rough, nor rigid, nor high minded, as the former sorts of men, exemplified by
other sorts of metals are.

2 A poor man is also pliable as lead, you may wind him* and turn him any way,
put him to any bu^nesse, speak any thing to him, he is content to be of
another judgment, being ignorant, ^oon persuaded, do any thing for a
livelihood.

3 Again, a poor man, like as lead will receive any impression any stamp; call
him what you will any title serves him, he bears it because he cannot avoid it
he is also as Lead malleable; the hammer will fashion him to any thing; to this
condition or to that, to any form.

In all the^e qualifications the poor seems to be the best of all. Most true
it is, that there are a sort of poor, that in all the equalities, do appear in
the world beyond the men of the world, (whom our precedent discourse has made
mention of): for the wisdom of Almighty God is such that he knows what is
best for us, and to some, in his great and rich love, does he give a very small
pittance of the outward things of this life, that being hereby pinched they
might be still calling to God, who is the giver of all things meat, and drink
apparel, houses, and other necessaries, they are gifts of God; Dantur bonis
quia non mala, dantur malis qu^a non bona, good men may be bettered by them,
and e ill men may be made worse however it be, yet God is good, and loving to
Israel and to all them that are true of heart; they shall want nothing that is
good for them. Ha^h God appointed the poor to serve the rich, and are they th^s
p^i^b^e, ^o^t and gentle, unto their earthly masters, Let us by them, yea, let
all the great ones of the world, learn to be p iable to their Maker, in all t
ings, as the poor man is to his master, be willing to go, to come, to be easily
persuaded by the Word of our God, and not to live being ignorant according to
our own judgments, and understandings, but according to the will of our God:
Psalm. 7^
David when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, he was cast down, and thought
he had cleansed himself in vain, But afterward, when he had been at the
Sanctuary of God, he understood, etc. and said, Thou will guide me with thy
counsel, and after that receive me to Glory; In this, let us learn of the
poor, and be poor in spirit, for they shall inherit the Kingdom of God: the
poor takes any impression, call him what you will, he is not angry neither
offended; so should it be with us, take all manner of wrongs and injuries
patiently, not seeking revenge, but be Mal eable, under the hammer of God, to
be beaten, and fashioned to what he will have us to be.

Again, Lead is weighty, and in that quality it is like Gold, for that is the
weightiest of all metals. But this lead being a weighty and heavy metal, it
serves in the world to make weights, wherewith most commodities that are sold
by weight, are weighed and balanced. So are they, the poor of the world, they
are as the weights wherewith the dealings of men, one with another, and toward
themselves, are by them weighed, and considered; all their unjust actions,
their oppressions, fraud, injuries, and hard dealing is by them seen, and felt,
and known more then to others; for by such means, men are made poor, and kept
so: and therefore the pressure of it lying on them chiefly, it is by them
weighed, and considered, and also by them judged, censured, and execrated,

Lead also is weighty in another respect, and that is in respect of the poor
themselves, being heavy, and burdensome, to the places, they are and do remain
in: some of them, being aged, lame, impotent and blind, and destitute; these
poor are chargeable, and burdensome, and such as these, are always in the
world, and to be provided for.

Thete is also poor that are vagarants, rogues, thieves, and poor prisoners;
the which are troublesome, to the Common Wealth, and burdensome where they are;
these the civil Magistrate should take in hand to restrain, punish, and
suppress:

Here we see, that the poor here understood by the metal Lead, are of two
kinds, the one are very flexible, and tractable, and does resemble the silver,
that is in the Lead, as it lies in the drossy body unseen.

The other poor is as the drossey body of the Lead, which must by refining be
brought to a separation, forth from the Silver, and so the one makes a vessel
for the refiner, and the other is as a weighty, and burdensome people in the
world.

Take Lead as it is in the original, and ye cannot perceive any Silver to be
in it. So the poor; they are such that have some graces, and discoveries of God
unto them, but they cannot show it; they are so trampled on by the men the
world, and kept low, in a despised, forlorn, and mean condition, that they
cannot exercise their graces as they should, it lies inwardly in the heart, and
does not appear outwardly; This is the condition of many, and yet the rich
justify themselves very much, by the carriages of the poor, being contrary to
them; for they frequent public preaching, and use long prayers, pay their
dues, speak the truth without avowing, and do acts of charity, being sober, and
chaste outwardly, whereby it comes to pass, that the rich man in his demeanor,
and carriage blesses himself that he is not such a one as the poor, like the
proud Pharisee, that did thank God he was not as other men, he did fast twice a
week, etc. whereas there is a great difference between them; the rich can very
well spare the time, to be seen of men, and spend much in the outward visible
matter of service, and nothing troubles him, all things is in store for his
use, without seeking after it. But the poor man, he must get his bread, and be
employed, at all seasons, for that end, to have to sustain nature: but seeing
the difference, he cries to the Lord, from his heart, God be merciful to me a
sinner, and so gets inward comfort, and solace, though outwardly he cannot
show it to the world.

Other poor, that is signified by Lead, being parted from the Silver, is that
fort of poor, that are wicked: of these there are, that are mockers, raylers,
revilers and verbal persecutours, slanderers of men in high places, for good
acts of Justice, Piety, and Charity, having nor the fear of God before their
eyes: they are ready to do any evil, as coadjutors to others, being thereunto
engaged, wherein men of eminence, outwardly civil, forbear in their own
persons, and force and compel those poor whom they can command. And thus the
designs of evil men, are brought to pass, and executed as in these days,
against the pure people of God, who are drawn from the the common practice of
the world, to live more nearer with God, and to commune with him, out of the
worlds ordinances; these are much abused and mocked.

Some of these poor are such, that are discontented that they are poor, falling
from one wickedness to another, and most rudely do abuse the Name of God, his
people, his creatures, and all the things of God, impatient, passionate, and
charging of God, for aflicting them; some, as it has been heard say, said:
Could God do more to me then he has done? some also that were before, A poor
man at Cardiffe.
of some ability and means, having lost it, are moved through the instigation
of the evil One, to rage and foment evil against their Maker; for that they
have not, as heretofore, to carry on the desires of their lustful hearts, into
that, they formerly lived in?

There are also poor that are idle, lazy, and swinish, that are as monsters
among men, and the very shame, of nature, by their most filthy, nasty, and
beastly behavior, who are nor worthy the name of men, and women, who takes no
care, neither will they be advised, and ruled by any good persuasion, or desire
the same: but like brute beasts, which have no understanding to seek after any
thing that savours of civility, or humanity; for these, let our pity and grief,
make future prevention, that no more may fall into the like condition, that
poor children may have some Christian education, a thing desired of all them
that fear the Lord:

Must the poor, the Lead be melted? Consider this, then ye that are the poor of
the world, although you have not store of talents, put into your hands as
others have: if you have but one, you must not hide it in a napkin, you must
employ it. Demean your selves, according to your measure, murmr not at your
short allowance you have of the things of this life; but rather praise the
Almighty God that you are kept short, seeing his great love in it, that you
should not enjoy the desires of your own fleshly wills, and heart, which would
make you to spurn and kick against your maker, Job. 11.12.
and to be as, Job says, like the wild Asses colt, to run away from him, and
to be filled with high exaltations, living in, and loving of, the vanities the
world affords, having not that way of procuring, and perfecting the full
accommodation of these terrene and earthly treasures, neither able to reach
them by any earthly means, or power in your selves* but are kept low,
depressed, and despised by the men of the world, who live in ease, pleasure,
and delight, knowing little care, sorrow, or want, having all things to the
full, and every thing prospers and goes well with them, who are like unto the
fatted Ox, that is fitted for the slaughter. You that are the poor of the
world, know, that the Lord, out of his great mercy would not have you to perish
with the world, but makes the world, to be bitter and grievous to you, that
your minds might be set on Heaven and heavenly things. Observe but the manner
of the world, and the several conditions of men in the world, and you shall
find, that it is a more blessed thing* for to be kept short of the things of
this life, then to have them to the full: David says, before I was afflicted I
went aastray; and the prophet says from the Lord In their affliction they will
seek me early: poverty is accounted an affliction for all affliction, that is
outward, tends to that end, to make men poor; See thou a man, that some
disease has seized on him? that is pined for hunger, starved with cold,
wounded, bruized, crippled, imprisoned, or any such like thing is come upon
him, or either cross or loss? if there be any grace in that party, it will
then be discovered; for there will be some symptoms, some cryings and
callings, some relentings, some ejaculations, or other expressions of a
penitent heart, which were not shown in time of prosperity and health; For the
prosperous welfare of the sons of men in this life, does cause corruption and
infection in the inward man, so that it often falls out, that the loss of a
limb, of the fight, of goods, strength, or liberty, by the goodness and mercy
of God in his providence, is the drawing and gaining of a soul unto God. Job he
praised God for e^i^ as well as for good, and made it to appear, that the evil
of punishment, correction and affliction, is better then prosperity. Happy are
those that see God to be good unto them in affliction and in poverty, surely
the Lord is good to all, then to the poor that are the Lords; for they shall be
melted and refined, and be made as the Lord will make others to be, his
vessels; for he dwells with the humble, and men of low degree, he despises
not the poor but sets them up among Princes.

By this that h^th been said concerning these several metals, Brass, Tin,
Iron, and Lead, we see what Israel was and what England is, and what would
become of us, if the Lord God should not melt us; Surely, we can never enter
into his Kingdom, we cannot be vessels, or temples for hi^ Spirit to dwell in;
except we are melted all are dross and drossie substances, all both high and
low, rich and poor have erred, and do go astray from the Lord, and it is his
great mercy that he does acquaint his people what shall come upon them, and
unto them; He will not deal with all as he does with his own people; for all
are not Israel, th^r are of Israel* Therefore says the Lord, I will gather
them, which is the first thing that God will do, now they are discovered to be
what they are.

Fourthly, he will gather them, and bring them into the midst of Jerusalem.
Will God gather his people? He will do it. Are his people scattered? It does
appear so. These words do not so much make it to appear, as the experience the
people of God have had of their condition, at all times and in all ages of the
world, as in Genesis; I will divide them in Jacob, Genes. 4.7. Nehem. 1.8. 1
King. 22.17. Ezekiel. 31.10. Ezekiel. 34.6.
and scatter them in Israel; Nehem. 1. Ye will transgress, and I will scatter
you among the people. God does scatter his people. And the shepherds that are
over them does scatter them, Ezekiel. 34.10. If Gods people be a scattered people,
that are not known by their multitudes and great numbers, at public places and
meetings, but are expelled and driven out from those places; then there is
matter of suspicion, what those places of great resort are, and what the people
are, that do meet together by such multitudes.

God will gather them: How will God gather them? He will gather them as men
gather fruit, 2 King. 4 39. Genes. 31.46. Psalm. 106.47. Jerem 49.5. Matthew. 3.
or herbs; he will with his own hand pull them from that whereunto they are
fixed, and will draw them out, or from the place, or places, where they abide
and remain, as men gather stones; he will gather his people from the Heathen,
from the men of the world, he will bring them from among the Nations, he will
gather him that wandereth, he will gather his out of the far Country. He will
gather them into his house, into his garner, into his bosom; they shall be
within his limits, near to himself, to have acquaintance with him, to be saved
and defended by him.

What great comfort is here to the people of God that are scattered, they shall
be gathered. God will do it, here is his word for it, who can hinder him, who
can scatter? when he says he will gather, he will gather them to himself, to
an acquaintance one with another; there shall be one God and one King, Zach.
14.7. Joh. 11.52.
they shall be taken from off their other Gods, their other lovers, My Beloved
is but one: this was was propesied by Caiaphas. That he might gather together
in one the children of God that are scattered, Ephesians. 1.10. He will gather all
things into one by Jesus Christ, who is the head of the body, that being knit
and coupled together, it may increase together in love. That that God gathers
to himself, he does esteem of it, he loves it, he does delight in it, takes
care of it, it continues with him for ever. Joh. 10.28, 29.
None shall be able to pull any thing out of Gods hand that he has gathered:
them that God does gather from wandering in the four elements, he does not
intend they shall return, but he will keep them as the apple of his eye, as the
signet on his right hand.

Was the people of God a scattered people, and are they not so now? Were the
true Israelites scattered, and are not the true Believers so now? Many of the
Saints are weeping in silent, for want of a solemn Assembly; but it cannot be,
it is their lot to sit down and weep by the waters of Babylon, while others
sing psalms, Psalm. 137.1, 2.
they cannot sing the songs of Sion in a strange land, li^ing in Babylon, in
flesh, and in self, in which they are sensible that they are in bondaged, and
not in the life and liberty of God alone: they are incumbered with much of the
filth of the world, it being centered in evil; yea, the pure things of the
world are most defiled, the worship of God, the teachings and exhortations
given out by men are full of impurity; the light of the world, Matthew. 6.23.
that that is embraced by the world is full of darkness, and if the light be
darkness, how great is that darkness?

It must needs be, that the people and Saints of God, who live with God, walk
with him, and commune with him inwardly, should not be bound up to apostate
forms, and Church ordinances outwardly, being not consistent with the pure life
of God, but as death they divide from them, and are scattered from such
Church-fellowships that bring no true peace, having been taught to be
essential, but now found to be only the name of an association, or agreement,
when as there is nothing more then difference, dissension, and confusion, as
Babel: Come our from among them, my people, says the Lord, the holy One. And
again, Associate your selves, O my people, and ye shall be broken in pieces;
gird your selves, Isai. 3.8.
and you shall be broken pieces. Let the world in their wisdoms, arts,
learning, and goodlinesse of flesh, meet and congregate by multitudes together:
let their teachers which conceive they can teach the Gospel, speak out what
they are able of themselves, having not that gift of the Spirit to manifest the
mystery, they shall be broken in pieces; that part which is built up to God,
and they unto whom the Lord has revealed himself, invisibly and individually,
must turn out, must scatter from them. Thus it must be, the Lord God will save
his, although it may be said, Many pastors, many teachers have destroyed and
distracted thee. O England; yet God has reserved to himself a scattered
people, whom he will save, and which he will gather.

Zach. 13.7, 8.
God will gather all the dispersed, scattered, and broken ones, he will bring
them out of Babylon, out of confusion, from the false christ's, which are the
false churches, and bring them to Christ, to the true Church. It is impossible
they should be deceived, who are in the hands of the Lord, who are with him,
who have renounced the fair forms and flesh of the Whore, and wait only for
the appearance of God in them, who shall not be ashamed, but shall rejoice,
having a new name, having higher discoveries of God, living in more holy and
righteous ways with men, the Almighty God being in them, all in all.

God does gather his people to this end, that they may live and abide with him
for ever. But first he gathers them to melt them, and to refine them, that
they may be capable of all that he has to bestow upon them, and therefore he
will gather them, and bring them into the midst of Jerusalem, there to be
melted.

Matthew. 4. Isai. 31.9. 1 King. 8.13.
He will bring them into the midst of Jerusalem, into Jerusalem the holy City,
the City of God, where Christ was tried and tempted, being the vision of peace,
where mount Sion is, the place of Saints, the City of David, in which the
Temple of Gods habitation was; Jerusalem which received many favors from God,
and has suffered for their disobedience. Is this the place where God will
bring his people? to his own City Jerusalem, and into the midst of that City,
where there is both safety and plenty, where there is the chief and the choice
of all things that can be had, or obtained; Zach. 12.5.
where there is security and strength; where there is rest, peace, and
tranquillity; where there is Governors and godly inhabitants; where there is
Laws, and obedience to those Laws, where there is all manner of delight and
comfort? To this place, this City, God will bring his people. Happy are the
people that shall be brought to such a City, such a place, where there is no
want, no manner of injurious, or wrongful dealing, but justice and equity
exercised in its due manner; Heb. 12.23.
this place which the author to the Hebrews speaks of, in the commendation of
the station of the Saints, that they are come to mount Sion, the City of the
living God, the celestial Jerusalem.

Behold here the love of God to his, that he will bring them to such a place to
be melted; by this appears his great love to them in every particular, he will
not deliver up his people into the hands of the wicked; into dark, obscure, and
uncomfortable places, there to be cruelly handled; but he will bring them among
his people, to his house, to the assembly of his Saints, there to be melted and
refined, and made conformable to himself.

Fifthly, the receptacle that must contain them, and the place whereinto the
Lord will put them is the furnace, and the midst of the furnace: What furnace
is this, that the Lord will put his people into? Deuteronomy. 4.20.
Egypt is called an iron furnace. Abraham saw a smoking furnace and a burning
lamp, Genesis 15.17. There is a furnace of affliction, Isai. 48.10, Dan. 3.23.
Isai. 31.9.
Nebuchadnezzars hot fiery furnace may be a type of this furnace which is in
Jerusalem; for Isaiah speaks, whose fire is in Sion, and whose furnace is in
Jerusalem. I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction; when the three
children were in the furnace, God was with them; So long as we are in the
furnace, we are in the hands of God, he is with us, for his help is still
abiding: his gracious appearances and his furnace are inseparable, although the
people of God may be brought to a very low condition by many pressures, yet
deliverance is at hand: there will be a door opened, a most gracious discovery
of the Lords presence and of his goodness toward them there will not be a
separation of us from God, but there will be a separation made betwixt us and
our defilements. Who shall separate us from the love of God? Romans 8.35, 36, 37,
38.
shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword, etc? By this, by this furnace we are more than conquerours,
through him that loved us; for those that God loves once, he loves ever: He is
a sun and a shield unto his, Psalm. 8.4.
he is a lamp unto them that are in the smoking furnace, it being the place of
trial that God has made for his to be tried, purified, and refined in.

The afflictions, losses, and crosses of the world, are not so much the
furnace, as the seeming loss of Gods favor, the multitude of our sins lying
before us, Satan continually assaulting, the horrible fear, and the pit, of our
own wounded spirits, when we see all men hate us.

Jerem. 30.17. Verse. 6.
This is Sion, whom no man regards: when our wounds stink and are festered,
when our bones are broken, and our sinews shrunk, when we are in captivity,
when we are dead when we are as dry bones; Ezekiel. 37.
then, then the Lord lives in us, when we have eaten the little book which is
bitter in the belly, even as death pangs. It is a mystery, that in the midst of
death we then have our chiefest life, when our bones are broken, when our
confidences are slain, then are we most firm, and best established in the power
and might of the Lord, when we find in our selves to be most out of the Lords
love and favor, then are we most in his favor and love, when our spirits are
most wounded, then the spirit of the Lord is upon us with healing, more
especially then, than when we had a peace of our own gaining. Was not this fe^t
by our Lord Jesus, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Was it upon him, and shall it not be upon us? Sion said, God has forgotten
me: When the glory and excellency of all flesh shall be crucified in us, Isa.
49.14. Phil. 3.
then shall we rejoice in the fellowship of the sufferings of Christ. The end
of the Cross is to bring us to the Crown, and the putting us into the furnace,
is to make us pure for the Lord, Psalm. 12.6.
as pure as the silver that is tried, in the furnace of earth seven times: then
shall we being dead with Christ, rise with him, and shall ever seek those
things that are above, above the reach of the world, the capacity of mortals,
we shall have no desire to seek and search after earthy treasures: for that
desire is subjected and dead, by our present enjoyment, (although in
tribulation,) having received a better hope of a more lively and lasting
treasure.

This furnace which the Lord will put his people into, is contracted of earth,
as may appear in the twelfth Psalm forenamed: as brass, and iron, and other
metals cannot be melted, but in furnaces of earth, so neither can the people of
God be melted, but in an earthen furnace. Here we may see what use the Lord
makes of all earthly minded wretches, of all despisers of his Word, and of his
people, he makes them to be the furnace, wherein he melts his people; their
mockings, scoffings, revilings, reproaches, and persecutions, their cruelty and
oppression, their tyranny and their slaughters, are as the furnace of the Lord
all the contentions, quarrellings and fightings against Gods people, are as the
refining pot. Prove. 27.21.
Gods personal afflicting of the body, or wounding the spirit, usually comes
not, but by the envy, malice, wrath, and hatred of man toward man. God is the
chief refiner but he has many instruments and weapons, wherewith he does so
refine us; Satan he desires it, Luke 22.32. Ezekiel. 21.31.
and his aim is utterly to undo us, and we are delivered up into the hands of
beastly and cruel men, and we know not how we shall be delivered: but the Lord
does know how to deliver his, and to reserve the ungodly unto the day of
judgment to be punished who by their malicious hating of the people of God, 2
Pet. 2 9.
do hate God himself, and his Word, and would, if it were possible, pull God
from his throne: Job. 19.22.
they persecute me, as God, says Job, their rage is against that of God, that
is in men; so that whatsoever the persecutour does speak, or act, against any
of the people of God, that they may assure themselves, is good, and whatsoever
they plead for, and would maintain, and defend it, may not be accounted for
good, nor so received, and entertained: these times testify to us that in
difficult matters, we may know good, by evil men's hating despising, and
persecuting of it.

Sixthly, God will blow the fire of his wrath, upon them, etc. Fire, is that
element, that does produce notable effects, both by making metalls, that are
very hard, to be soft and pliable, and by consuming the dross, out of them,
making them to be pure: this natural fire does many things that are excellent,
as in diverse arts, mysteries, and humane sciences, is to be seen, exceeding far
the other elements.

Esa. 66.15. Zach. 13.9. 1 King. 18.23. Ezekiel. 36.5. Amos. 7.4. 1 Cor. 3.13, etc.
It is by fire, that the Lord will purge his people he will Judge his people by
fire, and sword, he will bring them through the fire, and refine them, he will
show unto us, what sacrifice, he does accept of by fire, Malachy 3.2. who can
endure, when he appears, for he is like a purging fire, Amos 5.6. Seek ye the
Lord, and ye shall live, lest he break out, like fire, etc. Every man's work,
shall be tried by fire of what sort it is.

Genesis 3.15.
It was the great God for the sin of man, that first did put an enmity, between
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent; which enmity has
continued, and does by degrees, come to be as fire: it does from enmity come
to contention, from contention, to alienation, and separation; from that to
hatred, lothing, and revenge; from that to anger, and wrath, which does bring
to pass the design of the one, vanquishing, and overthrowing of the other.

Heb. 12.29. Psalm. 2. last.
God is said to be as fire, which does consume, our God is a consuming fire, he
is so in his anger, and in his wrath, against the enmity, against the wicked,
the profane, ungodly, against the despisers, and them that make a mock of his
word; the breath of the Lord, as a river of brimstone shall devour them. As God
placed, the enmity, Esa. 30.33.
so he will destroy it; there shall be nothing, that shall stand against him,
he will burn up all, and consume all, that is not of himself; that that lies
in the vain imagination of man, he will burn it up for nothing can come, from
vain man, as he is guided, by the enmity, but what is fuel, Rev. 1.10.
fit for the fire of the Lord.

Hence it is, that God terms his people to be dross, and drossy metalls, and
says he will melt them, he will blow the fire of his wrath upon them, and they
shall be melted: the Lord is the fire, and here he says, he will blow the
fire, etc. Much like to that, the Lord said permissively, concerning Ahab: I
will go forth, and be a lying spirit, 1. King. 22.22 Esa. 54.16. Esa. 40.7.
Hag. 1.9.
in the mouth of all his prophets. I will blow the fire, says the Lord, I will
set men a work, to blow the fire, Behold then, what the Lord has now done
among us. What fire has there been lately blown up, what Divisions,
Dissentions, Dashings, Clashings, Fomentings, Rentings, and Dividings, yea what
Burnings, and boylings is there, in the minds and hearts of men? some raging,
tearing, spoiling and consuming themselves, in blind zeal; others wearied, and
almost tired with patient waiting for the accomplishent of the promises, being
clouded, and veiled; and therein are afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and
have no comfort. Is it not the Lord that has kindled the fire, which Christ
speaks of, which he wished it were kindled? Esa. 54.11. Luke 12.49. 2 Cor. 11.29.
I will blow the fire of my wrath upon you, I have caused men to be inflamed one
against the other, I have blowed the fire, that is now among you; Your
diversities of opinions, your contrary and different judgments, your various
kinds of preaching, your several prayings, your fiery writings one against
another, your impatient and passionate speakings, railings, and revilings, your
condemnings, and sentencing one another, this fire that is in each of your
bosoms, will I blow, til it be such a strong fire, that it shall consume all that
is of flesh, and the glory of it, for it does deceive my people, and makes them
to err, therefore the fire shall burn out all the dross and the Tin, and
there shall be none left but the good metal.

When therefore we take notice of the several contradictions, that is in the
world, Romans 8.28.
among the sons of men, let us know that all shall work for good in the end, to
them that believe, and do, with faith and patience, wait for the accomplishment
of the promises: for herein does matter of comfort arise to them that have
received an unction from the Holy One, 1 John. 2.20.
for they know all things* if so that then as the Saints did, that there are
many antichrists now in the world, and that the time is come, nay the very day
does appear, in the which, an overturn shall be, to all rereligions and
professions, Isa. 66.22.
that were made, invented, and set up by men: And that there shall be a new
Heaven, a new religion set up by God, which shall remain for ever. But before
this is really accomplished, and brought to pass, there may be much
persecution, occasioned by them who are the upholders of Antichrist, in the
professed way of a religion, patched up in these times of Apostasy: which
cannot endure to hear of the fiery change, that shall come, which will burn up
all Envy, selfe-conceitednesse, pride, self-love, ambition, discord and
strife, and bring us to that pure love, that shall ever the Saints badge, 1
Cor. 13.5, 6, 7, 8.
and cognizance, as in the first of John, Chapter the fourth.

Seventhly, God will melt them, God will melt his people, as men melt Brass,
and Tin, and Iron, and Lead. This word, melting is often times used in the
Scriptures, as in Joshua 7.5. the peop es heart melted away: Josiah his heart
melted, 2 Kings 22.19. 2 Chro. 34.27.
as you may read at large, the issue of it, Nahum. 1.5. Psalm. 147.18. he
sends his Word and me teth them.

God will melt his people, that is, he will dissolve them, he will make them
soft and liquid, he will make them pliable to relent to faint, to be
discouraged he will break them and mollify them: The end of melting is to make
pliab^e and capab^e, the metal that is melted to accomplish, and to bring to
pass the design of the workman, for his intended purpose as may be seen, by
the several varieties of vessels, and other things, made founded, cast, and
formed, by men that are skild in metals.

Here the people of God, are as metal, Jer. 38.6. Romans 9.21.
in the hands of the founder: in other places of Holy writ, they are as clay,
in the hands of the potter, and he has power over them.

As clay is made soft by water, and so is wrought, and made to what fashion the
potter pleases: So are metals made soft by fire, some having a more strong
fire, then the others, according to their several qualities; and cast,
wrought, and made up by the workman, in what fashion, he pleases.

Even so it is with the Lord; he can melt us and cast us, frame us and form
us, into what fashion, or condition he pleases.

Will God deal thus with his people? Will he break them, undo them* melt them,
dissolve them, discourage them, make them faint, and relent; Yea, God will do
it, when no course else will serve the turn, he will do it: yet does he
appoint means, not to cast him out from Him, him that is expelled.

Behold, here the goodness, the bounty, and the love of God to mankind and to
his people! he will melt them, 2 Samuel 14.4.
their hearts sh^^ be melted, he wi^^ not consume them, but their dross that
is in them* he will new found them, that whereas their hearts were impure, he
will purify them, he will renew them, he will open their hearts, Acts 15.9.
Ezekiel 11.19. 1 King. 8.37.
as Lydias was, Acts 16.14. he will give them sincere hearts, Heb. 10.22.

He will establish their hearts, with holiness, 1 Th^s. 3.13. 2 These. 2.16.17.
he will give them upright hea^ts, as he did to Asa* 1 King. 15.14. A perfect
heart, as he ga e Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.3. a contrite heart, and a clean heart,
as he gave D^v^d (...) ^0. he will gi^e his people humble, patient m^^k(...)g
and tender hearts.

O, what a metamorphose will there (...) ^h^re God does melt, he will take all
manner of evil away, and give and bestow all manner of good: will it not be a
strange alteration among Christians, that of proud, they are become humble, of
being contray to God, they are God-like?

If I had not been undone; I had been undone.

Consider, how fit this resemblance is: Man is as drossy metal, that must be
melted, refined, and purified.

These metalls are all generated; and bread in the earth, and they are no way
useful, or serviceable, as they come forth of the earth, but must pass
through a strong blowing fire, before they can be made perfect, or useful for
the Artificer.

Even so it is with man, being brought forth into this world, he is not fit for
any thing, nor to have to do with his Maker, until he has past through the
fire, that all the earthy disposition, and incapable substance of dross, that
fixes to him, be clean taken away; A man cannon commune with his Maker, nor
offer any sacrifice to him, as he is in nature, until he is new born, he
cannot enter: all that earthinesse, and drossinesse, that is in the internal
part, must by fire be scummed, cleared, and utterly taken away, and consumed:
hence it is, that Saint John the Baptist says, John 3.3.
I Baptize you with water, but there is one that comes after me, who will
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 3.
and with fire; the baptism of fire, is that that will be hereafter, for the
Whore sits upon the many waters, and she is in discovering.

What is there in the world, that is fit for use and service, as it is brought
forth? Children are apt and prone to all evil, and disobedience, and do
whatsoever is contrary to right; if they be not educated, taught, corrected,
and instructed; the natural disposition must be subdued and kept under, that
the direction to a good demeanor, may work upon them, and they grow up into it.

Survey the whole creation, and see where there is any thing, that is fit, in
its body natural, by reason of its afaffixes, to make use of, before there is
a change. Corn cannot be made into bread, before it be threshed, winnowed,
ground, sifted, and baked: no flesh, can be fit to nourish, before it has been
ordered and dressed by fire. Trees cannot serve for building, but they must be
squared, sawed, and fitted, stones must be hewed: and so must all things that
does belong to meat, and drink, apparel and manufactory, there must be a
change of them, or an abatement from them: the earth it self cannot yield forth
fruits, before it be tilled and manured.

Can thou then, Oh unbeleeving man, conceive, although thou art lord of the
Creatures, that thou art cleaner then other creatures? can thou approach near
to, can thou serve, and obey thy Creator, in that nature of thine, thou wast
brought forth in, before thou art cleansed, purified, purged, melted, plowed,
winnowed, and sifted? before thy self, thy will, wisdom, understanding,
desires, Psalm. 51.8.
and all in that nature be dead, and a new birth be witnessed? that the broken
bones may rejoice over the dead body of sin, which is called the old man,
because it is as old as thy self, having all the parts of a man, a head to
imagine mischief and vanity, to plot and contrive against his Maker, a stiff
neck, arms, and hands, full of oppression and guile, and stretched out against
the innocent, feet swift to shed blood, heels to kick against the law of God,
ears to hear folly, eyes to behold vanity: if this old man be not dead in
thee, and thou art not a new creature, nothing that thou do can be accepted,
thou may dream of a happiness to be had, when thou have gotten an
artificial tongue, like a newborn creature, and art, through education and
thine own wisdom, Esa. 1.
civilized in the outward garb; but if thy heart b^ not changed, thou art
far off from happiness, Judgment must pass over thee, yea the fire of the
Lord, must burn out thy dross, or else thou will be miserable, poor, blind,
and naked.

Thou must yield and submit thy self to thy God bring thy cursed nature to him,
there to be slain, come willing y, Psalm. 10.
humble thy self, under the mighty hand of God, and he will exalt thee, learn
of thy Maker to know him, and to believe in him, that for the love of the
world, gave his only begotten Son, that they should not perish, but obtain
through him everlasting life. Think on this, O man: of the great love of God,
to thee, what satifaction could the whole world give, for the Redemption of one
soul? and has Christ Jesus, equal to God his Father, purchased, Redemption
for the whole world: and art thou so far from prising it, that thou will not
accept of it, but think to live happy without change, in thy natural unclean,
unpurified, and unrefined condition? Consider in thy hought it to mind, did
thy Savior Jesus Christ, that be no robbery, to be equal to God, as it were
un-God himself, becoming man, and suffering a shameful death, to recover and
Redeem thee? and art thou so desperately wicked, and so foolhardy, that thou will not unman thy self, to be like God, (that is to say) to put off, thy will,
wisdom, righteousness, thy pride, lust, and carnal mind, to be invested
into a kingdom of righteousness, peace, and holiness, and to be made like
unto Christ, in whom all fullness dwells, and to be in union and communion, with
the Father:

Let him, that has ears to hear, hear: what the Lord has said. Know ye not
that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates, and except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter: if
you are the servants of sin, your wages is death, if you live after the flesh,
you shall die, for they that are in flesh, cannot please God, for the wisdom
of the flesh, is death, but the wisdom of the spirit is life, and peace: all
that you can do, in the raw, unquoth, earthy, rough, drossy, vain, dark,
uncircumcised, unprepared, and dead condition of nature, though never so much
beautified, and adorned, with art learning, and outward wisdom, and glory, it
is but hypocrisy, we are only Christians portraied, and as it with a diamond,
if not right, it is worth nothing; and as in a picture, if it be not to the
life, then it has no regard: so, except we are really changed, and
metamorphosed, from that we were borne in, and are made like the Son of God, we
are not free from the law of sin, and death, but it has power over us, to
eternal death.

Will the almighty God melt his people? let them be of what sort soever? in
their outward callings? either men of authority, men of the world, teaching
men, or mean men? Then here, Behold, the great love of God unto you, he will
will melt you, he will make you pliable, tractable, and vertible, that what you
cannot do your selves, he will do for you. Can the Leopard change his spots, or
the Blackmore his skin, no more can a man change his nature of himself, or by
any power within himself, but God only is the changer of all; Are his people
Brass, Tin, Iron, and Lead, such metalls being of drossy, earthy substances,
and qualities that are not fit for his service, that will be served with Gold,
and Silver? how then can these metalls be melted, and purified, and be made fit
vessels, for the Lord? They cannot melt themselves, neither is it in the power
of one to melt another, no more can man be humbled, mollified, or be made
capable, tractable, or vertible of himself, by himself, or by any other man,
bur only by the Lord himself who says: I will melt them.

Behold then, I say, the goodness, mercy, and love of God, that does such
great things for us, as to melt us, himself! we are still in his hands, we
cannot do amiss, no hurt shall come to us, we have his presence, his love, his
bounty; although in the Furnace, he owns us, he will not depart from us, what
greater love then this? to be with us when we have most need, when we have the
bitter cup, presented to us, then, then is our sanctification near, then the
Lord is making of us like to Himself, and like to his Word, to be righteous, as
he is righteous, pure as he is pure.

Therefore those that have gone through this fire, and have been melted,
humbled, broken, and refined, sound fort the praises of God, and declare, as
David did, what the Lord has done for your souls, how he has severed, and
separated you, from the world, and has made you fit, to have fellowship, with
the Father, and with the Son, which is a mystery to the World, 1 John 1.3.
and to those, that have not past from death to life, that have not past
through the fire, and known the indignation of the Lord, but lives in the
vanity of their minds, serving their lusts cohering to the corrupt forms,
fashions, and customs, of the world, which have no life in them, but have the
issues of death, proceeding from a raw, earthy, drossy, unmelted, and
unpurified root, holding, and continuing, in it self, no true peace, nor joy,
but what nature or art has.

Let the people, who have been dead, and are now alive, that were darkness,
and are now light, in the Lord, that are made conformable to the Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, being dead to all sin, and alive, to all Grace, who
love not the world; nor the things of the world, but have attained the Kingdom
of Grace, Love, Joy, and Peace, and have communion with their God, have a
reciprocal, and correspondent love to God, and to their brethren, and echo
back, everlasting thanks, and praises, to their God, who has freely
communicated of himself unto them, and has made them, as kings, and priests,
who have not only, the fruits, and effects of peace, but peace it self: Heb.
7.2. Ephesians. 2.14. Col. 1.27.
for Christ in them, the hope of glory, he is their eternal Peace, and their
everlasting Light, which proceeded from that fire, in which they were melted
and purified, which has consumed, in them, all their dross, and all manner of
carnal lust, concupiscence, and self wisdom, all righteousness, invention,
and imagination, that was in the will, and carnal mind, that led them into
error, imitation, and separation, from the pure truth, that comes from God,
the Fountain of all Truth, and the very essence of all true religion, and of
all righteous living, being derived from him, and to be yielded up to him, with
a pure conscience, being divided, and severed, from the world, which savours
not of the things of God.

Eighthly, and lastly, The end; They shall know that the Lord has done it in
his wrath, and in his indignation. What, my people Israel, are they such
abominable sinners, as to commit such gross sins, bloodshed, idolatry,
oppression, disobedience, uncharitableness, covetousness, and fornication? I
have great indignation against my people, for these their great sins; you may
think that you are still in my favor, and because your secret hiding of your
sins makes the less cry among men, you think by my silence that I am like unto
you: But I will reprove you, and set your sins in order before you, Psalm. 50.21.
you shall know that I am angry and wrathful against you, you may apprehend in
your carnal wisdoms and understandings, that I still love you, but you shall
feel my fury, I will melt you, and then you shall know wherefore, because you
transgressed against me. The Lord in the sixteenth of Ezekiel speaks much of
his people, how they were, and what he did for them, Ezekiel. 16.
and what their behavior was, verse. 48. As I live, says the Lord God, Sodom
thy sister has not done, neither she, nor her daughters, as thou have done and
thy daughters. After many threats and menaces the Lord still owns them, and in
verse. 62. says, that he will establish his covenant with them, and they shall
know that he is the Lord.

The Lord here does tell them that when he has melted them, they shall know
that it is the Lord has done it in his wrath: they shall not say, This fiery
change came upon them by chance, or fortune, or out of the dust, or by the
transactions of differences that is among the Nations of the world, or through
the envy and malice of men against them, and so blame the instruments, as the
ignorant world does; but they shall know that it is he that does it, and by the
power of his arm, and in his wrath.

See here, and take notice of Gods love and mercy in the midst of judgment:
although he be angry and full of wrath, yet he will not destroy his people, in
the midst of judgment he remembereth mercy; Psalm. 83.3.
that what he does bring upon them is to change them, not to confound them; it
is to purify, not to consume them; it is that they may know the Lord, as in
many places in Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel of their prophecies, you shall
find, that after judgments denounced, it is said, And they shall know that I
am the Lord.

The knowledge of God is that that the world is not acquainted with, although
they talk much of it, they have none of it; Hos. 4.1.
God complains by his Prophet Hosea, that there was no knowledge of him in the
Land, and that his people were destroyed for want of knowledge, verse. 6. We are
Heathens by nature and by profession, we declare it; for we profess outwardly,
what is not inwardly: It is the inward living, the life of grace, that makes us
Christians; to be ingrafted into Christ truly, to be as the branches to the
Vine, to have experience of Gods mercy and love to us, to know God by our
acquaintance and fellowship with him, is to know him aright as Christians, not
as the world, that says they are Christians, and know God no otherwise, but as
a dreadful Judge, by the flashings that they have in their minds, living in
disobedience to the light, and every thing that they do in profession is
heavy, irksome, and burdensome to them; they worship God, because of his great
power that can destroy them, not for the love of his great power tha^ burns and
consumes sin and dross in them; they fear him because they are sinful, and do
not convert and change, but live in sin, love it, and plead for it. But because
God hates sin, and sin is of such a defilin, nature, and makes us that we
cannot be vessels for him therefore should we hate it.

Search and examine your selves, ye sons of men, tha^ say you know God, and are
Christians, and hope to b^ saved by Christ. Do you know God? If you did, yo^
would know his people, his Word, his will, his power his love, his mercy, his
goodness, and his tender compassion. Can people say they know God, and hate an
persecute his Saints, despise his Word, resist his will, regard not his power?
take nothing from God, as love to them, but what does appear visibly in the
things of the world? that cannot see God merciful to them when he does afflict
them, that cannot conceive that God made them men out of his goodness, that
cannot apprehend God to be tender unto them, in delivering them from their
lusts, from the snares of Satan, and from the allurements of the world? that
cannot praise God for afflictions, and rejoice under crosses? that fear death,
and being never renewed; nor changed, cannot tell what Heaven is, neither is
their desire to any other heaven, than that that is like the happiness of this
world?

Should there be such a strict survey and enquiry made of the knowledge of God
among us, we should find very few that do know God aright and truly, as they
ought, and as the Saints of old did; but imaginarily by relation, by hearsay,
and by writings. Who is it that knows God experimentally, not only to be his
Creator, but to be his God? Who is there that shows forth in a lively
practice, that he was made to glorify God, with and in his heart, mind, soul,
and strength? that does witness to the world, that all his members and senses
were deputed in their several orders and places, to honor and glorify his
Maker, and not to make them vassals and drudges in the service of sin and
Satan? Who is there that does exercise his affections in the things of God
only, that leapeth and danceth as David did, because of the Ark of God, 2 Samuel
6.14.
that was recovered and brought again among the people of God? Or who does
grieve and mourn to the death, as old Eli and his daughter Phineas wife, did, 1 Samuel, 4.13. Jerem 9.1. Isai. 22.3.
because the Ark of God was taken, they would not be comforted, The glory is
departed from Israel; therefore life was nothing to them? Are men's affections
carried on, or off, according to the tenor of Gods will, as for the glory of
God? Or are they set on the world, and carried on to the contrary, then there
can be no true knowledge of God? Who is there, that the passions of his mind
bends to the glory of God, that is angry when the Lord is dishonored, his
people abused, truth despised? Where is the zeal that David had, Psalm. 69 9.
which did eat him up, he was not himself, his zeal had devoured him? Who is
there that will adventure his life, liberty, goods, estate, credit, or
reputation for God? If there be any such, as are here enquired of, surely they
know the Lord. And all others that live only in the Heathenish nature, and run
together with the multitudes, to do they know not what, and to they know not
whom. The Lord will make as many as does belong to him, to know him by his
furnace, and acknowledge him to be just, holy, and good, as he has declared
himself to be, so shall his people find in themselves, if there were no
Scripture, by their own testimony, which is the best evidence and proof: for no
true knowledge can be, but by the inward testimony, other knowledge deceives;
for when men boast of their knowing God to be all-sufficient, and that he
knows best, what is fit for them, and if this be not radical within, by
inward testimony, when trouble and affliction comes, and the evil day
approaches, they are ready to murmr against God, and disdain his dealings,
whereby they testify to their own hearts, their own failings, and that
recoileth back that should go forwards, witnessing by their impatiency and
unquiet spirits, that their knowledge of him was not true, neither can there be
any thing true, but what will hold the fiery trial, that makes us to know the
Lord, and to know our selves.

The people of God that are and have been melted, they only shall know the
Lord and his indignation they shall not need to fear the wrath to come, for
wrath seizes on them here, and they shall know the Lords wrath, that it has
past over them, and that there shall be no more; and that his trial is that
they might be the better, that they might know, God knows what all men are,
though men know not themselves. Where no trial has been, and none of Gods
indignation has past over, to melt, refine, purify, and purge out the dross,
the filth and corruption, which lies hidden and covered within, what ever
metall-like shining there is, or what gilded profession soever there is, or
whatsoever art, or worldly wisdom there is, there is nothing but death. To know
God inwardly, savingly, experimentally, in all his attributes, in all his
dealings, to know that his wrath here, and his indignation here, works for
our eternal good, is the right, knowledge that God will indue his people with;
for the true knowledge of God and a pure mind goes together, being attained
unto by the Cross, and by the true revelation of the Son of God, made manifest
in the flesh by his sufferings, that as he overcame death, and now sits at the
right hand of the Father, so might we also overcome, and be fellow-heirs with
him.

Away with the knowledge the world has, that cannot apprehend God to be good
to them in time of distress, sorrow, misery and calamity, in the time of their
trial; but deem that they are out of Gods favor, and lie down either
despairing of happiness, looking without themselves, and revile others, which
they conceive have been the cause of that that is fallen upon them. The case of
England is so at present, because men cannot enjoy their pleasures and profits
as heretofore, and things are not according to their wills, they lie down in
discontent, and rage against those that rule over them, emulating and reviling
of them, if not seeking their destruction.

Mark, and behold what man is, he is a polluted, Psalm. 3. Isai. 6.
unclean, filthy, and a defiled creature, how unable is he to do any thing to
the cleansing of himself: and to enter into life he cannot, let him be what he
will, except he be cleansed: as the brass cannot make it self to be gold, nor
the Tin to be silver, so cannot man approach near to God, to be in union and
communion with him, except he be changed and renewed, and this God must alone
do, he is the Agent, and we must be the Patient; the work is Gods, man can but
resign himself up, and yield himself to him; his obedience is passive, God
works all in all: 1 Samuel 2.30.
Resignation and submission is that that God requires, Honorantes me honorabo,
Those that honor me I will honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and those that despise me shall be despised; those that will honor God by
their resignation, he will honor them by his communication and those that do
despise God, when he calls, shall be despised when they call, 1 Thessalonians. 5 19,
20.
S. Paul says, Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying: Does it not
appear that such there are that do? Our Savior Christ says, The children of
this world are wiser in their generation, than the children of light. Wherein
is that? The children of this world, let any man but nod, or becken to them, be
it in some hope of profit, away they get, and they take much pains and travel
to get the wealth of this world. But in matters concerning God, neither the
light that shines in the mind, the motions of the good Spirit, the
prophecyings, nor any verbal persuasion will work upon them, to take any
pains, so much as to yield, or submit, to endeavor to subdue a lust. But still
men say, What shall we do, or how shall we do this, or that, in matters between
God and them? but do not that they can. If man hold up his finger, or wink,
although never a word be spoken, it is presently understood. 2 Pet. 3.5.
But let God, notwithstanding the light that shines into every man's
conscience, speak by his Messengers plainly, Turn, return, repent, come,
submit, draw near, why will you die? and the like invitations, yet poor
miserable men refuse. Speak conscience; Prove. 1.24, 25.
may not a man be passively obedient in resigning and yielding himself up to
his Maker, taking up the Cross, and waiting on the light which directs him
to his God, Romans 1.19, 20, 21.
answering the motions of the good Spirit, and submitting to the will of God?
Must man of necessity be acting and doing in his own will, or else nothing to
be done? Surely the Lord will be served after the manner he prescribes, that
is in spirit and truth* no flesh, no will of man must be in any thing, wherein
we have to do with God; we cannot read of any that did walk according to his
own heart, but that he did wickedly.

Observe the commands of Christ, if we will have our flesh mortified, we shall
find them to be easy, Matthew. 11.29.
Come, love, believe, submit, embrace, kiss, follow, and the like: If he bid
us take up his yoke, he means to draw with us, we shall not be overburdened,
he will assist us, and make it easy and light. Consider this then, O man, what
can thou do less then come to thy Savior, to resign, yield, and roll thy
self on him, to embrace, to depend, and trust on him. O Israel, thy destruction
is of thy self: thou can move and stir forwards in thine own will, and in thy
misled understanding, and wilt not thou move or stir in submitting thy self
unto his will? You will not come to me that you may have life: It appears
then, that men love death, that they love darkness, Joh. 1.5.
most true it is, for they cannot comprehend the light: Let therefore the
consideration of the miserable effects: that follow the neglect of not coming
to Christ, make us to be wise, and come, move and stir, yield and submit, ask,
seek and knock, enquire, not as Ahaziah did, 1 Kihg. 1.2.
but as David did, Psalm. 37. at the Sanctuary of God, and as the Prophet Isa
says, Should not they enquire of their God? Isai. 8.8.


Hitherto, that that has been said, has been to show what is signified by
dross and drossie metals, whereunto God does liken his people: it remains now
that somewhat be said to each particular people, as a direction from the Lord
to walk by. If the Apostles, Paul, Peter, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12.
Jam. 5.8.
James, and John foresaw a change that would be in the world, as if it had been
at hand in their days: what do the people and Saints of God foresee now, now
Antichrist the man of sin is revealed; for Saint Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. That
the Lord shall consume him with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of
his coming: When man fell from God, he fled away, and his posterity has ever
been feeding upon the four elements, and would not willingly be beholding to
God, but eternally live in them: what will mankind do, when these elements shall
be melted with the heat of fire? surely not one jot or tittle of Gods word,
shall evade; but in his du time, all that has been prophesied of, Esa. 40.8.
shall come to pass; It seems clear to some, that the day of the Lords
coming, is now begun, and that the apostasy, which has continued many hundreds
of years, is declining, and the light begins to shine, that along time has
been simulated, which declares what the visible church is now upon the earth,
even like to Israel, they are dross to the pure, and holy God, they are
Brass, Tin, Iron, and Lead. These four metals, which signify four sorts of
men, me^ of power, teaching men, men of Traffic, and poor men, may be further
resembled, to the four elements, S. Peter speaks of, that shall likewise melt,
fire, 2 Pet. 3.12.
air, earth, and water: The man of power, being as the fire which does
predominate, and do the greatest execution, to the regularity of the rest; the
teaching man, which is as the air in which men do breath, and live in, yet as
air; the man of traffic, which is as the earth, that bears forth fruit, to
the support of the life of man; the poor man which is as the water, that does
refresh and ease, and bring much comfort, and help to man.

Will God not only melt the forenamed metalls, but also the elements, in which
man, has, and does live in, being the only support of man (for what can man
do, if any one of these elements be taken away, he cannot subsist, in his
natural being) Then here see the great goodness of God, that will not only
pruge, and refine man, but he will also refine the elements, that man lives in,
and whereby, he does subsist. God will not only, make man pure, but the place
and seat, where man's station is, he will make it pure, also; there shall be a
pure world, as well as pure inhabitants, the fire shall be pure fire, like the
fire of the Lord, that consumes all the combustible matter, of dross and
filth, that remains now: the air shall be pure, cleared, and purged, from all
humane, and terrene vapors wherein, the defilements of it, did consist; there
shall be no more of of noisome and infectious air, but an air, 1 These. 4.17.
like that Saint Paul speaks of, or the same: where we shall meet the Lord,
and ever be with him.

The earth also, shall be made pure, Rev. 21.2.
for it shall be made new, there shall be a new earth, all the actions,
commerce, converse, that is in the world, that were corrupted, through deceit,
oppression, and cruelty, shall all be burnt up, and there shall be a clear, and
a pure converse, and commerce, without fraud, covetousness, or guile; equity,
and honesty, shall then be exercised, according to the Christian rule to do, as
others should do unto us, the waters shall no more remain, there shall be no
more Sea, all the waters shall be dried up, by the fire of the Lord; Rev. 21.1.
Esa. 11.6.7. Acts 3.19.
there shall be no more poor, and oppressed, by the rich the Lion shall lie
down with the Lamb, and our refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord.

Again, Saint Peter says, in the forenamed chapter, that the heavens shall
pass away, that the Heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and further
says: Ver. 10. ver. 12. ves. 13.
We look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
Many heretofore, and some now, do from this Scripture, tell the people, of the
final end, and dissolution of the whole world for ever. But Christ says, To
you it is given, to know the mysteries or secrets of the the Kingdom: And the
Prophet Amos chapter the third, Matthew. 13.11.
and the seventh, says surely, the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals, his
secrets to his servants, the Prophets. It cannot be then so understood, as our
common Expositors, have concluded, but it must be truly, and clearly taken, for
the fiery change, that shall be by the anger, and wrath of God, upon the world,
which shall dissolve the Heavens; That is, the religions, that are in the
world, for Religion, is as Heaven, by it we do converse with God, and commune
with him, and it has been, from the beginning, that the people of God, have
had a way, to draw near to God, by religious worship, and services of him: But
so it is come to pass, that the man of sin, that is, sin deceiving man, and
Satan's temptations, prevailing with man, has so corruptly and so confusedly,
so hypocritically, and so adulterately, worshipped and obeyed God, in the
outward form, in the show, in the history, with the lip only, in the outward
man, by and in the will of man; That the Spouse is become an Harlot; Man is
become a beast, and that body which the now-religion boasts that it is
Christ, is Antichrist; This heaven wherein the sons of men, do solace
themselves, this strong City, this fenced Jerusalem, This mountain, which they
trust unto, plead and fight for, This heaven, where righteousness dwells
not, that is but the husk, the shell, the sheath, the outside, the carcass,
where the inward man, is prisoned, captivated, and imbondaged, and suffers:
This heaven, which is counterfeit, full of dross, falsehood, lies, whoredoms,
witchcrafts, abominations, mockings, and persecutions, This heaven shall pass
away, with a noise, This heaven shall be dissolved.

This is the great wonder of the world, at this time, that the heavens shall
melt, that the earth shall quake, that the stars shall fall; But he that has
eyes to see, sees it now plainly, for the sixth seal is opened, and it does
manifestly appear, Rev. 6.12.
that the change now is begun; men's confidences are slaying, Babylon is
besieged, Antichrist is discovered, persecution increased, the iniquity of the
Whore revealed, her secrets uncovered, and the man of sin dismantled, upon
which there is arisen, a great war, between Michael, and the Dragon, in this
heaven, they are both within the limits of heaven: a strange thing that the
Dragon, the great old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, should have his
abode in heaven, and claim a right there, and now fights, against that power
of M chael, Rev. 12.
to maintain, keep up, and to continue this heaven, which is designed to pass
away, and to be dissolved: Yet so it is, This heaven, must pass away, this
corrupted, simulate, and drossy religion, must fade, Luke 16.17. Mat. 5.18.
Rev. 6.14. Esa. 66.22. Rev. 21.1.
the Dragon shall be overcome, there will be a new heaven, and a new earth,
which shall continue and remain for ever, that God himself will make, which
John saw, wherein there is no visible temple, but the Lord God, and the Lamb
are the temple thereof, where righteousness dwells, and abides for ever;
Not as the old heaven, that yet continues, which is full of ceremonies,
ordinances, humane institutions, and injunctions, which has caused much
confusion, contentions, and intanglements, the Nations being in controversy,
how it shall go, every one thinking his own way to be right, and that he shall
have the conquest, at last, exercising themselves, in the corrupt and
infatuated matter, proceeding from the four elements, within them, of pride,
malice, covetousness, and murmuring, awaking, and stirring up the wrath and
fiery indignation of the Lord, to the bringing of sore, sad, heavy, and,
lamentable tribulation, by which, and through which tribulation, the Lord will
make known, the great mysteries of the Kingdom, that lies now hidden, veiled,
and unrevealed, that men shall know the Lord, even in nature, in which
knowledge, the stranger, and the Heathens, shall be converted, and turn to the
Lord, as Christians; and all Art, cuning, skill, humane learning, forms,
customs, and inventions of men, shall be clean dispelled, and God alone shall
be all in all.

That which has been said, concerning metals let it be seriously considered,
How the Almighty God, does set out the condition of his people by metalls, and
declares, his purpose, concerning them, as by the comparison of metalls, is
largely discoursed, how he will melt them in all manner of their conditions,
degrees, and qualities, and not only so, but he will melt the Elements, the
Heavens also shall be dissolved, the Earth and all the works therein shall be
burnt, let it then be considered, as in the forenamed Epistle of Peter, what
manner of persons, ought we to be? To this inquiry he does advise, That our
conversation should be holy, and God-like, that we may be found, when the Lord
comes, without spot and blameless, having peace within us: To this end is the
Prophesies, the sayings of Christ, and his Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.
that we might be betttered, and amended. The disease then being discovered,
and the cause of it, there remains now the remedy to be applied.

First then, to the men of power, signified by brass, Let it be said to them,
from the Lord, although they may think well of themselves: they are dross, and
they are Brass; Hag. 1.7, 8.
Consider in your minds you great ones, God will be glorified by you, you are
his servants, and his work you must do, you are not to act, any thing in, and
according to your own wills, neither to and for your own ends; you are not to
look to the glory and fame of your callings, and places, but to have respect
unto the glory of God above all, as the Prophet Micha speaks, you should do
justly, Mica. 6.8.
love mercy and walk humbly with God; Justice and mercy should be exercised,
after the most perfect, pattern of God himself, for God says, Be holy, as I am
holy, perfect as your Hevenly Father is perfect: the justice dispensed by men
on earth, Matthew. 5.48.
should be suitable to the justice, and judgment of God, answering to his
holiness, and to his righteousness, and that not in some things, as do the
Heathens, but in all things whatsoever, and that exactly, and completely, that
the will of God may be done, on Earth, as it is done in Heaven; In this
deportment, the wise and faithful, that are in authority, do manifest
themselves, to be the children of God their Father, when that among all the
prunings, Matthew. 5.9.
and loppings of injustice, the equitable, and clear reducement, stands
consistent with the most free, single, and perfect righteousness of the most
Holy God.

And as God requires justice, so does he require also mercy, mercy to the poor
that are oppressed, wronged, and trampled on; Justice and Mercy must go
together; it is justice to punish the offender and oppressor, Psalm. 101.1.
and it is mercy to relieve the poor and the innocent. It is the counsel of
Christ; Be merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful, and there is a
blessing pronounced, to them that are merciful, full of mercy.

Matthew. 5.7.
Again, men of power, should walk humbly with God, men that do walk humbly, as
they ought to do, do walk with God, as Noah did: the Lord he will dwell with
the humble man, he gives grace to the humble, and resists the proud; Pride
has been much among men of power, some have smarted, 1 Pet. 5.5.
for their pride, as our late times can testify, and through that, and by that
means, the powers are some way refined: the taking away of the Ecclesiastical
power, is a great sign, that God intends good unto us; and it should cause
the opposites derived from them, to be humbled.

Let men of power consider, how the Lord, for the pride of Nebuchadnezzar,
dealt by him, taking from him his reason, making him to feed, as the beasts;
They may also look back, to the times that we have known of late: how were the
powers of this Nation, shaken and shivered, yea broken to pieces, that when
they thought, to make a greater addition to tyranny and oppression, they became
powerless? What were those that were in authority, or how were they set up?
was is not more because of their wealth, then of their grace? or because of
their sinister relations, then their qualifications? more that they might act,
and do the will of man, then to do according to Gods will?

Has God begun to refine the powers, have we seen some amendment? Doubtless,
God will proceed. For he will have those to rule, that are God-like, that are
as Himself is, he will be the Shepherd of his sheep, he will correct them with
his rod, and bear them up with his staff, he will have no cruelty, exercised
on his, nor partiality on the evil doers, but the Judges, and the Arbiters,
shall deal justly, and impartially, in dubious matters.

Most strange effects of Gods providence in this Nation, is to be taken notice
of: how has God begun among us, as it were were with a besome, to sweep away
all adverse power, in the great mutation of Governors and of Government,
laying aside some persons, and powers, Psalm. 23.
and deposing of them, who thought themselves, on a sure foundation, and
setting up others, that never thought of being capable of it, being of mean
descent: Luke. 1.43.
Surely this cannot, but show unto us, that the Decree of God is gone forth, to
overturn all Nations, Kingdoms, Kings, Governors, and Rulers of the earth,
until they be wise, and learned, in the the fear of their God, and are willing
to kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.
to embrace the Lord Christ, the chief Head of all kingdoms, and do yield up
themselves, their greatness, laws, interest, and affairs, into perfect
subjection, and conformity, to the most absolute, and perfect power of Christ;
and to rule men, no further, nor no otherwise, then as they are the servants of
Christ, their Lord; Thus God will have his people, that rule over others, under
himself, when they are melted, to be such, as shall curb the evil doers, and
to defend, preserve, sustain, maintain, and uphold, them that do well.

Truth and right government, according to the perfect Law of God, is most
serviceable, in its place, and it cannot be performed, rightly, but by such as
fear God, and hate covetousness, that are impartial. God that has by the
spirit of burning, burnt and consumed the fleshly mind, and will of
Governors, causes them to act acaccording to his own will, and for his glory,
being led by his Holy Spirit, into all wisdom, endeavoring to please him, not
winking at any deceit for carnal ends, but administering, and distributing true
justice, for Gods sake, saving the innocent, and punishing the nocent, giving
forth according to Gods will, and not according to their own, without respect
of persons, but for conscience sake, to do the thing that is right, and as
becomes men, given wholly up, to serve and obey the living God:

1 Cor. 6.1. Matthew. 19.28.
Let the Arbiters, they that were of old called so, now the Lawyers of our
times, learn to dread the Lord, and not to scrue, and wrest the proposalls,
made to them of peace, into a long contrived debate, to enrich themselves by
others ruin, and clothe themselves by the nakedness of others: It is an
office for Saints, and not for the covetous, and cruel; there will be a time,
in the new Jerusalem, that the Saints shall judge the earth, they shall give
the Law forth, from the Spirit of the Lord; for the Evangelicall
Righteousness, shall comprehend, more then the the Moral, the love of the
Father shall be in the Arbitrer, and he shall administer judiciously, equally,
and impartially, which shall cast out the oppressor, and restore again the
prey, taken from the spoiled, and be in that love and meekness, as becomes a
Saint, doing no wrong.

Secondly, Those that are called, by the will of man, to teach, and to instruct
men, let them consider, what they are, and how they are to be qualified: it is
not for them to be as Tin, to have the likeness of the better metals, and to
adulterate with all mean metals, it is not sufficient for them, to have an
artificial, humane, pregnant, and Scholastique manner of delivering speeches
and sermons, and with it, set forms of prayer, but they must have the theory
within them, that is, such a testimony that their spirits can bear witness
within them, of the truth, of what they do speak: for Saint John says, The
testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19.10.
is the spirit of prophecy. They are not to teach by letter, or by another
man's lines, nor by transmission of other authors, for that is as theft, which
the Lord by his prophets complains of, and also they are not, to teach the
visions, the divinations, the falsities, vanities, Jer. 14.14.15.
and deceitfulness of their own hearts, but clearly and exactly, what is
within themselves, of the truth of God, and of the power, and life of the
Spirit of God.

Wherefore, let all the Teachers, that are at this day, who have took upon
them, to teach; examine, and try themselves, whether they are of the same
Spirit, that their Lord Christ was of, when he taught upon the mount, Matthew. 5.
after he had foiled the Tempter, he pronounces happiness, and blessedness
to diverse; As to the poor, to the mourner, to the meek, to the hungry, to the
merciful, to the pure, to the peacemakers, and to them that are persecuted:
prove your selves, ye teachers of men, whether the same mind be in you, as
was in Christ Jesus; he was according to all these several sorts of people,
and he gives them comfort, whom comfort belongs unto, and blessedness to
them that are pure, etc.

Is it so with you, do you do the like? then are you the Light of the world,
and the Salt of the earth. It is to be feared, that the worlds preachers are
not so to be found, but rather in stead of being poor in spirit, they are rich,
like the Laodiceans; Revel. 3.
in stead of mourning for the abominations that are in the land, as spiritual
whoredoms, they are blind to it, and think themselves to be the very Spouse of
Christ, and rejoice in the fleshly service of God, which is not accepted; in
stead of being meek, they are filled full of envy, breaking out into revilings
and persecutings; in stead of being hungry, they are full, they have need of
nothing, Luke 2^
when they are poor, blind and naked; in stead of being merciful, they are
cruel, Incendiaries to authority against the innocent; in stead of being pure
in heart, they are pure in tongue, they prophecy in the name of God, but God
may say unto them, I know you not, I have had no inward acquaintance with you;
in stead of being peacemakers, I would it could not be said, that they are the
greatest peace-breakers, dividing, rending, railing, fomenting and dissenting
with those, that they suppose are risen up, to justle them out of their livings.

Are the teachers of the world contrary to Christ? Surely then they are not to
be heard: Take heed how you hear, says our Savior: Come learn of me, says he
also. Those that have the holy Spirit of God in them, have the gift of
discerning, 1 John 3.
and they are guided to hear nothing, but what the Spirit speaks, he that has
ears to hear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: They were all faulty,
and would our Churches now were not so. It is the scattered people in Babylon,
the despised remnant that deserteth the worlds fashions, that are persecuted by
the Churches, that are now gathering together by the hands of the Almighty,
which will be the people, that will grow up to an invincible mountain, which
shall for ever stand.

Can the Teachers of the world say? that they are the light of the world, Job
18.6.21.17.
and live in blindness and darkness, and have not the true light shining in
them, can they give light to others that have no light? They may have a certain
kind of light in dark and obscure places, like that rotten wood that is called
Dadock, which shines until the true light comes; and when It comes, no light
at all appears in it. Can they say they are the salt of the earth? Salt is of
that quality, that it does as it were give life to that which is dead, it
preserves from putrefaction, it is medicinal, and of a healing quality, Sal
sapit omnia, It is an emblem of love: would this were so, that the teachers of
the world were as salt, that they could introduce into their dead hearers, the
living and eternal Gospel of God, that it might be to them as life, and that
their exhortations, instructions, rebukes, and comforts, were medicinal and
healing to the diseases and wounds of their peoples souls and spirits, as salt
is to the body, and that there were pure love and a godly jealousy in them, as
was in Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2.
that had prepared the Corinthians for one husband, to present them as pure
virgins to Christ, but feared they were beguiled, as Eve was by the Serpent,
and their minds might be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

None should be teachers of others, but those that are Believers; for the
simple and plain Believer is the best speaker: David said, I did believe,
therefore I spoke; Psalm. 116.10.
intimating, had he not truly believed, he had not been capable of speaking; a
true Believer may be a right Expositour, and a right Interpreter. But pity it
is, that where the Teacher is defective, there is joined the traditions of men
with the pure Word, and with Christ's commands; carnal paganish Philosophy,
with the anointing of the Spirit; the orders and degrees of Schools, rudiments
of the world with the ministry of Christ which is from Heaven. These things
cannot stand together, and therefore there is a great rent made, and will still
divide and rend, until all be made new; for new wine must be put into new
bottles; the old bottles of the flesh cannot hold the wine of the spirit of
God; the new Covenant requires another manner of obedience then the old did,
Prove. 4.18*
and the Gospel ministration is for the perfecting of the Saints; the way of
the righteous is light, that shines more and more to the perfect day, to build
them up into the unity of faith, and to lead them from faith to faith, into the
perfect knowledge of the Son of God, to be a perfect man, into the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ.

When will the time come, that there shall be no more complaint against
unsavory salt, blind guides, and divine Merchants? Surely the time is now
coming, it is begun, that the Lord will expel and drive out from his Church
all those that are pernicious, unnecessary and unprofitable teachers and
guides, who by the will of man are educated and brought to learning and humane
art, fitted, as to the eyes of men, for to teach, and instruct, and no way, as
by the election of God inwardly posited and habituated by the Lord, but rather
suffered and continued for the sins and transgressions of the people, who do
collect matter together out of Authors, keeping it in memory to deliver it,
not fixed by the Spirit in themselves, but are as a channel or pipe, that
conveyeth to the outward, certain positions framed and compiled out of the
letter, chosen by themselves to serve their own turns, for the advance of their
functions. Most certain it is, that there is a generation of teachers that are
not sent by the Lord, who are desperate enemies to the pure truth, Jer. 23.21.
Ezekiel. 13.2, 3, 4
and cannot endure those that do discover their weakness, defections, or
wickedness, and upon this ground will be raised a far greater contest than is
yet, not consonant to the mind of God; for disputing should be laid aside, and
be no longer among us, but advice given, to turn, amend, repent, or else for
ever perish.

Let not Teachers be slight in the examination of themselves in that large
charge which is laid against them, lest that come upon them which Saint Paul
endeavored to avoid, that after he had preached to others, himself might not be
a castaway; 1 Cor. 9.27.
therefore did he beat down his body, and kept it in subjection. But how far
are many from this duty? How do they feed and pamper their bodies in every
manner of way as much as any? It is a strange recoil for a diseased man to say,
Physician, heal thy self: or for an Auditour to say to the preacher, Pull the
beam out of thine own eye. That light which is sprung up and sent among us from
the Lord, let them obey it, though never so cross to their wills, lest that,
after all their learning, teaching, preaching, praying and exercising, Psalm.
2.1.
they be found among the raging Heathen; or, which is worse, to be their
Abettours and Ringleaders. Think upon the complaints that the Lord often has
made against the Prophets, who caused his people to err: Judge your selves,
that you be not judged and condemned of the Lord; Try and examine your selves,
ye that call your selves sons of Levi, for the Lord is coming to try and to
refine you.

Great is the goodness of God to his Church, that he has made such a
discovery, that they in whom we trusted, and have been our introduction, we
must forsake, being called to a better, and a more lively hope to the
indwellings of God, than to attend the ordinances of man; that speaks naught
but death: the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7.
but they have destroyed the true saving knowledge; they have known the will of
the Lord; but they have not done it; they have thrust themselves into Christ's
office, merely to get profit, favor, and honor. It is a great mischief, and a
deadly injury to be blinde-led; Christ says, If the blind lead the blind,
they both fall into the ditch, that is, they fall into that they cannot easily
get out, and when they are, through mercy, helped out, they must be cleansed
from the filth of the ditch which they have received, in the ditch. If by
leading men fall, where their desire is to avoid, what are they better by
leading? what a heavy account have these leaders to give above all others?

Are not the teachers moved, to hear of the fall of Babylon? Surely some are,
but those that are not, that endeavor to uphold Antichrist in the mystery,
shall suffer with the Whore, and be partaker of her plagues. Is there (...) in
Heaven, and cannot those hear of it that are still talking of Heaven? Is there
a new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, and shall our Supervisours
not see it? Has that City but one street in it, and no crosse-wayes at all,
tending to unity and concord, and shall our peaceful Preachers not know it?
Certainly God will dwell himself with his people, and they shall know all
things, 1 John 3.19.
through that light and love of his, wherewith many Nations shall be joined to
him, and whereby he will be all in all, that that which was above the reach of
the highest Apostle, will come down and appear to the lowest and meanest of his
people.

The great discoveries that Almighty God has made, concerning the fall and
overthrow of Antichrist, which fall is beginning; the wise and the learned of
the world are so far from waiting to see it, that they are blind, yea wilfully
blind, concerning it; being friends to that worship of God, which is according
to the oldnesse of the Letter, Romans 7.6.
and great enemies to that of the newness of the Spirit, holding forth for
good the outward Circumcision, the outward Baptism, the outward lip-labor, and
auricular attendance in divine Ordinances, that now is wounded; and condemns
the Circumcision and the Baptism of the heart, the invisible and spiritual
Communion in the Spirit with the Father, and the Son, which is the marrow of
all religion, Romans 2.27, 28, 29.
not holden by men worthy of praise, or commendation, and therefore maligned
and envied, as Stephen was, Acts 7.54. etc. being stoned for speaking the truth
which the people could not apprehend. All the Apostles spoke somewhat of the
great change that would be in the world, Romans 8.23. 1 John 3.2. 2 Pet. 3 13.
and do declare evidently, that there is a third dispensation, which is of the
Spirit; that of the Law had its period; that of the Gospel, as the Gospel had
its limit bound up to the outward administrations of men gifted, has had its
Apostate-being, digressing from Gospel graces and faith, being as the night of
the world, to the revelation of the great light that God would after shine into
the spirits and hearts of men, spoken of by Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11.
Now the night of Apostacy is beginning to pass away, and the day
approaches, wherein the Almighty will manifest himself to be the God and
Father of his people, by his dwelling in them, foretold by the Prophets, seen a
far off by the Apostles, and witnessed by some now, the which has a very great
opposition, not by scandalous and profane persons only, but by great
Professors, acute and learned Teachers, which will not yield to any reproof,
nor subscribe to any other man's revelation, and therefore do charge the
unchangeable God, that he changes not, nor disturbeth not, neither does he
rent and divide the visible Church, but that some do, they do conclude, they
are suborned of the evil one, and endeavor to stop their mouths, and punish
those persons that say as Malachi did, Mal. 2.17.
Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, Why use you so many words, so much
pharisaicall prayers, and such counterfeit and heedlesse singing and praising?
Why such variety of humane learning, philosophy, and pleasing the fleshly
minds of men? And, wherein have we wearied the Lord, are we not his people,
and are not our exercises the exercises of Faith and Love, derived from the
primitive time? we know nothing of it, but what is agreeable to the Word, and
if we should desist, what will become of religion? Mark the Text when ye say,
Every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in
them, or where is the God of judgment? Look to this, O ye Teachers of men,
your case is so, that God has found you great enemies to the most pure light
and truth that flows from himself; Mal. 3.
and as in the third chapter of the same Prophet, being the next words, hear
there your doom, God will try you.

Judgment begins at the house of God, among the righteous, among them that
are full, that are rich, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.
that are wise: Oh that this sort of people could see but their
unrighteousness, their emptiness, their poverty, and their folly; until men
come to see that they are so, Joh. 3.39. Isa. 29.18, 19.
they are not happy; the blind only shall see, and the deaf only shall hear;
and he that is hungry shall be satisfied, for the Lord has sealed the book,
that he that can read cannot open it, and he that can read will not meddle with
it, Isa. 29.11, 12.
but persecute it; witness the late times since that the hidden mysteries that
John saw has been opened, which the Teachers of our times yielded themselves
willingly to be blind unto, 2 Pet. 3.5.
how is it like to be persecuted further? Is the rise of their persecution,
because that some illiterate men speak, accounted not worthy in their esteem to
meddle with such things? Rev. 18.7, 16.
Or, is it because that Babel, the seat of the Whore, with all her ornaments,
shall be destroyed? Or, is it because divine merchandising shall have an utter
end? Saint Paul did intimate in his Epistle to the Corinthians, that there were
some, 2 Cor. 2.17.
but he and the rest of the Apostles were no such, that did make merchandise of
the Word.

Tremble then all you that are Teachers, that say you are Apostles and are not,
Rev. 2.2.
that would be canonized for Saints here, and have not yet bowed to the Scepter
of the Lord Christ, that have only tasted of the little book which is sweet in
the mouth, Emanuel, God with us, but have not eaten it up, Rev. 10.9. etc. Rev.
21.8.
because of its bitterness in the belly, that are fearful of losing the
glorious things of the world, if they should embrace Christ really, loving such
a religion and profession that agrees with the conditions of the great men,
driving still at those that would separate worldly same, pomp, ease and wealth,
from the inward, 1 John 2.15.
invisible, and spiritual worship of God, which cannot stand together, joining
the humane and corrupt ordinances and will worship, with the inward worship of
God in spirit, limiting the holy One to their traditionall service.

Learn to know that the Almighty has power to change all things at his own
will and pleasure, yea, the very Heavens, which is the Church, and the religion
we live and converse with God in; and that there shall not such adulteries and
fornications be committed among his people, and in his house there shall be no
more inticers to love the strange woman, Prove. 7.
who has all comeliness and excellent entertainment to the satisfaction of
the desires of the flesh. There is other discoveries made, and they who are the
sons of Levi, that wait at the Altar must be changed, and not cry, Templum
Domini, not the temple of the Lord, because once it was so, and now it has not
the Spirits presence to say all one words, but they must cry, Dominus in
templo, Rev. 21.3. Rev. 3.20.
The Lord in his temple; the Lord is now coming to dwell, he stands at the
door and knocks.

Observe with a discerning eye, whether it be not in vain for the Teachers of
the world to go about to uphold that which God has designed down; if
Antichrist shall fall, it will not be in part, but in the whole, the stars
shall fall; therefore envy not, and despise not the small beginnings, neither
trample on any springing up, that is of the Lords planting, for it may prosper
the better. Contend not, neither fight against them unto whom the Lord has
made great discoveries of Christ his coming forth in the glory of God,
censuring, reproaching, and persecuting those doctrines that you are not able
to comprehend, as the devout women did, and the chief men did against Paul and
Barnabas; Acts 13.5^.
such are the great opposers of pure truth, that live in the profession of
truth and teach others, carried out with a zeal kindled from the outward
letter, endeavoring to open the mysteries, by and with their outward gifts,
which cannot be. But in stead of opening Heaven, they open Hell, having the key
of the bottomless pit, stirring up contentions and strifes, rather manifesting
themselves to be the apostles of Gods anger and infliction, then the
peace-exercising and teaching Apostles of Christ were. Show forth your
Evangelicall fruits, you that style your selves so; let your love, your
patience, meekness, righteousness, and long-suffering appear in your
behavior toward all men, and your rendering good for evil, blessing for
cursing, praying for persecuting.

Behold, and see ye Teachers of the world, whether there has not been and now
is amongst you, such which have been as you say, called to the function and
place of the Ministry, vile and vicious persons. A great grief it has been to
many souls who have received somewhat from God, Mills Flavell Wells.
by the conscientious and right dividers, to see such covetous, proud,
oppressing, drunken, idle, lying, vain and incontinent persons to stand up, to
speak, as if sent from God, striking terror and amazement to the poor tender
hearted hearer, being ignorant of God, that such as are reprovers of evil,
should be examples of committing evil: This, blessed be the Lord is taken
notice of by our Governors, and there is a beginning in some places of the
Nation, to call such to the bar, and to try them for those gross evils; and
there is hope that they being taken in hand for their open wickedness, others
that live in the secret, shall also be detected; it is manifest that God is
coming forth to refine and purify all.

Thirdly, to the men of Traffic, Merchants and others, that by their
commerce, are as the earth, to support and bear up, and yield sufficiency to
others, through the exercise of their worldly imploiments, Let them learn here
to know God as he is, and to know themselves what they are, for God is the
chiefest good, and there is no happiness in the enjoyment of any thing without
God, al things created by him, having not their use for, and to his glory, are
abused, and become as so many hindrances, and letts unto us in the way to
life, Ester. 1.5.
They are all vanity, there is no worth in them; all the world, and the things
therein are not worth one soul; Luke. 16.1.
and as for themselves, let them know that they are but as stewards, which must
give an account, 1 Timothy 6.17.
of their stewardship, and they are not to put their trust, in uncertain
riches, nor to be high minded, but to do good and to distribute, laying up in
store a good foundation, against the time to come, etc.

The men of the world sets their minds on the world wholly, Pro. 1.19.
all their study and care, all their diligence, and watchfulness is to get
gain, to add to what they have, to make themselves great, to be in esteem in
the world, to have an abundance, contriving to get large possessions, great
inheritances, fair buildings store of moneys, potent friends, all which is
nothing; this procures no inward peace, no forgiveness, no spiritual
satisfaction to the soul, no communion with God; but does corrupt infect and
mis-lead the soul, into the snares of death, for by loving, affecting, and
delighting in the things of the world, the poor soul is everlastingly
captivated, and hardened in the worldly walkings, that they come to plead for
their sins of covetousness, calling it good husbandry, and exercising of their
talents, Psalm. 73.
and so the Lord God their Maker comes to be forgotten of them, all things
going well with them, that they break out into pride, ambition, cruelty, and
oppression, all under the color of living according to their degree and their
calling. Thus do men of the world, that are without God in the world, Ephesians.
5.17.
demean themselves toward God; ut Papa, sic populus.

They still entertain the religion of the word, that that is most in use, and
best agrees with their palate, although there is inwardly in them, nothing but
plotting, contriving, devising, studying, and indeavoring after the world, the
pleasures and profits thereof; Yet they would be known to be of some religion,
as well as others: and, these times do afford them a receptacle, they are
welcome to the teachers of the world, in all their exercises, praying,
preaching, singing, and conference, and have the chiefest room, and the best
applause, for constant hearers, and very good encouragement, to rejoice, and
boast of their religious carriage, especially because they pay their dues, keep
their church, being quiet, and not meddling with the differences, that now are,
but takes all for good that the ministers says or does.

Be not deceived, O worldling, God knows the secrets of thine heart, and
sees the bent thereof, Thou can not serve God, and Mammon; Luke 16.13.
Although thou love thy minister plyest the Church, and payest thy dues, and
all seems to be at peace, with thee: Thou art nothing but as earth, thou may
make a show of some religion to men, Jams. 2.18.
but the Lord sees, that thou have no religion at all, let it appear by thy
works, what thou art: the Lord cannot endure, a half Christian, an outside one,
he requires the inside, the heart, the Spirit of the mind; there is nothing
can make thee happy, but the enjoyment of the Lord Christ, Ephesians. 4.
and his benefits; Silver and Gold cannot deliver thee, in the day of the Lords
wrath, neither will God be served, but with the male of thy flock, thou must
sacrifice the best for an offering to the Lord, and think nothing too dear to
part withal, Luke. 16.9.
in comparison of gaining Christ. Make you friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitation: make you friends, Abraham believed God, and was called his friend?
what great happiness it is for a man to have God for his friend, nothing can
go ill with him, if God be on our side, who can be against us: Make Christ thy
friend, Romans 8.31. John 15.14.
O worldly man; the benefit of His friendship, will be great, he is thy
Savior, Mediator, and Intercessour. What privilege like to this, to be the
friend of Christ? we cannot, but must participate of all, he has obtained for
us, and has in store also. Make the poor your friends, give them of your
substance, and of your store, spare something of your abundance, visit the
prisoner, feed the hungry, cloathe the naked, take pity on the sick, and
entertain the stranger; that their prayers to God, and praises of God, for such
reaching of outward comforts to them, by their frequency, and fervency, may
cause the dew of heaven, to distill down upon you.

Do not forget thy Maker? O worldling, but remember him, and do works of pity,
and mercy, of love, and charity, and as thou have received freely, from the
Lord; so for the Lords sake give freely, that thou may not be liable, to the
sentence, that God does pronounce against the covetous, not to enter into life;
nor to have the curses, and the execrations of the poor, to ly at thy door.

1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Make the people of God thy friends, love them, acquaint thy self with them: Do
not revile, mock, scoff, scorn, and despise them, either because of their
plainnes, Matthew. 19.29.
nor because thou art reproved by them, nor because they love that thou hate,
and hate that thou love; but go to the Sanctuary of God, and learn to love,
that that God loves, to forsake all, and follow the Lord Christ, not to go
from that thou do possess, but out of that covetous will, that is within
thee; that will must be destroyed, and brought to nothing, thou must account
thy Mastership, thy Wealth, thy Wisdom, thy great Place, thy Credit, thy great
Prosperity, thy Authority, and thy costly Garments, to be all one, as Service,
Poverty, Plainness, Disesteeme, Disgrace, Adversity, and Scarcity: such a
temper should men, that have the wealth of the world be of, that they should be
as willing to lose as win, to wear coorse garments, as fine garments, and
whatsoever is conferred upon them, either of honor, wealth or goods, to
return, and give it back again to God, and say unfainedly, Lord it is thine; I
am unworthy to have the command over it, but being thou have put it into my
hands, make me to do thy will with it, and that thou may have the glory of
it, and that all the exercises and undertakings, I am called unto, may produce
good to thy people.

How far otherwise, is the practice of worldly men, that live in the anxiety of
their Spirits, both in the getting, and keeping earthly treasure, and how do
they expatiate their desires: the earthly father, would have an earthly son,
nothing can bring an earthly, worldly minded man's will, to a limit, but only
the love, and power of God; Man is apt to run all his stock, out upon the
world, his confidence, trust, joy, comfort, his love, and fear, and all, and
wholly to forget God, as if they were made for nothing else, but to get the
things of the world, and joy in them, which many through much care, travel and
watchings, do not possess, but sees them a far off, and cannot attain to
that joy: miserable is the condition of earthly minded men; some wants, that
they have, and some are at an eternal loss, by joying in them.

Let the advice of our Savior Christ be followed, by the men of the world. Ye
men of traffic, take heed to your selves, Luke 21.34.
that ye be not ovrcome with the cares of the world, for worldly things, cannot
produce any comfort, it is one of the greatest baits, the evil one has to
catch men by: what profit is there in winning the world, and losing the soul by
it, How hardly can a rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? Strive
therefore, in the exercise of piety, and God-like life, and not by grovelling
in the earth, as an earth-worm, but cast off the evil desire of gayning, which
causes oppression, cruelty, and exaction, and much detaining of the laborers
hire: be ye renewed, from the condition of old man, which is from the
earthearthy.

1 Cor. 15.47.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that that endures, vex not
your selves, in the anxiety of your minds, that you are not so rich, and have
such large possessions, as others, neither strive, in the attaining of riches,
as the manner of the world is, and that among professors, having dark, and
deceiveable lights, false weights, and measures, fraud cousenage, and lying,
with swearing; Take heed of these things, you that say you are Christians,
these things ought not to be among them, the Lord sees all your actions, and
will punish the evil doers, yea even him that is as the Wolf, that devoureth
his neighbor, by subtilty to increase unto himself unlawful gain; and also
the usurer, that commonly drinks the blood of the poor: these, like to a Wolf
that has blind whelps, go down into the pit, with their children, the one
for gathering, and the other for scattering.

Fourthly and lastly, the poor of the world, are here to learn, whether
impotent poor, or aged poor, to be rich, in God. Ask of God in faith and he
will give freely; he gives to all that asks, and upbraideth none, you that
are still ready to open your lips to the men of the world, your brethren for
relief; call and cry, mightily to God, for his mercy, learn to be of a poor
and a low spirit, what will you do, if poor, and not poor in spirit, you shall
not see God. You poor that are hungry, learn to hunger, and thirst after
righteousness, Mat. 5.
and you shall be satisfied, a strange saying that the hungry shall be
satisfied, and the full sent empty away, so it is that the fulness that is in
men, cording to the wisdom of their flesh, agreeable to the lusts thereof,
speaks satisfaction to the carnal mind, 1 King. 8.38.
but it is the plague of the heart. Better it is for a vessel to be empty then
to be filled, with filthy corruptible and evil matter.

Let no outward engagement make you that are poor to offend, and sin against
God: or to forsake him, for the Lord is with you while you be with him, 2 Chro.
15.^
in what state or condition soever, but if you forsake him, he will forsake
you: Hazard all, endure all, that you may enjoy your God, your Savior, and the
gifts, and graces of his Holy Spirit, subject your selves, to none, whereby you
might break your peace, with God; do nothing for any man's sake, friendship or
money, but what may stand with a good conscience, spend what time you may, in
the service of God, and in accompanying his people: and if the necessary
endeavors for bread, takes away preparation, know thus much, that God does
accept of all those that cleave to him with all their hearts, 2 Chr. 30.19.
though they may not be outwardly cleansed: the poor Publicane, was commended
and justified, through the fervency of his short prayer, being not with with
ostentation, but in humble confession, contrition, and animadversion.

The poor may take comfort in this, that they are not in the way of sinners,
the great enormities, and impieties, Psalm. 3.
that are committed by the wanton ones of the world; they are bard from them,
through their poverty, as not fit companions, being not fitted in outward
deportment, for such company, neither can they so walk, in the counsel of the
ungodly, for ungodly counsels, are most among the wealthy of the world: happy
are they, that are expeld from such ungodly counsels, that do conspire against
God and Christ, and that are not exercised, Psalm. 2.2.1, 2, etc.
in the seat of the scorners: usually the proud, and the rich of the world are
sornefull, it is a heinous sin, to be a scorner, Prove. 1.
the Lord will laugh at their destruction, many plagues are denounced against
them: if men are blessed, that are none of these, then happy are the poor that
are not so.

Take heed thou that art poor, and be low in thine own estimation, walk humbly
with God, because thou art constrained, to walk humbly to man, let God be in
all thy thoughts, he it is that will bless thee; and give thee thy hearts
desire, Psalm. 37.
if thou delight in him, he will feed thee: Commit thy way to him, and he will
bring it pass; that for thy povery here he has eternal riches for thee
hereafter.

Now seeing that all sorts of person, signified by these metals, have had
advice from the Lord, in particular, let them here take warning in this their
day, and repent, for the day of the Lord is drawing near: if we be washed,
cleansed, purified, and purged, then are we fit vessels for him, if not then
know, that notwithstanding all, that we boast of, as concerning Oidinances,
Ministers, Churches, Professions, and Services, we are no way fit, but without
God, in the world, in carnal sacrifices.

O that England did know the day of its visitation, and could but see how
gracious and merciful the Lord bath bin, and still is, in forbearing, and
forgiving, and standing at the door there knocking, waiting, when we will open
unto him, that he may come in, and sup with us, his kindness is so great, that
he would have us eat of the same that He does, that there may be both union and
communion, He would not have us lay out our money, and not for bread, that, that
does not profit: but would have us to come, and buy milk, and wine, without
money, yea, to buy Gold, of him, and eye salve, to anoint our eyes, that we may
see; But foolish people as we are, we think our selves happy, in our old
customary services, and do not consider from whence they were derived, and had
their rise. And that the night of Apostasy, has been over the face of the
whole world, this many hundred years; It appears plain, that England, as well
as Israel, is dross; and who is there, that has the spirit of discerning, but
does perceive the very fiery beginnings, that God has made among us, as to
destroy, and consume, all will of man, fleshly wisdom, and Antichristian
church policy, which has kept us, from the sincere, and the most pure, and
unblameale service of God in the spirit.

Know thy self O England, to be not that, what thou boastest thou art. Thou art
ready to say, thou art a reformed Church; See where thy reformation lies, if
it lie in words, in show, in form, in letter, this is not that, that God
requires, he will have it in actions, in substance, Pro. 1.7, 26, 12. Jer.
4.22. Esa. 1.
in the inner man, in the spirit. See how the Lord of old, did reprove his
people, for their being well conceited of themselves, having nothing, but the
external sacrifices, the husk and shell of purity, the internal, and
spiritual life being departed. Sooth not thy self up, see thy poverty, thy
need, and luke-warmenesse. It is in vain to bring a dead sacrifice, to the
living God, It is to very great loss, so to do, Witness the sacrifices of
Cain, and others, who found no acceptance, but were cast off.

It is a hard thing for men to be convinced of their impurity, and drossines,
that do love live in a strict profession godliness and have not the life, Pro.
28.13.
and the power of it within them. Solomon says, he that hides his sins shall
not prosper, hence men infer, that such as hide the sins of murder, adultery,
deceit, lying, stealing, and the like, they shall not prosper: and very well
may it be, but yet that speech of Solomon, is more nicely, and closely spoken
to, and directed to professing people, being in other languages rendered
Defection: as thus, Mat. 19.22. Luke 18.22.
if so be a man were even a perfect, spotless, and an unblameable man,
observing all things, from his youth up, as the Ruler did, yet being defective
in one particular, endeavoring to cover it, and hide it from the Lord, he
shall not prosper: it is the covering, the hiding from the Lord, that makes the
Whore. The honest and chaste wife, she hides nothing from her husband; but it
is the whorish woman, she that loves another, and that does commit folly
privately, secretly, in dark places, and yet seems to be as honest, and chaste
as any; The varnish, and gilt of a profession, makes the base metal, to be of
great esteem, being it appears not, the corruption lies within, and cannot
be discerned, but by the fiery light and heat of God: Corruption cannot see
coruption, it is grace, that can see it, and discover it, no light in man,
Psalm. 36.9. 1 John 3.18. Exodus 27.20.
can make his defilements, visible to his inward, and internal mind, until
the perfect, and real light of God appears, that is a searching light, a
lasting light, a pure light, a powerful light, and a discerning light: where
this light is, there is God, and there is no darkness, for where God is, the
patient may see himself; and what he is, and that sight is the cure. When thou
wast in thy blood, then said I, Live, when we are as dead, and as dry bones,
Ezekiel. 16. and 37.12.
Then oh my people, says God, I will open your graves, I will do it by mine
own power, I will not let you lie in the fleshly outward forms, as great
professors, and small practizers, but you shall see your selves, as dead and
dry bones, then will I bring you to live, in the spirit, that you may see your
life in the Lord alone, not hid in Christ only, but Christ appearing to be
life, in you; your life may appear to be in God.

The great work that God is doing, is by melting of us, to make us see, that in
the flesh, we are the dead body of Christ, that is the end; why the Lord does
rend, divide, disquiet, and destroy all our comforts, for we would willingly,
Jer. 50, 34.
establish a righteousness, of our own, and it is a great mercy that God does
shake us, he will disquiet the inhabitants of Babell, they have no rest, until
they return to his land: happy are we, when we see our selves the dead body,
Esa. 26.19.
of the Lord Christ, then we shall arise: With my body says he, shall they
raise, the same spirit, that raised his body, raises ours, together with him;
we that truly see our selves, Ephe. 2.12. Ephe. 5.
to be darkness, are light in the living Lord, let us walk as children of the
light.

What great change will there be, when a believer sees, and does know, what he
is? before that time, his heart and his apprehensions, does deceive him: every
man naturally, desires good to his own sense, and apprehension but our
enemies, the Devil, the world, and the flesh, do so cunningly deceive us, that
we cannot come, to understand what Almighty God is, neither what good is, but
conceive amiss of both, taking good for evil, and evil for good, and are ready
to yield up, our engagements to God, upon the account of our base, fleshly
reasonings about Gods dealing with us: and unless we are become dead to all
things of our selves, and in our selves, we cannot have power from God to
vanquish. This mortal must put on immortality, this dross must be purged and
refined out, we must be as the gold, and as the silver that is Gods; for how
can two be together except they be agreed: when God has refined his people,
Amos 3.3.
they shall be like to himself, and they shall set forth his glory, and
witness the coming of Christ in them, having felt the power of his death, and
the virtue of his resurrection, being changed out of the worlds nature into the
perfect image of God, glorifying God, that they are past the condemnation, the
war, the refining furnace, the slaughter, the enmity, the undoing the strong
man, and the taking away of his goods: rejoicing, that they have been baptized
with the Baptism of fire, being assured of their union and communion with God,
the life of God dwelling and abiding with them; that there is begun in them an
eternal and everlasting peace, which shall have no end; here is comfort, that
they are past from death to life; death being overcome, shall have no more
dominion over them: Blessed and happy are they that have their part in the
first resurrection, Rev. 20.
for over them the second death has no power.

A sad thing it is, being well weighed, to see England in such a posture, a
great, goodly, gilded profession, but a miserable, a desperate, and wretched
practice, exercise, and execution in that profession: it is plain by the words
of Christ; If you are not in the Vine, you are not of him; except you be in
Christ, you are reprobates: John 15.
we love the form, the beauty, and goodlinesse of religion, but do hate the
power, the life, and the cross, that true religion does present. Salomons
advice is, Buy the truth, and sell it not; truth must be bought, it must be
purchased, it is not to be had by one days going in a week to hear, spending
that day chiefly in decking and adorning the body, in feasting or high feeding,
in idle and vain discoursings, and proud walkings, and think all is well, and
that we are good Christians, because we can talk of Christ having not found the
true doctrine, being hid from us in a mystery; so that our knowledge, without
the mystery, becomes a snare, a bar, to keep us from the life and light of God,
being proud, thinking thou art something, when thou art nothing. Gal. 6.
Get out of thy self into single-hearted humility, deny the glory and same of
thine own wit, wisdom and understanding, which is sprung up in thee from that
evil seed, and is become that dross in thee, that has defiled and corrupted
the good metal: so shall thou find the Lord, and he will teach thee, and
instruct thee, Psalm. 16.7. Psalm. 45.
he it is that will give thee counsel, without which thou art Antichrist, and
of the Whore, let thy profession be never so shining, for the Kings daughter is
all glorious within.

Try and examine thy self, O England, whether thou do obey the Lord thy God,
whether thou do love him with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy
soul, with all thy strength, thou have been catechized unto this, Psalm. 81.8.
but where is the exercise of it? Had not thou need to learn it again of the
Lord, hear what God says of Israel, If they would have hearkened unto him, and
not have any other gods, what blessings would he have brought upon them, etc?
The like might the Lord say of England, See and behold thy gods of silver, of
gold, of high places, lands, livings, friends, trade, and the like. Are not thy
teachers, thy gods whom thou servest and praisest? Do not thou idolize them
for their parts of wit, art, humane learning and invention, speaking things
agreeable to thy palate, and do despise, reject, and refuse the inward
teachings of God, being thereunto wilfully blinded: Why do thou take the
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50.20. Esa. 1.
1 Cor. 4.5. Mat. 10.26.
Or why should thou think, that God is as thou art? consider this ye that
forget God, he will reprove you by his creatures, the Ox, and the Ass, and
other creatures, by his judgments, and by thine own conscience: Forsake
therefore thine hypocrisy, and leave off thy lip-labor, go from the falsehood,
dwell no longer in Babylon, neither delight thy self in the abominations of the
Whore; for her flesh shall be burnt, and happy are they that have attained to
this in particular, and who are by the teachings of God made like to himself;
he that is built on the Rock need not fear undermining.

Tremble all you that live in blindness and ignorance, that see not the
mystery of God manifested among men, God in union with man being new created,
cleansed, purged, purified, and refined. Will you still continue as young
children, to be bound up, and swadled in swaddling clouts: Time was when the
Church was in its infancy, that it was needful, that it should be bound and
limited with ordinances, and fed with a little at a time being chewed by the
Pastor, which used Catechisticall forms, having then no other seize:
which salting, kept the Church from a farther declension or putrefaction, being
introducible to a further and more clear demonstration, which now is lifted up
and held forth, namely, the accomplishment of the promises, whereby we do not
only enjoy by faith the benefit of Gods goodness, mercy and love, as
dis-joyned, but his presence and abiding with us. Are you not glad to hear of
the beginnings, of that which your forefathers did long to see? are you content
with the rudiments and traditions of men, and forsake the inward teachings of
God? Take heed you do not turn the grace of God into wantonness, and consult
with the arm of flesh, and be found fighters against God and his pure truth,
accounting the times of darkness to be better then the taking up the Cross,
by embracing and obeying the pure light, without which you shall never see
light, nor enjoy the Crown.

Much might be said concerning the times, and of the people that are in
controversy in these our days, the one would have this way, the other that
way, every one seeking to be master over others their words and actions, yea of
their spirits too, contemning one another, and contending one with another,
insomuch that England is become (as it were) a Chaos of confusion, and a
nursery of Sects and Orders, some binding up the spirit of Christ to the forms
and orders of disputation, setting foolish reason to be the Master, or Judge,
in things concerning the kingdom of Christ, giving out the meaning of the
spirit of God without inward testimony, perverting the holy Scriptures to their
own destruction; and others, in several various ways, broaching new
doctrines, not consistent with the mind of God, insomuch, that brotherly love
has been much impaired, divisions increased, and many revolted, and rebel in
their minds, against the Law and love of God: Some stand much upon the
ordinances and divine orders in stone-houses called Churches, that their devout
duties of lip-labor and preaching, wherein is counterfeited somewhat of
Christ, is the only way to life, calling themselves the true Church; and their
Teachers true Apostles. Others spend rheir time in disputing, contending, and
brawling about sects, idolatries, opinions, and judgments, so that one party
does condemn and sentence another, so that the ears and hearts of the Auditors
are much infected with gall and bitterness, wilfully opposing one another,
crying down that for diabolical, that is not their own judgment; whence
proceeds very dangerous effects of daily and most deadly provocations,
through a secret inward pride of mind, working by envy and malice, generated
and bred in that gall, exercising and urging one another by evil entreating, by
which it does appear, 1 John 2.18.
that there are many Antichrists in the world, one persecuting and speaking
evil of another, Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and
both against Judah.

These contentions among us do perfectly declare, that the war spoken of is
begun, Rev. 12.7.
betwixt Michael and the Dragon: they that have received the unction, 1 John
2.20.
Saint John speaks of, they know all things, they need not be taught of men,
but they speak of it, and that great tribulation shall be, such as was not from
the beginning, all to bring to pass the promised thing. It is much that the
Devil, the great red Dragon, should make Heaven his place to war in; so it is,
he is now warring against Michael in Heaven, that is, in religion, in and among
the Professors thereof; but the comfort is, he shall not prevail, although his
angels make sport and recreation to fulfill the anger of God, being the very
fire of God, and his bellows also to blow up the fire; they do only his will,
in purging away the dross of his people, by their most fiery contentions,
brawlings, revilings, Zach. 8.10. Isa. 66.5.
and persecutions, as if it were the very zeal of the Lords glory. The people
of God knowing that the Lord will purge and refine them, do willingly yield
themselves thereunto to be tried and purified, so that the cruel and wicked
practices of the one, is the means of purging out the defilements of the other,
being set in opposition, through the wisdom of our most holy God.

Comfort thy self, O Christian, thy God will purge thee through the fiery
contentions that is among true Believers and hypocrites; the fire is kindled,
Jer. 6.28.
and the bellows do blow, thy dross shall be clean purged out, and thou shall
be as the silver and gold, for the Lord has enough, and he will fill thee out
of his own fullness: Read the thirteenth of Zachariah and the three last
verses, God says there of the small number of his people, Zach. 13.7, 8. 9
that after he has refined them, then he will be their God, and they shall say,
The Lord is my God: where no dross is to purge out, there God will not cast
into the fire, but he will there dwell, and abide for ever; thou shall never
need to mourn for the want of a Minister, for God will be thy Minister, and he
will minister light and peace unto thee; the Sun shall shine seven times
brighter than at noon, for the Lord himself will be thy light.

When Almighty God has melted his people, and burnt up their dross, and
utterly consumed it, then shall they come to be in union with him, living and
abiding with him for ever. This is that new Jerusalem that John saw, that came
down from God out of Heaven, wherein there is no temple nor ordinance, being
there is no need. In the time of the Apostacy, after the Apostles days, which
yet remains (although wounded) then there was a need of Pastors and Teachers,
as the only means of distributing light to the world, like unto the light of
the Moon, always changing, sometimes Popery, sometimes Episcopacie, sometimes
Presbytery, Independent, and Baptized. So that God was always well pleased, to
make some cloudy discoveries of himself, by the ministry of men. But the day
of the Lord being now dawned, Christ who is our light shall appear again, and
the power of Antichrist, which waxed so great, shall be clean taken away, and
the rent that was made, shall be made whole: God will cement his people to
himself, and he will be their light and defense. Psalm. 83. ult.
And this is Babylons plague, yea, the vexation of the grand Professors that
are now full, and will not obey the true light, but do persecute it, calling it
the new light, or new lights, being blind to the discoveries that God has
made to his people of the Whore, and of her destruction, and of the purest
flesh, and the glory thereof, which must be burnt, that God may be all in all
in his people, and never be any more forms.

Rest not then, oh thou doubting soul, until thou have found the Lord, Cant. 3.
as the Church in the Canticles, he it is that gives light and life, he is our
peace, he shall be thy Minister, and thy Church, and the house thou live in,
for the Temple of Christ is within you, and thou shall hear Christ teach within
thee, incline therefore thine heart to the temple within, cast away all thine
abominations, and bring thy will to the Father, regard not the glory and vanity
of the world, but humble thy self under his mighty hand, and know that there is
no time to be when the holy Spirit of God, will force it self into the will of
the hardened. But thou must bring thy will into the holy Spirit, and then shall
thou hear it, teaching thee by another way and means than formerly thou have
waited in; for most certain it is, that the change is now begun, and God will
finish that long expected and waited for, Psalm. 45.6, 7.
even his own presence and fellowship with the Saints; prize thy dignity, and
give praises, yea, eternal praises to the Lord of glory, that shows himself
unto thee, in the fellowship of sufferings. Oh the height, the depth, the
breadth, and length of the love of God, that does invest poor worms into such
glory, that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither can enter into
the heart of man, to conceive the riches of that glory!

Now seeing that there must be such a fiery change, as is spoken of, which
through the great mercy of God does free us from wrath to come; What manner of
persons ought we to be, now in the body of flesh? We ought to attend and wait
on the inward calling of God, and to obey the light that shines into our
minds, living according to our measure, exercising our selves in all godlike
conversation, redeeming the time, because the days are evil, shaking off the
things that cleave so close to us, even our lusts, crush the Serpent in the
head, kill the Cockatrice in the shell, wait upon God with weeping, fasting,
and mourning, praying, and ever praying, that the Kingdom of Christ may be
enlarged that the wickedness of the world may be abated, and the dross among
his people utterly consumed and that the Nations that yet know not the Lord,
may be insightened and instructed to know him, glorifying God the Father, that
he has been so gracious, so long suffering, so merciful, and so patient, in
bearing with such a wicked and hypocritical a generation as we are.

You that are enemies to the pure truth now declared, and despisers of the
light of Jesus made manifest, and do live in contention for the upholding of
the outward profession, being blind to the inward and invisible power that
should rule within: Learn to know that there are but two ways, the broad way,
and the narrow way; the one a way of death, the other of life, the one without
God in the world, the other God with us, living and abiding with us; the one
way directs and leads to God, as a merciful Father and all-sufficient
Redeemer; the other way directs and leads to God, as a terrible Judge, and
Avenger, knowing this: Be you led by the light that shines in you, the light
of Christ, to the narrow way, to the strait gate, through which you cannot
enter, until you are new born, new creatures, new molded, new melted, which
cannot be with the taking of the ease, pleasure, and profits of the world,
living in an external, professed, and visible way of outward observances, but
it must be by the inward breaking, bruizing, and killing of that serpentine
life, will, and wisdom of the carnal man; Either you must fall on the stone
and be broken, Luke 10.18.
or else it will fall upon you, and it will grind you to powder; there is no
middle way to life, salvation and happiness: Either you must yield, bow,
submit, and embrace Christ upon terms of loss, and death to the carnal; or
else you cannot have Christ at all, keeping the carnal mind, although never
so much covered and gilded.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near, get oil
into your lamps, now there is an opportunity of having of it; come to the
wedding now the dinner is ready, make no worldly, or flesh-pleasurable excuses;
get among the people of God into his Sanctuary, stand not gazing about,
expecting happiness without you, by other ways and means, than by the death of
sin within you, and a resurrection from that death of sin, to a life of God
within you, for there are none saved by the report of Christ's dying at
Jerusalem, and of his resurrection and ascension into Heaven, but by the virtue
and efficacy of it within them, finding the powers of sin and darkness, by
his death, to be utterly vanquished within, and a new creation, a new life
within.

Examine your selves, and see whether you are yet still as you were born, and
brought forth into the world, whether there be the same terrene thoughts, and
affections, 2 Cor. 13.5.
and actions, the same will, and wisdom, whether the old man be dead or no,
Thou may by the light of Christ, keep court within thine own self, thou
may Apprehend, Arraign, Try, Judge, and Condemn thy self, that thou may
be freed from the judgments of the Lord: what is done by the light within thee,
is of and from the Lord, and the judgment is his which passes, 1 Cor. 11, ^1.
and delivers thee from wrath: Will thou then be tried in this court, what
thou art, and what thou do deserve, thou shall cry out, what have I done,
what am I become, and what shall I do? Thou shall see thou have offended, a most
gracious, a most merciful, and a long suffering God, That thou art a filthy, a
polluted, defiled, and a disobedient wretch, and know not what to do,
running up and down, in disquietnesse of mind, not finding any comfort at all,
in any creature: but wait in patience, the Lord is nigh, when thou think, he
is farthest off, in thine own apprehension, then is he nearest, Psa. 34.18. and
145.18. Luke 21.18.
yea, to them that are afflicted in spirit he will come in and be thy peace,
after thou have had a conflict in thy self, and have made war aginast thy self.

If thou do examine thy self, thou shall find what thou art, better then an
another can tell thee, whether thou have observed the checks of thy conscience,
wherefore thou did restrain from committing sin, at any time, whether for the
love of God, or for fear of outward disgrace, discredit, or repute among men,
what thy end is, in all thy actions, whether thou art offended with thy self,
after sin committed, whether thou do cover or hide any sin, or defection in
thy self, or whether thou do let loose the rains of thy affections to all
impiety, not caring to be changed, but in the outward Garb; only Civilized
without, the powers of darkness reigning and ruling within, thy desires after
carnal treasures, thy confidence on that, that fades, thy felicity and joy in
the prosperity of the world. When thou have found what thou art, and that thou
art not willing to unvail, strip, and lay thy self open, before thy maker, hear
then thy doom, thou shall be cast into utter darkness, for thou have not
obeyed the light of Jesus within thee and darkness will for ever overshadow
thee, that thou shall not see thy self, but in a condition of peace, gotten by
outward observances of reading, hearing, praying discoursing, disputing, and
talking of Heaven, not knowing, what it is, so that notwithstanding, all things
that seems to be of God, and in power is not, thou art in death, and art a
stranger to the life of Jesus. Consider this, ye that smother, dim, and put
out the light in you, and will not be guided by it, to walk up, to the
everlasting light; for the time will come, that there will be no remedy, the
gates will be shut and cannot be opened.

Awake therefore thou that sleep, stand up, and Christ shall give thee light,
Jer. 50.5.
defer no time, make no delay, but ask the way to Sion, with thy face
thitherwards, get out of Babel, the place of confusion, wait only on the
teachings of God, be renewed in the spirit of thy mind, exercise thy self, in
all low and humble matters, lean not to thine own understanding, be meek to all
men, render good for evil, despise not prophesying, quench not the spirit,
pray continually, that the Lord would give thee an understanding heart and
enlightened mind, to abhor the Whore, with all her gay glitterings, and
smiling inticements to alienate from the true enjoyments.

Now to conclude, let England in general, and every man in particular, learn,
what to do, Remember thy Creator, in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
before the evil days comes, while liberty, strength, peace, and
opportunity is: embrace that, that customary, and stiff old age cannot
embrace, let no man marvel when he hears, that the church is impure, or that
being a member of the church, he is in controversy with other members, for so
it is, we are under the changing and overturning arm of God, and we must dash
one against the other, Rev. 12.1.
until the time come that we shall know the Lord, and shall be clothed with the
Sun, having the Moon under our feet, all these sublunary metalls, and things
before mentioned, shall ly beneath our affections, being not worthy of them,
although much of Gods glory is seen in them, there lies in them the tempter,
and subtle enemy; that it is a hard matter to escape, by the use of them or
any terrene things, from the defilement and corruption.

Be therefore lifted up, oh thou dejected soul, that waitest on the Lord, Thy
God O Israel reigns in Sion. Psa. 39.1.
Do waters, and the overflowing floods trouble thee? God will come with his
fire, and dry up all those waters and floods: thou thoughtest that thou did
well, to be washed and cleared by water, being an element of refreshing; But
thou shall now understand from the Lord, Mat. 23.25, 26.
that the element of fire, is the most excellent to purg and refine thee; the
element of water has had its use, and its time, which did very well clean the
outside of the vessel, but it is the fire, that purifies the inward body of
the metal whereof the vessel is made, wherein corruption lies, and water
cannot wash, scour, rinse or purge it out; It is fire that will consume all thy
tin, and base metal within thee, or amongst thy Silver; the seeing of thy God,
to be such a consuming fire within thee, is the greatest matter that can be for
thee to lift the head, and rejoice: When the brook in the way, is drunk up, it
will be otherwise with thee, Psalm. 110.7.
then when thou wast in the watery element, for then thy Christianity was in
show, and Christlesse in power within, in profession: then the believing, the
report of a Savior dying for thee, was faith; but now the entertaining, the
receiving in, and possession of Christ within, has made thee faithful, and
faithfulness to appear within thee.

O ye despisers, tremble before the Lord, and quake, O ye mockers, for the day
of the Lord is come, in which he will not only search Jerusalem with candles
but he will change Jerusalem by fire: what can you expect, that when the great
and dreadful God who is holy and cannot endure uncleanesse, and dross to be
among his people, but will consume it, by the fire of his anger, but to be
utterly consumed, as these sublunary metalls: you can have no other end, for
the Silver and the Gold, the pure metals, you ever hated, and made no reckoning
of, but rested, and trusted, in the shinings of your own base metals, not
regarding to know God, and therefore, God will give you up to a reprobate
mind, Romans 1.28.
let seasonable advice take hold on you: What ever you do, or suffer, get Gold;
buy Truth, dig deep for Silver; and let not all the metalls beneath these
metalls, gain thy heart, let them have what luster, gilding, or shining soever,
they will deceive thee. Jona. 3.8.
They that trust, in lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.

What will become of our Nation, if it should neglect so great salvation; is
there not a deluge of pride, hypocrisy, idolatry, covetousness, and
murmuring, now? God would be merciful to us, if we would but resign our
selves up to him, but we are proud and exalted in the fleshly wisdom, being
blind, thinking our selves in an excellent good condition, giving our selves
up to the lusts of our own hearts, not caring to see the visions of God in the
inward and internal way; and so perish, through our own carnal
understandings, in an outward profession.

Let us be humbled, under the mighty hand of God, who will exalt us, the humble
he will teach, and those that dread and fear him, he will reveal his secrets
unto, what greater blessedness, can be to any of the sons of men, then this,
to be his scholars, Pro. 29.18.
and to know his will.

The teachers of the world are corrupted, Psalm. 25.9, 14.
and need to be taught themselves; for it appears, they are not as the
Apostles were in the primitive time, but alienated from their practice, having
not the inlivening power within them, of the spirit: whence it comes to pass,
that living and speaking according to the letter, they are by an Artifice of
Satan, strengthened by the outward profession to oppose strongly, from their
form, the inward and true spiritual worshiper; and so Antichrist comes, to be
taken for Christ, and Christ for Antichrist. As the Scriptures are, such are
the Ministers of it: the letter serves as a shelter or an hiding place for
Antichrist, to lurk and save himself in, where now he is striving for
superiority, as the Pharisees did in the time of Christ, against whom he did
chiefly speak, but the Spirit is of that pure, simple, individual, and virgin
like, holy quality, proceeding from the Father of light, that it needs not to
be urged, either by letter or word, being given up wholly to the invisible and
internal enjoyment of the life of God, which by his inspiration, the letter
was first monumented: to enjoy the letter, without the spirit, is to enjoy the
picture, and not the person. Christ says, you think to have eternal life, in
the Scriptures: No, you cannot, they testify of me, John. 5.39.
that gives life to all, that do believe: His ministration, is a ministration
of reconciliation, to salvation, and we are to look after no other, although
there may be excellent pretenses.

Should the men of the world study but half so much, for their eternal
welfare, as they do for their temporal, they could not but give strong
reasons, and gain strong resolutions, against their own practices: to be in
Israel, and not an Israelite; to be of the visible Church, and to have no
invisible light and truth; this is worth nothing: to talk of grace with the
mouth, and have none in the heart, to say they know, and do not, there sin
remains: Stir up thy self, Joh. 9.14.
O worldling, ly not still, consider what thou art, and wherefore thou wast
created: 1 John 3.20.
let not the natural light that is within, condemn thee to perdition, and make
no further use of any thing wherein others meet with the Lord their God, then
that thou might so really and truly meet him also: Let not the outward
performances of duties, Eccles. 5.7. Job 34.19. Psalm. 113.7.
serve thine own will, to the increase of worldly gain, or preferment, but
serve God with a pure mind, and heart-performance, which he only accepts of.

Let the poor, and mean, Yea the servants of men, endeavor chiefly that the
Lord may be their portion: the sin of murmuring is, as among all people, so
especially among people of low degree; they murmr because God has not given
them, such a portion of the world, as oothers, because they are impotent, or
that they are under the command of others: many ways is there a murmuring
against God; learn patience, and know that the very worst estate, that can be,
is beyond thy desert, and that thy Maker will do with his own, as He pleases.
Happy art thou if thou find within thy self the God of love and infinite
mercy, anyway to appear: if in that thou have received thou have seen a hand
directing it to thee, though it be bitter, take it from the Lord, as a token of
his infinite love; rejoice in thy low condition, the Lords eye is over thee,
and will nevertheless judge thine oppressor, he has a regard to the poor, he
will defend them, he will bring them them out of the dust, and set them among
Princes: all that wait upon the Lord, shall see his goodness, in the Land of
the Living. Let all therefore say, that have not to their desire in outward
appearance of Gods favor, Verily thou O God hidest thy self, O God thou
Savior of Israel.

Lastly, whatever thou art, that do draw near to God in any outward
performance, meditate with thy self to what end thou do it, and be more near
to hear than to offer the sacrifice of fools; Eccles. 4.17, ^, 1.
neither be rash with thy mouth to utter a thing before God, for he is in
Heaven, and thou art on earth; therefore let thy words be few. Eccles. 4.17.5.1.
Lamentable it is to see, how sinfully men present themselves before the Lord
in Congregations, petitioning for that their hearts are not affected with, and
promising that they have no intent to perform. Consider in your minds: would a
mortal man be so served, that is in some regal authority, and do you think
the great God can bear it? No, if this be your resolved practice, he will cast
you into utter darkness, that does thus counterfeit and dissemble with him,
who sees the heart; you shall never have the light of his countenance here,
nor that Heaven which you care little for, hereafter. Behold, the day of the
Lord is very near at hand, and he comes as a thief in the night: Revel. 3.2.
Who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall endure when he appears?
Mal. 3.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
for he is like a purging fire, and like Fullers soap. Watch therefore, Luke
12.33. to the 41. (read it in the Spirit, that being forewarned, you may be
fore-armed.) Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if there be
any praise, think on these things, which you have both learned, and received,
and heard, and seen in Paul, or in any of the Saints of God; those things do,
and the God of peace shall be with you.

FINIS.

