Die Veneris, 1 Martii, 1649.
ORdered by the PARLIAMENT, That the Thanks of this House be given to Mr OWEN,
for his great pains taken in his SERMON Preached yesterday before the
PARLIAMENT at Margarets Westminster (being a day set apart for Public
Humiliation) And that he be desired to Print his SERMON; And that he have the
like Privilege in Printing, as others in like Cases have usually had.

Ordered, That Sr William-Masham do give the Thanks of this House to Mr OWEN
accordingly.

Hen. Scobel, Cler' Parliament.

I appoint PETER COLE to Print my Sermon.

JOHN OWEN.

The Ranters Ranting: WITH The apprehending, examinations, and confession of
John Collins, I. Shakespeare, Tho. Wiberton, and five more which are to answer
the next Sessions. And several songs or catches, which were sung at their
meetings. Also their several kinds of mirth and dancing. Their blasphemous
opinions. Their belief concerning heaven and hell. And the reason why one of
the same opinion cut off the heads of his own mother and brother. Set forth for
the further discovery of this ungodly crew.

Behold our lov^ to our Fellow Creature.

Welcome Fellow Creature.

Let us eat while they dance.



LONDON Printed by B. Alsop, 165^

COurteous Reader, having perused a printed sheet entitled The Routing of the
Ranters, and finding that many things are totally omitted, and other things
minced and come short of the truth, which might have been said. And having
taken the advice of some friends (well wishers to the present Government)
concerning some passages which I have gleaned, either from such as have
accidentally happened in the society of that kind of people, or else were at
the apprehending of some of them and heard their examinations before the
Magistrate, it is thought fit and necessary that there should be a more perfect
discovery of them, to the end that when they appear more in their proper
colors (according to their deserts) they will be rendered a hissing and by word
to the nation; and that if any of them pertein to the election of grace, they
may return from their wickedness and live; for that which I shall relate
proceeds not from rancor and bitterness of spirit, but merely for the love
of the truth, that they may be distinguished and known, and that which the
Apostle calls pure Religion and undefiled may shine with the more splendour, for
if these notorious Atheists (who if it were possible to excel the Devil in
wickedness) are not nipt in the bud, it is feared that it presageth some sad
Omen to this Nation, which that the Almighty will divert is the constant prayer
of him,

That is thine in any offfice of Christian love. I. R.

Behold, ye Despisers VVonder and Perish.
UPon the first day of November 1650. (toward evening) came one Shakespeare
(that called himself a Warrenner) one John Collins a Glover, one Wyberton, and
four others to the house of one Middleton, at the David and Harp in Moor lane,
in the parrish of Giles Creplegate, London, where some of them being known,
they were soon admitted into the best room in the house, and entertained by the
woman of the house, who long before was suspected to be one of the Ranting
crew. When they had continued many hours in the house, and it grew something
late in the evening, when the street was void of noises, and sober men prepared
to go to bed, these people were heard to sing blasphemous songs in the tune of
David's Psalms, and many uncivil words and actions were perceived and heard to
pass amongst them; which put it into the hearts of some of the neighbors to
acquaint the Constable therewith; who being as desirous to suppress disorders,
as willing to bring such wicked persons to condign punishment, he took some
others with him to apprehend them; but to make the fuller discovery of this
wicked pack, one that had some acquaintance with an active Ranter, went alone
to the door where this wicked company were, and enquired of John Collins that
opened it, whether such a one were not amongst them? who replied, he was not
there yet, but was expected; asking him if he was of his acquaintance? to which
the party answered, that he was: then Collins took him about the neck, and
kissed him, saying, Welcome fellow creature. With this the party came into the
room, where the like ceremony was offered by the rest (some Women being (...)
amongst them:) presently after, one of the men let his breeches slip down in
the middle of the room, and another ran and kissed his buttock, and called to the
rest to come and kiss their God. And after the passing away of a little more
time in blasphemous words and uncivil behavior, a joint of meat, and some
other things were brought and set upon the table, about which they flackt like
bruit beasts, without any order, or sign of reverence; but on the contrary; one
of them laid hold on the meat, and tearing it to pieces like a dog, both for
himself and the rest of his fellow creatures, in a beastly manner he let a
great Fart, and as it gave report he (...) these words, Let every thing thing
that has breath praise the Lord.

In the midst of which profane and wicked words and behavior, came in the
Constable and apprehended them, who thinking them to be given over to commit
all manner of wickedness, thought good to search their pockets, for fear they
might have some dangerous weapons about them to do mischief, and in searching
them, he found two written papers stuffed with very blasphemous matter, which
are not fit to be made public, especially until such time as they have
received their trial, when this was done the Constable brought them down
stairs into another room, and himself and others reproved them for their
wickedness, in the midst of which reproof, one of them, that were taken took a
candle and made as though he did seek for something that he had lost, and being
asked what he sought for, in a jeering and disdainful manner he answered, That
he sought for his sins but there were none, and that which they thought so
great unto him, was so small, that he could not see it, by which it appears
that they hold forth an opinion, that Sin is no sin, for which opinion an
Officer of the Army was lately cashiered, and his sword broken over his head,
at the head of the Regiment. But to return to that which I was relating before,
the Constable finding them desperately incorragible and hardened in their
iniquity, carried the said Collins, Shake spear, and five others to the
Compter, (who had been accompanied with Mrs. Middleton her self, had she not
privately ^ade an escape.

The next morning they were brought before Sir John Wolaston, and charged with
the matters before recited; as also that they had sung vile and filthy songs to
the tune of Psalms, and uttered many oaths (or asseverations of oaths) and
execrations: some of which were, Ram me, Dam me, etc. and it being demanded of
one of them what they meant by these words, he said by the word Ram, they meant
God: and many other things of this nature were confessed by them: whereupon Sir
John sent them to Bridewell, where for a time they beat Hemp; and are bound
over to answer for their offenses, according to Law the next Sessions.

Having given you the true relation of this meeting, with the manner of their
discovery, and some passages concerning their examinations, I shall proceed to
some other instances to show the vanity of this mad crew (of which there be too
many) for all pleasures which are not reduced to honesty and necessity, are
reproachful and evil and especially those two of touching and tasting, do
draw men most to offend in vice and unclearnesse; and forasmuch as all
occasions and opportunities, whereby the people are trained and drawn away to
live dishonestly, shamelessely, wickedly, and intemperately are to be shunned
and avoided, take in the next place some perticulers of another meeting which
they had near Thames Street (not long before the Act was made against
blasphemy, and another act for whoredom, etc.) as soon as they came together
they coupled men and women) choosing their mates, and when they had fitted
themselves in that kind, there comes into the room a man with a pottle of sack,
and a glass in his hand uttering these words, viz. Where does God want any
wine, to which presently answered one that had his minion on his knee, here,
here, at which words the glass of sack was given him, and he drank to his
fellow creature (as he called her) and so it went round, after this they fell
to singing filthy songs and catches which are not fit to be published, yet, for
satisfaction sake, I shall give one of their songs to the first Scene, when they
began to act upon the Devils Stage, what every one pleased, according to the
fullness of wickedness in his own heart, which was taken at the window, and in
truth, is the leastoffensive of any I have heard, otherwise I should have had
more modesty, than to have made it public.

The song that was sung at the first meeting together of a company of Ranters.
THis is the merry meeting of
The Creatures set a part
To exercise their liberty,
And teach the Mothers Art.
If Adam were deceived by Eve,
It was because he knew
Not how to exercise the gifts
Which nature did indue.
The Slavish terror that men have,
And thoughts of hell to fear
Is unto us a laughing stock,
We give to it no ear.
Some men another world do prize
Of which they have no measure,
Let us make merry, sing, and dance,
There is no heaven to pleasure.
Which we enjoy with sweet content
A short life, and a merry,
Is all the heaven that we expect,
Let Us drink off our Canary.
The fellow Creature which sits next
is more delight to me
Then any that I else can find;
For that she is always free.
Yet whilst I speak of loving one,
Let no mistaking come:
For we that know our liberty,
In loving all love none.
But for to satisfy our lust
And beastly appetite,
Not caring what we do or say,
So we may take delight.
Then let us rant it to the fill
And let our love too range
For it has wings, and they are freest
That in their loves do change.
This Song being ended, they went to revelling till ten of the clock the next
day, by which time, they having satisfied themselves with chamber exercise,
they fetched a walk toward Smithfield, and went into Charter House lane, where
they had a lesson played on the Organs, danced mixed dances, and had an Antic
Mask; and during the time of the masking, the Music that played, was, the
Treble-Viol, the Hand-Symbal and Tongs: After this the Organs went anew, to the
tune of a Psalm. After this, some of the creatures went into rooms apart to
milk and fodder; and others (whose chiefest pleasure was in drinking) sung this
catch following.

A drinking Song.
DRrink to day and drown all sorrow,
You shall perhaps not do it to morrow;
Best while you have it use your breath,
There is no drinking after Death.
Wine works the Heart up, wakes the wit,
There is no cure'gainst Age, but it;
It helps the Headache, Cough, and Tissick,
And is for all diseases Physic.
Then let us swill* boys, for our health;
Who drinks well, loves the Commonwealth:
And he that will to bed go sober,
Falls with the leaf still in October.
Unto this I shall add another, somewhat pertinent to the business, viz. A
Gent. of quality (as I am credidibly informed) meeting with a Gentlewoman of
his acquaintance, after a salutation how do you, and a little familiar
discourse, he told her he was indifferent well in health, but wanted a stomach,
whereupon she replied that if he pleased to come to her lodging the next day,
she doubted not but she should find something to which he had an appetite, for
which courteous invitation, in a civil manner he returned thanks, and promised
a visit the next day about 11 of the clock: at which time according to
appointment he made good his promise; and being invited up unto her chamber, he
found her in her night array; and after the first greeting was over, she asked
him how he found his stomach? he replied, that it was as when he left her the
day before; she then said, that she hoped it would soon be regained: and on the
sudden, instead of putting on her day apparel, disrobed her self of what she
had on, and appearing in nothing but her smock, asked him how he liked her, and
whether his stomach would not come to him? to which he replied, that he
understood not her meaning; but he hoped to have a stomach to his victuals when
it was before him: then she said, I will try that presently; and immediately
presented her self to him naked, saying, Fellow Creature, what say thou to a
plump leg of mutton (striking her hand upon her thigh) with the cates that are
now in thy view? which strange carriage of hers, did so appal this virtuous
Gentleman, that he (in blushing wise) departed, wondering at the shameless
uncivil carriage of her, of whom he had better confidence; which may be read
and commended for a badge of his Virtue and Chastity, and characterize the
deserved infamy of the lascivious behavior of her that was empty of all
goodness, and discover her to be a true Prosolite of Cop and Claxton and the
rest of that infernal gang which have been the dispercers of a Diabolical
opinion that there is neither heaven nor hell, for otherwise she could not be
so audacious.

Having named Cop, I cannot let it pass without a word or two of what he is;
he is one that not long, since assumed the Pulpit in a noted Church in London,
and in a most wicked manner blasphemed and cursed, for an hour together saying,
a pox of God take al your prayers hearing, reading, fasting, etc. And being
charged before he came down with uttering blasphemy, he said that he would
answer what he had done, and for this and other things of like nature laid to
his charge, he is now in Newgate, and to discover what might be said of him
alone, would fill many sheets of paper, at this time I have promised brevity;
therefore I shall only ad to that in the pulpit. a passage of his on an
alehouse bench, which is this, when he had drunk very hard and the woman of
the house, to avoid disorder, desired him and his company to depart the house,
he said God Dam me, thou needst not fear, The Devil confound me, thou art in
heaven, By Gods Blood and Wounds, thou art saved, etc. which put the woman into
such a fright, to hear his curses and blasphemies, that she trembled and quaked
some hours after.

I thought to have given you many other particulers, but I hope these are
sufficient to satisfy all good people concerning the wicked practices and
blasphemous opinions of this generation which have too long increased, and from
what has been said by way of discovery, take warning and avoid their company
which may prove dangerous to the body as well as to the soul: for I am able to
justify that one Evan ap Bevan born of good Parentage near Bishops-Castle in
the County of Salop, was for many years a constant hearer of the word, yet
afterward fell into strange opinions and would admit of no Scrament, no
Baptism, no Duty, no Obedience, no Devil, no Hell, etc. in a short time after
his fall into these grand errors (the Devil growing strong with him) that for
no other cause but that they were conscientious and finding an opportunity, he
cut off the heads of his own mother and brother, for which he was hanged in
chains near Shrews-bury.

FINIS.

