PROVERBS English, French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish.
All Englished and Alphabetically Digested.

By N. R. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Mi^dar at the Star in Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE Judicious READER.
HAving long since, upon the Advice of my Friends, begun a Collection of
Proverbs, which I had finished, had I not fell unto that misfortune that does
commonly attend upon the greatest Resolutions; I mean, I could not perfect what
I begun, by reason of some occasions that did interpose: Wherefore I was
constrained to lay it aside till a more favorable aspect would countenance my
endeavors. Now having an opportunity, I have Published that which the greatest
Students of our time did never set upon.

I need not tell you how useful those Sentences are for your Knowledge, that
there is nothing more Elegant or Eloquent, then to intermix in your serious
Discourse, these Proverbs, to illustrate your style in writing; and this is the
greatest use. There happens many times, that a man cannot find Expressions
readily for a Noble Intention, but in a way that is either too common for the
manner, or too mean for the matter; now in such a pinch, to clap in an honest
Proverb, the aptness of the phrase, and festivity of the Joke, contributes
satisfaction to the Writer, and pleasure to the Reader. Now here you have, with
much labor, Collected almost all the Proverbs spoken, whether in English,
French, Dutch, Italian, or Spanish; and all suitable to the capacity of the
Reader, and so methodically in Alphabet disposed, that at the first sight
almost, a man may furnish himself according to his Occasion. Thus wishing you
the same content in the Reading that I had in the writing, I remain

Your Friend N. R.

REader, be pleased to take notice, that there is now in the Press, and will
be Extent about Michalmas Term, in folio, Eighteen Books of rare Secrets,
Collected out of the choicest Authors, both Ancient and Modern; first designed
by John VVecker Dr of Physic, augmented and much enlarged by Dr R. Read. The
like never before in the English Tongue.

PROVERBS English, French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, etc.
A Fools bolt is soon shot. -- As good lost as found. A Candle lights others,
and consumes it self. An ill wound may be cured, not an ill Name. A barren
Woman can never be satisfied. A Poet in adversity can hardly make Verses. A
huge Building, a low Foundation. All who come into a Church, say not their
Prayers. A Fool and wealth, cannot possess each other. A clear bargain, a dear
Friend. Affections are the wings of the soul. A good Winter brings a good
Summer. A Cat may look on a King. A fool may sometimes give a wise man
counsel. An unhappy Boy makes a good man. A carrion Kite will never be a good
Hauk. A bow long bent, at last waxes weak. A close mouth catches no flies. A
good beginning, a good ending. A hungery belly has no ears. At length the Fox
turns Monk. A Cur will bite, before he bark. As lecherous as a cock-sparrow. A
dog has a day. Agree, for the Law is costly. A Friend will help at a dead
lift. A Place, or Office discovers a man, what he is. As tender as a Priests
Lemmon. A broken sleeve, holds the arm back. A full Purse, and a fat Bribe,
command contention. An old Drunkard is hardly reclaimed. A fool and his money
is soon parted. After meat mustard. At Court every one for himself. A Friend is
not so soon gotten, as lost. An idle man seldom virtuous. After black clouds,
clear weather. A House and a Woman suit excellently. A cool mouth and warm
feet livelong. A fool may throw a stone in a Well, which a hundred wise men
cannot get out. A Friend in Court is worth a penny in Purse. After a storm
comes a calm. A heart content has the world at command. A Physician has three
faces. A Friend is never known, till a man has need. All covet, all loose. A
diligent Scholar, and the Masters paid. A good man can no more harm, then a
Sheep. A Ship and a Woman are ever repairing. As fit as a Pudding for a Friars
mouth. A calm pretends a storm. A living Dog is better then a dead Lion. A good
tale ill told, in the telling is marred. A vapourer in words, but not in deeds.
A low hedge is easily leapt over. A short Grace, and a long Thanksgiving. A
good Jack makes a good Gill. A gentle heart is tied with an easy thread.
After Dinner sit a while, after Supper walk a mile. A scold, a whore, and a
slut, makes a man's life uncomfortable. A good Neighbor, a good morrow. An ill
Bird lays a naughty Egg. An idle head is a box for the wind. A grunting
Horse, and a groaning Wife, never fail their Masters. A Friend in a corner, is
better then money in a man's Purse. A wonder lasts but nine days. A man is
praised by his Land. Alms never makes poor. Age and Wedlock, tames man and
Beast. A good Name is sufficient Wealth. A swine over-fat is cause of his own
bane. As good sleep together, as do nothing. All is well, that ends well. A
ragged Colt may make a good Horse. All the proof a Pudding is in the eating. As
good sit still, as rise up and fall. A man knows not the worth of a thing,
till he wants it. As good sit still, as be idle. An ill weed grows apace. A bad
man has ever bad conditions. A sleeping man is no better then a dead man. A
good Poet, an evil Person. As soon goes the young Lambs skin to the Market, as
the old one. An Ox is bound by his horns, a man by his word. A Rat may very
ill plead Law. A sweet tree yields savoury fruit. An old Cat laps as much, as
a young Kitlin. A Guest and a fish at three days end, grow musty. A bad Judge
has bad conditions. A white wall, is a fools paper. An old man, unfit for a
young woman. A dull Servant was never good for his Master, nor himself. A
Mouse, in time, may bite in two a Cable. As I brew, so must I needs drink. An
interprizing fool, needs little wit. A piece of a Kid is worth two of a Cat. At
a round Table there is no dispute of place. A learned Wife seldom proves good.
Ask my companion, whether I am a Thief. A man may bring a Horse to the water,
but he cannot make him drink without he will. A hard beginning has a good
ending. A young Saint, an old Devil. As good to play for naught, as work for
naught. A gadding Hen, and a Housewife, are soon lost. All that the Clerk gets,
his punck devoures. A pennyworth of ease is worth two in a man's Purse. A man
of straw, is worth a woman of gold. A son of a whore never did well. A hard
fought Field, where no man scapeth unkil'd. A desperate debt takes any
satisfaction. A words enough to the wise. As deep drinks the Goosse, as the
Gander. A poor dog, that is not worth the whistling. A hasty man never wants
woe. A honey tongue, a heart of gall. A man far from his good is nigh his harm.
All is not gold, that glisters. As proud comes behind, as before. A little pot
is soon hot. A pound of care will not pay an ounce of debt. A proud horse, that
will not bear his own provinder. A scald head is soon broken. A leg of a Lark,
is worth the body of a Kite. As long lives a merry man, as a sad. A long
Harvest, of a little Corn. A shrew profitable may serve a man reasonable. All
is well with him, that is beloved of his neighbors. A full belly neither
fights nor flies well. A false knave needs no broker. An unhappy boy makes a
good man. A short Horse is soon curried. As the old Cock croweth so the young
follows. A scald horse is good enough for a scabd Squire. A man is not so
soon healed as hurt. A man may buy gold to dear. A cursed dog must be tied
short. A right fool forgets himself. All shall be well when Jack shall have a
Gill. An inch breaks no Squares. As the bell tinks, the fool thinks. As cold
as charity. An unbidden guest knows not where to sit. All is fish, that come to
net. All fools are sots, but all sots are not fools. A fool begins strife, a
wise man ends business. A bungler seldom fits himself with good tools. A good
play master starts not at assurances. An ill Cook, that cannot lick his own
finger. A fool often finds himself short of his reckoning. An inch in a miss, is
as good as an ell. As a man is friended, so the Law is ended. An old Dog biteth
sore. A heavy Purse makes a light heart. A man may hold his peace in an ill
time. A babbler wearieth all the company. An idle Husband, and empty walls,
makes a light Housewife. A maid that gives, yields. A hook well lost to get
a Salmon. A hot Winter makes a full Churchyard. A Bird in hand is worth two in
the bush. An honest woman is much worth. A fool brooks any disgrace. A false
tongue can hardly speak truth. An evening red, and a morning gray, are hopeful
signs of a fair day. A word hurts more then a wound. A fly has a spleen. A
woman that has lost her shame, has lost her respect, and her good Name. A
handful of good life, is better then a bushel of learning. All came from, and
will go to others. A Lions skin is never cheap. A crooked lie, makes a straight
fie. A Merchant that gains not, loses. A bad Dog never sees the Wolf. An old
sack asks much patching. A woman and a glass are ever in danger. A woman
conceales what she knows not. As good be merry as sad. A long tongue is a sign
of a short hand. All truths are not to be told. A pure beauty finds more Lovers
then Husbands. A house pulled down is half built up. An after wit is every
bodies wit. A virtuous Wife is worth a Diadem. As blind as a mole. An ill Wife
that grows not worse, is not of the Wives the worst. Anger and hearts ease are
utter enemies. A man must fish with a silver hook. A good stomach is the best
sauce. A secret is too little for one, enough for two, too much for three. A
gentle housewife marres the Household. A broken sack will hold no corn. A
faithful friend what good may he do us? A traveller may lie by authority. A
man will not loose a Hog for a half penny worth of a tar. A man must creep
before he go. All Joy has sad effects in a troubled heart. A musled Cat was
never good mouser. A man will be a man though he have but a hose on his head. A
good Winter brings a good Summer. A bribe enters every where without
knocking. A dwarf on a Giants shoulders sees further of the two. An Ass,
though slow, if provoked, will kick. A Wolf casts his hair, but not his malice.
A frog cannot out of her bog. A tongue has no bone in it, yet it breaks ones
back. As welcome as water into a Ship. A fair Wife, and a fronteir Castle,
breed quarrels. All Carriers are not Knaves, some have souls to be saved. A
fair death honors the life. A knife that cuts not, and a friend that is worth
naught, value not. A light burden carried far, proves heavy. As fit as a saddle
for a Sow. A thing done by force is not worth a rush. A good bargain is a
pick-purse. Autumnall agues are long or mortal. A wicked man's gift has a
touch of his Master. Ambition loses many a man. An honest heart cannot
dissemble. A cheerful look makes a dish a Feast. All manner of vices are in a
Gamester. A good meal, a bad meal, and a midling meal, preserves a man in
health. A proud mind, and a beggars purse, goes together. A body is esteemed,
according as he values himself. A chip of the old block. A rouling stone
gathers no Moss. An empty bag cannot stand upright. A virtuous mind, and an
honest hand, carries a man all over the world. All that is given to a fool, is
cast away. A small rain allayes a great wind. A cask, and an ill custom, must
be broken. At length the Fox is brought to the Furrier. A guilty conscience is
evermore suspicious, and full of fear. A man had better have a Knave, then a
fool, to his Servant. A young Serving-man, and old beggar. A fat Housekeeper
makes a lean Executor. A silent tongue, and a true heart, did never any hurt to
a Servant. A man is known by his Wine, by his anger, and by his money. A young
man idle, and old man needy. A gazing and gadding maid, seldom proves good
House-wife. A Gentleman's Grayhound, and a Saltbox, seek them at the fire. A
disarmed Peace, is weak. Astrology is true, but the Astrologers cannot find it.
At the Gmes end we shall see who wins. A holy habit clears not a foul soul. A
little labor, much health. A seasonable gathering, and a reasonable spending,
makes a good Housekeeping. A flatterers throat, is an open Sepulcher. A good
renoun is better then a golden girdle. A maid often seen is a garment often
worn. An old wise man's shadow, is better then a young buzzards sword. A man's
House is his Castle. A hat is not made for one shower. A covetous man is never
rich. Assail who will the valiant attends. An idle youth makes a needy old age.
A sad house where the hen crows louder then the cock. A poor man's life is
secure from harm. A man may be deceived when he thinks himself most sure. A
gift much expected, is paid not given. An old Physician and a young Lawyer. A
little wind kindles much, puts out a fire. A scepter is one thing and a ladle
another. A great dowry is a bed full of brambles. A sleepy Master makes his
Servant a lout. Afflictions are sent us by God for our good. Adversity makes
men wise. A man without money is a body without life. A snow year a rich year.
A penny spared is twice got. A small heart has small desires. A pleasure long
expected is deer enough sold. A tyrant is most tyrant to himself. A Trade is
better then Service. All beasts of prey are strong or treacherous. An ill
agreement is better then a good judgment. A piece of a Churchyard fits many a
man's body. A Jade eats as much as a good Horse. An ill deed cannot bring
honor. A little given seasonable excuses a great gift. An old man's staff is
the rapper at deaths door. An Ox is taken by the horns a man by his tongue.
All that shakes falls not. An old cat sports not with her prey. After death the
Doctor. All the arms in England will not arm fear. A fair day in Winter is
Mother of a Storm. A man is known to be mortal by sleep and lust. A man's
destiny is always dark. A great Ship asks deep waters. A wise man need not
blush for changing his purpose. An examined enterprise goes on boldly. A good
Sallet the beginning of a bad Supper. A drunkards purse is a bottle. A Garden
should be dressed and looked to as the body. A dog scalded with hot water is
afterward afraid of cold. A pitiful Mother makes a scab'd daughter. A
disorder begets another. An old sin a new penance. A wall without a cross, a
Knight without money, is abused by every one.
BEware the Geese when the Fox preaches. Before you make a friend, eat a
bushel of Salt with him. Blind men can judge no colors. Better fed then
taught. Between the hand and the lip the morsel is lost. Bastards by chance
are good, by nature bad. Birds of a feather will flock together. Bad words
finds bad acceptance. Better a snoty child then his nose wipt off. Black will
take no other hew. Brag's a good dog. Bate me an ace, quoth Bolton. Burnt child
dreads the fire. By Peace plenty. Batchelers Wives, and Maids Children are
well taught. By scratching and biting cats and dogs comes together. By shaving
a fool many learn to sheare. By wisdom Peace. Black Ox has not trod on his
foot. Be it better be it worse, be ruled by him that bears the purse. Beat the
dog before the Lion. Bare walls makes giddy housewifes. Believe well and have
well. Beggars should be no choosers. By Suppers more have been killed then Galen
ever cured. Build castles in the air. Better fill a gluttons belly then his
eye. Better a bare foot then none. Better be envyed then pitied. Better eye
out then half awake. Better children weep then old men. Building and marrying
of children are great wasters. Beauty draws more then Oxen. Be as it may is no
banning. Better spare to have of thine own then ask others. Better fed then
taught. Better late then never. Building is chargeable. Bread with holes,
cheese without holes, and wine that sparkles into the eyes, are the best.
Better speak truth rudely then lie covertly. Bells call others, but themselves
enter not into the Church. Better leave then lack. Better suffer ill then do
ill. Bear with evil and expect good. Building is a sweet impoverishing. Better
half a loaf then no bread. Beware of had-I-wist. Bad Husbands are as necessary
in a Commonwealth as good. Between two stools the tail comes to the ground.
Better be an old man's darling, then a young man's warling. Better a bad excuse
then none at all. Buy a horse ready manned but a Wife unmand. Brabling curs
never want soar ears. Better unborn then untaught. Better the feet slip then
the tongue. Benefits please like flowers when they are fresh. By doing nothing
we learn to do ill. Be what thou would seem to be. Better to rule then be
ruled by the rout. Better to bow then break. Better come to the latter end of a
Feast then the beginning of a fray. Better be half hanged then ill wed. Better
to be happy then wise. Better spare at brim then bottom. Bashfulnesse is a sign
of grace. Before thou marry have thy dwelling house. Beauty is no heritage.
Better is an egg in peace then an Ox in war. Better a louse in the Pot then no
flesh at all. Better sit still then rise and fall. Better one bird in the hand
then ten in the wood. By biting and scratching the Cat is with Kitlin. Better
good afar off then ill near at hand. Buy at a Fair but sell at home.
CHildren and fools tell the truth. Custom is a second nature. Can Jackanapes
be merry when his dog is at his heels? Children learn to creep before they go.
Critics are like brushers of noble men's clothes. Castles are Fortresses of
stone. Counsel without a cure, is a body without a soul. Courting and wooing
brings dallying and doing. Cursed cows have short horns. Cunning is no burden.
Covetousness breaks the bag. Cut your coat according to your cloth. Cat after
kind. Cities seldom change Religion only. Courtesy on one only side lasts not
long. Cloudy mornings turn to clear evenings. Civil Wars of France made a
million of Atheists and 30000 Witches. Cruelty is more cruel if we defer the
pain. Children when little, makes Parents fools, when great mad. Comparisons
are odious. Close sits my shirt but closer my skin. Christmas comes but once a
year. Clothes adorn Poules. Change of pasture makes fat calves. Children and
chickens are always a feeding. Care brings gray hairs. Change of Women make
bald knaves. Conscience is hanged up long ago. Claw a churl by the arse, and he
will shite in thy face. Cloth thee in War, arm thee in Peace. Counsel breaks
not the head. Craft against craft makes no living. Civility gains more then
strength of arms. Coin moves men to rage. Conversation makes one what he is.
Corn is cleaned with wind the soul with chastenings. Cover your self with your
Shield and care not for cries. Choose none for thy servant who has served thy
betters. Change of Country, change of Fortune. Conditions breaks Laws.
DO well and have well. Dally not with money nor women. Disgraces are like
cherries one draws another. Deadly heavy and full of sin. Dancing follows a
full belly. Desires torments us and hope comfor us. Dear bought and far fetched
is good for Ladies. Danger it self is the best remedy for danger. Dogs barking
a loof bite not at hand. Dinner cannot be long where dainties are wanting.
Divine ashes are better then earthly meat. Desires are nourisht by delay. Drink
after grief goes merrily down. Death and the Grave make no distinction of
persons. Dogs begin in jest and end in earnest. Deceive not thy Physician,
Confessor or Lawyer. Dry bread is better at home then roast-meat abroad. Divine
grace was never flow. Drought never brought a dearth. Do what thou ought and
come what can. Discreet Women have neither keys nor ears. Do well for others
yet look to your self. Debtors are liars. Diseases of the eyes are to be tured
with the elbow. Dearths foreseen come not. Days are fine in the field. Death
keeps no Callender. Deeds are* Males words are Females.
EVery one that is in black is not* not a Scholar. Evening words are not like
to mornning. Every house in Malagon has a thief of his own. Every mile is two
in Winter. Enough is as good as a Feast. Every one fastens where there is gain.
Every dog is a Lion at home. Even reckonings make long friends. Every Ape.
thinks his Puppy the fairest. Every man's conscience is first molded in his own
nature. Every one puts his fault on the times. Expectation torments. Ever since
we wear clothes, we know not one another. Every cock is proud on his own dung
hill. Either wealth is much increased, or moderation is much decayed. Every man
cannot hit the nail on the head. Ever spare and ever bare. Ever drunk ever dry.
Every fool will be meddling. Early-pricks that will be a thorn. Essex styles,
Kentish miles, Norfolk wiles, many men beguiles. Eaten bread is forgot. Every
one is not merry that dances. Every one is King in his own house. Every one
has a fool in his sleeve. Every thing is of use to a Housekeeper. Every thing
new is fine. Every man is bound to have a good conscience. Every one is witty
for his own purpose. Every Bees Honey is sweet. Every one as she likes, quoth
the good woman when she kissed her Cow. Every man basteth the fat hog. Every one
after his own fashion. Empty vessels sound most. Every man cannot be honest
that would. Every one can rule a shrew save he that has her. Evil gotten goods
never prove well. Every man for himself and God for us all. Eat a peck of salt
with a man before you trust him. Every thing helps, quoth the Wren when she
pist in the Sea. Every day brings its bread with it. Evil will never said well.
Empty Chambers makes foolish maids. Every man has his ill day. Every labor
will have its reward. Even some old Foxes are taken in the snare. Every Fox
loves a Hen-rust. Every meddall has its right side and its wrong.
FIne words dress ill deeds. For one pleasure a thousand sorrows. For washing
his hands none sells his Lands. Fair words makes me look to my Purse. From good
men comes goodness. Fear nothing but sin. Fools live poor to die rich. Fortune
to one is a mother, another a stepmother. Favor will as surely perish as
life. Few words and many deeds is best. Fools bite one another but wise men
agree together. Foolish tongues talk by the douzen. Fair is not fair but that
which pleases. Fair language grates not the tongue. Fair feathers makes fair
fowls. Far fetched and dear bought is good for Ladies. For a desperate debt
take any satisfaction. From a foolish Judge a quick sentence. Fish without wine
is poison. Far shooting never killed bird. Fools have Fortune. Fools are wise as
long as silent. For poor men to keep places for their pleasure is their ruin.
Few words to the wise suffice. Flies are busiest about lean Horses. First come
first served. Fair words and large promises pacify anger. From a choleric man
withdraw a little, from him that says nothing for ever. First diserve and then
desire. Foul in the Cradle proves fair in the saddle. Fools lade the water
and wise men catch the fish. Faint heart never won fair Lady. Fears are
divided in the midst. Fare and softly goes far. Fools set stools for wise
folks to stumble at. Few Lawyers die well. Fast bind fast find. Fair without
foul within. First creep then go. Frost and fraud have always foul ends. From
three things God keep us, from Powder'd-beef without mustard, from a servant
that vieweth himself, a wife that is painted. France is a meadow that cuts
thrice a year. Fools with fair words are pleased. Few Physicians live well.
Full of courtesy full of craft. Fair words hurts not the mouth. Foul water
will quench fire as well as fair. Fish must ever swim twice. Folly it is to
spurn against a prick. From women light and liquorish, good fortune still
deliver us. Forsake not the Market for the toll. Forbear not fowing because of
Birds. Folly grows without watering. Four good Mothers beget four bad
Daughters, Great familiarity contempt, Truth hatred, Virtue envy, Riches
ignorance. For the same man to be a heretic and a good Subject is impossible.
Fair dressing is a foul house swept before the door. Fools give to please all
but their own. Frenzy, heresy, and jealousy seldom cured. From my friends God
defend me, from my enemies I can keep my self. First come to the Mill first
grind.
GOod to be merry and wise. God sends meat the Devil sends cooks. Give a dog
roast and beat him with the spit. Good words are worth much and cost little.
Good words quench more then a bucket of water. Gaming Women and Wine, whilst
they laugh make men pine. Give a Woman what she should have, and what she would
have, and she will be quiet. Great rye and little wool. Give an inch and you
will take an ell. Good clothes put a man in heart. God sends cold after
clothes. Great strokes makes not sweet music. Good workmen are seldom rich.
Govern the mouth by the estate. Gifts enter every where without a Wimble. God
sends cool according to clothes. God sends fortune to fools. Great fortune
brings with it great misfortune. Good words cost naught. Great boast small
roast. God never sends mouths but he sends meat. Gamesters drink and
Fiddlers Wives are free for all comers. Good Wine needs no bush. Good cheap
commodities are notable pick-purses. God gives his wrath by weight and without
weight his mercy. God sends cursed Cows short horns. Good riding at two Anchors
if one fail the other will hold. God sends corn the Devil makes the sack. Great
is the Harvest the abundant gather. Gods secrets are concealed from men
Gamesters and Race-horses never last long. Great allowing lessens no man's
living. Good stomach needs no sauce. Good news may be told at any time, but ill
in the morning. Green wood makes a hot fire. Goods are theirs that enjoy them.
Gods Mill grindes slow but sure. Give a clown your finger and he will take your
hand. Good service is a great enchantment. Good is to be sought out and evil
attended. God is at the end when we think he is furthest of. Good and quickly
seldom meet. Good fortune still delivers any. Good restorers make good lenders.
God heals and the Physician has the thanks. God rewards the obedient. God,
our Parents, and our Masters can never be requited. God favors and defends
the wronged. Great pains quickly finds ease. God comes to see without a Bell.
God complains not but does what is fitting. Give loosers leave to talk. Great
deformers grow intolerable presumers. God often has a great share in a little
house. God keep me from four Houses, a Usurers, a Tavern, a Spittle, and a
Prison. God provides for him that trusts. Giving much to the poor, does
increase a man's store. God in the tongue, and the Devil in the heart. Gluttony
kills more then the Sword. Great trees are good for nothing but shade. Giving is
dead restoring very sick.
HOney is sweet but the Be stingeth. He that strikes with his tongue must ward
with his head. He that marries for wealth sells his Liberty. He that tells his
wife news is but newly married. He that has a Fox for his mate had need have a
net at his girdle. He that is not handsome at twenty, nor strong at thirty, nor
rich at forty, nor wise at fifty, will never be handsome, strong, rich or
wise. He sits not sure, that sits too high. He who will know what he is worth,
let him not be surety. He that marries late marries ill. Hearken to Reason or
she will be heard. He truly begins to dye that quits his chief desire. He has
great need of a fool that will play the fool himself. Half a loaf is better
then no bread. He that goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing. He that bewailes his
want has begged sufficiently. He that stumbles and falls not mends his pace. He
that will live in Peace and rest, must hear, and see, and say the best. He that
gainsayes not gives his full consent. He has enough that is pleased. He that
does fight with silver is sure to overcome. He that cannot pay let him pray.
He is least worthy of honor that seeks it. Hazard little to gain much. He that
corrects not small faults, cannot control great ones. He that has one eye is
a King among the blind. He will play at small game before he will stand out. He
that lies down with dogs must rise with fleas. He plays well that winnes. He
speaks me fair but wishes my throat cut. He dotes more then a fool on his
babble. He that is manned by Boys, and horst with Colts, shall have his meat
eaten, and his work undone. He that lives well is learned enough. He that has
not wherewithal to eat has store of sorrows. He that will take the Bird let
him not scare it. He is an Ass that hurts himself. He must needs swim that is
held up by the chin. He that will learn to pray let him go to Sea. Hold with
the Hare and run with the Hound. He that wants money wants all things. He is
doubly fond that satisfies his fondness. He that sees what is good, and takes
what is bad, is a wilful fool. He deserves not to give Laws, who cannot
endure to receive them. Hungry dogs will eat durty Puddings. He may weep till
his heart ache that has no body comfort him. He that sends a Sea, is sure to
loose his Venture. He hears with one ear that is deaf with the other. He that
eats Cherries with his Love picks not the best. He that contemplates has a day
without a night. He that dares not trust to his hand had best to trust to his
feet. He is a very Ass that thinks to live ever. He must needs go that the
Devil drives. He that is warm thinks all so. He who has but one days felicity
is unhappy all the year. He thinks not well that thinks not again. He barks at
the Moon that endeavors to disparage truth. Half warned half armed. He that
hopes for dead men's shoes may go long barefoot. He that studies his
contentment overmuch ever wants it. He casts a mist before a man's eyes that
puts money in his hand. Hunger will break through stone walls. He that has
spice may season as he list. He dances well to whom fortune pipes. He spent
Michaelmas Rent in Midsommer Quarter. He has an oar in every man's boat. He
has many Irons in the fire. He shall be called a Fool to his face, That doing
well will quit his place. He is an Ass that cannot make use of his own. He
that will have a Hare to breakfast must hunt over night. He that is at ease
seeks vanities. He knows on which side his bread is buttered on. He is a good
marksman that aims at the heel and hits the head. He that mounteth higher then
he ought shall descend lower then he would. He that mischief hatcheth mischief
catches. He loses nothing that loses not God. He that gives a Capon give him
him the leg and the wing. He that does that he ought not, that happens to him
that he thinks not. How can the Fool amble when the Horse and Mare trot? Honor
is troublesome. He that plays his money ought to value it. He begins to
build to soon that has not money to finish it. He that is angry at a Feast is
rude. He shall never have a thing good cheap that is afraid to ask the price.
He that is angry is not at ease. Have makes waste. He mends as four Ale mends
in Summer. He that has times and looks for time loses time. He that has
horns in his bosom let him not put them on his head. He is an ill Husband
that is not mist. He can ill pipe that lacks his upperlip. He that is afraid of
every grass, must not piss in a Meadow. He thoroughly punishes that loves
thoroughly. He never loved well that hated for a trifle. He that loves another
better then himself starves in a Cooks Shop. He is a fool that throws at his
heel what he has in his hand. Half a word is enough to an understanding
Reader. He that has a fame of rising early may sleep till dinner. He that will
eat the kernel let him crack the nur. He loses the Market for the toll. He
goes far that never returns. He that lives ill fear follows him. Hunger and
shame are mortal enemies. He that sends a fool means to follow him. He is as
blind as a beetle. He has a leaden head and a wooden wit. He that winketh with
one eye, and sees with the other, I will not trust him though he were my
Brother. He stands not surely that never slipped. Health is a Jewel. Hell is
full of good meanings and wishings. He that sees his neighbors house a fire
must look to his own. He that sows good seed shall reap good Corn. He holds
his Nose to the Grindstone. He that is born to be hanged shall never be
drowned. Hot love soon cold. He is handsome that hansdome does. Happy is he
that Chastens himself. He that stays does the business. Hold fast when you
have it. Hope well and have well. He had need have a long spoon that eat with
the Devil. Happy is he that owes nothing. He leaves a place well that leaves a
Friend in it. He that has much shall have more. Hauger pierces stone-walls.
Health without money is half a sickness. Honor is unseemly for a fool. His
body is better clothed then his soul. He would make you believe the Moon is
made of green Cheese. He is mad that quarrels with women or Beasts. He has a
conscience as large as a Fransiscans sleeve. He may ill run that cannot go. He
that reckons without his host must reckon twice. He is happy that can be warned
by others harms. Hunger has always a good Cook. He makes a mountain of a
molehill. He that goes far gains much. He makes a long harvest of a little
Corn. He is foolhardy. He that loses his wife and six pence has lost a
Teaster. Fr. He that has an ill Name is half Hanged. He that kills a man when
he is drunk, shall be hanged when he is sober. Home is home when all is done,
or be it never so poor. Honors should change manners. He does little that does
not afford his hand as well as his head. He that lies long abed his Estate
feels it. Handsome women without Portions, finds more sweet-hearts then
Husbands. Hunger is the best sauce. He that lives in hope danceth without
music. He that will live long, must keep his mouth cool, his feet warm and
dry. He that will not when he may, When he will he shall have nay. He that
never drank was never adry. He that is angry without a cause, must be pleased
without amends. He that will meddle with all things, may go shoe the Goose. He
swears like an Abbot. He that buys a house ready built has many a pin and
nayl for naught. He that leaves God, God will leave him. He that will not do
ill must look well to himself. He that Rises first is first dressed. He is
proper that has proper conditions. He that looks not before finds himself
behind. He that plays more then he sees, forfeits his eyes to the King. Husty
counsel seldom profitable. He that loves the tree loves the branch. He is to
hasty to be a Parish Clerk. He is as sharp as a thorn. He is more busy then he
has thanks for his labor. He that has not enough has nothing. He gets
enough that loses nothing He that has told good news need tell no more. He
is an ass that gives flesh for bones. He that strikes with the sword, shall
be beaten with the scabbard. Humble hearts have humble desires. He that goes
barefoot must not plant thorns. He that has right has courage. He that
makes himself asleep the Wolf shall catch him. He pulls with a long Rope that
waits for another death. He that will revenge all wrongs shall sooner end
himself then them. He begins to die that quits his desire. He that gets out of
debt grows rich. He that is truly hungry, will not stick to eat any thing. He
that is faulty turns coward. He laugheth that wins. He that eats the hard
shall eat the ripe. Haste makes wast. Here Is a talk of the Turk and the Pope,
but my next neighbor does me more harm then either. He that comes last makes
all fast. He that worst pays shall hold the Candle. He is no body. He stands
for a Cipher. He that deceives me once, it is his faul; if twice, it is mine.
He scorns the motion. He that will not berul'd by his own dame, must be ruled
by his stepdame, He over-looks him as the Devil looked over Lincoln. He that
cannot dissemble knows not how to live. Hatred with Friends is succor to foes.
He gets in the hundred but loses in the shire. He gives others good counsel
but takes none himself. He that has plenty of goods shall have more. He pulls
an old House on his head. He is in a peck of troubles. Honor without profit is
a Ring on the finger. He that will be served must be patient. He that does what
he will does not what he ought. He that has lost his credit is dead to the
world. He that has no ill fortune is troubled with good. He that takes not up
a pin slights his his Wife. He that loses his due gets not thanks. He that
demands misseth not unless his demands be foolish. He that blames would buy.
He that once deceives is ever suspected. He is a fool that brags of four
things; Good wine, a handsome Wife, a handsome Horse, and good store of money.
He that makes a good War makes a good Peace. He that has love on his breast
has Spurs on his sides. He that respects not is not respected. He that
speaks sowes, and he that holds his Peace gathers. He that has one hog makes
him fat, and he that has but one Son makes him a fool. Hope is the poor man's
bread He that is long a giving knows not how to give. He that tells a secret is
another servant. Help thy self and God will help thee. He that commits a fault
thinks every one speaks of it. He that lives well one year sorrows seven year
after. He that trusts in a lie shall perish in truth. He that rises betimes
has something in his head. He is a fool that thinks not that ather thinks.
Hunger draws a Wolf out of the Forest. He that burns his house warms himself
once. He spends ill that spends a whole years rent at one meal. He is not poor
that has little but he that desires much. He wrongs not an old man that
steals his Supper from him. He that labors and thrives spins gold. He that
sows trusts in God. He that is foolish in the thought let him be wise in
the punishment. He that has no good Trade it is to his loss. Happier are the
hands compast with iron then the heart with thoughts. He that lends gives. Have
comes not alone. He looks not well to himself that looks not ever. He can give
little to his Servant that locks his knife. He that can stay obtains. He that
gives all before he dies provides to suffer. He that has not his Craft let him
shut up shop. He that mocks a Cripple ought to be whole. He that goes far has
many encounters. He that cockers his child provides for his enemy. He is not
free that draws his chain. He that keeps his own makes War. He that endures is
not overcome. He that talks much of happiness summons grief. He that knows
nothing doubts nothing. He that passes a Winters day escapes an enemy. He that
is his own Counselor knows nothing sure but what he has laid out. He has not
lived that lives not after death. He that learns a Trade, hat a purchase made.
He that is at ease seeks dainties. He that sowes intends to reap. He that is in
a Tavern thinks he is in a Vine Garden. He that is surprised with the first
Frost feels it all the Winter after. He that follows the Lord hopes to go
before. He that gives me small gifts would have me live. He that has Laws has
quarrels. He that steals an egg will steal an Ox. Half the world knows not
how the other half lies. He that is a Master must serve another. He is a fool
that goes afoot for the ease of his horse. He a beast must die that has done
no good to his Country. He that is not in the Wars is not out of danger. He
that goes to bed thirsty rises healthy. Heaven is not to be got with wishing.
He that will do thee a good turn, either he will be gone or die. He that is
once born, once must die. He that makes himself asleep must be eat by the
Wolves. He that is afraid of leaves goes not to the wood. Happiness cannot be
attained in this world. Health and wealth makes men's lives comfortable.
IT is better to give one Shilling away way then lend twenty. In a woman's
Garment is her vanity. It is a shame to steal but a worse to carry home. Ill
gotten ill spent. In love is no lack. Ill gotten goods never thrive. If the
Wise erred not it would go hard with the fool. Ill putting a naked sword in a
mad man's hand. It is not good to hold a Candle before the duel. In trust is
Treason. In a good house all is quickly ready. Ill weeds grow apace. It Is
better to see a clout then a hole out. If things were to be done twice all
would be wise. Jack would be a Gentleman if he could speak French. It is better
to be envyed then pitied. It Is absurd to warm one in his Armor. In spending
lies the advantage. In a hundred else of contention there is not one inch of
love. If every man would mend one all would mend. It Is a great trouble to ride
and death to foot it. It Is batter to buy then borrow. It Is as good to be in the
dark as without light. It is ill to set spurs to a flying horse. It is a foul
Bird that fouls his own nest Ill egging makes ill begging. It is easy to think
a thing but hard to bring it about. It is better to be spited then pitied. It
is better to stand idle then to perform a thing idly. Ital. It Is better to
strike a man on the back then on the belly. It Is no sporting with edg's tools.
In space comes grace. It Is good to have some friends both in heaven and hell.
In time comes she whom God sends. It chances in an hour that comes not in
seven years. It Is an ill wind blows no man good. It Is a good horse never
stumbles. Ill news comes to soon. It is not good jesting with edged tools. Ill
gotten goods soon waste. In the Husband wisdom, in the Wife gentleness. It Is
better to bow then break. If you would know secrets, look them in grief or
pleasure. If the Mother had never been in the Oven she had never looked for her
daughter there. It Is the best part of a fool to say, I had not thought. In life
you love me not, in death you bewail me. If every man had is own he would be as
rich as a new shorn sheep. It staineth lik the dirt of Paris. It Is bad cloth
will take no color. It Is easier to come into debt then pay a debt. It Is an ill
counsel has no miscape. It comes by kind, it cost them nothing. It Is better
to kiss a knave then be troubled with him. Ill ware is never cheap. It Is
better to be unborn then untaught. It Is better to be a shrew then a sheep. It Is
an ill dog not worth the whistling. Ill vessels seldom miscarry. I scratch
where it itcheth not. It Is easier to descend then ascend. If it were a Bear it
would bite you. It Is ill waking of a sleeping dog. It is true that all men say.
It Is hard striving against a stream. It Is ill healing of an old sore. It must
needs be true that every man says. Ill gotten goods what becomes of them? If
the staff be crooked the shadow cannot be straight. It Is good sleeping in a
whole skin. It Is to late to grieve when the chance is past. It is ill shaving
against the wool. Ill luck is good for something. If the Lions skin cannot do it
the Foxes shall. Ill comes in by else and goes out by inches. It Is ill halting
before a Cripple. It Is merry in hall when beards wag all. It Is an ill bird
defiles his own nest. If wishes were Thrushes then beggar s would eat Birds. I
had rather ride on a horse that carries me then an Ass that throws me. It Is
good fishing in troubled waters. In good years corn is hay, in ill years straw
is corn. It Is good to beware by other men's harms. It Is better late then never.
If you would know a knave give him a staff. It Is good to have a hatch before
the door. It Is a long journey from the tongue to the hand. It Is an easy matter
to find a staff to beat a dog. Ill company is the author of all mischief. It Is
hard to wive and thrive both in a year. It Is merry when Knaves meet. If you
loose your time you cannot get money. It is not all butter that the cow shites.
I wept when I was born, and every day shows why. It is hard to teach an old dog
tricks. It is better to give the fleece then the wool. In vain does the mill
clack if the Miller his hearing lack. It is hard to keep that which is desired
by many. In choosing a Wife and buying a a sword, we ought not trust another.
It Is a good horse never stumbles. I may speak for what I paid for. If the blind
lead the blind both will fall into the ditch. I was taken by a morsel, says
the fish. If thou mindest to be Pope, thou must have him to write in thy
forehead. It will not out of the flesh that is bred in the bone. Ill natures,
the more you ask them the more they stick. It Is impossible to avoid destiny. I
will not buy a Pig in a poake. In every Art it is good to have a master. It Is
too much to find salve and lint. Ill never spoke well. If fools went not to
market all wares would be kept. In love there is both dotage and discretion. In
time men get experience. It is worse to be bad then to be thought so. If great
men would have care of little ones, both would last long. It is not always
fair wheather. I give my mouse a hole and she will become my heir. It is not
good to have an oar in every ones boat. It is better to be the head of Pike
then the tail of a Sturgeon. In a hundred pound of Law there is not a
halfpenny weight of love. Infants manners are molded more by the Parents
example then by the stars of their nativity. It Is god to strike while the iron
is hot. In the morning mountains in the evening fountains. If you could run as
you drink you might catch a hare. It Is not good fishing before the net. In a
long journey straw wares. It Is more pain to do nothing then something. It Is a
wicked thing to make a dearth ones Gardner. If the brain sows not corn it plant
thistles.
KNowledge makes one laugh but wealth makes one dance. Kissing goes by favor.
King Henry Loud a man. Kiss my arse is but a poor complement. Kick not against
a prick. Ka me and I Will ka thee. Kindness will creep where it cannot go.
Knaves and fools are the composition of the whole world. Kill two Birds with
one stone. Knowledge is no burden. Keep good men company and you shall be of
the number. Keep the Wolf from the door. Keep your eye off writings and your
hand out of other men's pockets. Kind words are current money at sometimes.
LEt him laugh that wins. Look not too high lest a chip fall in thine eye. Love
is potent but money is omnipotent. Lesson after lesson makes good Scholars.
Love is not without bitterness. Love comes in at the window and goes out at
the door. Long Jestings are never good. Little pot soon hot. Love overcomes
nothing but a spightfull heart. Lightly come lightly go. Loss embraces shame.
Like the Flounder, out of the drying pan into the fire. Love your neighbor,
yet pull not down your hedge. Love is blind. Let the world say what they will
if I find all well at home. Little wealth little care. Little knows the fat
sow what the lean does mean. Love makes all hard things gentle. Little good
soon spent. Leaves enough but few Grapes. Let a hen live though she has the
pip. Leave jeasting whilst it pleases, lest it come to earnest. Love me
little love me long. Little dogs start the hare, the great one get lier. Love
does much but money does all. Look ere you leap. Love me, love my dog. Love
rules his Kingdom without a sword. Love asks faith and faith firmness.
Lawyers houses are built on the heads of fools. Lovers live by love as Larks by
leeks. Look not for musk in a dogs Kennel. Let every man meddle with his own.
Like master like man. Love is the true price of love. Life is half spent before
we know what it is. Lean not to a broken staff. Love makes one fit for any
work. Little said soon amended. Love and business find eloquence. Love is not
found in the Market. Love and a cough cannot be hid. Longs more to marrage the
four bare legs in a bed. Learn weeping and thou shall laugh gaming. Let all
live as they would die. Like a chip in pottage does neither good nor harm. Like
will to like. Life without a friend is death without witness. Long absent soon
forgotten. Love and Lordship abides no fellowship, Let every one his own burden
bear. Leave a fool alone and he will bethink what he has to do. Love warms
more then a thousand fires. Liberty is a Jewel. Look not a given horse in the
mouth. Let not him that fears feathers come. among wild-fowels. Light a Candle
before the devil. Little pitchers have wide ears. Leave is light. Let an ill
man lie in thy straw and he looks to be thy heir. Light gains makes a heavy
Purse. Light burdens long born grow heavy. Lay no Pearl before swine.
MUch water goes by the Mill the Miller knows not of. Many Lords many Laws.
Money breeds rage love marriage. Measure is a merry mean. Modesty is the mother
of good manners. Money answers all things. Many things are lost for want of
asking. More afraid then hurt. Money begets money. Much cry and little wool.
Man purposes God disposes. Might overcomes right. My house, my house, though
thou art small thou art to me Escuriall. Much would have more. Many speak much
that cannot speak well. Much babbling is not without offense. Much traveling
makes bad ways. Many a good cow has an ill calf. Make have in an ill way to
get out of it. Many Kinsfolk few friends. Men speak of the fare as things went
with them there. Many hands makes light work. My Kill of Malt is on fire.
M^sfortunes seldom come alone. Misreckoning is no payment. Man will strive hard
for profit. Many a little makes a mickle. Money refused loses his
brightness. Make hay while the Sun shines. Marry your Son when you will, your
daughter when you can. Money cheereth man's heart. More have worst speed. Marry
a Widow before she leaves mourning. Many cannot see wood for trees. Mend your
clothes and you may hold out this year. Man has nothing that is his, not
himself. Many kiss the child for the nurses sake. Misfortunes are burdens
hard to be born. Many a man talks of little John that never did him know. More
sauce than meat. Many small make a great. Mention not a halter in the house of
him that was hanged. Much profit cannot be made in poor towns. Make a page of
your own age. Many speak of Robbin Hood that never shot in his bow. Married to
day sad to morrow. Make a pipe of a pigges tail. Money wants no followers. Men
are not measured by the yard or ell. Many things are lost for want of asking.
Marriage and hanging goes by destiny. Many kiss the hand they wish cut off.
Most men salure the wronged man. Make not a balk of good ground. Most master
wear the breeches. Mills and Wives ever want. Men must make there market as the
time serves. Man ought to be humble not proud. Milk says to Wine, Welcome
Friend. Many stumble ar a straw and leap over a block. Marry your daughters
betimes lest they marry themselves. Malice never speaks well.
NO Alchimy to saving. Never pleasure without Repentance. No love to a Fathers.
No cheat like the religious cheat. No longer pipe no longer dance. No fence for
ill fortune. Nothing so certain as death. New Objects breed new thoughts. Not
length of days but strength of heart rids the work. Need has no Law. No lock
will hold against the power of gold. Need makes the old Wife trot. Never had
ill workman good rooles. New Lords new Laws. Nothing but money is moneys worth.
No dearth but breeds in the Horsemanger. Neither bribe nor lose thy right. No
man loves his fetters though they be of gold. None knows the weight of
another burden. Nothing venture, nothing have. No Writer can please all. None
so great an enemy as he of ones own trade. No man ought to look a gift Horse
in the mouth. Night is the Mother of Counsels. Nothing is impossible to a
willing mind. No pride like an inricht beggar. No butter will stick on his
Bread. No envy like a Monks. Near is my petticoat but nearer is my smock.
Novelties please women. No smoke but there is some fire. None is a fool
always, every one sometimes. Nothing has no savor. No body deceived but he
that confides. None says his Garner is full. No sooner is a Temple built to
God, but the Devil has his Chapel hard by. Nature draws more then ten
teemes. Never yet that man that every one spoke well of. Nothing is to be
presumed of nor despaired of. No Churchyard so handsome as a man would desire
straight to be buried there. Necessity is the best Schoolmistrisse. Nothing
dries sooner then tears. Nothing lasts but the Church. No Barber shaves so
close but another finds work.
ONe may think what he dares not speak. One shrewd turn follows another. Ones
gettings orders ones spendings. Of an ill play master never refuse money. One
acre of possession is worth a whole land of promise. On a good bargain think
twice. One foot is better then two crutches. Of sufferance comes ease. One
flower makes no Garland. One beggars woe that another by the door should go. One
sound blow will serve to undo all. One ill word asks another. One fore-warned
as good as two. Out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun. Once a whore and
always a whore. One must be a Servant before he can be a Master. Once a Knave
and ever a Knave. One stroke fells not an Oak. Of all smells bread of all
tastes salt. One pair of heels worth two pair of hands. One fool makes a
hundred. One regards more the will then the deed. One Wolf will not bite
another. Of a good beginning comes a good ending. One good turn asks another.
One journey and two errands. Ital. One swallow makes no Summer. Of young men
there dies many of old men scapes not any. One day Cash-keeper the next
casheir'd. Of little meddling comes great ease. Out of debt out of danger. One
may easily find a staff to beat a dog. Out of sight out of mind. One slumber
finds another. One ill weed marres a whole pot of pottage. One mouth does
nothing without another. Old wine and an old friend are good provisions. On
painting and fighting look afar of. Opportunity is whoredoms baud. One may
visit a friend sometimes, but if he intends to be welcome he must not stay
long. One may see day at a little hole. One tongue is enough for a woman.
Opportunity makes a thief. Our own actions are our security, not others
Judgments. One beats the bush and another catches the Bird. One pair of ears
is enough to dry up an hundred tongues. Often and little eating makes a man
fat. Old men go to death, death comes to young men. Out nettle in dock. Out of
the drying pan into the fire. One enemy is too much. One sword keeps another in
the sheath. One swallow makes not a Summer, nor one Woodcock a Winter. Offer
not to present salt or the head of any creature. Old men and far travelers may
lie by authority. One hou^^ sleep before midnight is worth three after. Old
Birds are not caught with chaff. One fair day in Winter makes not birds merry.
Often under a mean habit is hid a fine Treasure. One seldom loses by dealing
with honest men. One scab'd sheep will mar a whole flock. One hair of
benevolence draws more then a hundred yoke of Oxen. Of fair things the autumn
is fair. Once at ease and ever a custom. Old men when they seem young make much
of death. Once a year a man may say on his conscience.
PLeasure long expected is dear enough bought Play, a Whore, and brisk Wine,
make a man poor laughing. Promising is the eye of giving. Play with a fool at
home and he will play with you abroad. Preferment choaks. Pardons and
pleasantness are great revenges of slanders. Poor and proud, fie fie.
Prettiness dies first. Pain is forgotten where gain follows. Perverseness
makes one squint-eyed. Penny wise and pound foolish. Poverty is the Mother of
health. Pride goes before shame comes after. Praise a hill but keep low. Pride
will have a fall. Pleasure and profit draws all the world. Proffered service
stinks. Pains to get, care to keep, fear to loose. Punishment is lame but it
comes. Presents of love fear not to be ill taken of strangers. Prove thy friend
ere thou have need. Poor and liberal rich and covetous. Puff not against the
wind. Pensions never enricht young man. Poverty is no sin. Prejudicial
friendship let it go with a vengeance. Peevish pity marres a City. Physician
cure thy self. Praise none too much for all are fickle. Pillow Counsel proves
vain. Praise a fair day at night. Princes are Venison in Heaven. Pretended
holiness is double iniquity. Providence is better then a rent. Pouring oil
into the fire is not the way to quench it. Prayers and provender hinder no
journey. Parsons are fools Waggoners. Pleasing ware is half sold.
QUick at Victuals quick at work. Quick believers need broad shoulders.
REady money is a ready medicine. Rich Land must not be left for a greedy
Landlore. Rivers need a spring. Rivers swell not with clear water. Revenge is
sweet. Riches have wings. Rouling stones gather no moss. Rome was not built in
one day. Rob Peter to pay Paul. Reckoners without their host must reckon twice.
Remove an old tree and it will die. Rich men are like Whales, for they grow
great by the ruin of others. Raw leather will stretch.
SHe spins well that breeds her Children. Sorrow is always dry. Set a Knave to
catch a Knave. Save a thief from the Gallows and he will cut your throat. Sep
after step the Ladder's ascended. Seldom comes a better. So many men in Court
so many strangers. Saying and doing are two things. So many Countries so many
customs. Self do self have. Show me a liar and I Will show thee a thief. Seldom
seen is soon forgotten. Say no ill of the year till it be past. Shame in a
kindred cannot be avoided. Some make a conscience of spitting in the Church yet
rob the Altar. So long goes the pot to the water that at last it comes home
broken. Service is no Inheritance. Shameful craving must have shameful nay.
Skill and confidence are an unconquered Army. Small pitchers have wide ears.
Such a Saint such an offering. Set a beggar on Horseback and he will gallop.
Soft fire makes sweet malt. Soon gotten soon spent. Such Carpenters such Ships.
Sad is he that stands between the Anvill and the hammer. Spit in your hands and
take better hold. Short shooting loses the game. Short mass and long dinner.
So many heads so many wits. Silk does quench the fire in the Kitchen. Somewhat
is better then nothing. Soon hot soon cold. Sweet meat will have sour sauce.
Sleep without Supper wake without owing. Stumble at a straw and leap over a
block. Speak fitly or be silent wisely. Sweet discourse makes short days and
nights. Sound love is not soon forgotten. See for love and buy for money. Soon
ripe soon rotten. Still fisheth he that catches one. Soldiers in Peace are
like chimneys in Summer. Speak fair and think what you will. Such a Father such
a Son. Science is naught worth without conscience. Spend and God will send.
Such lips such lettice. Silks and sattins put ont the fire in the chimney.
Such welcome such farewell. Spare and ever bare. Sins are not known till they
are acted. Stop two gaps with one bush. Speak not of my debts unless you mean
to pay them. States have their Periods as well as bodies. Send a wise man on an
errand and say nothing to him. Spare to speak and spare to speed. Store is no
sore. Such a one has a good wit if a wise man had the keeping of it. Ships
fear fire more then water. Struggle not against the stream. Stay a while that
we may make an end the sooner. Such beginning such end. Small invitation will
serve a beggar. Still sow eats all the draff. Serve a noble man though poor
the time comes that he will repay thee. Spectacles are deaths Harquebuze. Shame
take him that shame thinks. Service without reward is punishment. Some had
rather loose their friend then their jest. Slander is a shipwreck by a dry
tempest. Some men plant an opinion they seem to eradicate.
THe Citizen at his business before he rise. The eyes have a language every
where. To speak of a Userer at the Table marres the Wine. To review ones store
is to mow twice. Two false Knaves need no broker. The eye is bigger then the
belly. The world is now adays God save the Conqueror. The death of Wolves is
the safety of sheep. Those that God loves don't live long. Two heads are better
then one. The devil divides the world between Atheism and Superstition. The
mouse that has but one hole is quickly taken. There Is a Remedy for every thing
could men find it. There is an hour wherein a man might be happy all his life
could he find it. The effect speaks the tongue need not. To a child all weather
is cold. To him that will ways are not wanting. The Market is the best Garden.
Time undermines us. The cholarick drinks, the melancholy eats, the phlegmatic
sleeps. The deaf gains the injury. The dainties of the great are tears of the
poor. The Master absent and the house dead. The great put the little on the
tenters. The Italians are wise before the deed, the Germans in the deed, the
French after the deed. The best bread have the best Portions. Too much
familiarity breeds contempt. The Spring for the eye but the fall for the mouth.
That which is bred in the bone will never out of the flesh. Truth may be blamed
but it cannot be shamed. To be too busy gets contempt. There is no fire
without some smoke. The good wan is the last that knows what is amiss at home.
To day in a posture or shape to morrow in ones grave. The Court has no
Almanac. The worlds well amended with him. There Is not so great a flood but
there is as low an ebb. The eye and Religion can bear no jeasting. There Is no
accord where every man would be a Lord. The sluggard loves alife things done to
his hand. There is no earthly gate, that an Ass laden with money cannot enter.
The best of the sport is to do the deed and say nothing. There Is no hill
without it is valley. The greatest state the less sure. They that are bound
must obey. The Pox is a gentleman's companion. The Woman had never looked for her
daughter in the Oven if she had not been there her self. The first and the last
frost is the worst. The hearts letter is read in the eye. Trust no friend with
that you need fear him if he were your enemy. The defects are the men's not the
arts. The table robs more then a thief. The new broom sweeps clean. The Wolf
knows what the ill beast thinks. The fearful man never makes good Surgeon. The
snow for eight days is a mother after a stepmother. The virtue of a coward is
suspicion. The Germans wit is in his fingers. The devil never assails a man
unless he find him void of knowledge or the fear of God. Take heed of still
water the quick pass away. The nearer the Church the further from God. The
Corn hides it self in snow as an old man in furs. There Is no body will go to
hell for company. The Jews spend at Easter, the Moors at marriage the
Christians in suits. The love of money and the love of learning readily meet.
The wise hand does not all the foolish mouth speaks. The horse that is next the
mill carries all the grist. The more women look in the glass the less they
look to their house. The worst of Law is that one suit breeds twenty. There are
more men threatened then stricken. The hard gives more then he that has nothing.
The fool asks much but more he that grants it. Three may keep counsel if two
be away. The beast that goes always never wants blows. There is no fool to the
old fool. There is more talk then trouble. There is difference betwixt staring
and stark mad. The Fox knows much but more he that catches him. Time and tide
stays for no man. There would be no great ones if there were no little ones.
The best mirror is an old friend. The tongue talks at the heads cast. Tha^
(...) not good language which all understands not. The Child says nothing but
what it learned by the fire. The absent party is still faulty. Though you rise
early yet the day comes at his time and not till then. There is falsehood in
fellowship. The fault is as great as he that is faulty. Time is the Rider that
breaks youth. The buyer needs a hundred eyes the seller one. The dog that licks
ashes trust not with meal. The horse thinks one thing and he that saddles him
another. The rought net is not the best catcher of fish. There are three ways,
the University, the Sea, the Court. This world is nothing except it tend to
another. Thou have death in thy house and do bewail another. The Priest has
forgotten that he was a Clark. The morning Sun never lasts a day. The
comforters head never aches. To a crazy Ship all winds are contrary. Too much of
one thing is good for nothing. The resolved mind has no ears. The bite of a
sheep never pierces the skin. The back door robs the house. The Gown is his
that wears it, and the world his that enjoys it. Time stays for no man.
Things well fitted abide. The Masters eye fattens the horse and his foot the
ground. Talk paies no toll. Touch a galled horse on the back and and he will
winch. The tree that God plants no wind rents it. Time past we cannot recall.
The best workmen are commonly the worst Husbands. The toothach is more ease
then to deal with ill people. It Is hard to be wretched but worse to be known
so. The charges of building and making of Gardens are unknown. There Is more
maids then maukins. Trust not one nights ice. Though you see a Churchman ill
yet continue in the Church still. To gain teaches how to spend. There Is more
ways to the wood then one. The dog gnaws the bone because he cannot swallow
it. The Sea has fish for every man. The good Mother says not will you but
gives. Two eyes can see more then one. The eye will have his part. The first
degree of folly is to hold ones self wise, the second to profess it, the third
to despise counsel. Truth shameth the Devil. To weep for joy is a kind of
Manna. The Crow bewailes the sheep, and eats it. Tread on a worm and it will
turn. The first service a child does a Father is to make him foolish. The
command of custom is great. Two ill meals makes the third a glutton. True
praise roots and sprouts. The Cat sees not the mouse ever. The fish adores the
bait. The Royal Crown cures not the headache. There is great force hidden in a
sweet command. The more thy years the nigher the grave. The thread breaks where
it is weakest. The fat man knows not what the lean thinks. The slothful is
the Servant of a Prison. The more you stir the more you stink. Time is the
Rider that breaks youth. Two anons and a by and by is an hour and a half. The
persuasions of fortune swayes the doubtful. Talk much and err much, says the
Spaniard. The sight of a man has the force of a Lion. Time and straw makes
medlers ripe. The balance distinguishes not between gold and silver. There is
no Colt but will break some halter. The soul needs few things the body many.
The Reasons of the poor weigh not. To be beloved is above all bargains. The
evening praises the day. To deceive ones self is very easy. The fair lasts
the whole year. The escaped mouse ever feels the taste of the bait. The back
door makes the thief and whore. The covetous spends more then the liberal. The
offspring of the very old or very young lasts not. There Is no weather ill when
the wind is still. Too much taking heed is loss. The reverend are ever before.
The first dish pleases all. It Is easier to build two Chimneys then to main
tain one. That groat is ill saved that shames the Master. Take heed of an Ox
before, an horse behind, of a Parson on all sides. The greatest crabs be not
the best. There are more Physicians in health then drunkards. There Is a craft
in daubing. The Wife is the key of the house. The greatest Clarks be not the
wisest men. The least foolish is wise. The singing man keeps his shop in his
throat. The first blow is as much as two. The life of a man is a Winter way.
The Physician ows all to the Patient, but the Patient ows him nothing but a
little money. There Is not enough if nothing be lost. To the counsel of fools a
word is best. To a fair day open your window. The ignorant has an Eagles wing
and an Owls eye. To a grateful man give money when he asks. The greatest
talkers are the least doers There Is none so deaf as he that will not hear. The
higher the Ape goes the more he shows his tail. The Fox fares best when he is
cursed. The Dutch have there wits in their hands. The best may amend. The chief
disease that reigns this year is folly. The scaled head fears cold water.
Three things always bring cost, the fawning of a dog, the love of a whore, and
the invitation of an host. There is no jeasting either with ones eye or ones
Religion. The Horse to the saddle, the Ass to the pack, the Ox to the plow,
the Dog to the chase, but man to that art which nature calls him to. The year
does nothing else but open and shut. The greedy fool that all would press The
head of a woman, the body of a Serjant, the legs of a Lackey, make a Devil
perfect. True honor is the Daughter of truth. Trust is the Mother of deceit.
The world is round, and he that cannot swim sinks to the bottom. The outside of
a woman is commonly the best. The curious searcher finds himself unfortunate.
The honester man the worser luck. Two wits discern better then one. Thoughts be
free from toll. Troubles sent from God are Jewels, but drawn on by our selves
are torments. The greatest Calf is not the sweetest Veal. Though the Sun shine
leave not thy cloak at home. Two pots well filled are signs of a Feast. The end
makes all equal. The offender never pardons. The higher I climb the greater my
fall. Travel whether thou can but die where thou ought. That which one
learns in youth will continue till old age. There is no ill which does not turn
to our good. The mill gets by going. The Cuckold is the last that knows it. The
Hoarding of money is both sinful and casual. The skilfullest, wanting money,
are but scorned. Too crafty a Cur to be taken with this bone. They that are
booted are not always ready. The Wife that bites her lips and treads askew is
to her husband and her self untrue. The Sun that shines early in the morning,
a Woman that speaks lattin, and a Child that drinks Wine, seldom make good
end. The wife and the sword are to be showed not lent. Tears in the eyes have
sorrow in the heart. To day a merchant to morrow a miscreant. The weakest goes
to the walls. The Chicken is the Countries but the City eats it. The more rich
the more honor. Takes pepper in the nose. The wearer knows where the shoe
wrings. Too much scratching smarts, too much speaking hurts. The more knave the
better luck. To speak well belongs to few, to live well belongs to all. The
proof of the pudding is in the eating. The gray mare is the better horse. That
is not handsome which is handsome, but that is handsome which takes. Things
well fitted abide. They that know one another salute afar of. The rising of one
man is the fall of another. The good Wife of a wilful man has many a woeful
day. Think of ease but work on. There Is as many fashions as folks. The King of
good-fellows is appointed for the Queen of beggars. Truth and Oil are ever
above. The Marketplace the Rogues house. There longs more to a wedding then
four bare legs in a bed. The tongue Walks where the teeth speed not. The early
Bird catches the worm. The lame tongue gets nothing. There are many ways to
fame. The shortest anger is doing. The toothach is more easy then love. Three
Women make a Market. The wisest man does sometimes play the fool. The Pope
comes by voices, the King by natue, the Emperor by force. There are some that
would be droun'd in a glass of water. The Goat must brouse where she is tied.
The house shows the owner. The fool is most fusty when he is least foolish. The
rich devour the poor, the strong the weak. The Smith and his penny both are
black. The dead are not to be mentioned at Board. The Razer may boldly grase on
a fools beard. The lean man is Wolves meat. The worst step is that over the
threshold. The best play on the board is not to play at all. The Huntsmans
breakfast the Lawyers dinner. The miserable man makes a penny of a farthing,
the liberal of a penny six pence. There is no equity in keeping an unjust
promise. The wisest man says least. The hole calls the thief. The first love is
the fastest. The gentle Hawk half man's her self. The envious man shall never
want woe. The pompkin dies with the seed in its belly. Thieves falling out true
men come by their goods. The Devilis not always at one door. Two hands in a
dish one in Purse. Those that promise most perform least. There is no scourge
of wit or learning that will lash a wanton lover out of his lust. The Mill
cannot gride with the water that is past. Time stays not the fools leisure. The
fools tears are not to be trusted. The fairest women in the Stews the
handsomest mate at the Gallows. The good usage of a Master is a spur to an
ingenious servant. The sluggard must be clad in rags. The fault of the Horse is
put on the saddle. The richer the Cobbler the blacker his thumb. The best remedy
against an ill man is to keep at a distance. The head of a fish is first tamed.
The beggar may sing before the thief. True content is only in Heaven. Though a
lie be well dressed it is ever over-ripe. The eye of the Master makes the horse
fat. True good is that which is eternal. The best Cart may overthrow. There is
no Knave like an Abbot that was a Monk. The best is best cheap. The Cat knows
whose lips she licks. There are more threatened then stricken. The belly thinks
the throat is cut. The highest tree has the greatest fall. The ambitious man
is never satisfied. The blind eats many a fly. The Fox when he cannot reach the
Grapes says they are not ripe. The more the merrier the fewer the better
cheer. The fairest Rose in the end is withered. Though the Mastiff be gentle
yet bite him not by the lip. The Cat would eat fish but would not wet her feet.
Three helping one another bear the burden of six. The more have the less
speed. The young Cock croweth as the old hears. The Son full, and tattard the
daughter empty and fine. The low stake stands long. The longest day has his
end. The faulty man stands on his Guard. The Keys hang not all at one Girdle.
The ill that comes out of our mouth falls into our bosom. That the eye sees
not the heart rueth not. The lame gos as far as your staggerer. The tongue is
not steel yet it cures. Though the Fox run yet the Chickens have wings. That
penny is well spent that saves a groat. That is gold which is worth gold. The
first shour is that which wets most The wolf must die in his own skin. The rich
knows not who is his friend. They talk of Christmas so long that it comes. To a
close shorn sheep God gives wind by measure. That which suffers is not
little. There needs a long time to know the worlds Pulse. To him that has lost
his taste sweet is sour. They that hold the greatest farms pay the least rent:
applied to rich men that are unthankful to God. There is no woe to want. Two
heads are better then one. Tales of Robbin Hood are good for fools. The command
of Custom is great. That one will not another will. The leg does what the knee
would have it. To deceive the deceiver is no deceit. Tith and be rich. The lame
Post brings the true news. The burnt Child dreads the fire. Threatened folks
live long. Take heed is a good need. Take time when time comes left time
steals away. The eye is a shrew. Thursday come and the week gone.
VIrtue never grows old. Virtue and a Trade are the best portions for Children.
Under a threadbare cloak lies many times much learning. Valor that Parlies is
near yielding. Unsound minds like unsound bodies if you feed you poison.
Unwonted Objects breed unwonted thoughts.
Words ar women's deeds. When the Fox preaches beware the Geese. Winter thunder
makes Summers wonder. Who repents chastizeth himself. Who takes bond for money
trusts his Estate not his Person. Wit is never good till bought. Who has no
memory let him have legs. What your glass tells you will not be told by
counsel. Where Coin is not, commons must be scant. When the Cat is away the
mice play. Wine and women have consumed many a Lordship. Who that may not as
they will must as they may. Well bred spirits seldom degenerate. Wares dear
bought are seldom return without loss. While the discreet advise, the fool
has his business. Who goes willingly goes twice. Win gold and wear gold. When
all sins grow old covetousness grows young. Who does his own business fouls
not his hands. Who wed ere he be wise shall dye before he thrive. Who drives
another man's Trade make a sop in a panier. Weight justly and sell dearly. Who
so that knew what would be dear should need be a Merchant but one year. Were
there not fools bad ware would not pass. When there is a plague in Castile the
infection is general. Where no fault is there needs no pardon. Who so blind as
they that will not see? Will you? is spoken to sick Folks. We Batchellers show
our teeth, but you married-men laugh till your heart ache. Who will borrow when
he has not let him borrow when he has. Who is so deaf as he that will not
hear? Women, Money, and Wine, have there good and there evil. Who will do ill
never wants occasion. Would you know what money is? go borrow some. Who goes to
bed Supperlesse all night tumbles and tosses. Wealth is like Rhume it falls on
the weakest part. Water afar of quenches not fire. Wisdom has one foot on
the land, another on the sea. Where many words are the truth often goes by.
Who can sing a merrier Note then he that cannot change a Groat? Wine in bottels
does not quench the thirst. We can have no more of a Cat then her skin. Whether
shall the Ox go where he shall not labor? Who invites bears the danger. Who
gives to all denies all. What Is a workman without tools? Whose house is of
glass must not throw stones at another. When the belly is full the bones would
be at rest. Who has no more bread then need must not keep a dog. Who bestows a
bow on thee wishes thee not dead. When the Iron is hot strike. Who tells his
secrets makes himself a slave. Wine is a turncoat, first a friend then an
enemy. Who lets his wife go to every Feast, and his horse to every water, shall
neither have good wife, nor a good horse. Willows are weak yet they bind
oothers. Women laughed when they can weep when they will. Who so bold as blind
bayard. What Is a fool without a babble? Well may he smell fire whose gown burns.
Whores affect your purse not you. Who more busy then he that has least to do.
Wisdom is better then riches. When Prayers are done my Lady is ready. We must
not judge of men by their birth but by their breeding. What the heart thinks
the tongue speaks. Who means to have the egg must endure the cackling of the
Hen. What some win in the hundred they loose in the shire. When a friend asks
there is no to morrow. Who labors is tempted by one Devil, but who stands idle
by a thousand. When Italy shall be without poison, France without treason,
England without war, the world shall be without earth. Who means to be lean
must keep his eyes open and his mouth shut. When the sky falls we shall have
Larks. Who has no mind to his business valleys seem mountains. What needs
words where there are works? When the Sun shines make Hay. Who buys has need
of a hundred eyes, who sells has enough of one. We learn for to understand,
not for to dispute. Where nothing is a little does ease. When a Lackey comes to
hels door the devil locks the gate. Women love to be eyed and to be looked upon.
Who makes a Cart knows also how to take it in pieces. Water, fire, and
Soldiers, quickly make room. Women are young men's Mistresses, middle-ag'd men's
Companions, and old men's Nurses. When the danger is past the fact is forgotten.
What need a contentious man marry? When a dog is drowned every one offers him
help. Where shall a man have a worse friend then he brings from home? Who
removes stones bruise their fingers. Without business debauchery. Where
nothing is the King must lose his right. Who has a wolf for his mate needs a
dog for his man. Who reads to others reads also to himself. Whatsoever was
the Father of a disease an ill diet was the mother. We know not who lives or
dies. Words are not Links. Whores and dogs fawn upon a man no longer then they
are fed. Were there no hearers there would be no backbyters. Were there no
receivers there would be no thieves. Whether you boil Snow or pound it you can
have but water of it. Wine makes all sorts of creatures at Table. Who covets
all dies a mad man. While the grass grows the steed starves. Who is worse
shod then the Shooemakers wife. When age is jocond it makes sport for death.
War is deaths Feast. Where there is no honor there is no grief. Wine that
cost nothing is digested before it be drank. Where the drink goes in the wit
goes out. Where you will is ready your feet is light. Without hope the heart
would break. When God will no wind but brings rain. VVood half burnt is easily
kindled. Weight and measure take away strife. Who hunts two Hares loses the
one and deserts the other. When the Horse is stolen shut the Stable door.
When my house burns it is not good playing at Chesse. Who lacks a stock his
gain is not worth a chip. War makes thieves and Peace hangs them. Who hastens
a glutton choaks him. Who receives forgets not. Who praises St. Peter does
not blame St. Paul. Who so fears a dog ensures himself from being bitten. Who
pays the Physician does the cure. When one is on horsback he knows all
things. VVish not for a Horse that is bridled at the tail. When you enter into
a house leave the anger at door. Whom weal pricks sorrow comes after and
licks. War and Physic are governed by the eye. Wine ever pays for for his
lodging. With Customs we live well but Laws undo us. When all men have what
belongs to them it cannot be much. Who has eaten the Candles void the weeks.
We leave more to do when we die then we have done. Who gives well sells dear.
Who attempts not errs not. When a man sleeps his head is in his stomach. Who
has money and Capers is well furnished for Lent. When God is made the Master
of a Family he disorders the disorderly. Where gold speaks every tongue is
silent. Words and feathers the wind carries away. Who embraces all nothing
graspes. We do it soon enough if that we do be well. VVo be to him that reads
but one Book. Who gives good words feeds with an empty spoon. Who lives in
hopes dies a Fool.
YOu must lose a fly to catch a gnat. You shall know what a man is worth when
he is dead. You come with your five eggs and four of them addled. You may know
what a man is by his company. You had as live go to Mill as to mass. Years
know more then Books. Your thoughts close and your countenance lose. Young men
may die but old men must die. You need not sow weeds. You cannot see wood for
trees. You cannot hide an ell in a sack. You are as seasonable as snow in
winter. You cannot know Wine by the Barrel. You cannot flea a stone. You must
lose a fly to catch a Trout. Young Saint old Devil. You cannot make a fire so
low but it will go out. Enough is as good as a Feast.
Wise SPEECHES, AND Golden SENTENCES.
1. GIve me the heart of a man, and out of that all other deeds shall be
acceptable.

2. When thou have taken unlawfully, restore it speedily; for the sin in
taking, is repeated every minute thou keep it: if thou can, restore it in
kind, if not, in value; if it may be, restore it to the party, if not, to God:
The poor is Gods receiver.

3. It was said of Nero, that though he could tune his Harp well, yet in his
Government he did always wind up the strings to high, or let them down to low.

4. Severus the Emperor being but meanly born, and having raised himself to
that high honor, was wont to say, I have been all, and am never the better.

5. Cato had this saying, That the best way to keep good acts in memory, was to
refresh them with new.

6. A private Soldier (seeing Philip King of Macedon vainly pufft up with a
great Victory over the Athenians) took courage and told him, That if he
measured his own shadow, be should find it no longer then it was before his
victory.

7. Do thou want things necessary, grumble not? perchance it was a necessary
thus thou should want; endeavor lawfully to supply it, if God bless not thy
endeavor, bless him, that knows what is fittest for thee; thou art Gods
Patient, prescribe not thy Physician.

8. It Is no shame to be poor, provided thou keep thy self honest in thy poverty.

9. It Is the greatest folly in youth, either not to endeavor good advice, or
not to believe it till their peril comes upon them, and makes them see it to
their shtme.

10. Rich Croesus showing Solon the Philosopher a great heap of gold that he
had gathered together, asked him what he thought of it, who confidently replied,
If another come that has better iron then you, he will be Master of all this
gold.

11. He that professes himself thy open enemy, arm thee against the evil he
means thee; but he that dissembles himself thy secret friend, strikes beyond
caution, and wounds above cure: From the first thou may deliver thy self,
from the last good Lord deliver thee.

12. Errors by mistakes should not be too vigourously censured, but errors
that be wilful should not be spared.

13. It was a wise saying of a Senator of Rome (during the Government of Galba
who being aged, the people took liberty and had almost brought all into
confusion) That it were better to live where nothing is lawful, then where all
things are lawful.

14. It Is a certain Rule in all dark Prophesies, That they are never clearly
understood, till they are accomplished.

15. Correction without Instruction, is but mere tyranny.

16. All qualities, without direction of virtue profit not but overthrow their
possessor.

17. Gold is tried with the Touchstone, but men by gold.

18. As the Servants of God are known by humility and charity, so the servants
of the Devil are known by pride and cruelty.

19. No man gains by war, but he that has not wherewith to live in Peace.

20. Pray often because thou sinnest always, repent quickly lest thou die
suddenly.

21. He is said truly to serve his Country, whose body executes what is
wisdom plotteth.

22. The honor of a King stands in the multitude of the people, but his safety
in the love of his Subjects.

23. Be always less willing to speak then to hear; when thou hear thou
receivest, when thou speak thou give; it is more glorious to give, more
profitable to receive.

24. Prayer is one of the worthiest actions we do, for we speak with God as it
were, reasoning with him; it brings down God from Heaven, and makes him grant
our will, and dwell with us and we with him eternally.

25. Syward Earl of Northumberland, lying on his sickbed, and feeling death
approaching suddenly started out of his bed and put on his Armor, saying, It
became not a valiant man to die lying like a beast.

26. If any speak ill of thee, flee home to thy own conscience and examine thy
heart; if thou be guilty it is a just correction, if not guilty, it is a fair
Instruction; make use of both, so shall thou distill honey out of gall, and of
an open enemy create a secret friend.

27. Religious Alms-deeds makes God become our debtour.

28. He is not worthy to command others, that cannot bridle his own affections
and unresonable appetite.

29. Sir Walter Rawleigh in his imprisonment, was wont to comfort himself with
this, saying, That the world was but a wide Prison, and every day one or other
was called out to execution.

30. We complain of the times, and justly, for never more wicked; but let us
take heed that we be not a part of the misery of the times, and they made worse
by our sins.

31. Time the Mother, will bring forth Virtue the Daughter in due season.

32. King Charles of ever blessed memory used this Speech to his second
Parliament, That it is more honorable for a King to be invaded, and almost
destroyed by a foreign enemy, then to be despised at home.

33. Beware of drunkenesse, lest all good men beware of thee: where drunkenesse
reigns, there reason is an exile, Virtue a stranger, God an enemy, blasphemy is
wit, oaths are rhetoric, and secrets are proclamations. Noah discovered that
in one hour drunk, which sober he kept secret six hundred years.

34. Antoninus the Emperor having laid a double Tax upon the people, one of
his under Officers told him, If he would have the people pay two Taxes in one
year, be should give them two seed-times and two Harvests.

35. My Lord Bacon was wont to say, That Laws were like cobwebs, where the
small flies are caught, and the great flies break through.

36. If thou desire rest to thy soul, be just: for he that does no injury
fears not to suffer injury: The unjust mind is always in labor, it either
practices the evil it has projected, or projects to avoid the evil, it has
deserved.

37. False Miracles and lying News, are the food of superstition, which by
credulity deludes ignorant people.

38. William the Conqueror was wont to say, That an unlearned King was a
crowned ass.

39. A rich Merchant using constantly to drink out of a wodden dish, and being
reproved for it by a friend, answered, I had rather drink out of Wood, and make
golden payments, then drink out of gold, and make wooden payments.

40. In all thy actions, think God sees thee, and in all his actions, labor to
see him; that will make thee fear him, this will move thee to love him.

41. Continual experience shows, That idleness is the greatest spur to lechery.

42. The Birds of the air die to sustain thee, the beasts of the field die to
nourish thee, the fishes of the Sea die to feed thee: Our stomachs are their
common Sepulcher. Good God, with how many deaths are our poor lives patcht up
of? How full of death is the miserable life of mortal man?

43. Suggestions are needless from abroad, when the mischief is felt at home.

44. It is a hard thing to be rich and honored in this world, and not struk
with the dart of pride and vain glory.

45. A heart not exercised in some honest calling, works trouble out of it self.

46. The Devil never assaults a man, except he find him either void of
knowledge, or the fear of God.

47. Rebuke thy Servants fault in private, public Reproofs hardens his shame:
if he be past a youth, strike him not; he is not fit for thy Service, that
after wise reproofs will either deserve thy strokes, or digest them.

48. God has left three Books in the world, in each of which he may easily be
found; The Book of the Creatures, the Book of Conscience, and his written Word.
The first shows his Omnipotency, the second his Justice, the third his Mercy
and Goodness.

49. Nothing inslaveth a grateful Nature like a free benefit; he that conferrs
it on me, steals me from my self, and in one and the same art, makes me a
vassell, and himself my King.

50. A prating Barber coming to trim King Archelaus, asked him, Sir, How will
you please to have me cut your hair? The King silently answered; Though a man
has nothing to do but to hear and answer, yet a limitless tongue is a strange
unbitted beast to worry one with.

51. They that speak much, seldom speak well: for they that know how to speak
right, know not how to dwell in discourse.

52. He that has a Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune; for they
are Impediments to great enterprises.

53. Men in great places are thrice Servants; Servants of the Sovereign or
State, Servants of Fame, or Servants of Business: So that they may be truly
said, to have no freedom neither in their Persons nor in their Actions.

54. Riches may truly be called the baggage of Virtue, for of great Riches there
is no real use, except it be in distribution, therest is but conceited.

55. Kings and Emperors are in a miserable condition, for they have few things
to desire, and many things to fear.

56. Plato observed, That all knowledge was but remembrance. And Solomon says,
That all novelty is but Oblivion. There is nothing in this world that may be
said to be permanent, but the two great windingsheets that bury all things in
oblivion, Deluges and Earthquakes.

57. Music is more for pleasure then profit to mankind, which caused Diogenes
to say to one that bragged in his skill, That wisdom governed Cities, but with
Songs and Music he could not expect to order a House well.

58. After a long sense of Peace War enters the stage, and indeed it is the
worlds Physic, it is both a a Purge and a Blood-letting: Peace, Fullness,
Pride, and War, are the four fellies that being let into one another, makes the
wheel that the times turn on.

59. One asking Diogenes what was the saddest creature in the world, he
answered, An old man in poverty.

60. It argues a base disposition, either for favor or frowns, to desert a
good cause in evil times.

61. Would thou multiply thy Riches, diminish them wisely, or would thou
make thy estate entire, divide it charitably: Seeds that are scattered,
increase, but hoarded up, they perish.

62. No man shall do ill that thinks ere he undertakes what the end will be,
not what his passion will have it to be.

63. In an age of plottings (as these are in which we live) the deepest plot is
to be saved, and the best policy is to get assurance of Heaven.

64. Revenge is sweet to man's nature, it may fitly be compared to the arrow
that flies in the dark. Cesmus Duke of Florence had a desperate saying against
perfidious Friends, (We read that we are commanded to forgive our enemies, but
we never read that we are commanded to forgive our Friends.) That man which
studies Revenge, keeps his own wounds green, which otherwise would heal.

65. He was a wise man, that being asked what was the best time to marry in,
made this answer; For a young man not yet, for an elder man not at all.

66. Charles King of Sweden, a great enemy to the Jesuits, who when he had
taken away their Colleges, caused the old Jesuits to be hanged, and sent the
young to the Mines, saying, That since they wrought so hard above ground he
would try how they could work under ground.

67. To bestow benefits on the bad, makes them worse, and villifyeth the reward
of the virtuous.

68. This wise saying of of Sir Henry Wotton, That the itch of Disputation will
at last prove the scab of the Church, will eternize his Name more then all the
monuments, that Art can possibly devise.

69. Be not unstable in thy Resolutions, nor various in thy Actions, nor
inconstant in thy Affections; so deliberate, that thou may resolve, so
resolve, that thou may perform: Mutability is the badge of Infirmity.

70. As the natural body is delighted in change, so also is the politic body
greedy of alterations.

71. He said truly, That buying of Church Lands, would be a mouth to eat up the
rest of the Purchasers Estate.

72. There is no trust in the multitude, (as we have lately seen by woeful
experience,) one day they adore, the next rebel; to day cry Hail, Hail; to
morrow Crucify.

73. There is nothing the nature of man can less brook then Reproach, for there
is no man so mean but thinks himself worthy of some regard.

74. Cicero said, That perfect glory consists in three things; If the multitude
loved a man, if they will trust him, if they hold him worthy of admiration,
praise, and honor.

75. The Stoics affirmed, That to live agreeable to nature, was to live
virtuously and valiantly.

76. The Lord Burleigh, Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth, was wont to say, That he
overcame envy and ill will, more by patience then pertinacy. And Mr. Camden
said of him, That he was amongst those few that lived and died with glory.

77. At the Battle of Newport, the Prince of Orange having the Spanish Army
before him, and the Sea behind him, spoke thus to his Soldiers; If you will
live, you must either eat up these Spaniards, or drink up this Sea.

78. Alexander having a Soldier of his Name under him, that was a coward, bid
him either leave off his Name, or cease being a Soldier.

79. A confident woman came clamouring to Gratian the Emperor against her
Husband, to whom the Emperor mildly answered, What is that to me? she
presently told him, That he had spoken Treason against him: He again replied,
What is that to thee? Which caused the woman to go away ashamed.

80. It was the usual saying of a French Poet, That he was not happy that had
the things that he desired, but he which did not desire the things he had not.

81. A Bashaw of Turkey, persuading the Emperor not to make war upon the
Germans by reason of their multitudes, who answered; That his fingers would
sooner be all of a length, then their Princes be all of one mind.

82. Cato speaking of the authority that the Women of Rome had over their
Husbands, said, Other men command their Wives; we command men, and our Wives
command us.

83. Do well while thou may, lest thou do evil when thou would not: He that
takes not advantage of a good power, shall lose the benefit of a good will.

84. Man's happiness rests in the managing of his own time; so that every man
may be blessed, and rich in perfection, if his own dssiolutenesse and
unthriftinesse incurres not the contrary.

85. Cato was wont to say, that in all his life time, it repented him of three
things: 1. That ever he had told a secret to a woman. 2. That he went by water
when he might have gone by Land. 3. That he had been idle a whole day and done
nothing.

86. In all Nations two things are Causes of a common prosperity; Good
Government, and Good Obedience: A good Magistrate over a perverse people, is a
sound head on a surfeited body; a good Commonalty and a bad Ruler, is a sound
body with a headache.

87. The wisdom of Simonides was very commendable, who being asked by Hiero
what he thought of God, desired a seven nights space to consider of it; at the
seven nights end, he asked a fortnights; at the fortnights end, a month; at
which Hiero marvelling, Simonides answered, That the longer he thought of it,
the more difficult he found it.

88. The way whereby Faith quieteth the soul, is by raising it above all
discontentments and storms here below, and pitching it on God.

89. Alexander was not commended for conquering the world, but for doing it
before he was thirty years of age.

90. A full swinge in pleasure, is the way to make men senseless; a confident
persuasion of unavoidably misery, is a ready path to despair.

91. Three things necessary for a Christian to know; His own misery, Gods love,
his own thankful obedience.

92. It was good counsel the Philosopher gave the young men of Athens; That
they should often view themselves in a glass; if they were fair and well
featured, that they should do those things that were beseeming their amiable
shape; but if foul and ill-favored, that then they should labor to salve the
bodies blemishes by the beauties of a mind accountred with the ornaments of
virtue and good literature: All which is fitly applicable to a Christian.

93. It was King James his advise, That we should not be like the Puritan in
our Prayers, who speak to God as to there fellows, and sit at Christ's Table as
with their companions, but to join reverence with the sweet confidence we have
in Gods love.

74. It is better to follow the perfections of them whom we love not, then in
defects, resemble them whom we love.

95. In choosing a friend, besure to avoid two sorts of men: 1. Drunkard: 2. A
passionate man. For, the first, he speaks what he knows not, nor after can he
remember what that was he spoke; for the other, in his fit he is perfectly mad,
and speaks not a word by reason, but by brutish passion: for anger is the
fever of the soul.

96. Peace from the mouth of a Tyrant is oftener promised then performed.

97. Love breaks the brain, but never bruiseth the brow; it consumes the
heart, but never touches the skin, and makes a deep scar be seen, before any
wound be felt.

98. Envy never casts her eye low, nor ambition never points but always upward.

99. That man that has married a virtuous Wife, may truly be said to be happy;
for being on earth, he has attained Heaven; being in want, has attained
wealth; being in woe, has attained comfort.

100. The holiest man in show, proves commonly the hollowest man in heart.

101. It is better to have an open enemy then a dissembling Friend.

102. The heart of a fool is in his mouth, but the mouth of a wise man is in
his heart.

103. Mistrust no man without cause, neither be thou credulous without proof.

104. Words wittily spoken awake and revive the judgment, but examples persuade
the heart.

105. Wisdom was begot by nature, nourisht by experience, and brought forth by
learning.

106. Of all the Treasures in a Commonwealth, the innocent man is most to be
esteemed.

107. Happy is that Country whose Captains are Gentlemen, and whose Gentlemen
are Captains.

108. Honor is brittle, and Riches are blossoms, which every frost of fortune
causes to wither.

109. He that through custom makes little account of his promise, may swear
often, but shall seldom be believed.

110. A man having honor and wanting wisdom, is like a fair tree without fruit.

111. The evenings hope may comfort the mornings misery.

112. A poor man being in charity is rich, but a rich man without charity is
poor.

113. Time and Patience teach all men to be content.

114. A foolish man begins many things, and ends nothing.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following, are Printed for Simon Miller, and Sold
by him at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shortly be
reprinted with large Additions. The Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of
Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our
late unhappy differences are paralleled in many particularss. A general History
of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James, containing the
principal Revolutions and Transactions of Church* and State, with Political
Observations, and reflections upon the same: by David Hume of Godscroft. The
History of this Iron Age. Mr Paul Baine on the Ephesians. The Queen of Arragon,
a Play: In fol.
In Quarto large.
Jo. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert ^^e Grise Knight, by his
Late Majesty's special Command. An Eperimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix
Wortz.
Quarto Small.
Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true Faith of Gods Elect: By John Nicholson Minister
of the Gospel. The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Strood. Three Treatises: 1.
The Conversion of Nineveh touching Frayer and Fasting. 2. Gods Trumpet sounding
to Repentance. 3. Sovereign preservatives against distrustful Thoughts and
Cares: By Will. Atters^ll Minister of Gods Word at Isfield in Sussex. Aynsworth
on the Canticles. Paul Baine, his Diocesans Trial. Gralle against Appolonius. A
Treatise of Civil policy, being a clear Decision of 43 Queries, concerning
prerogative, right and privilege, in reference to the supreme Prince and
people: By Samuel Rutherford Professor of Divinity of St Andrews in Scotland.
Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government, containing
the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes and
Magistrates. Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.
Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided. Wells his
Souls Progress. Christ tempted, the Devils Conquered; Being a plain Exposition
on the fourth Chapter of St Mathews Gospel: By John Gumbledon Minister of the
Gospel. The Saints Society. Dr Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his
Body of Divinity. The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren concerning the
Presbyterian Government, together with the answer of the Assembly of Divines.
Gamdens Remains. The Harmonious Consent and Confession of Faith, of all the
Protestant Reformed Churches in Christendom. The description of the Universal
Quadrant, by which is performed with great Expedition, the whole Doctrine of
Triangles, both plain and Sphericall: Also the Resolution of such Prop^sitions
as are most useful in Astronomy, Navigation, and Dialling: By which is
performed the proportioning of Lines for measuring of all manner of Land,
Board, Glass, Timber, Stone, etc. by Tho. Stirrup Mathemat.
Large Octavo.
Florus Anglicus, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since
the Conquest, cut in Brass. The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two
thousand seeming Contradictions are fully and plainly Reconciled. Evidences for
Heaven, containing infallible Signs and real Demonstrations for assurance of
Salvation: published by Ed^. Calamy Minister of Aldermanbury, Lo^d. The Life
and Reign of King Charles from his Birth to his Death, By Lambert Wood. The
Night-Search, the second part: By H. Mill. A view of the Jewish Religion, with
their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies. Useful Instructions for these Evil
times; held forth in 22 Sermons, by Nicholas Lockyer, Provost of Eaton College
The Nullity of Church Censures, or Excommunication, not of Divine Institution,
but a mere humane Invention: Written by the famous Tho. Erastes, and never
before Englished.
Small Octavo.
Ed Waterhouse Esquire His Discourse of Piety and Charity. Panacea, or the
Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admirable Nature and Virtues of
Tobacco: By Dr. Everard and Others. A view and Defense of the Reformation of
the Church of England, very useful in these times. Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his
Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to prevent the Delusions of the
Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy amongst us Herberts Devotions, or a
Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and prayers useful upon all
occasions. O^id de Pento, in English. The Loves of Cli^io and Lezio a Romance.
Mr. Know^es, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue. A Book of Scheams or Figures of
Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of times, and very useful for all
Astrologers. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England from the Reig^ of
William to the death of the Late King. Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue,
and five Senses for Speriority: a serious Comedy. The Spirits Touchstone; being
a clear discovery how a man may certainly know whether he be truly taught by
the Spirit of God, or not. The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion. Physical
Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, for
the cure of all Diseases Incident to man's body: By R W^lliams. To which is
added the physical Mathematics: By Hermes, Tris. Magistus. The Idol of Clowns,
or the Relation of Wat ^iler's Rebellion. The Christian Moderator, in 3 parts.
The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England. Dr. Sibbs his
Divine Meditations. Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes. Grotij Poemata. Three
Books of Mr. Mathews Minister at Swansey in Southwales. 1 The Messiah Magnified
by the mouths of Babes in America; or Gaius and Gamaliel, a helpful Father
and his hopeful Son discoursing of the three most considerable points: 1. The
great want of Christ 2. The great worth. that is in Christ. 3. The good way
that is chalkt our by Christ. 2. The New Congregationall Church proved to be
the old Christian Church, by Scripture, Reason, and History. 3. The Rending
Churchmember R^gularly called back to Christ and his Church.
A Physical Dictionary.
Duodecim.
Doctor Smith's practice of physic. The G^ammar War. Possellius Apothegmes.
Fascicul^^ Florum. Crashaw's Visions. The Juniper Lecture. Helvicus Colloquies.
The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three arch-enemies of mankind,
the world, the flesh, and the devil. Hensius de Crepundiis. The History of
Russia, or the Government of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the manner and
fashions of the people of that Country. Drexeliu's School of Patience.
Drexelius his right Intention of every ones Action.
Vigimi Quat.
The New Testament. The third part of the Bible. Sir Richard Baker's Med. and
Prayers for every day of the Week.
Plays.
The Ball. Chawbut. Conspiracy. Obstinate Lady. The London Chanticlers; a
Comedy full of various and delightful Mirth, never before published.

