A MEDITATION For the Thirtieth day of January, THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE Murder
and Martyrdom OF K. CHARLES the I.
The best of Kings, of Husbands, of Fathers, and of Men, who was decolated on
that day, Anno 1648. and in the Four and twentieth year of His Sacred Majesty's
most Gracious Reign.
Cain rose up against Abel his Brother, and slew him. Genesis 4. 8.
HArd hearted Nature! That being yet so young, should bring forth so cruel a
Monster? A Brother to kill a Brother, and that for no other quarrel, but for
his Righteousness, because his deeds were good, and Cains evil; what malignity
did our first Parents fall, distill into all the succeeding Race? Yet being
questioned by the voice of Heaven, Cain, desperately evil as he was, was not
so impudently shameless as to own, though not so ingenuous, as to confess the
fact; but why should we remember Cain with so black a Character? Cain, a Saint
may seem, compared with the Sons of Belial, whom this latter age has produced;
we have seen (as this day England direful Tragedy; England, that most dismally
has committed Felony upon her self, and with her own bloody hands, cut off her
own Royal head: Oh, it is a sad judgment, that upon the defect of our prayers,
and the omission of our obedience, is fallen upon us, a judgment accompanied
with such lamentable consequences, occasioned by so deplorable an action, so
fatal a blow, as no hand can write the story of it, for trembling; or if it
could, no eye were able to read for weeping; no tongue is able to speak it is
grief, for stammering and titubations; or if it should, no ear were able to
hear it, for glowing: Nay, we have seen that that is so far from being
communicable to posterity in any credible relation, that we our selves, can
hardly believe our selves, to to have seen a most gracious, glorious King,
settled in his Fathers Throne, by the Laws of God and of the Land, confirmed in
his Regal Power, by the Oaths of Allegiance, taken by his very enemies, in the
issue of a sharp tedious War, after the expense of many thousands of Noble,
Generous, Loyal, Protestant Christians lives, in his just defense, to be at
length, by the power of a rebellious, treacherous crew of his own Subjects,
(and many of them his false-hearted, household Servants,) born, and bred* and
grown rich under his happy Government, (and by his liberal hand) brought to a
solemn trial, under pretense of Law, formally arraigned for his life and
adjudged by those that were his professed foes (and without being heard) as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer and a public Enemy to be put to death, by the
severing his Head from his Body; and that this sentence should be executed, by
the force of the Soldiery, on a Scaffold erected before his own Court? In the
midst of Populous London and Westminster; in the face of the Sun at noon day,
God, Angels, Men, looking on; and to pass through his Banqueting House, his
house of State and Pleasure, to this Mount-Calvary; and as a Lamb, before the
Shearers not to open his mouth? Oh the Heavens! I dare not enter into too
serious a consideration of this unheard off, unparalleled fact, lest I drown my
senses in the Abyss of incomprehensible sorrow; the whole world abroad stands
amazed at it, England only being under the stroke, remains stupidly
insensible of her own, both fin and misery: The earth indeed at this day, was
not felt to quake, but all men's hearts, (not more hard then the Adamant)
trembled: The graves indeed did not open to let forth their dead, but many
tenderhearted, amongst the living, with grief dyed, and went to their graves:
The vales of our Temples indeed were not rent, but our material Temples
themselves, in this the head of our Church on earth, were vertually destroyed
in his Majesty's Dominions: More, I cannot tell more, on this sad Theme; I dare
not so much as think, lest I thinking, dye: Much less do I know what to do,
(for since the Creation of the World, the like has not been seen) but mine
eyes, dear God, are toward thee.

EJACULATION.
Lord! How long will thou be angry? shall thy jealousy burn like fire for
ever? If this be done to the green and fruitful tree, what shall become of the
dry and withered? If a gracious King, whom thou have made so near thy self,
escape not thy hand of temporal punishment, what may a rebellious, a
monstrously sinful People expect? But in Judgment thou have promised to
remember mercy, have mercy then I humbly pray thee, upon the remnant of thy
People, preserve us under the shadow of thy wings, until this Tyranny be
over-past, and establish over us if it be thy holy will CHARLES the Second, the
undoubted Son and Heir of his fathers Virtues and Crowns, that Kings again
according to thy own ordinance, may be Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing
Mothers is this our Israel, that Religion, Law, Liberty, Property, Commerce,
Love, and Unity, may return again to our bleeding and fainting Nations, and
all this for thy Sons sake, our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen.

Written and wept by M. de R. of the Middle Temple. Exq. 3. Printed in the
Year. 1660.


