Reasons Humbly offered for the suppressing all Hackney Stage-Coaches and
Caravans, and for inducing Gentlemen to live upon their Estates in the
Country, and Wear the Manufactures of England, and to restrain Servants from
wearing any other.
1. THey spoil the Roads, put the Country to vast Charge to keep them in
Repair, are often the occasion of great Mischiefs to Gentlemen that travel on
Horsback, by frequent putting them out of the way, and forcing them into
dangerous Holes and Rutts. 2. They spoil all Inns on the Roads, render the
Masters of them incapable of making necessary provisions for Travellors, or to
pay their Landlords their Rents, or to give the Relief they were wont to do to
the Poor, or to pay Taxes, or quarter Soldiers. 3. They are the occasion of
the fall of Rents all over England, by hindering the consumption of all sorts of
Provision both for Man and Beast. 4. They have occasioned the breeding of good
Horses to be neglected, and create in mankind a slothful and Lazy habit and
disposition of body, make them take no care to attain to good Horsmanship, a
thing so necessary for all men to understand in order to their own and their
Countries services. 5. They have been, and are highly prejudicial to the
Watermen, and have hindered the breeding of many thousands, who otherwise might
at this time have been fit for the service of the King and Kingdom. 6. They
greatly hinder the consumption of the Woollen, and Leather Manufactures of the
Kingdom, and thereby (together with the Transportation of Leather) have
already Ruined above one hundred thousand of Families, in the City and
Country; such as, Combers, Carders, Spinners, Knitters, and Weavers of
Woollen; Fullers, Clothiers, Clothworkers, Drapers, Tailors, Cloth-drawers,
Cordwayners, Sadlers, Trunkmakers, Girdlers, Sword Cutlers, Loriners,
Inholders, Curryers, Tanners, Felt-makers, Gunsmiths, Grasiers, Butchers,
Poulterers, and Farmers of Land: and if not prevented, will quickly ruin many
thousands more, whose families do, and must lie upon the several Parishes
wherein they live to be kept; and in the mean time those who should maintain
them, are by the fall of their Rents (occasioned by the means aforesaid)
reduced to so small a yearly income as that they can hardly defray the
necessary expenses of their own family. 7. They are the occasion of many great
Robberies being committed, two or three men being able at pleasure to surprise
and Rob a Coach or Caravan, whereas if travelers were not shut up in Coaches
and Caravans, but were on horseback, they could neither be surprised nor robbed
without greater force. 8. They prevent the Consumption of Beer and Ale upon the
Roads, and thereby greatly lessen his Majesty's revenew of Excise, and by
carrying multitudes of Letters, abate very much the yearly value of the Post
Office, to the great prejudice of his Highness the Duke of York.


For Demonstration, It is Humbly Offered.

But if these were put down, the Consequences as is humbly conceived, would be.

1. THe Roads would be better, the Countries charge in repairing of them
lessened, and Travelers less incommoded.

2. Every of these Passengers who travel in these Coaches would have a Horse
upon the road, many of them would without doubt ride with a servant, some with
two or three, which now travel either without men, or with a boy only behind
the Coach; by this means there would be thirty at least, if not forty or fifty
horses on the road, instead of the ten which draws the Coach or Caravan.

3. These Travelers would disperse themselves into the several Inns on the
Roads, each man where he could find best Accommodations, and thereby Trade
would be defused, Inholders encouraged to provide Accommodations for their
Guests, and to pay their ancient Rents unto their Landlords.

4. Most of these Horses would go to grass in Summer time, which would greatly
raise the Rents of Pasture Lands about great towns, which though formerly bare
a great price, yet since these Coaches were set up, are but of little value.

5. It would occasion the consumption of at least ten times as much Hey, Straw
and Corn, that now is consumed, whereby Farmers would have a vent for their
Commodities and raise money to pay their Rents, and this appears very plain if
it be considered.

That not only will there be four times as many Horses traveling upon the
Roades as are now, but then in the City of London, and in all great Towns in
England, there would be great numbers of good Horses kept, not only by
Merchants and other Tradesmen and Gentlemen for their own uses, but several, as
formerly, would keep Stables of good horses to Let, which men may hire cheaper
then they pay for their passage in Coaches, and by this means would a vast
quantity of horsemeat be consumed.

6. These Travelers on the Roads would have twenty dishes of meat at least,
some of them two or three, and by this means would be consumed Ten times the
quantity of Beef, Veal, Mutton Lamb, and all sorts of Fish, Foul, Poultry; and
other Provisions that is now consumed, which will raise the price of them, and
Gentlemen's servants would drink Beer and Ale upon the Roads, which will help
off with the Country Barley, and increase the Revenue of Excise.

7. All these Travelers (if men) must have Boots, Spurrs, Saddles, Bridles,
Saddle and horse clothes; most of them would have Swords and Belts,
Pormantues, many of them Pistols and Holsters, and all of them good Cloaks,
Coats, riding Stockings and Hats, to keep out the weather. If women, they would
have side Saddles, or Pillions, Bridles, Safeguards and Hoods, and many other
Accouterments Laced or Imbroydered whereby the makers of all these things (above
one hundred thousand whereof, who lived well, consumed four or five joints of
meat every week in each of their Families, and releived others, but now are
reduced to beggary) would be set at work again and provide as formerly for
their Families, and help consume the Manufacturies and Provisions of the
Kingdom, and prevent Foreigners growing Rich by Manufacturing Leather, one of
our Staple Commodities, which till within these few years was Felony to
Transport; and then Foreigners, who could not be without Boots, Shoes,
Saddles, Portmantues, Holsters, Hatcases, Trunks, and many other things made of
Leather, had them from hence Manufactured, by the making whereof, above
fourscore thousand Handicraft Tradesmen get livelyhoods; nor had there been any
need of passing an Act to Transport Leather unmanfactured, if it had not been
that these Coaches prevented the consumption that formerly was, of Boots,
Saddles, Portmantues, Hat-cases, etc. But for want of the consumption that
formerly was, before these Coaches were set up, Hydes bare so small a price
that it was thought fit to transport Leather. The sad consequence whereof is,
that all our Handicraft Tradesmen are undone, for now Foreigners buy up the
best of our Leather, transport it and manufacture it abroad, whereby they grow
Rich, and will carry out nothing that is Manufactured here, so that we are
impoverished, for now instead of carrying out five hundred pounds worth of
Leather as we did formerly, when it was Manufactured here, they now carry out
but one hundred pounds worth unmanufactured and manufacture it themselves,
whereby they get four hundred pounds, which our Tradesmen not only lose, but
for want of getting are ready to starve.

And if it be true, as most certainly it is, that we do carry out but one
hundred pounds instead of five hundred pounds formerly exported, and yet import
five hundred pounds worth of Foreign Goods as we used to do, when we carried
out our Leather Manufactured as aforesaid; then must it needs follow, that we
pay four hundred pounds in ready money, which formerly we paid in work, and
that not only impoverisheth our Tradesmen, but exhausts the Treasure of the
Kingdom, and makes not only Foreign Manufactures rich, by getting what we
might earn here, but foreign Kingdoms Rich by having so much of our money to
pay their Manufactures with. Now if these Coaches were down, Leather should not
need to be Transported unmanufactured, and then must Forraigners have all from
England manufactured as formerly they had, insomuch that till of late, all our
old Boots, and Shoes were bought up, mended and sent beyond Seas; but now the
quite contrary, for forraigners transport Leather unmanufactured, Manufacture
it there, and import it back when Manufactured, to almost the total destruction
of the trade of our English Manufacturers.

8. If these Coaches were down, all Gentlemen would be encouraged to breed good
Horses for the service of the Kingdom, which may (if not in time taken care
of) be wanting, great numbers being of late years transported beyond the Seas,
and little care taken for breeding of others, because Gentlemen ride little
themselves; but if they had not this effeminate kind of traveling to trust
unto, they would use themselves unto riding, and take care to breed good horses
for their own use, and be fit and able for to serve His Majesty and the
Kingdom, if occasion require the same.

And it would prevent their so frequent traveling from home, whereby they
would be more in the Country amongst their Tenants, live and spend their Rents
amongst them, take off their Provisions, we are their Manufactures, sit at work
and relieve the Poor, keep the money in the country circulating amongst their
Tenants, that now is drawn up to London and spent here in gay clothes and
Treats; and by this means their affairs would be more carefully managed, great
expenses prevented, the provision in the Country consumed, and their Rents
increased and be well paid.

9. If these were down, then would many thousands of Watermen be bred, which
have been hindered by Stage-Coaches, which go to every town between Graves End
and Hendly, on both sides the River, and carry those Passengers (that before
they set up) were Oar or S^uller fares, and so discourage the Watermen that
are bred, and been the occasion of laying aside Barges, by bringing and
carrying the Passengers bundles and small parcels that they used to bring and
carry.

10. If these Coaches were down, then would those Letters they carry, go by
Post, which by computation, may raise that part of his Highness the Duke of
York's Revenue 5000 l. per annum.

11. If these were down, Travelers would ride on horsback, and thereby prevent
many Robberies now committed by reason of there being shut up into Coaches and
Caravans, so that two or three men may surprise a Coach at pleasure.

12. It would prevent the Ruin of the four hundred Hackney Coachmen about the
town, who are Licenced, pay five pound per annum a piece for their Licenses,
are under Rules, liable to punishment for breach of the Law made for their
government, yet are undone by those who keep Stage-Coaches, they coming out in
the night and taking their work from them, eat the bread out of their mouths,
and yet are not Licenced, nor pay any thing toward the breaking up the
Streets, by which means the streets are more broken and annoyed then before the
Act for settling the number of 400. was made, when as if these were down,
Hackney Caoches would be often hired into the Country, and so the streets
would be emptier of them, and not so much broken by them.

To conclude, there is hardly a Trade or Tradesman that is not one way or other
hurt by these Coaches, nor is there a Gentleman, if he truly and seriously
consider his interest, but is prejudiced infinitely beyond the advantage he
pleases himself with the having by traveling in these Coaches, considring
that if he save five pound a journey once or twice a year, he by the lowering
the prices of commodities, hindering the consumption of them, destroying the
many trades and tradesmen aforesaid, has brought down his Rents a third penny
already, and if some remedy be not found out must speedily abate more, and yet
have his charge increased upon him by expenses in London and mayntaining, the
poor tradesmen and their families who are ruined by means as aforesaid, when as
if these things were remedied, Stage-Coaches put down, and Gentlemen would live
upon their Estates, and encourage the poor by wearing the Manufacturyes of the
Kingdom, and keeping good houses, commodities would be consumed, Rents raised,
the charge of maintaining the poor taken off, the Handicrafts Tradesmen be
employed, and all poor set at work and enriched, and Foreigners growing rich by
Manufacturing our Staple commodities be prevented, the Kings revenue would be
increased, and the safety of the King and Kingdom provided for; Watermen and
horses would be bred, and the Subjects would be in a capacity not only to live
handsomely, but cheerfully to contribute toward raising money to pay the debts
and defray the charge of the Kingdom, and the Gentry will endear themselves
with their tenants and Countrymen.


