Real Persecution, or the Foundation of a general Toleration, Displaied and
Portrayed by a proper Emblem, and adorned with the same Flowers wherewith the
Scoffers of this last age have strowed their Libellous Pamphlets.
Collected out of several books of the Sectaries to discover to world their
wicked and abusive language against godly Presbyterian Ministers.
Esaias. 28. 22. Now therefore be ye not mockers, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 13. And who is
he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good.

But to you that suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, be not afraid of
these men nor troubled.

Having a good conscience that whereas them that thus speak evil of you as of
evil doers, they may be ashamed that thus falsely accuse you, etc.


The Picture of an English Persecutor or a Fool Ridden Ante* Presbeterian
Sectary
For Opposeing Authority Reuileing the Assembly Slandering the Government by
Presbetry and disturbing the ministers at the time of their public excersise
by giueing up bills in mockery calling the ministers priests rideing slaves,
horse leeches Cormorants gorbellyd Idol Consistory of devils etc: has not
this discoverd jshmaels carnal spirits persecuting godly Isaaks



1. MArtins Echo, page 16. Loving friends and neighbors, stand still gaping
with your mouths open, and quietly bow down your backs whilst you are bridled
and sadled, and let the holy humble gentle Presbyterians get up and ride, etc.
2. They Will deal very gentle with you, though the Proverb be, Set a beggar on
horseback and he will ride to the Devil. 3. Though they have spurs, yet they
will not use them; yet if they do chance to gall your backs and shoulders, and
force you to cry out, etc. 4. Then you shall have liberty to leap out of the
frying pan into the fire, by making your appeal to the Common Council of
Presbyters. 5. Here you shall have Rehoboams answer, our fathers the Bishops
chastis'd you with whips, but we will chastise you with scorpions, etc. 6. For
the same power which was lately resident in an Archbishop, is inherent and of
divine right in every Presbyter. 7. Has not the Protestant Religion been locked
up in the breast of the Assembly. 8. Has not your Faith been pind on their
sleeve, and you must take the result of them whether it be right or wrong. 9.
You have engaged to suppress Prelacy, High Commission, etc. thus you have beat
the bush, but the Presbyterians have caught the bird. 10. Thus to shun the
smoke, you have leapt into the fire. 11. Page 7. 8. Be ye mounted upon your
great Horses, that trundle you to and fro from London to Westminster. 12. Mount
all your Cannons, and advance like mighty men of valor, etc. even whole black
Regiments of you into the Fields. 13. Page 21. Presbytery is but a shift at a
pinch, what good the Devil will have of it, I know not. 14. Who knows the luck
of a lowzy cur, he may prove a good dog. 15. Page 5. 6. Sir John Presbyters
life is like neither, to be long nor good. 16. He will be brought to some
sudden untimely end, perhaps to hanging. 17. Presbytery shall have but a short
time to do mischief in, and then the people will sing, Hey toss the Devils
dead. 18. The Synod shall speedily be dissolved, and the Devil chaind up. 19.
Rejoice oh England, Presbytery shall shortly have never a child to vex thee, or
to suck up thy fat. 20. Then farewell Assembly of Divines dissembled at
Westminster, Sir Simon Synod and his son Presbyter Jack. 21. Page 5. The
barbarous Caniball Sir John Synod, etc. 22. Let him suffer his teeth and nails
to be plucked out and cut off by an Independent Barber. 23. That hereafter he
may never bite or scratch more. 24. Well Sir Simon, if you will not mend your
manners, Martin will observe all your postures. 25. An Martin will set
Christopher Skale-skie, Rowland Rattle-priest, Martin Claw-clergy, and
Bartholmew Bang-priest upon your back. 26. And in time these will pull down
your Synod, and your sphere about your ears. 27. Behold a Troup comes, Sir
Simon Martin is of the tribe of Gad. 28. Though a Troup of Sir John's overcome
him for a time, yet he will overcome him at last. 29. Martin is resolved to
jeet you out of your black Cloaks and Cassocks. 30. Martin intends no longer to
dally with you, but to handle you without mittins. 31. He'lethwack your
Cassocks, and rattle your jackets. 32. He Will stamp upon the panch of your
villainy, and squeeze out the garbidge of your iniquity. 33. He is resolved to
beat you and your son Jack into a mouse hole. 34. There Is not a man of Martins,
but is a man of valour^ and metal. 35. These all hate a Tithe divouring
Priest, as they hate the Devil. 36. You stif necked Priests, turn to Martin,
lest his fierce wrath confound you and your whole posterity. 37. Harken you
rebellious Assembly to Martin, and persecure no more. 38. Persecution has a
thousand Jack-tricks to block up all passages, and stop all mouths. 39. Page 2.
He turned Reverend Imprimatur, and here was all as sure as the Devil and
Presbyter could make it. 40. Page 14. We employ Doctor Featley's Devil to make
up a Description of the Anabaptists. In the Nativity of Presbytery.
41. That the Devil made the urchin Sir John Presbyter an abject, a fugetive
newly come out of Scotland. 42. Page 5. Like his father the Devil, he delights
in black. 43. That he is fitter to be a weathercock, then a Divine. 44. Only
the evil spirit of Mercury presents him to be the Devils goat-head.
A Pamphlet against Tithes.
45. The sabred Ordinance of Tithes was wisely thought on before the Directory.
46. Because he is worse then an Infidel, and denies the faith that provides not
for his Family. 47. My Lord the Defendant, smells of a fat Benefice. 48. See,
his pockets are full of presbyterian Steeples, the Spires stick under his
girdle. 49. Ha, ha, ha, Instead of weather-cocks, every Spire has got a black
box on it. 50. Instead of Moses, Aaron, and the two Tables, we shall have Sir
Simon, and Sir John, holding the late solemn League and Covenant. 51. And then
that spotless sacred Ordinance of Tithes, the two Tables of our Presbyterian
Gospel, painted on all the Churches in England. 52 O brave Sir Simon, the bells
in your pockets chime all in; ours chime all out. 53. I pray you give us a
funeral Homely for your friends before you depart, here is twenty shillings for
your pains. 54. It Is Sacrilege to bring down the prise, as it was in the
beginning, is now, and shall be ever more, world without end. 55. Our
temporizing Doctors are not so simple to swim against the stream. 56. Their
Religion moves upon the wheel of the State. 57. I would your Lordships would
call in your Ordinance for Tithes, and turn them to the peoples good wills. 58.
Then we should have a tithe Pig sold for a penny.
Sacred Decretall.
59. The Ordinance permitting none to Preach but such as are Ordained, is a
Patten of the Spirit worse then the Monopoly of Soap. 60. Therefore we wisely
consulted of a Committee of Examination to be chosen out of us. 61. It must not
be esteemed a Court of Inquisition, that is Popery. 62. Only an inlet to a
thorough Reformation, that is a goodly name, may do much good. 63. O ye two
houses of Parliament, make an other Ordinance, that all the martins may be made
to fly the three Kingdoms the next Mid-summer with Cuccoes and Swallows. 64.
That so we may have a Blew-cap Reformation, amongst bats, owls, jackdaws, and
wood-cocks. 65. Then Blew-cap for us.
A Bil given up at M. Calamy's Church as follows.
66. You are desired to remember the Priest-Ridden-slaves that went about to
gather hands for the disbanding, Sir Tho. Fairfaxes Army.

Reverend Assembly, up arise and jog,
For you have fairly fisht, and caught a frog:
Now you have sat four years, pray can you tell
A man the way, that Christ went down to Hell.
In these two years, what can a wise man think,
That you have done ought else, but eat and drink:
Presbytery climbed to the top of fame,
Directory and all from Scotland came;
O monstrous idleness, alack and welly,
Our learned Clergy mind naught but their belly.
JUDE 17, 18, 19. Beloved, remember the words that were spoken by the Apostles
and our Lord Jesus Christ.

How they told you there should be mockers in the last times, who should walk
after their ungodly lusts.

These are they that separate themselves sensual having not the spirit.

These are they that make it their common practice and delight to cast reproach
and contempt upon the Gospel, and the faithful Messengers and Ministers thereof.

London, Printed for J. H. and are to be sold in Popes head Alley. 1647.


