REASONS for Preserving the Public Market of Blackwell-Hall, and restraining
the Levant Company of Merchants from deferring their Shipping as long as they
please.
Humbly Offered to the PARLIAMENT.
THE Life of Trade depends upon an equal Encouragement to all Persons that are
Instruments of its Promotion: And the Variety of Circumstances that make an
Odds in Buying and Selling (the tender part of Trade) are so many, that nothing
but a Public Market can make an equal Balance, where alone the Buyer and
Seller are upon equal Ground. The Buildings of Blackwell-Hall (fairly
accommodated to Trade) are now become no more (for the most part in Merchants
Cloth) than a Reception to collect a Duty out of the Cloth, and then sent by
Factors and others into private Houses for a Sale, and the Maker become an
unconcerned Person in the Sale of his own Goods, scarce a Merchant appearing at
this public Market.

The Hardships upon the Clothiers from this Alteration, which is about twenty
or thirty Years, are chiefly these:

1. He can never know what Quantities of Cloth of any sort is upon Hand to be
sold, which is a great light for his Government in holding up the Price of his
Goods; whilst the Merchants and Packers are well enough conversant in this
Point: Nay, the Packers many times magnify their Stock of Cloth, to give the
Merchants Encouragement to come and buy from the greater Choice; as has been
manifest from many Instances; which is hard upon the Maker.

2. Hereby the Merchants have their Parcels of Cloth laid up by the Packers
against a Shipping, which remain upon the Clothiers Account, thereby beating
down the Price in little Parcels to support the Work-people; and when the
Shipping come, the whole Parcel sold off at that Price, and not the least
Advance made by the Merchant: Whereas, was so great Quantities of Cloth bought
by many Hands in the Public Market, it would necessarily make some Advance
upon Cloth, and our Monied Merchants, to gain that Advantage, would always be a
buying beforehand.

3. The Packer and Factor, to accommodate the Merchant, has brought on a long
Credit with Cloth; and the Packer being under other Obligations, is always very
tender of pressing the Merchant for Payment, if his Conditions are not
performed: Neither, indeed, is he a fit Person to be employed in the Sale of
Cloth for a Clothier, having a nearer Interest of his own to prefer.

4. The Packer being a Buyer of Cloth himself against a Shipping, is always a
beating down the Price upon the Clothier, for his own Advantage; and the best
Opportunities for Sales besure will be reserved for his own Goods, if not put
off by a better Sortment of the Clothier's.

5. Hereby the Merchant having Opportunity to buy Cloth upon any day of the
Week, the Clothier has no Dispatch in his Business, but remains twice as long
in Town as in former days, when no Cloth was to be had at the first-hand, but
at the public Market, upon the usual Market-days; which kept the Merchant to a
Dispatch with the Clothier.

The Consequences of which has been, that the Price of Cloth has been beat
down a third part, the Prices of Wages in the Country many times from
Nine-pence to Sixpence; besides many Hardships to the poor Laborers, in
putting Commodities upon them above the real Value. How far this Management
has affected the Country-Gentleman's Estate, he is now to make a Judgment.

The Practice of our Turkey-Merchants, for many Years past, in deferring their
Shippings above two Years at a time, being added to this, (which was eminently
made out by some of their own Members,) does sufficiently illustrate the low
Prices of Wool, and the Poverty of the Country.

The Packers who have been entrusted with the Sale of the Clothiers Cloth,
without peradventure were true to the Merchants Interest, otherwise they had
never appeared so vigorous to support their Practice: And this being evidently
so, the Politic Timeing of their Shipping, has easily procured Cloth upon
their own Terms. In the Year 1675. the Clothiers Petitioned the Parliament
against this Grievance, and it was then resolved, That the Turkey Merchants
should send Ships with the Woollen-Manufactures twice a Year to their
respective Factories: But the Order being not brought into a Law, through the
rising of the Parliament, it was soon forgot, and worse Practices used in that
kind since that time than was before, which we hope will now be redressed by
this Bill.

But our Merchants and Packers now give out, that they will ruin the Clothiers
of those Counties that are the Promoters of this Bill, by getting some
particular Counties excepted, a greater Kindness than the Clothiers themselves
desired; And in order hereto, they have procured a Letter, from some few
Clothiers of Oxfordshire, to their Members, to desire the same, which would be
very unreasonable, in that they are but one days Journey distant from this
public Market, and most other Counties above two. The next Exception is
Suffolk Cloth, which has been always sold at Leaden-hall-Market, and is no way
affected by this Bill; as also Yorkshire, when the Cloth of that County is
Shipped off at Hull, and none brought to London but what is bought in the
Country, which is provided for in the Bill. The whole of which we humbly submit
to the Impartial Justice of this Honorable House.

OF THE CLOTHIERS.


