THE KINGS MARCH WITH THE SCOTS,

And a List of the names of 3. Lords, 12. Knights, 5. great Officers, and 3.
Doctors of Divinity, with other Gentlemen that submit to the Parliament upon
the surrender of Newarke.

Where we took on Friday last, May the 8. 1646. 1. Great piece of Ordnance,
called Sweet-lips. 2. Great piece of Ordnance more. 2. Mortar pieces, and
diverse small Guns. 4000. Arms, and 40 Barrels of Gunpowder. Many thousand
weight of Bullet, and all their Ammunition and provisions, and all their bag
and baggage.


These being examined by the original Papers, are commanded to be printed, and
are published according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, May 11. 1646.

The Copy of a Letter from the Comm^ssioners Quarters at Newarke, relating the
manner of the Surrender thereof to the Parliament, on Friday the 8 of May, 1646.
Worthy Sir,
YOu had in my last the Copy of the Articles of the surrender of Newarke; since
which, I give you this further account of the performing what was there agreed
to, it being ours one day sooner then we expected from them. For, whereas the
agreement was by the Commissioners on both sides, that Newarke should be
surrendered this day to the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, for the Parliament
of England. The Governor has bin so ready to hasten it, that yesterday, being
Friday, the 8 of this instant May, the Lord Bellasis sent to Major General
Poyntz to have it then surrendered; which, by reason of the sickness, being so
hot in Newarke, he desired to hasten; as also, the other Lords and Gentlemen,
with the Ladies and Gentlewomen* did much desire to be speeded, as much as
could be, longing for their Enlargement, which occasioned the surrender a day
sooner then by the Articles was agreed; and truly, it is become a miserable
stinking infected Town, I pray God they do not infect the Countries and
Towns adjacent, which is the care of the Commissioners, that way be taken to
prevent.

Yesterday the Commissioners came up to see them march out of Newarke; they
carried not much out of the Town, for they had but very few Carriages: we have
gathered together 4000 Arms already, and there are more; which, by reason of
the sickness in diverse places, the Officers dare not yet venture to fetch out,
nor make that diligent search, which will afterward be made, so soon as with
safety we may.

We have taken Sweet-lips (the great Gunne) which they so much esteemed of, and
11 more great pieces, two Mortar pieces, and diverse Drakes, and other small
pieces, and 40 Gunpowder, with great store Match, Bullets, and all sorts of
Ammunition.

Those of Newarke Garrison, from the greatest to the least, do all of them
generally seem to be much discontented at their hearing, that the King has
delivered himself up to the Scots, and are very much troubled at the hearing
thereof, which makes many of them to repent, that ever they were engaged in the
service, being like men in amaze at the hearing of it; And when 800 of them had
marched out with the Lord Bellasis the Governor, and it was expected that they
should name to what Garrison they should march, they would not nominate any
Garrison to march to, for the further service of the King in the design
against the Parliament: But (as all the rest that came out of Newarke, who were
above 1000 more, so they went every one to their own homes: So that, as I
confess, I know not where they could have easily found out any Garrison
unbesieged to march to, according to the Articles, so they did not take care to
put themselves into any other prison in that service, in which they have
received so little satisfaction.

The Governor (to give him his due) has been very punctual, and the
conditions very exactly observed, and performed so fully, as I believe, ever
any were, and all of them are very diligent to procure a good repute of the
Parliament; the Commissioners and the Courtry, for which they labor much, and
thereby make way to compound with the Parliament for their delinquency: I
believe, that all those of quality (of whom there are many) will continue
laboring to compound for their estates.

The Country thereabouts are all summoned to come in with Spades, Shovels,
Pick-axes, and other necessaries on Monday next, to assist in the demolishing
of the Works of Newarke, which are very many, strong, and formidable, I
believe they will come in very joyfully to that work, which tends to so great
an ease to all those parts, as they have found by woeful experience, since they
felt the oppression of that Garrison, and others, of all which they are now
clear, and all will be buried in the ruins of this, which they are forthwith
to level. Doctor Deane, Doctor Hurst, Doctor March, and diverse other malignant
Clergymen were in Newarke, who with the Gentry, as Aldermen Atkinson, and the
rest of the malignant Townes-men, and others, are very sad in the Town, so as
they walk away in a mournful posture; the troubles of those parts, being now
most troubled in their own thoughts.

The Scots are marched Northward withal their whole body of Horse and foot;
the Horse march before with the King, and with them Lieutenant General David
Lesley; they march along with great rejoicing that they have the King with
them. But the Yorkshire men, so soon as they heard that the Scots Army were to
march Northward, they presently (most of them) gathered their Horses, and
forthwith sent them over Trent into Lincolnshire, for fear that some unruly
Soldiers, in the Scots Army, upon their march northward (coming through their
country) should plunder them, by which means there were very many horses sent
into Lincolnshire, and so the country had not many horses left in their
grounds to loose. The Scots Forces are marched toward Doncaster, but I believe
that a party of Horse will go before with the King toward Newcastle.

They say that they have dealt very plainly with the King since he came into
their Army.

We have taken great care to prevent the Soldiers from plundering, though
some of them did very well remember how they were stripped at Spittle.

The Governor has had very great care of all things in Newarke, to see that
nothing should be imbezeled, and has showed himself very noble; there is a
great change, by which God has given us experience of his great power, in
bringing down the hearts of the proud and h^ughty.

There is a M^ssenger come to the Commissioners from the Parliament, for those
who came with the King, and the Commissioners have sent to the Scots, to demand
Master John Ashburnham, and Mr. Hudson, for those are the two that came along
with his Majesty from Oxford, but the Messenger is not yet returned, nor do we
yet hear what answer is made to him.

The several Regiments and Companies from the Association, that came to assist
us in the taking in of Newarke, are all marching home with no small joy, that
all things are now s^ clear in those parts.

Our Commissioners have endeavored (by all means possible) to continue all
amity and loving accord with the Scots, who, I believe, will grant to have his
Majesty disposed of as both Kingdoms shall agree, and in the mean while to
remain with General Levens Army, where he shall dispose of him; and General
Leven has carried on things since he came to the Army with great wisdom and
moderation; and it is said, that he is much troubled what to do to please
both Kingdoms, in the matter of giving account about the King.

Newa^ke is now open and free again, and the Tradesmen are prepa^ing to
furnish their shops, our Soldiers have already bought diverse thing of them,
and the Country have a free market, but it cannot be expected to be much,
whilst the sickness is in the Town; but to God be the praise, who has done
this great work for us, to deliver this strong hold of the enemies into our
hands; I pray God, that others (so oppressed) may have the like mercy, and
peace and truth be settled amongst us, which is the prayers of

Your humble s^rvant, S. R.
Balderton, May 9. 1646.
A List of what was taken in Newarke, on Friday the eighth of May, 1646.
1. Great piece of Ordnance, called, Sweet-lips. 11 Great pieces of Ordnance
more. 2. Mortar pieces. Diverse Drakes and small pieces. 4000. Arms gathered,
diverse Arms not taken in. 40. Barrel of Gunpowder. Many thousand weight of
Bullets and Lead, Match, and other Ammunition, proportionable and plentiful.
Little fresh meat, only Poultry, and that very scarce. Salt-meat, some
plenty, but much of it tainted, and not fit to be eaten. Butter and Cheese,
some store, Beer and Wine many barrels. Corn good store. Fuel for fire very
little.
A List of the Lords, Knights, Colonels, and chief of the Gentry that marched
out of Newark, to their own homes, to submit to the Ordinances of Parliament.
Lords.
Lord Bellasis, Governor. Lord Davencourt. Lord Laxington.
Knights.
Sir John Burrell. Sir Guy Palms. Sir Charles Dalison. Sir Robert Dalison. Sir
Robert Tredway. Sir George Hennings. Sir Jarvis Skroop. Sir Philip Constable.
Sir Thomas Iugram. Sir Bryan Balmes. Sir Iarvis Nevill. Sir Simon Fanshaw. And
others.
Great Clergymen.
Doctor Farmer, Chancellor of Lincoln. Doctor March, Dean of Y^^ke. Doctor
Hurst, and others.
Chief Officers.
Major General Air. Colonel Gilby. Colonel Trollop. Colonel Herne.
Colonel Darsey. Colonel Atkins. And others.
The most malignant Aldermen of the Town were The Mayor of Newark. Alderman
Atkinson. Alderman Standish. And others.

FINIS.

