REMARABLE PASSAGES Newly received of the great overthrow of Sir Ralph Hopton
and his Eorces; At Madburie, 12. miles from Plymouth:

WITH The taking of the High Sheriff ( Sir Edmond Fortescue) prisoner, and
diverse others of Note, their names being here inserted.

THE WHICH PARTICULARS WERE Sent in two Letters, to Gentlemen of good Credit
here in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, December. 14. 1642.

Plymouth, December. 9. 1642.
SIr Nicolas Slaning, and Sir Ralph Hopton have entered Devon: as you have
already heard, with two or three thousand foot and horse, and first took
Tavestocke, and next Plymton near Plymouth, and after went to Modberry,
leaving these towns fortified where the high Sheriff of Devon: Sir Edw.
Fortescue met them, and by his warrant of Posse commitatus called many
thousands together at Modberry on Tuesday and Wedsday last, where they thought
by examining every man to persuade the people to stand against the Parliament,
either by fair or foul means, and also to increase their army by taking up
of volunteeres, and arming them with the arms they could take from honest men
that were unwilling to follow their designs, by which means they would
certainly have gotten many to serve them, for that most part appeered from 18.
years to 60. years, but it has pleased God to frustrate their designs for
this time, by means the Scottish Colonel went hence on Wednesday morning by
four of the clock with four troops of horse, viz. Bar. Drakes, Captain
Tompsons, Captain Pimmes, and Captain Gooldes, and about 200. Dragoneeres; and
coming to Modberry about nine of the clock, all the Country people sled,
most of them being naked men, and those that had arms also threw them down and
ran away without any arms or horses; by which means, with the loss of one
man, they took the high Shereffe Sir Edmond Fortescue, Baronet Seymer and his
eldest son which was Knight of the Sheire for Devon: in Parliament) and
Squire Arthur Basset of the North of Devon: (a notable Malignant) but the
Clarke of the Peace, and about thirteen Gentlemen more, which they carried
from Dartmouth, and this day sent them hither by sea (God send them a fair
wind, I hope here will be 30. or 40. great Malignants sent from hence to
London) Sir Nicholas Slaning, and Sir Ralph Hopton escaped very narrowly:
Captain Goold, I hear, is sent with his troop to Exon to desire some aid
from thence, which if they come to join with our forces, with Dartmouth and
Plymouth (I hope, by Gods assistance) they will be speedily suppressed. Our
Soldiers are hearty to the Work, at Madbury they got great store of money,
horse, and arms from the Gentry they met there,

Vale.
Master Stock and loving friend,
SInce the writing of my Letter a friend is come hither upon purpose from
Exeter, to bring us tidings of a brave exploit done by the Plymouth Forces,
worthy to be Chronicled, a neat and true relation, and fit for the Press, is
as solloweth.

Upon Tuesday last at night, being the 6: of this instant, The Commanders of
the Garrison at Plymouth entered into a consultation concerning what was fit to
be done, and having intelligence that the Sheriff lay at Madbury, where the
trained bands by virtue of his Posse Comitatus met that day, and the next, the
Cavaliers chief quarrers being at Plympton, within 3. miles of them, thereupon
they framed their design. Very early in the morning Captain Thomson, Captain
Pym, and Captain Goold, and some others, with 500. Horse and Dragooneers,
marched away very privately Northward, toward Roubard Down, as if they meant
to go to Tavestock, and then wheeled about toward Ivy Bridge on Plymouth
road, and so went to Madbury, where in Master Champernons house, and in the
Town, they found the Sheriff, with diverse other Gentlemen of quality, and
2000. trained Soldiers, and Volunteers; presently on their approach the
Trained bands crying out, the Troopers are come, run away, many of them leaving
their Arms behind them; The house was beset, and the Sheriff stood upon his
defense until it was fired, and then the Assailants breaking in, possessed the
house, and took diverse prisoners, to the number of 20. or thereabouts, amongst
which were these that follow, Sir Edmond Fortescue, high Sheriff, Sir Edward
Seimor Baronet, Master Edward Seimor Knight of the Shire, Master Basset,
Captain Champernon, Captain Pomeroy, Captain Bedlake, Captain Peter
Fortescue, Master Barnes, Master Sheptoc Clerk of the Peace: After which they
marched away toward Dartmouth, with their prisoners, where that night they
safely arrived, bringing good store of Arms with them.

This good news I could not but write, although 10. at night: I conceive, nay
I hear they will there Ship these Prisoners for london, I wish them a fair
wind to bring them unto Winchester house, or some such place: Master Hill
understanding the ways of the March, will say it is as brave an exploit as
has been attempted a long time, unto whom, with all my good friends that shall
be at the reading hereof, I pray remember him that is always ready to serve
you, etc.

Dated December. 9. 1642. R. B.
We have now Letters from Portsmouth, where they are very courageous, and ready
to do exploits.




FINIS.

