The taking of CARNARVEN THE Castle, Works, Ammunition Bag and Baggage, By
Major-Generall MITTON: Where are, The Lord Byron, Colonel Vere. Colonel Vane.
And diverse Officers of note, Bishops, Gentlemen, Malignant Clergymen. And
others.
WITH Our prosperous Proceedings in the total reducing of North-VVales.

Printed by the Original Papers, and published according to Order of
PARLIAMENT.

LONDON: Printed by Jane Coe, June the 11. 1646.

Articles agreed upon June 4. 1646. Between Col. Edward Vere, Colonel George
Vane, Lieutenant Col John Disney; Commissioners on the behalf of the Lord
Byron; And Col. Thomas Glyn, Col. John Carter, Major Hierome Sankey,
Commissioners appointed on the behalf of General Mitton, for the surrender of
the Town and Castle of Carnarvan.
I.
THat the Lord Byron, the Governor of the Town and Castle of Carnarvan, all
Officers in Commission, and Gentlemen of quality, with their meniall Servants,
shall have liberty to march out with their Horse, Arms, Bag and Baggage,
properly to them belonging unto their several Countries Friends, and Estates,
wheresoever they are in this Kingdom, and to have liberty for three Months
unmolested, to make their peace with the Parliament, or to procure the
Parliaments License to go beyond Seas, they doing nothing during the time, to
the prejudice of the Parliament.

II.
That the rest of the inferior Officers and common Soldiers shall have
liberty to march to Worcester, marching ten miles a day, and if that Town be
besieged before they come thither; the Commander in chief at that Leagure, to
be desired by Major Genesis Mitton to give them Passes to go to their own homes,
they engaging themselves to do nothing to the prejudice of the Parliament, and
all to have free quarter in their march.

III
That all Officers and Soldiers whatsoever, that are sick, or wounded in the
Town, or Castle, shall have liberty to continue in Genesis Mitton his quarters
till they be recovered and then to have Passes to travel to their own
Countries, and in the mean time to be carefully provided for by Genesis Mitton his
order, they doing nothing prejudicial to the Parliament.

IV.
That neither the person of the L. Byron, nor the person of any Offiicer,
Gentleman, or Soldier, marching out as aforesaid, be searched; molested, or
troubled upon what pretense soever, they passing their Honors, that they carry
nothing but what is Articled for, and that none be entised from their Regiment
upon promise of preferment, or other inducement whatsoever.

V.
That such provision of Carriage be made as the Lord Byron shall think
necessary.

VI.
That Sir VVil. Byron, Lieut. Col. John Robinson, Lieut. Col. Shake^ly, Capt.
Hassal, Capt. Alcock, Cap. Bennet, Arch Deacon Price, and the Clergy men in
Town have the benefit of the Articles.

VII.
That the Town and Townsmen of Carnarvan shall enjoy all those rights and
privileges which formerly they had, and be preserv^d and kept from the
violence and plunder of the Soldiers.

VIII.
That the Irish according to the sense of the Ordinance of Parliament made in
that behalf shall be prisoners.

IX.
That in consideration hereof, the Town and Castle of Carnarvan, with all the
Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Boats and Provision, without any imbezelling or
defacing, and all other Provisions of war whatsoever, with the Records
therein, except what is allowed by the Articles to be carried away, and formerly
herein mentioned, be delivered up to Genesis Tho. Mitton, or to such as he shall
appoint upon Saturday next ensuing, being the 6 of this instant June, by twelve
of the Clock at Noon for the use of King and Parliament.

X.
That a Convoy be appointed for the L. Byron, and such Officers Gentlemen, and
Soldiers, as shall march out, for their safe Conduct out of North Wales,

XI.
That Hostages be given on both sides for the performance of these Articles,
and the return of the Convoy.

Subscribed by Commissioners for Genesis Mitton.
Thomas Glynne. John Carter. Jerome Sanky.
Commissioners for the L, Byron.
Edward Vere. John Vane. John Disney.


The Copy of a Letter from Carnarvan of the surrender of the Castle, etc. to
Major-Gen: Mitton, agreed to by Commissioners on both sides.
SIR,
IN my last I advertised you of our Agreement to capitulate with the Lord Byron
for the surrender of Carnarven, and six Commissioners were chosen, three for
Major-Generall Mitton, and three for the L. Byron, his Lordship sent out Col.
Edward Vere, Colonel John Vane, and Lieutenant Col. John Disney, and on our
side were chosen Col. Thomas Glyn, Col. John Carter, and Serjeant-Major Hierome
Zankey, who have effected the work, so that Carnarven is agreed to be
surrendered to us, agreed by both parties upon this treaty, and by each signed.
I have here enclosed sent you the Copy of the Articles whereupon it is to be
surrendered, which I hope will give very good satisfaction, and content to the
State. I am sure it is a very considerable service; it being a place of great
strength and of great use; And we are now to fall upon other designs for the
reducing of these parts to the obedience of the Parliament, but I must tell you
they are here for matter of Religion a most ignorant, and brutish people; who
know very little of God; and it is heartily to be wished that some honest and
godly painful Ministers would come to preach the Gospel to them, Indeed
there are some Prelates, and prelaticall Clergy in Carnerven very malignant,
and such as the people are like to profit but little by; except they will study
to preach Jesus Christ more then for ought I can here they have done but the
Country Towns here abouts have been quite without all manner of preaching
almost, but blessed be God we are in a fair way to reduce, these parts to the
obedience of the Parliament, (who I doubt not) will take care to send a
powerful ministry so soon as North Wales is totally reduced, I hope that
(very shortly) you will here good news, from Anglesay which is the place of
the greatest consequence (in all these parts, this that we have taken in being
very considerable also) Benmorris being a place that has bin of great use to
the King; I hope it will now be suddenly in our hands, which is of great
consequence; because of the convenience of bringing in of diverse foreign
forces thither as has been often done to serve the King against the Parliament
and Kingdom. I trust in the Lord that now God will be pleased to put an end to
all the troubles of these parts; that we may meet in peace. The King has now
no more Garrisons mentained by his party against us in all North Wales save only
5. and all of them either are or will be besiged (if not part of thdm
surrend^^d) with (...) days. Indeed some of them it may be will prove (...)
be reduced, and may hold out long, our Major General, Major General Mytton is
very active, even to be admired in the hastening to make an end of the work,
Colonel Glyne does us service since he joined with us, and truly Col. Carter,
is a very pretty Gentleman, and full of action; the Country are no little glad
of the hopes they have to enjoy what they have in peace; which is in a good way
for them, there are in Carnarven (with the Lord Byron) many gentlemen of
quality, most of the chief of those Officers that came from Chester, some
Bishops, and diverse malignant Clergy, the works are exceeding good and reguler,
high works and thick, and deep motes, I can not give you the certain number
of the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and provisions, till we be possessed of the
Castle, but after we have taken a note of them I will send you a list by the
first opportunity: but thus much I can assure you that they were so strongly
fortified that they little thought that Carnerven would so soon have bin in
our hands when Byron went thither; but blessed be-God this work is not put out
of question, and by the next I believe you will hear something both of Anglesey
and Flint Castle, but this is all at present from.

Carnarven the 5. of June 1646. Your humble Servant. S. R.

FINIS.

