The Receiver undeceived: OR AN ANSWER TO THE AVTHOR OF A late Sheet entitled,
Of Receiving the Communion in the Company of such, whom we conceive not so
good, holy, and rightly principled, as we wish they were.

WITH An Appendix for this Proposition, Ungodly Persons ought not to be
admitted to the holy Supper.

By SIONOPHILUS ECHTHROBABYLONICUS.

Luke 22.19. My body given for You.

20. Blood shed for You.

Act. 20.7. When the Disciples came together to break bread.

1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the blood of Christ?

v. 17. We being many are one bread and one body.

1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself, etc.

OXFORD, Printed in the year 1651.

The Readers Admonition.
READER,
I Am not ignorant that this present age is cloyed with public controversies.
Nor that the subject I discourse of has the weaker side, as to the Vulgar
approbation. Mine aim is truly told thee in the Title; how well the mark is
hitt, thy self may tell me in the trial. I hope thou will prove none of
those that set their Conscience in Religion, by their Country; not Gods
Counsel. It Is found too true, that custom is a second nature. And
prescription, even in Christianity carries a greater stroke then Scripture
does with very many, nor the meaner only. Hence are those pleas: Has been the
custom: And by our Fathers too before us. Joh. 4.
Alas! but did not the Samaritanes say the same? And Peter; A vain
conversation was received by tradition from your Fathers. 1 Pet. 1.
Yet more particularly: Approaching to Christ's table is a Case of life and
death. It cost him dear that had not on his wedding garment at the feast. Mat.
22.
What pity notwithstanding is it to see how sinners on the grounds aforesaid,
rush thereto, as horses to the battle, upon their ruin. And those most eager
for it that least understand the hazard of it. No marvel the Apostle charge
to Examine: not in the former formal road, but as it is elsewhere, Whether ye
be in the faith or not; and, 1 Co. 11. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Know ye not that Jesus Christ dwells in you, except ye be reprobates. Sure,
Reader, then thou have cause to try, before thou trust; to be well advised ere
thou adventure on business of eternal consequence. However I have done my
part thus to fore-warn; look thou to thine, to be fore-armed, else at thy
peril be it.

To the Author of the Sheet entitled [Of receiving the Communion in the
company of etc.]
YOu undertake the resolution of a Case of Conscience; but (if I mistake not)
leave it in as bad a Case as e're you found it. I would, without your
prejudice, cast in my mite to prevent abortion of such an hopeful Issue. It Is
not the Credit, but the Cause I serve, which makes me, (though my skill be
little at the weapon,) take up the buckler with you yet as at all would I not
be your, Enemy, so must I to the utmost be Truths friend herein; 2 Cor. 13.
you know who said, We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

Title exam. Former part.
First to your Title, then your Text.
That former truly halts down right: but, whether its a slip, or subtilty, I
don't determine. However it begins, and ends alike: indeed, it is current in
neither. The former part enquireth of receving the Communion barely; Disciples
ignorance, Peter's Cursing and Swearing, Judas's Treason. And Proleps^ and Pos.
3. and 7. Sub finem.
as if you meant to satisfy receivers only, about communicating with those
they think unworthy: whereas it is See Pos. 1, and 2.
elsewhere evident your purpose is to defend Dispensers also, and that too in
admitting See Pos. 1, and 2.
any or all, notwithstanding See Pos. 1, and 2.
ignorance or profaneness, (as the Custom was) unto that Ordinance; with
reproof of such as practice otherwise. And this indeed is the White you
chiefly aim at; as may be seen apparently, if the Reader will but trust to
his own eyes, before he take your word. Truly such dealing then is but a kind
of dodging with us; except you would have us think we have cause to thank you for
that as over measure.

But yet there is worse behind, where it proceeds [In the Company of such whom
we conceive not so good, holy, and rightly principled etc.] Latter part.
Sir, let me be ingenuous with you: were all your following Arguments clear
demonstrations above all possibility of exception, 'Twere but the Conquest of a
man of straw your self sat up. Who doubts but the least degree of goodness,
holiness, and rightly principlednesse, (to use your terms) or saving faith,
(as others speak more properly) who doubts, I say, but this as it entitles to
the Thing, much rather to the Sign and Scale the Sacrament? And as for that
addition [As we wish they were.] That is as true (if I may use that proverb)
as the very Gospel. where is He that has made the forward'st progress in the
way of godliness, but yet must say (Lay by the Ranters and their retinue) with
blessed Paul to the Philippians, I am not already perfect: and so may have our
wishes, as they had his, to abound yet more and more. Phil. 3.12. etc. 1.9.
And then what news you tell us! When the blind may see, it is of necessity to
receive with such, or else with none at all. In this we are agreed.

And now, good Reader, perchance thou wilt think the quarrel ended; and it were
indeed, but that there is an Ambush laid, which (it may be) is not observed by
thee. These are our Author's words it is true; but for his mind we must divo
deeper before we fetch that up. There Is no great danger in the venture. Compare
his place quoted in the margent of the former page with this his Title. The
sense is plain. He takes for granted, that our English parishes are Saints
Assemblies, nor only thus professedly, but positively also: (although the
generality are either dead in ignorance, or buried in profaneness, or both) and
therefore having, as he supposes, some See Title so good, holy, etc.
good degree though not so great, as we could wish, of goodness, holiness
etc. (you know the language) there is no reason to suspend them from the
Communion, or our selves from communicating with them. But where is the proof
of this? Or must the Reader give, because he begs that question of him? We know
what Numb. 16.13. [Congregation holy, every one of them.
Korah said, and the Papists think, but that will not serve the turn. Nor must we
trust, in such like cases, the word of Man, unless Gods Word be passed for it:
much less when it is against it, yet such is the foundation of all our Authors
building. But that I leave, with his Title too, unto thy Censure, and shall
enquire whether it be mended after in his Text.

This stands divided into 7 Positions as you term them.

exam.
The first is this.
[ Jesus Christ gave the Communion to Peter, who he knew would deny him with
cursing and swearing; and indeed so did.] yet Sir, you name but one temptation
wherein Peter had the foil so foulely, whereof he soon repented also, and that
with bitter tears, and what is this to continued viees of those unrepenting
ones, against whose suspension yet you plead, And truly Sir, you might have
been so courteous, indeed so just unto the Memory of that blessed Saint, as,
like the Mat. 26. ult.
scripture, to have let your Reader seen his virtue, with his vice; his faith
as over ballancing that his failing; at least that none occasion might be given
for presumption to prophaner hearts. And 2 that fault was not committed before
the holy supper, and therefore who would look that he should be suspended from
the supper for it, unless you think one may be justly punished before he has
offended. But you go on [and to all the disciples, who as Peter did not yet
believe the resurrection, nor a great while after neither, nor indeed could
they be brought to it.] But Sir, let us give the just allowance unto this, and
then it will not be found so much to light, as by your aggravations you would have
men believe. For first 'twas not the general resurrection whereof they
doubted, as the Sadduces; nor consequently That particular one of the body of
Jesus Christ. The failer as it seems, was made but in the Circumstance of time,
when it should rise: they thinking strange, belike, that his should lodge but
three days in the grave, where other bodies were to dwell even to the last.
Nor yet do I excuse them for giving higher place to their own thoughts, then
their Masters words. Well, you go farther, and tell us too of [Cleophas etc.]
but I c'ant tell why, since that he neither was of the twelve, nor received
with them. You name Thomas also, but he was included in [all the Disciples,]
whereof before. And last of all, you speak of their expecting [a temporal
Kingdome] wherein I grant they were mistaken, in expecting more then was
intended for them. Though yet it was the restoration of the Kingdom unto
Israel, Act. 1.6.
and not the subjection of Israel unto themselves whereof they did enquire. And
all men know, the old allusions of the Prophets about Messiah Coming, do look
like such as seem to promise the bringing in of that at least, as superadded
to a better stute.

These are the several sums of those your premises, the total truly cast up
comes to this [Christ gave the Supper to his weak Disciples.] What then? you
leave the Reader to conclude himself, wherein I Will do my best to help him,
since you have not. As your question runs this you would have, Therefore
receiving the Communion in the company of such, etc. is lawful. How well this
follows we spare to speak. But the conclusion shall be granted, as that which
neither any does oppose, nor the defense whereof your self do purpose.
Otherwise as you mean, thus; See above. and Pos. 5. [In the Ordinance of the
Lords and Commons etc.
Therefore it is lawful for a Minister to admit all his Parishoners, ignorant
and scandalous, unto the supper, and it is unwarrantable for any conscientious
persons to refuse receiving with them.

Whereto I answer. The Conclusion's bigger then the Premises, and therefore
Count it but on Courtesy if I take notice of the latter part. The other's
thus. Christ gave etc. Ergo, Ministers may etc. Here we deny the Consequence.

Our reasons are
1. Examples do not necessarily conclude. I Am sure thoug^ Christ's example be
in some, it is not in all things for our im^tation. I need not speak of his
fasting forty days; we have a cleerer instance about his ministerial office:
Joh. 4.2.
himself baptized none, may ministers therefore refuse that exercise? 'Twould
be a greatefull service for the Seekers.

2. Divines say commonly (your self too I suppose) tha^ from a church
constituting to one constituted, the argumen^ does not hold. We know that in
the infancy of common wealth's, whilst laws are making, policy framing,
things may be done, according to emergencies; which afterward must be
foreborne. 'Ime sure as to our business, there were that time, no offices nor
ce^sures exercised amongst the Apostles, as in a body politic; which
afterward in their number did increase, was not omitted.

3. Admit these two were very blanks; yet till you prove a likeness (which you
are never like to do) 'twixt those disciples and your parishoners, this reason
will be silent. Let the world be judge: for thus you argue. Christ gave the
supper unto weak beleivers, therefore we may to wicked unbeleivers, (I count
beleivers and disciples here to be synonyma's.) For, Sir, lay all the
Aggravations that your wit affords on the disciples blemishes (whether to
bolster ignorance and profaneness, I dare not say, what ever others may
suspect) I say, * Joh 6.68, 69, 2, 11, 16, 27, 17, 8. Luc. 22.32. Mat. 13.16.
alibi passim, o ye of little faith.
do what you can (and yet you are dexterous at it) to rub and lance their
sores, youl't find them sound at bottom, and true, though weak beleivers in
their foulest rags before the resurection, as well as after in their fairest
robes. And though you labor till you sweat, can it be proved that ignorant and
scandalous persons ( As above etc.
for such you mainly plead for) are any other in scripture plainness, then Joh.
17.3. with c. 3.36. 1 John 3. 3. Jam. 2.20.
wicked unbeleivers and do you think that strangers are as free unto the
privileges of a corporation, as Citizens themselves? But now let us see how
well the other follows hence. You mean the weak Disciples or believers did
receive together. Therefore the Se last particular of the 3. Pos. [mixt
Communion.]
mixture in this business of godly and ungodly is lawful. The very naming is
a nulling of it.

Thus Sir, I think your Pos. 2 sub finem.
strongest hold appears unable to hold out in your defense against the truth,
whereof I let the reader judge imparitally. For your Prolepsis our special
business with it is from part thereof to pick your meaning in the whole
discourse, and that we have already noted. Only whereas you intimate, the only
or maine reason of suspention is for reformation; it is your mistake at least of
others minds, if not of truth, who judge the cheifer ends are to prevent the
prophanacion of that Seal, and condemnation of his soul that is unworthy.

Lastly that speech of the [disciples vnbeleife] may be interpreted either of
the weakness of their faith and then you might have said so: or simply of
their want of faith (which may be thought you mean, and then it is before
refuted


[Judas received, ergo etc.] you spend two pages and some what better, with no
little confidence, about the proving of your antecedent, that Judas did receive
and think your office fairly done by disproving of that place which unto most
seems most against it It Is Joh. 13.30. You say [this place with all
circumstances seems unanswerably to prove the contrary] but let us see the
substance of those circumstances you boast will do the business. Joh. 13.30.


First let me tell you that I think you might have saved some pains and well
reducd your five to two, or three particulars at most; but that this serves to
fill the paper, and amaze the simple reader. But something unto each,

1 You say [v. 2. supper, that is the passover was ended and that in the
twilight.] But Sir, here lies the ground of your mistake, in that you are not
well acquainted with, or else oppugn your knowledge in the Jewish rites at
celebrating of the passover: which was briefly thus, as far as it concerns our
purpose. Scaliger 6. de Emend. p. 567.573. and Beza on Mat. 26. So Godw. Jew.
ant.
In the evening they lay down to eat the Lamb and unleavened bread, which
done they rose and washed their feet then returned again to a certain Leo
Modena page 129. of this also.
sauce wherein they dipped their bread and herbs. By this you may perceive what
means the supper ended v. 2. that is, the first course: the intermediat
washing; and the dipped sopp. Though I could have told you, that some translate
for Musc. in loc. Erasmus.
coena facta cum coena fieret, and one greek copy reads Beza.
(...), not (...) as the rest.

2. [ After supper, and before the Communion, was done and said all, from v. 2.
to v. 17.] True, rightly understood and until verse the 31. For the Communion
what mention's made of that weel'e see anon.

3. [ Our Savior thrice intimated Judas's treason 1 long before, 2 then at his
last passover and 3 at the Communion for certain if not a little after Luc.
22.21.] This last I answer in Beza's words, In Luc. 22.
it appears plainly from the other Evangelists and John especially that this
discourse was at the second course of the legal supper, and then for certain
not at the Communion, but before. So that your thrice is at the most but twice.

4 [The dipped sop was a piece of the blessed and broken bread] This is not
only a bare mistake (as by what above appears) but a bold dictate also; when
nota syllable does that Evangelist use (which I can find) about blessing or
breaking Sacramental bread. It Is plain he medles not at all about the
institution of the holy supper as being largely done by others before him. So
Bucer, Calv. Bez. and the Authors Marg. Paralepomen^ scribebat Johannes
omittens aliis dicta.


5 [ Supper that is the Passover was ended by twilight v. 2. but Judas went not
out till it was dark night v. 30.] 1 v. 2. proves not what you say, but if you
mean your comment on it I refer my reader to my answer there, with this
addition that the Law of the Passover only says. Exodus 12.6. (...) Between
two Evenings, some think Vespera Solis and Luminis. Others Declinationis and
Occasus.
Kill it in the Evening. 2. To that of Judas going out at [dark] night, there is
some thing of your own in that, you know it is common with the scriptures and in
our ordinary speech to speak of things as come or present, which are only
coming, or near at hand: and so interpreters Bulling. in Locum.
Night was at hand.

Now let the Reader judge, Quid dignum tanto etc. Though I am not ignorant, nor
desirous to have him so, that the question's controverted among some Learned.
Yet unto me it seems evident, that they are right who hold the negative, as
Certa eorum videtur sententia qui existima^t institutioni S. coenae non inter
fuisse. in Joh. 13.
Beza, Omnino probabile mihi videtur, Juda^ coenae illi non interfuisse. in
Mat. 26.
Piscator etc. which may be partly gathered from these words of Christ then
spoken to those present at the holy Supper: My body given for You: and blood
shed for You. Wherein all know, that Judas had no part. And clearly from that
John says expressly, he went out immediately upon the sops receiving, which
needs must be before the Suppers institution, as above appears. And though
Parens doubted, yet mark his Inde tamcu non sequitur quoth scelerati non sint a
mensa Domini arcendi juxta mandatum Apostoli cum talibus no cibum sumite.
inference. It follows not, that the wicked should not be suspended from
Christ's Table, as the Apostle wills: With such not to eat.

But should we grant it. Then you would say, sure Ministers may to such, etc. None
to forbear, etc.

It follows not: for 1. review the two former answers to the 1 Pos. 2. Judas
was an Apostle, a Preacher: nor do I find him whilst he kept his Ministry
branded with profaneness. 3. And specially, he was not yet convicted of his
villainous treason, nor indeed accused of it, * Non igitur quod Christus oraculo
complendo fecit trahi debet in exemplum. Par. in Mat. 26.
which is no marvel since it was not then brought forth though (wretched
caytiffe!) 'twas a breeding by him.

And for the other Disciples, why should they scruple Joining with him, when as
they knew no worse by him then by themselves? especially since as you think,
their Lord did not except against his coming thither.

Thus we have tried your Champion reasons. The rest may go by number not by
weight, and yet we will lay them in the balance too.

[ Not discerning the Lords body, is a great and perilous sin, but not there or
else where made aground to people to forbear, etc. as they suspect etc. nor
Minister to suspend whom he only fears etc.] Indeed Sir you speak very
softly yet may be over heard. Who tells you that suspicion barely in the one or
only fear in the other: is ground enough for such proceedings? In truth I
would make one to chide such jealous spirits if I could find them. Yet see how
well you do it. Not discerning is not held forth. Ergo, nothing else. Surely
you will not stand to this But farther, do you think there is no ground to
either when it is known that such do eat and drink damnation to themselfes? Me
think your second thoughts should grant it something to encourage madmen to
destroy themselves, 1 Cor. 11.
and more to put Knifes in their hands to cut their throats with all. And need
I make the Application?

[ To communicate with unworthy receivours is not held forth 1 Cor. 11.29, 30,
to us to be any cause of temporal much less eternal judgment to those that
are worthy though communicating with them.] Suppose it be not there, might not
divine indulgence be the reason of it as well as what you aim at? Or, it is
not there held forth as a ground of any judgment: but it may be else where. I
wonder how you would expound that place of Numb. 16.26. and that too Revel.
18.4. Be not pertakers of her sins that ye receive not of her plagues. Number.
16.26. Rev. 18.4.
But to pass that by. We know the whole church was not only 1 Cor. 5.
elsewhere blamed about their countenance to, and continuance of that
scandalous person in their fellwship: but in this very chapter also for the
same disorder whereof we speak v. 17.22, 31.

forget it self; and yet we must remember to say something to it for the
Readers sake. It begins [ In the Ordinance of Lords and Commons etc. We know
they did make many, but no doubt, you mean that of suspending ignorant: and
scandelous from the supper. (By this again observe, good Reader, as above we
noted, whom our Author in this work does vindicate, viz. Ignorant and
scandalous persons against whom that Ordinance was provided.) But Sir, let us
consult the Ordinances of Jesus Christ the Lord of Lords and Commons, and
submit to theirs as they agree to his, Otherwise it is better to obey God then
men. Act. 5.
Whereas you after speak of some, godly livers that can give little or no
account of his faith almost in words.] You do but well to speak for him that
can say nothing for himself. And trust me when I meet that dumb believer, he
may expect my my good word also. Only it is pity the Apostle Peter should
forget him, when he bids us all be ready to for to give a reason of our Hope.
And for your charity that persuades you, had he not a good measure of Christian
faith and knowledge in his heart, he would not show so much in life.] You may
remember All Is not gold that glisters. Alas Sir, that you should be ignorant
that other principles beside Christian faith and knowledge may serve to
moralize men in their lives. What was it that made Paul so blameless whilst a
Pharisee? And very Heathens famous (as to this) unto posterity? Ps^ i. 3.
I trow not Christian faith and knowledge.

a hue and cry could meet the meaning of it. You tell us what Queen Elizabeth
said about these words, This is my body:

Christ took the bread and brake it,
He was the Word that spoke it,
And what that Word did make it,
I do receive and take it.
I hope you would not give lift to set up bankrupt transubstantiation once
again in England. And for your descant on it, All controversies are best shut
up with such short resolutioni as this is. I must confess, this were a short
if safe dispatch. But sure such remedy is worse then the malady. I think (for
all the papist^) that ignorance is still the mother of Error, not Devotion.
Once it was certain that Hos. 4.6.
people perished for lack of knowledge. Nor fared they beter that worshipped
they knew, not what. Joh. 4.
And yet shall we believe we cannot tell what, and practice what we cannot
believe. It is enough. Implicit faith (it seems) has faster friends then all
men find.

good opinion of you notwithstanding this your undertakement; whether to serve
the times, or other ends, it is no matter; I, for my part, will promise not to
speak a word against you in it. Only I must take notice how you say [nothing
was defective in your former way as preceptively to worthy receiving,
necessary.] And yet in your whole sheet you have not one position or any
portion grounded on a precept. Perhaps you have a charter that examples barely
may serve to raise your buildings up, but precepts only raze them down. Howere
I doubt not but the Reader sees by this time (though you make the best on it, by
setting a good face upon the business) that you are poorly provided of that
kind of furniture likewise. So that had not the Magistrates sword stuck closer
then Gods Word unto your former way it would have tumbled long ago. And lastly
for that monument your lines erect upon the ancient [ Rules and Rubricks] in
English, common ^^^^er and all it is appurtenancs) you do but keep the ancient
rule. Nothing but well of the dead. And let them rest, and r^tt for me at quiet
in their graves for ever.

Thus, Reader, as I hope I have done the truth and thy self too, right, nor
any wrong unto the Author. Now with thy leave, to prevent a vacuum, I Will take
my turn to stuff this paper up, by way of Essay, in asserting some thing of
mine own opinson; as well as hither to in answering of an others.

Ungodly persons ought not to be admitted to the holy supper
The terms are clear to those that will not cavil. And I hope anon the
proposition shall to such as arn't on purpose set against it.

Mat. 26. Mar 14. and Luc. 22.19. Take. i. Ye. and shed for Your* given for
You: i disciples godly or believers not others ( for what have thou to do to
take my Covenant into thy mouth etc.) repeated 1 Cor. 12.11. broken for You.
still restrained to Saints as 1 Cor. 1.2. Clearly explained 1 Cor. 5. with such
not to eat whereon Pareus Si convict is prophano cum talibus interdititur,
quanto magis convictu sacro^ Par. in 1. Cor. 5.11.
If that mere civil how much more sacred tabling is for bad with such (...)
ungodly, though at large professors.

primitive purer times Infractione Eucharistiae Sir. Interp.
Acts 2.42, 46. and 20.7. believers, 2 PRACTICE
and none other spoken of. Whether ungodly were admitted to the communion with
the faithful then may soon be seen Rom 1.6, 7. called to be Saints. there is of
that church. The like the 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. Col. 1.2. Phil. 1.1. etc.
Surely they were not there de jure 2 Cor. 6.14. Be not unequally yoked with
unbeleevers (see v. 15.16, 17.) not in breaking bread at least.

And now me thinks Christ's precept and the Christans practice agreeing with
it, should gain on tender hearts to be accounted full of duty, free from
danger; and that beaten road much better then by paths that have (...) ^rod
at first at best but by a sinful man if not the man of (...)

intimate, thy self enlarge them.

1 Christ's Order in his Ordinances would be inverted by it, his word should be
received, before this Seal applied. Twere vain to Seal a blanke. That Is for
James 1.
begetting this increasing grace. Men first must live before they eat and grow.

2 It would pervert the end of this perticularly. Breefly: on Gods part. First
to Sign.
represent Christ's death and benefits 2ly to Seal.
ratisie our souls communion with him and 1 Cor. 10.
one another in them. How suits this with ungodly men? Again, man's acts are
answerable. First, 1 Cor. 11.
commemoration of the benefits. Secondly, Jer. 31.33. 1 Cor. 15.31. Rom 6.3.
obligation to obedience. Who sees not these peculiar to believers?

3 They ought not where a Church is gathering to be received into fellowship*
or if there, to be rejected, 2 Cor. 6.15. Matt. 18.17^ and 1 Cor. 5
without repentance.

4 They have no right unto the thing: How then unto the Sign? They are open
enimles unto Christ and shou^ sit at table with him?

5 The ^^presence is of danger to the Church approvin^ A little da^^en
leaveneth the whole lump: spoken of the perso^^^

6. They eat and drink damnation to themselves. 1 C^^. 11. and 5.
And then what cause have all ungodly ignorant and unbelievers to tremble in
approaching to Christ's tables Since the which prosit Saints there, ^ Cor. 11.
poisons them. These have they death procured, by what they have their life
preserved. And does it not concern the godly too in prudence to themselves, in
pity unto them, but most in piety toward Christ to preserve his worship pure,
their souls, from perishing them selves to from pollution, by forbearing such
communion with ungodly persons? Christ's Stewards specially to have a care of
casting Pearls to swine, and Childrens bread to dogs: which proves not bread
but stone, not fish but serpent unto such rese^^^

And lastly (...) ^oke unto the Law and testimony to be their guide in all
their goings. Es. ^.


And as many as walk according to this Rule peace be unto them and mercy and
upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16.


FINIS.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.


