A CALL to the OFFICERS of the ARMY, AND All good Hearts, to stand upon their
Watch; And in all meekness and sobriety to plead for the Interest of the
People of God, and for the just Liberties of these Nations.

From diverse of their Ancient Friends and Comrades, that are lovers of Peace
and Righteousness.

S.R. H.W. R.P.




London, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, 1658.

A CALL to the Officers of the Army, etc.
From diverse of their ancient Friends and Comrades, that are lovers of Peace
and Righteousness.
IT has been and is the grand design of Satan, the old deceiver, to raise up
strong and complicated oppositions against the work of Reformation; And we are
not ignorant, that he fashions his snares and deceipts so curiously, and twists
and insinuates himself so subtly, that he makes use of the very Instruments
of that work, at once to hinder and to undermine it. It is a damp to our
spirits to consider that the sun of glory, which had advanced it sell so far in
this our Meridian, should go back so many of these Nations: and that from such
splendid hopes, as once there were, by reason of gross and thick
interpositions, it should tend almost to an universal Eclipse. We know not,
where the remora and Obstruction is, nor is it our purpose to fix the blame
upon any: But we lay our hands upon our hearts, and accuse our own vanity and
folly, and uneven walkings, that have been the cause of depriving us of so rich
a mercy. We cannot but with grief take notice of the unhappy disunions and
differences, that have been, and are yet amongst those who should close
together in most intimate oneness: For the divisions of the people of God
there are at this day great thoughts of heart; and we must not so much as hope
for the happiness of Halcion days, until they return and embrace each other in
love and harmony. It is too too evident, that the malignant party are busy,
and combining together to enslave us; and they have now fresh blooming hopes,
that this is their time to appear for the bringing back of that rejected Line,
and for the raising of themselves up again in our downfall. Nor could they have
such strong confidences, were they not confederate with that sour, ridgid,
discontented party, whom nothing will please, unless they can glut themselves
by setting their foot on our necks: Who though they once contested against that
old Royal Interest, yet now they cannot possibly fancy a lasting settlement,
but by recalling him in again upon their own terms. This flame also is blown up
by those, who whet their biting and imbittered tongues for mischief against us,
who prepare scourges for our backs. And because we walk in a track different
from them, and separate from them and the world, in things of spiritual
concernment; they are enraged, and devise devises against us, and strongly
endeavor to erect their own Dominion in our crushing and extirpation. The
great Engine, which all parties make use of, to gratify at once this their
Ambition and enmity, is, the vast distance, contests, and divisions, that are
unhappily ^rept in amongst us; whilst we lie scattered as Corn in the Field,
not bound up in sheaves; whilst we are dwelling in distinct Islands, not
entertaining commerce with each other: And whilst we speak, or rather babble
out different voices and languages, to our own confusion, and the dishonor of
our Master. Is it not then high time to awaken, and to raise our selves from
the bed of sloth and security? Should we not unite together in love and
sweetness? Should we not humble our selves before our God? Should we not pray?
believe, confer, and take counsel together, as in the days of old, when the
blessed presence of the Lord was like fresh springs of water in our souls?
Should we not consider from whence we are fallen, and repent, and do our first
works, and remember the loves of our Virginity? These we think, are things
proper and suiteable unto the present times we live in. Surely, we are begirt
with dangers from all sides: surely, the judgments of the Lord are already gone
out against us; and they sound a loud and dreadful alarm in our ears: If we
yet be stupid, and not take warning, and return unto the Lord, we may justly
expect the full viols of his wrath to be emptied out upon us. In such an
extraordinary day, as this is, we conceive, that there is a more than ordinary
duty incumbent on us. The most fine gold is become dim, and has contracted
the mixture of much dross: The most glorious cause, which at the beginning
brake forth fresh and vigorous, and appeared like a Bride decked with
ornaments, is now become sullied, being faded in its beauty; and is so changed,
and misshapen with a strange dress, we had almost said, with the attire of an
Harlot, that we have at once both lost our selves and our full-grown hopes,
whilst in vain we endeavor to find it. We have been all made drunk, as it
were with sweet wine, through the confluence of earthly enjoyments, and
delights: And we have not only deserted the work put into our hands, but we
have so blemished it, that we have given our Adversaries advantages thereby, as
well to blaspheme, as to rejoice. It is as hard now to know what we have to do
in this doubtful juncture, as it is easy to see; that we are out of the way,
and have lost the footsteps of that glorious presence, which heretofore
conducted us. We will open our very hearts unto you, because we can say,
through grace, that we endeavor to keep a good conscience, void of offense
both toward God, and toward man. We must needs say, that we would not have
the Authority and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus slighted and neglected: We would
not have superstitions and false worships creep up again, and appear in
public, uncontrouled; We would not have the Consciences of our
fellow-brethren burdened, and under the yokes of rigid impositions: We would
not have Tyranny, Oppression, and Injustice, so much as seen amongst us in any
of their shapes and appearances; We would not have the profane spirit of the
world gratified in their excesses, and in their pastimes not suitable to a
well-guided Commonwealth; we would not have the just Liberties of the Nation
trampled on by any, nor under the footstool of an Arbitrary disposal: If in
these things we offend, we are sorry, and if we are convinced thereof, we shall
amend. Sure we are, it was once the main design, to extirpate every thing that
stood in the way of a through Reformation. It was once the great principle,
that swayed our actings, to advance the best things, and to entrust the
management of them in the hands of the best, and most upright persons. But how
far we have warped, and deflected from these things. Let all sober unprejudiced
spirits, that do not willingly shut their eyes, be the judges. Be not
displeased then, that we call upon you to stand in the good old way, and to
return into that path, where the Lord met you and owned you, and displayed his
mavelous loving kindnesses, and his triumphant excellencies before your eyes.
Remember that the Vows of God are upon you; if through your remissness and
inadvertency ruin over take us, we shall have an hiding place in the chambers
of divine love, in the midst of those desolations: But what comfort you can
have, that you have not discharged the duty incumbent on you, in this day of
danger, whilst an opportunity was in your hands to do it; we now lay it upon
your Consciences to consider, before it is yet too late. The Lord pour out
upon us richly the spirit of love and of unanimity; the spirit of courage and
of activity, the spirit of wisdom and zeal; that the sun of glory may again
visit us, and ascend unto its perfect height and splendor: That we may do
worthily for God, and for his people in our generations: And that the undoubted
Rights and Liberties of these Nations may be fixed upon the lasting durable
foundation of Truth and Righteousness.

Finis.

