A CEDARS SAD and SOLEMN FALL.

Delivered in a SERMON at the Parish Church of Waltham Abbey in Essex.

By THOMAS REEVE, D. D. Preacher of Gods Word there.

At the Funeral of JAMES late Earl of Carlisle.

4 JAMES 14. What is our life? it is but a vapor which appeared for a little
season, and afterward it vanishes away.

2 SAMUEL 14.14. We must all needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again; neither does God respect any Person.

LONDON, Printed for William Grantham, at the black Bear in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door. 1661.

To the Right Honorable, Margaret, Countess-Dowager of Carlisle, my very noble
Patroness, etc.
Length of days, Days of gladness, the holy Calling, the holy Anointing,
Light in the Lord, the Light of Gods countenance, the Spirit of the fear of the
Lord, the Spirit of comfort, the height of Honor, and eternity of Bliss.
Right Honorable and graciously-accomplish'd Lady:
MArriage is an image of heaven, for the celestial state is compared to
espousals: This mystery is great, Ephesians. 5.32. because union of hearts in
wedlock does much resemble the glorious union. Then you have had in this kind
the heaven upon earth, as much as Marriage can afford it you; for the dear, and
entire, mutual and reciprocal love which passed between you and your noble
Bridegroom was so eminent, that it seemed not only to be affection, but
passion: it was expressed to admiration, and it might be presented to the world
for imitation. But all earthly comforts have their stints and limits. They that
rejoice must be as if they rejoiced not, 1 Cor. 7.30. There is nothing here so
transcendent, but it is transitory; the sweetest fruit does corrupt, the
brightest gemms do lose their luster; that which does most delight us does
leave us with an heart-gripe, we must turn away our eyes from our most
enamouring objects with a storm of tears. So has it happened to Your Honor;
He which lay nearest to Your heart it taken out of Your bosom, and the want of
him has caused You to be a true mourner. Thus heavenly providence does order
all things concerning our temporary comforts; he will have nothing here
permanent, that we might rely upon him which is unchangeable: it is not the
wedding-ring that can endow any with lasting felicity, constant joy is not to
be found in the Bride-bed; they are not our embraces that can keep fast our
desired delights, nor our eager eyes that can fix a face long for us to look
upon: No, death does pluck many a dear pledge out of our hands, and extinguish
many a lamp when it is shining before us with the greatest brightness: This
moth does fret in pieces our costliest robes, this thunderbolt does cleave
asunder our most admired monuments; there is no armor of proof against this
dart; when this blow is given, adamantine chains break; when death does give
the knock there is no keeping within doors, when death does come with the
ground-spade, who must not be buried under ground? we had need not to fancy any
thing too much, for the best is but a perishing delight; we had need to provide
something that is immortal, for every thing that we do here enjoy is mortal.
The wisest head at last will be but a deaths-skull, and the kindest husband, we
may at last take him up in an handful of dust, or go lie by him in a bed of
clay. Death does but smile when we do call any thing here our own, and deride
us that we laugh in that face which with a stroke can be made pale and grisly.
Your Honor therefore has done well to furnish Your self with that which might
comfort You beyond Nature, and give You engagements when all the privileges of
Nature do fail: and indeed. Godliness is profitable to all things, and has the
promises of this life and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. these are the
great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. How would You have done if You had had
nothing above this world to strengthen You against this trial? You did but a
little (if You remember) leave Your self to Your self, and Your footsteps were
well nigh gone; You did but conceive Your Husband to be dead when he was not
dead, and yielding to Natures sad apprehensions, what a sad fit did it bring
upon You? Your own life was in danger: but You no sooner left consulting with
flesh and blood, and began to take up Religion to be Your director, but You
were able with more patience and prudence, moderation and Christian submission,
to undergo what God in his high and overruling wisdom should appoint and
determine: You could then speak to the honor of God, and conform to the will
of God, saying, Why should You try masteries with God, when You knew that A
sparrow does not fall to the ground but by Gods appointment? So that (noble
Lady) there is no light like to a beam of Gods Spirit, nor no counselor like
to a sanctified heart: all the Preachers upon earth, all the Angels of heaven
can hardly so well inform us as our own regenerate consciences. They which
fear not God fear all things; they which have learned God are taught against
all exigents; therefore the fear of the Lord is the treasure, Es. 33.6. I know
that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before
him, Eccles. 8.13. Natural perfections are a scant and fickle livelihood,
therefore the Saints fee-simple is free grace; then have we something to
rejoice in and rely upon, when he in heaven, according to his godly power, has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. This
is the stock that is to be preferred before Rubies, yea of greater value than
all the treasures of Egypt. The Carbuncle of high birth is nothing like to the
jewel of new birth; all Academical Arts are nothing like to the eye salve of
the Spirit. There is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding, Job 32.8. Here is the mind which has understanding, Rev.
17.9. The most solid judgment is that where there is a quick understanding in
the fear of the Lord, Es. 11.3. Through Christ I can do all things, says the
Apostle; but without Christ we can do nothing, or very little. The heart of the
wicked is little worth: There is not such a faint-heart as an unregenerate
person, he does flee when none does pursue, the least trial does cause in him
astonishment of heart; yea, the sound of a shaken leaf does chase him, Lev.
26.37. he is like a silly Dove without heart, Hos. 7.11. We see it in Haman,
who wanted nothing for outward pomp and potency, and yet the least check of
neglect does make all that he was worth a burden, yea a very loathing to him,
for, What does all this avail me? And the like is to be seen in Achitophel,
who had greatness enough, and pusillanimity, dastardlinesse enough, for being
crossed he is quite confounded, his Counsel being but despised; he does defy
himself, and in an impatient humor does ease his troubled heart with an
halter: So that a mere worldling does sink under all trials: But is a Saint no
more magnanimous? yes, such an one can bear more weight then the shoulders of
Sampson the puissant; There is the invincible Spirit and the invulnerable
breast. There is not such an Hero upon Earth as a gracious Creature. My grace
is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. sufficient it is against all the pressures
of nature and buffets of Satan. Such neither fret nor faint at the saddest
events. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. I became
dumb and opened not my mouth because thou did it. Psalm. 39.9. Tribulation
does bring forth patience, Romans 5.3. I take pleasure in infirmities, reproaches,
necessities, 2 Cor. 12.10. O rare creatures that can make Miseries Medicines,
Afflictions Affections, Exigents Exercises, Ruthes Recreations, Distresses
Delights! How can this thing be? by Gods power being made perfect through
weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. As the Apostle says of himself, when I am weak then am
I strong, v. 10. no Chemist can draw out such an Elixar; no, it is the secret
of regeneration or the miracle of grace. And is it not (noble Lady) grace that
has perfected and preserved you in your trial? yes, nature made you look
downward, and grace made you look upward; nature made you to stagger, and grace
did stablish you; nature set you on weeping, and grace dried the tears on your
cheeks; nature made you look mournfully on your dying and dead Lord, and grace
made you patiently resign him up to your God. Grace is our revenew, remedy and
refuge in all extremities; preserve your grace, and you are fitted for all
future casualties, and that I trust shall never fail you; for as I know few of
your Sex which do excel you in wisdom, so do I know none Superior to you in
grace. Gracious Lady, wait upon your gracious God, and he does offer yet more
grace, James 4.6. Yea, he is able to make all grace to abound toward you, that
you having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work, 2 Cor.
9.8. for there is the unsearchable riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2.7. Well, be
wanting in no grace, that you may count it your spiritual subsistence; and say
with the blessed Apostle, by the grace of God I am what I am; not I, but the
grace of God which is with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. seems to be created to the praise
of the glory of his grace, that you may be accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.
value this life no further then to have the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. have
grace whereby you may serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly fear, 12
Heb. 28. Let grace reign in your heart by righteousness unto eternal life,
Romans 5.21. The richest Jewel is the white stone, the most gorgeous habiliment
is the wedding garment, to be the Elect Lady is better then with Queen
Cleopatra, to be able to drink a bowl-full of dissolved pearls; the Paragon of
the Earth is she that has the amiableness of virtue. Favor is deceitful, and
beauty is vanity, but a woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised, Prove.
31.30. Dear and Illustrious Lady, I honor your Person, reverence your
Perfections, rejoice in your Affections, admire your Graces, prize your
Exercises, magnify your Fruits; for you do not only profess Christ, but
endeavor that the life of Christ might be made manifest in this mortal flesh;
therefore I wish that that Christ which is the Consolation of Israel may be
your Consolation, and that he which has shed his blood for you, may shed his
spirit into you to comfort you in the midst of your sorrows, and to strengthen
you under all trials. I confess this is a very sad affliction, especially to
quench so much love in a breast, when the heart was in a burning flame; and were
it not for Gods irresistible will and your own Chistian obedience to his divine
pleasure, I should not know how to settle your spirit, but you see from what
hand the chastisement came; therefore, hear the rod and who has appointed it,
Mich. 6.9. you know whom you have believed, fix your heart upon that God,
humbly yielding to the stroke, and in that God of recompenses you may find this
loss repaired, and perhaps a double blessing for this present sad accident. He
is Shaddai, God all-sufficient. That God of patience and all consolation,
strengthen and support you, and give you an ample supply of all necessary
satisfactions; you can be no loser in your dependence upon God, for he can give
you a firmer right then the nuptial interest, even an union and communion with
himself; the band of the spirit is better then the bands of wedlock, and the
joy of Gods chosen does exceed the joys of marriage. To comfort you thoroughly
I should carry you up to heaven, and show you that there is variety of comforts
and blessings to counterpoise this loss; but I know your translated spirit,
that you are ready there without a conduct, and indeed you are fitter to be a
leader then to make use of a guide. That heaven then, where your conversation,
vows, hopes, tears, prayers, faith, fruits, contemplations are, satisfy you,
that measure pressed down, shaken together, and running over will be poured
into your bosom, for humbling your self under the mighty hand of God. So long
as you are upon earth I can comfort you up no otherwise, then by telling you
and assuring you, that your noble Consort is still upon earth, though not in
Person, yet in Memory; and for that end have I provided this impress. His
living Image you much delighted in; my desire is, that you might still have a
sight of him in this dead picture. For want of time it was but half drawn in
the Pulpit, I now present it to you as I had pensilled it out by my self;
stretch out your honorable hand to accept of the piece, and bear with the mean
Artist. Thus with thanks for your first choice, and your firm affection, and
all Terrestrial and Celestial Benedictions wished to your Honor, submissively
I take leave, and rest

Madam, Your Honors Chaplain, the humble Observer of your person, and the high
admirer of your graces, Waltham Abbey. THOMAS REEVE.

II ZACH. 2. Howl Fine-tree, for the Cedar is fallen.


ARma Virumque cano -- My Discourse must be this day of a man at Arms, Virgil.
an ancient Colonel, the Commander of the Tower of Lebanon. Well, what need
Lebanon with such a Tower, and such a Commander fear? Yes, very much, for, --
pateant Carthaginis arces, Open thy doors, O Lebanon, Virgil.
that is, thy Castle-gates, for the Commander in chief is to be fetched out.
What is he? what is he?

-- Quis facta Drovini nescit? Claudius.
who know not the noble Governor? an eminent man he was, for he has his title
of honor, a Cedar. A Cedar he was, but did he grow upon an immortal root? no,

Pulsa gemit crebris succumbens ictibus arbos, Sil. Ital.
the lofty tree is subject to the stroke of the axe, the Cedar is fallen; he is
fallen, and may not others be frighted? yes, the blow of the axe, or the noise
of the fall of the Cedar ought be heard with horror through the whole forest,
Virgil.
-- tonat omne fragore, the whole wood filled with a dreadful sound; for if the
Cedar be fallen, how shall the firre-tree stand? no, the fall of the Cedar will
be [the destiny of the firre-tree.

-- Vnum et commune periclum. Ovid.
One common danger does belong to both; the Cedar being fallen, all the
firre-trees may shake at the top, and quake at the bottom. But shall the Cedar
fall, and shall there only be an appalling apprehension of the general
casualty? no, there ought to be some honor done to the Cedar at his fall; a
doleful shriek should be heard through the whole wood, every tree should have
its dumb groan. Ovid.
Ter conata loqui, ter fletibus ora rigavit, Thrice it should desire to speak,
and at last speak rather with tears then words: Outcries are the best language
at the fall of a Cedar; let there be sighs and sobs at such a mournful
accident, that as the Cedar did grow, to the honor of the forest, so he might
fall, to the anguish of the forest; yea, the lamentation should be no less
then ejulation, every family apart, every firre-tree apart howling. Howl
firre-tree for the Cedar is fallen.

Firretrees I see enough here, but are they not so taken with their own
excellencies, that they cannot acknowledge another perfections? It is an hard
thing to confess, commend, praise, and prize the deserts of our brethren. Envy
is a bad praeco, an Encomiastick, and self-love is almost as ill; Omnes sibi
melius esse velle quam alteri. Terent. And.
the one has a squint eye, and the other has a dumb tongue. Every one had
rather hear his own praises then another. Their own birds are fairest, there
is no Hyacinth but that which does grow in their own garden; their own temples
must only be filled with Laurel; Bavius and Mevius will detract what they can
from Virgil's due praises. There is an Emulation that is a generous and noble
imitation of another man's virtues; Aemulatio est dolor animi, cum al us potitur
ca re quam tu concup^veris. Francis. Patric.
and there is an emulation that is a base, and passionate vexation against
another man's just honor for his virtue. Our friends envy is as dangerous as
our enemies treachery, as Cleobulus said: Asinius Pollio will leap out of the
room, if he does hear Sextilius commend Ciccro; Simmias will not endure
Pericles to be praised, nor Alcmaeon Themistocles. Caligula having a bald head
himself cannot endure a comely bush of hair upon other men's heads, for he sent
the young men of Rome to the shaving. Agathocles was so enraged to see Gelo
have a stately sepulcher erected to his honor by the Syracusans, that he
depraved Geloe's virtues, and rased his tomb. For the work that is upright a
man is envied of his very neighbor, Eccles. 4.4. These are the dead flies
which corrupt the sweet ointment; none must wear a garland living, nor have an
honorable exequy dying, but they. How then shall I get my Commander of the
tower of Lebanon interred? what wayling shall I hear through the wood at his
fall? what are ye the only men of desert? ye may be worthy, praiseworthy, I do
not deny your qualifications, ye are firre-trees; but may there not be a tree
in the forest which may equal you, exceed you? yes, I do present you with a
Cedar, a Cedar he was, a Cedar he is not; no, he is fallen. And what now? that
which dies let it dye, and that which falls let it fall. Does it not grieve
you to see such a goodly plant lie on the ground? then let no man tender a
firre-tree, if the firre-tree do not value the Cedar; fall thou with ignominy,
if thou do suffer such an one to fall without due esteem. Remember that he is
fallen, and that it is the last good office which thou can do to him to
lament his fall; to say of him, so long as he stood he stood with admiration,
and now he is fallen, let him fall even to exanimation. Every good man amici
casum gemit, does lament the death of such a Country-Splendour; the loss of
such a valuable Cedar is even unvaluable; wish that thou had his eminencies,
wish that thou had fallen in his stead; many a firre-tree might be spared in
respect of such a Cedar. But seeing it pleased the Lord of the forest that he
should no longer grow, look with a sad eye upon the breach, the rent, the torn
flagge, the deep hole he has made at his fall. Oh that so many trees about him
should never enjoy his presence again! that so many eyes which beheld this
Cedar in his glory should never be so happy as to behold him in his height
again! but seeing there is no remedy, but this Cedar must be taken away, call
him Cedar, and bestow a volly of groans at his fall. I do not wish thee to fall
with him; no, long may thou grow upon thy stock and stemm; but if it be
possible let thy top bow down, thy bark cleave, a little sap drop out of thy
rind at his fall; if any firre-trees have any sense in them, let them loosen
their pith at such an accident; if they have any speech in them let them howl.
Howl firre-tree, for the Cedar is fallen.

1. We are this day at a great-mans Funeral, and it is fit we should have a
Scutcheon, and here it is in the person of honor, the Cedar.

2. And that we should have an hearse, and here it is in the dead corpse, that
the Cedar was fallen.

3. And that we should have a Mourner, and here he is in the firre-tree.

4. And that we should have the right funeral cry, and here it is in the
Howling; Howl firre-tree, for the Cedar is fallen.

First, for the Scutcheon, in the person of honor, the Cedar. Are great men
Cedars? then from hence observe, that Mankind has heights in it, that is, One
Superior to another. There are lower trees, and taller trees. Are all
Apostles? are all Cedars? no, The whole body is not one Member, 1 Cor. 12.14.
there are the nobler and ignobler parts. All creatures have their distinctions,
beasts, birds, flowers, plants, and planets; amongst men naturally there are
distinctions, are all of the same height, strength, beauty, wit? nay, there are
distinctions in man's faculties, senses, homogeneal and heterogeneal parts. Why
then should the states and conditions of men be brought down to a parity, as if
all men were alike, and must be alike for power, and possessions? no, this is
but the Vagrants argument, or Spittle-house Logic: the Scripture does tell us
that there are abjects, Ps. 35.15. the lowest of the people, 1 Kings 12.31.
Children of base men, viler then the earth, Job 30.8. and that there are the
mighty of the land, 2 Kings 24.15. men of high degree, 1. Chron. 17.13. the
sheilds of the earth, Ps. 47.9. and the foundations of the earth, Ps. 82.5.
some so great, that they are called the mountains of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.1. and
so high, that their height is like the height of Cedars, Amos 2.9. Shall the
men of low rank then vie degrees with the Nobles of the land? no, the
honorable man is the head, Es. 9.6. Plut.
Have not all states had these Superiors and inferiors? yes, the
Lacedaemonians had the common people, and the chief Magistrates, which were
called Phylarchae; Herodot.
the Egyptians had seven orders, and the principal amongst them were the
Celasyries and the Hermotybies. Herodotus does prove that there were the like
amongst the Persians, Indians, Scythians, Lydians, etc. Let us look upon Rome,
the famous State of the world; Inqu^lini and cives. Sigon. de yu^ Romans I. 1.
In the days of Romulus there were the baser sort of people, and true
Citizens; and afterward he settled them into Clients and Patrons, and
Patricicians. In the days of Romulus there were but three Tribes, but in the
days of Servius there were four Tribes; and afterward they increased to 35
Tribes; and every one of these Tribes had five divisions for several degrees,
and ten Courts, where the Superiors executed justice upon the Inferiors, as
Merula, Lazias, Toxita, Phileticus, Rosine, Lipsius, and many others, do
report; yea, amongst all sorts of people there were strange distinctions (as
those authors do affirm) by the want or enjoyment of outward privileges; the
slaves ware long hair, and went either bare-headed, or with a sordid covering;
but the freemen had their heads shaven, Sagum paludamentum.
and the right of a cap allowed them; the common soldiers might wear but a
long cloak, but the General might wear a rich robe of honor; the ordinary
Gentry had the right of the golden ring, and the Shoe with the half Moon upon
it; but the high Nobility had the right of the Curule chair, and of Images. The
Senators themselves had several sorts of Orders amongst them, as the Consuls,
the Praetor, the Dictatour, the Decemviri, Aediles, Censors, Questors, etc. So
then seeing all Nations allowed of mean men and chief men, should the earthen
pitchers hold themselves to be made of as good materials as the best vessels of
a Commonwealth? no, the Nobles are said to be comparable to fine gold, Lam.
4.2. If there were not a distinguishing dignity to be ascribed to men of high
place, why is Joseph called the second man of the Kingdom? Joseph of Arimathea
styled an honorable Councellor? Festus spoken to by the name of noble? and
Christ himself compared to a Nobleman? So then the forest of a Nation has not
all trees of the same growth, no, there is the low plant, and the Cedar. The
Cedar.

Application.
1. First then let the Cedar have his height, let Superiority be acknowledged.
Oh that many men would crop the top of the Cedar, and make the pesant equal to
the Peer. A generation of men there are in the world, which would have all
wear homespun, and dig with the spade; they were born to no patrimonies, and
so would have other men share inheritances with them; they came out of a
drudges womb themselves, and so are professed enemies to all noble blood: why
should any Nobleman enjoy ten thousand, twenty thousand pounds by the year,
when this estate divided would serve many a good Christian? a good Christian! a
ravening Christian; for what Title have thou to another man's Birthright? did
the noble Theophilus, Sergius Paulus, Onesiphorus, Gaius, Saint John's elect
Lady, give over the right of their estates, or suffer others to come to share
portions with them when they embraced Christ? Is this to be a Christian? No, it
is to be a Nicolaitan. The Levellers golden age is to turn the whole wealth of
a Kingdom into a Dividend. He seems to be but a Lapwing, to make a great noise
where he does fly, but if he were let alone, ye should find him a Griffin or a
Vulture.

But these Malcontents must hold them to their tatters, till Scripture,
Nature, and Nations will provide them a better Wardrobe. I believe that these
men do labor but little with their hands, and so they hope to raise a fortune
with the sweat of their tongues; but it is hard getting estates by Paradoxes.
Noblemen will not readily be decoyed out of what their Ancestors left them by
such cutpurse Professors. Dare they compare their Crab-stock to the noble
Cedar? No, if they do believe Scripture, (for all their inspirings, and
aspirings) they shall find it to be a sin for Children to presume against the
ancient, (...). Splendour generis. Arist. de. not. an. c. 1. Nobilitas est
eminentia. Gers. de nob. Gentiles homines. Dubdus de div. rep. c. 11.
or the vile against the honorable, Isa. 3.5. Let Noblemen then maintain their
Crests, their rights; they are the better born, the men to be reverenced, the
Worthy, and persons set apart, or severed from others to be ennobled: there is
in them a splendor of birth. Nobility is Eminency, they are the Gentile men to
be preferred before others. Let Noblemen take their Peerage, they are persons
of honor, for they are Cedars.

2. Secondly, this should teach Noblemen to be grateful men, even Mirrours of
thankfulness; for are ye Cedars? the highest to heaven in greatness, and the
lowest to heaven in the sense of Gods mercies? Know ye not that it is the hand
of heaven which has planted you, and the dew of heaven which has watered you?
then how justly might God blast your branches, and make you wither at the root?
It was ill in Pharaohs Butler to forget Joseph; then what is it in you to
forget your great God? Memory is the best keeper of benefits, Memoria est
Custos benesiciorum. Chris.
and what have ye good Estates, and bad Memories? no, keep not your Court-rolls
more strictly then a Memorial of Gods bounty. It was good Counsel of St.
Augustine, Know that thou have much, and that thou have nothing of thy self.
Cognosce te habere, and non ex te habere. Aug.
Are thy deserts answerable to thy abundance? no, thou may say with Jacob, I
am less then the least of thy mercies; yea, thou may in a time of
astonishment cry out with David, and say, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my
Fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18. The best Noble
family at first had but a poor Foundation-stone, as the best Cedar at first had
but a poor root. Art thou a Cedar? God might have made thee a shrub, and thy
first Progenitor had no loftier top; the times are well mended with thee, there
is a large dowry come to thee for the needy portion that thy first Predecessor
was born to. Can look backward? can see the rock out of which thou were
hewn? has God out of a Chaos created such greatness? has mercy by miracle
made the cloud, which was no bigger then a man's hand, to overspread the whole
Heavens? O Springtide of favor! O ecstasy of Divine Providence! and what have
lost thy eyes, or lost thy tongue? alas poor blind and mute creature! has
fullness stifled thee? or a surfeit of blessings choked thee? art become
short-winded? can not breath through multiplicity of incomes and honors?
has so much brightness quite dazzled thee? has this rank blood begot a fever?
must God bring a dark sky before thou will recover thy sight? must he open a
vein before thou will be perfectly cured? must he recover his wool and his
flax before thou will consider what store God has sent in to thee? O
unthankful creatures to such a bountiful God! O that ever God should pamper
thee thus to forget thy Feeder! O unkind creature, that thou should force God
to be severe to thee, because thou will not know favor; or constrain him to
punish thee, because thou will not feel his embraces! Do ye thus requite the
Lord, O foolish people? is this the wages that thou repayest to God for his
careful and watchful feeding thee? a goodly price that he is valued at by
thee; a Potter might have had as good a recompense from thee for a few drinking
vessels, or gallipots, or basins, or pure Chinah-stuffe, as God has for a
whole vintage of blessings. Is this the Peace Offering, the Sacrifice of
praise, which thou do offer for magnifying mercies, for bands of love, for
the goodwill of him that dwells in the bush, for the candle of the Lord shining
upon thy head, for silver wings, and feathers of gold, for a lot fallen unto
thee in a good place, for waters of a full cup, for washing thy steps in
butter, for prosperity that has risen as the flood, for riding upon the high
places of the earth, for excellency that mounts up to the Heavens, for an horn
exalted like the horn of an Unicorn, for making thy nest as the Eagle, for
living as in Eden the garden of God, where every precious stone has been thy
covering, for being satisfied with favor, and being full of the blessing of
God, for a hill of blessings, for showers of blessings, for blessings poured
out of the windows of heaven in such an abundance that there is scarce room to
receive them? will not all these spokesmen crying in thy ears make thee know
thy God? will not the beams of such a radiant favor make thee to see thy God?
does God heap benefits upon thee, and can not discern a hand of bounty? are
there so many blessings singing in thy ears, and yet can not hear the
sounding of his bowels? when shall God speak to thy heart? when shall he send
tokens enough unto thee to make thee acknowledge him Friend? he has made thee
great, but when will thou ascribe greatness to him? thou have had the fruit of
his mercies, when shall he have the fruit of thy lips? wilt never make him
Prince? nor exhibit to him his true glory who has set thee amongst Princes,
and made thee inherit the throne of glory? have been brought up thus long in
the school of bounty, and can not learn the lesson of thankfulness? has God
blown up such a bright flame of prosperity for thee, and will not a spark of
gratitude fly from thee? read over all thy patents, free deeds, leases,
Courtrolls, Commissions, look upon thy porches, fanes, halles, dining-chambers,
galleries, Banqueting-houses, parkes, fish ponds, gardens, orchards, and see if
a dumb man ought to possess all these; thou art so great, that thou art not
able to manage all thy estate thy self, but thou art enforced to have thy
Steward, Sollicitour, Bayliffe, Auditor, Gardener, Park-keeper, Wood-man, and
whom not? and is there not one amongst all these which can tell thee what a
bountiful God thou do live by? nor can not be thy own Remembrancer? If
thou can not find God in thy large possessions abroad, nor in thy vast rooms
at home, yet methink thou should find him in thy Chapel; Oh that same
little Chapel (methink) should show thee the face of thy great God: oh when
thou art bending thy knees to God, and lifting up thy eyes to God, and
stretching out thy hands to God, and opening thy lips to God, and offering thy
heart to God, methinks thou should have a clear and a dear, an actual and an
effectual apprehension of thy God, thy precious and promoting God. Will not thy
Chaplain pray or preach home this God unto thee? then thou should be Priest
to thy self: Has God given thee an honorable Family, and a noble fortune,
only to stretch out thy neck, or to be a man of appetite, or to enlarge thy
border, that thou might dwell alone upon the earth? then how art thou a
Nobleman? no, thou art rather a proud, sensual, covetous man than a Nobleman; a
true Nobleman does disdain thus to live, to the disparagement of his Family, to
the dishonor of his God. Who calls thee Nobleman? Hinds and Pesants, and
menial servants, and Yeomen, and Tradesmen, and Gentlemen, and Citizens, and
Courtiers may give thee that name; but God, his Angels, his Saints, Nihil
constat esse bonum nisi quod ab ipso dignoscitur esse collatum. Cassiod.
thine own Conscience do not so style thee: For how can thou esteem thy self
a Nobleman, unless thou be a thankful man? thy true greatness is in
gratitude; else, how can thou call any thing about thee comfortable? no, Cum
bona venarint benedicito Deo, sic perseverabunt bona and presp^ra. Chrysostom.
Nothing is good but that a which is acknowledged to come from God; else, how
can thou resolve that any thing will be permanent? no, When blessings come,
extol God, and so thy good and prosperous things shall have n establisshment.
Thy present use then, and the future perpetuity of all that thou do possess,
is both legitimated and ratified by thankfulness: what then, thou have lands in
many Countries, and amongst all these can not find out the grand Landlord?
thou art a Lord, but there is a Lord paramount over thee: thou art a man of
honor, and thou have an house of honor, and wherefore, but to honor thy true
Benefactor? yes, thou ought to magnify him, and deifie him. Grati as agere
Deo possumus, refer non possumus. Cassiod. in Ps. 47.
God has given thee all for a breast and a tongue, if thou will not praise God
thou will not requite him: the act of commemoration had need to be thine, for
the act of recompensation is beyond thy power: O then that thou will not pay
thy quit-rent, thy pepper-corn! yes, do it, or else thou art blind in
whatsoever thou do possess: For why has God made thee a Nobleman? bring an
argument, if thou can, but out of the Topics of feee favor; he that made
thee a Nobleman might have made thee a Drudgeman, he that made thee a Cedar
might have made thee one of the under-trees which grow about thee: why do
thou flourish in thy palace, when others have not a cottage to hide their heads
in: why does thy Rent-taille come to many thousands by the year, when many have
not money enough to pay their house-rent? O! God might have made those strong
shoulders of thine to have born burdens, and those lusty arms of thine to have
wrought for thy living, yea and with that diligence and strictness, that If
those hands of thine out of idleness had kept one day an Holy Day, the next day
might have been a Fasting-day. Si manus c^ssaret, panis desiceret. Cassiod.
There are a company of Egenoes in the land, an host of needy people which
wander up and down the Nation to beg necessary sustenance; God might have
listed thee into this tattered Regiment, and made thee to have crouched for a
piece of silver, and to have sought thy bread out of desolate places; but God
has so well provided for thee, that thy Table is continually spread, thy
Coffers filled, and thy Wardrobe furnished: whatsoever the wants of others are
for meat, money, raiment, thou can eat dainties according to thy appetite,
take out gold and silver by the handful, put on changeable suits of apparel
according to thy delight: others cannot sleep enough in the nightime, nor
keep their houses in the day time, nor choose their work, but do any thing
whereby they may get a livelihood; but thou can lie in bed as long as thou
listest, and rise when thou please; thou can either sit at home at ease, or
ride abroad at pleasure, and thou can choose thy work, even choose whether thou will work at all; for what is thy labor? to wash thy hands rather than to work
with thy hands, to stretch thy self in idleness rather than to stretch thy
joints in industry; to sprinkle thy head with perfuming powders, rather than to
oil thine hair with thine own sweat: alas, when others are enforced to look to
herds and flocks, tilling, seeding, reaping, etc. thou lookst only to thy cuts
and curles, thy knots and fancies, thy half-arms and half-wastes, thy
chapfallen boots and neckerchief knees: O then, has God freed thee from the
aching limbs, the warded hands and surbaten feet of other men, and have not
leisure enough to magnify thy God? yes, God has given thee all this liberty,
opulency and affluency, merely that thou might praise the name of him that
has done wonderously for thee. If three should not be an oblation kindled in
private cottages, yet the Altar should flame with sacrifices in Noblemens
families: God has pricked out such a song for thee, that it might be called
the Noblemans Magnificat; yea, every member about thee might be a Querister to
sing in consort, Glory be to God. God has separated that house of thine from
all other employment merely to make it a chantry to himself, what then will thou not yet say, Awake Lute and Harp, I my self will awake right early? will thou not cause thy glory to awaken? praise God with the best member thou have?
praise him in the highest that he has given thee cedar-height? yes, blazon
Gods Coat of mercies better than thy progenitors Arms, and sing in a louder
tone for Gods rich blessings, than thou would if a triumphant chariot were
prepared for thee; such mercies deserve a song of degrees, yea, the song might
be appointed to the chief singer on Neginothai, or to him that excelled upon
Hajjaleth Halshahar; no ordinary Instrument is fit for this ditty, but even
that which David calls the Hind of the morning. If a poor man ought to praise
God for a being, how much more the Nobleman for a well-being? if a poor man
ought to praise God upon a wel-tuned Cymbal, the Nobleman ought to praise him
upon a loud-sounding Cymbal; if a poor man ought to bring a Turtle Dove and two
young Pigeons, a Nobleman ought to bring a whole burnt Offering, an Hecatombe;
if the height of a Noblemans praises ought to be according to the height of his
greatness, then let him consider that God has given him Cedar-height. The
Cedar.

3. Thirdly, a Nobleman is from hence exhorted to be the better man, for as the
Cedar is the excellent tree in the forest, so a Nobleman should be the
excellent Professor in the Church. The Star of the great Magnitude should yield
the brighter light, the better plant should bring forth the sweeter fruit. God
does expect great duty from men of great dignity, and high service from them
upon whom he has bestowed high honor. Optimates optimi, men's graces and
places should carry a correspondency; for these have a price in their hands,
and they are called fools to their faces if their hearts be not answerable to
their abilities; it is a sin against Gods favors if these should be the
inferior Saints, howsoever if they should be the worst of sinners. A great man
to be a great Libertine, or great Oppressor, is no more honor then to be a
great Swine, or a great Tiger. The fall of that house (says our Savior) is
great, so the fall of that noble person is great; then Jeconiah is but Coniah,
and no more in effect but a broken Idol. Who honor Nimrod the great hunter, or
Haman the great persecutor, or Achitophel the great traitor? (...) Men^n.
Nobile malum. Sen. G^nus d^^icitur. Arist. 2. Rher. (...) Menaud.
one Abraham which was the Father of the faithful, one Job which was so
righteous that there was not the like unto him upon earth, one Obadiah which
feared the Lord greatly, is to be preferred before a thousand of these Monsters
and Miscreants. Noblemen if they be wicked are but the greater Stains, for
there is no Nobility in impiety, there is nothing noble there but a noble
villainy. The stock is there decayed, such an one has lost his Arms, though he
were born of a better Father then ever was Jupiter, says Menander. It was an
heavy thing when Jeremy went unto the great men, thinking that they had known
the way of the Lord, and the judgments of their God; but these altogether had
broken the yoke, and burst the bonds in sunder, Jer. 5.5. How is God offended
when he had planted a noble Vine, and it turned into a degenerate plant? As God
is served in Heaven by the best Spirits, so he would be served upon Earth by
the best men. Bring unto the Lord O ye Sons of the Mighty; whosoever do hold
back, do ye bring; these, to be good precedents to others, should have sanctity
seen in every thing that belongs to them, they should have written upon their
very horse-bridles, Holiness to the Lord, Zack. 14.20. Why should they promote
Gods honor most? yes, he has promoted them to the highest pitch of worldly
greatness, for earthly privileges they are his grand Favorites, he has created
them Cedars. But how shall noblemen be true Cedars?

1. First, if they be smooth, that is, courteous. Nobility is highly adorned
with affability. Socrates said that harsh manners were no more fit for
conversation then harsh wine is for taste. Better it is to be of an humble mind
with the lowly, then to divide spoils with the proud, Pro. 16.19. Proud men
are the defiance of the earth. There is that speaks words like the prickings
of a sword; now who will come near these sharp-edged dagger-pointed lips? O it
is a shame for great men to make humor their praise, or passion their dialect,
as if they were never high enough except they expressed themselves in high
language, nor dashing enough except they storm in men's faces with tempests. But
is the Euroclidon any pleasing wind? is the Raver the acceptable Noblemen? no,
he is the Darling of the Age which does treat the world gently, like great
Moses, who was the meekest man upon earth, and great Mordecai, who spoke peace
to all his seed; these are the men which with Orpheus can tame Lions and
Tigers, and with Amphion can move the hardest rocks. Is it seemly for great men
to frame sour faces to themselves (like Caligula) in a glass, that when they
go abroad they might look the more formidably upon them whom they do not
affect? Sueton.
or to give no answer to Suitors till they have crouched down to their very
toes, as if their ears lay in their feet, as Aristippus said of Dionysius?
Diod. Si^u^.
no, men of high descent and quality should be most benign and placid in their
expressions, as the Cedar, though it be high, yet it is not rough and knotty,
but smooth.

2. Secondly, if they be useful; for as the Cedar is very good for building of
houses, so should these Cedars be for building of the Commonwealth: the famous
Nobleman is the famous Patriot, for if a man's Country be like another God,
T^nquam alter D^us.
as Hierocles said, then a man should ever be sacrificing to this Numen; it is
not enough for men of high degree to live competently and commendably upon
their own means, (for every Snail and Dormouse can live upon his own juice) but
he must live splendidly and magnificently, in benefiting and bettering the
state of his native soil, I^veni late^i^iam, reliqui marmoream.
that if he find it of Brick he should leave it of Marble, as it is said of
Augustus. It is not honorable for a Nobleman to take the fat of the Land, and
to pay no Rent for his birth and beeding, his rich possessions and large
promotions; no, he should give largesses living, or Legacies dying, or else his
Children might be shut within their own walls, never to have liberty to trace
that Country to which the Father was so unkind or unthankful; it is baseness
and not nobleness to hoard up all to posterity, and to do no memorable thing
to the public; they scarce deserve a Tombstone, much less an Epitaph. A
Barbarian might as well dwell in such a Country as a Native; Thistles do thus
grow in a Land, and Vermin do thus creep up and down the Nation. Non nobis
nati, we are not born for our selves only, was the old saying; and is it so
old, that it is like the Inscriptions of an old decayed Monument, that few men
can now read it? Well, they are the best Antiquaries that can tell the meaning,
and fulfill the meaning of this National Adage. For are the mighty of the Land
only to show their might and riches in preserving what is left them, or in
purchasing in new Lordships and Royalties? no, this is self-thrifty nobleness;
and I could name a great number of these Horse-leeches in the Nation, of the
greatest rank and degree, which worship no other Deities but their
Houshold-Gods, which keep their hands within their bosoms, and have conjured
their Estates within a circle, which know no Country but their coffers, nor no
Commonwealth but their private wealth; which are politic, and yet not
political; of the Nation, and yet not National; great Pole-cats, high-flown
Kites, honorable Lizards, noble Niggards; as gripple, and inhospital, and
innational as ever was Laban, Nabal, Timon, Telemachus, Zarus, Calenus,
Patroclus, Fabullus, Labullus, or any other which have been noted of sordid and
tenacious spirits. Now are these Cedars? are they useful for the general good?
the general! no, ye are too general for them, they know nothing but their
particular pouch; if they build, they build only like Ravens, a nest for their
own lumps, and blackbirds, a goodly Mansion for Father-flint and his progeny;
but not a Dormant, Pillar, Joyce, Stud or Tenon will these spare for the
public; therefore had as good a Bramble grow in the Forest as such Cedars.
But ought true Commonwealths-men to keep all their Timber within their own
bark? no, they should serve to repair the breaches of the Land, and to build up
the old waste places, Moses, Nehemiah, Zorobabel, the Ruler in the Gospel,
Alcibiades, Aristides, Pericles, Porsena, Probus, Telegoras, Pompey the Great,
Timeleon, Horatius Cocles, Valerius Publicola, all which have been renowned for
famous Patriots, have done thus. All worthy men are beneficial to the Country
where they have their being, for this is to be a true Cedar, to have pieces
quartered out of them, to rear up structures of honor to the Kingdom; then are
they properly useful.

3. Thirdly, if they be fragrant; for as a Cedar does give a sweet sent, so a
kind of fragrancy should come from a true Nobleman, his smell should be like
the smell of Lebanon, Hos. 14.7. But how should this fragrancy be expressed? To
God, the King, the People.

1. First, to God; in purity of faith; for error in judgment is a bone out of
joint, a glaucome in the eye, an imposthume or calenture in the brain; all
Religion without an incorrupt faith is a blazing Comet; such a man is
subverted, Tit. 3.10. He has in him the mystery of iniquity, 2 These. 2.7. The
root of bitterness, 12 Heb. 15. The Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. he has
(as Jeremias says) broken in pieces Gods image, and set up a Foxes in stead of
it. How necessary is it then that men's minds should not be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, 2. Cor. 11.3. But hold fast he faithful
word according to Doctrine? 1 Tit. 9. Away with all Heteroclites in Religion,
and Hermaphrodites in the Church. Error gives an ill sent afar off, it is
truth only like the Cedar which does yield the fragrant savor.

2. Secondly, to a King in Loyalty, Loyalty I say, and not contumacy. What is
left to the best of the people but subjection? Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man, whether to the King as supreme. Be subject to principalities
and powers. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Fear God and honor
the King. The Fathers children must bow down before him that holds the
scepter. Where then is there the least ground for opposing Princes? they which
say they are the Kings best subjects, must not only help him into the Throne,
but they must not disturb him in his Throne; if they draw not a sword till
Scripture give them authority, I never look to see a pitched field fought
against a Prince; for the Word of God will not suffer a sword to be unsheathed
against a lawful Sovereign. Do thou abhor Idols, and yet commit sacrilege?
so, do thou defy Popery, and yet take the Jesuits Priming-powder? I like
never an Article nor Particle of that Religion, and blush to think, that they
which seem to be as great enemies to it as my self, yet have fought battle
after battle against their gracious King, as fast as any Romish Catholic
could: O, rebellion, I doubt, is worse Popery than scrupled Ceremonies: I
tremble at it the more because I find Solomon threatening sudden destruction
against it, and St. Paul damnation. If it were but a matter of gallantry it
were another thing, yet Joab's an Abner's Men playing this game was but mad
sport, there was bitterness in the later end; but when it comes to the loss of
a soul, and ends in damnation, this is horror: let all them which are true
Protestants beware of this lusty, bloody, damning Popery. But what need I
trouble my self about this needless fear? though this were once an unhappy
error, yet it shall never be renewed: the Times are pacified, men's judgments
more enlightened, their actions reformed, and their hearts settled in firm
Loyalty; nothing but the peace of the Kingdom shall be studied, and subjection
to supreme Authority practiced, no King shall ever suffer a broken nights rest
by a Protestant; a Protestant will take an Oath of abjuration against
rebellion, as well as against the other erroneous opinions of Popery;
whatsoever turbulencies, commotions and treasons may be in other Religions, yet
amongst us there shall be seen nothing but the peaceable, obedient, and
King-preserving Protestant: Protestant, do it, for it is for the honor of thy
profession, thy conformity to Gods Laws, the inviolableness of thy Oath, the
welfare of the Nation, and the bliss of thy soul. If we be subjects, what can
be more eminent in us than duty and submission? no, Obedience does carry the
palm. Sola obedientia palmam gerit. Aug. Subditis obsequij gloria relicta est.
Tacit. Generale pactum est humanae societatis obtemperare regibus. Aug. 2
Confess.
The glory of Obedience is left to subjects. It is a general covenant of humane
society to obey Kings. How is a King supreme if other men may measure heads
with him? how do men take heed to his commandment if they give laws to him? how
are they his Liege-men if they be League-men against him? how is that Oath
which they take to him truly the Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. if it may be sworn
down and sworn against? let any man reconcile these contradictions. But we have
no need of a Doctor of the chair to compose differences, or expound
difficulties; for the whole Nation now does speak nothing but humble
subjection, and so let it ever do; for Sedition has an ill sent, it is Loyalty
that has the true savor.

3. Thirdly, to the people in Patience, Justice and Charity.

1. First, in Patience: It is the honor of a man to pass by an offense, it is
but the humor of a man to be revenged on an offense: The wisdom which does
descend from above is gentle, peaceable, and easy to be entreated; but the
wisdom which does descend from beneath is furious, spightful, and never to be
entreated; and an implacable man is the incendiary of the Country, and the
fiend of the Age. Is this to imitate David, who patiently endured Shimei's
reproaches? or Joseph, who forgave his malicious brethren? or Christ, who
pendebat and petebat, hung upon the Cross, and yet prayed for his enemies? Aug.
no, it is to imitate Cain, Esau, Saul, Haman, and the Devil himself, who is
the envious. Should we then for every distaste require an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth? no, we that owe ten thousand talents, had not need pluck our
brethren by the throat for a few pence: Forgive thine enemy, and thou have
given him a deadly wound. Funestam inimico dedisti plagam. Chrysostom. in 5 Mat.
Posse and nolle nobile.
Is it honorable to work our teeme upon injuries? no, to be able to do a
shrewd turn to an adversary, and not to do it, this is noble. Revenge has an
ill sent, patience is that which does give the sweet savor.

2. Secondly, in Justice: Let beasts live by prey, but a true noble heart does
scorn to live by spoils; he has nothing that he does possess just, unless it
has been weighed out unto him by the standard. He is ready to say with that
noble Judge, Nolo denarium male intrantem, I will not have a penny come over my
threshold the wrong way: the sighs of his neighbors, the groans of his
tenants, and the cries of the poor are as terrible unto him as thunder;
therefore he does measure out all his actions by equity. Violence has a bad
sent, but Justice is a very sweet savor.

3. Thirdly, in Charity: Where God has not spared bounty, it is ill for that
man to spare more than is fit. A true Nobleman is the Almoner of his Country,
he does account hospitality his honor; he does think that his whole estate is
but a Lease of Gods free favor, and therefore he does pay his rent strictly;
he does suppose that he is not a Nobleman, unless he be a charitable man. If
the clouds be full they will pour out rain: He dare not hide his eyes from his
own flesh, the poor is brought up with him as with his father: He does think he
can never say his prayers well, unless he does listen to the cries of the poor;
for he that stops his ears against the cries of the poor, shall cry himself
and not be heard. He does think that he cannot justly beg his daily bread, D^
paululum ut recipias centuplum. Aug.
if he does not break bread to the hungry: He knows that there is no more
thriving merchandise than alms-deeds, Forgive a little, and receive an
hundredfold. He does remember, that the hand of the poor is Christ's treasury;
Manus pauperis est gazophylacium Christ. Rab. Maurus.
therefore he will not look God in the face till he has sent him a present by
the hand of the poor. O! this is the man which does smell sweetly upon earth,
which does walk the streets with a fragrancy, which has the Cedar-sent. Thus
have I done with the Scutcheon in the person of honor, the Cedar.

PART II.
now let us come to the Hearse, the dead corpse under it, in the word fallen, the
Cedar is fallen.

From hence observe, that Natures greatest glory is subject to the stroke of
death, the Cedar is fallen. The magnificence of this world is but an
apparition, the sweetest Music but a semibrief: Are not my days few? what
should we talk of the pomp and Minstrilsy which the flesh does afford? for thy
pomp shall be brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy Viols. Death will
strip us out of our pompous robes, and case up our Viols: though thy windows be
close shut, and thou have mured up thy self in hewn stone, yet Death will come
up into the windows, and enter into the palaces, Jer. 9.21. Let thy veins, eyes
and heart strings be never so quick and lively, yet thy eyes will be turned
into thy head, thy veins will be broken, and thy heart rent asunder with
sorrow. Oculi vertentur in capite, venae rumpentur, and cor scindetur dolor.
Bern. Sit volu^t^rium quod est necessarium. Chys. Prima quae vitam dedit hora,
carpsit. Seneca
Thou had as good yield up thy self cheerfully to death, for, maugre all thy
resistance death will force thee into her back-room, her blind room, dark room,
rotten room, carcase-hole; therefore let that be voluntary which is necessary.
Thou tookest thy poison in the womb, and it will never leave working till it
has brought thee to the grave: the first hour which gave that life took it
away, for if thou be in thy young age thou art beginning to dye, if thou art
in thy middle age thou art half dead, if thou be in thy old age thou art at
the point of death, and wilt ere long be quite dead: These Chimes will soon
leave going, this Lottery will be soon drawn forth, this Comedy will soon be
acted out to the last Scene; sleep will enter into our eyes, the Voyder will be
brought upon the table, these shop-doors will be shut, these buzzing flies will
betake themselves to their Winter-rooms, these swelling torrents will be dried
up, the fair fruit will drop, the loftiest Cedar will fall. The Cedar is fallen.

Application.
1. First, this does show that Nature has her casualty.

Non est, creed mihi, sapientis dicere, vivam. It is not (believe me) the part
of a wise man to say I will live. Fools may thus chatter, but wise men will use
no such Solecisms: yet how many of these Lunaticks have we that talk of nothing
but of long life? let things happen here tanquam in choro, as it were in a fit
of Music, yet they think the tune will never alter, nor the dance be done. Naz.
We have many a Deaths-head worn upon our fingers, but when shall we find this
Deaths-head in our ears, eyes, tongues or hearts? We see many a dead corpse, but
we do not think that this flesh of ours shall ever be carcase-strong: we behold
many a Grave-spade, yet we are confident that it will be a long time ere that
shall dig for us. But, O be not Fanatics, beware of illusions; Moriendo
obliviscatur sui qui vivens oblitus est Dei. Caesarius admonit. 6. Quid
perdidit homo, quid invenit. Ansel^r. in med.
thou which wilt not mind death, perhaps at last shall not mind thy soul. If
thou must part with life, it were good beforehand to think of the separation,
lest thou do meet with a general damage and a general curse together: such a
careless wretch does know to purpose, both what he has lost and what he has
found. Simple men, ye that cannot hide your selves from death, why do ye not
endeavor to kill death by many a dying thought before it does come to kill
you? O that this whole Congregation should not be full of dying men! O that
this whole Congregation has scarce three dying men in it! How many of you do
that now living that ye would do at last dying? how many of you do kill those
corruptions now, which being here unmortified will kill you in another world?
what can ye feel nothing till the Pursivant has arrested you? what do ye put
off all your souls work to a deaths pillow? it is to be thought so? for weak
men have not misery enough about them to apprehend this, learned men have not
wit enough to apply this: what is the reason? can any of you escape death? have
any of you a writ of privilege to be freed from death? no, death has you in
her black roll, and every one of you shall be called forth in order: O
therefore have an expectation of death, and a preparation for death, or else I
shall say that there is a great deal of Knowledge, but little Virtue; a great
deal of Profession, but little Conscience. Tell not me of your skill in the
Metaphysics, get skill in the Physics, this same state of Nature; be well
versed in generation and corruption: I shall conclude that ye are some
Conjurers, and addicted to familiar Spirits, and much given to Necromancy, if
your knowledge of death do not teach you to dye, but only to tell tales or
death, and to prophecy of accidents in this world; they that study the Black
Art do thus, and I doubt ye do little better. Would to God I could draw you,
with the Magicians, to burn your books of curious Arts, and to turn this book
of the Expiring art, the large Treatise of Corruption; as small a book as ye do
account it, I tell you it is more voluminous than the Pandects, or than all the
Codes. To study this book well it will exercise the best wit to the height; ye
will find more Aenigma's and Postula's in it, than in the Mathematics; yea,
more difficulties in it than in learning all the Eastern Languages: A crafty
politician, for all his Mercurial brain, will be Lard put to it to unfold this
State-riddle; a Doctor of the chair may be posed in this intricate book. I tell
you it has so many branches in it, and is so copious in Canons and Axioms, and
Aphorisms, that it may be called the book in Folio, or the Library of the
world, or a general History, Annal, Ephemerides: It does discourse of all
things from the Artique to the Antartique Pole, from the Creation to the later
day of Judgment, it does contain the state of all Mankind. Ye must not go to
any Stationer for it, for it is sold only in Tomb-street at the sign of the
Deaths-head; and thou can not buy it for any money, but only laying down a
mortified heart for it: Amongst all thy pamphlets, or most classical Authors,
it were good for thee to get this book, and to peruse it seriously, and to
begin to be skilled in it betimes; for I tell thee it is a necessary book, an
hard book, and a large book; thou can not read it over in an hour, in a year;
no, the Saints are learning it from the first hour of their conversion to the
last gasp: If thou will not get this book of thy self, Death at last will
thrust it into thy hand, it will force thee to read it: If thou will not have
it in thy Closet, it will be laid open before thee upon thy deathbed; and will thou neglect the getting of it, or the getting exact insight into it till it
shall be presented to thee at that last hour, when thou shall have a dark eye,
and a blind heart? can thou with a dead hove upon thine eyelids be a quick
reader? O there are many sentences at such a time will trouble thee, especially
these; O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. All the days of mine appointed
time will I wait till my change come. Teach us, O Lord, to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, By our rejoicing which I have in
Christ Jesus our Lord I dye daily. Let your loins be girt up, and your lamps
burning, and be ye like men that wait for their master, when he will return
from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks ye may open to him immediately.
Walk whilst ye have light, for the night comes when no man can walk.
Afterward came the other Virgins also saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us: but he
answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for
ye know neither the day nor hour when the Son of man will come. Afterward he
would have inherited the blessing, but he was rejected, for he found no place
for repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears. These and a thousand
other heartbreaking sayings thou will meet with at that time, which will be as
ill as Hieroglyphics to thee to understand; if thou have but read a word or
two of them in thy lifetime, it will be confounding to thee to read a whole
book of such a perplexing character, and such enigmatical precepts at the hour
of death. O if all families would buy this book, and set Conscience to mark the
Contents of it, what a reformation should we instantly see amongst Lords and
Ladies, Puffes and Browers, giddy heads and crafty souls, sherking Merchants,
and griping Officers, young Damne-me blades and old Usurers, corrupt Judges and
temporizing Clergymen, black Libertines and white Hypocrites? for ought not all
to learn the art of dying? yes, it had need be their art, for it will be their
fate; whosoever does stand he must fall. The Cedar is fallen.

2. Secondly, this should serve to take men off from their high dependence,
that because they are Cedars therefore they shall not fall: O how many, because
they dwell in houses of Ivory, cannot find the way to the house of c^^y! they
have so many locks against thieves, tha^ they think death cannot get an
entrance to them; they have frighted so many inferiors, that they think to
daunt the King of terrors: They full little think that a coffin at last must
be their bedchamber, and worms their chamberlains; that they shall be so eaten
up, that no fragments shall be left of them but bones and skulls: show them the
dunghill, they think that they shall never be swept out to remain in the heap.;
show them the Sapypot, they think they shall never be dissolved into mere
gelly; hold this glass of mortality to their faces, they are confident that
this shall never be their grisly complexion: they have enjoyed so much liberty,
that they have no bands in death; they have so many conveyances lying by them,
that they think they have gotten a covenant with death, and that they are at an
agreement with hell: they take, make, much pleasure in their flatterers, and do
infinitely depend upon their physicians. But, O let them put off their false
spectacles, and stop their ears against Siren-songs, and think that Patents and
Patrimonies, Chimney-pieces and Head-pieces, Shields and Spears cannot defend
them against the Pursivant of the grave. Thunderbolts strike upon the highest
mountains. There is no difference in death between the bodies of the rich and
the poor. God will take away the honorable and the counselors, Feriuatque,
summ^s fulm^na montes. Horat. Nulla d^ser^tio inter cadav ra d^vitum and
pauperum. Amb. in hexam.
3 Es. 3. The Nobles of Judah are slain, Job 39.6. The pillars of strength sall
to the ground, Eze. 36.17. They of high stature shall be cut off, Es. 10.33. He
slew the wealthiest of them, Psalm. 78.31. He will destroy the fat and the
strong, and feed them with judgment, Eze. 34 16. The Nobles shall be called to
the Kingdom, and there shall be none, Es. 34.12. Here is a leaf-fall or Nobles,
or a Charnel-house for Peers: noble blood will congeal in the veins, honorable
breasts are but the fairer mark for deaths fatal dart. God for his own use will
beat the sweetest spices in his Mortar, put the best herbs into his streyner,
feed his guests in the dark Ordinary with noble flesh, have an handful of noble
dust, to show that he is Lord of the Creation. What tree shall stand when his
axe is lift up? no, He will consume the glory of the forest, Es. 10.18. The
Cedars shall fall. The Cedar is fallen.

3. Thirdly, this does show, that the greatest are but temporary possessors of
what they do enjoy, for death is an absolute fall: the Cedar does not bow or
bend, shake or totter only, but the Cedar is fallen; and when the Cedar is
fallen what does remain of it but a dead trunk? thou enjoyest much whilst thou
art living, but when thou art in thy grave what of thy revenue does remain unto
thee? no, thou art fallen, and all thy greatness fallen with thee. Where are
they which were ambitious of the chariot of Authority? a Ubi sant q^i mb ebant
currum potestatis? ubi vestes and oraamenta peregrina? ubi turba servorum? Aug.
de mt. and great Verae devitiae sunt quas porrat conscientia. Chrysostom.
Where are their gorgeous vestures and outlandish dresses? where are their
troops of servants? is there any thing left to themselves but dust and ashes?
Where then is the perpetuity of wealth or welfare? no, a man may say, that
those are only a man's true riches which a good conscience do carry away. As
for these worldly riches, we know the date of their continuance, all must at
last leave their free Deeds behind them, give up their Keys, seal away their
Estates to new heirs. What pleasure has a man in his house when the number of
his months are cut off? Job 21.21. When his goods are increased he shall take
nothing away with him, neither shall his pomp descend after him, Psalm. 49.16,
17. His substance shall not continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection
thereof upon earth, Job 15.29. They have slept their sleep, and all the men of
might have found nothing, Psalm. 76.5. If this night thy sont should be taken
from thee, whose shall those things be? whose? name the man, thou can not
name thy self; no, whosoever shall be left rich, if thou have not a secret
stock thou shall dye a very beggar: Ye talk much of your riches and your vast
means, but so soon as ye have lost your breath ye have lost your right to them,
Si vestrae sint, ollite vob^scum. Bern.
for if they be yours then take them away with you. But was there ever heard of
a proprietary in the grave? or of a great Land-holder in the land of
forgetfulness? that a Coffin should be a counting house, or a dead carcass a
freeholder? no, I will not give thee one years purchase for all thy
grave-stock. If thou have no other livelihood, there is not the poorest
day-labourer which is worth but the clothes upon his back, which would change
Estates with thee: what then? thou art yet perhaps a mighty Owner, and thou
have liberty and ability to do eminent things; consider, have nothing to do for
the Church? God calls upon thee for this duty, Honor the Lord with thy
substance: Have lived thus long under the Gospel, and neither living nor dying
will thou do nothing for the Gospel? shall the Churchman be none of thy
Legatee? wilt only pay thy Tithes, and have never a free will Offering? what,
worse than any Jew? will thou slip out of the world and leave no Offering to
the Pulpit? would any Papist thus take his leave of his Massepriest? But if
thou will thus die, farewell needy Gospeller, we are well rid of such a
parcimonious professor. But further, have nothing to do for thy fame? Seek
those things which are of good report; a good name is better than a precious
ointment. Hoc naturae thesauris reponimus quod famae commodis applicamus.
Cassiod. l. 8. ^p. 23.
Nature has no greater treasure than the golden wedge of Fame: I do not say,
that there is a more imprudent, but that there is not a more impudent man, than
he which does contemn his own fame: Next to thy soul it is fame that does carry
the immortality. What therefore, do desire never to be spoken of when thou
have left speech? Contemptio boni nominis est vitium cum impudentia. Plut. in
Alcib.
then pity it is that ever thou had a name: let the Bearers carry thy sappy
body and thy carcase-memory together, and let them be buried together in one
grave like entrails, and stench in one dunghill. What therefore will thou do
nothing to eternize thine own fame? have means enough, but no mind to get a new
life when thou art dead in the lips of the people? have ambitious men been
desirous of this, and shall not men of virtuous and generous resolutions aspire
after this? what then, had Absalon his pillar, and have thou no monument? then
farewell fame-killer. Yet further, have nothing to do for thy soul? Make ye
friends of this Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye shall fail them they
may receive you into the everlasting habitations. Charge them to be rich in
good works, ready to distribute and communicate, laying up a good foundation
against the time to come. He has dispersed abroad and given to the poor, his
righteousness remains for ever. God is not unjust, to forget your work and
labor of love. Has God then blessed you with liberal means and large
possessions? how will ye dispose of these at last? will ye look into heaven
before ye seal away your estates? will ye cast an eye upon your souls before ye
make your Wills? Remember that ye are to leave all; to whom shall it be left?
whatsoever ye give to posterity, it may be scattered abroad within a few years;
but whatsoever ye give to heaven, that will be kept sure: whatsoever ye bestow
upon your acquaintance, they will thank you for it but for a year; but
whatsoever ye shall bestow upon your souls, these will thank you for it for
ever. Love all then, be kind to Nature, let not Wives and Children, Kindred and
Friends say, that ye were strait-handed to them; they are your relations, and
show ye your dying respects to them; but let it never be said, that when ye
parted with all ye had no affection to heaven, no hearts toward your souls.
Amongst all that ye bequeath away shall there not be an Heavens-portion, a
souls-legacy? I lament such an Owner, yea I defy such a Testator. Let him and
his Will go together, let him have that heaven and souls-bliss that his own
seal has assured to him. Can ye consider this without fear? can ye think on it
without horror? O then, shall I not persuade you to lay aside a good
benevolence for heaven, and to spare a large bag for your souls? yes, ye that
have but a small charge of children, give a quarter of your estates to heaven;
ye that have no children, give half of your estates to your souls. This is the
Doctrine which I do preach to mine own people, and I would send it abroad as a
general cry to the whole Nation; that as I would here raise up an Almes-house,
so if it were possible I would fill the whole Kingdom full of Almes-houses. The
first founders of our Protestant Church were magnificent in these works, and
why are we fallen from their first love? O it grieves me to think how Princes
and Priests, Noblemen and Gentlemen, Judges, Merchants, Physicians, rich
Officers, in these later times have declined from their Forefathers noble
examples. What are pious works become the windfalls of Religion, or the
superfluous branches of the fruitful tree? the last sentence will not adjudge
them to be so; for, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world: for I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I
was thirsty and ye gave me drink I, was a stranger and ye lodged me, I was
naked and ye clothed me, etc. Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of these
little ones, ye have done it unto me. Is this the last sentence? and is it the
Kingdom-tenure? and shall we think to be blessed of the Father without this
motive of benediction? no, let us trust the Judge, and prepare the right fruit
for the sentence: Whosoever then possess some of your means, let heaven have a
part; whosoever inherits a moity of your estates, be sure that ye make your
souls coheirs: what will ye dye indebted to your souls, or leave year souls
without a competent allowance to travel into another world? he is an unkind and
an unnatural man that does not love his wife and children; but he is a witless
and a mad man, that does love any better than his soul. It was a passionate
saying of St. Ambrose, He that places his treasures only upon earth, Qui
collocat thesauros in terra, non habet quid speret in coelo. Ut quid respiciat
in coelum, ubi nihil habet repositum? quicquid pro anima seceris hoc tuum est.
Amb. in Mat. 6.
has nothing that he can hope for in heaven: why should that man look up to
heaven, who has nothing there laid is? whatsoever then thou do for thy soul,
that is only thine own Let none then be dearer unto you than your souls.
Though ye cause others to abound, yet let not your souls want: your devout
Forefathers did thus, and be ye their religious charitable children: yea, I
beseech you by your progenitors eleemosynary Wills, and by their soft bowels,
by their gracious hearts and precious dust, by their generous spirits and
illustrious names, by their glorious remains, their honored memories, their
bright crowns, and their ravished souls, that ye would prove your selves to be
right-born, uphold the honor of their families, exemplify the copies which
they have set you to write, grave your selves to be their true progeny in
letters of gold, stay behind them to shine in their beams, to cast a smell
abroad with their odours, to show their charitable hearts stirring quick in
your bosoms, to follow after them with a cluster of their fruits, to carry in
your hands a transcript of their compassionate works, to settle their good
foundations in another world; yea, to be attended upon with such a glorious
train of alms-deeds, as ye find waited upon them in bright liveries when they
entered into heaven. If your old Protestant Ancestors, or their old Protestant
Faith; their glorified souls, or your souls, which may be glorified by their
fruits, can stir your heart strings, enlarge your bowels, infuse the like
communicating, sympathizing spirit into you: O give their rich portions, feed
the world with their bread, sacrifice their Offering of a fair eye, stretch out
their distributing hand, preserve their records, write out your selves worthy
by their inscriptions, leave behind you their monuments, enter heaven by their
golden key, purchase a crown at their rate: If by all this you do find your
selves prompted to the work, apprehend your opportunity, make use of your
minutes, hear now the clock does strike, see how the glass does run, behold how
the shadows go off from the dial; consider the naked skin and bare hand which
ere long ye will have, look into deaths Inventory, remember that at last ye
will be left nothing worth but coffin-reliques, worms-leavings, stench, gelly,
sappyness; for when we are dead all power and purpose, sufficiency and
efficiency, means and mind, fruit and freedom, enjoyment and enterprise,
possession and possibility, asfluency and ability will be taken away from you.
O! death is the old rifler, the grave the grand plunderer: what shall then be
the end of you, O ye Cedars? where shall your tops then be? ye shall be hewn
down, or blown down to purpose, not worth stock or branch, root or rind, pith
or leaf; the tree is then at the mercy of the axe, a pitiful Cedar when a
fallen Cedar; all the glory is thrown down to the earth, every one then will
make spoil of it, it is subject to a general waste, for the Cedar is fallen.
Thus much of the Hearse, the dead corpse under it in this word fallen.

PART III.
Now let us come to the Mourner, the Firre-tree. Why is the Firre-tree called
upon to consider the fall of the Cedar? to show that Inferiors ought to bemoan
the fall of their Superious. From hence observe then, that the death of eminent
men is to be lamented; Shall such be carried out of the world without
solemnity? no, the Mourners ought to go about in the streets, Eccles. 12.5. The
bearers do but carry them out upon their shoulders, but these carry them out in
their breasts, their sad hearts bear the weight of their Coffin. Others may
make it a vulgar day, but these make it a a bitter day, Amos 8.10. others may
not alter a posture, bur these bow down heavily, Psalm. 35.14. others may remain
dumb, but these cry Alas, Alas, Amos 5.16. others may have their delicious
fare, but these have a diet by themselves; they eat the bread of Mourners, Hos.
9.4. yea, eat ashes like bread, Psalm. 102.9. others may spruse up themselves in
raiment, but these have a dress by themselves; they will not so much as put on
ornaments, Exodus 33.4. nor bind a tire upon their heads, or put on shoes,
Ezech. 24.17. but they sprinkle dust upon their heads, Job 2.12. rend their
clothes, Esther 4.1. yea expressly, wear mourning apparel, 2 Samuel 14.2. others
may have pleasant gradens, the frolicks of joyous times; but these have
postures by themselves, they put their mouths in the dust, Lam. 3.29. they
cover their lips, Mich. 3.7. they make their selves bald, Ezech. 27.31. they
cut their beards, Es. 15.2. they taber upon their breasts, Nah. 2.7. they teach
their daughters wailings, and every one her neighbor lamentation, Jer. 9.20.
There is a time for all things; and as others have their time for lawful
delights, as to plant and gather stones, and heal, and sew, and dance, and
embrace, and speak out, and sing out; so these have their time according to sad
accidents, to pluck up that which is planted, to cast away stones, to wound, to
rend, to mourn, to be far from embracing, and to keep silence. O that there can
be a bright corner within that Hemisphere where the Sun is in an Eclipse! that
there can be a cheerful look to that place where an eminent man does die:
wringing hands, blubbered cheeks, and doleful outcries, are as proper for the
Funeral of a famous Patriot, as scorns, and taunts, and clapping of hands are
for the hearse of a tormenter of his Country; let the one be buried with the
burial of an Ass, saying, Rot thou bruit beast: Let the other be buried with
the burial of an Hero, saying, O that such precious flesh should ever come to
waste underground. The fall of a cedar should be the anguish of the
firre-tree; living man look disconsolately, the mirror of the age is departed;
firre-tree shake thy top to the ground-ward, the Cedar is fallen. Funeral
mourning is a lamentable plaint for the decease of dead men worthy in esteem:
Luctus est planctus pro mortuis ad^matis Aq in Ps. 34. Luctus est animi
aegritudo ex acerbo conce^^u interitus ^jus qui nobis charus fuit. Fran. pat.
de reg. l. 5. c. 17. (...). Eurip.
yea, it is a fever upon the spirit, out of a sad apprehension for the death of
him that was dear to us. They are men of no bowels which can part with
deserving friends without tears and troubled bowels; for, as Quirinus said,
when can any rather show themselves to be true men then at such a time, and at
such an accident? It is pity upon such an occasion (as Demonax said) that there
should be three men found that had not water enough to sprinkle upon such a
grave; they are fit their selves to be buried who stand not true Mourners at
the burial of a Country-ornament; such a Firre-tree does not deserve to have
had such a Cedar grow by him. With how much sorrow and sadness were Jacob,
Moses, Samuel, Josiah, Christ, St. Stephen, Justin Martyr, Ignatius, Polycarp
and Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzen, Constantine the Great, Justinian the Great,
Theodosius the Great, Artemius, Procefius, Venanitus, Agathon, Mascalon,
Vsthazarus, Pontianus, Hilarious, Florentius, Pregentinus, Laurentinus,
Armogaslus, Aithalus, Abdon, Sennas, Tiburtius, Agrippitus, and a thousand
others which I could name unto you buried? O they were buried as if the
Watercourse and the Cataracts of peoples heads had been set open and let
loose; yea, as if they would have made their graves to swim with tears. What
then are the Naeniae and Epicedia, the sorrowful Mournings at Funerals
unlawful? no, they were wont to be called, Justa, true dead-rights: The harsh
Music at such meetings should be Lachrymae, nothing but Threnodies should then
be heard; Nihi, nihi, plange, plange, as the old Hebrew ditty was. Woe and alas,
ah my Brother! all my Sister! the strings of that instrument should be
heart strings, and the keys should be cries, and the quaverings should be
quakings, and the soundings should be swounings; the Firre-tree must not suffer
the Cedar to fall without the moon of the Forest; no, Fitre-trees, dash your
tops together, raise a Lamentation amongst your selves, know the pitiful,
accident that is befallen: Firre-tree, the Cedar is fallen.

Application.
This serves to reprove them who know not the want, nor feel not the loss of
illustrious men. The cedar is fallen, but where is my firre-tree, which droops
and bends, and is ready to bow down to the earth at the sense of such a fall? I
read that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell, they stood still, 2 Samuel 2.23. and that when Elias was taken away, Elisha cried after him, My
father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof, 2 Kings
2.12. and that David lift up his voice and wept beside the sepulcher of Abner,
2 Samuel 3.32. and gave him many an honorable testimony, as, Dyed Abner as a
fool dies? Know ye not that a Prince and a great man is fallen in Israel? But
I find no such consternation, commemoration or lamentation for the death of
many a worthy man amongst us: no, they let them fall like a scale from the back
of a fish, like a stone out of a wall, like a tooth out of the jaw bone, like
an hair from the head, like things of no moment or price, and so let them go.
Men are forgotten in the city where they have done good, Eccles. 8.10. Merciful
men are taken away and no man understands it, Plind. 10. c. 43.
Es. 57.1. I read that the people of Rome, for the death of a Crow that was
wont to salute Tiberius, Germanicus and Drusus for Caesar's, were so afflicted
that they performed exequies for it: and that L. Crassus for a Lamprey dying,
Marcob. l. 3. Saturn. c. 15.
which he was wont to feed with his own hand, was so dejected, that he mourned
for it in black, as if his dear daughter had been dead: and that Cyparissus
vexed himself to death, Virg l.
because a white Heart which he loved, died. But I find no such deep grief
diverse times from many men for the death of persons highly-meriting; they have
no odours in their lips, nor no bassom in their eyes, to preserve these men's
honors: they have scarce a wrinkled face, much less a wounded heart; yea, it
were well, that instead of (...), a grievous bewayling at their departure,
there were not (...), a malicious rejoicing at their departure: As the
Athenians, so soon as they heard that Philip was dead, Plut in Demost.
sacrificed to their gods, and gave a crown to Pausanias which murdered him:
Eutrop l. 8.
and Adrian, so soon as he heard that Trajan that famous Emperor was departed,
he triumphed, reproched his virtues, and pulled down the bridge which he had
built over the Danubius: and Lewis the Eleventh, Aemil l. 10.
when tidings was brought him that Charles D. of Burgundy was slain at Nancey,
he leaped for joy, and gave a liberal reward to the messenger which brought the
news. Such maligners have we amongst us, who are infinitely comforted when such
glorious Lamps as did outshine them are extinguished, and when such lofty,
Cedars as did overtop them are fallen. But is this thy neighborhood, that
thou which did grow so nigh to observe the height of the Cedar, is this thy
humanity that thou which have known what fragrancy the Cedar had, should be
pleased that the Cedar is fallen? no, rather perplexed; thy rind should change
color, and thy sap should run down to the root, thou should be a Mourner,
for this is the reason why the Firre-tree is spoken to, namely with anguish to
consider what is happened to the Cedar. Firre-tree the Cedar is fallen.

2. But secondly, the Firre-tree is to be a Mourner, because the state of the
Firre-tree is as dangerous as that of the Cedar. The Cedar is fallen, Quis se
exceptum putet a condition moriendi, qui non fuit exceptus a condition
nascendi? Ambros. Ha lige intravimus ut exir^mus. Bern.
a Firee-tree does but grow upon a loose root, and has but a time of standing.
From hence observe, that death is a general lot; Cedars and Firre-trees must
all down to the ground. Who should think himself excepted from the condition of
dying, which was not excepted from the condition of being born? upon this Law
we entered into the world that we should go out of it. This is the end of all
men. I go the way of all the earth. We must all needs die. What man is he that
lives, and shall not see death? Non miseretur inopiae, non reveretur divitias.
Bern. Vide quis sitservus, quis sit dominus; discern si potes victum a rege,
fortem a debili. Aug.
The rich and the poor meet together. There Kings and Counselors and the
Prisoners rest together, and the servant which is free from his Master. Death
does not pity the poor, nor fear the rich. See who shall be the Servant, who
shall be the Master; distinguish if thou can between the Slave and the King:
the Pigmee and the Giant, Robes and Rags, Palaces and Cottages, Golden Chains
and Iron Chains, Bevers and Bonnets, Bags piled up, and the beggars pouch,
are all one to death. The rich man is in deaths eye, and the poor man cannot
hide himself; no, death has a nimble eye that does pierce into all corners. Do
not think that because thy stature is low, thou shall be over-looked: No, thou
which art poor do make such a crying in the streets for supply of wants, that
death cannot but hear thee; thou walk abroad so naked of attendance and
followers, that death can strike thee at ease; thy purse is so empty to procure
Physicians to preserve life, that death can creep to thy heart without fearing
or feeling an antidote. Death does go a general circuit; there is no such
Epidemical disease as death, it does level all to the ground; Cedars and
Firre-trees must fall. Firre-tree, the Cedar is fallen.

Application.
This does serve to fray all the wood. Ye thought here would have been only a
Cedar-Sermon, but I have Firre-tree-Doctrine also. I know it pleased you highly
to hear the Grandees menaced thoroughly; but rejoice not too much, for I have
threats for the infimates also. Come on then, Mechanics, Tradesmen; yea, the
poorest Abjects here which are half-naked, and perhaps halfe-starved, look to
your selves, I hold up deaths arrow, and show you that it will strike in the
breasts of you all; for ye in the galleries, and ye upon the pavements; ye that
sit, and ye that stand; ye that have the vast Warehouses, and ye that have
scarce a shop or should of your own, are all going into the strait passage, the
narrow hole. Your lusty legs will fail you, your quick breath will draw short
in your lung-pipes, ye are all fainting and failing, the Cedar is fallen, and
the Firre-tree must fall. I see none but mortal faces amongst you, I behold
none but dying men. Death does sway an equal scepter to all mankind, impartial
death does spare no man. Communia toti genti sceptra tenens. Maphreus Vegius in
append. Virg. Nullum saeva coput Proserpina sugit.
Many of you have gotten a pardon for all your exorbitances, but death will
seal no Act of Indemnity; ye have escaped the halter of many your
fellow-miscreants, but death has set up her gibbet for you. Free your selves
from this, and I will say that ye have more wit then the cunning Secretary, the
crafty Judge, wily Gaol-keeper, and the politic Fanatic; but I see death
ready to apprehend you, condemn you, and lead you forth to execution; what
therefore have ye any wet eyes? ye will else ere long have dry eyes. Do ye bend
your knees? if not, ye shall bend them lower; have ye held up your hands for
mercy? if not, ye shall not have an hand to stir; have ye found the plague of
your own hearts? if not, ye will die with the deadly mark upon you; have ye
stilled the cries of the poor? have ye made satisfaction for your minglings,
adulteratings, false-weights, slippery bargains, usuries, perjuries, spoils,
spights? if not, they will meet you at Gods judgment seat. Think not that ye,
because ye can out-brave the pulpit, that there is nothing can tame you; yes,
death is coming to right all the injuries that ye have done to the Ordinances.
Who has heard our voice? to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? no, the
Prophet is (ye say) a fool, the spiritual man is mad: But behold ye despisers,
and wonder. Ye shall answer for every Sermon which ye have disdained, defied,
vilified, or neglected: He that has dashed his foot against this stone shall
be broken in pieces, it had been better for him that a mil-stone had been hung
about his neck, and that he had been thrown into the midst of the Sea. We are
Messengers, but death is the powerful Preacher; it is the Church-mans pleader,
or, if ye will, Gods Herald at Arms; it will force you to make reparation for
all your contempts, and revenge them with fury. Here is a thundering teacher
indeed, it does preach the Funeral Sermon of the whole world, the last Sermon
that every man shall hear, or, if ye will, the Repetition-Sermon. Thou shall
have but one Lecture, and if thou be not converted by that, it will send
thee away to the deep pit, the scalding furnace, the worm that will never die,
the utter darkness, to lament thy hard-heartedness. O therefore search, for
thou will be tried to the height; humble thy self, or else there will be no
place found for repentance; cleanse, or else thou will remain spotted for ever;
shine, for thou must be extinguished; turn a living Saint, for thou will turn a
dead corpse. The Cedar is fallen, and Firre-tree thou must fall. I know that ye
of the Inferior rank have Superior spirits, but for all your roughness and
perverseness, your obstinacy will not prevail against this prophet of the
Sepulcher; Death is a sharp preacher indeed, for it does preach with a dart in
the lips; and this preacher you must hear, and this dart ye must feel. Quit
your selves of your sins, for ye cannot quit your selves from the grave; leap
out of hell, for ye cannot leap from death: Ye must all have grisly faces,
fallen chaps, bloodless cheeks, breathless lungs, staring eyes, and stark
limbs; ye will be fit for nothing at last, but the land of darkness and the
pit of corruption. Potent and impotent, noble and base, rich and poor, Cedars
and Firre-trees, must all fall. Firre-tree the Cedar is fallen.

But why did the Prophet call upon the Firre-tree to consider the fall of the
Cedar? could he not have called upon the shrubs, or myrtles, or thorn-trees, to
lament the loss of a Cedar? no, these had ill sap in them, or a rough bark, and
so fruitless and useless many of them, that they were fit for nothing but the
fire; therefore he does reject these, and apply himself to the firre-tree: For
the firre-tree is a most beautiful tree, as Pliny says, and purely white, and
therefore it is called by some Gallica; it is full of delightful strakes
within, and admirable for beams, and to bear the weight of buildings, and both
the pars sapina and fusterna (as Authors call them) are of rare use for several
employments: Cato would have his curious Presses made of them, and Solomon,
next to the Cedar, does call to Hiram for the Firre-tree to build his Temple
with, as ye may see in 1 Kings 5.8. and 10. Verses: a very singular tree it
was, and though not so excellent as the Cedar, yet little inferior to it. The
Firre-tree then was the fittest judge of the worth of the Cedar, and well
chosen out by the Prophet, as the most proper tree to lament the fall of the
Cedar. Firre-tree, the Cedar is fallen. From hence then further observe, That
they must be men of prime affections which must be selected to prise the
perfections of others. Desert will want its honor if worthless men pass
sentence upon it: what need have 1 of madmen? so what have we of low-gifted, or
bad and base-minded men? Sus Minervam? shall the injudicious or profligate set
out the fame of meriting men? no, what taste is there in the white of an eggs?
the heart of the wicked is little worth. Virtue will never have due
commendation from the contemptible. Wisdom is justified of her children.
Indignitas and laus non habent concordiam. Seneca.
They which have no dignity in themselves leave the most laudable things with
an indignity: honey is not sweet to a distempered palate. Hercules shall be
held but an half-man if Lycus give his opinion of him, who knew not how to
handle either sword, bow or spear: Cicero shall be counted a man of no wit, if
Cestius may pass sentence upon him: Varro shall have no other name but that of
Swine out of the mouth of Palaemon. So that as the Hircanians were wont to
cast, their dead bodies to dogs to be devoured, so we had as good have Mastiffs
as men to be judges of worthy men's qualities, if they have no good
qualifications themselves, for they will but tear and worry. Well then, if ye
would have noble-spirited men to have their just Funeral-right, let those which
are praiseworthy themselves give it them; as the Prophet here, when he would
have the Cedar to fall with honor, he does call to the Firre-tree to discharge
this duty. Firre-tree, the Cedar is fallen.

Application.
This does serve to show, that the ignoble do but eclipse the honor of the
conspicuous. These men's eyes are too dim to discern the brightness of orient
colors, these men's voices are too harsh to sing with melody this high-pricked
song: they which are of sordid spirits themselves will never celebrate to the
height the peerless parts of others: no, when this work is to be done, Come men
and not dunghills, Adeste homines, non sterquilinia.
as Diogenes was wont to say. Homer brake that potters vessels which would be
singing of his Verses. They which have not two good qualities will ever be
detracting from them which abound in variety of rare perfections; as Hiero told
Xenophanes, that he which could not maintain two servants well, was continually
disparaging Homer which daily fed above ten thousand. The stone of an eminent
man's praise is too hard for him to break who has not cad his teeth; Dentes non
edidit. Adag. Nescit capitis and inguiuis d scrimen. Juven.
what has he to limb out a rare Picture, which does not know the difference
between the head and groin? Away then with all the abjects and refuse of
mankind (which have neither wit nor virtues in them) when the excellent come to
be magnified; for the Prophet here does not call to them which were the scorn
and shame of the forest to set out the praises of the Cedar at the fall, but
the noble Firre-tree. Free-tree, the Cedar is fallen.

PART IV.
Now let us come to the right Funeral-cry in the word howling, Howl
firre-tree. From hence observe, that the fall of a principal man should carry a
deep sense with it. He which was admired greatly in his lifetime should be
deplored greatly at his death; one tree should begin the cry,

-- at que omne querelis
Impleri nemus. Virg. 8 Aeneid.
--
the whole Wood should be filled with doleful sounds, yea, we should see a
whole Congregation

-- inexpleto rumpentem pectora questu, rending as it were their breasts with
passionate groans. Statius.
It is not enough at such a time to step into the house of mourning, or to
accompany the dead corpse, or to stand by and behold the solemnity at the grave,
but we should be like those which -- viscera vivis eripiunt, would even tear
out their bowels alive: the hearts should ache, Virg. 12 Aeneid.
and the tongues should howl, there should be a doleful lamentation, Mic. 2.4.
People should cry bitterly, Eze. 27.30. They should weep with the weeping of
Jazer Es. 48.30. There should be a mourning like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the field of Megiddo, Zach. 12.11. Men should weep till they have no more power
to weep, 1 Samuel 30.4. Those things which formerly were occasions to us of
pleasure, Quae mihi erant voluptati maximae, xunt recordatione doloris
exasperant. Amb de ob Satyri. Publico luctu tanquam parente orbati omnes
essent. Plat. in Cleto.
should now exasperate our grief at the remembrance of them. Titus that famous
Emperor was brought to his grave with a gene ral mourning, as if people had
been deprived of their common paront. When Pertinax was dead, the people did so
ingeminate their griefs and cries, that they even fainted, as Cuspinian
reports. When Valdemar the Danish King died, the men with beating their
heads, the women with dishevelled hair, the husbandmen with filling the Woods
with cries, and the Mariners with filling the sea-shores with yels, so lamented
his death, Saxo Grom. l. 15.
as if the common funeral of the nation had been come upon them. Thorismund the
renowned King of the Ostrogathes, was lamented forty years together, for doing
those famous acts against the Gepides. Crantz. l. 2. Suec. c. 16.
O then, men are not to be turned out of the world with ordinary grief, but
passion; there should not only be sobbing, but wayling; not mourning, but
howling. Howl Firre-tree, the Cedar is fallen.

Application.
This serves to reprove them which are too soft-speeched at the fall of a
Cedar; no great noise heard through the wood, howsoever not shrieks, our
Firretrees know not how to howl; no, the most deserving men for the most part
are buried in too much obscurity, howsoever with too much silence; there is
little dejection, or discruciation at the interment; an hired Mourner might do
as much as they express; the greatest black is to be seen in the Herse-cloth,
or the mourning apparel; no great heaviness seen, little howling heard, a man
would think they were a brambles, and that there was scarce a good firretree
left in the wood; Tanquam oculos d^fossos. Basil. Monod. de Naz.
they do not as S. Basil did at the death of Nazienzene, weep for their loss
as if they were deprived of their eyes; or, with the people of Rome, at the
death of Constantine the Great, shut up their bathes, forbid markets; some
stand in the streets as if they were astonished, Sigon. l. 5. Imp.
others ran up and down as if they had lost their senses, some lying upon the
ground, and others knocking their heads against the walls, and a great company
sobbing and roaring, as if in the death of him they were half dead. No, we can
part with our dearest friends and the brightest splendours of a nation, without
any great darkning in our selves: we may have a demure countenance, but no
perplexed breasts, no driery tears, no bitter howling. O! how do I blush when I
hear the Trojans crying out, Hectora flemus, We lament our valiant Hector? and
when I read that Alexander, upon the death of his dear Hephestion, was so
afflicted, that he not only bestowed ten thousand talents upon his Funeral,
and hung Glaucus his Physician, because he went to see a Play when he should
have been attending upon his Patient; but he threw down the pinacles of cities,
forbad all Instruments to play within his Ten^s, caused his mules and horses to
be shaven, and sat like a most disconsolate creature in his Tent: and that we
for our renowned Patriots have not the affections and afflictions, the griefs
and groans, heavy hearts and doleful tones that the very Heathens had. We talk
of Christian burial, but what Christian passages or passions are there? only a
Christian company, or Christian rites, but no Christian commemoration of
virtues, or Christian lamentation for the loss of one that countenanced
Religion, defended the State, adorned his Country with Clemency, Justice and
Hospitality: no, the Priest does all, the people have no other solemnity to
afford but to yield their appearance. O firre-trees, is this your respect and
reverence that ye owe to a cedar? shall he fall by you with so little sorrow or
astonishment? no, ye should know what the loss of one sublime, beneficial man
is: there should be nothing but shrill cries heard in that forest where such a
Cedar does fall: not only the Firre-tree should grieve, but it should howl.
Howl firre-tree, the cedar is fallen.

Now let us consider a little what there has happened amongst us: has there not
been a fall? yes, and a very sad one, so sad, that it might make you drop and
droop, sigh and sob, rend and roar: he that has a breast, methink, should
groan, and he that has a tongue, methink, should howl. Here are many clad in
black before you, and ye had need to be as black within as they are without:
Never was there a greater occasion amongst you for a mournful meeting, a
doleful congregation; the forest it self may be afflicted, and they without
the forest may lament. If ye should hold your peace the stones would speak; so
if ye should be silent, the dumb would open their lips, even strangers and
foreigners; as Germanicus at his death was lamented by the Barbarians; and
Baldwin the Third was bewailed by Noradine, and the very Turks far and nigh.
What Inhabitant will be so unworthy, or what neighbor so unkind, as not to
bestow a few drops and mones at the fall of such an ornament of his Country,
and (without offense I hope it may be spoken) a luster to his Nation? Had he
such fame by his lifetime, and shall he have no honor at his death? yes, as
Socrates said, Frankincense does belong to the gods, and praise to men: Thus di
is, laus hominibus debetur.
Give unto God his true worship, and unto this worthy Peer his due praise. If
the fruitless or saplesse, the inferior and vulgar trees should not be
sensible of the accident, yet let the nobler trees have an anxious apprehension
of such a fall; yea, let all the firre-trees howl; Howl firre-tree, for the
Cedar is fall. And I say, the Cedar, for was he not a lofty tree in his time?
yes, noble he was by birth,

-- altis inclytum titulis genus.
Clara domus satis haec nobilitate tua est. Sentea in Here. sur.

Look upon his crest, Ovid op. 16.
and there ye shall see the soaring Falcon, which brought as much Land to his
Predecessors, as that could with her swift wings measure out with one flight;
the story is known, and therefore I shall not need to beautify it with
language. But stemmata quid faciunt? had he had never a noble Ancestor, (as he
had many, both by the Fathers and Mothers side) yet he was worthy to have been
created a Noble for his noble heart and his honorable qualifications, Arist.
l. 2. ^her. Nobilitas est quaedam lous veniens de meritis parentum. Boer. l. 3.
Pros. 6 de Colis. Phil. I sid. Pelus. l. 2. Ep. 126.
which adorned him more then lineage and pedigree: for though Nobility be
Majorum claritas, the brightness of anancient family, and it is a kind of
praise, when a man can derive a stock from deserving parents, yet vera
nobilitas a probis moribus nata est, as Isidor Pelusota says, nobility of good
dispositions, is better then nobility of a good descent; for what is the honor
of blood to the honor of virtue? no, they which want the last, it may be said
of them as it was of the two Gracchi, that whosoever could say that they were
Great, yet no man could say that they were Good; but mine was not only the
Great but the Good Nobleman; there was in him not only (...) but (...) and
(...). To let pass then the Cedar for his height, and to come to his
properties. Had he not in him every thing that is requisite for a Cedar? yes:

1. For first, was he not smooth? who can call him a knotty tree? no, Quo non
alter amabilior, as it was said of Augustus, then whom there was none more
friendly, I may say of him as Agistrata said of Agis, nimia tua bonitas, nimia
mansuetudo, thy courtesy might seem too great, thy mildness too great, the
very Idea of humanity and gemme of affability; it did appear to all.

1. First, where there was the nearest conjunction; I mean betwixt him and his
honorable Lady: Were there ever Espousals with more inviolable affection? was
the yoke of Wed-lock ever worn with more delight? was not he to her the
covering of her eyes? Genesis 20.16, was not she to him the very desire of his
eyes? Ezech. 24.16. Eadem erat illis men's and simillimi affe ^tus. Ludov. Vives
de Christ. sem. l. 2.
may I not say of them as Ludovicus says of his Father and Mother, that there
was ever between them the same mind and the same affections, as if they had
been born under one Constellation, or had but only two faces and one will?
Match me such noble paires, which spent out so many years in dear and
reciprocal affection.

2. Secondly, for his servants; was there ever a great Lord that treated
servants with more gentleness? no, they lived with him rather as with a Father
then a Lord, or as with a Friend then a Master; under some others, servants
might be called as they were in Lacedemonia, Helot, slaves, but under him they
might be called as they were in Creet, Chrysonetae, the golden servants; he
preferred many, loved all; now where was there more freedom and freeness?

3. Thirdly, for his neighbors, was he not most affable? yes, another Adrian
the great Emperor, who was as Dion says, humilimorum amicus, a friend to the
most humble; so was he a companion to the meanest, a Lord amongst Lords, but
familiar amongst his neighbors; yea, he had rather lose his life than his
humanity, as the same Adrian said, when her was taxed for using too much
civility (as they thought) toward his Inferiors. I never remember any which
knew better how to reserve state and preserve friendship, to be both a Lord and
a neighbor together. His courtefie then is evident, a great heart that carried
in it a most heroic spirit, and yet was the soft bosom of kindness.

2. Was he not useful? yes, what did he study more than the good of the
Commonwealth? one of a most public spirit, he honored his Country as his
Mother, as Pythagoras advised his scholars; and he was not only born in a
Famous Country, but he was dignus patria worthy of his Country, as Aristotle
said of a friend: how many good offices and noble favors could I reckon up to
confirm this?

3. Thirdly, was he not fragrant? yes,

1. First, for his faith: as he was well-gifted, so he was well-principled; he
had a singular judgment and a sincere heart, apprehensive and steady; that
whereas some travel into far Countries to bring home an outlandish faith as
well as outlandish manners, which think they are never witty enough till they
be skilled in the Magic of Religion: he, though he had been amongst the
Inchanters, yet would he learn none of their sorceries. Few Noblemen had been
in more European Countries than he himself, and there where the Crafts-masters
dwelt, yet none of these could corrupt him or seduce him, he returning home a
true English Protestant: when his Mother Church had given him his grounds, he
hated that a Stepmother should be his new Mistress: he ever hated error and
novelty, and was sound both in doctrine and discipline: It is true, the jewel
was his own, yet he came often hither to have it filed; for as he stored the
Church with the ablest men he could find, so he was a diligent frequenter of
the Sanctuary, and a reverent hearer; and those which he found to be
intelligent and invariable, he both countenanced and honored them: that as it
was said of Pertinax, that he was pater Senatus, and pater omnium bonorum, The
father of the Senate, and the father of all good men: so he was the Patron of
Orthodox Doctrine and Orthodox Teachers. And as he lived so he dyed; for a
little before his departure he made a solemn profession of his faith, and then
said that he died a professed adversary to all Romish doctrine, and a true Son of
the Church of England according to the 39. Articles. And thus ye find him
fragrant concerning his faith.

2. Secondly, was he not fragrant toward his King? yes, name me a more loyal
Peer. He was lapis quadratus, a squared sone; neither Sequestrations, nor
Imprisonments, Basil.
Compositions, Taxations or Decimations could make him fickle or false; he had
rather have been sick of any disease, then have had the Leprosy of disloyalty
to have appeared in his forehead. He was (as it were) one of the steadfast
Angels which remained firm, when Lucifer and his train rebelled. His fidelity
in this kind was so eminent, that it was Gods high mercy that it did not once
cost him his life at home; and it drew him when he got free often to hazard his
life abroad; and when he returned, how was his Estate drained, till it almost
fell into an Epilepsie? So then for his Loyalty, he is come to his grave with
this honor, that he lived and died an unblemished and an unstained Royalist,
fragrant he was to his Prince.

3. Thirdly, was he not fragrant toward his neighbors? yes,

1. First, in patience; I hope there is not here or elsewhere, the most
impatient or pacified man that can accuse him to have been an irefull man. It
is true, he had an high magnanimity of spirit to defend his just Rights and
Royalties, but for common injuries he regarded them no more then Northern
blasts; Suidat.
he did not with the Athenians set up a spear to run that man to the heart
which had injured him, or offered him an abuse. But when he was provoked diverse
times to compel satisfaction for high affronts and contempts, he thought it
was beyond his Religion and his nobleness to right himself for every trivial
distaste; no dart would stick in this water: Telum in aqua non remanet. Chrysostom
Non m^m ni me percussum.
yea when he had been highly irritated, he was ready to say with the
Philosopher, I do not remember that I was stricken. He had learned that of
Solomon, say not I will do to him as he has done to me, and that of St. Paul,
why do ye not rather suffer wrong? who of his degree and quality lived more
peaceably amongst his neighbors? or had a more relenting heart? or troubled
the Age less with vexatious suits?

2. Secondly, was he not fragrant in his Justice? yes, he might be set up for
the Standard. The Lamb can as soon bite as he could gripe or oppress; another
Pericles, that never caused any man to go in a sad garment for his rapines. He
might have said with Samuel, whose ox have I taken? whose ass have I taken?
or to whom have I done any wrong? bring me that man that can say truly, that he
has a Tenement belonging to him that he has gotten by the wrest; or one
furrow of Land in his whole Estate which does cry out against: him for
injustice.

3. Thirdly, was he not fragrant in Charity? yes, Town and Country can testify
that odoriferous sent. His house was a kind of Hospital, a Storehouse to hail
and sick; his White Wood-stacks and his black pots can never be forgotten.
Those which came, went not away empty; and those which did not come, he would
seek them out and relieve them; his heart was the poores Guardian, and his hand
was their Treasurer: He had troops of poor attended upon him, as it was said of
Henry the third, a German Emperor; and wheresoever he met them, either in
streets, highways, or fields, his sympathising spirit melted toward them,
and his communicating hand dropped bounty to them; thus every way his fragrancy
was felt. A right Cedar he was in all respects, and though he be fallen, yet as
the forest will want him, so it should not see him cast to the ground without
an heart-stroke, a lip-roar, yea a passionate howling. Howl Firee-tree for the
Cedar is fallen. But says one, when you have magnified your Cedar to the
height, I see a spot in him; do thou? so did he in himself, and I hope that
his repentance has prevented thy censure, and his remorse thy rancor. To me,
to others he often lamented his errors; and with fervent prayers and bitter
tears begged pardon at the hands of God Almighty. And is God reconciled to him,
and will thou be inexorable? But what was his spot? have not thou the same?
have not thou more? have not thou worse? He was no Persecutor, he was no
Traitor, he was no Temporizer, he was no Hypocrite. There are many spots, and
the Leper may be apt to cry out of another foul skin. It is good for every one
to sttitch up his own rents, before he do complain of a seam-rent place in
another garment, or to wash his own face clean before he do find fault with a
spray in another checks. Who can say my heart is clean? I am clean from sin?
in many things we offend all. If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is
done amiss, who is able to stand? But let his spot be what it will, I trust he
has prayed it away, and we have prayed it away, that by the virtue of his
tears and his friends tears (for God was reconciled to Jobs friends for his
prayers and sacrifices) or howsoever by the infallibility of Gods Covenant, and
efficacy of Christ's blood it is rinsed away. To give thee all the assurance
that by the judgment of Charity is requisite, that be died a true Penitent:
Consider what I am now to propound unto thee. A little before his departure
like a man that had his deaths stroke in his bosom, and a yearning for divine
favor in his conscience; he fought for nothing but mercy, and thirsted for
nothing but reconciliation: he abounded in tears, was frequent in
supplications, forced himself beyond his strength to the prayers of the family,
had often the prayers of diverse Churchmen in his Chamber, and would lift up
his hands devoutly at those things which moved him: he wanted no Counsel, and
embraced Counsel, delighted to have the Bible read to him, even eight Chapters
at a time; he called for mercy whilst he had freedom of speech; and when for
four days together he lay in a manner speechless, yet God gave him liberty to
utter these words, Lord, Lord, have mercy, Lord, Lord, have mercy; and these
were the only words it that long space which came from him distinctly to the
hour of his death; God taught him (I trust) the language with which he should
breathe out his last gasp, or God himself (which is very likely) spoke for him.
But if he had never shed tear, nor uttered prayer, the tears and prayer of his
friends if there be any power in Christian intercession) I hope have beaten out
a way to Heaven for him; for his friends were seldom without watery eyes, and
we were seldom off from our knees; so that God I trust has received our
prayers, and received his soul; he went like Elias with a whirlwind and a
fiery Chariot into Heaven. Come on then ye Firre-trees, will ye suffer such a
Cedar to be carried off from the ground without a forrest-clashing, and beating
your tops one against another? no, let the wilding-tree, the aspe-tree, the
sloe-tree the beech-tree and wicl -- ree be silent if they will, but let all
the Firre-trees join together in a general mourning for when shall we see his
equal? when shall we behold his Superior? do ye bury him with thrilling
spirits and torn hearts; make all the wood to ring, and rend, and roar at his
fall; yea, do ye break out into an absolute howling. Howl Firre-tree, the
Cedar is fallen. Well, since he is fallen, let us leave him to the Lord
Paramount of the Forest, only let his Memory be precious, and his fragrancy
sweet in our nostrills; let us for a farewell to him, call him the Mirror of
worth, and the Monument of honor: Let us hope that God has but taken him
away, because he has use of some Cedar above for his own building; and that he
that planted him has disposed of him for the honor of his own Court; yea,
that he sent special Messengers, even the blessed Angels, to carry him from
hence upon their shoulders, and to lay him within the Court-gate, to be made a
Pillar in the Temple of God: There lie thou, thou noble Cedar, and remain to
thy everlasting honor and bliss. Only he being gone, God give us grace to
think on our own fall, that we that howl for his fall, may not howl at or after
our own fall, but fall with comfort, and be carried away at last to the
building of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.

