woodcut of an agricultural cycle. At the top is a cross-section of crops
growing in the ground. Below are 8 numbered panels: 1. a man scattering seeds
over a ploughed field; 2. a man cutting crops with a scythe; 3. a man flailing
crops in two tied bushels; 4. a woman sifting or separating grain from sacks
through a sieve; 5. a woman tending a fire over which sits a large pot; 6. a
man seated, drinking from a mug, with a jug and several barrels nearby; 7. a
man vomiting; 8. a woman sweeping with a broom

THE REBELS TVRKISH TYRANNY, in their march December. 24. 1641.
As it was taken out of a Letter sent from Mr. Witcome a Merchant in Kingsale
to a Brother of his here. Showing how cruelly they put them to the Sword,
ravished religious women, and put their Children upon red hot Spits before
their parents eyes; throw them in the fire, and burn them to ashes; cut off
their ears, and nose, put out their eyes; cut off their arms, and legs,
broyle them at the fire, cut out their tongues, and thrust hot Irons down their
throats, drown them; dash out their brains, and such like other cruelty not
heard of amongst Christians. With a great and bloody skirmish fought between
Captain Hull, and the Rebels: and the names of the chief Rebels of that
Regiment. And the firing of a Town within a mile of Dublin.

LONDON: Printed for W. R. 1641.

THE FRISH REBELS TVRKISH TYRANNY: December 24. 1641.
A Among other sad diasters of the Rising of the Rebels in Ireland, there was
the 24. of December 1641. an Army of about 5000. Rebels, who were gathered
together about Croke Haven in the County of Cork, which is in the South west
part of Ireland.

There was a Religious and godly man, that lived there by name M. Dabnet; who
perceiving that the Rebels were come near, sent his servants to his neighbors
and Tenants, persuading as many as he could to stand with him at his house,
upon their guard, if possible keep them out: So that he had gathered together
about 500 that were able to bear Arms; but there was but little provision. So
that they barred the gates to them as well as the fence of the house would
permit them, and betook them within the house to such provision as they had.
But poor souls, it was all to little purpose, for when the Rebels approached,
they fell upon the house, and soon entered, and slew all the guard after a most
butcherly and cruel manner as soon as ever they entered.

Then they took M. Dabnet his wife, a religions godly woman, and threw her down
upon the floor, and ravished her before (...). And having to done, they took
one of their children, with trickling tears running down its pretty face,
stripped off its clothes, and barbarously spit the harmless babe upon a red hot
spit, which they had heated in the fire, before its parents eyes, and yet were
they not herewith satisfied; but upon the same spit they put another of the
children also, to the great and unspeakable grief of their parents. These two
babes, they laid down upon a pair of Racks that stood in the chimney, to roast
before the fire, and by force made another of the children (bigger then either
of the other) to turn the spit about, which was done with an heavy heart. And
when he had turned a little, they took him away from the spit, and threw that
boy into the fire, and held the poor child down till he was dead, and let him
lie till he was burnt to ashes. Here was a heavy sight for the parents.

Afterward they took M. Dabnet himself, and before his wifes face, cut off
both his ears, and his nose, and put out both his eyes, and cut off both his
arms, and his legs also; and having so done, they stripped him naked, and laid
him along close by the fire to scorch him, where he lay until his flesh did
rise up in blisters with the heat of the fire: then they took him up and asked
him (in derision and scorn) if he were not acold: Who languishing between life
and death, as it were, all his blood being in a manner gone, and his vital
spirits, in much weakness spoke to them thus, That the worst that they could
do to him, he doubted not but that it was for his eternal good; and he did
admonish them to take heed; for all these things will rise up at the day of
Judgment against them.

This speech did but the more inrage them against him, when they saw, that all
these tortures would not make him yield, but that he was resolved to die a
Protestant; insomuch, that they pulled open his mouth, and cut out his tongue,
and run an hot Iron down his throat, and so he died.

His Wife, poor soul, standing by, beheld all this, with what sorrow, let all
loving wives, and tender hearted mothers judge; then they demanded of her if
she would turn to them, and follow with them; but what with fear, sorrow and
the distraction that she was in, was not able to speak, or make them any
Answer; only with weeping eyes in an abundant manner, fell upon her knees,
like one half dead: But they pulled off her headcloaths, and dragged her out
of the house by the hair of the head into the yard, where there was a Well,
into which they threw her, and drowned her; and after this set the house on
fire.

From hence they matched to Buiton, to Sir William Hulls Castle; entending to
take the Castle, but they could not enter the Castle; for it was well
fortified, both with men, powder, shot, and other provision for War, good
store of Muskets; besides two brass Pieces of Ordnance mounted on the wall;
and a great murderer planted against the coming in at the gate, which was fast
shut also so that in a short space there were a hundred of the Rebels slain,
and the rest were forced to retreat back.

So they went into the Town, and with wild fire burned up the most part of it;
which forced the Inhabitants to fly out of their houses to save their lives,
and they fled to the Castle thinking there to find shelter; which was about
the space of a mile off from the Town, But in the way the Rebels fell upon
them, and slew the greatest part of them.

From thence they marched to the Bantry, a place about ten miles from the said
Castle, where was Captain Hull with five hundred men. The Rebels fell upon
him and his Army, and there was a bloody Skirmish between them, but Captain
Hulls Army was but an handful to them in comparison.

In the Skirmish whilst the Captain fought, there was about two hundred of
his men slain, and about a hundred of the Rebels. And Captain Hull himself
being slain band so many of his Army; the rest were driven back by the Rebels
toward the Sea and there some of them were battered to pieces upon the Rocks,
and others drowned in the Sea; to the great grief of the Protestants
thereabouts.

Then the Rebels returned into the Town, and took it; and used the
Protestants in it cruelly; defloured the women before their husbands faces,
dragged them up and down the streets by the hair of the head, and dashing out
their childrens brains against the walls, and against the stones in the
streets, and pulled them in pieces before their parents faces; and putting
Christians to unheard of torments. Some they hanged by the hair of the head;
some they hanged by the hands, and whipped them to death; and other such like
cruel torments.

Then they took those Arms that were in the Armory for the County; which were
about a thousand Arms, which they carried away, and fired the Town.

After such cruel manner have the Rebels destroyed the Town in the space of
one week, in the West part of the County of Cork.

The Names of the chief Rebels of his Company.
Oswelren Beer. Filminey Makecue. Onen Marmuffe. Darmon Ofanen.
There is a little Town within a mile of Dublin, which the Govemours there
have caused to be burnt, for fear that any of the Rebels should come and
harbor there.

FINIS.

