ENGLAND'S RESTITUTION OR The Man, the Man of Men, THE STATESMAN. DELIVERED In
several SERMONS in the Parish Church of Waltham Abbey in the County of Essex.

By THOMAS REEVE D.D. Preacher of Gods Word there.

PSALM 28.8. The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his
Anointed.

Magna est caligo in divinis.

Callimachus. Dii vertunt omnia retrorsum.

Adag. LONDON, Printed by John Redmayne, for William Grantham, at the black
Bear in S Paul's Churchyard, near the little North Door, 166^

To the most Religious, Renowned, Potent, Puissant, Just, Temperate, Wise,
Worthy, Patient, Clement, Chaste, Charitable, Incorrupt, Innocuous Prince,
CHARLES the Second, King of Great, Britain, France, and Ireland, Defendour of
the Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic faith, etc: The providence of God, the
protection of Angels, healthful days, long life, a quiet State, a prosperous
Reign, faithful friends, satisfied enemies, honor at home, splendor abroad,
an illustrious name, and a glorious Crown.
Dread Sovereign, and Europ's highly qualified Prince,
YOu have set a whole Nation in an ecstasy, yea the whole earth in amazement;
Nescio qua praeter solitum dulcedine laeti. Virg. 1. Georg.

Nay the very heavens do seem to rejoice, and to join in the trance. Exhilarant
ipsos gaudia nostra Deo^. Martial.

Oh! what evil Angel drove you out of the Land? Oh! What good Angel has
brought you again into the Land? It is said of Socrates, that he had a
Phenomenon attended him whithersoever he went; and doubtless some good Spirit
waited upon you in all your Pilgrimage, or else we had never seen your face
again. Had you not dwelt between the shoulders of God, how many were there that
would have shouldered you to death? this was no ordinary preservation, no, --
(...) Homer.

Oh how many dangers have you escaped? how many plots have you prevented? it is
an admiration to see Incoluniem Pallanta, Virg. 8. Aeneid.
a Prince so waylaid safe, and secure. Struxerit insidias notus feritate
Lycaon, Ovid. 1. Met.

Your cruel, bloodthirsty Lycaon (known far and nigh for his savagenesse)
wanted not his treacheries and stratagems for you in all Countries, and
corners; that base, ignoble Merchant, would have bought your Royal head at the
price of Millions; one of his Factours you happily met with, and sent him out
of the world with his due guerdon, Hic laqueo fauces, elisaque guttura fregit.
Luc. 1. Phars.

A goodly spectacle, let all those which aspire to touch a Princes head, leave
their heads upon such a gibbet. This was the deliverance, but how great was the
danger? bitter it was to endure, joyful it is to remember. All these hazards
considered, was it not as great an admiration to see your Majesty's exile
changed into such a state of exaltation, as to see Agrippa's iron chain turned
into a golden chain? Joseph. Antiq. l. 19 c. 5.
Oh that you which were expelled out of the Land, should have the happiness to
visit your Native Country, even expiring, and in a moment to restore it to
life; Pausan. in Messen.
as Conon dreamt, that he lay with his dead Mother, and she thereupon presently
revived. Your stay was tedious, your return was transporting. Was ever Prince
entertained with more solemnity? and welcomed home with more triumph? the
shores shouted, the high ways chaunted, the hills ecchoed, the streets were
Theaters of joy; and have we not the fruit of this melody, and bringing in a
King with honor? yes, how peaceably do we live? how gloriously do you reign?
there has been a festival ever since. Mollia securae peragebant otia gentes.
Ovid. 1. Met.

Oh that we could see Gods face shining upon us in your Royal presence! and
with clear eyes look upon you as the man of Gods right hand. Doubtless this
was one of the mysteries of Divine providence, and one of the chiefest of the
ways of God. There does want nothing for the perfecting this blessing, but
thankfulness to God, and obedience to his known Laws. Who would not praise God
for such a mercy? who would not serve God for such a Prince? Oh that we could
prize you, as our felicity in you is prizelesse! Oh that we could honor God,
as he honored us by you, making us in the sight of the world his special
Favorites! But I am afraid that all this will be but a blast, and end in a
lip-strain. Ten may be cleansed, but where are the nine? Nothing is more
short-lived, then the sense of a recovery. Our maladies are even healed, and we
begin to forget our cure; we scarcely magnify our God, or value our King. What
is the price of a good God? what is a true King worth? cloth of silver, chains
of gold, ringing of bells, blowing of Trumpets, roaring of Ordnance, kindling
of bonefires, a panegyrical Oration, a thanksgiving-Sermon. Is not here all out
pomp? our chiefest devotion? what mortifying of corruptions, cleansing of
consciences, vows of reformation, fruits of obedience are there to be seen
amongst us, more then formerly? no, we were affected only for a time, or holy
for a season; some are again at their old frolicks, and some at their old
Politics. We are satiated both with our God, and our King. Never well without
our King, and never the better when we have him. There are men, that will not
forbear a cursed oath, a bowsing bowl, a cheat in the shop, a bribe in the
Court, a seditious design, a factious meeting, to make the reign of such a King
peaceable, or the life of such a King safe; they must either be Kings
themselves, or else no King does please them. So that this high favor from
heaven, is like to be but an ominous trial, an imminent and impending
judgment. For how can God be but angry, if we be offended at our peace, or
kick at his blessing? we hazard our welfare, and jeopard our King. Oh that we
can forget our distractions before this settlement! and our despairing
condition before God opened this door of hope in the land! with what sobbes,
and tears, would we have bought this calm, and comfortable state, which we do
now enjoy? Before your Majesty came amongst us we were a sick Nation, visited
with Many Princes; and this King's Evil nothing could have healed but the touch
of your own Royal hand. By the blessing of God, and your Majesty's happy
appearance, the Many Princes are turned into One. And is not this a change, a
cure to be magnified and admired? yes, if we had either sense of mercy, or
conscience of duty left in us, we would never sin again, but dread as much to
be guilty, as miserable. For we know, that it was the transgression of the
Land, that brought in the Many Princes, and will not we cast away our
transgressions to cast out, and keep out such Princes? were they once so
odious, and are they now again become so precious? else why do we set open the
right broad gates to give them entrance? is there any readier passage for them
to break in amongst us, then by your old corruptions? If we would preserve the
Man of understanding and knowledge, can there be a surer means of prevention of
misery, then by taking the right Antidote against Transgression? For can
Transgression be prolonged, and the State prolonged? no, Contraries do expel
each other. If the distemper be continued, the disease may renew. Our
incorrigible sins may endanger your Majesty's Royal person, and shed your Royal
blood. I do not fear so much the Malcontents at home, or the Machivilians
abroad, as these Miscreants of impiety, and impenitency. Some call their selves
your Majesty's good Subjects, and some your best Subjects, I would they would
try their degrees of comparison by a superiority of repentance. Repentance?
what should we repent of? Some think only of carnal sins, but carnal sins, are
only greater for turpitude, and infamy; Tho. Aq. 12 q. 72^. art.
but spiritual sins are the most heinous for deordination, and irregularity,
and that in respect of subject, object, and motive. Well, both the black and
the white Devil had need to be dispossessed. Your Majesty therefore did wisely
to publish your pious Proclamation to call home all to a religious life; I call
it a pious Proclamation, because if men had listened to it, they might have
been made not only happy, but holy under you. A divine sentence was in the
lips of the King, when that was sent through the whole Nation; it is a rare
thing to hear a King upon the Throne to teach all the Kingdom virtue, such a
King may be surnamed Ecclesiastes, such a motion is able to sanctify a Land;
especially, when it is not only mandatory, but exemplary, edged with as much
piety as authority; whereby all your people might ascribe to you your
attributes of Gracious Sovereign, and Sacred Majesty. Your Majesty have done
your part, freed your own soul, and endeavored to cleanse ours. But I beseech
you (my dear and dread Sovereign) what operation have you found by that
Masterpiece of your government? how many Royal Converts have you to rejoice in?
If you have, I will say that Majesty does carry some Sovereignty with it, and
that your Crown is not more glorious, then your Scepter awful; you are then a
potent King, and have true loyal Subjects; then all Nations will flock hither
more to see your virtue, your efficacious virtue, then ever they did to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, and say that here do dwell the people of holiness, and
that you do reign in a Kindome of Saints; which is not only your proper
Territory, but your proper Sanctuary, a Temple which you have consecrated by
your own graces; yea then as Cyprus was once called (...), the happy Island,
Knolles Turk. hist.
so we shall be called (...), the religious Island. Does your Majesty find by
experience that your physic has wrought? and that your Patient has voided
his ill humors? is your Court purged? is your Land cleansed? has the
Goddammee-Blade filed his blaspheming tongue? has the riotous Carowser left
drowning himself upon dry land? has Felix given over his groping for bribes?
has Shebah laid down his trumpet? have the Monichangers pulled down their
Tables? what are all rough places made plain? and crooked things made straight?
Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such things? shall the earth be
brought forth in one day? or a Nation be born at once? Es. 66.8. Oh
regenerating King then! Oh converting Proclamation! If men be thus really
renewed, it is pity that they should be reproached with any of their former
errors, for none but a sordid spirit will gather up that filth which
repentance has washed away: When the bond is cancelled, the former debts are
no more to be required, the reformed man is no more to be called a scandalous
person, for then what comfort should any man have in his change? or in striking
the mortifying nail into his breast? it is as great a sin to censure a Penitent,
as to flatter a Libertine. Repentance does give the exequies to all former
crimes; mortified crimes are to be buried, as well as dead corpses. There are
none but Necromancers, which will call up the spirits of the deceased to work
their Magical ends withal; there are none but ravenous dogs, which will
satisfy their greedy appetites with such Carrion: for what can God, or man,
require more of the greatest Sinner, then reformation. Were it unpriestly,
unchristian, unmanly in me, to call any man Rebel who is become a Loyal
Subject? or him an Heretic, or Schismatic, who is, turned Orthodox in
doctrine, and discipline? then how ungodly and inhumane is it in any to call
them profane, who have declared themselves Converts? Mary Magdalen, Peter, and
Paul, would never have been, called Saints by these spiritual Murderers of
reformation; but repentance has so rinsed a Penitent, that he is never after
to be called filthy; P^nitentia revocat omnes defectus, restituendo hominem in
pristinam gratiam. Dignitas amissa per peccatum restauratur per poenitentiam,
Aquin. 3. q. 9. art. 3.
for it is an expulsion of all former defects, and a restitution into a state
of grace. The dignity that was lost by sin, is restored by repentance. If your
Majesty therefore does meet with such, esteem them, and embrace them, prize
them, and prefer them, they are the lustres of your Nation, and the Supporters
of your Throne. But I doubt, that your Majesty upon due search, can find few of
these Proclamation-men; they may read and magnify, but not loath and cleanse.
That Witch of Religion (I am afraid) did more good with his redhot iron, then
you can do with your Imperial Edict. They which make a foul show in the flesh,
and they which make a fair show in the flesh, they whose course is wholly
sin, and they whose cause is wholly sin, antiquum obtinent. Now are these
likely to fortify your Title? or to establish your greatness? no, God send
you better Champions, three righteous Saints were better then Myriads of such
Heroes; they may have the brawny arms of Giants, but they have no good sinews;
their sins will never suffer them to fight with a conquering hand. If they will
not express their selves truly virtuous, how do they reverence your person?
or cordially desire your preservation? no, they do but live under you to
confirm their interests, and in effect care not whether you live or die,
prosper or perish; if they did, they would shun those transgressions, which
they know will cause the bloud-draught of Princes. If they will not wash, I
will go to the Laver my self, and endeavor to cleanse my self, and as many as
I can, that there may be a race of your Proclamation-births to guard your Royal
Person in all exigents. Thus beseeching your Sacred Majesty to cast your benign
Princely eye upon these unpolished Sermons, which are principally intended to
second your Proclamation, blessing God Almighty that he has restored you to
your Kingdom, and humbly imploring, that the State thereof may be prolonged,
submissively I take leave, and rest

Your Majesty's sincere suppliant, and sacrificing subject, Tho. Reeve.
Waltham Abbey.
ERRATA.
Ministers for Monsters, p. 11. l. 1. dread such an army for dread such an
Enemy, p. 15. l. 30.

ENGLAND'S RESTITUTION.
Proverbs, xxviij. 2. For the transgression of a Land many are the Princes
thereof: but by a man of understanding and knowledge, the state thereof shall
be prolonged.


SOlomon shows here the high misery of a Nation, many Princes; and he shows
what it is that brings in this plague, the transgression of the Land; For the
transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof. But let Solomon
demonstrate, yet there are those which will remonstrate, for what is the cause
of the alteration of States, and the change of governments, that good Rulers
are taken away, and bad come in their stead, is it transgression? No, we are
too great Advocates to our own corruptions to confess the original of sorrows
to flow from our own prevarications; they are not our many sins that are the
occasion of the many Princes, but there are many other accidents; some look to
the malignancy of Planets, some to the improvidence of Statesmen, some to the
turbulency of men's natures; but Transgression is not the procatarctical cause;
No, the Land does suffer, but the Land is innocent; it is the judgment of the
Land, but not the trespass of the Land; the tribulation of the Land, but not
the transgression of the land. Thus all the judgments from heaven cannot
awaken the sinner out of the spirit of slumber; Jonas does sleep in the midst
of the Tempest, and he must be taken by lot, before he will acknowledge that
the ship was ready to be cast away for his sake. Pindarus.
Pychon formosus, this venomous serpent shall be cried up to be amiable. But
when we have used all our subterfuges, our own guilts will be found to be the
State-Troublers; if there be changes of Governors, it is the iniquity of the
times, which has buried the good Governors; if there be many Princes, it is
the transgression of the Land, that has shown to the Land these many strange
faces. For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof: well, a
breach is made, how shall it be closed up? mourn ye for your sins, and the
Land shall no longer mourn, take away the transgression of the Land, and the
trial of the Land is taken away; the many Princes are gone, and a good Prince
come in their stead; a Prince indeed that shall cause the wasted Land to
flourish, and a decayed State to be prolonged; But by a man of understanding
and knowledge, the state thereof shall be prolonged. For the transgression of
the Land many are the Princes thereof, but by a man of understanding and
knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged.

So that here we have Solomon's proverb, and his prophecy. His proverb, For
the transgression of the Land many are the Princes thereof; his prophecy, that
after the many unfortunate Princes, a glorious Prince should arise, who should
bless the Land, and prolong the State, But by a man of understanding and
knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged. Many Princes made the Land
unhappy, but had it never been happy before? yes, he that talks of many
Princes, does intimate that there was once a choice Prince; for as the
transgression of the Land brought in many Princes, so the obedience of the Land
was blessed with one eminent Prince; a Prince of blood, a Prince of virtues,
the honor of the Throne, the Mirror of Princes; a Prince that was the Crystal
drop of innocence, the bright flame of devotion, the Gem of Justice, Chastity,
clemency, constancy, affability, wisdom, bounty, and in a word, the Treasury
of all Royal perfections, the trance of all his loyal Subjects, and the
admiration of strangers; who whilst he was in power, preserved their Religion,
Laws, Liberties, and endeavored what in him lay to make the Church a
Sanctuary, and the Kingdom a Chauntry. But this Prince was too happy for the
times, too good for the Land; the people having lost their obedience, they lost
their Prince; the innocence of the Land being turned into the transgression of
the Land, this Prince proved but short-lived; he was taken away by disaster,
the sins of the Land had filled this Nation full of troubles, his person full
of hazards, and took away his precious peace, and at last took away his
precious life; turned a Prince into a prisoner, and a Monarch into a Martyr; so
that there remained nothing but to cry out after him, oh beat Sesti, Horace.
oh happy Sestius! well, he being gone, what was the fate of this transgressing
Land? judgment from heaven brought in many Princes; many Princes? what
Princes? 1. One Prince seemed like a Giant, I have read of many Giants, but
this was a Giant indeed, as big well-nigh as five hundred men, above the
stature, or dimensions of any of the Anakims, or Zanzummims. How did this Giant
reign? and how long? oh the reign was fierce, there was nothing but exactions,
and impositions, depredations upon Estates, and pressures of Conscience. How
long was the reign? too long, and yet not very long, for the government was so
intolerable, that this Giant was plucked away by force, thrust by with scorn,
and removed without a groan: well, after that Prince was gone, who was the
next? Lu. ad Call. Pi.
One, which insigni praestinguit imagine visus, daun^ted the age with his
Looks, a man of ire, fire, tumor, tumult, terror, torment, a Gorgon, a
Centaure, an enraged Ajax, an Hercules furens, which would war against right
reason, laws, leagues, motions, modesty, promises, precedents, orders, oaths,
decrees, destinies, which would set all in commotion and combustion, call for
aid above, but if that would not come, readily force it from beneath, consult
with cunning men, not refuse Astrologers, Magicians to give advice, Flectere si
nequeo superos Acheronta movebo;
Yea, mingle heaven and earth together to accomplish designs. Oh the base arts
of ambitious men! oh the damned attempts of aspiring Politicians! next the red
Dragon, can any thing be more venomous? next Beelzebub, can any thing be
blacker, or give a worse sent of brimstone? Urit miserum gloria pectus: this
same desire of worldly glory does scorch a wretched breast. Bern. sermon.
Quadrages.
Ambitio subtle malum, doli artifex, tinea sanctitatis, ex remediis morbos
creans, Ambition is a subtle evil, the prime artisant of deceit, the moth of
holiness, creating diseases of remedies; Bonsin. l. 8. Dec. 2.
with Zingis it will kill all that will not obey, and stick at nothing which
will advance; Plutarch.
yea with Pyrrhus out of a thirst to get more, it does not regard what already
it does possess, but aim at greater things, and never care by what means it
does obtain them; just like this haughty Prince before you, who had honor, and
greatness in his eye, and to ascend this Mount he did not care what craggy
places he did climb. He would get the best of men (as esteem made them) to
countenance his drifts, but he never troubled himself to have the worst of men
(known so to be) to be Actors in them; Saints or Miscreants it was all one to
him, if they would serre pedem, Virgil.
lend a foot to stir about his projects. Oh from what a mean beginning did he
raise himself to that sublime celsitude? He once purposed to have drained in
the Fennes, but the Flag of defiance being hung out he sought for booty in the
Up-lands; from the wasting himself into a Spend-thrift, he fought himself into
a Prince; after the decocting of three Manors, he cast three Kingdoms into
the Cauldron to boil toothsome diet for his greedy and insatiable appetite. And
to attain to this, what loftiness did he express? how did he set up his
crests? was there ever a poor Abject more turgid, and supercilious? Claud. in
^rat.
Levantibus alte Intumuit rebus. Who was his companion? who was his compeer?
No, he was not only disdainful, but defying, not only proud, but prodigious,
Quas gerit ore minas, quanto premit omnia fastu? Stat. 1. Theb.

He had a blazing beacon in his forehead, his face flamed like Mount Aetna, he
had lightning in his eyes, and thunderbolts in his lips. And what rare
Artificers had he? Virgil. 2. Aeneid.
Ille dolis instructus and art Pelasga; he could weep, when he intended to
devour, pray, when he meant to sacrifice men's lives, seek God (as he called
it) when he resolved to engage with the Devil. And by these policies, and
hypocritical impostures what a woeful government was there under him? there
was nothing to be seen but Taxes, sessments, confinements, confiscations
depopulations, decimations, chains, dungeons, halters, bloud-axes. Ye may know
him by his kindred, Consorts, Confidents, Counselors, Colleagues, Chapmen,
Chaplains, Secretaries, Emissaries, Judges, Guards, and Life guards; except it
be in the bottomless pit, where can there be found such a swarm of Locusts?
And for his manners (setting aside a few enchantments of pretended holiness)
can ye imagine a man almost more stupendiously evil? Tarquin the proud was not
more arrogant, Nero the cruel not more merciless, Caligula the shameless not
more impudent; a greater enemy to Orthodox men, then to the Blasphemers of the
faith; and a greater friend to the Jews, then Christians, a man very tender of
an oath, and yet maligned them that would not be perjured; an hater of Popery,
and yet a bosome-Friend to the most Jesuited person in the world. One wholly
composed of ambition and insolence, fraud and fury, subtilty and savagenesse;
so bent upon his own will, and inflexible in what he had resolved upon, that at
last he became violent in his designs, and desperate in his attempts,
vexatious at home, quarrelsome abroad, a Firebrand to his Countrymen, a Fiend
to his neighbors, the great Boutefeau and incendiary of the whole earth; how
did he rage in the Baltic sea, in the Streights, upon the coasts of Barbary,
and in the Atlantic Ocean? No honors, or Titles were sufficient for him, he
would have been Emperor of the British Isles, and had a Navy floating to go
fish for new Isles, as far as the Bay of Mexico. A man that at last was so
severe to his enemies, and bitter to his friends, and jealous and suspicious of
all, that he become a general odium: for he was flattered but by a few, hated
of most, and dreaded of all. The only comfort of the Nation was this, that the
Land in a short time was rid of him, and after all his vauntings and rantings,
violences, violations, vexations and victories, -- inexorabile fatum Virg. 2.
Georg.

Subjecit Manibus. --
Irae Thyeston exitio gravi stravere. Hor. 1. Car. Ode 16.

He breathed out his turbulent spirit and proved mortal. How he dyed is a
doubt, what became of him after death is a great secret; I confess I heard
that he was Canonized at his Funeral, and seen very nigh to the elbow of
Christ, but I question whether that Preacher were a true Seer, I cannot tell
whether every Peter has the Keys of heaven to let in Saints; I believe the
whirlwind was a truer Prophet to foretell whither he was carried. Gone he is,
and his name is not worth the recording, nor his Skin the owning; Exiit
Tremebundus, who does follow next?

After him follow another Prince, who had in him no great bane, nor no great
benefit, who had not time enough to do evil, nor wit enough to do good; which
did only talk and make offers, and drink healths, and promise a golden age with
leaden feet; but alas he was bliteus, and infrunitus, saplesse, and senseless,
useless, and giftlesse, he had in him more pretense then prudence, or
courtesy then courage, Quicunque aspiciunt mente carete putant. Ovid. 1. Fast.

He knew not how to rule, nor how to bring in another to rule: perhaps
well-minded, but his drifts ill-managed; he could neither shake off his
fetters, suppress mutinies, order his Council, discipline his Army, confirm
his interests, countenance his adherents, apprehend overtures, lay hold on
opportunities, hear them which gave him faithful advice, be true to them to
whom he had plighted his faith, stand by them which had promised to live and
die with him. A man not master of his own word, nor commander of his own sword,
but fickle and mutable, timorous and pusillanimous, false and faultring. And so
like a man shaken in the brain and breast, he sealed away his own authority,
leaving as little power to himself to preserve his person, as money to pay his
debts, and went out as the fable of the Age, and in stead of a Prince turned
Petitioner.

4. After him came a stern Prince indeed, a limme of the old Giant, not the
Giant, but the Giant's Elf, Minume, Durgen. There wanted something of the
magnitude, but nothing of the mischief of the old Sire. Had this Prince
continued long, what rents and ruins would there have been? the age found him
grimme enough for the time, the old dragge-net was cast to catch leveys, the
old forge was at work for new State-rules, and the old Gibbet was setting up to
dispatch persons ill-affected, yea there would have been not only laying men
in chains of iron, but hanging them up in chains of gold; a most black and
bloody reign there would have been, if hirtus and hispidus, this rough-skin'd
Prince had been long-lived; but this high-metalld Ruler, because he would
command Commanders in modelling a new Army, brought the old Army to draw upon
him, and to drive him far enough. Farewell for a time, another Prince must take
the chair of State.

5. And who was that? One all clad in steel, armed cap-a-pe, who being in
bright harness kept a fearful rattling and clattering for a while. Mars was
then the predominant Planet, and culminated, Ferrati venere viri. -- Claud. 3.
Coss. Hon.

The streets clad with nothing but Troopers, yea the Soldier was the
Sovereign. The name of the Prince was Safety, the design was to revive the Good
Old Cause; the Engine was a new Form of Government. And when this Masterpiece
was even completed, the Fabric and the Crafts-masters were both broken
together, for the stripling of the old Giant gathering strength again, Safety
was enforced to flee for safety, the Council Chamger was left empty, and the
General was made a Particular; happy was he that could run soonest, or fly
furtherst. Oh valiant Soldiers, was there ever heard of such a battle fought?
In the head and heart of the Army, was there not the same puissance or
pusillanimity expressed? yes a valiant Hero but setting his face that way, and
a general pardon to all them that would yield in time being proclaimed, the
Commander in chief, what was he but a Complainer in chief? where are ye my
stout Hectors? my old Bloud-hounds? Stand, stand says he; fly, fly, fly say
they; so that he had scarce Soldiers enough left him to sound a retreat, or to
keep one Castle for him where he might capitulate to lay down arms upon terms
of honor. No, the whole Camp was in a Panick fear, they think either lay down
arms or lay down necks, either fly or dye, either submit or hang, so that the
whole formidable host does disband or disperse; the Pikeman was the pitifullest
Prince, a Prince of Apparition, and is vanished.

Well, who was the next, the last Prince? Nanus redivivus, the Giant's Dwarf
showing his head again; for he had two lives; or a Funeral, and a resurrection,
an Exiit, and a Rediit; as Aethalides lived sometimes amongst the living, and
sometimes amongst the dead, and then returned to the living again, whereby he
knew what was done in all places, so happened it to this Prince, chopped in
pieces he was, and yet like Aeson had a new soul enter into his dismembered
body. Well, come he is again, and what? does he come to mend former oversights?
to reform old errors? is there nothing now to be seen in him but mercy and
meekness, kindness and sweetness? no, stay there, Suetonius.
Senex vulpes pilum, non pellem mutat, the old Fox may change his hair, but not
his skin. This angry Deity knows not how to be propitious; Totus Echinus, He
is prickles all over. If he does speak, there is nothing but (...) Scythian
Rhetoric; if he does act any thing, it is Lemnia manu, with a braining hand;
he that does expect any humanity from such an one; -- nescit Busiridis aras, he
does not know what sacrifices must be offered upon the altars of Busitis. This
Prince had no sooner crept into the Throne, and confirmed himself in authority,
but all the passion and severity, which could be imagined was expressed. The
Soldiery indeed was pardoned, but what should become of the Commonalty? how
was the Gentry hunted after? What search was there for the Nobility? and were
the Citizens in security? no, their resolutions were high, and their hazards
were great: they would not open their purses, and they must shut up their
warehouses; there was no lending of money, and so there must be no trading;
their streets were filled with armed Soldiers, their gates taken off from the
hinges, their chains and posts pulled up, their walls and bulwarks upon the
rasing, the flower of their Burgers secured, their Common Council a Medly of
Sectaries; they were threatened to be disarmed, and how nigh were they then to
be despoiled, and dispatched? He in heaven knows whether there was not a
general plunder, and a general Massacre decreed, the Citizens sentenced to
wallow in their own blood, and the City to be buried in her own ashes.
Suetonius.
It is said that Caligula had two books (the one called the poniard, and the
other the sword) wherein all the principal men of the Empire were written down
to be executed, which he had condemned in his secret thoughts. But had we the
Red book of this Prince to lay open all the cruelties designed and determined,
what a Slaughterhouse should we then see was this Nation intended and purposed
to have been made? what now then, was not this Land all over the mournful
spectacle of the Earth? yes, there was nothing to be seen, but a wailing
Country, a weeping City; every where confusion, consternation, peril,
perplexity, fears, tears, abashment, amazement, a sick State at the last pant,
at the last gasp. But when all things were thus in distress, despair, then
Pater altitonans, Jupiter Stator does appear, the arrow of the Lords
deliverance was shot abroad, God broke the staff of the wicked, the Scepters
of the Rulers, he helped the arm that had no strength, took us like two legs,
or a piece of an ear out of the mouth of the Lion; yea when no man durst write,
or fight, he put a pen into the hand of a prime Wit, and a pike into the hand
of a valiant Worthy, and so the miseries of the Nation began to abate; for
whereas before the Nation sobbed, and sued for redress in vain, then the
groans, the plaints, the applications, the supplications, the Declarations, the
Lamentations of a perishing people came to be heard, and hearkened to, and
secluded Members being added to the excluding Members, the hideous, odious
reign of the many Princes ended, and after a short space instead of the
wilful, self-seeking Rulers which would have confounded the State, there was
voted in a Man of understanding and knowledge, which should prolong the state.
But by a man of understanding and knowledge, the slate shall be prolonged. For
the transgression of the Land many are the Princes thereof, etc.

The misery of a Land does come from the transgression of a Land, whatsoever be
the accident, this is the cause; we must accuse nothing within the Land, or
without the Land, at home or abroad, neither our inconsiderate Friends, nor our
inveterate Enemies, but the proper, peculiar, principal and primitive occasion
of all calamity must be our own noxious and vicious lives. The distress of a
Nation does flow from the disobedience of the Nation; the trouble and trial of
a Land does arise from the transgression of the Land. The transgression of a
Land has a fruitful womb, and does bring forth variety of plagues, like many
deformed children, but amongst all the curses that can happen to a Nation,
there is none like unto the Many Princes; no, the torture of a Land is to be
vexed with many Princes, for they with their new forms of Government, and new
stratagems to destroy the rights and liberties of a people, make the judgment
insupportable; these do so plague men in their estates, and vex them in their
consciences, that next unto many Fiends there is nothing worse then many
Princes; therefore For the transgression of the Land, etc. Many Princes there
are, but how long do they wear their Crowns? is their reign endless? no, many
Princes are a judgment, and judgments do not long continue; storms at last
cease, torrents in time dry up, they afflict a Land, but the Land is at last
quit of them, -- haec nos suprema manebant
Exitiis positura modum -- Virgil. 7. Aeneid.

Miseries have their limits, for with a causal of sorrow, there is a discretive
of comfort: But, For the transgression of the Land many are the Princes
thereof; But, this But excludes these many Princes out of their Palace-doors,
or wring their Scepters out of their hands. Farewell many Princes, who succeed
in their rooms? what still an Hydra? no, these ministers are hideous, the Land
is never happy till it be espoused to a particular Bridegroom, the many Princes
must be changed into one, a Man, but by a Man. Man, have we found thee again?
thou art welcome, though the Land for a while could not endure thee, but it
must be wasted with the tyrranny of many Princes, that it might know the gentle
government of one Prince, yet to enjoy such a Prince we will fetch him out of a
foreign Land, invite him home to us from beyond Sea; those men would never have
blessed us, no, thou art the Man. The many Princes must be changed into One,
there must be but A Man, But by a Man etc. Well, a Man we have gotten, but how
must he be endowed? he must have other qualifications, then the other Princes
had; they were rash, and violent, and heady, which would have their own wills
and commands satisfied, though it were against all principles of reason, and
fundamental Laws; yield or fly, obey or perish: but a true Governor must not
be thus precipitate and desperate, the golden reins of authority must be guided
with more discretion and moderation; the auspicious Prince must be a wise
Prince, one that knows how to quell animosities, settle distempers, heal all
diseases in religion and policy. See then your right Man, a man that comes to
you as richly gifted as ye can desire, or government it self can require; look
upon him, and see if ye be not ravished with the sight of him; he is
intelligent, and considerate, that does every thing prudently and deliberately,
a man of understanding and knowledge: But by a Man of, etc. Grant such a Man,
who shall be benefited by him? who not? shall his own family or favorites only
be made happy by him? no, a whole State, for the state thereof, etc. How long
shall such a State flourish? what, sprout a little, and then have the former
leaf-fall? no, after many years ye shall see it in as vernant a condition as
ever, such a Prince shall be a Blessing to Ages, for the state shall be
prolonged. For the transgression of the Land many are the Princes thereof, but
by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged

In the Text consider these three things; 1. The peccant humor, For the
transgression of a Land. 2. The sad disease, Many are the Princes thereof. 3.
The happy cure, But by a Man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof
shall be prolonged.


First to handle the peccant humor, For the transgression of a Land. From
hence observe that Transgression is the inlet unto judgment; no transgression,
no judgment; punishment is the exercise of vindicative justice, now how can
God avenge, where there is no trespass? punishment is per inflictione^
contrarii, Aquin. 22. q. 19. a. 1.
by the inflicting of that which is contrary; now till we make opposition
against God, God lays upon us nothing which is contrary to our natures; no,
till sin come to be the corruption of the action, God brings no judgment as
the corruption of the Agent: Idem 1. q. 48. a. 5.
punishment is contrary to our wills, and till we do that which is contrary to
Gods Laws, God does nothing which is contrary to our desires; no, we have
subtracted that which is due to him, before he substracts that which is
convenient for us: we are guilty of an injury, before he exacts satisfaction of
us by suffering: our palates are out of course, before be does administer such
sharp Physic to us to recover our taste. It is the tree of disobedience that
brings forth the rod of correction. Culpam sequitur percussio, Cass.
No man is smitten but for a fault. As Aristophon was ninety times accused by
the Athenians, and as often acquitted; so God has no Bar to condemn an
innocent. If Alphonsus could walk without his guard because he had wronged no
man; so where there is no injury offered against heaven, there is no justice to
be feared: people offend highly, before they are made the generation of Gods
wrath, Jer. 7.29. He visit transgressions, Amos 3.14. Pour upon men their own
wickedness, Jer. 14.16. Measure their former work into their bosom, Isa. 65.7.
Consume them in their sins, Number. 16.26. Make them bear their own iniquity,
Levit. 5.1. Can two walk together except they be agreed? Amos 3.3. But can two
fight together when they are agreed? no, God has no sword to wound his
Friends, nor no corrosive to apply to sound flesh; will God stub up his trees
of righteousness? trample under feet his own jewels? raze his own Temples? It
is enough for Saturn to devour his own children, God will never destroy the
seed of the blessed. Balaam could use no enchantment against Jacob, nor no
divination against Israel, because God saw no iniquity in them. Number. 23.21.
Achior the Ammonite gave good counsel to Holofernes not to attempt war against
the Bethulians, except he could find out, that they had sinned against their
God, Judith 5.20,21. without sin people live as securely as if there were not a
God of justice in heaven, or any Ministers of his vengeance upon earth; for,
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? will he make a wast in his own
portion? root up his own garden? cast down his own Throne? no, he is a buckler
to them that walk uprightly, Pr. 2.7. he keeps the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel
2.7. they shall dwell between his shoulders, Deuteronomy. 33.12. he will be unto them
for a Sanctuary, Es. 8.14. and they shall inherit the seat of glory, 1 Samuel
2.8. But if men provoke the eyes of his glory, fury will come up in his face,
his hot displeasure will soon arise, he will appoint terrors over them, Lev.
26.16. and make their plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28.29. and execute judgments
upon them with furious rebukes, Ezech. 5.15. for why should not God skin the
fat Bulls of Basan? and crush the nest of Cockatrices eggs? a tire of Ordnance
discharged is little enough for them which hold out the flag of defiance
against him, fire that will burn to the bottom of hell is not too hot to
consume those which branch up in presumptuous sins, as patient as God is, yet
he is not slack to them that hate him, Deuteronomy. 7.10. Ah, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and be avenged of mine enemies, Es. 1.24. for, has God enabled
men to serve him, and do these turn their own Masters? is it not fit for such
insolent servants to be humbled? Illa est p^na justissima, ut amittat
unusquisque quod been uti no^it, Aug. Just puniuntur qui licitis abutuntur,
Hugo.
yes, That is the equallest punishment, that they should lose that which they
will not use well. Or, they are justly punished which abuse lawful things. A
people of obedience have their Tutelar Numen to preserve them, but can a Land
of transgression be a Land of security? no, a Land of trouble and anguish, Es.
30.6. a Land of destruction, Es. 49.19. God will fan in the gate of that Land,
Jer. 15.7. leave that people upon their Land, Ezech. 32.4. all the mirth of the
Land is gone, Es. 24.11. yea, an end is come upon all the corners of the Land,
Ezec. 7.2. Sinners beat out their own chains, or hew out their own gibbets, a
peoples calamity does come from their own impiety, the Land does suffer by the
Transgression of the Land.

And how can it be otherwise, when they cast away their Target, lose their
Antidote: turn the Law into an Accuser, and Conscience into a Fury: make the
Flesh their Ensign-bearer, and corrupt Nature their Champion: defy Scripture,
and brave upon the Pulpite contradict their own convictions, and wrestle with
their own conflicts: make Filth no shame, and Vengeance no horror: which
delight in corruption, and seek misery: love to be unworthy, and strive to be
unhappy: Patronize Sinners, and hate Saints: reject all motions of grace, and
entertain all opportunities to wickedness: listen to carnal allurements, and
stop their Ears against Soul-smiting warnings: snuff at dangers, and kick
against the just God. Now is it possible that these men should run through the
Pikes and not be wounded? Fall down from such precipices and not crush their
bones? shall not these beasts of prey at last be slayed? and these Mutineers
shot to death? yes, your iniquities at last will stiffle your own breath, and
your sins suck your own blood. Evil will hunt the evil doer. The Land will
smart for her own transgression; for, For the transgression of the Land, etc.

Applicat. This shows that the sinner is on the fore'hand with God Almighty,
the sinner does give the first blow, make the first thrust, begin the quarrel,
set up the standard. Before God does strike, how many indignities has he
endured? how many grievances has he been vexed with: Virg. 1. Aeneid.
-- longa est injuria, longae ambages. There is a long track of injurious
courses, infinite windings of provocations, which we have past through; --
pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse reselli. Ovid. 1. Metam.

God can read a large indictment against us, where the crimes charged against
us are so manifest, that there is no reply to be made. Sin is so apparent, that
it is a wonder, (as Cato said to a vaunting Soldier) whether men do more
undervalue virtue, or the honor of their own lives. Virtutem, an vitam
vilipendas, Plu. in Pelopida. Quis optimus? tui dissimillimus. Plut. in Apopth.
Many are so notoriously wicked, that if they ask for a good man, they must
seek for one most unlike themselves, as Agis the younger said to one
desperately profane, who would needs be propounding questions concerning true
virtuous men. We have little cause to wonder why this Land has been the Stage
of judgments; for how many transgressions have we had, which have brought in
the Actours; we have sinned, till our hands did call for strokes, till we did
add rebellion to our sin, till God was weary with repenting. He endured, till
there was no remedy. 2 Chapter 36.10. till he could no longer forbear for the evil
of our doings, Jer. 44.22. How injurious were we, before be waxed ireful? how
execrable, before he became implacable? Is God prone to be severe? no his
bowels are soft, his heart strings are tender, and at last his Justice is
without Fury, and his wrath without passion: Oh what an urging people then have
we been, that have stirred up a patient God to lay heavy hand upon us! can we
justify our selves? no, then our impudence were as much to be blamed as our
impiety. God has a large Catalogue of distastes, and disgusts, irritations and
exasperations, plaints and complaints to bring against us. We have been the
miserable of the earth, yet we cannot say, but that as his mercy is infinite,
so his vengeance has been just. People feel but the stings of their own
incorrigiblenesse, a Land suffers for her own transgression, For the
transgression of a Land.

Secondly, here we may see, that sin has judgment following her at the heels.
If there be transgression, look for no truce; no, breach of Articles raise up a
professed enemy. Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful Kingdom to
destroy it from the face of the earth, Amos 9.8. The sinners in Sion shall be
afraid. Isa. 33.14. Our Fathers have sinned and are not. Lam. 5.7. and Sons and
Fathers will at last be buried in the same grave. The Lord will not acquit the
wicked, Nah. 3. He has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, that he will never
forget any of their works, Am. 8.7. Ye then that do try masteries with God by
your sins, shall find by your broken bones, what it is to grapple with such an
adversary. Constitit Alcides stupefactus robore tanto. Luc. Phars.

Hercules himself might dread such an Army: If ye contend with God, where will
you leave your glory? Isa. 10.3. Sin at last will be buried in her own ruins.
A wicked Nation is a Conspiratour against her own welfare, it does undermine
her own State, and dig Mines to blow up her own greatness. Take away the prop
of obedience, and the house will soon fall; put out the Candle of holiness, and
there will be a dark room; fight against the Scriptures, and ye will have a
thousand curses pluck ye by the throat; send a challenge to heaven, and ye will
have an host of Angels draw upon you. It is a hard thing for any Leonem radere,
Plato.
to shave a Lion, to provoke the all confounding God. Dares Entellum provocas?
Virgil. 5. Aeneid.
does Dares vie puissance with the great Entellus? Do ye provoke me to wrath,
and not your selves to confusion? Who ever resisted the Lord and prospered?
have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like him.? Job
40.4. Qui Deum evigilare in judicio facit, velocem ultorem inveniet. Aug.
He that does cause God to awaken in Judgment, will find him a swift avenger;
God will strike surely, he will strike but once: They which fly about the
Candle of Gods Laws, will soon have their wings burnt: they which swallow
poison, will swell to death; they which plow wickedness, Hos. 10.13. it is
easy to know what they shall reap: they which violate Gods commandments, are
sinners against their own Souls, Number. 16.38. They which have upon their necks
the yoke of transgression. La. 1.14. are ready to have their throats cut. Is
not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity? Job. 31.3. (...)
It is a good saying of Aeschines, Obedience is the Mother of felicity, but
disobedience is the Mother of misery. There is no Barricado to be set up
against Gods justice, nor Fort-royall to be reared against the Fury of his
Canon. Farewell to all the glory and splendour of the Nation, if Gods vengeance
come once to lay battery against it. Our sins are the most destructive things
that are in the Nation; they will empty Warehouses, drayn away Treasure,
unlock Ports, raze Block-houses, sink Ships, fire Cities, massacre Heroes. All
go to wreck and ruin, where sin does call in judgment: the Land must suffer,
that abound with transgression; for, For the transgression of a Land, etc.

3. Thirdly, this discovers unto us the true state of our Land: for are not we
a Land of transgression? I know with Lysimachus, we think that we can touch
heaven with our Lance, that we are the only heavenly people upon earth. Creed
mihi magnos aquabunt ista Camillos, believe me (says one) the pious things
that are amongst us, will equal the ages of the Patriarchs and Prophets. We
are wise people, and the Law of the Lord is with us. But all these swimmerings
of our own perfections, are but velut aegri somnia vana, the vain dreams of a
sick brain; for in stead of being the pure Nation upon earth, what are we, but
the corrupt Nation? Indeed, with Chorazin and Bethsaidah, we are lifted up to
heaven in the enjoyment of the means, but where is the fruit of our
privileges? we have a profession of godliness, but where is the power of
godliness? Alas, we have little holy amongst us but the Ordinances, or
consecrated but our Temples: we study Christianity, but learn nothing but
Principles; and run to Lectures, but carry away nothing but observations: we
pray, but all our Religion is in our Knees; and weep, but all our contrition is
in a little salt water: we speak much of the primitive truth, but any new
fashion, or old abomination is dearer unto us; we talk highly of the Gospel,
but the light of Nature was more perfect: we cry out against Rome, but their
Beads and Crucifixes; Whipcord and Sackcloth; Roodlofts and Relics; Holy
Grains and Holy Water, have more self-denial in them, then our
Sabboth-services, or our morning exercises; our petitions, or our repetitions;
our Monthly Sacraments, or our Quarterly Fasts. We have forms of Worship, but
the green Bush on the Sign, is better then the Wine in the Cellar. Set aside
the noise of our Sermon Bells, and our Sanctuary Crowdes; the listing up of our
Eyes, and listening with our Ears; the penning down of Notes, and dropping
forth Sentences; our magnifying of precious Truths, and admiring of gracious
Teachers; the adoring of our own Saints, and the defying of all others as
Reprobates; what sincere piety is there amongst us? nay what execrable impiety
does there not abound, where God and his Laws, Christ and his Gospel, seem so
much to be valued? Are we Protestants? wherein? but in protesting against the
Pope? Are we the Reformed Church? wherein? but in reforming our Title? It is an
easy thing to give Names, or to take Names. Have we not limited all Sanctity
to the rules of our own devising, and to the modells of our own framing, to our
own ascriptions and subscriptions, to the addicting our selves to particular
Doctors, and the principling our selves in particular Doctrines, to our own
Paradoxes of Government, and Criticismes of Worship? Is not Christianity almost
turned into these Mathematics? and redemption it self into these
Hieroglyphics? are not our own divinations almost as much set by, as Gods
visions? is not the fear of God taught by the precepts of men? shall not all be
Saints which will use these things? shall any be Saints which will not submit
to them? Indeed in respect of the high cry about these things, there is an
opinionative Religion amongst us; yea a man would think, that the Chair of
Sanctity were in this Church, nay, that the Oracle of piety were in this Land.
But it is not the making a fair show in the flesh, that will create a true
beauty; it is not the broad Phylactery, that will constitute a true observer of
the Law, nor skeptical opinions that will verify true Christianity: pure
Religion consists very much in purity of life. And I pray what manner of Land
are we now? a Land of innocence, or a Land of transgression? I am loath to
decide the question, because I find it to be more dangerous to speak truth,
then to be guilty, and to discover sin, then to commit it. I am unwilling to
look toward this Dunghill, or to rake this Sink, or to dig the earth about
this root of gall and wormwood, to prefer an Indictment against the Age, or
howsoever to be the Crier of the Court: Yet because my Office is, to tell Judah
of her sin, and my conscience does tremble to bear the guilt of other men's
blood, more to preserve my peace in heaven, then to quarrel with the sins of
the Age; I knock at the Goal door, and ask what Prisoners are there; or feel
the Pulse, and try the constitution of the body: What therefore a Land of
Ordinances, and not a Land of abominations? a Land of profession, and not a
Land of transgression? Oh that I could acquit you! oh that ye could excuse your
selves! But I beseech you, was there ever a people which unclasped a Bible,
laid a Sacrifice upon the Altar, trod upon the pavements of a Sanctuary, or
stood within the sound of a Preacher's voice, that was guilty of more enormous
sins, then are daily and daringly committed in this Nation? The old World was
scarce drowned, and Sodom and Gomorrah scarce burnt for more heinous and
horrid crimes then this Land is stained with: we have sins amongst us, Quae
socci superant risus luctusque cothurni.
which cannot be sufficiently derided, or deplored: we even Deploramus patriam
nostra^, quod talium malorum and auctor sit, and nutrix. Basil.
lament, that our Country should be the Mother and Nurse of such evils. This
land is so full of transgression, that what transgression is it free from? we
are as spleenative as Esau, as bribe-taking as Balaam, we are as uncharitable
as Nabal, and as oppressing as Ahab, we are as voluptuous as Delilah, and as
much addicted to painting as Iezebel, we curse like Rabshakeh, and quaffe like
Belshazar, we are as temporising as Demas, and as treacherous as Judas, we are
as ill as Caldeans and Sabeans in the fields, and as Turks and Jews in our
Shops, we thrust into all Offices, and care not by what sordid means we get
gains, we have defiled Sanctuaries, and polluted the very Table of the Lord, we
have rifled our neighbors houses, and stained the earth with our Brethrens
blood, we have seized upon the Lords portion, and cast lots for Christ's
Garment, we have revived ancient heresies, and speak blasphemy as familiarly as
if it were our Mother tongue, we have expelled many a worthy Patriot from his
lawful inheritance, and chased many an eminent Minister from his just Cure:
St. Steven in these days would have been stoned, and John Baptist beheaded:
what one precept have we not made a breach of? What one Law have we not
violated? if some have not the sins of the Publicanes, yet they have the sins
of the Pharisees: what example of Jew or Infidel, is not some way imitated? we
have equalled the most lawless, yea, overpassed the deeds of the wicked. Bern.
Multi habent scientiam, pauci vero conscientiam, we are a people of much
knowledge but of little conscience, of much seeming devotion, but of little
real sanctity: for as they of old cried, the Temple, the Temple, and yet
profaned the honor of God, casting men out of their houses, and saying, let
God be glorified; so we have committed all these things with our Bibles in our
hands, and the name of Christ in our lips, as if the Scripture must give
dispensation, and the Savior Patronage to all our impieties. Holy Writ, the
holy Redeemer, were they ever so disparaged? Oh the sin of the house of Judah
is very great! we have filled the Land with sin from the one end to the other,
Satan's seat seems to be set up amongst us, we have caused God to abhor the
excellency of Jacob, we have scandaled our profession, and blasphemed that
worthy name by which we are called. Is this the smell of the rose of Sharon?
the taste of the wine of Lebanon? the luster of the pearl? the fruit of the
noble vine? The chastity of the Virgin daughter of Judah? the milk of a
Churches breasts? no, the botch of Egypt, the stench of a dead carcass, the
skin of a viper; the forehead of a Leper, the head of a Leopard. If the flesh
had been our Church, and Nature had been our Laver, and Hell had given Laws,
and the devil had been our Prophet, could many have been worse livers? Well, if
this be your State, as excuse it if you can, will ye still cry peace, peace, a
Lady sure for ever, To morrow shall be as this day, and much better? No, so
many sins are like so many pioners to dig down this glorious structure,
though it were settled upon a foundation of brass. Much we have suffered
already, but all that may be but a warning, the fatal stroke may yet be behind.
God may send in his black horse famine, to starve us to death; or his red horse
war, to dash out our brains, he may send in pestilence after the manner of
Egypt to make our Country but a common burying place, he may send earthquakes
to shiver in pieces the Nation, or inundations to wash this Island into the
salt sea, he may bring in a foreign enemy to put yokes about our necks, or stir
up malcontents to be domestic Executioners. Sueton.
Antidotum adversus Caesarem? is there any antidote against Caesar? any
preservative against divine wrath? Virgil.
no, God has -- mill modos, mill nocendi Arts, a thousand ways, and means
to work destruction. They are not our Banks or our Bulwarks, our Mounts or our
Magazines, our Castles or our Cannon, our ^ourts of Guard or our Camps royal
that can protect us against his justice. Though ye have kept your heads whole
in many dangers, yet if Jupiter altitonans; He that rides upon the heavens as
an horse come to back his warlike steed, and shake his glittering sword, ye die
without remedy; Oh therefore dread his power, and presume not too much upon his
patience, for ye have sins enough to kindle the wrath of a just God, and to
incense the displeasure of a long-suffering God. God will never enter into a
League, or conclude a lasting peace with wilful sinners; no, he may stay till
ye be gorged with vanities, till the sins of the Amorites be full; but then
he will be as quick in punishment as ye have been in provocation;
incorrigiblenesse will bring in inexorablenesse, contempt: confusion; judgment
will enter into the Land, if there be transgression in the Land: For the
transgression of the Land.

Fourthly, this should teach us to know, that Sin is the misery of the Land. A
man cannot imagine a greater damage, or infelicity to a Nation, then sin; Sin
is a shame to the people, nay sin is a bane to the people. Man suffers for
his sin. Ah people laden with iniquity! As if sin were a horror to behold, an
anguish to think on, which cannot be spoken of without passion, nor mentioned
without an Ah. It is sin that causes all the groans and yells, and wastes, and
bloud-draughts in a Land. We transfer them to other causes, and cry out of
other motives, as the recklessness of friends, and the rage of enemies, but
when we have declaimed against a thousand inducements and seducements, our
chief indignation ought to bespent against sin; here is the Jonas that hazards
the ship, the Achan that troubles the whole Camp, Iuvenal. Sat. 2.
-- dedit hanc contagio labem, it is this contagion, which causes the malady
of the times. Be sure that whenever judgment enters into a Nation, Horat. 1.
Ep.
Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra, that all the walls within and without
are stained with sin. A peccato venit ira Dei, and miseria hominis, Aug. de
pec. mer. and rem. c. 23.
From sin comes the wrath of God, and the wretchedness of man. Impute not
therefore these fatal Accidents to turbulent Spirits, or violent rapines, to
the deformity of government, or decay of trading, for they proceed properly
from the instigation and exasperation of your own outrageous, enormous,
unbridled, and unreformed impieties, the misery of the Land does come from the
transgression of the land. For the transgression of the Land, etc.

Fifthly, this should stir up men to a sense of sin. For oh that there should be
transgression in the Land, and that we should have no feeling of it! yet how
hard a thing is it to bring any to a lively apprehension of their apparent,
published, and stigmatized errors? I have brought in a large Transcript of
Transgression, but I doubt that the only use which will be made of it, shall be
for reprehension, not apprehension; I shall be counted rather too prying, and
pragmatical; then men stand forth peccant, and criminal; Ministers are usually
turned off rather as Orators, then Convincers, or as Remembrancers, then
Preachers; the fruit of a thousand Sermons end without any serious application,
or passionate remorse. How hard a thing is it to strike a sinner to his knees?
to humble his haughty brow? to open his dumb lips? and to make his flinty heart
cleave? no, men have only a general perception of sin, but no particular
cognizance; the Age is sinful, but there are no sinful men to be found in it;
not these are their sins, or those their delinquencies; it is not lawful to
nominate a sinner, and he will never cite or summon himself. So long as Christ
say but There is one of you shall betray me, that One will never single out
himself: no, face out all with an impudent question, Master is it I? if a man
should speak of Traitors, Murderers, Thieves, Oppressors, of the most
scandalous, noxious sins that could be uttered; would there not be many as
artificial as Judas to conceal their selves and errors? yes, when men come to
close with their own crimes they are past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. their consciences
are seared with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. they are hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.10. they are in a spirit of slumber, Romans 11.8.
first there is incuria recklessnesse, and then there is indolentia
remorslessnesse; if (...) irregularity does go before, then (...) insensibility
does follow after. There are men, which can go a pilgrimage over the whole
world, yea compass the Artick and Antarctick Poles rather then travel into
themselves, their own demeanor is the true terra incognita, Unknown Land to
them. They can as soon see all the hidden mines in the bowels of the earth, and
all the secret meteors in the air, the creeping things innumerable in the sea,
their own entrails, and their own souls, as their own sins; they can tell
their own names, but not what names the Law, or the Judge does give them; they
can tell their own age, but not what old prevaricatours they have been; they
can tell when they were sick, but not when they were heart-sick; when they
broke a leg, but not when they broke a Commandment; when they bought such a
Message, but not when they bought a Tenement in hell; when they sold such a
parcel of ground, but not when they sold themselves to commit evil; when they
were diseased from the womb, but not when they were transgressors from the
womb; when they were in the highway to ruin, but not when they were in the
broad way which leads to destruction; when they had the overflowing of the
gall, but not when they were in the gall of bitterness; when their estates did
reach up to such a revenue, but not when their sins did reach up to heaven;
when they did take leave of their neighbors, but not when they turned their
backs upon God Almighty; they can tell a thousand things, all the accidents of
their lives rather then the errors of their lives; these same sins of
theirs, though they have conceived them, and acted them, reiterated and
persisted in them, given them education, and subsistence, yet they are not
acquainted with them; they are privy to all the parts of their bodies, rather
then to that little piece called the heart; they are great Politicians, but
very idiots to their souls. I have read of many ignorant men, as of they young
Senators, Tully.
which knew not the way to the Senate house, of Messala Corvinus Pliny.
which knew not his own name, of the Leifelanders, Orosius.
that knew not how to make wax of honey, but threw it away; of the Helvetians
Ph. Comen.
that sold a Carbuncle of infinite luster for half a floren, of Ranimere a King
in Spain, Collerut.
who in a warlike expedition holding his shield on his left hand, and his spear
in his right hand, knew not how to order his bridle, but held it between his
teeth, but thou seem to be a greater Bard and Dulhead then all these, which
know not thine own sins, which thou have been acquainted withal from thine
infancy, and daily do converse with them.

But what is the reason that men which are so sensible of all other things,
should be so insensible of sin.

When men make sin a delight, there is nothing more pernicious to the soul then
pleasure in unrighteousness; if men come once to affect their vanities, the
very love they bear to them, will not suffer them to see either the corruption,
or the curse of them. Quippe nec ira Deum tantum, nec tela, nec hosts,
Quantum sola nocet animis illapsa voluptas. Silius Ital. lib. 15.

Pleasure secretly stolen into the heart, does wound deeplier then Gods anger,
or enemies armor; they which rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos 6.3. though it
be never so empty, yet they hold it some complete thing. The Eccles. 11.9.
young man which does rejoice in the ways of his own heart, and walk in the
sight of his own eyes, there is nothing almost will make him to discern this
dangerous state, but the latter Judgment. Delilah then does lay in the Lap,
till it does shave off our Locks, cast us into fetters, and pluck out our eyes;
Voluptas est lubrica suavitas ad illicita, Isiod. Synon. voluptas est affectio
tota simul, and sensibiliter in naturam proficiscens Arist. l. 1. Rhet.
for there is in it such a slippery sweetness to things unlawful, and such an
eagerness of the affection to mere natural things, that there cannot be a
thought spared, to recount the peril of such irregular ways. Pleasing things
are binding things; he that is under this sorcery, has enchantment enough upon
him. This is the man that has the fat heart, which can feel nothing, nor fear
nothing.

When men have a frequency in sinning, Iuven. Sat. 7.
-- laqueo tenet ambitiosi Consuetudo mali, custom in sinning has taken us in
her chain. Callus adimit sensum. The brauny heart has no sense of sin. St.
Chrysostom was wont to call the doubling and trebling of ill manners a
Tyranny; Plin. lib. 25. cap. 2.
for as Pomponius Marcellus said truly, it would at last bear more Sovereignty
over us, then the greatest Emperor upon earth. They which are frozen in their
dreggs, and settled upon their Lees, can scarce alter their dispositions;
Mithridates by eating poison often, counted it no venom. Claudius was so used
to play bloody prizes, that he accounted it no trespass to stab men upon the
least occasion. They which love to wander, cannot at last refrain their feet.

When men have but a sudden terror for sin, as Felix for a while trembled, and
Ahab for a short space went softly; these same present consternations are but
Bugbears, that terrify only at the first appearance; there is not the most
unregenerate heart, but has some gripes, and gallings for sin; the natural
conscience is sometimes troubled with fury; but true contrition is a continual
displicency, if not in the exterior, yet in the interior part; Aquin. supp.
4. 4. d. 1.
for, semper doleat poenitens and de dolor gaudeat Let the penitent always
grieve, and let him rejoice of such grief: Aug. de vera and falls. poen. cap.
11. Hugo sum. sent. tr. 5. cap. 11.
For whosoever is truly humbled for sin, Deus ligat eum vinculo perpetuae,
detestationis peccati, God does bind him with the bond of a perpetual
detestation of sin, that though blushing and groaning, and weeping against sin
does not always continue, yet the hatred against sin must be permanent; not
only because sin does retard us from perfection, but because it is of the
nature of virtue to be essentialized with constancy; now where this is wanting,
there is rather a fright of sin, then a true sense.

4. When men take away the scandal of sin, that they are not abased, nor
dejected for it: let men count virtue an honor, but let sin have no such same;
for a shame it is, that the Harlot should wear the Spouses Jewels. It is an
heavy thing, when men rejoice in doing of evil. Had they not as good brag of
Botches, or Squint eyes, or stinking breaths? will any one write encomium's of
vermin, or excrements, or burnings, or famines, or shipwracks, or Magicians,
or Devils? they which praise sin, will next praise Hell it self; they which are
not ashamed of sin, will not be ashamed of damnation. Yet how many are there
which count it no blemish to be vicious, nor ignominy to be detestable; the
unjust knows no shame, Zep. 3.5. they glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19. like
Cyrus the younger, who boasted that he could take off more Cups then
Artaxerxes, and bear his drink better: and Sylla, who set his hands by his
sides, when he had filled a Pool with man's blood, and cried out, oh what a
noble act have I done! And have not we many that magnify swearing, as a
dialect of high speaking, and lust as a Gallants frolic, and new fashions as
the garb of comeliness? No marvel that these men have no sense of sin, when
they have vaunted away all the reproach of sin, and I think would hold it a
credit unto them, to be called firebrands, and sons of perdition, for they
declare their sins as Sodom, Isa. 3.9. and know not how to blush, Jer. 6.15.

5. When men take upon them the defense of their own actions, that because they
have had a hand in them, therefore they must be justified; or else their
wisdom and integrity will be disputed (they think) and disparaged, as if they
carried the measuring line of equity in their brains, or held the balance of
Justice only in their own hands; a proud, self-conceited people, who will
submit to no counsel, nor be brought to any scrutiny; as the Athenians, who
being accused because they had banished Aristides the justest man of the earth
in those days, yet they defended it, saying they had purged their City; and
the Corinthians when they were shamed that they had defiled the Roman
Ambassadors with dung, they excused themselves, and said that it was fit for
them to carry dung to Rome, who came to fearch for their gold. Did not our
first Parents thus excuse the eating of the forbidden fruit? Cain his murder?
Simeon and Levi their slaughtering the Shechemites? Achan his stealing the
Babylonish garment, and the golden wedge? Saul his sparing Agag, and the chief
of the cattle? yes, what men have once done they will be Advocates and Patrons
to it, and so instead of the first sin they committed, they beget a new breed,
verifying the old saying, that scelere scelus velandum est, One sin is to be
covered with another. Oh this is the intoxicating cup (that persons must not
suffer their own actions to lay open to disgrace) which send such a fuming
steam into their brains, that it takes away both wit, and conscience too; men
can be sensible of no sin, when they are sensible only of their own honor.

6. When men take up example for the lawfulness of their actions; we should
live by Precepts, and we live most by precedents. To do as others do, this is
the golden rule, yea to too many Canonical Scriptures. These are resembling
times, it is the Age of imitation, yea diverse times we limme out our lives
according to the draughts of the worst pictures; Ovid. de Ponto, l. 3.
that whereas a wise man aegri contagia vitat, does shun the contagion of sick
men, we will be sick for company, Iuv. Sat. 14.
-- veteris trahit orbita culpae, our conversations are squared out by the
compasses of old crimes. Lapides qui sunt intus in aedificatione, sed cos qui
sunt foris, Chry. hom. 21. in Mat.
We look not upon the curious stones within the building, but upon the rough
stones without. Quomodo in theatralibus scenis agitur, ita tot habemus
personarum fimilitudines, Hier. ad Marcel. Sueton.
The Scenes of our lives are just like the Parts, which we see several men act
upon the Theater of the World: bitter things change the sweet, and bright
things are soiled by the touch of the filthy, we would not have other men's
judgments (as Dion says) and yet we have their sins; a very conforming
people we are, and generally in the worst things; as the Aethiopians imitated
the diseases of their Princes, so the basest things usually have the most
followers. Not a wicked man does appear, but he shall have his second. Let Nero
be never so bad, yet Vitellius will not only repair his Images, and sacrifice
to his Ghost, but endeavor what he can to equal him in all villainy. How many
God-dammees have ye that have their disciples, yea I have heard of them, which
have had their Partners in drinking healths to the Devil, and not this amongst
Paganish infidels, but Christian infidels; now, how can these have any feeling
of sin, which have scarcely any feeling of a God, but the use of the Age is
their Deity? But ought we to follow a multitude to do evil? then evil will
march with her Troopers: there will be little true worship left, if men will
have customary adoration, swear that Dan lives, and the manner of Beersheba
lives, Amos 8.14. Christ shall have few Believers, if the crafty heads of the
times shall be taken up for the Rabbis of their faith, for, Do any of the
Pharisees believe in him? wise men, and most men must not be our warrant, but
the unchangeable rule of the eternal God, and for want of this, what little
reflection upon sin?

7. When men Deisie Teachers, that because such admired Teachers have justified
such a thing in the pulpit, therefore it must be taken up for an infallible
truth. Oh says many a man, I have heard that which I practice preached up with
considence, and my souls Guide is a man of conscience; I know his rare parts,
it would make you quaver to hear his rhapsodies, he speaks like a man that had
learned his Divinity at the radiant Academy amongst the Cherubims and
Seraphims; and for his integrity, he has a breast washed throughout with the
water of that fountain which is as clear as Crystal, the dove seems to take
up his nest in that Locker, suspect not his sincerity, for I am privy to all
his intentions, I have turned his heart upside down in my hand, and find
nothing but pure spirit; therefore such a man would not offer to misguide and
mislead; thus men are enchanted with their Teachers, and infatuated with their
fancied Prophets, Athen. l, 6. c. 6.
that as Euphantus said, the people thought that Callicrates had Ulysses image
in his seal, so these think that their magnified Churchmen have the Vive Image
of the holy Ghost in their lips, yea they are so intoxicated with high opinions
of their gifts, that they drown them in their heady doctrines, Ioh. Magnus, l.
7. c. 17.
as Fliolmus King of the Goths was drowned in a Butte of rich liquors by his
own Partizanes, whose sweet cups he delighted to taste of. Oh it is a dangerous
thing to be too much addicted to plausible Counselors, ye are ensnared with
them before ye are aware; ye think ye know all things they drive at, and ye
silly hearers know but only their tongue. Fistula dulce canit -- the pipe makes
a merry noise, when the bird is ready to be catched. Oh this Mercurial Syrinx
is able to cast into a deep sleep the hundred-ey'd Argus: do think to have
all politic designs chaunting upon a Preacher's tongues end? no, then could he
never inchant. For all his Saint-like language he has underhand drifts, which
thou can not, nor shall not pry into. He has undertaken a cause, and to live
by that cause he will sacrifice the honesty of his person, the honor of his
calling, yea both credit and soul too rather then he will desert his cause.
Beware therefore of these same Temple-wizards, there is a great deal of
witchcraft in the pulpit, O foolish Galatians who has bewitched you? Thou art
like to have a very unsteady soul if thou do fix thy faith upon such a false,
mutable, self ended Director; I have Scripture for what I say, A wonderful and
an horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and
the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so, and
what will ye do in the end thereof? Jer. 5.30,31. When Prophets are apt to
circumvent, and people willing to be seduced, there is a crafty Teacher, and a
credulous hearer well met or ill met. Believe not every spirit then, but try
the spirits whether they be of God. Beware therefore of depending too much upon
man, for then thou must be made man indeed, as simple a man, as thy first
father was by listening to what the Serpent said. If the serpent were a
Lecturer in paradise, he met with two as weakbrained hearers a could be, he
preached seditious doctrine, corrupted the Text, Nequaquam moriemini, Ye shall
not die at all; and he having poisoned their judgment, presently the serpentine
venom, the false doctrine wrought, two -- caught in schism and rebellion, the
two Sectaries and Conspiratours have haughty hearts aspiring, they would be no
longer subjects, but Princes, no longer creatures but Gods, Gods of the
serpents making, Aspes rather then Gods, or very poisonous Gods; the serpent by
preaching them into a God head, preached them out of paradise, preached them
into their grave, and without Gods mercy had preac^d them into hell; here is
the heaven that such preachers will bring men unto, or the Godhead which they
will leave them, such a Godhead as the preachers themselves have. It is strange
the serpent could persuade our first parents to make them greater then he was
himself, but false doctrine does so dazzle the understanding, that it can mind
neither grounds nor consequences, nor absurdities, but only the bright object
before it. Beware then of thy Churchman, go with a circumcised heart and ear
into the Temple, lest thy magnified Teacher make thee a slave to his error,
and carry thee in bondage to hell; if thou be not wary, night may be unto
thee for a vision, there are those that can transform vices into virtues, call
good evil, and evil good, sweet sow'r, and sow'r sweet, light darkness, and
darkness light; therefore if thou be not sensible of thy Preacher, thou will never be sensible of thy sin, thou will turn sin into sanctity.

8. When men contemn admonition, for if thou have vilified one warning thou will hazard to despise the next, and so at last neither counsel nor
commination, checks nor threats will reform thee: it is an heavy thing, when
faithful advertisement, Virgil. Ec. 2
-- projecta vilior alga, is baser then any Sea-weed. Saul, Jeroboam,
Zedechias, are woeful examples. He that being often reproved hardneth his neck,
shall be destroyed without remedy, Pro. 29.1. If the Ministers tongue be the
alarum-bell to awaken thee out of thy culpable condition, then if thou will not
be sensible of his admonition, thou will never be sensible of thy sin; a man
should leave his sin without admonition, for why should not every man's
Conscience be his own Prophet? but if the domestical Chaplain be tongue-tied,
should not a man hear the loud Crier in the Temple? wherefore does God send his
Messenger, if he cannot have audience? or his admonition be anguish, and a rage
does attend his reproofs? Plutarch.
Qui admonentem non patiuntur, de his nulla spes salutis; they which will not
endure them that give warning, of such there is no hope of health. Yet how
commonly is it seen, that rebuke is a grievance? John Baptist will soon have
his head in a Platt^ if he must be talking against Herod's incest? Micaiah must
to l^le-ease, if he does prophecy against Ahabs mercy to Ramoth; Amos must eat
no bread in that Land, where he must be denouncing judgment against the
Idolatry of the Age; Zonaras.
Ignatius the Patriarch of Constantinople, must be cast out of his Chayr, and
be shut up alive in a Sepulcher, if he will be reprehending Bardaes loose life;
Theodoret
St. Chrysostom must have a double banishment, if he cannot double with
Eudoxia's violences. There is a great cry in the world for courageous Teachers,
but if they be so, they will meet with outrageous Censurers, if they tell Judah
of her sin they will be told of it, if they put a trumpet to their mouths,
they will find Sakers and Demiculverins in their peoples mouths; the Minister
of all the people in the world should be stout and zealous, but if he be
impartial it is easily found who will be impatient. I see none more spighted,
then those which would sever men from their known sins, and pluck men out of
the claws of the Devourer; men are saved with a kind of rage, or are sullen
and savage if we will not suffer them to be quietly damned. There are some
which are all for moderate Teachers, so moderate, that they must see their
riots, and cheats, and new fashions, and what not? and yet they must remain
like a company of silenced Preachers, or if they do speak against whoredom,
drunkenness, and swearing; yet by no means they must not preach against
hypocrisy, perjury, schism, sedition, rebellion, sacrilege; no, touch the
Publicans as much as ye will, but by no means do not meddle with the Scribes,
and Pharisees. If these things come to be glanced at, then the Minister is
taught the boundaries of his calling, that he must preach nothing but
repentance, faith, and Christ Jesus; and I pray how repentance, if ye will not
suffer us to bring you to a sense of your manifest sins? and how faith, if we
must tell you stories of justification, and your brains are full of nothing but
your old erroneous opinions? and how Christ Jesus, if we must assure to you a
redeemer, and ye make all other slaves? these men's repentance is nothing, but
to have men lament the sins against their own cause, and their Faith is nothing
but to have people learn their new principles of justification, and their
Christ Jesus is nothing but to set up a Savior of politics, that they might
by their Iure divino, keep whom they would from Church Livings, and seclude
whom they would from the Sacrament. And yet under these neat pretenses no sins
must be touched, or not their sins; no, he that with an upright heart, and a
bleeding Conscience come to reprove such sins, as he finds are an infamy to the
Protestant Religion, and have in their physnomy too much of the Jesuits
choleric complexion, and the Devils Coal-black, shall be counted but a
Traducer, if not a Fury. Elias for this was counted the Troubler of Israel, and
St. Paul a sower of sedition, and our Blessd Savior one that had a Devil. Oh
beloved, Gods Laws are not abrogated, the curses are as confounding as ever;
guilts do not alter with the times; we are not to be partakers of other men's
sins, and if we may not reprove manifest abominations, how shall we cleanse
your souls, and free our own? This same connivence, which many men drive at,
what is it but a soft pillow for carnal security to sleep upon, till the last
trump does come to awaken; or a stupifying of the senses, that people might go
out of the world, without any feeling of their Maladies, and die of a Lethargy?
they which hate warning, will never be sensible of their sins.

9. When men make sin light; that Judah excelled Samaria in Idolatry, seemed
but a little thing unto her, Ezech. 16.4. the unworthy guests that were called
to the Kings Banquet, counted it a matter of nothing, to despise such an
invitation; for when the Messengers came to bid them, they set light by it,
Mat, 22.5. So the most grievous trespasses with some men are but little, and
light. The whore wipeth her mouth and goes away; so we think to cleanse away
the defilements of our conversations with a sponge, or a wipe; we swear and
carouse, and cheat, and slander, and work our teene upon our adversaries, and
we think there may be some error in these things, but they are crimes of no
great concernment, we scarce blush, or go to our knees to beg pardon for them.
But though we extenuate these things, yet do they not aggravate guilt before
God? Peccatum peccato addit, qui culpae quam fecit pa^recinia defensionis
adjungit Greg. l. 22. moral.
yes, he does add sin to sin, which after the sin committed, does take upon
him the Patronage of an unlawful thing. How shall a man keep his house up, if
he do not thoroughly observe the maimes? or clear his scores, if he does not
lessen his debts? or recover of his disease, if he does slight his distempers?
Difficulter ad sanitate venimus qui^ nos aegrotare nescimu^. Seneca Ep. 60.
no, we come difficultly to health, if we do not know our selves to be sick.
God was highly offended with his dear people, because when they had trimmed
themselves to get Lovers, and they had taught the wicked ones their ways, and
in their skirts were found the blood of innocents, yet they stood upon their
innocence; will he not bring them unto trial for this? yes, I will plead with
thee, because thou say I have not sinned, Jer, 2.25. The Prophecy of Malachi
is every where edged with divine indignation, that people were nigh to
destruction, and yet they saw not the least ruining sin in them, Judah had
profaned the holiness of the Lord, in marrying the daughter of a strange God;
and though God threaten, that he will cut off the man that does this, the
Master and she Scholar, and root him out of the Tabernacle of Jacob, yet Judah
does ask a reason of Gods displeasure. Is God so offended as ye say? yes, and
the more angry, because ye purge your selves, for though ye be guilty of all
this, yet ye say wherefore? Mal. 2.14. yea further, Ye have said, that every
one that is evil, is good in the sight of the Lord: what is that? Ye have taken
upon you a new Canonization, to cry up Miscreants for holy men, and put new
Titles upon their odious sins, stiling out of your partial affections the
vilest offenders (which Barbarians would blush at) men well affected, gracious
people, and precious Saints; yea, ye will force God to own them against his own
Laws, making Monsters Mirrors. Ye have wearied the Lord with these things, yet
ye say, wherein have we wearied him, Mal. 2.17. Nay, in the 3 chapter and 7. v. of
that Prophecy it is said, From the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from
his Ordinances, and have not kept them yet return ye unto me, and I will return
unto you, but ye said, wherein shall we return? Return? from what? or for what?
they were as bright as the sun, as innocent as new born Babes; they had not set
a step awry, not strayed an inch from their just duty. Return? wherein shall we
return? God charges, and they answer the charge; God accuses them of high
things, but they see no reason of the accusation, they are ever and anon at
wherefore? and wherein? God puts in his Bill, and they put in their
Interrogatories; God may have the first word, but they will word it too; God
shall not say all, or say alone; no, they will have their saying with him, for
I said, and ye said. Well, has God now done? has he said his last? no, he
has another saying for them, and such a one, that if Malachy be a true
Prophet, I would not suffer the doom of the reprehension for the Grand
Signior's Crown, or Crown-land: why? what is the crime? nothing but a little
Sacrilege, a great crime indeed! has God nothing (...) to lay to our charge?
nothing else? ye will find enough before all is done; Sacrilege indeed is a
petty sin in the world, but it is an high grievance, an horrid sin, for it does
bring down a dreadful judgment: what jugement? ye are cursed with a curse,
even this whole Nation, Mal. 3.9. what cursed? and a whole Nation cursed? what
is the matter? ye have spoiled me in Tithes and Offerings; in Tithes and
Offerings? aye, that is true indeed, and why may not we make a Banquet for our
selves, and purchase a Fee-Farm, and strike up a bargain, and fill the Wardrobe
with changeable Suits, and hang our Walls with Tapestry, and marry a Child or
two out of these same Tithes and Offerings? It is true, there are a kind of
people, which wear the Linen Ephod, and they do a little service for the
Tabernacle, burn a little incense, offer a few sacrifices, present a few
prayers, bless a little in thy name, give us a little lip-salve, and
mouth-cordials; but alas, this is but the fetch, ing of a few gaspes, the
stirring of their long pipes, an imaginary gale, a fancied wind: what should we
make of it? we know what this Church-work is, and if thou would (oh God!)
every Hind amongst us could do this, as well as the best of them: what
therefore? must we pay so dear for our Sanctuary wares? no, the Temple has too
much, these same Priests and Levites are too fat, they serve for Salary, they
live upon stipends, they are but Hirelings, we work for them, and sweat for
them; all that they have does come out of the fruit of our labors; and what?
shall we stand by and see so much go out of our Estates, and hold back nothing
for our selves? yes we will lurch out of this same, which they call the Church
means, sharke out of the oblations, curtayle, defalke, decerpe, detruncate,
purloin, pertenuate; what is it to make bold with a few Tithes and Offerings?
what is it says God? it is Robbery, yea, and such a Robbery, as would make
Pagans to hang down their heads for it. For, will any rob their gods? yet have
ye robbed me, Mal. 3.8. Thou say it, but we unsay it, gainsay, say the
contrary to it: for, wherein have we robbed thee? herein says God, wherein say
they? Sacrilege with them was no sin, or a puny sin, a very inconsiderable
sin, a sin that does not deserve an inward gripe or check, or the least scruple
of conscience; for wherein? If Malachy had lived in these times, he would have
been counted Episcopal he speaks much in the tone, and accent of an old
Canonical Priest. If Malachy be a true Prophet, and he has something in him
Moral, as well as Leviticall, he will be a sad Prophet to some; a sad Prophet?
not a whit; for as those times slighted him, so these times would have been
less frighted with him. Let him curse on, people can blow away all these
curses with a single blast; he shall curse neither dread of sin, nor terror of
conscience into many; no, wherein? well, is God now at his full stop? no, there
is one short sentence more, before God will set to his period; what is that? ye
call the proud happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, and they that
tempt God are delivered, Mal. 3.15. that is, the daringest persons were counted
the most zealous, they which could most comply in wretched designs were the
only Favorites; they which deserved to stand upon the Pillory, and to bleed
at the whipping post, and to swing upon the Gibbet, yet these are the men that
have the only protection; not a man of worth can have any respect, favor, or
countenance, but prosecuted for supposed crimes, or for the least shadow of
transgression against the Laws of their arrogated Government; but these men
find no such severity, but all the partiality, tenderness, and indulgence that
can be expressed; oh these are their Parasites, Sycophants, and therefore made
their Familiars, Intimates, Darlings; if they be never so arrogant, yet ye call
the proud happy; if they be never so debauched, ye the fitter for preferment;
they that work wickedness are set up; if the Law does justly require their
necks, yet not a Brother shall suffer, but be privileged, exempted from any
Courts of Judicature, for they that tempt God are delivered. These things have
been laid to your charge, but ye clear all, make your selves inculpable, and
them innocent; yea if ye be questioned, ye are enraged, and fume with disdain
and roughness against your God, that tells you of your partiality, and
blandishing. For your words have been stout against me, says the Lord, yet ye
say, wherein have we spoken against thee? Mal. 3.13. Not spoken nor done,
neither been faulty or stout; no, the grossest misdemeanors turned off with
wherefore and wherein? so that I think the Prophet has made this sufficiently
manifest; that people by extenuating errors, come at last to have no burden
of conscience for the greatest errors, but quarrel with God, and make it a
kind of injury, that they should be blamed, or faulted; howsoever if they have
transgressed, they are but lapses, they are guilty but a little. This same
dwarsing, and pusillating of sin, ye see, is as old as Malachy: Malachy is a
severe opposite to Temporizers, a deadly enemy to Neuters; if he had lived in
these times, it would have been said, that he had meddled with State matters,
and he would have been called Malignant to his face; I would not have exempted
him from a Sequestration; nay perhaps he would have been cast into Caitiff's
hole, and have had a lodging appointed for him in the Clink; he does spare
none, and yet he does fright none; no, they have the wit to keep their courage,
and to be as audacious as he was resolute, and as impudent as he was impartial;
let Malachy speak what he can, yet they will have a tongue, and endeavor to
out-tongue him too: Let them marry the daughter of a strange god, and rob the
true God; despise his Ordinances, and defile his Holiness; have the blood of
Innocents under their skirts, and make the scandals of the earth their bosom
friends; yet all this is nothing, or as good as nothing: small things in others
would be high crimes, but these grand exorbitancies in them, are but mistakes,
or misconstructions, not worthy a wet eye, a blush in the cheeks, the setting a
step backward; for Return unto me, says the Lord, but ye said, wherein shall
we return? Beware therefore, that ye do not like these hypocrites, varnish over
your decayed posts, when inward rottenness is within, and make your mortal
wounds less dangerous then they are, for they which slight sin, will never be
sensible of sin.

Thus have I shown you many things, which will make men insensible of sin,
would to God I had now spoken enough, that after all which I have said, I could
see the Rock cleaving in your brows, the Adamant softening in your bosoms,
the slumber going out of your temples, the vail rending from before your eyes,
the hot Iron cooling upon your consciences, that the Magicians would fetch out
their books of curious arts and burn them, that Ephraim would take up her Idols
and throw them away with indignation, saying, Get ye gone; that sinners of the
Land would lay to heart the transgressions of the Land; that this hour I could
see you take your pride from your backs, your lusts out of your members, your
riots out of your palats, your blasphemies out of your lips, your oppression
out of your hands, and your malice out of your hearts; that ye would know your
sins, and bewail them, reflect upon them and renounce them; that ye would say,
we have sinned, we are greived that we have sinned so often, and do vow that we
will sin no longer; that ye might say, we have once been at Church and heard
one penitential sermon, that here we have met with conviction, and will carry
home conversion; oh that it might be said, that ye came blind, but go away
seeing, that ye came remorsless, and go away contrite; ye came guilty, and go
away innocent; oh I stand waiting to see a little water in your eyes, a little
shame in your cheeks, a little smiting upon your breasts, a little turning of
your feet; oh I stay for a circumcised ear, a rent heart, and a renewed life.
Do it for the love of your souls, do it for love to your Country, for the land
that has been stained with transgression, for the land which has suffered for
transgression, and for the Land which may perish by transgression. Though a
great part of the Land should be impenitent, yet have ye repentance unto life;
pacify Gods wrath for your selves, and sacrifice for your Country; so if
greater judgments should be reserved for the land, and this Nation which will
not be reformed must be weather-beaten again, yet ye may have an hiding place
from the storm, that if the destroying Angel should smite on all sides, your
sprinkled door-posts may be past over, that ye may be taken like the two legs,
or the piece of an ear out of the mouth of the Lion, or plucked like a brand
out of the fire. Oh therefore search and try your ways, and turn again unto the
Lord, if iniquity be in your hands, put it far away, leave not an hoof in
Egypt, spare not one Amelekite but put the whole cursed race to the edge of the
sword, loath your selves in all your abominations, turn from every evil way,
thoroughly amend your ways, and your doings. I would I could convert the whole
Nation, howsoever I do desire to renew you, let it be the fruit of my Ministry,
the privilege of the meeting, the blessing of the day. Oh remember, that there
is no such refuge as repentance, nor no such Sanctuary as submission, God
cannot be angry with you if ye seek his favor by humiliation, or howsoever
ingratiate your selves into him by reformation. It is sin that is Gods
professed adversary; take away this, and there is not a frown in Gods brow, nor
a fret in his breast; his razor is laid aside, his vial of indignation is set
by, his thunderbolts fall out of his hand. Atonement with the land, if there
be the amendment of the land, because judgment to the land, if there be the
transgression of the land. For the transgression of the Land.

PART. II.
Now let us come to the sad disease, Many are the Princes thereof. Baynus,
Rhemus, Cope hold both Kings successively, and several Governments to be here
understood but R. Sal. Mercer, Salazer with many others do understand only
seveveral Governments, because of the Antithesis between many Princes, and the
man, and so insist only Polyarchy to be here intended.
Some think the meaning to be, that God for the transgression of the Land did
take away Prince after Prince, which maintained the same Government; and if I
thought that this were the true sense, my Observations should be these: 1 That
sin is the great blood-sucker. 2 That Princes are not exempted from judgment. 3
That till God be appeased for the transgression of the Land, there is a
succession of misery. 4 That the heaviest judgment upon a Nation is the
destruction of Princes. 5 That Princes above all others ought to look to the
transgression of the Land, because it is most fatal and Epidemical to the
Throne. 6 That the sins of that Land are heinous, which do take away Princes by
heaps. But I find by many judicious Expositors that this is not the meaning,
but that by many Princes there is to be understood several sorts of government
brought into that transgressing Land. Following their opinion, from hence
observe, that many Princes are a judgment. It is an heavy thing when the
Bramble, Thistle, and Briar have the sole reign, Judge. 9. then the foot of
pride does strut in authority, Psalm. 36.11. then the Leopard does watch over
the city, Ier. 5.6. what are the people but the sheep of slaughter, when God
does break his staff of Beauty, and staff of Bands, and rule them with the
instruments of a foolish Shepherd. Zach. 11. A Nation punished with variety of
Governments is like the monstrous, and prodigious Beast, which had seven heads;
and ten horns, Rev. 13.1. the several plagues in Egypt were scarce more
grievous then several governments in a Nation; then in stead of just Princes
Ziims, and Ohims, and Satyrs, and Iims, and Dragons dwell in the Palaces, Isa.
13.21,22. Sure I am there are many sins where there are these many Princes.
Barnsf. de populi improbitate, and l. 12. Pandect. Crin. de populi improb.
Brunfelfius says, that popular government is a pestilent government; and so
says Crinitus. Pausan in mes.
Pausanias says, he never saw it make any great progress, and there are
several instances given of variety of miseries which have come from that
imperfect, turbulent, disordered, and distempered government. Plut. in Lacon.
Lycurgus would have no government counted happy in a Commonwealth which a man
would not allow in his private family. If no man can serve two Masters, then
doubtless no man can serve many Princes; for many Princes are like many
Empiricks, which practice so long upon the weak patient, that little vigor is
left in the body. When God takes away lawful government from a Nation, he does
even take away peace from that people. Cicero pro domo sua, crebra tempestatum
commutatio, ex plebis colluvie.
For when the Crown and Diadem is removed, then God overturn, overturn,
overturn, and the Nation shall be no more as it was, till he come whose right
it is, and God does give it him, Ezekiel. 21.26,27. Many Princes are a cakexy,
which turn all the nutriment into ill humors till the good habitude be removed;
yea they are almost like many evil spirits afflicting and tormenting the
Creature, till the body be dispossessed of the Devil called Legion, Tully says
that there is nothing where these governments are permitted, but several
changes of tempests, Plato in Axiocho.
Plato says, that rage and rapine do abound where the government does arise
from the dregs of the common people. Herod. l. 3. Plut. in Nicia. Seneca in
Consol. ad Helvid. c. 6. Live. Decad, 4. l. 8.
Herodotus says that a violent torrent of sorrows, and unbridled insolency
does accompany such a government, There abjects are raised up and men of
command depressed, as Plutarch says. New foundations of Worlds are laid, says
Seneca: Ancestors seats are left and new ones sought for, says Livy: yea as a
worse habitation does please wandering brains, so a worse government does
content these same State-Vagrants. Diod. Sic. l. 14, Plut. in Arato. Paus.
Herod. l. 3.
What outrages were committed when the seven Magi did reign in Persia? and
amongst the Sycionians in the days of Clinias and Abantidas? and amongst the
Milssians by the slaughter of forty of the principal men at one time, and of
three hundred at another time? and amongst the Athenians when the thirty
Tyrants had the superiority? So then these many Princes, what are they but the
scourges of the people, the racks of Nations, and Pests of Common wealths?
People may look upon their sins with a fright, to see that by them such
horrors of government are brought in. For for the transgression of a Land many
are the Princes thereof.

Applicat. This does show that Sin does leave nothing firm, for when
Governements are changed nothing is stable; No, sins are the Hericanos in
states, and the earthquakes in commonwealths, then the Beauty of excellency
shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah 13. Esaias 19. Princes shall be
clothed with desolation Ezech. 7.27. Houses of Ivory shall perish Amos 3.19.
The strong staves, and the beautiful rods shall be broken. Ier. 48.17. Yea were
a Land in never such pomp, and splendor, the spark of their fire shall not
shine. Job 18.9. their glory shall fly away as the bird. Hos. 9.11. There is no
such pickaxe, or thunderbolt to a state as sin, could we make melody to the joy
of our prosperity upon an Harp, as sweet as was that of Orpheus, yet our sins
like the Maenades would tear us in pieces; were we surfeited with worldly
welfar, yet such servitours as our sins would take away our full platters, and
Diet us so, that like hunger-starved E^isicthon we should be glad to eat our
own flesh. Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they will come to vanity. Hos.
14.11. the is, to a state of vanity, their glory may for a while shine like the
Sun in his Nonetide brightness, but where will ye leave your glory? Esa. 5.3.
our sins will strip us, and rifle us, clip us and shave us, and what can remain
settled when Thrones and Monarchies shake? no, sins will change Golden Scepters
into rods of iron, and lawful Princes into many Princes. For the transgression
of a Land many are the Princes thereof.

2. Secondly, This does teach us that many Princes do bring woeful confusion
into a State, for then fundamental Laws are turned into arbitrary commands, and
liberties into the limits of usurping Commanders. When many Princes are full of
many stratagemes; oh the many hurles in that Government! the dissipation of
that disorder! the death of that malady! the Hecticke fever, the Erysipelas,
the ^lenture not more dangerous; want of economy does destroy the family, Ordo
est a summitate. Order is when chief Authority is preserved, but if the true
Supreme be laid aside, and many Princes come to reign in the stead of him, how
is the Land racked, and wrecked? Plato. Naz. Mo^.
A dreadful thing it is, when nemo Thronos metuit, sed, unusquisque jus a
Potestate sumit, no man does fear the Thrones but every one does take his right
from the present prevailling power? There is an evil, which I have seen under
the Sun, Folly is set in great excellency, and the Rich set in low place, I
have seen servants riding on horses, and Princes walking by as servants on the
ground. Eccles. 10.5,6,7. Oh! these new Riders art fit for nothing, but to
trample a Nation under foot! there is no vexation like to the fury of a
distracted Government, there is no garboyl like to the turbulency of many
Princes, it is pronounced here, as the saddest of judgments, many are the
Princes thereof.

3. Thirdly, This does show, that God can make Judgment answer sin; will a
Land transgress? then God can punish it with many Princes. Do not these many
Princes sufficiently sting men for their many errors? Indeed fools make a
mock of sin, but then they make a mock at vengeance. Sin seldom does escape
without a retaliation. The God of recompenses will surely requite. Ier. 51.56.
Pharaoh that does plague the Israelites shall have strange plagues brought upon
him; Nadab, and Abihu which do kindle strange fire shall be burnt with the fire
of their own censers; Ahab which does shed Naboths blood, shall have dogs to
lick his blood; Adonibezek which does cut off thumbs and toes, shall be cut
short himself, and cry out, as I have done to others so has the Lord done to
me. Hipparchorum tabulae. Adag. Sero Jupiter diptheram inspexit Menander.
Chrysostom. l. 1. de provid. Theoph. in 3. Ion.
The note books of God are surer, then the Tables of the wise Philosophers. God
may lay by his book of remembrance for a while, but at last he will peruse his
Records. Every man at last shall (...), pay use and principal for his offenses.
God suffers many malefactors to live here as it were in prison, sed tandem ad
mortem praecipit duci, he does command them at last to be led away to prison.
Inflammationem sectio sequitur, blood-letting does follow inflammation.
Therefore let no man make bold with God in sinning, for he does trespass
against his own safety. Do ye provoke me to wrath, and not your selves to
confusion? Be not deceived, God is not mocked, whatsoever a man does sow, that
shall he reap. The rebound of sin will end in destruction. This blood-hound
will follow hot upon the footsteps, till it has found out the Malefactor.
They which have many crimes will at last have many curses, as they here in my
Text, which had many unlawful pleasures, had at last many unlawful Princes
brought upon them, For the transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof.

4. Fourthly, This may serve to show us that we have been transcendently
wicked, which have been so transcendently wretched. Are the many Princes a
grievous judgment, then what grievous Transgressors have we been? Ah sinful
Nation! a people-laden with iniquity! do not our scourge show our disobedience?
or bitter potion our noisome disease? our many Princes our many prevarications,
abominations? Yes doubtless we were sinners before the Lord exceedingly, to
draw so much blood from us we had scarlet and crimson sins in this land; we had
deeply corrupted our selves, as in the days of Gibeah; we had hatched
Cockatrices eggs, our root bare gall and wormwood, our Vine was as the Vine of
Sodom, or else God had never punished us with such an out-^tretched arm,
whipped us with his full might, roared thus out of Sion, burnt against Jacob
with such a consuming flame, shaven us with such a sharp razor, made our
plagues wonderful: we that have felt so much anger and misery with it, may
think that great was the quarrel of Gods covenant, which he was forced to
avenge. Plutarch. de emolumen^o ex inimicis capiendo.
But as Hieron knew not his own bad breath, so we know not the ill sent and
smell of our sins. Cicero in Topicis.
Stalerius would not confess those faults at the bar which he was wont to
confess in his private chamber; so we will not acknowledge those offenses to
God, which we cannot but recount in our private consciences. Val. Max.
Messala Corvinus knew not his own name, nor we our own errors. I am now
preaching of the sins of the times, but I doubt that I preach to such as would
seem to be an innocent Congregation; ye will all confess the sins of the Age in
general, but who will confess his own particular trespasses? I doubt whether
the Lords prayer has been said heartily by many these many years: for I see
little sense, or shame of their apparent impieties. Torture will not draw from
some the disclosing of their evil practices, nor judgment from heaven will not
draw from us the discerning of our offenses. The many Princes which have been
amongst us, will not show us our many detestable and execrable demeanours; we
have been miserable to purpose, but we are scarce yet culpable. We pass by all
judgments, as accidents and fates of Commonwealths, rather then feel them as
just visitations; the rage of the enemy has done much in this Nation, but the
rage of our sins has done just nothing: we feel the curse but not the crime;
in stead of discerning and disclosing sin, we shut our eyes, and shut up our
lips. Have ye brought any fuel to kindle this flame? have ye stamped any
bitter grapes in this Wine Press to put such a cup of astonishment to the lips
of the Nation? There is a corrupt generation, which will take no notice of
vice, and there is a more righteous generation, which does dream of nothing but
virtue; one, and other make little search of conscience, or spy out corruption
with compunction. Are there any of you here which have walked frowardly against
your God? or clapped your hands against heaven? no, the irreligious are dumb,
and the religious are blind. Oh! it is a hard thing with Ezra to say, Lord we
are here before thee in our trespasses, Ezr. 9.15. or to say with the faithful,
The crown fallen from our heads, woe unto us we have sinned; Lam. 5.16. How many
of you have thus brought iniquity to remembrance, and loathed your selves in
the evil which ye have committed? how shall it appear by your conflicts, or
your tears, your conviction, your contrition, or conversion? No, God has
smitten us, but we have not felt it: we are still as great strangers to our
sins, as if God had never shown us the faces of them in the glass of vengeance;
God has read a long lesson to us, but we have gotten little of it by heart. We
are come to a Jail-delivery, but consider not wherefore we were cast into
prison; our Ulcers are even healing, but we observe not how corrupt the Botches
were. How few are yet sensible of their lusts, riots, frauds, spights,
blasphemies, rapin^, haughtiness, hypocrisy, scandal of profession, and
contempt of the Gospel? we have suffered to extremity, but are there yet any
sins in the Nation? are they yet in any of your aching hearts? where are they?
whose are they? I hearkened, and heard, but no man spoke aright, no man repented
him of his wickedness, saying what have I done? Jer. 8.6. Oh that we had
endured all these Judgments in the Land, I say not with patience, but with
true remorse! oh that we had carried all these Judgments out of the Land, I
say not with shouts, but with true penitent hearts! But though God has set us
for our sins as a gazing stock to the whole earth, yet we gaze not upon our
iniquities; though God has spit in our faces, yet we blush not much; we have
stared upon our Judgments, but are yet to cast the first glance upon our
transgressions; we are generally a stupid, and an impenitent generation. But oh
what we could not see in the eclipse, let us see in the bright sunshine; what
we could not apprehend under the Judgment, let us be privy to at the
deliverance! It is a great mercy to be preserved, preservation ought not to go
without consideration. Let us know then, what a peccant people God has had
compassion upon, what grievous sinners he has pardoned. Let us a little face
our sins at the taking of the scourge: ye which never felt a burdened
conscience under the thraldom, have souls-frets at the freedom: ye which
never did water your eyes in the time of the trial, melt a little at the
release: that which Gods stripes could not do, let his embraces. Be not
preserved as a remorssesse people; let not God take off your yoke, without a
sin-offering sacrificed upon his Altar. Say that he has saved us beyond our
expectation; say that he has delivered us even to a miracle; say that it is
much, that God could unloosen such a bond; that he could be reconciled to such
perverse sinners. Had we had our deserts, we had been still under his plaguing
hand, or might still have roared under his corrections, for they were our sins
that brought us first to the whipping post, and left such black and blew marks
upon us: there were heinous provocations, which brought such an astonishable
Judgment upon the Nation; yea, the Land had many transgressions in it, which
punished it with these many Princes; For the transgressions of a Land many are
the Princes thereof etc.

5. This does show, that Ambition has a most aspiring spirit, many Peasants
would be many Princes. The Frog in the Fable would swell himself to be as big
as the Bullock; Amb. l. 3. in Luc.
this same appetentia dignitatis, desire of Command, does stretch men beyond
their limits: that though men know what they were born to, yet they cannot keep
within their Fathers hedge, but they must transilire limits, break over the
fence; the desire and design is, for every one to be a Ruler, to wear Robes,
and shake Scepters; to set up the many Princes. Ieron. ad Algas. Innocent. de
vit. hum. cond. plures fulgor convocat aulae ^neca Trag. Nisi Imperatorem^e
stare non posse Suetonius.
Many Princes they are, and scarce a good one amongst them all; for they care
not prodesse sed praeesse, to benefit, but to get superiority. The brightness
of a Court does dazzle most men's eyes. Corah, Dathan and Abiram will not spare
Moses the deliverer of the Nation, nor Zimri his own Master, nor Absalom his
own Father. Ambition has neither modesty nor reverence, it does know neither
Laws, nor blood; it is insatiable in desires, insolent in attempts. Julius
Caesar said he could not stand, unless he were Commander in chief; so these are
ready to faint, if they cannot attain to the height of their desired
greatness; Livy.
for this with the Horatii* (which slew the Curiatii) they will spare neither
the living nor the dead; their own credits, their own consciences, their own
blood, or the blood of their dearest kindred, or most natural Countrymen.
Though Pechamy, Hanapus, and Johannes Carnotensis have written most sharply
against this sin, yet all the Pens and Pulpits in the world were never able to
destroy it. The Serpent does creep in Paradise it self, Ambition does reign in
the Church; Religion cannot keep with in her measures, but diverse times the
most zealous are the most haughty; men with Bibles in their hands will be
striking at Thrones, and with the Laws of subjection in their lips will be
listening after prepotencie, and the Legislative power. How many would be
meddling with the Chair of State? though they be no very good Rulers of a shop,
yet they strive for the domination of a Nation; let the lawful Prince (say
they) be thrust by, excluded; we are for the many Princes; Many are the Princes
thereof etc,

6. Sixthly, This does serve to present to us the misery of our Nation; how
have the many Princes here insulted, and domineered? this Land has been the
Stage, where many of these woeful Scenes have been acted; here has been Ilias
malorum, an Iliad of sorrows; tempestas lugendorum, a tempest of most doleful
and mournful passages; Omnis longo se solvit Teucria luctu, National wailing:
Virg. 2. Aeneid.
we have been the Correction-house of the age, nay the Slaughterhouse of the
earth. Men's evidences, keys, necks, were scarcely their own: what Informings,
Imprisonings, Riflings, Sequestrings, Gibbetings, defaming of Reputations,
defacing of Monuments, profaning of Churches, abasing and abusing of Churchmen
has there been in this Country? no names given to many but Malignants, no
houses allowed them but Goals, no deathbeds spread for them but Gibbets: new
impositions, new Oaths, new High Courts of Justice invented. The Land full of
nothing but beating of Drums, breaking open of Houses, free quarter, and free
booty, Taskmasters, Messengers, Spies, Executioners were the Locusts, which
have overspread the Nation: how many have died by the Sword? how many by
penury? how many by poison? how great has been the decay of Trading? the
eclipsing of Learning? the obstruction of Justice? the underprizing of
Nobility? the corruption of Faith? how many have been destroyed in the field?
how many made away in corners? how many used like slaves within the Land, and
sold for slaves out of the Land? Oh! our lives have been made bitter unto us,
men have Ruled over us with rigor; we have eaten the bread of mourners, drank
waters of gall, our steps have been hunted, our persecutors have been swifter
then the Eagles; our days have been danger, and our nights of pleasure have
been turned into fear; our familiars watched for our haltings, and every man
was amazed at his Neighbor; men have been drunk with the blood of their own
Countrymen as with sweet wine, the Land has eaten up her inhabitants; we might
have wished our fathers bosoms to have been our Coffins, and our mothers wombs
to have been our Sepulchers. It is beyond the Wit of an Orator, and the Art of
a Chronicler to express all the extremities, and exigents which we have been
put to under our new Masters, our many Princes, the Giant-Parliament, the
Pigmy-Parliament, the furious Protector, the faint ^d Protector, the
Lymphatick Bugbear, and the Ph^ Committee. Our sufferings as they might once
ha^ ^ed to be superior to our strength, so they may now seem to exceed our
memory; this Age can scarcely relate them, and after-ages will scarcely believe
them. Can a Spectatour consider them without anguish? no, doubtless strangers
cannot but lament them, and enemies cannot but pity them; an Episcopal man
might roar at the thought of them, a Presbyterian might give a knock upon his
breast for them, an Anabaptist might bite his lip concerning them, and a
Quaker might look to the earth with a demure countenance about them; for, do
any one believe a God, and fear him? read Scriptures, and think them to be
rules sent from heaven? acknowledge knowledge a Protestant Church, and confess
it is to be built up with Mutual amity? name a Country and profess that it
ought by all Natives to be cherished with all dearnesse, and tenderness, and
should not every one of these lament that so much Hostility, and cruelty should
be expressed by men of the same religion, and Nation? should we not find
commiseration from every one that has either piety, or humanity? yes from all,
except it be from the many Princes, and their many Agents. Oh! then we that
have smarted so much, and so long, let us know what it is to have been a
tortured Land; though our servile condition be even over, yet let us look upon
our chain, and bang it up for a Monuments let us know what it is to have
wrought in the brickkilns, and let not the noise of those cries, which we there
sent up into heaven yet seem to be out of our ears. Fulgos. l. 8.
Lucius Luccios wrote the History of the Catilinary conspiracy, with which Rome
was so long infested, and let us keep memorials of those sufferings, which made
us a Terror to our selves, and a Dread to our Enemies. I am the man, which
have seen affliction. Lam. 3.1. So we are the men of all the people of the
earth, which have seen and felt rage and rapine, bonds and bondage, spights
and spoils, slanders and slaughters; Oh infinite, and intolerable were the
savage, and Barbarous usages which (...) subject to by those feinds of
Government! were (...) enough to vex a Nation almost to death? yes, many (...)
Princes thereof.

7. Seventhly, This may ^erve so daunt the hearts of incroaching Princes, for
are many Princes here a Curse, and should any one bless himself in being a
Curse? Is not an unjust claim a self terrifying plea? can any man pride, or
boast himself in that, which is ill and illegal, forced and fraudulent,
surreptitious and treacherous? what right had these for their regality? what
jus for their jurisdiction? was there any more then the Gantlet, and the
Pole-axe? shall we draw pedigrees from the Muster-roll? of shall a Court
Martial be the judicatory for Thrones, and Scepters? then let us go next to
Shuters-hill for Titles, and Tenures; And have our many Princes any other
evidence to show? is not this all the Crown-right which they have to show? were
they heirs by descent? no, heirs by dissent. Not Princes by title, but Princes
by tumult; not Princes of the blood, but Princes of blood; which by all manner
of rancour and rigor, subtlety and supplanting, craft and cruelty, mounted the
Throne; which deflowred the spotless virgin of Sovereignty, and committed a
rape upon Majesty. Princes they called themselves, and Parasites styled them
so; but no more true Princes then Balaam was a true Prophet, or Lucifer was a
true God, Princes they were, which had their first rise from the crimes of a
corrupt Age, from the transgressions of the land. They were our sins that gave
them their royal Stem, and were the Heralds at Arms which proclaimed their
Title, and is not this a noble descent? were not these singular Princes? rare
heirs apparent? may not the base-born challenge as good a birthright? can
there any legitimate offspring come out of the womb of this prostitute and
common Strumpet? If the seed of the bondwoman shall not inherit with the seed
of the free; then doubtless the seed of the unlawful bed shall never go for a
right heir. Oh then that they blush not at their stock that they are not
ashamed to call themselves by their mothers name! Have I not derived their
pedigree rightly? Yes, had we been obedient they had never been Princely; had
we been regular, they had never been Regents. They had their first conception
from our corruptions, For the transgression of the Land many were the Princes
thereof; they entered by our sins, and stood by our sins, Monarchs they were by
prevarication, Princes by the transgression of the Land. Oh that they would lay
this before their eyes, that they would lay it to heart, and say, what
injurious, what accursed Princes have we been? if we sprung from the errors of
the times, it was an error in us to take upon us government; if we came in by
the transgression of the Land, the Devil might have set us up for Princes; we
were created by vice, we fetch our title from hell, as the infernal spirits do
reign in the air, so have we reigned in our Country; our claim is defective,
odious, away with it, we will own no more such a stained pedigree. For what
have we to do to challenge ^uch a Princedom, when we hold it but from the
challenging transgressions of the land? no, we are but sinful Princes derived
from a sinful people. Oh that these upstart, and outstart Princes would look
upon their broken Scepters, and Thrones cast down with frayed spirits, that
they had conscience enough left in them to consider how they were lift up, and
how they were cast out; then might we expect some remorse from them for their
wicked reign, some restitution from them of their ill-gotten goods, and some
satisfaction to repair their former disobedience.

1. First some remorse from them for their wicked reign. Recte poenitentem
decet, ut quicquid contraxit sordis contritione abluat. Aug. l. de poen.
It does rightly become a Penitent, that whatsoever filth he has contracted,
he should wash it away with contrition. Amarum sapiat in anima, quod prius
dulce fuit in vita. Amb. in quod. sermon.
Let that be bitter in the soul which was formerly sweet in the conversation.
Polluta conscientia sit lachrymis baptizata. Greg. 21. moral.
A polluted conscience ought to be baptized in tears. But can such Princes feel
any remorse? is it possible for such ambitious Tyrants to weep? Do ye ever look
for a true Penitent amongst such haughty, inveterated Usurpers? Oh that we
could behold water gushing from such rocks, see Springs arising up in such dry
Pools, doleful Princes they have been, oh that we could discern them dolorous.
What have they sat so long in the Throne, that they are given up to a
reprobate sense? if not, why do they not smite upon the thigh? and drop out the
sense of their sins at their eyelids? why do they not give the world some
testimony of their compunction, and sob over those sins which roar in heaven,
saying, Oh that we were so inconsiderate as to take upon us this authority,
that we have so wretchedly abused our government, that our blemishes are
printed in our foreheads, and the brands of our tyranny are to be seen in every
corner. Oh we repent, we lament, that ever we have insulted over a patient
people, and trampled upon a burdened, over-burthened people; we are aghast now
to look upon our heavy Ordinances, our subtle Votes, our breach of trust, our
breach of oaths, our causless jealousies, our black aspersions, our wresting
of Laws, and our erecting cruel Judicatories; we look with anguish upon the
flourishing Church which we have defaced, the wealthy State which we have half
beggered, the scandal which we have brought upon Religion, the insamy which we
have fixed upon our names and posterity, the innocent blood, the Priestly
blood, the Princely blood which we have shed. All our plots and projects,
inventions and circumventions, despights and delusions which we have been
guilty of, do now press upon our consciences. We groan, for the earth groans
under us; we abhor our selves, for heaven does abhor us. Oh if our many Princes
had not saces harder then the rock, Jer. 5.3. and hearts that could not repent,
Romans 2.5. we should see them thus conscious, and take revenge upon themselves
for all the wants and woes which they have brought upon the land by a most
serious remorse.

2. Secondly, we might expect from them some restitution of their ill-gotten
goods. Ill-gotten goods are an ill stock, a man had as good go dig an hole in
mount Aetna to lay up treasure in; they are gotten, but they are ill gotten,
and so gotten for an ill close; just goods are Gods largesses, but ill-gotten
goods are the Devils benevolences; Hoc natura aequum est neminem alterius
detrimento locupletiorem fieri. Iurecons. in l. 14. de condict. indeb.
This is equal by the Law of nature, that no man should grow rich by another
man's detriment, they then which have advanced themselves by other men's ruins,
how requisite is it that they should not leave detriment crying, or injury
howling, if they do, they may cry never so loud for mercy, and find God as
deaf to their requests, as they are to the groans of the oppressed. Such men
must never look to change their hearts from guilts, which do not cleanse their
estates from damages; there can never be a pacified conscience, where the Age
is disquieted with wrongs; should such men humble themselves never so much for
their sins, Poenitentiae non agitur, sed simulatur. Aug. ep. 54. ad Maced.
Repentance is not performed, but counterfaited. David does cast such men out
heaven, for he that does wrong shall never dwell in Gods tabernacle, nor rest
upon his holy hill Psalm, 15. and S. Paul does throw them down to hell, for he
that does wrong shall suffer for the wrong that he does. Col. 3.25. Now if
these many Princes have advanced themselves by preys, and pampered themselves
with the fat of spoils, how should they fear that the stone out of the wall
should cry, and the beam out of the timber should answer it with Woe unto him
that builds an house by blood? how should they look sadly upon their smiting
fists, trampling feet, and devouring jaws? we have heaped together much should
they say, but we were never born to it, nor sweat for it; our possessions are
other men's patrimonies; and our rights other men's birthrights: we have no
claim but the military conveighance, or the freedeed of a liberal State; can a
statute of pacification, or an Act of Indemnity secure us in a just enjoyment
of these things? no, these are Acts of Grace, or condescensions of politic
prudence, we many possess these things without molestation from the world, but
is there no other Court, where titles must be decided? Are the ten Commandments
abrogated? have we by this a Writ of privilege against Doomesday? no, the
moral law does still continue in force, conscience does tell us, that we would
not have our estates thus wrested away. There will be another inquisition made
after these Tenures, our rights must be tried at another Bar, there is a just
Judge which will pass sentence upon all just evidences, to the legality of
that Court we must stand. Oh then we which believe the last, and strict
reckoning, that we should own any thing, which we do not hold by inheritance,
or just industry! can these be comfortable livelihoods at last? no we eat
sumptuously, and cloth our selves gorgeously, and stock up for posterity
abundantly for the present, but our wretched souls must scorch for these
damnifying gains in conclusion: oh then, that our feet should stand any longer
within such thresholds, that our hands should carry about with them such keys,
that we should write our selves owners of such Mansions and Messuages where the
true Heirs are yet living. Woe unto us, that we have ever fingered such unjust
means, we hold but a curse in our hands so long as we graspe it to own use, we
will resign up therefore our interest, and call home the true Heirs. For.
better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without equity. We
got it with violence, and we keep it with vexation, therefore away with it, we
will rather work for maintenance, nay beg for relief, then we will feed our
selves with other men's bread. A free soul, and a quiet conscience is above all
the rich revenues of the world. Thus if evil Princes could be brought to a
sense of their Tyrannical Government, we should hear them expostulating about
their extortions, and send them out of their houses with haste, yea with
speed, and earnestness make restitution of their ill-gotten goods.

3. Thirdly, We might expect some reparation for their former disobedience: For
Princes they have been, but how came they by it? was it not by disobedience
and disloyalty, by resisting and rebelling, by opposing, and deposing? did they
not pull down the lavvful Prince, and set up their selves, as aspiring
Princes? now is usurpation a just title? may private men take upon them to be
Princes? is not this to new act the parts of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Sheba,
Absalon, Zimri, Pekah the son of Remaliah? are not these worthy guides to
follovv? noble precedents to imitate? find we not Traitors out amongst the
worst men of the perilous times? 2 Timothy 3.5. Job 34.37.
Is it not the height of disobedience to add rebellion to sin? If God would
stigmatize people, can he fix worse epithets upon them, then to style them
treacherous, and rebellious? Hear now ye Rebels. Number. 20.10. backsliding
Israel, and treacherous Judah, Ier. 3.6.7. Are not these apostates in
commonweals, nay very state wizards? yes rebellion is as the sin of
whitchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. the impes of hell, and the devils Zanies, his claws
whereby he does scratch states, or his stings whereby he does poison kingdoms,
who would not abhor that name were it not for Judas surnamed the traitor? Luke
6.16.
or especially because God cast Adam out of paradise, and Lucifer out of Heaven
for rebellion and treason, are not subjects rather to ly down upon their bended
knees, then to stand up with their armed-hands before their lawful
Sovereigns? yes Judah shall have the Scepter, and his fathers Sons shall bow
down unto him. Genesis 49.8. If against a King there be no rising up. Pro. 30.31.
then should any by cunning glosses and subtle distinctions raise up tumults,
distractions, commotions, conspiracies in Nations? is not hell threatened to all
such wild furies? Seditio a secedendo vel seorsum eundo Cicero de repub.
yes, Whosoever resists the power, resists t^ Ordinance of God, and they
which resist shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2. Sedition is a
violent separation from a true Governor, now those which are united by
allegiance how can they set themselves apart for their own turbulent designs?
is not this to turn the union of a Commowealth into a combination? Inter bonos
amicitiam inter malos factione^ Sal. In bell. Iud.
Yes, as amongst good men there is friendship, so amongst bad men there is
faction. Petrus Gregorius counts these insurrections diseases in
Commonwealths; others wildfire to inflame peoples affections, others Vermin to
consume the goods of a Nation; and not one learned Author gives them a good
term: for the very reproach therefore persons might abstain from them. How
odious to this day are the names of them which have been practisers in them, as
of Sejanus under Tiberius, Philip the Arabian under Gordianus, Plantianus under
Antoninus, Cleander under Commodus, Bessus under Darius, Phocas under
Mauricius? Man's laws have no greater judgment, nor Gods laws have no greater
vengeance then for Rebels and Traitors. Oh then how might these many Princes
say, that we would not content our selves with our own estates, nor quiet our
selves in those degrees wherein God had set us; but against the scandal and
curse of the sin, out of haughtiness and arrogance, we must attempt execrable
and hideous things, in stead of obedience and duty which we did owe to our just
and lawful Prince, we have expressed nothing but obstinacy and contumacy,
pervicacy and pertinacy, and in stead of subjection, we have aimed at
sovereignty, and in stead of loyalty we have affected royalty. Princes we would
be, and Princes we have been, but now ejected by justice from heaven, and
rejected with the shame of the whole world: O that our own fierce humors, and
the Devils violent suggestions should so far prevail with us, and seduce us, as
with Bibles in our hands, Sermons in our ears, Prayers in our lips, the name of
Christ in our foreheads, and oaths of allegiance in our consciences we have
perpetrated such things, as all divine precepts do forbid, and all justifiable
Religion does defy. We blush, we tremble at the thought of all the commotions
we have raised, the wastes we have made, the blood we have shed, the peaceable
land we have distracted, the innocent King we have murdered; his dead head
does ly bleeding before our eyes, his Ghost does day and night torture us. Oh
that we could redeem our error, that we could expiate our guilts. If there be
any mercy left for us, we will deplore our faults, implore favor, ly at the
feet of the Nation, and beg forgiveness, yea weep our selves half blind to
be pardoned, and our future resolutions, and expressions shall be to preserve
our dear Country, and to support Monarchy; we have been scourges to the Land,
we will be Targets; we have been Batterers, we will be Bulwarks; we have been
Butchers, we will be Foster-fathers; we have been Depopulators, we will be
Patriots: have we a King again? we will acknowledge him to be a King; honor
him as a King, give him reverence, give him his right, bless his name;
preserve his person, fear his power, submit to his Laws, admire his virtues,
give him fealty, give him tribute, give him our hearts, pray for him, fight for
him, live and dye for him: we will have nothing but a King in our eyes, and our
lips; we shall rejoice to see him great, and we will endeavor to make him
illustrious; our studies shall be for him, our songs shall be of him, and our
satisfactions shall be in him. As a penitent thinks he can never do enough for
his God, so a State-convert thinks he can never do enough for his King; he was
never so much for his own State, as he will now be for Majesty. Thus if these
many Princes can but have their eyes opened, they will have their hearts
changed; they were never so destructive to their Country, as they will be
beneficial; they were never so treacherous to their King, as they will be his
trusty and true hearted Leigemen. Every way they will make compensation for
injuries, satisfaction for demerits, and reparation for former disobedience.
Thus now then I have handled the sad disease, a sad disease indeed, for woe to
that Land that is sick of many Princes; we may think that there has been
transgression enough in the Land, when this Judgment does enter the Land; we
then which have been thus visited, it is fit for us to think of the peccant
humor; it is meet for us to take notice of it, and to have our hearts ache with
it, as it has made the Land to ache; that we might feel as much of our
transgression, as we have felt of the many Princes. We cannot justify our
selves, for our plea of innocence is taken from us if we had been a righteous
people, we should have been an happy people; but we have been a wicked people,
for we have been made a miserable people; we have suffered as Malefactors, been
punished as the most grievous sinners; we have exceeded the nature of
transgressors, for vengeance has been more heavy upon us then upon other
transgressors; War has been in other Nations, but not such a War; Judgment
has been in other Lands, but not such a Judgment; they have had many
distractions, many confusions, but we have had many Governments, many Princes.
Is it not time then to lay our sins to heart? yes, and it is expedient, and
necessary, that they should gripe our hearts fore; will we still talk of the
holy merrinthe Nation, the praying, weeping, cleansing people that are amongst
us? no, let us speak sparingly of them; for though I believe that there are
many Saints in the Land, yet I see that the sinners do out-number the Saint;
the indevotion of the one, does exceed the Prayers of the other, and the
remorslesnesse of the one the tears of the other, and the sensuality of the
one, the sanctity of the other: The sinners are more numerous, for they were
more forcible to bring in Judgment, then the Saints were to prevent it; our
Armor might be Saint-bright, but it was not tempered enough for defense, it
was not Saint-proof: Gods Arrow shot through our Target, Gods Poll-axe beat
through our Headpiece, for all our Saints we were judged like sinners: Job,
Noah, and Daniel could do us no good; we had so few Saints, that we had the
many Princes, Oh therefore, if it be possible, let us destroy sin, however let
us diminish it, that if God come to correct us again he may but chastise us
with the rod of men, and not lay the iron rod upon us; let us not so trespass
as to sin a King out of his Throne; for assure your selves, that a Land cannot
have a greater Judgment inflicted upon it from heaven, then for the height of
transgression in it, to be deprived of the lawful Prince, and in his stead to
be punished with many Princes. For the transgression of the Land many are the
Princes thereof, etc.

PART. III.
Now let us come to the happy Cure, But by a man of understanding and knowledge
the State thereof shall be prolonged,

In which words observe these parts 1. An hope of recovery, But. 2. The rare
Physician, a man, by a man. 3. His singular compound, understanding, and
knowledge. 4. The Patient that is to have the benefit of the Physic, the
State, the State thereof. 5. The lastingnesse of the cure, shall be prolonged.


First, For the hope of recovery, But. From hence observe that misery is not
incurable. For the transsgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof, But;
that is, a change may come, these many Princes may have their last day dawn,
their imperious reign may cease, there may not be one of these new-made,
self-made, time-made, vote-made, art-made, sword-made, insolent, fuming,
fukeblown, fleerblown, lyblown, flyblown, Antic, Fantastic Princes to show
an head; these Many Princes had their many vicissitudes, theirmany State
Princes, State pranks, But. To that, trials have their prefixed limit's, the
rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous. Psalm. 125.3. The
Egyptians, whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see again. Exodus 14.3.
Oh! what great troubles, and adversities did thou show me, yet did thou
turn, and refresh me? Psalm. 17.18. Bread Corn when it is threshed he does not
always tresh, neither does the wheel of his Cart still make a noise. Esai,
28.28. I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds,
because they called thee the castaway, saying. This is Sion, whom no man
seeks after. Ier. 30.17. After two days he will revive us, and the third day
be will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Hos. 6.3. Though they be
quiet, and also many, yet thus shall they be cut off, when he shall pass by; I
will afflict thee no more. For now will I break his yoke, and will burst his
bonds in sunder. Nahum. 1.12,13. It shall come to pass as ye were a curse
amongst the Heathen, oh house of Judah, and house of Israel, so will I deliver
you, and ye shall be a blessing, fear not but let your hands be strong. For
thus says the Lord of Hosts, as I thought to punish you, when your Fathers
provoked me to wrath, and repented not, So again have I determined in these
days to do well unto the house of Jerusalem, and the house of Judah, fear ye
not. Zach. 8.13,14,15. So that there is a time for all things, a time to slay,
and a time to heal, a time to break down, and a time to build up, a time to
weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance, a time to
rend, and a time to sew, a time to keep silence, and a time to speak, a time
for war, and a time for peace. Eccles. 3. The shaking fits of an ague do not
always continue, fiery Comets have but their blazing seasons; will God be
angry for ever? no, this is man's unappeasable, and implacable disposition, but
as for God, it is said for a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great
compassion will I gather thee, for a moment in my anger I have hid my face from
thee for a little season; but with everlasting mercy will I have compassion
upon thee, Esai 5.4.7,8. God does oftentimes Lighten darkness. Psalm. 18.28.
Close up breaches Amos 9.11. Give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning; and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness Ps. 61.3. How
many of these Shipwrackt creatures do we see come swimming to the shore? how
many of these prisoners do we behold at last shaking off their fetters? As
there is the arrow of Gods punishment, so there is the Arrow of Gods
deliverance 2 Kings 13.17. He does give rest from the days of adversity, Psalm.
94.13. break the yoke of the burden, the staff of the shoulder, and the rod
of the oppressor, Esai 9.4. Qui nil potest sperare desperet nihil. Seneca.
He which can hope for nothing let him despair of nothing. As far as things
have gone on in an adverse, improsperous way against us, yet God can turn all
things again backwards; captivity may return like the rivers in the south.
(...) Euripid.
A Rhodian being cast into a Dungeon, and fed after the manner of a beast, and
his hand cut off, and his face wounded, his friends wished him to furnish
himself to death, no says he, Cuncta homini quoad vivit speranda sunt, Eras.
l. 8. Apoph. Sueton.
All things to man so long as he lives are to be hoped for. When Nero had lost
all his jewels in the Sea, Oh! says he, this loss may be repaired, for the
fishes may bring them again; so whatsoever precious things we are deprived of
for a while, Gods providence may in time restore them. They which have endured
the saddest casualties may have a return of the sweetest comforts. Here was a
land infested with the rigorous Government of many Princes, yet may not these
outrages cease? yes, For the transgression of a land many are the Princes
thereof, But.

Applicat. First, this serves to show, that God is a pardoning God, he may be a
punishing God, but his punishments are but a blow and away, he is the slowest
to chastise; and the readiest to be reconciled, his soft bowels are not long
without compassion; our eyes do no sooner weep, but his heart does bleed; we
may be for a while without help, but never without hope; the most destitute
has a dependence. Erit egeno spes, The poor has his hope Job 5.16. The flesh
of the righteous may be chastised, bus he keeps all his bones. Psalm. 34.20.
he may wax strong again after all his disciplining; Gods corrections are
moderate, and momentary, Behold I have fined thee but not as silver is sined.
Esai. 48.10, wicked people shall not trouble them any more as before time. 2 Samuel 7.10. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be wroth always, for
the spirit would sail before me. Esai 57.16. Ambr. de ob. Theod. Id. in Matt.
Greg. in pastor. Aug. ep. 54. ad Maced.
Theodosius did count it for a favor when he was desired to forgive, so does
God when he is entreated to pardon, yea uberior gratia, quam precatio, Gods
pity does exceed our prayers. Deus ante oculos slenda peccata non opponit. God
does not put before our eyes those sins which we have watered with tears, if
we have bewailed the guilt of them, he will take away the correction of them,
contrition is the medicine for correction, God punishes his own, but it is
misericordia puniens a merciful punishing, such a punishment as is ready to
turn into mercy, after blows come embraces, after chastisements come comforts;
They which sow in tears shall reap in joy, and bring their sheaves with them,
Psalm. 26.6. The rage of States do not always last, the banished may wear a
Crown again, usurpation has but a time to domineer; The many Princes here
blustered for a season, But, For the transgression of a Land many are the
Princes thereof, But.

2. Secondly, This serves to show that a suffering people are not a scandalous
people, the world would make them the reproach of the earth; Oh! we have had
the upperhand of you, humbled you to purpose, made you to fear our brows, and
wear our chains, we have had your bodies in our dungeons, and your necks on
our gibbets. Have ye so? the more shame to your fury, and the greater infamy to
your cruelty. But when ve have done your worst, what then? what then? God has
judged between you and us, the righteous case is on our side, ye are blind that
do not see your selves fighting against an host of Saints, ye are deaf that do
not hear God from his Throne pronouncing justice on our side, heaven does
approve of our reformation, the spirit has written down your errors in
letters of blood, God with us is our Motto, for we have Gods Commission to
purge the Church, we have Gods sword in our hand to hew down such Malignants as
you are, open your eyes, and see the iniquity of your case, for ye have Gods
searing iron upon your foreheads, ye are signally branded; no, never a whit the
more for a few hasty censures, for all which endure divine wrath are not hated
of heaven, Aug. l. 1. de Civ. Dei. c. 8.
uva tam been ut amurca in torculari premitur. The sweet grape; as well as the
sour grape is stamped in the winepresse. The truest Church has the hour of
temptation, Rev. 3.10. Men may suffer for righteousness sake. 1 Pet. 3.14. the
faithful have carried the marks of the Lord Jesus in their bodies. Gal. 6.17.
for thee we are slain all the day long. Romans 8.36. why may not the children be
subject to such sudden accidents, when the Mother has been exposed to this sad
fate? For the woman clothed with the Sun, which had the Moon under her feet,
and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head may be driven by the great red Dragon
into the wilderness, Rev. 2.6. Aug. in Psalm. 93.
Mali damnantur ut alieni, boni flagellantur ut filii. Cyp. ser. 4. de immortal.
The wicked are damned as strangers, the good are scourged as children. Area
fruges terit, The floor does dash out the best Corn, were the Jews accursed
because they endured seventy years captivity? were the Babylonians the better
Saints? were the Martyrs in the primitive Church wretches because they were
beheaded, and burnt, and boiled to death in Cauldrons? Had the Gentiles the
purer religion? were the Orthodoxe Christians stained in faith because for four
hundred years they endured the severity of the Arian persecution? were the
prevailing Heretics the sounder believers? no, they may have trials whose
faith is more pure, and precious then the tried gold, Judge your selves
therefore to be the wicked of the world, because against all Laws of God, and
principles of morality ye have acted hideous things, and suffered nothing for
them, rather then to judge a just case for the present afflictions. They are
the ungodly, whom God never does take into favor, but does reject them with an
everlasting hatred; but may not a righteous people at last be free from all
miseries, and enjoy a return of all defireable blessings? yes, after good men
have had their feathers clipped, their wings may grow again, after a disease
there may be an hope of recovery. The Many Princes here did afflict the body of
the State a great while, But an alteration there was, For the transgression of
a Land many are the Princes thereof; But

3. This does shame the diffidence of timorous Professors, who if misery does
happen do give over all as inauspicious. Oh our best times are past, our
Halcyon days are over, we shall never again see any thing that is prosperous,
Were there not graves enough in Egypt, that thou have brought us forth to dye
in the wilderness? Exodus 14.11. the sense of misery does carry nothing with it
but exanimation with many, men see nothing but death in their eye, they lay out
their selves for the sepulcher, If God should open the windows of heaven, how
shall this thing come to pass? 2 Kings 7.19. So if God should stretch put his
right hand, how should these extremities be redressed? must there not be a
miracle? Oh what a dismayed ed generation, have we met with? when the many
Princes reigned over us, because for a time they kept us in subjection, they
concluded of nothing but everlasting thraldom. We have been crushed, and
vanquished (sajd they) put to the worst, put to the rour, driven to exigents,
driven out of the field, how can we now lift up a spear, lift up our heads? No,
to fight were but to carry out weapons for our adversaries, to display colors
were but to prepare trophies for their victories, we are an undone people, a
ruined Nation; we must look no, more after Liberties, or think of Privileges,
adieu to Propriety, farewell to birthrights; we have seen the last of our
glorious freedom, our flourishing Kingdom: these many Princes have fettered us,
we must give over our selves to chains, and expect nothing but to be perpetual
slaves: Sabell.
just like Caecilius Metellus, who after the battle at Cannae would fly out of
Italy; Livy.
and Marius the younger, who after he had been crossed in his haughty designs,
would give his throat to be cut by Portius Telesinus. But ought a trial to
carry such a dread with it? or a judgment strike us into an absolute amazement?
No, if thou faintest in a day of adversity, thy strength is but small, Prove.
24.10. Is the Artillery of heaven yet won? is God disarmed? if he does come to
put on his habergeon, to anoint his shield, to unsheath his two-edged sword,
shall not all our enemies be cut off, as the foame, upon the waters? cannot he
break in pieces the hammers of the earth? has not be strange engines to
overthrow puissant armies? secret mines to blow up formidable camps? cannot he
scatter with a look? cannot be conquer without a weapon? How came the walls of
Jericho to fall down? the Citizens of Ai to fly before their enemies? Zerahs
numerous host to be scattered? and Senacheribs formidable army to be
discomsited? what are the brawny arms, and the Lion-like faces to the force and
fury of the Almighty? The Lord is a man of War, his name is Jehovah. Exodus
15.3. Has not he gathered Trained bands out of the prison? has not he put
weapons into Captains hands? See how these Hebrews creep out of their holes;
yet these creepers became redoubted Captains, and made the Midianites creep,
and run; yea, for fear that the Hebrews should dispatch them, they did sheath
their swords in their own bowels. When then men seem to be lost, all is not
lost, if God does please to preserve. Who has despised the day of small
things? Cannot he feed the sheep of slaughter? Be resolute therefore in the
midst of casualties: Confidentiae est mentem immotam inter adversa habere. Hugo
de S. Victorino.
for Confidence is to carry an immovable mind in the time of adversity. Magnus
gubernator and scisso navigat velo. Seneca.
A good Mariner can steer his bark with a rent sail. Oh then that disasters
should distract us, or heavy accidents fray us! Can we presume upon nothing but
what we feel? or believe nothing but what we see? does any eclipse last always?
is a woman ever in travel? may not the boisterous winds cease, and the
scorching Sun go back from the Tropic? do not the frozen iceicles quickly melt
away? and are not the gadde-flies gone a month? The body of a Commonwealth is
not ever troubled with the overflowing of the gall, these same State-head
aches by degrees do assuage; Turbulency in government, whenever it does
happen, is like an Epidemical disease, it does spread far and torture much, but
the force of the disease at last will be spent, there is hope of recovery; as
in this valetudinary Commonwealth, this Crown-sick Land, there was a kind of
Lazerhouse for a while in respect of the many Princes, yet at last all the
distempered Governors and governments were removed. Amongst the many, there
was not any to be seen, they lay for some time like an heavy judgment upon the
Land, But, For the transgression of the Land many are the Princes thereof; But

By a man.
2. Secondly, I am to handle the rare Physician, a Man, But by a man. From
hence observe that true government does not require multitudes. That is the
most singular government that has but in it the single Person; show me such a
man, and he is your Man. Let a man oversee the Congregation, Numb. 27.16. The
Lord has sought him out a man according to his own heart, and has appointed
him to be Governor over his people, 1 Samuel 13.14. Let thy hand be upon the man
of thy right hand, Psalm. 80.17, There but a Man, not Men. He that rules over
men, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that holds the Scepter, Amos 1.5. He, not They. There is
but one Lawgiver mentioned, Gen, 49.10. but one Light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17.
but one Head of the tribes, 1 Samuel 15.17. not Lawgivers, Lights, Heads. There
is but one Robe, one Crown, one Throne, therefore but one King. From amongst
thy brethren shall thou make a King over thee, Deuteronomy, 17.15. a King, not Kings.
When a man come to have two hearts to quicken him, or two fathers to beget him,
or two wombs to conceive him, then will I think he may have two, or many Kings
to reign over him. In the mean time true Majesty is a Monarchy, yea Monarchy is
the Protarchy, the first and best government. One Jesus in spiritual matters,
one King in civil affairs. Did the government of the World begin in one father
of the family? and till the reign of Kings was it confirmed in one Moses, one
Joshua, one Judge? and when Kings were set up in their splendor, was there but
one individual person designed to exercise Sovereignty and supreme Authority
from the beginning of Kingly Government to the end of the Macchabees reign? Do
Heathens, Mahometans, the wild Tartarians, and the wise Persians, and Chaldees
allow but of the government by One? Is there but one King amongst Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, Devils? And shall neither the Moral Law, nor Positive Law, the
light of Nature, nor instinct of Nature, the order upon Earth, nor the order of
Hell dired us to know what is expedient, and necessary, lawful, and laudable in
the Architectonicall point of Government? Read all Authors, and see if the
generality of writers do not terminate Government to one; yes they agreed for
the most part in one person, though that person was represented to the world
under several names. Ios. l. 1. c. Appion. Herod. l. 6. c 29 Ioh. Mesellus.
Huit. l. 3. c. 21. Cato in fragmentis p. Dia^. l. 3. de long. c. 8. Herod. l. 3.
Amongst the Jews a chief Ruler was called Hyscus, amongst the Egyptians
Piromis, amongst the Iaponians Voon, amongst the Tartarians Caan, or Can,
amongst the Hetrurians, Larts, or Larthes, amongst the Longobards, Autharis, or
Flavius, amongst the Servians at this day Despots, amongst the Transilvanians,
Valachians, Moldavians Vayvods, yet though the Denominations, or appellative
terms be several, yet they all accord in signification, that Government is to
be limited to one. Indeed I do find Ottanes disputing hard for Democracy and
Megabisus, as earnestly for Aristocracy, but wiser heathens have been wholly
for Monarchy. Aristot. l. 8. Ethic.
Aristotle says, that the best form of Government is a kingdom, and the worst
is a Commonwealth. Plato in Dial. c. 10. polit,
Plato says the best and mildest Government is by a King. Isoc. in Nicocle.
Isocrates says that Monarchy is the supereminen^ Government. Plut. in 7. Sap.
con.
Plutarch says, that if free choice were given to a people to choose what
Government they would, a Monarch should be preferred before all: they which
will read Volateran l. 36. Philo tit, de polit. Alcinous c. 33. F. Patricius.
lib. 1. Philostratus de optima reip. forma: Sigon. de Antiq. jure civ. Romans l.
1. shall find this most judiciously, and abundantly confirmed, namely that
Monarchical Government does excel all: what combustions in votes, litigations
in designs, altercations, tumults, rents, ruptures in dividing Authority have
there been where any kind of popular Governments have been erected? The
contests have been so bitter, that to appease these commotions the best
tempered States have been driven to the election of one single Magistrate; was
there not for this end amongst the Lacedaemonians an Harmosta? amongst the
Thessalians an Archus? amongst the Mitileneans an Azimneta? and amongst the
Romans, a Dictatour? If they could choose One to quiet differences at last,
why not at first to avoid them? preventing Physic is the best Physic. Aelian
Polycletus must not only have a moving Image, that turn it which way soever
he would it should please the people, but if he would be a right workman he
must have a standing piece (as his Masterpiece) that might please wise men,
and skilful Artists: So though popular Governments be very acceptable to the
multitude, yet we must not have such a voluble Government as is pleasing to the
people, but a true standing, fixed Government that is agreeable to Art, the
highest Art, even Divine inspiration; and where I pray you in the whole
Scripture did God constitute any Government but Monarchical, or that which is
correspondent to it? The Government of many is so pernicious, that the
Government of two has ever been held dangerous. Nulla fides sociis regni,
omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit. -- Lucan.



There is no trust to be put in Companions of Government, all power is
impatient of consortship. Did not Romulus kill Remus his partner in Government
upon a slight disconten^? were Caesar and Pompey, Augustus and Antony ever
quiet when the Government was divided? was not Eucratides killed by his own son
(whom he had made equal in Government with him) when he returned with a great
victory over the Indians? Justin l. 11. Justin. l. 1. Sueton. Plin. de vir.
illust.
did not Cambyses for this kill his brother Smerdes? Domitian (as many think)
his good brother Titus? Aemilius, Numitor? Etheocles, Polynices? Bassianus,
Geta? And can it be expected but that a divided Government should have these
divided spirits in it? is there any thing almost to prevent it? Herodian l. 2.
4. Herod. l. 2.
No, Herodotus I remember has a famous history, that when Sethon the King of
Egypt was dead, the people constituted twelve Kings, as Governors, they at
the beginning of their reign (to prevent all emulation, and envy) took an oath
one of another, that one should not conspire against another for disturbance,
or deposition; but going to the Oracle to know what should be the end of this
Government; they received answer, that whosoever did sacrifice in the temple of
Vulcan in an iron vial he should reign over them all, they having heard that
Psammeticus had done this, they Banished him, and his children into the Fens,
where they lived a slavish, fordid life for a while, but at last Psammeticus
being helped by the Ionians, (for all his oath) came in an armed way against
the eleven Governors, fought with them, subdued them, and cut their throats.
So that no obligations, or oaths will restrain men that have joint Authority
from being Competitours to strive for obtaining the sole power into their
hands. Nunquam aut vix aut parvo tempore divisum imperium sine pugna, aut
invidia Oros.
Orosius saw it so apparently, that he pronounces, that it was never known, or
scarcely, or but for a small time, that a divided Government was without
strife, and envy. But some will say, that under Monarchy outrages have been
often committed, what then? do not 'Democracy, outvy them both for number, and
horror? oh! the bloody factions that have been in Rome, Athens, Carthage, etc?
Was there ever any man, much less any calling free from error since the first
fall? Is every thing that has imperfections in it to be rejected? then how
should the world soon be without a man, and the Church without a Saint. I had
then lost my ministry, for I find imperfections enough in my self, and I
believe that many others must be degraded with me and be called my sliding
brethren, yea many great Saints might be put into the sinners Catalogue with
me; Archives and Diptyckes, Synodical and Select Congregations might have a
Crowd of them which are guilty of lapses, and relapses; it is not the white
surplesse, nor the white cap which can make men all white, they may signify
much, but they often sanctify but little; and if spiritual sins (as Divines
hold) be greater then carnal, then where would my spiritual brethren be? I will
not call them carnal Reprobates, but I doubt there is a Court might call them
spiritual filths. The maine comfort to any of us is that we are Reformed, for
to be reformed is as it were to have a new creation, yea to be new souled, and
to have a new form. He is worse then a Publicane, that calls Zacheus after his
conversion extortioner, or Mary Magdalene strumpet, or S. Paul persecutour, or
S. Cyprian Magician, or S. Augustine Bastardgetter, or Euagrius Atheist, for at
first he neither believed end of the world, resurrection, or reward of good
works, as Cedrene reports: if repentance has killed sins, the censure of
others (who perhaps are greater sinners in another kind, then ever the Penitent
was in his kind) ought not to keep them alive, this is to be as evil, as the
Devil, who will never cease to be Calumniator Fratrum, the Accuser of the
brethren; The Devils have nothing to do with the Reformed, and are there men
that are worse then Devils? will not they which cry out so much for
Reformation, accept of Reformation? is not reformation of conscience better
then reformation of tenets? must a man be their own convert, or else he is no
Penitent? what are many men turned Donatists? and confine all religion to
Artemia, and the holy Mount? no if I as a Reformed man should exceed others in
true strictness I should not fear my former sins, nor other men's present
censures; yet as Reformed as the best are we cannot be absolute. In reformation
there will be imperfections, and till we can get the unregenerate man quite
mortified there will be a vicissitude of operations concerning grace, and
corrupt nature; well then, Monarchy has imperfections, what then? if thou
can not be without failings, why should Monarchy be rejected for debilities,
and imbecillities? Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? till thou can get a pure conscience cry not out too loudly for
a pure Monarchy; but suppose that there have been errors, may not Monarchy turn
a Convert? what shall not reformed Monarchy obtain thy pardon? what inflexible,
inexorable to a Penitent? hard hearted Judge, I would not wish thy sanctity to
be tried at such a bar; a scandalous person (whatsoever mad rage has been
used to such persons) ought not to be ejected, or rejected till he has had his
reiterated Church-warning; for doubtless a scandalous person ought to have as
much favor as an Heretic, who is not to be rejected till he has been twice
admonished, Titus 3.10. Then shall Monarchy be a Contumax, when it has been a
Suppliant, and without the help of other Physic has cured her Itch by her own
fasting spittle? what shall not Monarchy reformed have thy indulgence? what is
there yet wanting? must it be thy convert, or else is it a Castaway? then the
contention is not about the calling but the Owner; and I believe if Monarchy
would subscribe to thy Tenets, and seal thee Patents, and fight for thy Cause,
Monarchy should he held lawful enough. Would thou be a friend to Monarchy,
if it would be thy friend and Champion? Yes, thou would not refuse the name
of Royalist, and write more Encomiums in the honor of Monarchy, then ever any
(as thou call them) of the Courtscribes did; alas! men can change their
opinions, or relaxe in their rigours, if it be for their ends, as easily as an
Anabaptist can fight, possess Estates, pay Customs, or swear, and enforce
severe oaths on others; It is not Monarchy therefore that is the quarrel, but
that men cannot make Monarchy their own Monopoly. What a Saint might a Monarch
be, if he could do two things, please parties, and get a general conscience!
But if he will not submit to this, then the imperfections of Monarchy shall be
sought out, and these shall be urged to blemish and blast it, but if the
calling be just of it self, they are not imperfections which can abolish it.
No, blame the errors, but not abrogate the function, will any man shut up his
windows, because some men have cast themselves headlong out of them? or pluck
down Pulpits, because some men have preached false Doctrine in them? or refuse
to receive the Communion, because some men have been poisoned by it? will thou
kill thy horse, because he does halt? or pull down thy house because it has a
smoaky chimney? or pluck thy eye out of thy head because it is blood-shotten?
no, expel the grievance, but honor the calling. Kingship in the State of
nature is no damned Office, for the King of Egypt or Babylon the Great Cham, or
great Turk are lawful Kings, much less is Monarchy reformed a child of
perdition; for though thou in the state of regeneration art not an absolute
Sinner, yet thou art not an absolute Saint, what then? thou which in thy best
mortal condition art an half Devil, would thou have a King a pure Angel?
fear thou not God seeing thou art in the same condemnation? I must show thee
the lees in thine own vessel, and the husk that grows about thine own sined
wheat, or else I shall never strike thee mute from clamouring against Monarchy.
All Governments have their frailties, but none fewer then Monarchy: we have had
trial of thy several forms, and find them more deformed then that which thou
would have looked upon with a loathing eye, as a Morian. The wise God no
doubt knew this very well, and therefore he instituted Monarchy as the calling
most approved by himself, and which he knew least obnoxious to culpablenesse;
as he himself is but one God, so he would have but one Substitute to represent
him upon earth; he is not for Men, but for a Man. But by a Man, etc.

Applicat. First, This does show that God does not in Government work all
immediately by himself, but does choose Man to be subservient to him in ruling
the world. I will set up Shepherds over them, which shall feed them, Jer.
23.4. They shall be of thee, which shall build up the old wast places, Es.
48.12. Is not a King expedient to make a Kingdom happy? yes, A King by
judgment maintains a Country, Prove. 29.4. Him has he appointed, (or set)
as blessings, Psalm 21.6. The great God is the principal, but this Man is the
subordinate Agent; God is the chief Doctor, but a King too is a Physician to
cure the maladies of a Nation. Man is Gods Deputy, Delegate. Man is the
principal in Generation, yet the help of the woman is used for conception; so
though God be the prime Ruler, yet for the execution of Government, God does
make use of the womb of Magistracy. Rex servit Deo, leges justas praecipiendo,
and contrarias abrogando; A King does serve God in enjoining good Laws, and
abrogating bad: Aug. ep. 32.
yea, Menander could say, that a King was (...), the enlivened Image of God
Almighty. That when we do not, and indeed cannot see God personally reigning
upon earth (for no man can see God and live) yet we may see him in this Image.
We may discern God shining in this bright pillar going before us, or behold him
representing himself in these glorious back parts. A King is as the Sun-glasse,
wherein the splendour of the Sun is clearly manifested. God does heal the bitter
waters of a Nations distempered manners, by this sweet tree cast into it, or
does feed an whole Camp with this celestial Manna. God does not act all by
himself, but much by his inferior Substitute: we ought for an happy Government
to depend upon God as the spring, but upon Man as the Channel: he does not
honor God, which does not respect his Providore general. They have not cast
thee away, but they have cast me away; we may contemn God in his Ruler. Thou will respect the Messenger that brings thee thy Patent, and not a King, which
from God does present thee with a Charter of so many rich Privileges? yes,
bless God, and reverence his Steadsman, his Vicegerent. God does reign in
such; though the blessing does come from God, yet the administration of it does
come from Man. The Nation is often sick, and often cured, but God does appoint
a Party in his stead to work the recovery; Man is the Physician. But by a Man,
etc.

2. Secondly, this does serve to show the wonder of Government; Naz. in apol.
Government is ars artium, the art of arts; Chrysostom. in 2. man.
certantibus ventis mare concutitur. The Sea is shaken with contrary winds, but
not more then a Commonwealth with the whirlwinds of men's opposite dispositions.
It was a singular thing to see Heliogabalus to have tamed Tigers, so that he
could drive them in his Chariot; but more admirable is it to see a King so to
moderate the fiery natures of men, that they are pliant to his Sovereign
authority, and he can make them draw the Chariot of his legal commands; Is not
this mavelous? what is a King to rule a whole Nation? He is but a Man to a
multitude. Who knows how the bones grow in the womb; so who knows how the
various humors of a Land are by the wisdom, and power of one man kept in good
order. The regular motions of the heavens are beyond apprehension, so are the
ordinate motions in a Kingdom: doubtless God must highly inspire the heart of
the Prince, and incline the hearts of the people to keep them in this sweet
composure. He must be a rare Prince to keep such an Instrument in tune, and a
choice Physician that could preserve such a Body in a due crasis. Have I
conceived all this people, or begotten them, that thou should say unto me,
carry them in thy bosom as a Nurse bears her sucking child? Numb. 11.12. It
is much, that a Nurse should have breasts enough for such a numerous company. A
Prince might say with Moses, I am not able to bear all this people, it is a
burden too heavy for me, Numb. 11.14. He had need have shoulders as strong as
those of Atlas, which should bear such a weight. Oh therefore pray for thy
Prince, and obey thy Prince, dishonor not his person, disturb not his
Government, for as Solomon said, Who is able to Judge this mighty people, 1
Kings 3.9. A mighty people, a mighty charge; he had need be a person of high
perfections, and ye of due subjection, where such a trust should be discharged.
Fie then upon the Malcontent, shame to the Mutineer, the King has enough to
do to keep the obedient constant in duty, what then should he be molested, to
quel the stubborn, and obstinate? he has foreign dangers enough to prevent,
he had not need have domestic jarres to pacify. That heart is arrogant, and
that head pragmatical, that does consult, and contrive variances, and
grievances against his Prince, wearied with State-cares. Away therefore, ye
turbulent and seditious spirits, ye deserve not the eyes in your heads to look
upon a King, nor feet upon your bodies to walk through his Territories, nor
your necks upon your shoulders to carry them unshaken under his Government,
which are carping, traducing, and perhaps ready for challenging, and fighting
to disturb the reign of a just Prince. How shall he Govern the quarrelling,
when it is an hard thing to rule or to keep in rule the peaceable? Remember
that Government is a wonder. A King is but one to all, a particular Man, But by
a man.

3. Thirdly, This does serve to exhort persons to bear with the infirmities of
a Prince, he is but a Man, would thou have him without Man's frailties? Art
thou so? is any man here so? since the fall was there ever man so? no, Who can
say my heart is clean, I am clean from sin? Who can bring a clean thing out of
filthiness? In many things we offend all, surely there is not a just man upon
earth, that does good, and sins not Eccles. 7.22. Guilts are general, and
Horat.
Optimus ille qui minimis urgetur. He is the best man which has the fewest to
account for; -- quantum noxae sit ubique repertum? Ovid.

How much disobedience is there to be found every where? To hold thy self pure,
and thy Prince impure, this is to be just overmuch; to condemn that in thy
Prince, which thou can not excuse in thy self, this is to be wicked overmuch.
It is a shame Cum tua pervideas oculis mala lippus inunctis, Horat.

When thou art purblind in discerning thine own faults, and Eagle-eyed in
prying into thy Sovereigns errors. Take thine own indictment out of the
Court, before thou do arraigne him; cleanse away thine own Leprosy before
thou do exclaim, or declaime against his biles. Thou can not pass
sentence upon him, till thou have said to thine own conscience with that worthy
Judge, Annon, ego talis? Am not I such an one? Nay art thou not worse, and
superior in wickedness? yet how common a thing is it to see people
inquisitive into Princes faylings, and to riddle their lives, and to dissect
their conversations, when they their selves are by many degrees more culpable?
how light soever they be in the balance, the Prince must have down weight, and
want nothing of his grains. If a Prince miscarry in any thing it is the Bruit
of the Kingdom, the discourse of every Lackey, and Fripperyman;
Councel-chambers will cry out of it, as if every States-man-were an Aristides,
and Pulpits will not be silent, as if every Preacher were an Enoch. Yea some
there are so rancorous, and venomous, that if they can discover no Crime, they
will create some, Sincerum vas incrustare, crack the sound vessel, raise a
false report, slander the footsteps of the Lords anointed. Nay if they cannot
question their Princes actions, they will his intentions, or if they cannot
make him criminal, they will lay his servants exorbitances to his charge. So
apt is the age to make Invectives against Authority, and to be Libellers
against the Throne; every one will be examining a Princes foot-prints, and
spying out stains in the Robe of Majesty. That though the Scripture says (and
what is Scripture to them with it under their arms, and upon their tongues
ends?) that we must not speak evil of Dignities, or curse the King in our
thoughts, yet there are men which will defame, and deprave, carpe, and curse,
yea they are not more violent, and virulent against any then Princes. But oh
search your own consciences, and be not too searching into Princes lives, they
are subject to many temptations, which never assaulted thee; the Court has a
thousand inticements, which the Country do want. Aliud sceptrum, aliud
plectrum. The Scepter is one thing, the Minstrels instrument is another thing.
There is a great difference between a Princely life, and a private life. If thy
Prince therefore be not absolutely vicious, apparently idolatrous, bear with
common errors. How can thou expect him to be innocent, when thou thy self
must deprecate the curse of thy daily trespasses. Be a candid Interpreter
therefore of thy Princes actions, he is a Prince, he is no Cherubin, he may
err, he is but a Man. But by a Man.

4. Fourthly, This does show that government does belong to Princes, thou art
not to be the Ruler, no he is the man. What? shall the Mariners limit the
Pilot? the Soldiers prescribe Laws to the General? There can be no quiet state
Scire imperare, and far imperium, Plut.
where some do not know how to rule, and others to submit to Authority, as Agis
said. Aelian. l. 2. var. Hist. Bruson. l. 3. c. 11. Niph in vit. Nero.
If subjects take upon them to control their superiors, what is Sovereignty,
but nobilis servitus, a noble kind of slavery? as Antigonus said. Then that of
Saturninus will be verified, quantum mali sit imperare, What a great mischief
would it be to be a chief Magistrate? There is a genetal confusion, where omnia
licent omnibus, as Fronto said, all things are left to the liberty of a general
determining. The wearing of a Crown should doubtless carry more majesty with
it, the golden reins of Authority should carry a more restraining power with
them. Does not Scripture enjoin so? yes I advertise thee to take heed to the
Kings Commandment Eccl. 8.2. Be subject to principalities, and powers, Tit.
3.1. ye must be subject not only for wrath, but conscience sake, Romans 13.5.
Aug. de op. Monarch.
Quid iniquius, quam velle se obtemperari a minoribus, and nolle obtemperare
majoribus? what more unjust then that men would be obeyed of their inferiors,
and will not obey their superiors? Art thou to try Masteries with Princes? or
to pluck Kings by the throat? to contest with their Laws? or to strive that
thy will might be rather obeyed then their Mandates? This is for thee to give
them only the Chair of State, but to assume all Authority to thy self, or for
thee to allow them the title of Rulers, but to take upon thy self to be Lord
Paramount in all thy designs. This is a strange oath of allegiance where no
fealty and loyalty is exhibited, would any Lord of a Manor be contented with
such homage? that is a strange stooping before a Prince, where the knee does
bow, and the heart does strive for superiority, would any Father be satisfied
with such a prostration from his child? what is this but to make Kings painted
Giants? or to lead them up and down as Bearewards do their beasts of terror?
yet how common a thing is it to see Liegemen act the Prince? they swear
obedience to them, but all their subjection is in laying their hands upon a
book. They will have their own desires, or else they will fright him, and fight
with him, torment him, and vex the whole Nation; haughty aspiring, refractary,
ambitious, contumacious spirits! know ye not your station? are the best of you
compeers with Princes? does he not stand upon upper ground? does not his
calling exceed yours in stature by many cubits? yes, Kings are higher then
Agag, Numb. 24.7. The Mountains of Israel, Ezekiel 36.1. Therefore do not only
give Tributes, or pay him his Customs, but give fear to whom fear belongs,
and honor to whom honor belongs, Romans 13.7. The best Subsidy thou can
send in to thy Prince, is thy obedience; this the privy diet whereby he does
maintain his Table, or the Array, whereby he does defend his person. He does
prefer the Loyalty of his people above the Jewels of his Crown, and esteem
their subjection above the Rents and Revenues of his Crown-land. Then does he
Reign, when his Dignity is acknowledged, otherwise how is he a Sovereign? how
is he Diademed? Therefore know thy Ruler; a Grandeur does attend upon Princes,
they are the Cedars amongst all the Trees of the Forest; their eminency does
reach as high as the heavens: I have said ye are Gods, are ye then to affect a
Deity? no, there is but one Numen in a Nation; ye are then to be obsequious,
and officious; he is to prescribe, and be Imperial, there cannot be many Ruling
men, where the Dominion does belong but to one. There is but a Man, and he is
the Man, But by a Man.

5. Fifthly, this should exhort people to reject all devised Forms of
Government, and only admit, and to admire Monarchy. I have described the
utility, necessity, and excellency of Monarchy before, but what is all Theory
without practice? I have then preached up a King effectually amongst you, when
I have made you all Royalists: what therefore have I not yet convinced you?
cured your State Gangreen? are ye still thirsting for your popular Governments?
no let others if they will eat Swines flesh, but know ye how to distinguish
between the clean and unclean. For mine own part, I do dislike Polyarchy in
Government, as ill as I do Polygamy in Marriage: let not us multiply
Sovereignty where God has limited it; will ye be more regular then the divine
square? or wiser then inspiration? had we not better have that Government which
God has ordained then one of our own devising? yes, or else, as Aaron in stead
of a God brought forth a Calf; so we instead of a just Government will bring
forth but a Brute of our own invention. All other forms are so incongruous to
the peace, welfare, and honor of a Nation, that ye have heard, how the light
of nature has condemned them: yet let me speak what I can, and bring the
wisest that were in the world to confirm the equity and necessity of this
Government; yet the malady does go on, the age is sick of a Plurisie. In stead
of this one God which holy Writ has appointed to be in a Nation, there are
some that would have a Roodloft of Saints set up to worship: a Senate is better
to them then Sovereignty, and a Bench then the Throne. But to us, as Paulus
Aemilius said, Cor vitale and spiritus populi est Rex.
let the vital spirit of a Nation be a King. Let there be as many Cousellours
as ye will, for in the multitude of Counselors there is health, Prove. 15.22.
but let there be but one Throne, one Commander. A surfeit of meat is not worse
then a surfeit of Rulers, and a deluge of waters then an inundation of
Governors. One Master builder is enough to give direction how to build an
house; one Head is enough to convey animal spirits into the whole Body; so one
King is enough to diffuse Authority to a whole Nation. Let others then be drunk
with their several Bowls, but let us quench our thirst at our own golden Cup;
let others purge away their malady, by taking all the Drugs of the Apothecary,
but let us cure our selves, only by using our rare Catholicon. A Nation is
then happy, when the King is the Phosphorus of the Throne, and the Phoenix of
Majesty. This fair Spouse does desire but one Bridegroom; this Paradise does
need but one Tree of Life to grow in it. Magistracy divided, is rather a
Monster then an amiable Creature. We had almost lost our selves by traveling
in the new trodden Paths; let us hold our selves now to the Kings High way. A
lawful Governor as he must be Superior, so he must be separated from the
rest in greatness and dignity, a distinct and singular person, a Man, B^ by a
Man.

Of understanding and knowledge.
3. Thirdly, I am to handle the singular Compound, Of understanding and
knowledge. From hence we may observe, that a beneficial Prince must be a
prudent Prince; Prudence is the directive virtue in all Moral things, and so
in Political. If Prudence be nothing else but rectitudo rationi^, the rectitude
of reason; then in Government, what more requisite then reason refined?
prudens, quasi porro videns, a prudent man is as one that sees afar off, and
so he is as the Statsemans Scout, or Sentinel to discover all conveniences,
and inconveniences, in ordering public affairs. Prudence is a virtue, which
has discretion ingraffed into it; for though it be a Moral virtue according
to the matter, yet it is an intellectual virtue according to the essence; yea,
it is the general rule, or measure, by which all things are to be acted. It
has an influence into the appetite according to the application to the work,
and the practical thing to be done, but subjectively it is in the
understanding. If beasts do need sagacity for their actions, much more men
prudence for theirs. Sure I am, that good temperament is not more necessary to
live, then prudence to live well. For if men's actions have their defects by
inconsideration, precipitation and temerity, then they must have their
perfection by inspection, circumspection, and caution, which amongst other
things, are the potential parts of this virtue. There are many Maids of honor
attending upon this Queen (...); (...) to make due inquisition into things,
(...) to pass judgment according to general Rules, and (...) to go out of the
general road, prompting men to things not according to the usual grounds of
practice, but the more sublime grounds of equity. For a true Statesman is the
^igh towering Eagle, that flies beyond the tops of Customs, and Precedents,
and rests not, till it has soa^ed up to the clouds of integrity, and
conscience. Prudence then to a Governor is as a Moses Rod, whereby he does
work all his miracles of Government, eat up all the Serpents of enchanting
Politicians, divide the red Sea of deep and profound State matters, and draw
water out of the Rock, out of the difficulties of the ruling principles of
reason. An Idol in the world is nothing, no more is an ^dol Governor, which
has hands and feels not, eyes and sees not. Woe to thee, oh Land, when thy
Prince is a Child, Eccles. 10.16. A Child can do nothing here with his ^hildish
Judgment, no, he must be a Man, and a Man of ^nderstanding and knowledge. He
had need be -- aevi pruden^ia nostri, the Master-wit of the age, alter Ianus,
one that can ^ook on all sides. What is the high born Prince to the high
gifted? the valiant to the pregnant? the well guarded ^o the well qualified?
Prudence is better then Pedigree, Judgment does cut deeper then the sword, and
the weapons of reason are a surer defense, then the Halberds of Pensioners A
Kings honor is to search out a matter. Prove. 25.2. Where there is a Prince
that can ^hus unriddle doubts, Anatomize scruples, and has ^he sifting, and
searching judgment to find out a matter, ^here that Prince does excel all
the pompous Rulers upon earth, and is a King in his honor. Be wise oh ye
Kings. Psalm. 20. as if there were nothing more requisite for Kings, then
wisdom. Give unto thy servant an understanding heart to judge this great
people. 1 Kings 3.9. as if Solomon could not desire a greater blessing from
heaven. Sure I am it made him excel all the Princes of his time, and drew all
the earth to look upon him as the Gemme of Sovereignty, and the Angel of the
Throne. His Throne of ivory, his gorgeous Temple, his magnificent Palaces, his
house of Millo; his house of Lebanon, Megiddo, Hazor, Gezer, Baalath, Tadmo^ in
the wilderness, his two hundred targets, and three hundred shields of beaten
gold, his royal Navy which brought him home yearly six hundred threescore and
six talents of gold, did not so illustre him, preprince him, and supra. Majesty
him, as his wisdom. His luster was, that God gave Solomon wisdom, and
understanding exceeding much, and a large heart, that was as the sand by the
Seashore, insomuch that his wisdom exceeded the wisdom of all the children
of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt; For he was wiser then any man, then
Ethan the Ezrahite, then Heman, then Chalcol, then Darda the sons of Mahol. 1
Kings 4.29,30,31. So that all the world sought to see Solomon, and hear his
wisdom, which God had put into his heart, and they brought every man his
present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment and armor, and
sweet odours, Horses, and Mules year by year, 1 Kings 10.24,25. Oh! Solomon the
conspicuous, because Solomon the perspicuous! Oh Solomon the wonder, because
Solomon the wise! Solomon the wise to be preferred before Ahasuerus with 127.
Provinces, or Zerah that brought into the field 1000000. fighting men. Solomon
the Miracle of the earth, because the Oracle of his Age, when ye would talk of
a peerlesse, prizelesse Prince let it be of Solomon the wise. To this day he
does carry the palm, and is thought to be the Prince which is Cantari dignus,
worthy to have the highest celebration. What should we say then? Robes and
Crowns may deck Princes, but their (...) their (...), their (...), their
chiefest honor and splendor is their wisdom, here is the Royal Ornament;
for, Who is as the wise man, which can give the interpretation of a thing? this
man's wisdom will make his face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. It is a rare thing when
the Kings heart no man can search out, Prove. 25.2. that he is able by his solid
judgment to encounter with all the Crafts-masters of the Times, and to silence
all these Disputants of State-sophisms; the heavens in height, and the earth in
depth, is not like to the heart of such an intelligent Prince; his progeny may
give him blood royal, but his prudence has given him merit-royal. Worth is
better then Birth, and a Genius then Genealogy, and Prudence then Parentage.
All the balances upon earth cannot take the just weight of a wise Prince, the
stars in the firmament never shone more brightly then a wise Prince;
Carbuncles, Chrysolites, Iaspers, Topazzes are not to be valued to this Orient
Pearl. The Oracle of Oracles could pronounce no greater honor then to a Wise
man; the seven Wise men of Greece how are they famed to this day? Indeed there
is neither Verum nor Bonum without prudence, for that must apprehend Truth in
her propriety, and stir up the appetite to the prosecution and assecution of
goodness; from Prudence does come all legal Justice, and political Order; from
that virtue does proceed both the election and exercise of all good things.
Actus prudentiae est ordinate disponere ad finem. The act of prudence is
ordinately to dispose every thing to the just end. Reason is by nature, but
Prudence above nature, because it is acquisite, and does come by apprehending
of principles. Yea, what is all policy, society, community, but a confused,
indigested heap without Prudence? this is the matrix of Government, and the
Master-wheel of all State-motions. How should men dash against the rocks, if
the Barque of the Commonwealth were not guided by the virtue of this Rudder?
how would Nations be like wild horses, if there were not a Prince that did hold
them in by the bridle of prudence? the Flanders Steeds in the Coach would not
be more dangerous to cast the driver in the box, and the Cabinet Counselor
in the surer Seat to the flat earth, and to leave them sick of their bruises.
How necessary then is prudence in a Prince, for if he be set over the Land, Vt
corpori praesidet anima, aut mundo Deus. Aegid. de regim. principis.
as the soul is over the body, or God is over the world, then how shall he
quicken, and enliven his dominion without prudence? Scientia recte judicare
debet tam been quam potentia punire. Archyt. Pythag. de lege, and justit.
The knowledge of a Prince ought to teach him rightly to judge, as well as his
power justly to punish. Iamb^c. in Ep. ad Dysc. says, that prudence is the
Crown of Government: and Aristot. l. 3. polit. says, that it is the most
essential virtue in a Prince. Vegetius de re militari says, that there is none
that ought to know more, or better things then a Prince, because by his
understanding there does redound a general benefit to the whole Nation. An
injudicious Prince is like gold in the ore, but a wise Prince is like gold
refined; A man of Princely descent, or Royal extraction, does not all the
memorable things in a Nation, but the Man of understanding and knowledge: But
by a Man of understanding and knowledge.

APPLICATION.
1. FIrst this does serve to show, that State-mischiefs are hardly removed,
they stick till there do come a Man of understanding, and knowledge to remedy
them. It is ill to bring transgression into the Land, for the people shall sigh
and groan many years before the Lord will be appeased. Gods anger stirred up to
the height is not only fierce but lasting; they which are separated to evil,
will be strangers a long time before they can renew their acquaintance, and be
reunited to the Lord. The pot of indignation must stand a long time upon the
coals before the scumme will be taken out. If the Lord does break forth upon
his enemies like a breach of waters, 1 Samuel 2.20. what a tedious season will
there be to get this breach stopped? when men's sins have led them into
captivity, it will be no short time that will redeem them, no, they shall look
to return, till their eyes fall out. Deuteronomy. 28.65. When Gods sword is drawn, it
is not so easily sheathed; Oh thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere
thou do cease? turn again into thy scabberd, rest, and be still, how can it
cease, seeing the Lord has given it a charge? Ier. 47.6,7. Extrema extremorum
mala. Extremity of sin brings extremity of punishment. Haec omnia supra te,
Leparge. Lepargus must endure variety of punishments, before he does get quit
of his judgment. Impii bibent impietatis faecem. Wicked men shall drink the
very dregs of their impiety. Who would then incense God to displeasure? no,
Kiss the Son least he be angry, yea but a little, it is no little sorrow
that will come of it, for is Gods anger quickly pacified? no, he will punish
and pinch, and gripe, and smite, and break many a bone, before his revenging
hand will unloosen, and unfasten. Here were a people that sinned, and stirred
up Gods heart to be irefull, but they felt misery enough before their
transgression was expiated; there was Governor after Governor (many Princes)
which vexed, and tormented them, and no remedy to be gotten, till God brought
in a strange Physician, a Man of understanding and knowledge. But by a Man of
understanding and knowledge.

2. Secondly, This does serve to teach you that every high brained man is not a
judicious Man, no, he must be a Man of understanding, and knowledge. Was not
Balaam, that was the Prophet of his Age, acute? was not Achitophel the Oracle
of his times, expert? yes, they might seem to be wise, but they were but
crafty, and subtle; there are many that work wilily, and use the sleights of
men, and yet they are but juglers, and do use but the legerdemane of wit; It is
pity that such impostours should sit down amongst the sages, for then all the
State-Conjurers, an Magical Politicians might go for grave Senators, and the
Pulpit-wizards might be taken for inspired Teachers. But this same black Art be
it in Church or State has but the name of a Science falsely so called. Arist.
l. 6. Ethic. c. 12.
Est vis quaedam quam ingenium vocant, si finis quidem sit honestus, laudanda
est, sin malus calliditas est nominanda. There is a faculty which men do call
wit, if the end of it be good, it is to be praised, but if the end be evil it
is to be called craftiness. Petrarch. dial. 7.
Ingenium bonis artibus applicabile, tantum est pretiosa supellex. Wit
applicable to good Arts is only the precious household stuff. Id ibid.
Ingenium est excellens, sed magnum refert in quo genere excellit; malo enim
bonum ingenium quam excellens. Wit is excellent, but then it is of great
consequence to consider in what kind it does excel; I had rather (says
Petrarch) have a good wit, then an excellent wit. For if the wit be disordered,
it may be said, as it was of Galba, that Ingenium male habitat, there is a good
wit in a bad skull, or as Crispus said of Catiline, magna vi animi fuisse, sed
ingenio pravo, there was a quick apprehension, but a bad wit. Who had a more
seeming wit then Simon Magus, then the great Heretic Basilides? then Julian
the Apostate? then Dionysius the Tyrant? then Nero the Prodigy of Nature?
Those then which are cried up for the great Wits, are not always the true
Wits, for then ye might have all the crafty Merchants, smooth tongued
Sycophants, Lucre-skilled Projectours, Artificial State-Fiendes go for Wits;
these can reason though without reason and use Arguments though but figments,
and roar out loud motions, though but crude notions. Sinon had a brain, Davus
wanted not a tongue, Herod was a Fox, and the Devil himself is a subtle
serpent; but be jealous of such heads, beware of such wits. Petrarch. dial. 7.
de ingenio.
From an Aspe there does come nothing but poison, magni errores ex Magnis
ingeniis prodiere. Great errors have had such great Wits for their Authors.
These are the greatest Alchymists in States, the Mimicks in Commonwealths, the
Perdues, Decoyes, Implanatours, Veteratours, Larv's, Lemures, Suborners,
Supplanters, Dive-doppers, Hiaenaes, Vulpones, Trapanners that can appear upon
earth. There are no upright intentions, nor sincere drifts in any of their
designs, which work all by stales, and ensnare by ginnes, their chief art does
lie in ambushments, and Stratagems; Is Saul amongst the Prophets? are these
wily heads amongst the wits? Our conservatours thus wrought our consumption,
our many Princes skinned us with such a wit. Therefore it is not the head, but
the heart, not the brain, but the breast, not the conception, but the
conscience that must give the true test to wisdom. The judicious man is not
he, which is a man of policy, and contrivance, which can speak elegantly, and
flourish Oratorically, but the man skilled in fundamental truths, versed in
solid, and just principles, the man of understanding, and knowledge. But by a
man of understanding, and knowledge.

3. Thirdly, This does show, that a prudent Prince is the happiness of the
Nation. Our many Princes with their state-tricks ruined us, it must be a man of
understanding, and knowledge, which must repair us; there is nothing but the
weapon-salve of such a man's judgment, which must heal this wound, and the
rare skill of such a prime Physician which must cure this half dead State. A
divine sentence is in the lips of the King, Prove. 10.16. that is, of such a
King, that has his lips replenished with this understanding, and knowledge. He
does speak like a celestial spirit to men afflicted, and oppressed, he has
none of the Maxims of the old Machivillians, but is experienced in a more
heavenly Art, A divine sentence is in the lips of the King. A divine sentence,
which will make all his people ravished to hear his adages of liberties, and
Laconismes of privileges. Hearken says such a King, I come to ease you of
your heavy burdens, to release you from your insupportable servitude; ye whose
bellies did cleave to the ground, stand upon your feet, ye which did run into
corners return to your own thresholds; ye which were threshed with instruments
of iron, see these flayles cast away; ye which felt the fists of wickedness
smiting upon your cheeks; see your buffeters hiding their heads; ye which were
giving over your Trades, open your shop doors; ye which could not serve God
freely, behold the old Orthodoxe Teachers fixed in Cures. Mourners wipe your
watery eyes, despairers comfort your fainting hearts; I come (says that King)
with a general peace in my lips, I bring prosperity in my hands, I will seek up
the oppressed; I will go forth to meet the banished; I have a Court to
entertain such; I have an Exchequer to sustain such; let all forget their
former sorrows, I present them with comforts; let them not think on their
Tyrants, let them look upon the face of their gracious Sovereign; I would send
Tabrets into all my Dominions, I desire to make my whole Land sing; go forth
therefore in the dance amongst them which make merry, shout upon your shores,
that they beyond Sea may hear your melody: ye have seen your King, see an end
of all misery; ye have heard your King, he wishes that he had a voice loud
enough to convey joy into all your ears, and hearts; he would not have you to
fear his presence, for he does stretch out a golden Scepter; he would have you
to come nigh to him, for he would touch you, and cure you of the Kings evil;
trust me says he, I intend to be your Foster-father; believe me, says he, I
purpose to be your Physician: this is the reviving voice of a Natural Prince,
thus speaks the Rational Governor, this is the salutation of the Man of
understanding and knowledge; A divine sentence is in the lips of the King; who
then would not have a wise King? yes, a wise King is next unto a bright
Seraphim; he does dazzle all with his presence, and does set all in an ecstasy
wheresoever his radiant splendor is seen: Suidas. Joseph. Cuspin. Xiphil.
Cuspin.
No marvel therefore that wise Kings have been in all places desired, and
honored wheresoever they were enjoyed. Mercurius Trismegistus the King of
Egypt, had the surname of Thrice the Great for his singular wisdom, Argus the
King of Peloponnesus, was styled PANOPTS, ALL-SEEING for his admirable
learning. Lud. vives Ioh. Curaeus in annal. siles.
Periander King of Corinth (or as some say of Ambracia) was so wise; that he
was reckoned amongst the seven wise men of Greece. Iuba the King of Mauritania
was more memorable for his wisdom, then his Kingdom. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus
being the Scholar of Straton excelled in all literature. Trajan was no less
admired for his learning, then his virtue. M. Antoninus for his rare insight
into all Arts was called the Philosopher. Numerianus for his excellent
knowledge had a Statue erected to his honor in the Vlpian Library. Theodosius
the elder, was the best and most Learned Emperor, and he ought to be set forth
as an Idea to all good Princes. Mattheus King of Hungary, was a Library
himself, and built a most sumptuous Library. How were these wise Princes
celebrated, and their endowments as well as their Governments reverenced? how
did they bless their people whilst they were living? and their people bless
them when they were dead? their memories were more enbalmed then their bodies,
and they were shrined more in the hearts of their people, then in their
Sepulchers; their names were honored, and their ashes were precious; their
wisdom left so many Charters of infranchisements and liberties, that such
Princely Donours could not be forgotten; After-ages still cry to them; and weep
at the thought of them, saying, these were the Princes which set up Monuments
before their departure, and wrote out their own Epitaphs in the breasts of their
people with a pen of never-dying fame. Oh how were their Kingdoms then
Triumphal Arches, and Theaters of wonder! their people smiled in one another
faces, their whole land was a Banqueting House, they had the table of Alcinous,
and the talents of Pelops amongst them; their own Nation was in a trance for
their felicity, and all Nations admired their flourishing State. Oh honor to
such prudent Governors! echoes of praise, and veneration to such wise
Princes! So then the darling of people, the glee of Nations is an expert, and
judicious Ruler, the man of understanding, and knowledge. But by a man of
understanding and knowledge. But how should a Prince be a Man of understanding?
how a Man of knowledge? He must be a Man of understanding in heavenly things,
and he must be a Man of knowledge in temporal things.

First, he must be a Man of Understanding in Heavenly things. For what has a
Prince more to look after, then Religion? Is not the Scripture the Volume,
which he must be continually perusing? yes, When the King shall sit upon the
Throne of his Kingdom, then this Law shall be written out for him by the
Priests, and he shall read therein, and it shall be with him, that he may learn
to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the Words of this Law; and the
Ordinances for to do them. Deuteronomy. xvii. 18,19. A miserable thing it is, when a
King does become neglective of his God, and makes Religion but a mere
formality, and superflui^y. Profane to this Day is H^stilius for saying, he
could not endure to be much addicted to ceremonies, and sacrifices: and
Chae^ps, King of Egypt, who locked up all Temples, that there might be no
Prayers, nor Oblations. Is there any King in Scripture mentioned with Honor,
who was not religious? no, there the Glorious Prince is the Pious Prince. As a
King is next unto God, so he should maintain most familiarity with him; as he
does take his Crown out of God's Hand, so he should wear it for his Glory, as
he is the Lord's Anointed, so his conscience should be most s^ppled with his
fear, and service. If Religion were lost in the whole Nation, the King's breast
should be the Treasury, where it should be preserved. Princes, I confess, may
have their Royalty. Superiority must have some pomp attending upon it, a Prince
was never ordained to be an Anch^rite, but their chiefest Majesty should be to
Glorify their Maker. A Prince is never more mighty, then when he is Bowing in a
Temple, nor more Glorious, then when he is sacrificing at the Altar, nor more
Triumphant, then when he is highest in his Spiritual solemnities; the hearing
all his Judges, and Honorable Counselors, is not like to the lending his
ears to his Prophets, and Messengers, which speak out of the mouth of God. Let
the Throne then be Burnished with Piety, and let tha^ carry a sulg^ur through
the whole Kingdom, let the Sun shine, and let all the Stars participate of his
Brightness. Oh! it is a rare thing to see the Baslick Vein run with the best
Blood, and the sweetest Fruit to hang upon the top-Brarch. A King, which is
true to his God, is the man of understanding. But how should a Prince declare
himself to be a man of Understanding concerning Heavenly things?

First, in preserving a pure Faith. For if Kings ought to be Nursing Fathers to
the Church, Es. xlvii, 22. then what ought they to cherish more in their
Nation, then the s^ncere Faith? How memorable was that of Asah, he that
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do according to
the Law, and the Commandment; 2 Chronicles. xiiii. 4. And of Jehosaphat, that he
walked in the first ways of his Father David, and sought not Baalim, but sought
the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked in his Commandments, and not according
to the trade of Israel; 2 Chronicles. xvii. 3,4. And of Josiah, that he stood by the
Pillar, and made a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord to keep his
Commandments, Testimonies, and Statutes, and that he caused all, that were in
Jerusalem, and Benjamin to stand to it; 2 Chronicles xxiiii. 31,32. Constantine the
great, Justinian the great, Theodosius the first, Justin the first, Marcian,
Valentinian, how have they for this eternised their names? How ought every good
Prince to be as careful of Religion, as his Crown-land? and of the purity of
the Faith, as his Royal Prerogative? for with what joy can he Reign, if Satan
does set up his Throne in his Kingdom? how can he look up to Heaven with
comfort, if his God be blasphemed? Shall God promote him, and shall not he
promote the Gospel? Shall God preserve him, and shall not he preserve the
Truth? Yes, it is the Obligation of his high Office, the homage, that he owes
to his Lord in chief; God for this has made him his Deputy, God for this has
given him a Crown. If he be a Shepherd, he must take heed, that the Wolf does
not break into his Flock; if he be a Physician, he must beware, that this
Gangren does not Spread. He is never surer of God's target, then when he does
protect sound Doctrine; nor has a greater confidence in his people, then when
they are knit to him in Religion. To what end is his Scepter, if Seducers, and
False-Teachers may have liberty to vent their wares, and have a free Mart in
his Nation? No, the pure God, and the pure Angels, the holy Scriptures, and the
holy Church, the Blood of Christ, and the Blood of Martyrs, his own Peace, and
Honor, Oath, and account do require otherwise at his hands. Religion then is
high, and Flourishes in the Nation, when a King beholds the Cross s^anding
above his Crown, and does make Religion his main charge.

Secondly, in preserving pure Worship. For God is as strict about his service,
as about his belief. Worship is oftentimes the trial of Faith; no^ only the
true God must be acknowledged, but the Golden Calves, or Groves, must be
avoided: yea God is angry not only with gross Idolatry, as in pleading for
Baal, offering the seed to M^lech, weeping for Tam^z, or in having the Star of
R^mpham se^, but with a little leven in worship, a little strange Fire. For
whereas adoration is Recognitio dominii; Aquin.
the recognition, or acknowledgment of God's Deity, and Dominion, God will not
be doubled with in a thing, that is so high, so nigh, so Solemn, so Sacred, so
material, and mysterious. Next to he^ reed of the Nation, the King had need to
look to the Liturgy of his Nation; next to a stained Doctrine he had need look
to a spotted Sacrifice; next to a b^d Opinion, he had need look to a bad (...).
God is so precise in the mat^er of Worship, that he does look ^o ^he very
Bread, lest it should be unclean; and to the very Bea^, (...) whether it be not
sick, or lame; and to the very (...) in the vessels, whether it be not
abominable, and to the very Place where Incense is offered, and to the very
gestures in Worship, whether they did not stand with their backs toward the
Temple, Ezech. 8.16.
and with their faces toward the East, yea to their very lips, whether they did
not bestow a Kiss upon a wrong Lover, Hos. xiii. 8. Yea, to their new
Consecrated meetings, for Israel has forgoten his Maker, and builds Temples.
Hos. viii. 14. If every one might serve God in his own way (out of pretense of
tenderness of Conscience) what were this but the true Will Worship, and shall
we have Will Worship to affront God's pure Worship? it may go under the name of
Sanctity, but I doubt it is but Sorcery. The Connibenses, and Tentiritae which
maintained two manner of worships in Egypt, what woeful divisions did they
make? S^bellic. l. 5. c. 1.
Philip could not endure the Phocenses to bring in a new worship into Greece,
which was not established in the Country, and thereupon forced them by arms to
Relinquish their vanities, which was called Bellum sacrum, the Holy war, Diod.
Sic^ ^.
and thereby, says the History, got his greatest Honor. The Egyptians, which
were wont to Worship their Gods only with Prayers, and Frankincense: how did
they hate them, which would bring in amongst them the Offering of blood? And
would not endure for a long time that the Temples of Saturu, and Serapis (which
were so Worshipped) should be Built within any of their walls? Macrob. Satur.
l. 5.
How did M. Aemilius Destroy all those Books, which would teach the People a
new art of Sacrificing. Livy. l. iii. c. 5. Yea, Suetonius says, that Augustus
Caesar, fearing that the ancient Worship should be corrupted, burnt two
thousand of such kind of prophesying, and sacrificing books at one time.
Joseph. l. 2. c. Apion.
The Scy^hians destroyed Anacharsis (the wisest man of the times) only because
he made a show to bring in his Grecian Worship among them. If Heathens then
have been so rigorous concerning the worship of their false Gods, ought not
Christians to be as strict that the worship of the true God might not be
violated? The Prince therefore is not only to take care that God be
Worshipped, but to mark how he is worshipped, least people Worship they know
not what, and the Altar of Jealousy be set up in the Nation. Man is a very
conceited Creature, and not a greater Phanatique in any thing, then in God's
worship If people were left to their own Hallowings, then as it was once said,
According to the number of their Cities were the number of their Gods, so might
be now said, According to the number of their Congregations; would be the
number of their Consecrations; yea, there would be as many new worships in the
Land, as there are new fashions. Therefore the King had need to bound the
unlimited Devotions of People, that there may be primitive Rites as well as
Primitive Doctrines. For in a settled Church what more unseemly then wandering
Devotions, and floating worships? How has it been solemnly, anciently Decreed,
that no forms of Prayer should be brought into the Church, but those which were
approved by a public Synod? The incense of the Sanctuary, that it might be
sweet, and acceptable, ought to have nothing mixed in it, but the prescribed
sweet odours. How shall we glorify God with one mind and one mouth, if there
should be amongst us almost as many minds, as mouths? This would be next to the
confusion of Babel. Therefore herein the Prince for the peace of profession,
and the Unity of the Church, ought not only to permit a Worship, which may be
seemingly devout, but unquestionably lawful; yea, in this a Prince is to
declare his Zeal, and Understanding.

Thirdly, in preserving a pure Ministry. For if the Jews put many from their
Priesthood, because they could not prove their Genealogies, Nehem. vii. ^4.
Then doubtless there must be a true calling, as well as true Doctrine; Metuo,
non statuo.
where there is not a true Ministry, I know not what lawful preaching, or
lawful Sacraments there can be. Here has been a strange kind of Ministry in
these days, we have had gifted men for Ordained men, or they have begotten a
Ministry, which were but to exercise a Ministry. Can Presbytery of it self
ordain Ministers? it seems that it can, for Timothy was made a Minister by
the laying on the hands of the Presbytery. 1 Timothy iiii. 14. but doubtless this
only weapon does draw Blood from them, that dr^w it forth; for if Saint Pa^
made Timothy a Minister, 2. Tim. i. 6. what need the Presbytery reordaine him?
or if the Presbytery had made Timothy a Minister, what need St. Paul use any
imposition of hands? Was it ever heard, that a man was begotten twice? that
this sacred Order was doubled? I confess where the ordaining has been held
insufficient, because the Party giving Orders might be some grand Schismatic,
or Heretic, this might be practiced (as in the Presbyters made by Miletius,
the Council of Nice decreed, that they should have a more Sacred imposition of
hands, Socrat. l. ^. c. 9.) but not otherwise; besides it is conceived that
Timothy in that place was not made a Minister, but a Bishop, and so not Elders,
but Bishops laid their hands upon him to consecrate him. (...). Chrysostom. hom.
13. in 1. ad Tim. c. 4 Amb. upon the 1 Timothy c. 3. Neque fas erat, neque
licebat, ut inferior ordinaret majorem. Theodoret. in Cor. Presbyterium hic
vocat eos, qui Apostolicam gra^am acceperunt.
S. Chrysostom does clearly so expound it, saying, Elders laid not their hands
on a Bishop: and others conceived, that the Presbytery laid no hands there upon
Timothy, but the meaning is; that Timothy should not neglect the gift, that was
bestowed upon him by laying on of hands, to the ^aithful exercising of the
office of Presbytery. That this is the sense not only of Primasius, Saint
Jerome, Haymo, and Lyra upon the Place do testify; but Calvin himself does
concur with them in opinion, and speaks that not the College of the
Presbytery, but Timothie's function is there meant: others conceive, that by
Presbytery is there meant Prophecy, that is, that Timothy should look narrowly
to that office, which he received by the laying on of the hands of the
Prophets, for Prophecy in those days was frequent, and as Timothy had a
Prophecy went of him, that he should fight a good fight, 1 Timothy i. 18. and a
prophecy, that forbad him to Preach with Saint Paul the Gospel in Asia, Acts
xvi. so by the laying on of the hands of Prophets he might at first be called
to the Ministry: so Primasius, Oecumenius upon the place say expressly, and
say not only, that he was called to the Ministry by the Prophets, but that he
himself was a Prophet. For the thing it self Theod^ret in Tim. ^. ^. is clear
that Timothy received that order by Divine Revelation, and Saint Chrysostom,
Hom. 5. in 1 Timothy c. 1. says, that as the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Paul,
and Barnabas, so was Timothy chosen: yea, he says it was a common custom, or
rather a general Blessing, that in the infancy of the Church the Prophets named
what Ministers should be chose^ Tunc quia ni^il fi^bat humanum, Sacerdotes ex
Prophetia veni^bant. Quid ^st ^x Proph^ia? ex Spiritu Sancto. And Eusebius, (
l. 3. c. 23.) s^i^h, ba^a^ n^ John at Ephesus and thereabout made many
Ministers so, somewhere supplying the Clergy with such as the ^pi^it m^d,
^drawing lots for such as the Spirit signified. Seeing (...) so many
Expositions are given of this intricate Place, and that by ^he (...) learned
which ever wrote, Presbytery (which in these days is asserted) can scarce find
in Scripture a root from whence it should branch. No as the lay- Presbyter from
1 Timothy v. 17. may say, I was never here grafted, so the Spiritual Presbyter
from the 1. Tim. iiii. 14. may say, I was never here planted; yea they may be
fellow-Mourners, and sob together saying, We, that would have all things
attested by Scripture, have not a clear Scripture, either for the one's Binding
of hands, or for the other's laying on of hands; for these only places are
nonely places, neither pregnant, nor perspicuous; But to leave the Lay-
Presbyter, as one saluted by the way, and to talk a little more freely to the
Spiritual Presbyter, as the person, to whom this conference is intended. Can
Presbytery of it self create a Ministry? Scripture does not affirm it, will
Antiquity avouch it? I doubt not, or without doubt it will nor, Epiphanius
says, that Aerius the Arian was the first, which gave Presbyters power to
ordain Ministers: but says he, this cannot be; for the order of Bishops does
beget Fathers to the Church, but Presbyters do but only beget Chidren by the
laver of regeneration, and not Fathers, or Doctors: Episcoporum enim ordo
Patres generat Ecclesiae, Presbyterorum vero, non potens generare patres, per
lava^cri regenerationem generat filios Ecclesiae, non tamen Patres, aut
Doctores* Et quomodo pos^ibile erat Presbyterum constituere non habentem manuum
impositionem aequalem Episcopo? Epiphan. Haer. 75.
how is it then possible that a Presbyter, which has not the power of
imposition of hands, should be equal to a Bishop. Oecumenius in c. 5.1. ad Tim.
says, that where Saint Paul commands Timothy to lay hands rashly on no man,
he treats of imposing hands, because he wrote to a Bishop, as if it were
peculiar to him. Saint Chrysostom says, that only in laying on hands Bishops
go beyond Presbyters, and have that only thingmore, then the Presbyter.
Chrysostom. Hom. in c. v. 1. ad Tim. Saint Jerome says the self same in his
Epistle to Evagrius. The Council of Antioch says, that the Bishop shall have
power within his own Diocese to ordain Presbyters, and Deacons C. Antioch can.
2. The Council of Nice says the Ministers of the Paulianists must receive
imposition of hands from the Bishop of the Catholic Church. C. Nicen. c. 19.
And is there not reason for this, when Bishops are the direct Successors of
Apostles? for if Christ said, that I will be with you to the end of the World,
Matthew xxviii. 20. the Apostles being dead, where is Christ's perpetual
Providence, if there be not a perpetual succession? the Ministry in General
cannot prove this, for the Apostle's were superior to the seventy Disciples,
so there must be some (to represent the Apostles) which must be superior to
other Ministers; and that the Bishops are those persons, it may appear, because
they have often the honorable title of Apostles; James the Bishop of Jerusalem
(who was not James the son of Zebedee, for he was one of the twelve Apostles,
but James the Just, who is usually called the brother of the Lord) being no
immediate Apostle, but a Bishop: Com. in Es.
for his very office sake is called an Apostle, 1 Gal. xix. and by Saint Jerome
called the thirteenth Apostle; Theodor. in 1 Timothy 3.1
Theodoret does call Timothy the Bishop of Ephesus an Apostle. Ruffin. de
adult. lib. Orig.
Clemens is said by Ruffin to be almost an Apostle, and by Clemens Alexandrinus
he is expressly called Clement the Apostle. Ignatius by Saint Chrysostom. encom.
Ignat. is styled both Bishop, and Apostle. Rab. Ms. in Tim 4.
Rabanus Maurus says, that Bishops ruled whole Provinces, being call Apostles.
Theodor. in 1 Timothy 3.
And Theodoret says, that those which they now call Bishops, they did formerly
name, Apostles. I know it is Objected, that the Apostolical Order, being
extroardinary, it is not perpetual, but that is not so; for the calling of
Aaron was extraordinary at first, yet it was perpetuated in the succession, so
likewise the calling of the Apostles; for though it be not perpetual, in
respect of that, which was extraordinary, as the gift of tongues, healing, and
discerning of Spirits, yet it is in respect of the ordinary offices, else I
cannot see how any Minister could at this day Preach, or administer the
Sacraments. For as inferior Ministers do derive from the Apostles the use of
Preaching, and Sacraments, so do Bishops both these, and Jurisdiction, and the
power of Discipline. But it will be said, that a Presbyter, and a Bishop in
Scripture is all one, and so a Presbyter has as much power in the Church, both
for ordaining, and exterior regiment, as the best Bishop. -- parcius istis. --
Credat Judaeus Apella. If it were so, I am but a Presbyter, and no Bishop, and
would feign be at work; next to the creating of a race of Penitents, I would be
creating a race of Preachers; and next to wrestling with Principalities, and
Powers, would be delivering up men to Satan; I do not know but my heart might
be as Ambitious, and my hands as Pragmatical, and my tongue as Devouring, as
any others; but I read, that we must not stretch our selves beyond our line,
nor be many Masters, lest we receive the greater condemnation. James iii. 1.
The Lord will be sanctified in them, that come near Him, Levit. x. 3. No man
must take this Office upon him, but he that was called as Aaron was. Heb. v. 4.
I find no calling for these things, therefore I have no comfort in them, nor
courage toward them. Pride is odious in a Layman, it is execrable in a
Clergyman; all men must keep themselves within their bounds, and shall we
range beyond our limits? No, Nadab and Abihu paid dearly for their strange
fire, and so may we for our new blazes in our Censours, I tremble as much to
thrust my hands (in the degree that I am in) into mount Aetna, as to impose
hands by mine own power to make a Minister; and to cut of the neck of a man, as
to excommunicate. Are a Presbyter, and a Bishop all one? then we shall have ere
long a Servant, and a Master, a Subject, and a Prince all one. These have been
equiparating, modelling times, parity has been a Paramour, or the Paragon
which many have been Enamoured with; but if a Church should be ut acies
ordinata, as an Army with Banners: then the Commanders, and the gregarii
milites, should not be all one. No, a Bishop has an high Superiority over a
Presbyter: for he has power to take an accusation against an Elder, and to
stop the mouths of Gainsayers, and, if men persist in Errors, that raze
Fundamental truths, to reject them, as Heretics; is this no Superiority? And
if this be the Text, do not all An^iquity give this Commentary upon it? Yes,
they prefer the Bishop far beyond the Presbyter.

Jerome himself says, Hieron. adv. Lucif.
that Salus Ecclesiae pendet, The safety of the Church does depend on the
dignity of the Chief-Priest, to whom except there be given a Power without any
equal, and eminent above all, there will be as many Schisms in the Church, as
there be Priests. And upon 44 Psalm. he says, Bishops are thy Fathers, by whom
thou art to be ruled, Cui si non exor^, and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas,
tot schismata, quot sacerdotes. Hieron, ad Nepot.
and he advised his Dear Nepotian, that he should be subject to his Bishop, as
the Father of his Soul. To Evagrius he says, Quod Aaron, and filii ejus, and
Levitae, That which Aaron, and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple,
the same are the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, in the Church. And speaking
to Riparius concerning Vigilantius, I wonder, says he, that the Bishop, in
whose Charge he is reported to be a Presbyter, does not Break that unprofitable
vessel with the Apostolical Rod. And writing to Marcella against Motannus he
says, Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent. Hiero. ad Euagr.
With us Bishops hold the place of the Apostles. Hieron ad Riar, Adv. Vigil.
And, writing to Pammachius concerning the Errors of John of Jerusalem, who
amongst other things held, that there was no difference betwixt a Bishop, and a
Presbyter, he says, Hoc satis imperite: in portu, ut dicitur, naufragium est.
This is unskilfully enough spoken, and Shipwreck (as it is said) is committed
in the haven. And if the Chief Patron of Presbyters (as he is accounted) does
speak thus lowdly against them, in what a lo^y accent will the rest of the
Fathers express themselves. Ignatius says, Ignat ad Trall.
What is a Bishop, but one that has Power over all, as much as it is possible
for a man to have. It were infinite to relate what he says to this purpose in
his Epistles to the Magnesians, Antiochians, Smyrneans, and Philadelphians. St.
Augustine says, Aug. De civit. Dei. l. 20. c. 9.
that the seats of the Rulers, and the Rulers themselves are understood, by
whom the Church is now Governed. Optatus says, Optat. Cont. Parmen. l. 2.
that he is a Schismatic, and a sinner, that against one Chair does erect
another. Irenaeus says, Iren. l. 4. Haer. 63.
That Bishops are those, to whom the Apostles delivered the Church, which is in
every place. Tertullian says, Tert. de praesc.
that the Chairs of the Apostles are still preserved in the Succession of
Bishops. Ambrose says, A^b l. 2. offic. c. 24.
that if any Obey not his Bishop, he does swerve from the right way through
Pride. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Act. Apost.
that, though we be all Brethren, yet amongst Brethren it is lawful, ut unus
praescribat, and caeteri obtemperent, that one should prescribe, and the rest
should obey. Some of the Presbyters (says Cyprian) Cyp. l. 3. ep. 14.
neither remembering the Gospel, nor their Place, nor the Judgment of the Lord
to come, nor the Bishop, that is set over them, with Contempt, and reproach of
their Ruler, take upon them to do any thing. Thus speak the Fathers, and do not
the Councels agree with them? Yes, for Ordination they leave it wholly in the
Bishop's Hands. The Council of Nice says, Council. Nic. can. 19.
Let Ministers receive Imposition of Hands from the Bishops of the Catholic
Church. The Council of Antioch says, Council. Antioch. can. 9.
that every Bishop shall have power in his Diocese to Ordain Priests, and
Deacons. Yea by the Council of Ancyra it was Decreed, Council. Ancy^ can. 13.
that it should not be lawful for Rural Bishops to Ordain Presbyters, or
Deacons. Yea, to sum up all, the whole Government of the Church was so limited
to the Bishop, that, by the Command of the Council of Laodicea, Council. Laod.
can. 39.
the Presbyters must do nothing without the liking of the Bishop. And by the
first Council of Arles Council. Arelat.
(as ancient as Constantine) the Presbyters must do nothing without the
Conscience, Consent, or Privity of the Bishop. Where then are those Presbyters,
Epiph. haer, 69.
that without Bishops, against Bishops, and as Bishops, will take upon them to
Ordain Ministers? Coluthus, as Epiphanius says, did so. And Hosius, Athenas.
apol. 2. in lit. Presb* Marit.
in a General Council caused all such Spurious Presbyters to be pronounced
Illegitimate. And to return to their former State; Maximus did the like, and
the Council of Constantinople was so offended at the Disorder, Council.
Constant. 1. ca. 4^
that it frustrated all that he had done: all his Presbyters being brought down
to the State of Laymen; and made him for ever incapable to be a Bishop. A poor
old Bishop, making Presbyters, because he did but lay his hands upon them, and
not pronounce the Consecration, but caused a Presbyter, standing by, to utter
it, the Council of Sevil sharply reproved the Bishop for it, and, if the
Presbyter had been living, they would have severely Punished him, howsoever
they styled his Action a Bold presumption: and those, which had been so
Ordained, they rejected with a monument of Reproach; decreing, that they should
have no Title of Consecration, but be brought down from the Sac er dotal Order.

And where are those Presbyters, that dare Excommunicate? Is not this to usurp
the Bishop's Pastoral-staff? Is not this to wring the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven out of their hands? Have they any right in this high Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction? St Chrysostom says, No. Dic Ecclesiae Praesulibus scil^ et
Praesidentibu^ Chrysostom. 61. hom. in 28. Matt.
For tell it to the Church, that is, to the Rulers, and Governors of the
Church. And He says, that the vincula indissolubilia, The indissoluble bonds,
are in their hands. Origin says, Orig. Tract. 1^ in Matt.
that they, which do Challenge the place of Bishops, and have Received the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, have power in Binding, and Loosing. Saint Augustine
says, Aug. l. 50. hom^ hom. 50. ca. 11.
Let such an one come to the Presidents, by whom the Keys are Ministered in the
Church. The third Council of Carthage says, Council. Cartha. 3. Can. 31.
that the times of Repentance should be appointed by the Discretion of the
Bishops unto Penitents. The Council of Antioch says, Council. Anitoch Can. 6.
that Laymen, Presbyters, and Deacons, were to be excommunicated by their own
Bishop, and, he sentencing them, none had power to restore them without his
leave. Exuperantius being excommunicated by Triferius his Bishop, the Council
of Taurine, Council Taurinen. Can. 4.
in the 400. year, approved of the Fact, and would not allow of any of his
Favorers to Release him from the Sentence, till the Bishop was satisfied. Oh!
then, if men have any Fear of God, Honor to Primitive Institution, reverence
to Antiquity, how can they turn such an Ancient House holder out of Doors?
especially, when they know, that so little of the Episcopal Function does
belong to them, that, according to the Constitutions of the Church, they can
neither Baptize, Preach, nor Admniister the Lord's Supper in the presence of
the Bishop, nor out of his presence without his leave, and license, as the
Council of Carthage,Possidonius, Jerome, and Tertullian do manifestly affirm?
Council. Carth. 2. Can 9. Possidon. de vita Aug. Heron. adv, Luciferum Tertull.
de Baptis.
I know they have some sayings out of Ignatius, Cyprian, Ambrose, and
Augustine, to Countenance this Opinion, but with what Conscience can they,
alledg these things, when they know, that not only the Writings of those
Authors do, without any other Confutation: give plenary Satisfaction to all
the Doubts; but their own Practice is a Convincing Argument against all
Opposition, for were they not Bishops themselves, and Exercised Episcopal
jurisdiction, with all imaginable Authority, that a Bishop with us can be
invested withal? If all this will not Pacify the Contention; yet the Judgment
of our Fellow Protestants beyond the Seas might remove all Scruples. For not
only our own Martyrs did set up Episcopacy within the Land; but the most
judicious, and Conscientious Divines in Foreign parts, which have professed our
Reformed Religion, have asserted Episcopacy, as the only Lawful Government.
Melancthon, in his History of the Ausburge Confession says, That He endured
the height of Hatred for bringing in Episcopal Government, and, though he did
nothing but by the advice, and consent of Luther, yet Ia^ranus, and many
others, possessed the People, that he had built up again the Popish
jurisdiction: But (says he) against all Envy, I will speak what I think, which
is this, that I am so fully confirmed concerning the lawfulness of the
Government; that would to God, I could settle not only the Power, but the
Administration of Bishops: for I see what manner of Church we shall have
without it, even Ecclesiastical Polity wholly dissolved; yea, I see that, if
this be not Established, there will come a more intolerable Tyranny amongst us,
then ever was Exercised by the Papists. Hemingius in Synag. says, that the
Reformed Churchs after the Popish Darkness was dispelled, after the example of
the purest times retained Bishops, Doctors, and Pastors. Chytraeus, in his
History of the Ausburge Confession, says, that Bishops, may very easily retain
the lawful Obedience, which is due to them, Bucer, in his Book Of the force and
use of the Ministry, says, that these Orders are perpetual in Churches, and
are appointed by the Holy Ghost, viz Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, and,
that there might be no Tyranny used, Metropolitanes are set over them both
rightly, and zeal^ously. Heerbrand, in his Compendium of Divinity, propounds
a Question, Whether there ought to be Degrees in the Ministry? Yes, says he,
for God himself has made, and constituted, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons,
and I find St. Paul mentioning them, and amongst these it is necessary, that
some should be Superiors to others, lest there do come Anarchy into the
Church. Homberger, in his Book of Christian Doctrine, does answer the like
Question, Whether there ought to be Degrees amongst Ministers immediately
called? And he says, there may: and does put a great difference betwixt a
Bishop, and a Presbyter, Hailbronner, in his Commen-places, says, that there
ought to be Bishops, and they are not to have only Teaching with others, but
an Office of Inspection, and Government, to prefer fit Ministers to Cures, and
to take Accusations against Presbyters, and to decide the Quarrels. The like
Expressions I could bring out of Camerarius, Hunnius, Bullinger, Peter Martyr,
Zanchy, Deodate, Primrose, and many others, which have had the Fame to be the
most eminent Protestants, which ever the Reformed Church was adorned with; but
what need I urge particular men, when all the Prime Protestants, of Germany,
meeting together, Published a Book, which they call The Unity of the Church,
wherein they witness, that, to take away Schisms, there must be a profitable
Order, that out of many Presbyters a Bishop should be Chosen, which might Rule
the Church. Yea, Archbishops they say are needful (if they will do their Duty)
to call Synods, and punish usury, scandals, and divisions. And they wish, in
their Articles of the Colloquy; that for the Benefit of the Church, some would
take upon them this Difficult, and necessary calling of Episcopacy. And this is
not only their Opinion, but their Practice, for they have erected Bishops in
their Super-Intendents, and Archbishops in their General Super-Intendents. The
Bishop now might be set up with Jurisdiction, and Benediction; yea, Rule, and
Shine, if one dark Fog could be removed: and that is, whether Foreign Churches,
which do exercise another Government, may not ly liable to Censure. I will not
Censure, I cannot justify; I rather lament, then traduce. I have a great deal
of Compassion in me; but I would be Loath to have any compliance: for I find,
that some men to make other Churches chaste, have made their own a Prostitute;
and I think, that this is neither Justice, Affection, Moderation, or Sincerity.
Let every man, according to Conscience, clear Scripture, General practice,
Protestant Usages, his own Subscription, and his own Oaths, pass sentence: and
if there be any Discretion, Religion, Rules for just Judgment in these
passages, I partly conceive what the result, and votes must be. It is an heavy
thing to change piety into popularity, and sanctity into partiality, there is a
guilty Patience, as well as a sinful Passion. There is but one truth, and
Christ has but one Government upon his shoulder: Levit. 10.16.17.18.19.20
an Angel from Heaven can no more set up a new Government, then a new Creation.

After Nadab, and Abihu's death, there had like to have been another Funeral;
for Moses was even ready to have executed severe Judgment upon Eleazer, and
Ithamar, for not eating the Goat, the Sin-offering, where God had commanded,
and for not bringing the Blood into the Holy-place: and Aaron, though he
pleaded hard, and Moses connived at the Trespass, yet by Divines it is
concluded, that Moses was too Humane in the relaxation. Some Judicious
Expositours think there was too much natural infirmity in Aaron, and too much
condescension in Moses, to pass by the aberration. It is left as no precedent
for them, that sin pervicaciously. It is a dangerous thing to innovate any
thing in Church-rites. That, which is Apostolical, is Apophthegmatical, and
ought to be taken up as Valueable, and immutable. If the Church be Built upon
the Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, then I can Pronounce nothings
well grounselled, which do want their Fundamental Institution. A Foreign Church
may have something, that pertains to the building, but I doubt there is
something defective; therefore I must say, as it is in Ca^ viii. 9. If she be a
Wall, we will build upon her a silver Palace; and if she be a Door, we will
keep her in with boards of Cedar: but 'till I find in her a Wall, and a Door,
I can bestow no great cost upon her to enrich her, or adorn her. Miriam may
have breath in her: but, if she be stricken with a sore Leprosy, she is
half-dead whiles she lives. Sic ego sentio, si alii non consintant,
unusquisque abundet sensu suo.
I do not say, but that there are rare parts, and singular endowments there:
but I cannot call any thing perfect without a just calling. I am not certain,
whether th^e can be right* Baptism, lawful Preaching, a due Administration of
the Lord's Supper, without a true Priesthood. I fear it much, and I have just
grounds for my jealousy. I like her Profession well, I would I could like her
Polity as well, that I might say with the Apostle; "I rejoice, beholding your
order together with "your steadfast Faith; Col. 11.5, Privileges, Principles, an
accurate Wit, Fancies of men, confederacy with them, that seem holy, will not
do all; no, the law is strict, God is a Jealous God: a little Leaven may
corrupt the whole lump; he, that is unjust in a little, has his disparagement;
there can be no exactness without a general Perfection. Loth's Wife was turned
into a pillar of Salt for the cast of an Ey. Moses was debarred entrance into
the Land of Canaan for striking the Rock, when he should but have spoke to the
Rock. The High Places were enough for a grievance. Oh! if we feared the opening
of the Books, or the appearance before the white Throne, we would leave
palliating, and descanting, and conform to the Rule. Yea, cry out To the law,
To the testimony: for Every plant, which my Heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up. Therefore, if the Foreign Church can show her Consanguinity
of Government from the Blood of the Apostles, I shall acknowledge the kindred;
but otherwise, my heart may shake rather, then I can shake Hands with her. I
may piety her, but I cannot embrace her. I may pray for her, but cannot magnify
her, I cannot pronounce her sound, but only send her to the Physician; and she
must be cured by the right Party. I cannot allow her a College of Physicians to
consult with: for then she may spend all her money upon Physicians, but her
Bloody issue will never depart from her, till she has touched the hem of
Christ's garment, In the state she is in, I have no Vindication for her (let
other Advocates, if they will, justify her) but I have thus much charity to
wish her to repent, and reform, and if counsel do not prevail, my bowels shall
yearn for her, but my tongue cannot say to her All-hayl. But for the foreign
Church, sick, or sound, we will leave her to her self, and to her medicinal
Artists about her, which warrant her good constitution: for our selves, let us
praise God for our health, and seek to preserve it. Let us assure our selves,
that there is nothing more requisite in a visible Church, then a just
government: without this, there is neither peace, beauty, order, or purity of
the Ordinances. If every calling of the Nation ought to be justifiable, how
much more the Ministry? Else a man shall suspect every Church- Duty, which he
does communicate in, and be afraid whom to acknowledge as a true Messenger from
God Almighty. A great matter to sanctify a Nation is a sanctified Ministry, I
mean a sanctified Function; for all Sanctification is but sorcery (in respect
of the external conveyance of it) which does not flow from a right Springhead.
The wind, I know, blows where it lists, and I have nothing to do with the
secret motions of God's spirit: but for a public assurance right Ordination
is the best confirmation, yea the most Orthodox ratification. Away with Topical
reasonings, give me a Demonstrative argument; that, which is Apostolical, to
men is Characterical. Jannes and Jambres had an art of enchantment. Prophets,
that cause the people to err, and bite them with their teeth, can cry, A
Vision, though it be a lying divination. False Apostles can transform
themselves into Angels of light. The star, called Wormwood, has a brightness
in it. The beast, that came out of the earth, had two horns, like (...) There
is no trusting to appearances, and pretenses, the high satisfaction must be a
justifiable, undoubted commission. Oh! that the King's Daughter, who is to have
her raiment of Needle Work, should wear any thing about her, that is not
True-stitch; that the Temple should be overlaid with any thing, but pure gold.
What is comfortable in any Church, where the Squinancy is in the throat? where
the Sermon-Bell is riven? where there is a suspicious, supposititious
Ministry? a lawful Heir; a lawful Spouse; a lawful Officer; are not more
necessary then a lawful Ministry. Was God angry with them, which went, and
were not sent; and will not fury arise in his face, against unauthorised
Messengers? Men must be put apart, and separated for this Calling, Romans 1.1.
and be allowed of God, which are put in trust with the Gospel. 1 These. 2.4. And
be Ordained Preachers. 1 Timothy 2.7. Are the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to be
put into all hands? is every one to be a Steward in God's Family? no; Unto me
is this Grace given, to Preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ. 3 Ephesians. 8.
How else is the Gospel a Mystery? or this Function an Ordinance? The sons of
Scaeva met with claws, and were rent to purpose, because they would be dealing
with that, which they had no Authourity to meddle with. And do these scratches
terrify none? though the Devils be quiet for a while, are not their Talons to
be feared in another World? Is the Gospel a Feast, and may every one invite
Guests? no; Wisdom has her Maidens to send forth, to bid to the Banquet. Prove.
9.3. Christ chose his own Apostles, the Apostles their own Fellow Laborers;
and shall we have Gospel-Work done now by them, which have not an Apostolical
Institution to Authorize them? no; let the Church-Guardian look to that; seeing
then, that the External Regiment of the Church is annexed to the Crown, it
being one of the greatest Honors of a King, to be High-Chamberlain to the
Spouse of Christ, how highly does it concern Him, that none wait upon Her,
above Stairs, but they, which have their Patents Sealed; to keep out those
which come, in at the Window, and wear a Linen Ephod, not being of the Priests
true Race; this is his Church-Skill, and in this Heavenly thing, a part of His
Understanding is seen.

Fourthly, In preserving in the Land a pure Conversation. A King, that sits
in the Throne of Judgment, chaseth away all evil with His eyes. Prove. 20.8. A
King, next to His Personal Graces, does look to His Peoples Virtue's; and
therefore it is, that Aristotle says, Arist. 1. Polit.
Melius est civitatem regi a viro optimo, quam a lege optima. It is better for
a City to be Governed by the best Man, then by the best Law; because a King
does more Reform a Nation, then by all the Statutes of the Land. A true Prince
does think with Zeno, that a Kingdom is more beautified Virtutibus
inhabitantium, quam pretiosis ornamentis: with the Virtues of the Inhabitants,
then with all precious Ornaments. Aug. l. 1. de Trin.
Potestas non datur, nisi contra vitium. Power is not given, but against Vice;
a good Prince does exercise his Authority against the sins of the Times: He is
as ready to fight (as Alphonsus said) Panorm. l. 4. De rebus gestis Alph.
against a wicked liver, as against a Public Enemy. Yea, He is more awakened
with the Reigning Corruptions of His Nation, then if an Herald at Arms should
denounce War at His Court-Gate; for He knows, that, if He had never such
complete Armies to defend His Kingdom, yet these secret Conspiratours would
expose it to danger. Sins will shake in pieces States, and make Thrones to
totter; therefore He will make wicked men to fear Him, if they will not obey
him, if they will not imitate His Virtues; yet they shall dread His Justice. He
thinks Himself never to be Secure, so long as these are prevalent; nor free
from Vengeance, so long as these are unpunished. He accounts them His Grief,
and Shame, and fears, that they may be His Curse. Had He no Errors of His
own, yet, their Impiety, and Incorrigibleness, may make Him Weep, and Bleed.

How many a Righteous King has been ruined by the iniquity of His People?
Their perverse, and presumptuous sins, have undermined States, and kindled
consuming Flames to destroy both King, and Kingdom. If ye do wickedly, ye shall
perish, both ye, and your King.

How necessary therefore is it for a King, to cast all the filth of His Nation
into the sink? with the Nitre of His Justice, to scowre out these spots? and to
crush these Cockatrice's Eggs in the nest. The Wicked are the King's evil
Spirits, which haunt His Nation; but the Godly are the good Angels, which
protect, and defend it. Holy men are His best Courtiers: yea, the Lifeguard to
His Royal Person. A pious King does take delight in none, but Religious
Persons; He seek for them, He embraces them; He blesses Himself in them;
these He does esteem the Lustres of His Palace, and the Mirrours of His
Kingdom; these He does call His true Subjects, and the Keepers of His Crown.
Their Knees shall make all His enemies to bend; their Vows shall free Him from
those, which have entered into a League against Him; their Tears shall appease
Divine Indignation; their Innocent Lives shall draw God to look upon Him, and
His People with a propitious, and a preserving Eye. How can God shoot an Arrow
against that Land, where there is so much Innocence? or not bend his Shield,
and Target, to that Nation, where an Army of Saints does Camp? where there is
not only the Pure Faith, but the Power of Godliness? not only a Reformed
Church, but a Reformed Life? No, says God; here dwell my Sanctified Ones, the
People of my Holiness; the seed of the Blessed; those which Excel upon Earth;
the partakers of the Divine Nature; such, as have fled from the corruptions,
that are in the World, which have not defiled their garments; therefore these
shall dwell between my Shoulders; I will be a little Sanctuary to them, upon
all the Glory shall be a defense.

A King does choose out these for His true Favorites, and solace Himself with
these, till He can converse with Angels. To prize these, He does account it the
discretion of His Religion, yea, His purified Understanding. A King, then is
not to Reign only by Title, but by Prudence; not only by Power, but by
Understanding. But by a man of Understanding. Thus much for His Understanding
in Heavenly things.

Now let us come to His Knowledge in Temporal things. A King is not only to
Govern a Church, but a State; therefore, as His Understanding must be busied in
Celestial things, so His Knowledge must, have experience in Civil things. He
must be bonus vir, and bonus Civis; a good man, and a good Citizen; a good
Churchman (as it were) and a good Statesman; now a Kings Political Knowledge
is to be shown in these things.

First, In preserving of His own Rights. What is a King, if His Regalia be
infringed? if the Cap of Maintenance be every where defended, how tender ought
a King to be of His Crown? Lipsius.
Principis Majestatem ubique servandam esse. The Majesty of a Prince is every
where to be kept. Chrysostom. in Ps. 144.
Aliud est arrogantia, aliud magnitudo animi. Arrogance is one thing, but
Greatness of mind is another thing. It is not Pride in a King, but Magnanimity
of spirit (which is a true Virtue) to defend His just Honors. If a King be not
Supreme, he has nothing lofty in Him, but solium excelsum, an high Throne; if
He does lose his Prerogative, He is but a kind of Commoner: Why then should not
a King defend His Majesty, as well as His Title? yes; Moses, the meekest man
upon Earth, was not very meek, but resolute, when he came to be affronted by
the seditious. Nehemiah the humble, was not very humble, but Heroical, when
Sanballat threatened him, and Shemaiah disheartened him. Valentinian, when the
people came to encroach upon his Royalty, he was Royal, Rigid, Repressing,
Repulsing enough. What! says he, do you seek to Command your Emperor? no; Res
administrare non vestrum; sed nostrum est: vos imperata facere; me quod facta
opus est curare decet. Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 1.
To Govern is not yours, but mine: it becomes you to perform Commands, and me
to enjoin them.

The great heart of a Prince, should not suffer himself to be braved out of his
Rights, nor bought out of them; for, are such costly things to be exposed to
sale? or chaffered for, as in a Tradesman's Mart? no; the Prince's Blood Royal
should not be more precious unto him, then his Royal Preheminences; his
Scepter, and his Authority, should be vendible alike. For, it it is a sad
bargain for a King, to get aid of his Subjects, with the loss of the Gemms of
his Crown, and to gain Subsidies, with the parting with something of his
Prerogative; this is a dearer price given, then to buy Land at threescore years
purchase. It behooves a King therefore, to consider, what Rights his Ancestors
left him, and to preserve them as his right hand, or right-eye; this is a part
of his Knowledge.

Secondly, In preserving the Rights of his People, for though the King ought to
have a royal subsistence out of the Nation: insomuch, that all Callings ought
to be Contributary to his Maintenance: for the very Plowshare is not exempted;
The King consists by the field, that is tilled. Eccles. 5.8. Yet I find, that
the King has but his set portion, Ezech. 48.21,22. A Princely Revenew he is to
have, but not to take up the whole Nation, as Crown-Land; no, as his Royal
Grants ought not to be too large, and liberal: so his Royal Demands ought not
to be too heavy, and pressing. If all were the Kings, how then could Ahab sin,
in taking away Naboth's Vineyard? This may be Jezabel's Title, or the
Projectours Tenure; but a Princes Royal heart does abhor such a claim, for
indeed God ever established it. A good King does love his Subjects too well, to
tell them, that he would be a King of Bondmen, he is a base Subject, that will
suffer his King to remain poor; and a King is too Noble, to think, that his
chief Sovereignty is, to make his Subjects poor; Pesants may be so used, but
Subjects every where, are not to be brought down so low, as to have no other
vest, but a Canvas-suit. They are no good Courtiers which hold this Paradox,
they rather seek their own lucre, then their Princes luster; they are fitter to
wait upon Dionysius the Tyrant, then a Gracious Prince; if they loved their
Princes Honor, as well as they do their own Intradoes, they would disdain to
expose their Prince to obloquy, to satisfy their own greedy, gripple desires;
but these are but the dregs; garbage, Lumbard, excrements, sweepings, vervin,
of a Court; a worthy Courtier does scorn to salute such, or to call them
fellows; for he finds, that they are mere Horse-leeches, Ferrets, Caterpillars,
which thrust themselves into a Princes Service, to serve their own Interests:
whose Faith is Fortune, and their Grace Greatness; they have little in them of
a right Christian, and nothing at all of a true Courtier; they would sell the
Kings Honor for their own advantage, and bring him into a general hatred, for
their particular Accrument: they will stir him up to pluck the whole Kingdom,
that they may get the Feathers, and to flay his Subjects like Beasts, that they
may have the profit of their skins. A knowing King does detest such, and an
intelligent Courtier does defy such; for both these see, that they are but born
for themselves, that they tread inward, that they look not right forward, but
are Goggle-eyed, looking only to their own Coffers, famelici, tri-parci, mere
Flesh-flies, and Earthworms, Scandals to the King, and Stains to the splendid
Courtier. What need have I of Mad men? so, what need has a King of such
Selfish men? No; a Prudent King does prize them only, which advise him to
maintain his People's Liberties, as well as his own Royalties. For a Prince is
never more Glorious, then when he shines before the eyes of his People in the
bright beams of gentle Usage, and moderate Taxes. He, that Rules over men must
be just. 2 Samuel 23.3.

Sueton.
Tiberius the First would have the sheep to be shorn, but not skinned; Euagr.
Tiberius the Second liked not Tribute, which was gathered with the Sobs of the
people; Lamprid.
Alexander Severus would not have his Subject's Estates Merchandised. And,
indeed, every good Prince's Gold mines should chiefly ly in the hearts of his
People. That is the best Treasure, which is sent into him, by the Messengers of
his Subjects affections. The Fence of the People's Liberties is to be kept up,
for, He that breaks an Hedge, a serpent shall bite him. Stock up a Tree, and
it will bear no more; but let it grow, and there will be yearly fruit. Imbargo
Ships, and there is no Voyage to be expected; but let them go out freely, and
there will be Sea-fare abundant: they will come sailing home into the Ports
with Tunnage, and Poundage, beyond expression. Let the People have a moderate
freedom, and the Prince has an infinite Bank. A King is not to be straightened
in Means, for that is the disgrace of the Nation; Means must not be wrested in,
for that is the Groan of the Nation. He is the richest Prince, which does
desire no more Riches, then a thankful People is bound to part with, Therefore
for a Prince to preserve his People's Rights; as it is his admired equity, so
it is a branch of his Governing Knowledge.

Thirdly, In causing a free Administration of Justice, for what is a Throne,
but a Judgment Seat? Yes, the nether Judicatory to the Tribunal of Christ
Jesus. A King bears not the Sword for naught, but he is to have vengeance on
them, that do evil. Romans 13.4. A King's Sword is as necessary, as his Crown.
Judgment is to be executed in the Morning, and he, that is spoiled, is to be
delivered out of the hands of the oppressor. Jer. 12.12. Judgment is to run
down like water, and Righteousness like a mighty stream. Amos 5.24. It is
better, that wicked men should hear ill in their Reputation, then that the King
should hear ill for connivence, Plut.
as Philip told Harpalus. The Judge, and the Altar should be both alike;
Aristot. 3. Rhet.
as Archytas said. Fulgos. lib. c. 8.
He is no good Praetor, which does prefer a bad cause before he Laws. Wherefore
is the Pruning-hook, but to cut of withered branches? wherefore is the Launcer,
but to take away dead flesh? wherefore are not the Kites taken? and the Beasts
of Prey hunted to death? why are common Barretours suffered to vex the Nation?
why are impudent Concubines kept openly? why do just Heirs walk up and down the
Streets in their filthy garments? why do Damnable Blades swear, as if there
were neither Justice in the Land, nor God in Heaven? why do Cheaters,
Magicians, Witches, false-Coyners false-Witnesses, Heretics, Blasphemers, and
all manner of execrable sinners pollute the Land, defile the Church, reproach
the very Name of a Savior, and yet walk up and down the Streets, and are not
questioned? are these no Guilts? or, is there no Punishment? Is there nothing
which does blind the eyes of the wise? have the Judges shaken their hands well
from that, which hinders them from inflicting condign punishment? What uproars?
and Gallio care not for them? Should these Foxes rest every night in their
Buroughs, and not be dug out? Oh! seeing Judges are the King's Eyes,
whereby he should spy out Offenses; and his Lips, whereby he should speak to
the Land; and his Hands, whereby he should chastise Transgressors: A King had
need to arise in a Princely indignation, and dash these Eyes, buffet these
Lips, and cramp these Hands. I read, Alexand. ab Alex lib. 3. c. 5.
that Darius crucified Sandaces for not executing Judgment; and, Valerius Max.
lib. 6. cap. 4.
that Cambyses flayed Sisannes for pronouncing false Judgment; and, that a
Saxon King hung up Judges by the scores, for neglecting Judgment. If some
Judges had been so served, what a fatal Doom would there have been? Oh! how
many corrupt Humors do there abound, because this good Physic is not
administered? Because sentence against an evil-doer is not executed speedily;
therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully set to do evil; Ecc.
8.11. Are Judges in the King's stead? then, why do they not measure out Justice
the Kings without Partiality, or Corruption? A wise King scatters the wicked,
and causes the Wheel to turn over them, Prove. 20.26. If the Judges will not be
so honest, as to turn the Wheel, the King should be so wise, as to make them
wheel out of their places, or to cause them to suffer that wheel, that others
should have endured. Pity it is, that a Virtuous Prince, and his whole Kingdom.
should be put upon the hazard of ruin, because of wicked men's Impunity: Is he
freed of sin himself? and will his Judges make him a partaker of other men's
sins? Are not these faithful, trusty Judges? The King therefore to free his
Person, Conscience, and Nation, had need to take strict care, that the edge of
his Justice may be felt in Malefactour's sides, and this is a a part of his
Knowledge.

Fourthly, In advancing the Welfare of the Nation. For the Kingdom is his
Mansion; and will not every one beautify his own Mansion? It is his Spouse;
and will not every one deck his own Spouse? When the Righteous are in
Authority, the People rejoice; Prove. 29.2. A Righteous King makes a joyous
People; his love makes every Heart-string leap, and his Knowledge does send
Mirth into the farthest part of the Nation; he is so exact in Government, that
far, and nigh, they find the blessing of his prudent managing of Affairs; for
he does not study so much his own Greatness, as the Greatness of his People;
not to make himself high, as his Land happy. That, as in Asah's days it is
said, they built, and prospered; 2 Chronicles. 14.7. and in Hezekiah's days it is
said, that God blessed the people, and there was abundance, 2 Chronicles. 31.10. so,
in a good Princes days, there is nothing, but plenty, and prosperity to be
seen; for he does not, as Isocrates says, Isoc. in Helena.
impose labors upon the people, and enjoy delights himself; but he would have
his people have reciprocal Pleasures with him; he is (...), as Homer says of
Atreus, Homer. Il. 2.
a a man, that has a divided Mind, to take care of every particular man's
welfare; he does account Government to be rem populi, non sua^, The People's
business not his own, Platina.
as good Adrian was wont to say. Whatsoever a rent-Scate he does come to, he
does desire to be styled with Justinian; Sigon. lib. 20. Imper. Occident.
Veteris gloriae Instaurator eximius, The famous Restorer of the ancient Glory.
He would have all Arts to flourish, and Callings to prosper, the Wagons to
trace the Land, and the Ships to furrow the Seas, he Granaries to be filled,
the Warehouses to be furnished, the Magazines to be stored, that people might
talk of nothing, but Free-Trade, and vast Gains, heaping up Silver as Dust, and
Gold as the Stones of the street. As a roaring Lion, and an hungry Bear, so is
a wicked Ruler over the People; Prove. 28.^5. ^ut as Fostering Father, and a
Nursing Mother, so is a good Ruler over the People; for since this Prince came
into the Land, what Felicity has entered with him? Since he mounted the Throne,
how have we mounted to admiration? We had nothing but Wants, and Wastes, Penury,
and Scarcity; but now our Prosperity is risen like the Flood, we build our
Nests in the Stars: for see our Plenty, behold our abundance. Who ever thought
to have seen such Happy days? Who could have expected such a Return of
Blessings Our Phoenix is arisen out of her Ashes; our wasted Country is become
again like Eden, The Garden of God: Oh, praised be God! Oh, honored be the
Prince! So that a Land might be in-lai'd with Riches, and enamelled with
Wealth: a good King makes it the Achme of his Ruling Art, and Governing
Knowledge, to advance the welfare of the Nation.

Thus then, at last, ye have seen a complete King, who it is, that wears the
right Crown of Honor, and sways the true Scepter of Majesty in a Nation; even
He, which has these two Imperial Perfections in Him, Understanding for
Heavenly Things, and Knowledge for Temporal Things; But by a Man of
Understanding, and Knowledge.

The State thereof.
Now let us come to the Patient; that is to have the benefit of this Physic,
The State; The State thereof, that is, the whole Commonwealth. From hence
observe, that a Prudent Prince is a General Blessing. For the Root of the
Righteous gives Fruit; Prove. 12.12. It has not only Sap to flourish it self,
but Fruit to feed others; that is, many shall taste of the benefit of such an
one's Government; for, is the Royal Family only raised by a Wise, and just
Prince's coming to His Throne? No, Justice ^dteth the Nation; Prove. 14.34. A
whole Nation is exalted, when such an one is exalted; for, such a Governor
being set in Authority, He is as the Sun, which does give Light, and Splendor,
to all within His Dominions. Under His Shadow were we preserved; Lam. 4.20.
Preservation, and Prosperity, do reach to all that are under the Shadow of His
Sovereignty. For, as when the Wicked are in Authority, the People do sigh; so
when the Righteous are in Authority, the People do rejoice; Prove. 29.2. a
general Joy is spread through the whole Nation; for, not only the King himself
shall be happy, but the Kingdom shall share with Him in Felicity. Jacob shall
take Root, and Israel shall Blossom, and Bud, and fill the Face of the Earth
with Fruit; Es. 27.6. The Reign of Solomon the Wise made all the People joyful,
and glad of heart, for all the goodness, which the Lord had done; 1 King, 8.^6.
Yea, not only He himself was in safety, and welfare; but Judah and Israel
dwelt without fear, every man under his Vine, and Fig Tree, from Dan to
Beer-shebah; 1 King. 4.25. So that a Prudent Prince is to His People a
Fortunate Prince, the whole STATE fares the better for Him: His Virtues purify
his own Heart, and bless a Nation. Aug. lib. 1. Confess. cap. 11.
Nescit virtus mensuram, sed vult Cumulare. Virtue does know no measure, but it
heaps up Welfare. This is the Latitude of success, that does come by a good
Prince's Reign. The best Omen to a State, is to have such an one placed in
Authority; for what can a People desire more, then to be generally happy? Live.
Decad. 4. lib. 6.
Communis utilitas est societatis maximum vinculum. Common Profit is the
greatest Bond of Society. Raul. in 4. Sermon.
Parva vasa contemnuntur. Little empty Vessels, which hold but a small quantity
are contemned; but every one love those Vessels, which are brim-full of
State-Privileges. A good King does desire to exceed all his Predecessors, in
Princely Favors, and to write a fairer Hand, then all his Predecessors, in
Royal Bounty. Thus He does sign His Grants; or, if ye will, this is his
Court-Hand. He would have none to match him in these Throne-Characters, as
Philip told Philo the Theban, Plut. Apoph.
Nunquam beneficiis victus fuissem, I never knew my self overcome in Benefits.
Taxiles, the King of India, thought this to be a Prince's Emulation, and
Ambition to out-vy all his Fellow-Rulers in Courtesy. Q. Curtius.
Si sis me inferior, accipe beneficium; Si sis me superior, read beneficium.
If thou be'st Inferior to me, take a benefit; if thou be'st Superior to me,
bestow a benefit. As if Superiors must be beneficial with an Eminency; for
this is to imitate God, who being the Objective Perfection of all, he does
account them to come nighest to him, who do give the most complete Perfection,
or to the most; that being the truest good, which is most communicative, where
there is not only the greatest inherence of Goodness, but the most influence.

He is the Conspicuous Prince, which is a Derivative Prince, which does not
keep all his Perfections to himself, but his People have them by Redundancy:
That King does make good his Institution; for wherefore is a King Ordained,
but, in commune bonum, for the common good. These worthy Rulers, therefore,
have their Authority reach as far as their Dominion; and the Fruits of their
Prudence, as the Extents of their Dominions. They are National Triumphs,
Commonwealth Rhapsodies; the effect of their prudent Government does gladden a
whole State. But by a man of Understanding, and Knowledge the state thereof.

Application.
I. First, this does show, That that Kingdom is stripped of her Ornaments, which
is deprived of the State thereof. For what is a Kingdom without State? when it
does want either Power to defend it self; or free execution of Justice for
every one to enjoy his Propriety; or degrees of Honor, to make a distinction
betwixt Noble, and Ignoble; or liberty of Traffic, whereby the Wealth, and
Dignity of a Nation might be preserved? No, a Kingdom, thus abased, is like
unto a Vessel, wherein is no pleasure; Jer. 48.38. like an Oak, whose Leaf
fades; Es. 2.30. like a Lamp put out in obscure darkness; Prove. 20.20. like
choice Beauties, which have Dung spread upon their Faces; Mal. 2.^. Such are
said to have their Horn cut off, their Heels made bare, broken from being a
People, the Worm is spread upon them, and the Line of Confusion stretched over
them; Athen. Deonis. lib. 6. cap. 7.
they are like the Chians, which once lived in all manner of Liberty; and
afterward had their Hands bound by their own Servants. There is nothing of
Honor in that Nation: but there is only the Bran, Parings, Fragments,
Cinders, Snuffs, Tatters, Fins, and Skins of their former Dignity.

And were not we lately brought unto this disaster? Was not this all the Glory
of the Nation? Were not our hands bound by our own Contrymen, and by many
the meanest, and contemptiblest of the Nation? Were we secure in the safest
place of the Land? No: we were much like Aristotle, Plut.
who durst not stay at Athens; lest they, which had killed Socrates, should
kill him also?

What Stumps of the English Glory were there then to be seen? No: we were much
like the State of Rome; Sigon. lib. 14. Occid. Imp.
that, when Odoacer had conquered Augustulus, it is said, that All Imperial
Dignity ceased.

What Power had we to defend our selves; when we were so disarmed, that we had
not a Weapon to preserve our Lives; but were in danger to have our Throats cut
by every braving Enemy?

What free execution of Justice was there, when the Tribunals were filled with
such Judges; that there was little Right to be had, but for the Saints of the
Cause?

What Degrees of Honor were there; when every Mechanic would insult upon a
Noble; as if he were the better Peer?

What Liberty of Traffic; when Artificers were driven to those Exigents, that
they were ready to turn Vagabonds? Not a Meeting there could be; but it was
suspected to be a Conspiracy: Not a Conference, but a Spy was at hand to take
Notes of the Discourse. Those, which were not slain in the Field, were thrust
into Gaols. The Land, after it was Plundered, in despite of all Articles,
Covenants, and an Act of Oblivion, was Decimated.

Was not the best Cap of Maintenance a Steel-Bonnet? and the best Robe of
Honor a Buff-Coat?

What was there to be seen in the Nation, but Warrants, and Examinations,
Committees, and High-Courts of Justice, Chains, and Gibbets? Friends durst
scarcely salute one another. Every one was amazed at his Neighbor.

We durst not complain openly of our Oppressions: No, we were so danted; that,
like the enslaved Subjects of Dionysius the Tyrant, we durst scarcely groan
concerning them. Our Birthrights were taken away: and yet we were commanded to
reckon from the first Year of The English Liberty restored.

We were Slaves, and yet we must call our selves the Freeborn People of
England. Nothing but Schisms, and Heresies in the Church; and yet we must style
our selves the most Refined, and Reformed Protestants.

Nothing, but Designs to ruin Churches, and Universities, and to Sequester,
and Silence the most accomplished Teachers of the Land: and yet people must be
taught to cry up this Age, as the Blessed Season for the Propagation of the
GOSPEL.

Oh! sorrows, that We might yet feel with Convulsion-Fits! Oh! miseries, that
We might yet think on with an Agony!

Where was then the Majesty of the NATION? Where was the STATE? No: This was
rather a Stitch, then State; a Fate, then a State.

Oh! Sin not against GOD, to drive him once more to take down the Rod. Revive
not your old Errors; lest ye renew your old Judgments.

Consider what Corruptions ye have mortified, what Abominations ye have taken
away from the sight of GOD's jealous Eyes.

Recount, with your selves, whether the late Potion has thoroughly purged you,
whether it has cleansed your Members from Uncleanness, your Throats from
Riots, your Lips from Blasphemies, your Hands from Unjust Gains: If ye be as
Criminal, as ye were, ye may be as wretched, as ye were; and where will then be
the Fame, and Felicity of this Nation? No: Ye will be a Terror to your Selves,
and a Prodigy to Beholders.

What Joy shall ye have to open a Door; when ye shall see nothing, but variety
of ruths in the Land? Or, to walk up and down the Nation; when ye shall behold
nothing, but Aching Hearts, Watery Eyes, Wringing Hands, and Dropping Wounds.
Then are ye happy; when ye do serve GOD, that GOD may so bless you, that ye may
have not only your Native Country; but your Native Rights: when there is a
Nation, and the State of the Nation. The State thereof is the Glory thereof.
But by a Man of Understanding, and Knowledge, the State thereof.

II. Secondly, This does serve to Exhort all persons to be Men of public
Spirits, to be for the State. For, is there a State, and shall we not advance
the State? Yes: or else how are we Members of this Commonwealth?

It had been no matter, if such Stateless Natives had dyed under the Roofs,
where they were born: or the Families, where they took their first Breath, had
been their Castles; where they might have been perpetually immured. For, pity
it is, that they should ever walk abroad, which know nothing, but their own
Thresholds; or, that they should gain a Mite in the World, which wedge up all
to their own Interests.

Men, that are Lovers of themselves, ought to have all others Strangers to
them: they should not have an Heart, but their own, to affect them. Let them be
dear to themselves; but a contempt to all others, whom they do not tender. Let
them not have an Eye to look upon them with delight; which does not look abroad
to behold others in misery, with compassion: nor an Hand to help them; whose
hands do provide only for their own Necessities, or to promote their own
Greatness. It had been but a just Judgment, if these had been born one-ey'd, or
left handed.

In all Calamities who shall sympathise with them, which had such straight
Bowels to others wants? Or, who shall bear them Company to their Funerals with
Honor; who, whilst they lived, never regarded any thing, but their own
Potency. Their Skins at last might rot amongst their Beasts, or they might be
buried in their own Dung.

Let their own Wives only weep for them; for, for them they sweat out all
their strength: or their own Children only nayl them down in their Coffins;
for, for them they kept the Keys of their Coffers.

I know, that he is worse then an Infidel, which does not provide for his own;
but he, which does but only provide for his own, has many an Infidel, which
does far exceed him.

Athen. lib. 12. cap. 15.
Cimon, the Athenian, who, as Gorgias said of him, got Money only to use it
well, was wont to carry whole Sacks full of Money into the open Streets for
public Uses.

Fulgos lib 4. cap. 8.
Tullus Hostilius dedicated a great part of his Fields, which his Predecessors
had reserved for their private Advantage, to the benefit of the Distressed.

Cuspin. Plut in Valor. Pon. De liber. cap. 42.
Nerva, at one time, distributed an Hundred and Fifty Thousand pieces of Silver
for the general Good.

Porsenna, the King of Hetruria, gave away so much Treasure, at once, to the
Romans, that the Memory of that Bounty was preserved in Graven Tables, under
the honorable Name of The Goods of Porsenna.

Antoninus, surnamed Pius, was wont to give away whole Provinces upon such
occasions.

Plut. in Pericle.
What magnificent Structures did Pericles build for the Athenians? Id. in
Graccho.
Caius Grachus for the Romans?

Phocion was so addicted to the Common-good, that he was called (...), the
Profitable; and Ptolomy, Euergetes, the Benefactour; and Valerius, Publicola,
the Common-wealth's-man.

Where then are any self-breasted Brethren, which are Politic, but not for
the Body-politique? For Wealth, but not for the Commonwealth? For Estate, but
not for the State?

These men know no Liberality, but to their own Progeny; nor any Magnificence,
but to leave vast Patrimonies to their Children.

They set up no Monuments, whilst they are living, nor leave any behind them,
when they are dead: no, not so much, as to have a Stone to bear any remembrance
of them, but a Gravestone; neither Church, nor State, do receive any Largesses
from them.

Cyprian.
Do not these men tread close? Are they not the Incubi, which ly heavy upon
their Estates? They think so little upon their Souls, that they do forget their
Fames; and mind Eternity so little, that they do neglect their Memory. who
shall praise them, for what have they done that is laudable? who shall prize
them, for what have they done that is eminent? no, let them live in the world
as Churles, and be turned out of the world as Niggards. Is it not pity but that
these should be born in a State, and enjoy the privileges of a State? what, to
suck at the breasts of it, and to die indebted to their Nurse? could any moral
man thus shake hands with his Country at the parting? or any religious man thus
take his leave of a State? who is the Patriot? who is the true Gospeller, but
he that thinks of those things that pertain to love, and are of good report?
Phil. 4.8. Job was a true worthy, and he was as one which did comfort the
Mourners. Job. 29 25. Nehemiah was both a true Patriot, and a true Church-son,
and he built the walls of Jerusalem, and he maintained an hundred and fifty of
the Jews, and Rulers at his Table. Nehem. 5.16,17. Mordecai was his equal both
in charity and piety, and it is recorded of him that he spoke peace to all his
seed, and procured the wealth of his people. Ester 10 3. Oh therefore hoord not
up all to your selves, but have a State purse; lay not up treasures; but lay
out treasures; make not gold your hope, but make gold your Almoner; spare not
more then is fit, but give what is fit; seek not great things for your selves,
but seek great things for your honor; If there does come no good by all your
riches, but only the looking on them with your eyes; bestow something out of
your Estates which may be looked on with admiration, and your never-dying
renown. Remember that there are not only your families to be regarded; but the
Nation; not your posterities, but the Public. A Prudent King does not only
look to his Court, but the Kingdom; not only heal the maladies of his Palace
royal, but the State; For by a man of understanding, and knowledge the STATE
thereof is made happy.

Thirdly, this does serve to show what an invaluable blessing a Prudent Prince
is, he does make a whole State happy; his Princely eye does look through his
whole Region, his Royal hand is stretched out to the utmost extent of his
Territories; he does come with signal favors, and he does present his people
with regnal benedictions; if his Subjects do know how to obey, he does know how
to cherish; if they do know how to be Liegemen, he does know how to be a King.
Here is the Mannah, which does feed all the Camp, and the Alabaster box of
precious Spikenard, which does fill with the sweet savor of it, the whole
house where it is opened. As excellent Majesty is added to him. Dan. 4.36. so
excellent magnificence does flow from him; as the land is the land of his
dominion. 2 Chronicles. 8.6. so it is the land of his beneficence. To be a general
aid, this he does esteem his royalty; to benefit all, this he does account as
his high Prerogative. For this Pyrrhus was styled by his people Aquila, the
Eagle, Plutarch.
because with a quick eye he looked through all his Regions; Alexander l. 2. c.
11.
and Artaxerxes was called Mnemon, because he was mindful of all his Subjects
wants; Marmeus l. 11. Hist. Rer.
and Alphonsus the 10th of Aragon was named Largus, for his large and liberal
affection to all them within his Dominions; yea, how many Princes else were
honored with the illustrious Titles of Fundatores; the Founders of the peoples
happiness, and Liberatores, the Deliverers of them from slavery, and
Conservatores, the preservers of their freedoms? yea, they knew not how to
abound enough to them in exultations, and exaltations, approbations, and
acclamations, traunces, and triumphs; they hung up Tablets, and built Statues
to them; that what their mind, and memories could not perpetuate, their
Marbles, and Monuments might. Oh, they held themselves infinitely advanced,
generally blessed by them. And indeed what are good Princes but storehouses,
where a whole Nation may have supply? and Conduits, where a State in general
may fill its Pitchers? here is the pool of Bethesdah, which healed all sick of
Diseases, which when the Angel stirs the waters will step into it. A good King
does give a public call to all the people of the land, wishing them to resort
to him, and they shall be favored, and fostered. Come Nobles; (says he) come
Bishops, come Judges, come Merchants, come Prisoners, come Enemies, and ye
shall find my beneficent Nature.

1. Come Nobles, ye which have been brought up in Scarlet, and yet have
embraced the Dunghill; ye which are of Honorable houses, and yet the Other-house
had put you down; which have been men of renown, and yet Abjects have
confronted you; which are Nobles by birth, and yet the children of base men,
viler then the earth, which one would have disdeigned to set with the dogs of
his flock, have insulted over you, which are Lords; and servants of servants
have striven to be your Masters, which are to be the great Judges of the land
to punish Malefactors, and yet have been handled as if ye had been found
amongst Thieves, and been the grand Delinquents of the times; which are to be
the great Council of the Kingdom, but have been used, as if ye had not been fit
to be Clerks of the Council; not to be the little finger of a Parliament, but
have been unhoused, and could find no place to sit in, unless ye would step
down into an house of Commons. Oh, it does pity me (says such a King) to think
how long ye have been obscured, and lived rather like Cloistermen, then
Noblemen. Come ye, and ye shall find that ye have a King, that will seek you
out, and take you up; ye shall be no longer the Scorn, and Mockage of the
vulgar. If ye know your Fountain of honor, the spring is not yet dried up, as
ye were created by a Prince, so by a Prince shall ye be confirmed; ye are the
Mighty of the Land, 2 Kings 24.15. and ye shall be as Mighty, as ever were any
of your Progenitors, without an Herald at Arms. I will preserve to you your
Scutcheons, and Pedigrees: I will re-establish you in your pristine honors, and
dignities, and restore unto you PEEREAGE.

2. Secondly, come Bishops, ye which have the Consecration of the Lord upon
your Foreheads, which are Stars in the right hand of God; which have an
Apostolical institution, and an Apostolical succession; which are the Advocates
of faith, the Champions of truth; and the Bulwarks, and Buttresses of the
Protestant Church; whose learned Treatises are your own fame, the Schismatics
envy, and the Jesuits tortures; whose prudent, mild, and fatherly Government,
(though the best discipline upon earth cannot be free from scandals, and
exceptions, by them, which would not in all things govern half so well) has
been the Delight of judicious Princes, the satisfaction of well-principled
Nobles, and more acceptable to the people in general, and to Dissenters in
particular, then the coercive power of a more rigid party; Oh ye which have the
key of knowledge, and the key of jurisdiction, to whom belong the Pastoral
staff, the stole and the chair. Oh it does grieve me (says such a Prince)
that ye which have had such a Primitive calling, and been reverenced by all
Antiquity; and been entertained with such an high and honorable reception;
wheresoever Monarchical government has been settled, that of late to the
contempt of Apostolical Ordination, the scorn of Ecclesiastical usage, the
shame of the Reformed Churches, and the Inlet of heresy and blasphemy, have
been so declined, decried, despised, defamed, and even defaced; and that
because some would have you more then men, and some have voyced you forth to be
but trivial men, and some have made you the worst of men; well, I find that the
most Orthodox Fathers, the Holy Apostles, and our Blessed Savior met with as
base aspersions, and as cursed language; therefore these things do not move me;
your calling is just, the Orders are faultless, I cannot expect you to be
Angels, it is well that I find you for the general to be the wifest, and the
best of Men. Therefore gather together, ye are not utterly a lost calling, your
King knew the worth of you, and the Church feels the want of you: I will
therefore put your ^rosier again into your hands, invest you in your ancient
Robe, and establish you in your Prelacy.

4 Come Judges, ye which have Benches to exercise judicature in, and are the
Oracles of the land to determine the great difficulties of right; which sit by
the Kings Writ, and do represent the Kings person; that as in him is the
Portion of the Lawgiver, so there is in you the Portion of the Sence-givers;
for though ye be not Lawmakers, yet ye are Law-Remembrancers; the Text is not
yours, but the Commentary is yours; for what are ye but the great Interpreters
of the mysteries of Statutes and Usages? Yea the great Antiquaries of Records,
and Customs? Ye have eyes so clear, that ye can see as far as the Conquest,
and can Spy out the motions of Government in the Saxon Heptarchy; yea, that
find out the balance of the Roman justice, nay perhaps, if need were, could
glance at Brutes groundsel, and settle the Land upon the first Fundamental
Constitutions; which are versed in such ancient Memorials, as if ye could raise
the dead, or make wasted ashes to speak again; ye can tell the world of
Estovers, Escuage, Cornage, Trover, Quarentine, Misnomer, Abatement de brief,
Abbeyance, Burgbote, Conders, Corrodie, Arrrain, Dogger, Doggedraw, Fledwit,
Formedon, Garrantie, Coteerwit, Deforsour, Couthleulagh, Essoine, Embrason,
Withernam, and other great Enigma's of the Law.

Oh, high is your power, great is your judgment, weighty is your charge,
expedient is the exercise of your authority; for ye are the Cabinets of the
Laws jewels, the Vials to receive the Distilled judgments of the Ancients,
the Shrines to keep enbalmed precedents; ye are entrusted with the Plaints, and
Pleas, Liberties, and live of the people. Oh then that of late ye have been
driven from your Tribunals, and new Graffes set in your stead, many of them men
of obscure names, and some of obscure qualification, not known to their own
tribe, much less famed through the Land for eminency of endowments, and yet
these men who had in them more ambition, then knowledge, and haughtiness, then
conscience, to side with a Party and to work the feat of Designs, were
countenanced, and commissioned to supply the places of such accomplished grave
Sages, as your selves; whereby justice was Sphinx, and the Law a Labyrinth,
there being little else in the time of their judging, but severity to the
innocent, and indemnity to the guilty, judgment being turned into gall, and the
fruit of rightousness into wormwood, the foot of pride had her privileged
treadings, a snare was laid upon Mizpeh; the righteous were sold for Silver,
and the poor for shoes, the whole land cried out of injury, and violence, the
Fishers fished, and the Hunters hunted, the diseased of the flock were thrust
at with thigh and shoulder, and pushed with horns, the wicked devoured the man
more righteous then himself, the wine of the condemned was drunk in the house
of God; and all this misery, because the judges were as the Evening Wolves. Oh
sad times to think on, that violence was so predominant, and justice so long
fallen in the streets. It is time therefore to seek up our lost Gold, to repair
our shivered pillars, to scowr up our armor of proof. Oh therefore ye renowned
Fathers of the Law, ye have been a long time wanting to the Nation. The King
(says such a King) the Nobles, the Church, the Universities, the Citizen, the
Tradesman, the Landman, the Seaman do call for you, therefore ye shall no
longer remain like dislocated members, Diamonds shaken out of the ring,
disgraced, displaced, no, your commissions are renewed, your Seats are empty
to entertain you, ye shall appear in your Robes again, THE JUDGES SHALL BE
RESTORED AS AT THE FIRST.

Come Merchants, ye which were once the Lands Magazine, the Kings Burse, whose
trades were better unto you then fee-farmes, whose shops could buy out many
Mannours, whose brains maintained you better then the heritages of your elder
brethren, whose arts advanced you with more speed, and to a greater hight, then
all the Liberal Sciences; Men not only of ingenious inventions, but Heroic
attempts; what would not resolute Merchants undertake? They feared neither
Seas, nor Tempest, Rocks, nor Shelves, Streights, nor vast Ocean, Hericanoes,
nor Tornadoes, the Frozen, nor the torrid Zone, the Barbarous Continents nor
Malignant influences; they were contented to make Ships their Houses of State,
and Cabins their si^led Parlours, who for many months had fresh air enough,
but little fresh meat; which had the sight of many bright Stars, but of few
gorgeous buildings; which carried their precious coin along with them, but
lest their precious Pearls (their Wives, and children) behind them; which have
longed oftentimes as much to see land, as the Mother which bare them, and to
sail into a Port, as to step up into a Councel-chamber, and all this to
search all lands for commodities, and to purchase the rarities of the World;
whereby in a short time they grew up to that height, that their Stature could
not be taken, they exceeded all the ingenious and industrious of the land by
many Cubits; and their estates were no more vast, then their actions were
noble. I do not say, who built, and feasted, burnished, and furnished more then
the Merchant? but who relieved more Orphans, redeemed more Captives, founded
more Hospitals, Schools, Churches, then the Generous, and Magnificent Merchant?
The Merchant was one of the great Splendours, and Mirrours of the Nation. But
alas, of late, how was Merchandise fallen into a Consumption, her lungs wasted,
her breath corrupt, her cheeks sunk, her vitalls even spent a Macies, a tabes,
a pining disease ran through her, whole body, for it was so sucked with Taxes,
and Excise, bad debtors, and sad losses, that the merchant was even turning
Bankrupt. But shall such a famous Comforter of the Nation now die of
Melancholy? No, Merchant (says such a King) lift up thy head, thy Prudent
Prince knows how useful thou art to the land, therefore he does bid thee be of
good cheer, thy Harpies are flown away, thy Fiends are dispossessed, bring out
thy wares, for thy Customers come thronging. Rigge out thy Ships, for the Seas
are open, thy Bills of Lading, and Envoyes, and Churmarties, and letters of
credit, Rescounters, Parecer, averidge, Policy, Barratry, Betcommary, Wager,
Renuntiation, Laws of Old, or Staple Laws. Procurations will be of use again;
buy what thou can, there will be a quick return; stock but thy self with
commodities, and thy goods shall not lie Moth-eaten by thee; thy King says
unto thee, that there shall be a free trade: Merchandise shall flourish, again,

Fifthly, come Prisoners, ye which if ye would not complie, must be committed;
if ye could not yield to Orders, ye must yield to the Key-keeper; if ye would
not help a Free State, must lie bound in Fetters; if ye would not part with
your revenues for the present power, will be overpowred; ye must discontinues
from your heritages, Jer. 17.4. Yea, remember the doom of the times, either
partake, or take him to you Jaylour; either cast in your lot; or cast him into
the hole. Oh how many of you for preserving conscience toward God, and
fidelity to your Prince, that your names might not be blemished, nor your
professions scandalled nor your posterities branded, have lost your
livelyhoods, and liberties, and been enthralled like Captives taken in war,
which did endure all the rage of merciless Furies, rather then consent to such
Jesuitical, and Diabolical designs? But oh, shall ye always be warded up in
those Little eases? Is there no jayle-delivery to be expected? yes, the
sorrowful sighing of the Prisoners has been heard afar off, the noise of your
chains has ratled in your Kings ears; he does commiserate all his suffering
subjects, but every heartstring in him does ache to think of his distressed
Prisoners. They are their Malignants, but his Loyal Subjects; their Traitors,
but his True-men, and therefore shall not these be tender unto him? Yes, the
ruining of men's estates does grieve him, but hazarding of men's lives does
pierce him to the quick. Oh ye prisoners, therefore (says such a King) think
not your selves forgotten, your names are penned down there is a Record kept of
all your suffering; your King does speak to you through the keyhole, and does
promise you, that he will make the gates of Iron, and Brass fly opon for your
sakes, saying, Come forth prisoners, (ye have been Prisoners,) ye shall be
Courtiers, ye have worn chains of Iron, I will change them into chains of
Gold; ye have been upon hot service for Me, ye have waged a fierce battle for
my sake, ye have been ready to die for Me, and by the worst of Deaths, not
killed with the Sword, but the Axe. Well, ye are Soldiers too, Champions of
prowess, ye have fought a pitched battle for me in the field of obloquy, and
might have left your precious blood dropping out upon the top of the Hill.
Martial Worthies, I account you my Heroes, ye have outlived the fate of the
day, ye shall have your Salary, step to Court, and there ye shall find your
Princely Paymaster. Prisoners shall be released, and recompensed.

6. Sixthly, Come Enemies; who can cast an eye on such? I can look cheerfully
upon you; who can exchange a word with such? I can salute you; who can affect
such? I have a breast: for you; Who has a hand for such? I have arms to
embrace you; Ye have been Enemies, your enmity was apparent, ye denied my
Title, defied my Name, deprived me of my Revenue, slandered my Actions, took up
Arms against me, and would have taken away my life; ye Beheaded the Father,
and said ye would have whipped the Son to death; and if your hands had been as
long as your tongues I had been cut short enough, ye would have been real
Enemies, and made good your words to a title. Now who can pardon such Enemies?
I can pass an Act of Indemnity to them. Ye are Enemies, but ye have met with a
mericfull Enemy, one that does not desire to be an Enemy, one that will not be
an Enemy. Cannot I raze out of my breast all these injuries, and indignities?
Yes, I have a Princely heart of mine own, and ye shall find the Princely
operations of it; Your design does not exceed my Patience, nor your malice my
Prudence; Ye expelled me: but I will not banish you; Ye would have unkinged Me,
but I will not unman you: if ye know how to forsake your errors, I know how to
forgive them; If ye will but be peaceable, I am not implacable; I would win you
by clemency, I would reclaim you by Prudence; ye have been my blood-thirsty
Enemies, but I have not a blood-thirsty thought against you: I will not spill
your blood, and my heart would bleed, if ye should spill it your selves What
mercy should I have found at your hands, if I had fallen into your power? What
but mercy shall ye find at my hands, now ye are in my power? Ye which have
been barely my Enemies, I am no Enemy unto you; A man of fury and indignation
would destroy you all, but a man of Understanding and Knowledge will preserve
you all; ye cannot have more guilt, then I have kindness; nor more crime then I
have compassion. If ye can but repent for what ye have done, it shall never
repent me, that I have saved the lives of my penitent Enemies. It is baseness
to reproach a Reformed man for any of his former sins, though never so
grievous: who will reproach Zacheus for his extortion, or Saint Paul for his
persecution, after their conversion? Must contrite Sinners thus be treated, and
not contrite Enemies? Yes, my Humanity, and my Christianity teach me how to
relent, and to express my self indulgent, and to feel an obliterating heart
toward my converted Enemies. A Gracious Prince does not know how to revive
former grievances, or to call you Enemies: your Prudent prince knows not how to
feel the sting of ill turns, or to seek revenge for them. See how I would gain
your hearts by meekness, and break, or melt your hearts with Prudence. If ye
can but say it was an irreligious attempt, I have Religion enough to bury it;
if ye can but say, it was a Jesuitical parallel, I have a Protestant heart to
pardon it. Give Me but My own, and I give you your lives: give me but your
knees, and I give you your necks. At what price went necks formerly? the price
is much fallen. Though perhaps I could not have bought my neck of you for
millions, yet ye may have your necks of Me under the price of a Sowze, or a
Liver, even for the asking, even without asking, for I offer you them, if you
will give Me but calm tongues, and cordial affections. Return to your duty,
and your Prince does return to you in favor; be not ye Malcontents, and I am
pacified. Can you imagine lower terms for redintegration of affection? Was
there ever Prince so highly provoked, so easily reconciled? What would ye have?
Ye have my pacified Countenance, and if that does not satisfy you, ye have my
Act of Pacification. Ye are invincible Enemies, if ye will not believe Me; ye
are intractable, inveterate Enemies, if ye do not bless Me; Are ye not yet used
like Natives? What would my Countrymen have? am I not yet kind enough? can ye
wish me to be more amicable? Ye have my heart, and ye have my hand; my Princely
favor is both signified, and signed; it is to be feared, that your many
Princes used slippery arts with you, and were men of no fidelity, that your
true Princes word does carry so little credit with it; for what do ye still
doubt Me, and suspect me? shall there never be an end of fears, and jealousies?
am I yet too sparing in expressions? how should I persuade you, that my lips
are the true Ambassadors of my heart. Indeed some think, that I have something
forgot my Mothe-tongue, that I cannot speak readily French; but did not my
Father, think you, teach me to speak his country language? else why do ye
complain of the Idiome? Have I not spoken plain English? If I have, why do ye
not understand me? Why do ye not say that ye can require no more for plenary
satisfaction? Why have you still panick fears, that for all your Princes
candid, and liquid unbreasting of himself, ye say, or can say, that here is no
quiet corner, this Land must not be taken up for our safe resting place? Why
not? What troubles you? are your hearts working? are your feet stirring? will
ye shun the sight of your Prince? No, (says such a King) fly not my presence,
fly not out of the Nation; for except your own dreads chase you, who pursue
you? except the Devil does compel you to be gone, who does eject you? no, keep
your obedience, and keep your ground. Your King bids you iive in the Land, live
in his eye, live till (as Augustus Caesar said of Pollio) ye become grayheaded
under his mercy. What now then, nothing but proclaiming of Rebels, searching
abroad for Taytours, committing to Dungeons, holding up hands at the bars of
justice? Rackings, and Gibbetings in the Reign of such a Prince? no, some wiser
then other some. An hasty, precipitate Prince might do this, but a man of
understanding, and knowledge has no such spite, or rancour in him. There is
not an hasty word heard, not a disturbing Messenger sent abroad, not a
vindictive action appearing, but all in another accent. They which were his own
Enemies are not so much as called Enemies, much less prosecuted as Enemies;
except therefore they would have the Crown from his head, what would they have
more from the head, and heart of such a Mild, Merciful Prince that wears the
Crown? After intestine wars, and bloody encounters, what is the issue? There
is a reconciliation, all Friends, a general Amnesty is past, the King, and his
Enemies are at peace. There is not a man, which will hurt the King, there is
not a man whom the King will harm; his Enemies will rather fall at his feet,
then strike at his head: and the King is readier to shed tears, then blood.
The King may rest in his Throne, and his Enemies may rest in their beds. Let
them both rest, and let not all the Machiavilians in the land, all the Jesuits
at Rome, all the Devils in Hell, be able to set them at variance. We have had a
chargeable insurrection, a dismal war, a lasting, and wastng rent, but
praised be the great overruling God; that he by an Heavenly providence has
brought in the right Heir, and by an Heavenly inspiration has knit the hearts
of three Kingdoms to acknowledge this Heir, that not only the King, and his
faithful Subjects are met, but the King, and his fiercest Enemies are
reconciled. Oh, vexation to the turbulent Politicians! Oh, torment to the
State-troubling Jesuits! Oh, the mysteries of Gods secret actings! Oh, the
miracles of his unsearchable wisdom. Consider, and confess, ponder, and
publish, recount, and record, weigh, and wonder, sing for joy, and weep for
joy. Ask now of the days that are past, since the day that God Created man
upon earth: enquire from the one end of heaven to the other, if there came to
pass such a great thing as this, or whether any such like thing has been
heard, Deuteronomy. 4.32. A King without the Land, and a single person voted never
again to reign in the Land, and the whole Nation filled with Swordmen, Pikemen,
and Spearmen, to fight it out to the last drop of blood, rather then the
design should fall to the ground, and yet in the exiled condition of the King,
and against the desperate Decrees of such an Illegal, Irregal, Depriving,
Depraving, Deposing, Decrowning Party, coming through the midst of many, which
had been ancient Enemies, not one lifting tongue, or weapon (that was generally
known) either to oppose his entrance, or resist his right, God (to
astonishment) has brought the King into the Land, and brought him to his
Throne, settled him, and settled his Enemies, and all things so miraculously
ordered in Heaven, and so sweetly composed upon earth, that all differences are
ended in accord, and all jarres in embracements, that there are nothing but
mutual, and reciprocal desires, and vows for one another welfare. Oh mercy
mever to be forgotten! Oh miracle never enough to be admired; they require a
Trophee, they deserve an Hosannah, yea, a volley of Hymns to celebrate them.
Thus can the providence of God settle a distracted Nation, thus can the
prudence of a King pacify a displeased, distempered people, and turn Capital
enmity by degrees into cordial unity. But to draw to a close, a King that can
be thus good to his Enemies, to whom will he not be benign? I have shown you
how many shall have a sense of his happy Government, and who may not have a
share of it? Yes, expect it one, expect it every one. I say no more, but that a
Prudent Prince is extensive in felicity, He is a blessing to a whole STATE. But
by a man of understanding, and Knowledge, the STATE theref shall be prolonged.

Now let us come to the lastingness of the Cure, shall be prolonged. From hence
observe; that a prudent Prince does set up a Stable Kingdom; not for a life,
but for generations, His ego nec metus rerum, nec tempora pono. Virgil. 1.
Aeneid.

There are neither measures, nor stints to be put to such things, wise men do
not bury all their happiness with them, as if when they were dead their
children must go seek for estates; no the Fathers shall enjoy it, Virgil ib^d,
Et nati natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis, their Sons shall inherit it,
and their Sons Sons after them; so that they are happy in themselyes, and
happy in their posterity, therefore is it said, that the root of the righteous
shall not be moved, Prove, 12.3. Such leave a deep rooting, which long
continuance of time can hardly pluck up. Might may gain riches for a season,
but prudence does bring in durable riches, Pro 8.18. This is not greatness for
a glance, or glimpse, but for perpetual generations Genesis 9.12. or to the utmost
bounds of the everlasting hills, Genesis 49.26. that as a wise man's name and blood
shall remain in his posterity, so shall his felicity. Whatsoever does carry no
fastening with it, but is like unto a pin half driven home, yet this is a
nail in a sure place, yea such a nail as a man may hang upon it all the glory
of the Fathers house, and of the Nephews, and of the posterity. Es 22,23 24.
Quaeris Alcide parem? Seneca.
do look for any Champion like to Hercules? and do thou look for any
Founder like to the prudent man? no, he does build for ages. The King that
judges according to truth, (and he is the wisest Prince) his Throne shall be
established for ever. Pro. 29.14. Was it not verified in David? Yes, God
promised to make him a house, and when his days should be fulfilled, and he
should sleep with his Fathers, God would set up his seed, which should come out
of his loins, and the Kingdom should be established 2 Samuel 7.12. Was not this
promise found true in the event? yes, though Judah had some Kings that were
none of the best, yet for the first Founders sake the Kingdom was a long time
preserved, as it is manifest in the reign of Abiam, who was bad enough, yet for
David's sake did the Lord his God give him a light in Jerusalem. 1 Kings 15 4.
and the like is seen in Jehorams reign, who was desperately evil, for he not
only walked in the sins of Israel, but took the Daughter of Ahab to wife, yet
the Lord would not destroy Judah, for his servant David's sake, as he had
promised to give him a light, and to his seed for ever. 2 Kings 8.19. yea no
enemy for a long time could scale that City, which a wise man had built; for
when Sennacherib came against it with force, and fury, and thought to have
rifled it, and razed it, yet God bad Hezekiah be of good Comfort, saying that
the King of Assyria should not enter that City, nor shoot an arrow against it,
nor come before it with shield, nor cast a mount against it, but he should
return the same way that he came, and should not enter the City, for I (says
the Lord) will defend this City to save it, for mine own sake, and for my
servant David's sake. 2 Kings 19 32,33,34. So that here is a City set upon a
true basis; what a prudent Prince has built it remains, as it were, to
perpetuity, that whereas other States have their hurles, and are shaken down,
as if they were built upon a quicksand, for Kingdoms shall cease. Isai. 17.3.
and shall be broken, and divided to the four winds of heaven, and shall not be
for posterity. Dan. 11.4. and the Throne of Kingdoms shall be overthrown. Nah.
3.23. insomuch that there shall be neither royal Prince, nor royal City to be
seen. For how is Sheshach taken? and the glory of the whole earth taken? Jer.
31.41. I will make Rabbah a dwelling place for Camels, and the Ammonites a
Sheepcoat. Ezech. 25.5. Go ye over to Tharshish, howl ye that dwell in the
Isles, is not this that your glorious City? her antiquity is of ancient days,
but her own feet shall lead her far off to be a sojourner: Who has decreed
this against Tyrus that Crowns men? whose Merchants are as Princes, and her
Chapmen are the Nobles of the world? I the Lord of hosts have decreed it, to
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring to contempt all them that be
glorious in the earth. Es. 23.6,7,8,9. When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling,
but Ephraim afterward trembled, for he has sinned in Baal, and is dead. Hos.
13.1. Hear this ye fat kine of Bashan, which are in the mountain of Samaria,
which oppress the poor, and destroy the needy, and they say to their Masters,
bring ye, and let us drink, The Lord of hosts has sworn by his holiness, that
lo the days shall come upon you, that he will take you away with thorns. and
your posterity with Fishhoks, and ye shall go out of the breaches, every Cow
forward; and ye shall cast your selves out of the palace. Amos 4.1,2.3. Niniveh
was counted an invincible place, but the gates of her rivers shall be opened,
and her palaces shall melt, Huzzah the Queen shall be led away Captive, and her
Maids shall lead her like Doves tabring upon their breasts. Though Niniveh be of
old like a poole of water, yet they shall flee away: stand, stand, shall they
cry, but none shall look back, spoil ye the silver, spoil ye the gold, for
there is no end of store, and glory of all the pleasant vessels, but she is
empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the knees knook
together, and sorrow is in all loins, and all faces gather blackness together.
Nah. 2 6,7,8,9,10. Of Babylon it is said, that a cry of battle is as in a land
of great destruction; how is the hammer of the whole earth destroyed, and
broken? how is Babel become d^te, and waste? Ier. 50.22,23. Yea thou shall take
up this Proverb against the King of Babel, and say, how has the Oppressor
ceased? and the golden City rested? The Lord has broken the rod of the wicked,
and the scepters of the Rulers. Esai. 14.4,5. notwithstanding these be the
strange mutations of Cities, States, and Kingdoms, that nothing is firm, and
fixed, which power, and pol^cy only has reer'd up; and these ominous; and
stupendous fates and disasters are met with where earthly glory has been seen
in her brightest fulgour; yet Prudence builds no such perishing collapsing
structures; where Kings reign by heirs, there is lasting riches. Prove. 8.18.
those Governors which prudence authoriseth shall be planted in the mountain of
Gods inheritance, and his hands shall establish them, Exodus 15.17. mark, these
have an establishment go along with them, and shall have to them, and their
successors, a demise of their government, as long as God sits Prince upon his
mountain, be proprietary in his own inheritance, and hold his Crown-land; these
are not only placed but planted there; not only estated, but established. Of
such a King God says, as he does in Ps. 89.28,29. His mercy will I keep for
him for evermore, and my Covenant shall stand fast with him, his seed also will
I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the days of heaven. Vespasian had
two conspirators, which sought his life; he hearing of their pernicious
intention, caused them to be apprehended, and not long after brought them upon
an open stage, and putting two swords into their hands, bad them dispatch him;
they being astonished at the extraordinary motion refused it: what says
Vespatian, have ye thus long plotted my death, and will ye not now kill me? Oh,
give over such designs, for ye will never be Masters of your desires; do ye
not manifestly discern how such wretched attempts will be frustrated? yes,
videtis principatum fato dari, frustraque tentaturum facinus esse potiundispe.
Ye see Principality is given by destiny, and it is but lost labor to undertake
any horrid action with the hope to enjoy it, or to wrest the Principality to
your selves. Where God does bless the government of a prudent Prince, it is in
vain for all the Conspirators upon earth to seek to destroy it. It is in vain
for any to fight against the Destinies, I mean to oppose Gods decrees. Men may
murmr mutiny, plot and project, but at last end with shame in all their
undertakings. Wisdom does raise impregnable forts, A Prudent Prince does cause
a State to be prolonged. But by a man of understanding, and knowledge, the
State thereof shall be prolonged.

Application.
1. FIrst this does show, that present greatness is not the true greatness, but
the happiness that does continue; as here, the decaying State is not the right
State, but the State that is prolonged. Who care for Actours, which have gay
clothes upon their backs for a few hours? so who care for the said Momentany
Mimicks of Government? P^ut. in Solone
Croesus asked Solon whether he did not hold him (being in the achme, the
vertical of worldly greatness, and glory) the happiest man in the world; I
cannot tell (says Solon) yet what to think of thee, till I can see whether
this grandeur will continue, and hold out; ^urip.
for Ne Priamus hac aetate infaelix fuit, Priamus, that was at last the
miserable King of Troy was not unhappy at thy age. Aspicite me, qui fui
censpicuus mortalibus, praeclara peragens, at nunc una die me dejecit fortuna,
sicut plumam. Look upon me, who was once cons icuous amongst mortal men,
performing famous mous things, but now fortune has blown me down like a
Feather, said Amphytrion; Val. M. l. 6. c. 1.
Siphax that was once said to be Victor Victoriae, Id. ibid.
The Conqueror of Conquest, at last was cast into chains by Laelius Q. Cepio
that was called Patronus Senatus, the Patron of the Senate, had at last his
bowels torn out by the Hangman. Oh how many of these Glowormes have we seen
shine brightly for a time? How many of these Pageants have we beheld pass along
the streets with pomp and glory for a season? for God, diverse times, does shine
upon the counsel of the Ungodly, they rest in their houses, and flourish in
their Palaces, they walk with stretched out necks, and puff at their Inferiors;
they build their nests in the Stars, and wear pride like a chain about their
necks. Oh how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up! But what
is all this but as the brightness of a Falling-star, which does shine so long
as the unctuous matter does continue, but then does drop down in gelly? Worldly
glory does dazzle much for a while; but it is but fluid and transitory. How mad
are we then that are apt to be enchanted with present greatness? How ready are
we to magnify any sort of men which do thrust into Authority? by us they shall
be accepted, extolled, and said to be Governors designed from Heaven to rule
over us; they shall be crouched unto, and have all the flattering Titles that
Time-serving Parasites can invent. Oh your Excellency, Oh your Serene Highness;
these same Larves shall be taken for natural faces, these same Usurpers shall
be cried up as lawful princes. But beware of this delusion, for may not the
worst of men have the best of Fortunes. Yes, I my self have seen the wicked in
great prosperity, Psalm. 37.35. To them alone the land may be given, Job 15.19.
Their eyes may start out with Fatness, and they may have Collops in their
Flanks, Job. 19.27. But how long will this hold? nay how soon will it be gone?
have they any more than a Lease of this greatness? can they convey it to their
Heirs by free-deed? no, they have but their term, and when that is expired, the
posterity has scarce the rags of the Fathers Robes. Away therefore with all
mutable fading pomp; that is the true greatness that has a permanency in it,
as (here) that is the true State that is Prolonged. But by a man of
Understanding and Knowledge, the State thereof shall be Prolonged.

Secondly, this does show that it is not in the power of man, To cut off the
entaile of States. The Government may be interrupted, but again renewed; for a
while disturbed, but afterward prolonged. Away then with them, that think they
can shoot away Principalities out of the Gun-room, and blow down States with
Votes, break Scepters, and dash in pieces Crowns at pleasure; Monarchy (say
they) shall never return again into this Land, there is an end of the Single
Person; nay some there are that pretend they can see the dooms of Princes in
the stars, and poetize Kings out of their Thrones, with Mystical, Magical
Verses; Mars, Puer, Al^cto, Virgo, Vulpes, Leo, Nullus. Or raze out just Titles
to Sovereignty, by throwing down dead Images, or give the last Exequies to
Royal Lines, by crying, Exiit; no, there may be a dead winter for a time, but
at the Spring the Righteous shall flourish as the Palm tree. Psalm. 92,12.
There may be some opposition, and obstruction for a while, but all the weapons
that are formed against thee, shall not prosper and every tongue that rises up
against thee shall be condemed; this is the heritage of the Lords Servants, and
their righteousness is of me, says the Lord, Isa. 54.17. Though there be not
clear day on the sudden for them, yet Light is sown for the righteous, Psalm.
97.11. Though there may be some waiting, yet the Patient abiding of the
righteous shall be gladness, Prove, 10.28. Sigon. l. 11. Occid Imp. cap. 11.
Honorius the Son of the great Theodosius being expelled his Kingdom, at last
recovered it; Fulgos. l. 6.
and so did Justinian the Second, after several indignities endured by Leontius
and Tyberius; Id. ibid.
and so did Andronicus when he had been driven out of the Empire by Emanuel.
Saxo Grammaticus reports the like of Hiarnus, Syward, and Jarmericus; and
infinite it were to relate all examples that to this end might be produced.
Therefore let no man think that accidents can quite throw down Thrones, or
present Casualties can be perpetual Fates to Monarchies. No, Governments have
their interchanges, as the State here that had various chances under the many
Princes, yet when a wise Prince came to rule, it was Prolonged. But by a Man of
Understanding and Knowledge, the State thereof shall be Prolonged.

3 This does show that that Greatness is uncomfortable which is unconstant, and
that Felicity is not profitable, which will not be prolonged. Here is much
striving in the world to get vast Estates, and when all is done, men have no
confidence for their continuance. What man is there that has built a a new
house, and has not dedicated it, Deuteronomy. 20.5. Here are many Builders but few
Dedicators, they rather heap together Estates, then hallow them; so long as
they may get, they care not by what means they get, and are these revenues like
to prosper? is there no more required to happiness but thine own industry? can
thy own ripe head, or right hand, settle an estate? no, blind are the Dizzards
of these times, which think to raise fortunes by the engine of Endeavor; they
carke, and spare, and gripe, and think that is the high way to preferment, yea,
the only way to make Possessions firm, if they be but provident the Estate
shall be Prolonged; it is no matter for Gods Providence, but their own; but
alas, do not these men at last find that their hands may stretch, and their
brains may retch, and that in conclusion they do but spend their strength in
vain, and that they shall bring forth nothing but the wind. Endeavor, I
confess, is requisite, for I know that the Fool that fold, his hands together
shall eat his own Flesh, Eccles. 4.8. But endeavor is not all, for I know
likewise, that the anxious worldling may unfold both his hands, and not pamper
his flesh. There is the paineful Fool, as well as the slothful Fool, they are
both empty Sculls. It is true that the sluggard does bereave his own house, for
by slothfulness the Roof of the House does go to decay, Eccles. 10.18. And it
is as true that the Worldling that does think to fetch in all by his restless
pains, does but labor in the very fire, and weary himself for vanity, Heb.
2.13. What great substance is there to be gotten out of the fire, and that
which is gotten does it not carry such an heat in it, that it will consume all
to nothing? But I have nothing to do with the idle Fool, but the busy toylsom
Fool. Come forth then thou turmoiling Idiot, thou which do sweat thy self
into a dry skin, and travayl thy self into a Cripple, that do think that thy
warded hands shall fetch in an estate, and that thy sur-beaten feet shall stamp
up a fortune. Alas thou art in a Frensy, troubled with the Simples, yea, thou
art out of thy wits, for not only he that makes have to be rich shall not be
innocent, Prove. 28,20. but he, that with an evil eye makes have to be rich
shall come to poverty, Pro. 28.22. Poverty? Not power, but poverty, not plenty
but poverty: goodly industry that bring nothing but poverty with it; a very
Nonsense might show as much wit, for here is have to hindrance, have to
heaviness, have to hurt, have to hardship; sure I am, more have then good
speed, more have then happinss, for the man does make have to be rich, and he
does make have to be a beggar; Either he himself shall end his days in a
Clinke, or become a Parish Charge; or his heir shall turn vagabond, or die in an
Hospital. Therefore travail not too much to be rich, but cease from thy wisdom
Proverbs 23. thy brutish wisdom, which thou might have learned of crafty
Wolves, and subtle Foxes, all the beasts of prey have such ripe heads, every
Borough, and Den could have taught thee this skill. What now then is the
Gather-good, the standing, stable rich man? Can plotting, and projecting,
pushing, and pinching, ever perpetuate means? No, God does devide such. Ho, he
that coveteth an evil covetousness to his own house, to set his nest on high to
escape from the power of evil, he has consulted shame to his own house;
Habakkuck 2.9.10. Not same but shame? shame? Yea shattering, for the stone out
of the wall shall cry, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, Woe unto
him, etc. Habakkuck 2.11,12. the stones of his own walls shall yell down his
greatness, and the beams of his own timber shall rattle down his house, he
shall fall with a shrike, and come down with a vengeance, a Woe; and how can it
be otherwise? for will God ever suffer men to sacrifice to their own yarne,
when they have fished in estates? or kiss their own hands when they have
catched means? No, he will make them sacrifice to the true Deity, and kiss the
right hand, or else he will spread the dung of their sacrifices upon their
faces, and beat their kissing lips black and blew, for making Numens of their
rotten yarne, and their filthy fingers; their rich gayns shall never prosper,
for God will blow upon them; what they have gotten shall be put into a broken
bag, their wealth shall melt away like the fat of Lambs; though there be no end
of their travail, yet there shall be no fruit of their travail; though with
timely labor, and broken nights rests, and many a parsimonious meal they have
forced in a livelihood, yet all shall be in vain. It is in vain to rise early,
and to go to bed late, and to eat the bread of carefulness, Psalm. 127.2. In
vain? Then why do they not call their selves vain, Wizards? for do not
Soothsayers much after this manner? is it not a kind of conjuring up estates?
and fetching in maintenance by familiar Spirits? Are not the arts of Worldlings
next to the black art? There is little of God in them, and I am afraid too much
of the Devil; though they do not consult or compact with him, yet their works
are the works of darkness, and they have the depths of Satan, they are
malefici. Now will not all these Magicians end miserable Creatures, and all
these Witches (worse then the white Witches) end needy wretches? Yes, ye shall
see them stand with stamping feet, and staring eyes to see their goods wither
away like the grass upon the house top, and their riches take them wings and
fly away. Oh pains mis-imployed! Oh time misspent! Assure your selves whatsoever
heads they have gathered together for the present, they shall not purse up much
at the last reckoning. Have ye not presidents of this? yes dismaying examples.
Adonibezek, which for a time cut off Thumbs and Tooes to get means, at last eat
his bread like a Dog under the table. Shehnah the great Tre^surer, Esa. 22. who
h^d crept into Court, and thrust Eliakim out of his place, and by cunning
artifices had raised himself to an height of greatness, insomuch that he rode
in his Chariots of glory, yet at last he was driven from his station, and saw
Eliakim clothed with his own garments, and he himself was sent to wander in a
foreign land, and to roll, and turn like a ball in a strange Country. Zimri
that by subtle policies, was come to an high degree of command, (for he was
Captain of half the Chariots of the Kingdom, by which means he deposed and
destroyed his own Prince;) yet had Zimiri peace which slew his Master? No, he
reigned but seven days, and at last burnt himself. Haman that was the wonder of
his age, the Darling at Court, who had the Kings ear, and the Kings seal at
command, yet at last he had his face covered, his goods were confiscated, and
he himself ended his life upon a Gibbet. Cic. l. de divi.
Accius Navius which had gotten infinite wealth under Tarquinius Priscus, yet
at last he came to be so poor, that he fed Swine. Pont. l. 2. c. 5. de fort
domest
P. Scipio after all his pomp died so poor, that he had not money enough to
defray his funeral charges. Bons. l. 10. c. 3.
Telephus the great Soldier and waster of Countries, at last had not stock
enough to buy himself necessaries, but went up and down the streets with a
Basket begging relief, Nero that had the most sumptuous Palace which ever was
beheld, which was called the Golden House, yet at last he was adjudged by the
Senate to whipped to death; Sueton.
and flying from his Court, he could get nothing to eat but black bread, nor
nothing to drink but puddle water: and having neither friend nor enemy to
dispatch him, trying the points of two Poniards, at last he was his own fatal
Executioner. Sejanus that was the great Favorite of Tiberius, Zonarus.
and under him ruled all for a while throughout the Empire, yet at last he had
his head struck off, and when his body had layn three days unburied, it was
cast into the Tybur. Attalus which had committed horrible outrages in Africa,
Cuspinian.
and gained great spoil, being taken, had his right hand struck off by
Honorius, and his left hand by Constantius; and after he had been exposed many
days as a public Spectacle of scorn and horror, at last he died
ignominiously. Cedrenus.
Phocas having by art and treachery seized upon the Palace of his good Master
Mauricius, and killed his wife and children before his eyes, and afterward in
a most barbarous manner murdered him, flowing in all the delights and
pleasures, for a time, which such a vast Empire could afford him, was at last
taken by Heraclius, and having his hands, feet, shoulders, and privities cut
off, was at last deservedly beheaded. What should I speak more of Belisarius,
Bomilcar, Calippus, Cleander, Orgefforix, Procopius, Gildo Stilico, Felicianus,
Zaacius, Murziphilus, Massaeus, Bujamundus, Theupolus, Marinus, Falerius, and a
thousand others, which got great estates by tyranny, and lost them with
terror. How do ill gotten goods melt out of the hands of the Possessors? How
many are torn in pieces by their own Bloodhounds? Oh that they would hear
this, observe this, lay this to heart, which care not how they pile up means,
and beget a breed of riches out of the womb of a Concubine; cheats being as
good to them as lawful gains, and slippery devices, as the just Fruits of
their Callings. How few can look upon their means with a comfortable eye? or
bless Divine Providence as the Root of their flourishing Estates? What think
you of them which have advanced themselves by the short Yard-VVand, and the
scant measure, by varnishing and glozing, mingling and sophisticating, by
blowing and stretching, by the narrow Slay and the deep Toll-dish, by decoying
and trappanning, by pimping and pandoring, by broken Titles and False
Witnesses, by suborning and sycophantizing, by insinuating lies and insnaring
oaths, by breach of Promises and breach of Covenants, by Usury, Forgery,
Perjury, Bribery, biting Prices, griping Fees, Simony and Sacrilege? oh the
sordid spirits that many men have to raise Fortunes! men of high parts and
lofty preferments insatiable and imprudent in wresting in advantage; not only
we cannot eat, drink, or wear any thing but there is cheating, and cousenage in
it: but not an Office can be procured, nor a Sentence at Law obtained, but men
know the prices of them to purpose; both Court, and Courts of Justice have a
sad complaint concerning them. I blush, and bleed at what I hear, and men feel:
Oh that men of admired wisdom should be so blind about cursed gain! That men
that can talk in the highest accent about Religion, should be so anomolous in
matters of Equity; I particularise none, and it does trouble me, that so many
should know their names; yea, it does grieve me, that under a gracious Savior,
there should be so little Conscience, and under a pure Prince so much
corruption: The Brokers-shops, and the very Stews are scarce more infamous;
yea, God grant that Publicans and Harlots do not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven before them.

Do Heathens and Infidels only commit such things? no, Et Roma habet suum
Hannibalem (as Hannibal said of Fabius) Rome has her Hannibal, so the Reformed
Church has her rapacious crew, the whole World is full of little else (as
Saint Anthony dreamt) but snares, and gins: Yet these men are under my Prayers,
and my soul does weep for them in secret, for they cannot but be convinced of
the erroneousness of their actions, and so I trust there is some hope of their
conversions: But there are a generation of men, which seem to be twofold more
the children of Hell; and I am not certain whether Prayers or Tears will do
them any good; a man would almost think they were past conviction and shame;
they have gotten estates injuriously, and justify the possession of them
insolently: they hold them as good as birthrights, and no gains of a lawful
Trade seem to be more comfortable: As Naboths Vineyard was as good Freehold to
Ahab as his Crown-land; and Achans Babylonish Garment and Golden Wedge, was as
good purchase as his Fathers Carmies Tapestry, or the best Jewel in his
keeping: so what these men have gotten by the lurch; booty is as lawful Revenue
as a Patrimony: It is no matter how they came by it, so long as they have
fingered it. What say you to them, which have risen from being but Handicrafts
men, to be now r^ght good Gentlemen? and from Mechan^cks to shoulder it with
Peers and Potentates? and how? by Wastes and Spoils, Rents and Ruins,
Depradations and Depopulations, Free-plunder and Free quarter, Tears and Blood,
which have broken up Houses, and rifled Families, adorned their rooms with
other men's hangings, and decked their new Ladies with the old Ladies Jewels,
which felled down Woods after they had felled down Men, and sold Beasts out of
the Pastures, after they had imprisoned the Owners in Dungeons, like Beasts,
which entered inheritances by the beat of the Drum, and fetched home revenewes
by the swords point; Soldiers of forcune indeed, which fought for half
Crowns, and whole Crowns too; which lived upon Sequestered Means, Delinquents
Estates, Kings-land, and Church-land; men that studied a new Art, as famous as
Baltazars Academy; very liberal Sciences they proved to them; or if ye will set
up a new Merchandise, created a new Corporation, Freemen of the politics,
which trade in Goldsmiths Hall, Haberdashers Hall, Camden House, Darby House,
Worcester House, Somerset House, the pirilous Court of Indemnity, the
pernicious high Court of Justice; which have been Messengers, Informers, Flies,
Spies, Committeemen, Excisemen, Keepers of Jayles, Keepers of Liberties, any
vocation to thrive, and get commodity by: And yet these men tell the world that
they are neither Jews, nor Mores, for they have Bibles in their hands, and cry
aloud to have the Lord Jesus set upon his Throne. Well, what shall I say, that
these are inspired stilts for Religion to walk upon? or hallowed nets to catch
erring souls? no neat inventions to crutch up broken fortunes, or holy frauds
to bait angles with, to hook up silly fish. But can these men persuade
themselves, that goods so gotten have in them any good cement to uphold a
building? Truly I should have thought, that if I h^d been Officer, or
Commander, Chafferer, or Chaplain under such a State, that I should have
exposed my good name to infamy, my conscience to the Furies, and my Estate to
be torn in pieces by the Bandogs. Is there no lightning in the sky to blast
such unjust gains? are there no Thunderbolts in Heaven to strike down such
loftly Turrets, built up with Rapine? a man would think that the cries, and
curses of the poor were enough to demolish, and dismantle such structures.
Howsoever if God be the God of recompenses, he will render to them in time all
their wickedness, and take vengeance of them sevenfold. Though the good Prince,
or the great Council may pardon them, yet I doubt whether the just God will
cover their iniquity, and wash away their blood. They know who was their
Protector in all their violences, and who it was which gave them Commission to
prey upon an innocent people, but where is now the rage of the Oppressor? Es.
51.13. Where is the Lions dwelling! and the pasture of the Lions whelps; where
the Lion and the Lyoness walked, and the Lions whelpe, and none made him
afraid. The Lion did tear in pieces for his whelps, and worried for his
Lyoness, and filled his holes with prey and his dens with spoil. Nahum
2.11.12 Is your Protector yet living, and with his Vulcans face, and Hercules
club, able to defend you? no, it is thought that the Ghost of a Clergiman
frighted him out of the world, and was more fatal to him, then the Flanders
Prauncers. Whether, he went flying away in the air, or a special Messenger
from his old Master fetched him away in have, is uncertain; Stat 2. Syl.
but this we are sure, that if he did not leave his skin, he did leave his
gantlet behind him. Immensis urnam quatit Eacus umbris. Ye must stand, or fall
then by your selves, he is not able to protect you, and indeed what can protect
you? no, your outrages are in Gods ears and do cry night and day to make your
Plagues wonderful, and when he shall call you to account, and ye shall see fury
arising in his face, and brimstone sprinkled upon your habitations, ye shall
see how soon these possessions gotten by violence will waste away. Can ye read?
Is Scripture your infallible rule? do ye believe, that the Law it self is not
more binding then the curses thereof will be confounding? then lay to heart
these evident places. Behold I will judge between the fat sheep, and the lean
sheep: Because ye have thrust with thigh and shoulder, and pusht at the weak
with their horns till they be scattered; therefore I will judge between sheep
and sheep, Ezech. 34.20,21,22. Forasmuch as your treading is upon the poor, and
ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them, ye have
planted pleasant Vineyards; but ye shall not drink of the Wine of them, Amos
5.11. As the Patridge gathers the young, which she has not brought forth, so
he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool. Jer. 17.11. yea, and if ye will have a
memorable place, look with both your eyes upon that which is presented you in
Job, and be not blind in the viewing and reviewing of it. Chap. 27.

Verse 7. Mine Enemy shall be as the wicked, and he that rises up against me,
as the unrighteous.

Verse 8. For what hope has the hypocrite, when he has heaped up riches, if
God take away his soul.

Verse. 9. Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him.

Verse. 10. Will he set his delight upon the Almighty? will he call upon God at
all times.

Verse. 11. I will teach you what is the hand of God, and I will not conceal
that which is with the Almighty.

Verse 12. Behold ye your selves have all seen it, why then do ye thus vanish in
vanity.

Verse. 13. This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of
Tyrants, which they shall receive from the Almighty.

Verse. 14. If his Children be in great number, the sword shall destroy them,
and his posterity shall not be satisfied with bread.

Verse. 15. His remnant shall be buried in death, and his widows shall not weep.

Verse. 16. Though he should heap up silver as the dast, and prepare raiment as
the clay.

Verse. 17. He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent
shall divide the silver.

Verse 18. He builds his house as a moth, and as a lodge which the watchman
makes.

Verse, 19. When the rich man sleeps, he shall, not be gathered to his
fathers; they opened their eyes, and he was gone.

Verse. 20. Terrors shall take him away as waters, and a tempest shall carry him
away by night.

Verse. 21. The East Wind shall carry him away, and he shall depart; and it
shall hurl him out of his place.

Verse. 22. And God shall cast upon him, and not spare, though he would fain
flee out of his hand.

Verse. 23. Every man shall clap their hands at him, and hiss him out of his
place.

This is the Epilogue of Injury and Oppression; thus goes tyranny off from the
Stage. Oh therefore let all hear and fear, and with tingling ears, and
trembling hearts, consider the dreadful Catastrophe of Estates gotten unjustly.
Beware how do eat other men's fruits without money, or do grind the faces
of thy Neighbors, to get Manchet to feed thy hungry appetite If thou would
have a lasting estate, let it be a just estate; not gotten by policy, but
equity; not by craft and cruelty, but by Conscience and Prudence; for thou
see that it is the Wiseman that has Felicity with Permanency; it is the Man
of Understanding and Prudeuce, which has the State which if prolonged: But by
a Man of Understanding and Knowledge, the State thereof shall be prolonged.

4 This does serve to show, that he is the happy King, by whom a state is
prolonged. What have we to do with the Many Princes, no, we had enough, too
much of them: they had Government after Government, people were afflicted, and
amazed with such diversity of forms, and fictions of new Dominations, that it
is anguish, and astonishment to recount them, they were so tossed, and tortured
with the several scruples of men's regulating brains. Let these Many Princes
therefore stand by with their many Conceptions, and give us the Man, that that
One Man, which by his Understanding, and Knowledge can frame up such a
Government, as may last to ages, and by the discreet constitution of it, may be
prolonged. Heaven has its excellency because it is a Firmament, and the Earth
because it does stand upon stable pillars, and a Covenant bec use it is
unchangeable, and Marriage because it is indissoluble, and an inheritance
because it does carry a succession with it, and is a lasting possession, which
does p^ss from the Father to the Son; that is the most blessed Government,
which is firm, and fixed. That is a great abatement to the honor of a thing
which is subject to Time and Chance, Eccles. 9.11. Nothing is eminent, which is
without a certainty. Chrysostom. hom. 9. in Matthew.
Nihil potest sine radice florere. Nothing can sprout, and flourish without a
root. Casual things are calamitous things, because they are done preater
intentionem agentis, Arist. 2. Phys.
beyond the intention of the Agent. Those things are most pleasing to man,
which retain their motion and virtue, and like true natural things have most
force at the end. As the excellency therefore to direct a thing is wisdom.
Eccles. 10.10. So that is the truest wisdom which does settle things with the
longest duration. In quietness and confidence is the strength, Es. 30.15. When
men need not fear any alterations, declinations, or abolitions: therefore the
Spirit of God speaking of a good Governor s^ith, that he shall be a man of
peace, 1 Chronicles. 22 9. The Prophet Esaias speaking of such a good Governor,
s^ith, that the work of justice shall be peace, and assurance for ever: people
shall dw^ll in the Tabernacle of peace, and there shall be sure dwellings, Es.
32.17,18. For an heavy thing it is, when Government is but like Summer fruit,
or a vision of the night, or a rolling instrument. A comfortable thing it is
when people can say of their State, as God does of his own, Look upon Zion, the
City of your solemniti^s, thine eyes shall se^ Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a
Tabernacle that cannot be removed, and the stak^s thereof cannot be taken away,
nor any of the cords thereof brok^n, Es. 33.20. That is the rare Fabric then
which is hewn out of adamant, and the singular vessel which is made up of
Corinthian Brass. He is the rare Limbner in State, which can say with Zeuxis.
Vingo aeternitati, I do paint to Eternity. ^his is the man, which as Cicero
dreamt of Augustus, does come as a man sent from heaven with a golden chain in
his hand to rule a Nation, where the chain shall remain firm, and the linkes
thereof shall never be broken. Rash and vexatious Governors toss Kingdoms with
Earthquakes; and according as they have new fancies come into their heads, so
they are ever and anon for new Models, that people are never certain what they
shall stand to, or live under; but a man of understanding and knowledge does
account, th^e several Scenes of Government, fitter for Stage Plays, then for
States: therefore he is for a Perennity of Laws, and Liberties, for a state to
be prolonged. But by a man of u^derstanding and knowledge, the state thereof
shall be prolonged.

5. Fifthly, This does serve to make us sensible of our own happiness. Are we
now like to bring forth a shortlived child? no, if our sins be not the
Midwives. I hope it shall not take a little spoon meat, and then breath out the
last gasp, but that it shall live, and grow, till it be well stricken in
years, even to be a State prolonged. The age of jealousies is even over, and
the generation of vicissitudes past; we shall no more say, this we have seen,
and that we have felt, and another thing we have had trial of, and what shall
we have next? no, the Antickes are even come to their last Levolto, the
Mummeries and Morricedances are even at an end, and we are in all likelihood to
have nothing but that which is dur ble Oh happy thing that we which were the
laughter, or lamentation for our Lunacies, and Moonfits, should now have our
brains stayed, all things so composed, settled, and secured, that the present
age shall not disturb us, nor after ages distress us, whereby we shall not clap
our hands, and then wring them; no, sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Es.
51.11. Not sing a little and then shrike, but everlasting joy shall be upon our
heads, Es. 51.11. we shall delight our selves in the abundance of peace. Ps.
37.11. yea Peace shall be extended like a river, and like unto a flowing
stream. Es. 66.12. Martial Law before would not suffer any Ancient Law to take
place, but we chiefly ruled with new Orders; but now, God will break the Bow,
and the Sword, and the Battle out of the earth, and we shall ly down safely.
Hos. 2.18. For this is no spectacle to dazzle our eyes for a season, but Horace.
Monementum aere perennius, A Monument more lasting then brass.

These things shall hold Juvenal.
-- Dum saecla manebunt, whilst ages have any feathers upon their wings. God
does seem to say of us, as Jupiter did of the Roman Empire, Imperium sine fine
dedi. -- I have given thee an Empire without end. When this Picture is drawn
out exactly, we may with Phidias put it under the Helmet of Minerva, that is,
Gods providence, and resolve that there it shall be preserved: Ye then which
have not taken any rest a great while for the Tumultuous Ones, now walk the
streets with confidence, and couch down in your Beds with inward satisfaction,
yea, fleep as in the bosom of God; knowing, that instead of trouble, there
shall be tranquillity; and instead of a State disjoynted, a State united, a
State prolonged: But by a Man of Understanding and Knowledge, the State thereof
shall be prolonged.

What shall now be the Extract which shall be drawn out of all this large
discourse? but that we reflect upon that, which has been the occasion of all
our Calamities; Wherefore has this Land been plagued? we have had numerous
Rulers for our numerous sins. For the transgression of the Land, many have been
the Princes thereof. Oh then that we are quit of our Many Princes, and yet the
transgression of the Land does still continue? Have we a desire to more
Judgments, that we cannot cease to provoke? should we not change our manners,
when God does change our miseries? should not a new State, bring on a new
behavior? if we were never cleansed, should we not now be pure? if we were
newer mortified, should we not now be real Penitents? Yes, Lusts, Riots, Oaths,
Frauds, etc. should not be heard of in the Land? they should not, but are they
not? yes, we have sighed, and wailed, and prayed, and fasted, but confined all
our Repentance to the Temple: We have had days of Humiliation without any
Reformation, and days of Self-denial without any Abnegation or Abrenuntiation
of any of our known corruptions. -- Oh tu perverse Menalca! Virgil. 3. Eclog.

Oh thou perverse and incorrigible Protestant, what will work upon thee? we
call our selves the Reformed Church, but where are the reformed Professors?
Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit. Nos nequiores, mox daturos progeniem
vitiosiorem. Hor. 3. ca. Od. 34.
We are more wicked then our Ancestors, and we are like to leave a generation
more vicious then our selves. Sure I am, we are little the better for our
corrections, God grant we be not the worse. God might as well have whipped the
Rocks, as scourged many of our hardened Transgressors. Are there no Roisters,
and Swart-rutters, and Dammee-blades, and Sharkes left in this Nation? yes, our
backs, and bellies, and tongues, and fingers will show what manner of converts
we are. Oh fie upon this impudency, shame to this impenitencie, Are we come
out of the Brick-kilnes of Egypt, a stiff-necked people? Have the Midianites
left vexing us, for us to vex God? Are we returned from Babylon to bring our
outlandish wives at our heels? Has God delivered us (I mean) from our Many
Princes: for us to remain Many Praevaricatours? a comfortable release! Yet this
is our gratitude upon the freedom from servitude. We seem to be rather
Prodigees, then Penitents, or Contemners then Converts! Woe be to thee Corazin,
woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great things that have been done in thee
had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented in sackcloath and
ashes. Pagans and Mahometans would have made a better use of an Ereption, and
redemption from a most heavy thraldom then we have expressed. We have no
sackcloth, and ashes, but perfumes, and powders, complexion-waters, and
patches, long-tayles, and short-sloppes, bowsing bowls, and roaring oaths,
the most brutish luxury, and most cursed briberie, that ever this Nation
heard of: This is our Repentance, thus do we purge away the Transgression of
the Land. God forgive us, and quiver up his Arrows, that they may not be once
more levelled at our breasts: we deserve new Judgments, yea the most
confounding, and State-shivering plagues. What, will we out-trespass our first
crimes? out sin the Many Princes? Wretches that we are, that neither Gods
holy Laws, nor the Kings most pious Proclamation: our Religion, or our
loyalty, the sense of our former miseries, or the apprehension of such a
memorable deliverance, the honor of the Church, or the preservation of the
Nation, the derision of Adversaries, or the fear of hell can draw us to a more
rectified behavior; but we talk as if we had Baltasars tongue in our heads,
and look, as if we had Sodoms cheeks in our faces; and live as if we had
Pharaohs heart in our bosoms; there is a Riot upon a Mercy, and a rage in
sin; men only take the oath of Allegiance, but care neither for the honor,
nor safety of the King; keep Chapel, but regard neither God, nor his
Ordinances: consent to the thirty nine Articles, but live as if they had not a
Principle of Religion in them; talk of Orthodox Ministers, but are most
Heterodox Gospellers: it is anguish to think of it, shame to consider it,
astonishment to behold it. Oh, when will ye see your Impiety? When will ye
confess it? When will ye weep for it? When will ye desire absolution from it?
When will ye wash away the stain of it? I invite you this day to Repentance:
How many Hearers have I? If ye be not deaf, listen to the most necessary
Doctrine; Saint John Baptist prepared the way to Christ by it; Saint Peter set
up the Gospel with it; it is the entrance into a Church, and the joy of Angels,
the luster of Faith, and the preservation of Kingdoms: the leaping out of
hell, and the writing our names into the book of Life; What affiance have we in
God, what true Christianity have we without it? we are but sinners of the
Gentiles as it were; yea, it is well if the men of Niniveh do not rise up in
judgment against us. Our consciences are but the suburbs of hell without it,
for there is still the guilt of nature upon us, and the Kingdom is but the
shooting-mark of Vengeance being void of it, for there is the Transgression of
the Land; What sincerity is there in any of us if we be not Penitents? No, I
am but an hypocritical Teacher, if I do not crucify my known corruptions, and
ye are but counterfeit Hearers if ye do not purge your consciences from dead
works. Oh therefore, I beseech you all by the curse of Nature, and dread of
Judgment, by the shame of sin, and the fame of Conversion, by the state of
Adoption, and peace of conscience, by the efficacy of Faith, and the evidence
of a supernatural life, by the Union with Christ, and the communion of the
Spirit, by your living preparation, and your dying confidence, by the quickening
of your own souls, and the saving many a soul from death, by the blessing of
your own Families and the preserving a whole Kingdom, that ye hate sin, and
sorrow to Repentance, that ye have a broken spirit and circumcise your hearts,
that ye take unto you words, and take away all grievances: that ye pronounce a
vow, and obey from the heart, that ye hear the Voice behind you, and stretch
out your selves to that which is before you, that ye leave not an hoof behind
you in Egypt, nor suffer a spot to remain in the flesh, that ye instantly, and
intensively, and unfeignedly, and perfectly, kill all your corruptions, and
clear all your convictions, so may ye not only bury all the curses in your
bosom, but interre all the miseries of the Kingdom, that as the transgression
of the Land brought in Many Princes, so the Repentance of the Land may for ever
keep them out. I never found my heart so awakened to the work as now, and would
to God, that being rowsed my self out of slumber, that I could raise you out of
your dead sleep. The Lord knows who are his, would to God that this were the
day of his finding them up, and acknowledging them: for then what glad hearts,
and a joyful Kingdom might ye make: the men living, and the children unborn
might bless you. Oh therefore hear God, the King, the ruined Families, and the
repaired State call upon you to put an end to the transgression of the Land.

An high blessing is entered into the Land, welcome it, dedicate it with
repentance, ye sinned before, and ye see what were the effects of your sins,
sin no more, and ye may see, and foresee what will be the fruit and virtue of
your repentance. Remember that the rod is taken off your backs, the rasour
removed from your heads, the vials of wrath set by, the threshng instruments of
iron laid aside, your many Princes are gone, and are ye to be as miserable a
people as ever? no, your days of sorrow are past, your bitter griefs are
ended; if ye want not repentance, ye will want no welfare, ye are like to be
the happiest people in the world. Tempora phoebea lauro cingentur. Ovid. 4 de.
Trist. Eleg. 2.
We are entering upon Triumphs. Hunc laetum Tryiisque diem Trojaque profectis.
Virg. 1, Aennad.

A day of general joy to all far and near is dawned. For God has cast out
the many Princes, and brought in a lawful King: And what can such a King do
more then the many Princes? alas they had brought the state even almost unto an
end, but a King, and such a King shall cause the State to be prolonged. We that
were stung with many fiery serpents have now our wounds healed up, we that
wandered many years through the wilderness, are now come to the banks of
Canaan, we that have outlived the judgment of many Princes are now come co
have the blessing of one Man, oh look upon the Man, and look up to God, which
by his omnipotent hand has brought in such a Man, Virgil 4 Aenead.
ipse ante alios pulcherrimus omnes. He is the aimable Ruler, Hor. 1. ca. Od.
12.
-- nil majus generatur ipso. The earth can scarce be conceived to have brought
forth a more eminent Prince. Doubtless heaven had much in his bringing forth,
and bringing in. None but such a Father could have begot such a Son, none but
such a God could have created such a Prince: he has much of the spirit of God
in his affections, and much of the providence of God in his Settlement. Surely
it was God that brought in such a N^hemiah to repair the broken walls of
Jerusalem, such a Moses for the deliverance of all the Israelites. We were for
many years as bondmen, but now, says the Lord, will I bring back the
captivity of Jacob, and have compassion upon the whole house of Israel, and
will be jealous for my holy name, Ezekiel. 39.25. Released captives where are your
Hymns? yea, where are your shouts? what do ye come dumb out of the dungeon?
has freedom no trances, no ecstasies? yes, Let us praise the Lord, who has
remembered us in our base estate, for his mercy endures f^r ever, And has
rescued us from our Oppressors, for his mercy endures for ever. Psalm.
136.23,24. What people once more miserable? what people now more happy?
magnify your God, and kiss his present; extol his mercy, and be ravished with
his Man. We have had enough of the Many men, here is the one, and the Only
Man; we have had enough of the intruding men, here is the interessed man, we
have had enough of the self ended man, here is the genraell-ended man, the
right republike man, the true and great Statesman; a Man that does mind nothing
but the common good, that does prefer the welfare of the Nation before the
splendour of his own palace; a Man that is naturally ours; a man that is
cordially ours; a Man that is wholly ours; the Man of the Kingdom, the Man for
the Kingdom, a British man, the British glory, what would ye expect in man,
that is not to be found in this Man? what would ye desire in man, that is not
eminently in this Man? I am unwilling to call him Man, doubtless he is
celestial; or let him be Man, but withal call him Mirror. A Prince of
constellations, a Prince of the Sun, a Prince that has in him the influence
of the third heavens, yea I might say the inspiration of Gods own breast; the
Prince of Gods right eye, and Gods right hand. Blessed Prince, that enjoys such
a God; happy Land, that enjoys such a Prince. Since the Foundations of the
earth (all things considered) when were there so many mercies, and miracles
shown in one Prince? I admire them, and almost adore them, sure I am, I may God
for them: This Age has the fruit of them, after ages will have the bruit of
them: that we had judgment enough to prize them, or thankfulness enough to
honor them! Oh that this should be the Prince, that God in the sight of the
whole world would Crown with his own right Hand! That this should be the Land,
where such a Darling of Heaven should reign! To speak much of him is but his
desert, to speak all of him is beyond my All. It had need be some Appelles that
should draw this Picture, or some Thamiris (the son of Philammon) whose songs
were said to be composed by all the Muses, which should be the Precentor in
this Dittie! Yet thus much I can, and will say of him, and that not only for to
show my Princes honor, but the peoples happiness; that his birth is Royal,
and blessed art thou, Oh Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles. Now, where
is there a Prince in Christendom, which can derive such an ancient Lineage?
Secondly, That his puissance is proved and approved, his valor being the fame
of all Nations. Thirdly, That his patience is renowned, he having shown himself
the suffering Anvile, both of necessities and indignities. What should I speak
of more? his Temperance is an Example, and his clemency is beyond Example;
Should I set out his other perfections; and break a string in the expressing of
them, some Grasshopper or other, would be so kind as to leap upon my Instrument,
and sing out that which I might be defective in; Strabo. l. 6.
as it happened to Eunomus, when he contended with Ariston; For, his Eminencies
are so well known, that they are the daily speech of the vulgar. To abridge
therefore much that might be spoken, I shall only give him the just praise of
my Text, and say, that whatsoever a rare Man he be in other things, he is a
proper Man, I mean, a proper man to cure a Diseased, and perishing State: for,
he is a Man of Understanding and Knowledge. Briefly, to descant upon both
these: First, He is a Man of Understanding in heavenly things, he will own no
Faith, but that which is inspired; nor no Worship, but that which is Primitive;
nor no Ministry, but that which is Apostolical; nor no conversation but that
which is unblemished. He does desire a bright Church, more then a glorious
Court.

Secondly, He is a Man of Knowledge in temporal things: He that in his greatest
extremities Beyond Sea has wronged none, but has preserved the honor of his
justice, will not come come home to his own, to feed upon his peoples
Birthrights: there is nothing in him that does seem like a claw. For matters of
Judicature, the Administration of Justice is like to be as free under him as
the light of Heaven; for, as he has the ablest Judges, so he will make them
the faithfullest; he that ca^ies such an eye over his Bishops, will likewise
watch over his Judges, that there may be no remissness, partiality, nor
corruption in them. He does set up his Royal Standard to the whole Nation, and
if those which were entrusted by him do not weigh out justice to his people, he
will as soon punish a Judge, as a Judge should a Malefactor, or an Oppressor;
howsoever, if any thing should escape that way for want of his privi^y, it
shall be the sin of the Judges, and not of the Prince. For the advancement of
the welfare of the Nation ye need not doubt it, for, as he is a King, so his
Kingdom does lie close under his Eyel^ ^ea, it is deeply engraven into the
bottom or ^his (...) the benefit of his people being as dear to him (...) the
R^ of his Crown-land. His Presence has ^ken a^ly (...) hindrances to obstruct
Trade, and His Princely care shall be to add all furtherances, that all
Callings both by Sea, and Land may prosper, for he is very sensible that his
Subjects stock is his Bank, it being impossible (if there be not the height of
tenaciousnesse, and ingratitude) that there can be a wanting Prince, where
there is a flourishing people. In point of knowledge I do fear him but in one
thing, and that it the first, the preserving of his own Rites? but that he will
not fail in for want of Knowledge, but through abundance of good nature; for I
hear that he has a heart so great, and an hand so liberal, that he will give
Royalties to express Bounty; but this perhaps may be but a particular man's
fear, my wise Prince in time may prove as great an Husband of his Rights, as
others would have him a boundless Distributer. But, if this should be his
error, it were but his own injury, and an exuberancy of an heroical and
magnificent Spirit.

Thus then I have now shown you what your Prince is, and it is fit for every
one to know the worth of his own Jewel: to honor a Prince is a part of
loyalty. Give honor to whom honor belongs; Fear God and honor the King,
Honor me before the people, said Saul, and Samuel did not refuse it. To
ascribe more to a King then is due is flattery, to substract from a King, what
he does deserve is Felony; And as there may be many Parasites, so I doubt there
are a great company of Crown-plunderers. What I have uttered, I intend rather
for an Alarum-bel, then a Trumpet, for an Incentive, then a Panegyric, to
quicken your thankfulness, then to decipher my Princes perfections, and this I
think is both duty, and conscience. If he be such a Prince then affect him,
admire him, value him, reverence him. Think whit a misery ye had, what a
blessing ye have; oh strange alteration! Oh blessed change! Have ye a King? and
such a King? then do nothing to diminish his Worth, to disturb his Government,
to prejudice his Rights, to injury his person. Malicious is that eye which
coth look upon him with spite, Venomous is that heart which does envy his
Government, and cursed is that hand that would assault his person. Would any
one throw down that dish by which he should be fed? Pluck out that eye by which
he should see? Bruise that foot by which be should walk? Clip out that Tongue
by which he should speak? Stamp under foot that evidence by which he should
inherit? Rend in pieces that Garment wherewith he should be clothed? Burn that
house wherein he should dwell? abase, scorn, scandal, malign, mischieve,
murder that King that should make him happy both for body and soul? Is this
the subjection to a King? Is this the obedience to a Man of Understandidg and
Knowledge? God deliver us from such loyal Subjects: here is horrid Allegiance.
I beseech you therefore by the remembrance of the Many Princes ye have had, and
of the one Prince ye have, by the men of violent spirits, and politic heads,
and by the Man of Understanding, and Knowledge, by your former slaverie, and
your present liberty, by your Kings Right, and your Kings Graces, by your
Countrymens welfare, and your Enemies watchfulness, by the honor of
obedience, and the shame of Rebellion, by the names of Subjects, and the
Nobleness of Saints, by the obligation of Oaths, and the commination of Gods
Laws, by the impartial Judges which ye feel in your own bosoms, and the
incorrupt Judge which ye will meet with at the Throne, by the fruit ye desire
under the Ministry, and by the comforts you expect upon your deathbeds: that
laying aside all jealousies, irefull passages, exasperated passions, humors,
and tumors, motions, and commotions, ye do bow before such a King, and bless
God for such a Man; Know his just Claim, and acknowledge his Perfections, pray
for his prosperous Reign, and do what ye can to preserve his precious, and
sacred Person? so may the King have safety, thy Kingdom prosperity, Religion
Honor, the Church Unity, the Gospel propagation, Faith Purity, the Nation may
be preserved, the State may be prolonged, and Upon all the Glory there may be a
Defense: All which God grant for his mercies sake. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

