A RELATION Of the Passages in the BATTLE at SEA, Between the Fleet of ENGLAND
And the United NEITHERLANDS; Collected according to the charge and order of the
Lords States General: Dated June 24/14 1666.

By the Lords DE WIT, Councill-Pensioner, VRYBERGEN, VAN DER HOOLCK, KAN and
GERLACIUS, Deputies and Plenipotentiaries of the States General, at present
being in the VVielings, for expediteing and over the employ of the foresaid
Neitherlands Fleet.

Translated faithfully out of the Dutch Copy, and published for the undeceiving
of the English Nation.

seal PVGNO PRO PATRIA



Printed Anno 1666.

A Relation of the Passages in the Battle at Sea, betwixt the Fleet of England,
and of the United Neitherlands, collected according to the charge and order of
the Lords States General. Dated the 24 June, 1666.
By the Lords De Wit, Councill-Pensioner; Vrijbergen, Van der Hoolck, Kann,
and Gerlacius, their Deputies and Plenipotentiaries at present being in the
Wielings, for expediteing and over the Employ of the said Fleet, after a
curious examineing of the chief Officers, Commanders, and Captains of the
foresaid Fleet.
THE Neitherlands Fleet upon the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, of June successively, with
several winds and calmes being gotten to Sea out of the Texsell: And through
contrary winds or calmes not being able before the 8. to set course according
to order given to approach the English Coast; were with sailing, stopping of
tides, and driveing, on the 11. following in the morneing, advanced unto about
seven or eight Leagues East South East from the Northforeland, being the point
of England, which stretches out between the Channel and River of London: where
the said Neitherlands Fleet, through contrary wind and stream, were
necessitated to Anchor.

The English [who with their Fleet some days before were ankered in the
Downs,] on the foresaid 11 June 1666. [probably upon intelligence of the
approach of the Neitherlands Fleet,] put to Sea from thence with their Fleet,
about noone aproached near the Neitherlands Fleet, which Neitherlands Fleet
being then all together were eighty three Ships strong, namely Fregats men of
war, besides advise Boats, Fireships and other small Vessels; but by
accident even before the beginning of the work, and but one hour before the
Battle began, one of the capital Ships of the Neitherlands Fleet, commanded by
Colonel Gent, through stamping of the Sea, lost first his Bowsprit and
afterward his ^oremast in the sight of the enemy, and being unserviceable by
order of Genesis de Ruyter as Admiral and chief Commander of the Fleet aforesaid
was sent up to Holland, the aforesaid Coll. Gent. being before gone over aboard
the Ship of Cap. Godskens.

The English Fleet as they then were told by the Neitherlanders, were about
eighty sail strong; it was judged one a clock in the afternoon when each
began to fire at the other, the Neitherlanders Ships having before cut their
cables, because it was impossible through the hollow Sea and shortness of time
in any wise to get their Ankors onboard. Both the Fleets therewith being
under sail stood together over to the Southward the wind being W. S. W. by
which means the Esquadron of the L. Admirals Tromp, and van Meppelen, to whom
particularly was assigned the Reareguard (having lain at an Anchor to the South
westward) became the Vanguard. And he the said L. Admiral Tromp showed
himself valiant and resolute in the foremost and heaviest of the fight; and
he was also manfully seconded by his Vice- and Rear Admirals, and other
Officers. Whereupon immediately according to order the Esquadron of Generalde
Ruyter and L. Admiral van Nes, fell in with the enemy and with their chief
Officers and Captains signally quitted themselves. Presently after about 3. or
4. a clock afternoon an English Fregat of the Blew Esquadron carryng by guess
50. Guns, so soon as he was past the Genesis de Ruyters side having recieved from
him the last salute sunk a little a stern of him.

The Esquadron of the L. Admiralls Cornelius Evertson and Tjerck Hiddes de
Vries, could not at the first get up to the enemy, for that they were so far
to windward of them, whereby it was very fiercely fought on both sides, each
Fleet keeping the same course till about 5. of the clock in the astternoone,
when the English having tacked made North Westward, and were the most part of
them forced to bear up before the wind, as is judged to avoid the Flemmish
Banks, and then the Esquadron of the Admiralls Cornelius Evertson and Tjerck
Hiddes de Vries, came also into a fierce combat whith the enemy, who likewise
with their whole Esquadron praise-worthyly and courageously quitted themselves.
And in the winding off of the English Fleet some of their leeward-most Ships
were cut off, which were then presently boarded and each by one Neitherlands
Ship overcome and accordingly brought up in Holland. The one named Swiftsure,
mounted with 70. Guns, most of them brass and commanded by Sir William
Barckley, Vice Admiral of the white Esquadron, who (courageously defending
himself against his overcomer, namely Henry Adrianson, commanding the Ship
Hern, mounted with 73 Guns) was in person slain. The other named the seven
Oaks, with abouth 60 Guns, was overcome by Capt. Vander Saen, commanding a
Freggat of 52. Goteling. And the third named the Loyal George, with 44. Guns by
Capt. Jacob Andreas Swart, commanding the Ship Deventer, mounted with 66. Guns,
all three Captains belonging to the Admiralty of Amsterdam. On the other hand
in the first Attaque two Neitherlands Ships the one named Duivenvoord, carrying
64. Guns, of which was Capt. the Young Hero Otto van Treslong, and the other
named the Court of Zeeland, carrying 58. Guns, of which was Capt. Simon Block,
both fell on fire as is judged by burneing tamkins shot out of their own or
other Neitherlands Ships, by the f^rce of the wind dryven back into the
foresaid Ships. In the abovesaid Ship of Cap. Otto van Treslong, were the
Prince of Monaco, and the Earl of Guise, being carried on by a courageous
zeal, who both of them happily and in utmost peril were first saved in the
Ship Small Holland upon which is Commander Capt. Evert van Gelder, Brother in
the law to Genesis de Ruyter; and after came over into the Ship of the foresaid
Genesis de Ruyter.

In the foresaid Attaque was the Ship of L. Adm. Tromp found to be so damaged
in his Masts, that by mischance another Neitherlands Ship comeing onboard him
lost all his Masts; also the Ship of Rear Admiral van Nes about the same time
had his Foremast shot by the board, so that both were necessitated as to their
persons to go over into other Ships, where they again let fly their
respective Flaggs, and as before with great valiantnes continued to do their
endeavor as formerly, and the foresaid mastles Ships presently according to
orders given were sent up and towed out of the Fleet for Holland. The English
as above having turned and passing by the Neitherlands Fleet, their Admiral
and beside him some other Ships of his Fleet came to an Anchor, but shortly
after seeing that General de Ruyter with his Fleet under him had also turned
and was comeing upon him, they chopped their Cables and there fell betwixt
them a very hard and heavy long-dureing fight; in which through Gods grace none
of the Neitherlands Ships miscarryed. But betwixt seven and eight of the clock
in the evening one more of the capital English Ships of the Blew Esquadron,
carrying by estimation betwixt 60. or 70. Guns, being past by the Ship of the
General de Ruyter about a Musket shot, went to the ground; Both which English
Ships sunk close by and even amongst the Neitherlands Fleet, so as the same was
perfectly seen by very many Officers, Private Seamen and Soldiers, being
done before their eyes and remarqued by them; but it cannot certainly be
affirmed whether any other English Ships might be sunk or destroyed that day:
But toward evening the Rear Adm. of the White being a capital Ship of war
and made very unserviceable by Genesis de Ruyters and others shot, there was
commanded upon him one of the Fireships of the Genesis de Ruyters Esquadron, which
being gotten onboard him and presently set on fire, the said Fireship was forth
with sunk; whereupon a second Fireship out of the Zeelands Esquadron did
likewise come onboard the said R. Adm. and set him on fire but the said R. Adm.
cleared himself and each time found means to put out the fire in his Ship. A
third Neitherlands Fireship under the favor of the Guns of the L. Adm.
Cornelius Evertson endeavoring to lay the said R. Adm. onboard was before he
was fast, shot to ground and sunk, so that according to the agreeing witness
of all the Neitherlands Officers which were there abouts, the often mentioned
Rear Admiral of the White, with a special constancy, as an honorable
Soldier has quitted himself: And it is the more to be admired because that
[according to the witness of some English Prisoners who leaped out of his ship
into the sea, and were saved by the Neitherlands Ships at what time the
forefaid two first Fireships came onboard him] being on fire, three hundred of
his Seamen, accounting the matter desperate (and to decline the fire) leaped
over board, and chose the water. Out of the foresaid Rear Admiral in the
evening late an unhappy shot was made which took out of the world the valiant
L. Adm. Cornelius Evertson, whose good conduct and courage in many foregoeing
occasions, as also in this was experimented; and thereuppon for that time was
the fight parted by the Night, so that through the darkness in the smook and
damp, it could not be marked whether the foresaid Rear Adm. might be sunk or
have cleared and saved himself.

The Night being past the English Fleet on the 12 June 1666 with break of
Day was to windward above the Neitherlands Fleet about a league and half; the
wind then being West South West, at which time both the Fleetes again laid
one toward the other, to wit, the Neitherlands Fleet Northwest and the English
South over: So soon as the two Fleetes, were approached nigh each other, the
Neitherlands Fleet did also ly toward the South to stand the same course with
the enemy. But the English setting aside the advantage of the wind bore up
upon the Neitherlands Fleet and accordingly did run before the wind amongst
their enemies, the Neitherlanders keeping their course and bideing upon a
wind, running over against them, so that both Fleets did in this manner pass
with a heavy and sharp fight, without loseing any one single Ship of the
Neitherlanders.

Nor can any of the Neitherlands Officers as yet give testimony to the Deputies
and Plenipotentiaries, of the States General, that of a certeynty any of the
English Ships were taken or destroid in the said rencontre. The Fleets being
past each other in this manner and on both sides many Ships in their standing
and running rigging much damaged by shot, each with spliceing, wallknotting
and otherwise again sought to make fit, and there upon it being fallen quite
still, both Fleets lay and drove in a calm till about 11. of the clock before
noone: When the gale increasing both Fleets laid toward each other (the
Neitherlanders then being to Windward) and again fell into a very furious
fight. The Generallde Ruyter being advanced about half way in the English
Fleet, heard in the midst of the same very furious shooteing, and from thence
presumeing that some Ships of the Fleet under him must be in a straight and
totally surrounded by the enemy resolved with his Esquadron under him to fall
in; And he presently bearing up ran in amongst the enemy, who upon his
comeing making some room, he saw and found that the L. Admiral Tromp, then
in person being in and letting fly his flagg upon the Ship of Jacob Cornelius
Swart, had with a soldiers heart broken in there, and together with Vice-
Admiral van der Hulst, Captain Peter Salomonson, De Haen, and van Amstell, lay
very much disenabled surrounded by the enemy: All which without the aforesaid
succor were in great danger to be burned or sunk, as indeed the forementioned
Ship of Peter Salomonson was at the comeing of the foresaid succor already on
fire and thereby then lost. The aforesaid Captayn and a good part of his seamen
were in utmost peril and just in their Extremity saved by the Neitherlanders;
But it pleased God that he (being gone over upon the Ship of Captayn Schey,
and there according to his power doing worthily,) dyed during the battle in
the bed of honor.

The aforesaid Ship of Capt. Swart, and of the aforenamed three other Captains,
were, dureing the time of the said surrounding made so unserviceable, that the
L. Admiral Tromp was necessitated again to go over upon another Ship; And the
aforenamed Ships of Vice Admiral van der Hulst, and the foresaid Capt. de
Haen, Swart and van Amstel, as being wholly unusefull, must be sent up to the
first and fittingest heavens. In the aforesaid throng amongst others
Vice Admiral van der Hulst was also shot dead, who in all occasions had
carried and leported himself as a brave Soldier and understanding Officer.
Yet it pleased God the Lord in a short time doubly to repayr the foresaid loss
and damage of the Ships of the States of the United Neitherlands; for many of
the English Fleet were the same day sunk and burned. Amongst which there is
remaining the perfect knowledge and notice of these following Ships: Namely,

First, One of the Esquadron of the Red, being according to guess a Ship of
about 60 Guns, sunk about noon amongst the foremost Ships or in the van of the
English Fleet.

Secondly, One of the Blew Esquadron, carrying by guess between 50 and 60
Guns, sunk about three of the clock in the afternoon, after he had passed by
General de Ruyter, and in passing by him was duly saluted.

Thirdly, One of the White Esquadron, carrying according to guess near 50
Guns, a little time after was sunk by the side of Vice Admiral de Liefde, who
had so boared him through with his Canon that he went to the ground.

Fourthly, One of the Esquadron of the White Flag, carrying about 50 Guns by
computation, about half an hour after was sunk in the Esquadron of General de
Ruyter, a little behind the Ship of Capt. van Meewen, who gave him a full lower
tire in passing by. And that it may certainly be concluded that both the
foresaid Ships of the White Esquadron, are two distinct Ships it is to be noted
that many Officers and seamen saw the one as well as the other ruined: to wit,
the same persons that had seen the one sunk saw the other sunk also a short
time after: whereof examination is carefully made to be sure that one and the
same Ship should not be taken for two distinct Ships.

Fifthly, The Ship the Black Eagle, or Arms of Groening, being the last
Autumn (after that the Neitherlands Fleet by an heavy storm were dissipated
from each other,) met by the English and taken; which foresaid Ship the Black
Eagle was sunk, Capt. Marrevelt having with fore-consideration prepared and
fyred his whole broadside upon it.

Sixthly, Another English Ship sunk in the midst of the English Fleet, after
he had sailed for some time with a Flag of distress without any man's comeing
to his help.

In the aforesaid two days as also in the fight of the fourth day (of with
hereafter shall be further spoken) there were undoubtedly several English
Ships burned of which nevertheless no full certeynty of testimony can be
given, in regard that some sire Ships were set on fire and yet it cannot be
perfectly said whether the Ships which they were aboard of were burned or that
they cleared themselves. Except only two English Ships, which many be
certainly affirmed dureing the fight to be burned, one upon the second the
other upon the fourth day of the foresaid Battle, for as much as the
Neitherlands Officers and Seamen that served upon the Fireships, come in with
good certificates to obtain their settled reward for that service.

When the English Prisoners fisht out of the Sea, and sent to the respective
Colleges of Admiraltyes, shall be perfectly examined to understand out of
what Ships they are particulary saved, undoubtedly yet more of the burned and
sunk English Ships will be discovered.

The Fight of the foresaid 12. of June, was very fierce especially in the
afternoon, so that many Ships on both sides were very much damnifyed in their
Masts, ropmasts, sails and rigging: Amongst others about 3 or 4 of the clock
in the afternoon was the main Topmast of Genesis de Ruyters Ship shot down
falling with Flagg and pendant from above. He there upon being something
unfitted gave order presently to L. Admiral van Nes in mean while till that
another Topmast should be set again to let fly the pendent under his Flagg,
and for that time to act as General, orderly to prosecute the fight. The
which also was followed by him with such courage and conduct that both Fleets
came up three times one toward the other that afternoon and so having passed
each other toward the evening when the Neitherlands fleet had turned the
fourth time toward the English they followed their course and with all their
sails made toward their own coast; they body being lessened toeight or nine
and thirty men of war; the Neitherlands Fleet standing toward them (who were
by their tacking got a good way asterne,) did use all possible endeavor to
fetch them up, to that end making all the sail they could. But the night and
calm comeing up, were, next to Gods will, the cause that the Neitherlands
Fleet could not reach them. The Genesis de Ruyter with his other sails so much as
he could keepeing near the Fleet got in the mean while his maine Topmast, Flagg
and pendant again set up and all brought into fitting posture, and did again
on the 13 his office as General. The English with break of day discerneing
that the Neitherlands Ships continued all possible endeavor to fetch them up,
set their mastles and ill sailing Ships in fire, that they should not fall
into the hand of their enemy, and used all means to fetch the River of London,
setting to this end Topgallantsayles, Spritsayles, Lysayles, and Drabblers, yea
also wetting their Sails and setting all to work that could any ways further
or help them, the wind then East and afterward East South East, with a small
gale. How many was the number of the Ships that for the cause above said in the
morneing were set on fire, could out of the Neitherlands Fleet with no perfect
certainty be marked, the number being by one made greater than by another,
but the English in their Gazette of 4/14 to 7/17 June 1666 printed at London by
public authority [wherein they adscribe to themselves the Victory,] say that
3 Ships dureing the retreat, by order from their General were set on fire, to
wit, the Ship Saint Paul, and two other slugg Ships, of which the names are not
there printed. The foresaid retreat continueing the whole day the English
approached so near the sands lying before the foresaid River, that their
Admiral of the White, named Sir George Ascue, with the Ship Prince Royal
under him, mounted with ninety Brass Guns being the biggest and capitalst
Ship of their whole Fleet, came a ground upon a certain sand named the Galper
a grievous mischance for a Soldier, who dureing the whole Battle had quitted
himself manfully, and now not otherwise but according to order of his General
was retireing; and although the foresaid Admiral in this manner being come a
ground, made signs with shooting and otherwise for help and assistance yet
nevertheless all the Ships of the English Fleet and namely the rest of his
own Esquadron held their course: so that he being now alone bereft of force
to resist and forsaken by all succor should have been burned by two
Neitherlands Ships, which came presently up to him, had not L. Admiral Tromp,
being then upon the Ship of Rear Admiral Sweers given signs to the
aforesaid Fireships to forbear, because that upon the Ship of Admiral Asc^^
the Flagg was stricken, and so thereby as by other signs it was sh^wd that
quarter was desired; where upon the Seamen of the aforesaid Rear Admiral
Sweers by order of I. Admiral Tromp went onboard the forenamed Ascue, and
brought him over with some of his Officers and people as Prisoners upon the
foresaid R. Admiral Sweers, and the next day in the morneing by order of
General de Ruyter sent the foresaid Admiral Ascue with a Galliot to the
Hague, and although the aforesaid Ship the Prince Royal afterward got afloat
again, yet nevertheless because it would much incumber the Fleet General de
Ruyter ordered that the Ship should be burned, and the People saved, which
presently was accordingly effected.

About the same time toward the evening there came out of the Southwest twenty
two English Ships of war, commanded, as was afterward understood, by Prince
Rupert, who as is now certified the day before was sent off into the Channel
and there and in the Haven of Portsmouth and Plimmouth was to gather some more
Ships to him and so together to run and meet the French Fleet under the Command
of the Duke of Beaufort, and attacque them. Likewise there came, out of the
River of London as is judged, certainly from the English Coast, three other
great Ships of war, making together a new reinforce of 25 good men of
war. The Neitherlands Fleet seeing the foresaid new succors to approach,
the Zeeland and Viiesland Esquadron made toward them, but the aforesaid body
under Prince Rupert-decline them, and ran toward the English Fleet or the
remainder of them, vvherevvith he conjoined late in the evening. The whole
English Fleet being then in all with the foresaid new Reinforce sixty or
sixty one good ships of war strong, whereof so notable a part were wholy
fresh ships. The Neitherlanders on the other hand were then together about
sixty four ships of war, but all by a fight of two days and chase of the
enemy the third day, much damaged and tired out, being but the remainder of
their Fleet; three having been sunk or burned as is above related, others
with their taken prises gone for Holland, others either mast^es or tovving
mastles ships sent out of the Fleet. The matter now standing in these terms
the Neitherlanders, which now savv a considerable Battle to be expected
having this night (to decline the sands and have more room) with a small sail
stretched Eastvvards on: The General de Ruyter in the morneing early first
called a Council of War and afterward also made a sign to all his Captains
to come aboard, and having exhorted them all to do their endeavor as also
given them orders according to which they were to regulate themselves, the
Battle was again begun the 14 of June forevvritten in the morneing about 8 of
the clock, betwixt the Foreland and the Flemmsh Banks in the open sea about 8
leagues from the Land, the Wind being South south-east, whereby the
Neitherlands Fleet having the vveather gage did with their three Esquadrons
in three distinct places break into the enemy and fought through them,
wherewith the English were somewhat dispersed. This being done General de
Ruyter tacked again with the Neitherlands Fleet and stood over Southwards
toward the enemy, who on the other hand rallyed themselves. This was
re-iterated three several times distinctly, whereby it was fought near this
whole day very fiercely on both sides with uncerteynty of the issue. Dureing
this furious fight one of the Neitherlands Ships of war commanded by Capt.
Vytenhout was fyred and after sunk. One of the English Fireships seeing the
Vice Admiral de Liefde disabled and lying with his mainyard down, attempted
to lay him on board; but was by the Vice Admiral and by Capt. William
Bowdewijns turned off. Thereafter another Neitherlands Fireship that by a shot
was fired fell aboard that Fireship and they burned both together. On the other
side a Neitherlands Fireship attempting to board and fire the Ship of Prince
Rupert, the which in this short time was much battered, one of the English
Fireships which attended on the foresaid Prince came aboard the Neitherlands
fireship and thereby both the foresaid fireships as also another English Ship
which unhappily fell in with them were burned. In the mean while was the L.
Admiral Tromp with the a forenamed Ship of Rear Admiral Sweers and some other
Ships with hi^ in a long continued and furious fight with the enemy wholly
disenabled so that he was forced with his foresaid Ships to abide out of the
fight that they might as much as was possible fit and bring themselves in
posture again. Genesis de Ruyter [although by this means the Fleet under him was
diminished in a considerable number of capital Ships] nevertheless seeing that
the sun began to grow low, resolved [without tying himself too much to the
advantage of the wind] to make the appointed sign generally and together with
all the Esquadron to break in upon the enemy. Where upon the L. Adms van
Meppelen, de Vries, together with Vice Adms Banckert, Schram and Coenders, as
also the R. Adm. Brunysvelt and all the Captains which were to windward
resolutely breaking in and every one doing his endeavor, it fell out that the
L. Adm. van Nes and the Vice Admiral De Liefde with the R. Admirals van Nes
and Evertson and some others Ship being to lee-ward of the English Fleet and
the General de Ruyter with the rest of the Neytherlands Ships to Windward;
they so straightened the middle of the English Fleet betwixt them both the said
Fleet being by this means attacqued both before and behind, that the enemy
after a sharp fight of an hour and half, not willing as it seems to be boarded
by the Neitherlanders Ships, betook themselves the second time again to flight
and thereby fell wholly into confusion and rent in pieces. The White Flagg with
eight or ten English men of war bore away before the wind northwards with
leesayles set, and the Admiralls of the Red and Blew Esquadrons by the wind ran
over toward the English coast hoysing up all the sails that they could. The
Neitherlands Ships which upon the aforesaid signal of the Genesis de Ruyter
could lay a board any English Ship, mastered it: Amongst others the R. Adm.
Brunsvelt boarding two of the enemies Friggats that lay fast together he alone
overcame both the foresaid enemies Ships; But in this confusion as appears took
no sufficient order for the keeping possession of the two a foresaid prizes,
whereby the English afterward made themselves masters of them again: but some
time after Capt. Paws observeing it, retook both the fore said rescued Ships;
but the one named the Bull which could not longer keep the Sea nor be brought
in to any haven was soon sunk, the other named the Essex, a fair Fregat with
58 guns not very much damaged is brought up into the Texell. The like accident
of being retaken is happened to another English prize. The Vice Admiral
Coenders did at the same time overcome and bring up accordingly into the Texell
the Ship called the Clovetree mounted with 62 guns; which the last year was
taken by the English from the State of the United Neitherlands. Likewise also
Capt. Ruth Maximilliaen at the same time did master and has brought up into
Goree the Ship named the Convertine mounted with 54 guns. Besides these upon
the forewritten day according to the knowledge of the Neitherlands Officers
there were two English Ships sunk, to wit, one of the Esquadron of the White
which sunk in the evening, and the other a little time thereafter, it being
not without likely hood that more other English Ships are destroyed of which the
Neitherlands Officiers have not full knowledge and therefore of that particular
nothing can be certainly affirmed by them.

The English finding themselves in this desolate posture and followed by the
Neitherlanders, God the Lord; [which by his almighty hand had brought the work
thus farre] as appears did not please that they should for that time be
brought into farther ruin, or fall in to the hands of the Neitherlanders. His
Divine Majesty this evening about seven of the Clock very suddenly caused a
thick mist to come up, dureing the which the Neitherlands Fleet, having chased
the enemy 4. glasses was at last forced to forbear the further prosecution,
least chaseing the enemy upon uncerteynty and as it were by groping they should
scatter and dissipate themselves, which acording to rules of Sea affairs
should have been most unadvisedly don; yea not to be answered. Wherefore the
Genesis de Ruyter by the ordinary sign-shotts gathered the Fleet together, which
lay driving with a small sail the whole night, but the next day morneing
being the 15 of June aforesaid noe English Ship could be descryed no not from
the topmasts of the Neitherlands Ships. The battle and prosecution of it,
therewith had an end: The General de Ruyter the same day with the
Neitherlands Fleet being strong sixty Ships of war arrived in the Wielings
according to order, that being the rendezvous appointed by the State.

Nine others, beside the forementioned Ship of Coll. Gent, being, part dureing
the fight and part after the end of the Battle, either unserviceable or come
into Goree, to bring up their Prizes; Ten others for like reason successively
sent toward the Texell as belonging thereto; And the remaining four were as is
here above related burned or sunk, making together 843 which with one light
Fregat of the Maes used for an advise-boate, amounts to the number of 85 Ships
of war: which number the Neitherlands Fleet did consist of, besides
Fireships, Advise-boates, and other Vessels when they set sail from before the
Texell. And we understand that the remainder of the English Fleet having
endeavored with all diligence to fetch several of the next Havens they could,
did the most part of them get in at Harwich.

For which Victory the inhabitants of the Confoederate Neitherlands are bound
to give the highest thanks unto God the Lord, who has given them so eminent a
Victory. For according to the steadfast and constant witness of the Officers that
have been in the Fleet, and also according to what appears by bringing up of
Prises before our eyes, three and twenty Ships of war of the enemies are
ruined or taken and brought up, and amongst them especially one Admiral and
one Vice Admiral, besides those which without the knowledge of the foresaid
Neitherlands Officers may be burned, sunk, or come to other mischances: And on
the contrary in a fight of four days no more then 4 Neitherlands Men of war
all of particular although valiant Captains are lost; and not any thing
thereof is fallen into the enemies hands for their rejoyceing.

Thus Collected by the means and in manner before said this 26 of June 1666. Was
Signed T. Gerlacius.
And under stood By order of the Deputyes and Plenipotentiaryes aforesaid.
subscribed, G. Borth.

FINIS.

