Remarkable May 18. PROPOSITIONS By the COUNCIL IN IRELAND, Humbly Recommended
to the Parliament in England, desiring them to move the Judges to deliver their
Resolutions concerning the ensuing Questions, being in number 21.

Together with the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, Die Iovis 12. May,
1642.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the said
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

Printed at London for W. G. and are to be sold by T. Bates. 1642.

Propositions by the Parliament in Ireland, humbly desiring the Parliament in
England to move the Judges to deliver their Resolutions.
IN as much as the Subjects of this Kingdom are free, loyal, and dutiful
subjects to his most excellent Majesty, their natural Liege Lord and King, and
to be governed only by the Common Laws of England, and Statutes of force in
this Kingdom, in the same manner and form as his Majesty's subjects of the
Kingdom are and ought to be governed by the (...) Common Law of land Statutes
of force in that Kingdom, which of right the subjects of this Kingdom do
challenge, and make their protestation to be their birthright and best
inheritance.

In as much as the unlawful actions and proceedings of some of his Majesty's
Officers and Ministers of Justice of late years introduced and practiced in
this Kingdom, did tend to the infringing and violation of the laws,
liberties, and freedom of the said subjects, contrary to his Majesty's royal
and pious intent (...).

Therefore the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, not
for any doubt or ambiguity which may be conceived or thought concerning the
premises, nor of the ensuing Questions, but for manifestation and declaration
of a clear truth, and of the s^i^ Laws and Statutes already planted in this
Kingdom.

The said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses do therefore pray both houses of
Parliament may join in requiring the Judges forthwith to declare in writing
their Resolutions of, and unto the ensuing Questions, and subscribe to the same.

1. Whether the Subjects of this Kingdom be a free people, and to be governed
only by the Common Laws of England, and Statutes of force in this Kingdom?

2. Whether the Judges of this Land do take the oath of Judges, and if so,
whether upon pretense of any Act of State, Proclamation, Letter, or Direction
under the Great or Privy Seal, or Privy Signer, or Letter, or other
Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice or Justices, or
other chief Governor of this Kingdom, they may hinder, stay, or delay the
suit of any subject, or his Judgment or Execution thereupon. If so, in what
cases, and whether if they do hinder, stay, or delay such suits, judgments or
executions thereupon, what punishment do they incur therefore?

3. Whether the Kings Majesty's Privy Counsel, either with the chief
Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, or without him or them, be a place of
Judicature by the Common Laws: and whether in cases between party and party
for debts, trespasses, accounts, possession, or trial of Land, and which of
them may be heard and determined; and of what Civil causes they have
jurisdiction, and by what Law, and of what force is their Order or Decree in
such cases, or any of them.

4. The like of the chief Governor alone.

5. Whether grants of Monopolies be warranted by Law, and of what, and in what
cases, and how, and where, and by whom are the transgressors against such
grants punishable: and whether by fine, mutilation of members, imprisonment,
loss, or forfeiture of goods, or otherwise; and which of them?

6. In what cases the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors
of this Kingdom, and Council, may punish by fine, mutilation of members,
Pillory, or otherwise; whether they may sentence any to such punishments for
infringing commands of, or concerning any Proclamation, or and concerning
Monopolies; and what punishment do they incur that vote for the same?

7. Of what force is an Act of State or Proclamation in this Kingdom, to bind
the liberties, goods, possessions, or inheritance of the natives thereof;
whether they or any of them can alter the Common Law, or the infringers of
them, lose their goods, chattels, or leases, or forfeit the same for infringing
any such Act of State, Proclamation, or both; and what punishment do the
Judges of the Law that are Privy Counselors incur, that vote for such Acts,
or execution thereof?

8. Are the subjects of this Kingdom subject to the Marsh(...)ll Law; and
whether any man in time of peace, and no enemy being in the field with banner
displaid, can be sentenced to death: if so, by whom, and in what case; if not,
what punishment do they incur, that in time of peace do execute Marshall
Law?

9. Whether voluntarily oaths taken freely before Arbitrators, for affirmance
or disaffirmance of any thing, be punishable in the Castle Chamber, or any
other Court, and why, and wherefore?

10. Why, and by what Law, and by what rule of policy is it, that none is
admitted to reducement of fine or other penalties in the Castle Chamber, or
Council Chamber, until he confess the offense for which he is censured?

11. Whether the Judges of the Kings Bench, or any of the Judges of the Jail
delivery, or any other Court, and by what Law do or can deny the copies of
indictments of felony or treason to the parties accused, contrary to the law?

12. What power has the Barons of the Exchequer to raise the respit of homage
arbitrarily, to what rate they please, by what Law they may distinguish
between the respit of homage upon the diversity of the true value of the fees,
whereas Elcuage is the same for great and small fees, and are proportionable by
Parliament?

13. Whether it be censurable in the subjects of this Kingdom to repair into
England to appeal unto his Majesty for redress of injury, or for other
lawful occasions, if so, why and what condition of persons, and by what law?

14. Whether Deanes and other dignitories of Cathedral Churches, be properly,
and de mero june donative, and not elective and collative; if so, why, and by
what Law, and whether the confirmation of a Deane de facto of the Bishops grant
be good and valid in Law, if not, by what Law?

15. Whether the issuing of Quo warranto out of the Kings Bench or Exchequer,
against Buroughes that anciently sent Burgesses to the Parliament, to show
cause why they sent Burgesses, be legal; if not, what punishment ought to be
inflicted upon them that have been the occasioners, procurers, and Judges of
and in such Quo warranto's?

16. By what Law are Jurors that give verdict according to then consciences,
and are the sole Judges of the facts censured in the Castle Chamber in great
fines, and sometimes Pillory, with loss of ears, and bored through the
tongue, and marked sometimes in the forehead with a hot iron, and other like
punishments?

17. By what Law are men censurable in the Castle Chamber, with mutilation of
members, or any other brand of infamy; and in what causes, and what punishment
in each cause there is due, without respect of the quality of persons?

18. Whether in the Censures in the Castle Chamber regard be to be had to the
words of the great Charter, viz. Salvo contenemento.

19. Whether it one that steals a sheep, or commit any other felony, and
alter flies the course of Justice, or lies in woods or mountains, upon his
keeping be a traitor, if not, whether a proclamation can make him so?

20. Whether the testimony or verdict of Rebels, Traitors, protected Thieves,
or other infamous persons, be good evidence in law to be pressed at the trial
of men for their lives; or whether the Judge or Jurors ought to be Judge of the
matter in fact?

21. By what Law are Fayres and Markets to be held in Capite, when no other
express tenure is mentioned in his Majesty's Letters Patents or Grants of the
some Fayres or Markets, although the rents or yearly sum be reserved thereout?

Die Iovis 12. May, 1642.
The Declaration of both Houses of Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, That they are
resolved to maintain those Lords and Gentlemen, Committees of both Houses of
Parliament residing at York, in those things they have done, and shall further
do in obedience of their Commands for the preserving the peace of the Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That if any person whatsoever shall arrest,
or imprison the persons of those Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them, or any
member of either House, that are, or shall be employed in the service of both
Houses of Parliament; or shall offer violence to them, or any of them, for
doing of any thing in pursuance of their Commands, or the Instructions of both
Houses, given unto them shall held Disturbers of the proceedings of Parliament,
and public enemies of the State. And that all persons are bound by their
Protestation, to endeavor to bring them to condign punishment.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That those of the City of London, and all
other persons that have obeyed the Ordinance for the Militia; and done any
thing in execution thereof, have done it according to the Law of the Land, and
in pursuance of what they were commanded by both Houses of Parliament, and for
the defense and safety of the King and Kingdom, and shall have the assistance
of both Houses of Parliament, against any that shall presume to question them,
for yielding their obedience to the said command, in this necessary and
important service; And that whosoever shall obey the said Ordinance for the
time to come, shall receive the same approbation and assistance from both
Houses of Parliament.

FINIS.

