A LETTER FROM A WORTHY GENTLEMAN IN YORKE-SHIRE, To His Friend a Member of the
Honorable House of Commons.

Declaring 1 That the Parliament has, and continually ought to use their
zealous endeavors and hearty desires, for a through reformation in Church and
commonwealth. 2 That the same means the Prelates used to advance themselves to
petty deities, and to bury the honor of religion in the grave of oblivion,
has now removed the stones that pressed down truth and piety, and confounded
their carnal wisdom. 3 That the Papists in England and Ireland by their own
barbarous, savage and inhumane practices, as a just requital of their
villainies, will be the actors and authors of their own Tragedies. 4 Showing
though the honorable houses of parliament be by many evil affected people
scorned and derided; yet they ought to go on cheerfully in the establishment
of the true Religion, and suffer patiently, after the example of Christ etc. 5
The enemies of the Parliament and Kingdom, are papists to root out Religion
the Clergy for Bishoprics and pluralities, cloaked delinquents that study day
and night to make current their counterfeit conditions. 6 And lastly Advise to
the Parliament to go on with alacrity but not one foot but to God, to heavenly
ends, divine rules, apparent truths, in the Churches walks, and then they
shall not want the protection of the Almighty.


LONDON Printed for R. Best October 10. 1642.

WE can speculate nothing in this our Horizon but dis^^^ aspects. Bella;
horrida bell; horse and arms always in our eyes and ears; and yet we are
borne in hand with peace; it seems arms boads it, both by the profane
Soldiers of the sword, and by the licentious and starnizing professors of the
Word; both saying that the houses of Parliament are in the wane already
calculating that within one fortnights time, there will be an absolute change:
the latter calls for all for the King as a speedy means to settle a present
peace; and for that purpose do force through their Churches and Parishes, a
Petition entitled of the Gentry and Free holders, etc. at Hewarth-moore to
the Parliament: Where no such thing was there intended, by any considerable
number, but just the contrary speaking in the clouds, as though the heavens
were presently to be foulded up, and that new heavens and new earth are
forthwith to be molded again, new Parliament, new Lords, moderate Laws,
pliable Knights, and Burgesses, their minds and manners so full of
accommodation, as though in stead of vexing Puritans and tormonting Roundheads.
they might roll and tumble without stop or rub to a paradise of union and
sympathy: and yet these blind Egyptians will not see the truth of God which
shines so clearly within the circumference of our Goshe^; nor view the guards
which the blessed God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, nath placed about Sion; nor
the fiery walls which encompasse Jerusalem; neither will they deign to behold
the Church of God; though as dear to him as the apple of his eye; whose
fruitful blessings has always accompanied and waited upon those that have
been instruments of her good: of which number I hope your self to be, as now
witness the constant guard of Angels daily stopping the passages of Satan and
his adherents against you; and enlarging your hearts above humane courage in
The Lords work at this time is reformation of Church and State, and subversion
of their enemies.
all-affrighting oppositions against your civil and sacred employments wherein
you have fully expressed your zealous endeavors, and hearty desires for a through
Reformation both of Church and common wealth. And that this also is Gods
purpose at this time it will evidently appear to any that has observed the
Lords usual manner of working in former ages; for it is likely he has
suffered his Church and common wealth to decline, his people to be wearied with
so many taxes and heavy oppressions for many years together to move and stir
them up, like Israel in Egypt, to shake off their tirannicall yokes, and to lay
hold on the first opportunity and lawful means of their long desired freedom
whereas if the Church and common wealth had continued in their perscribed
forms and rules neither spiritualty nor lalty could ever have thought; much
less have undertaken to involve themselves in so difficult a Laborinth as this
has been. And whereas the aspiring Clergy would have by little and little
imagined themselves to have been some p^ety deities long ere now; if by chance
looking down their black and earthy feet had not appeared below their white
robes to male content (with the Swan) their overweaved conceits; and to
frustate their own vain and empty fantasies: therefore that they might still
retain some Majesty and superintendency above man, the better to insinuate
their spiritual impositions, or r there to force their tyranicall oppressions,
have labored to transform themselves into the Statues of imwortall Gods, Woe
to him that says to the wood arise, it shall teach: b^hold it is laid ove with
Gold, etc and their is noe b^ea^h in it.
that so for fear of their powerful shapes, and by virtue of their shrines,
their livelesse and mute professions, their non vox ^omi^^n implying that
admiration O deum certe; certe imagines; might serve to acquire some simple
respects; and attract some plain country reverence; But God has drawn that
veiled curtain to let men see they are but sons of the earth; too drossie
substance to ascend divine clymates, too far unsuitable for heavenly copes,
charactered, and pictured out by the heavenly Prophet in worthlesle creatures,
dumb dogs, being abjects, and contemptible objects of scorn for all sorts of
people: so that by that self same means whereby they had thoug^t to have
advanced themselves and buried the power of Religion, in the grave of oblivion;
it has pleased him to effect his own ends to overshoot t^^m in their own
bows, to confound their carnal wisdom, to remoove the stones that pressed
down truth and piety; and to smooth the way, for the luster and glory of his
divine worship. How miserable then are H^bb^kuk. 2 19.
they who when they are highest? abuse their power to keep the people of God
lowest, for though they, who should be nursing fathers and mothers to the
Za^hariah 10. 2. (...)
Church of God fo^sake her and become her enemies; they shall perish, yet
comfort and deliverance shall appear to Gods people, either by one or other.
When the appointed time of m^rcy was come that the people of Israel should be
delivered from ^aptivit^, ^^ so ^r^ered the state of earthly power afor the
acomplishment of ^^s will, (...) no impediment might hinder Cyrus Isaiah. 2 10.
from performing of his promised deliverance; so the Lord that he may work his
reformation by manumitting us from Egyptian slavery, and redeeming us ^^^lachy.
2. 8.
from Babylon^sh captivity, has reunited England and Scotland that they may be
cohelpers; has so subjugated, and muzled the bloudhounds of Ireland that we
are in no great danger of their rebellious and savage teeth, other nations also
having their respective prizes to p^ay that so your heavenly aims maugre all
hellish inventions whatsoevr may produee blessed and peaceable conclusions
Objection. Answer.
But ^ hear some say the case is not so clear, as we take it be; yes i^ is
judged already, but we must temper our spirits with patience, and not think to
conquer at the first stroke, nor expect to have the prize before we have run
the course. The children of Israel were sure of victory in their peregrination
to Canaan; and yet they were forced to strive till they got possessions let us
herein exercise our faith, and knit the beginning, progress and end together,
and we shall soon see, that he that begun this work will in good time bring it
to perfection: for where Christ begins to rule, he rules for ever; of his
Kingdom there is no end. When the fuell-strives with the fire the heel kicks
against the prick; and when the crea^ure advances himself against is Creator
it ^is easy to infer the conquest. What if Antichrist does march furiously,
and his supports use their utmost endeavors and parts to trample upon truth and
piety? they can extinguish their light no more then the morning clouds can do
the suns, which by little and little expells their gatherings, and wastes
their packs, that in an instant none of them are to be seen. Can we think that
he which threw the angels out of heaven, will suffer mortals to run a contrary
course without either curb or bridle, and to prevail against heavenly powers?
was there ever any fierce against God and prospered? surely the rage of man
contrary to his own intendment shall turn to the praise of Christ, and
furtherance of that work which God in his appointed time has proposed to
Subversion of the enemies.
himself, as now (blessed be God) before our eyes we may see in Ireland, for
could ever flesh and blood have attempted the subversion of t^ose matchless
multitudes in their own country, if they had not made rods for their own
correction and engines for their utter ruin? or could a Christians heart, so
merciful, pitiful, tender, and so full of compassion, have ever thought of any
bloody enterprises or destructive designs against them had they not pulled
them upon their own heads by their own barbarous, savage and inhumane practices
as a just requital of their own villainies? As for our own Papists, they now
show of what spirit they are; They have got their heads so much into the wind
that they cannot be turned by a gentle hand, whose insolences and provocations
rebound so high, that any finger may point at the mark of their hearts by the
level of their tongues, so that we need not doubt but their judgments also
will fall upon them, so soon as their treacheries are grown to full maturity*
yet these men had they guided themselves modestly, and tempered themselves
civilly, being all either allied kinsmen, or intimately friendly and familiar
with either one or other, how ha^dly could they have been rooted out by any
impartial doom? and this is the Lords doing, that they should be justly
offensive, and it is mavelous in our eyes that they should be actours of
their own tragedies: and yet we are so void of all sense, that we will neither
see, hear, nor give Objector.
thanks to God for those things which make for our peace. Yet I hear some s^y,
they are so far from rooting out, that they rather increase and rise Answer.
again: it is true, but only to harden them that they may receive the greater
fall, for howsoever the church has justly provoked God, yet the cause shall
stand impregnable and as firm as a rock to dash in pieces all waves, and stroms
of threatening oppositions. For Christ is King of Kings and Lord of Lords and
will not suffer dust and worms-meat always to ruffle his beloved spouse, for
Babylon shall fall; for strong is the Lord that has condemned her. Nay the
Parliament Objection
shall fall says some; for almost all have left it. Just as Gedeons 32000 too
many Answer.
to fight the Lords battle, were reduced to 300 upon trial approved for a
sufficient number to vindicate the honor of God. What if some be gone out from
them who was not of them? What if God would not honor them to fight his battle
against the mighty? Cannot God effect his own ends without a set number? Does
not Gods glory appear more without means then with means; more with less
means then with greater? Can God (says Objection.
one) get none but a company of roundheads, puritances seditious, factious,
beggarly fellows to labor in his cause* who are all for scismes and their
own ends) O how far are these from discharging their duties, in giving to
these public Answer.
ministers of the state the best interpretation that their actions will bear;
that they invert all their honest actions, and traduce and reproach their
innocent persons? but it is no matter, for it was Christ's and ^ohns lot,
austere John has a devil, sociable Christ is a wine bibber, etc. Whereas the
holiness of the one should have procu^ed reverence, and the sociablenesse of
the other been rewarded with love; but it is the lot of them a^^ all
christians, the disciple is not above his Master. Men may do well, but must
look to hear ill; wicked men, when they learn to think well, they will learn
to speak w^l^; and no marvel if man want his praise, when God is without his
deserved glory. Wheresoever Christ comes, there will be divisions, that the
very thoughts of men's hearts may be laid open: The flesh always rebels
against the spirit and endeavors to maintain its own regencie, and cries down
whatsoever crosses it, be they laws whether humane or divine, be they never
so well framed for repairing the breaches both of Church and Commonwealth,
View the opposers of thi^ Parliament, and you shall find them like so many
wild beasts heading together to break down the septs and hedges of this
vineyard; First you have the Papists encompassing both Sea and Land to root
out our religion, then have you the Clergy courting for Bishoprics and
Canterbur^ing for pluralities; Thirdly, The thirsty soldier gapes with open
mouth to swallow down the golden juice of this kingdom; Lastly, the cloked
delinqents that dare not come near the touchstone, they study day and night
to make current their counterfeit conditions: These are the aims of these men,
whose invectives must carry such credit with them as alone to condemn those
men whose words may be laws, and lives rules, for them to square their actions
by, whose outward man may serve as looking glasses for them every morning to
discover the spots and stains of their colluding thoughts and corrupted
conversations, Contraria in^^r ^^ oppos^^a magis elucescunt, it would be lost
labor to compare the together, aliud noctua sonat aliud cornix: They are so
far sundred, and distanced in qualities, that any purblind critic may justly
carp at those tricks whereby they play their game, so that there is no hazard
at all in the cause; for sincerity will demonstrate it self in plain and
untraversable evidences, and seal up its deeds with such authentical
witnesses, as that it shall not need to bribe sinister and indirect means to
make it transparent in the great Quest of this common wealth, Veritas non
quaerit anzulos, Truth is bold and like a standardbearer will manifest it self
before all the world: let therefore your ends be heavenly, the bent and sway of
your resolutions holy, wind up your souls higher and higher, soar and mount
up ^loft, and then no plots below, no stormy designs beneath, can beat you
from your wished haven: for in vain is the net spre^d in the sight of that
that has wings. Thus may you raise your self above the reach of humane
policy; and make your self safe in spite of Satan and his accomplices. I have
blessed Jacob and he shall be blessed, but can you not spare, or have you not
provided, one blessing for us ^lso? Yes promote your begun Reformation in truth
and sincerity, and it will di^ert all imminent plagues whatsoever, for where
there is repentance it will ^ind up Gods hands by his promi^es that he cannot
power out his vialls of wrath upon us, and where there is reformation without
which there can be no repentance, there is a lively expression and vigorous
manifestation of repentance as we may now see begun and declared in our eads.
But still I hear cu^sings upon Meroz and the inhabitants thereof, ^t were to
be washed that every county and kindred would lay their hands upon their hearts,
and see how forward or rather froward they have been in the grand concernm^nts
of this Church and c^mmonweale, that when they which have done most may see
th^^ h^ve but done their parts, they which have been contrary minded may
redeem their bygone neglects and perverseness (...) their more earnest and
present ind vours to prevent the bitter evils which the angels of God are
ready to let fail upon us. Can meat satisfy the hungry wight^ and drink appease
the thirst soul if they be not tasted and digested? shall we hunger an thirst
for the blessings of our kingdom, the fruits of this Paliament, and desire to
be feasted with them, and w^ll neither compl^ with them, nor appl^ them to our
selves, that the^ man be fit nourishment for our livelihoods? Na like stocks
and stones we lie in their way, and yet we cry out they run no faster on and
like Remoraes we retard their Navig^tions and et want patience to expect their
arrival, we undermine them b all assa es* and yet we proclaim to ad the world
that they go not forward upon sure grounds; were these the helps that former
S^ges received? or was ever such requitalls heaped upon the grave consultations
of ancient times, (...)? how far are we degenerated from our former births
and strains if we consider the mutual correspondencie, of our foref^thers who
lived together; (...), every man stud^e i^g how to ac^omm^date his neighbor in
what might advance his preferment, every man more officious then other for these
common good, gird your selves therefore with unda^ted res^lutions that thee
vexing distempers, being removed you man reduce us to those pristine times, so
friendly in their familiarities and sympathies, o^ fruitful in n^ighbourly
passages, of intimacie and de^r^nesse, go on with alacrity, bu^ set not one
foot forward without your God; b^ so true to heavenly ends, and fast to divine
rules that no hopes or fears be able to way you from apparent truths; for
assure our selves so long as you are in the churches walks, ^ou shall not want
the protection of the Almighty. (...) and side^a tulit. Hercules was but one,
and what wonders he has done same has made report; Atlas he has born that
high and burden Paramount, transcending all comparison and without any
joynt-tenant of that unweildy weight, but you are many, vis (...), many hands
make light work, and the choice workmen of our kingdom also, able if need
require to build a new worlds much more skillful to close the gappes, and bind
up the wounds of a little commonwealth, a few propps upholds a ruinous house.
What if Giants assault you? Saeva (...) mo^stra, numer^sum ma^um docu^t (...).
David cut off that out-daring Goliath, and if more heady monsters of mankind
do still bud out take notice of that conqueror, and you may know his weapons
also. There is no horrid or monsterous villainy hatched either by Sea or Land,
but it is mortal, it cannot exceed its growth, nor pass its limits, for space
and leisure will either wear them out, or truth expel their poison, or time
calcine them to their first principles again: what if nulla lux unquam secura
fu^^erit, what if finis un^us mali sit gradus (...)? though every day has
threatened your fall, yet experience has seen the furious fates to have had
their own destinies; and that the rageing and gloomie days have often bin
silenced upon fair and clear terms, and though restless assaults as they
spring up link themselves together against you, yet if your comforts, as we
hope, grow and multiply with them, you shall out-stride all their engines with
invincible courage, for victory over bygone practices promises victory over
all succeding intended evils; the sharper the conflict, the more honorable
shall be your conquest; when the Lord of Hoasts shall crown your actions with
trophies of everlasting fame and immortality, when after* years shall make
report, how you have emulated the stoutest of times, and stood out to the
hazard of your dearest blood for the reparing and vindicating the honor and
glory of your great God, for the advancing your King, and preserving his
Dominions, for the enacting laws for freeing your Country from slavery and
bondage. O how sovereign then will be your present praise, digito monstrari
and di^^^^ hic est, when every tongue shall be telling, how you and he, and the
rest have done things never to be forgotten when the labor is gone, the danger
out of doubt, then the glory of the cause will be your own, haec olim
meminisse iuvabit, good God a^ hi^ eripe flammis and iam tandem gravibus
aerumnis statue modum finemque cladi, deliver us from all the fiery contentions
of these days, and let not the double guilt of our high ingratitude die us in
our purest blood, give bounds to these merciless waves which threaten to
shipracke our welfare for ever, and secure our honest commerces with calm
roads to safe harbors, bless the season of the summer unto us, and grant that
at last comfortable issues may flow from the well-springs of our hearty
desires, that no alarm be heard by night* no lamentations by day, nor let
doleful ditties at any time hereafter ever sound out to our suceeding
posterities the discording jarrs of forefathers unhappy divisions.

Thus presenting my love and service unto you in the weak expressions of my
apprehensions of these times, not as doubting of your constancy in your
station, but that thus I thought fit to manifest my settled resolutions in this
common cause wherein I hope the God of heaven will not only bless you but also

Your Loving Cosen, R. R.

The fates foretell the stars and times decree:
That you a scourge to Papists now must be:
That you your oppressed Kingdom having borne,
It being free, your selves, and it adorn
With peace, with plenty, and blessings divine,
Such as no heart can wish, or tongue define.

FINIS.

