THE REFORMADO, Precisely Charactered by a Transformed Churchwarden, at a
Vestry, LONDON.

The Motion of the World this day
Is moved the quite contrary way. HODIE SIC VERTITVR ORBIS. -- Mutant quadrata
rotundis.
a celestial globe rests on a lobster's back in the foreground of a mountainous
coastline with a fortified harbor and sailing ship in the sea
Do thou, these froward Motions LORD, restrain;
And set the World in her due course again.
THE REFORMADO, Precisely Charactred by a Modern Churchwarden, etc.
IT was a blessed Easter (Brethren) that raised me up again to this ponderous
service; and if any Feast be worthy of annual solemnity, my Vote is, that the
Feast, of Easter (though moveable, shall stand fast for ever. Antiquity tells
me, that the Office Gardiani Eccclesiae, is an Office instituted and dignified
by the Fundamental, known, Common, and Statute Laws of this Kingdom, (as
for the Civil and Canon Laws, I have held them execrable, ever since the High
Commission departed with a Duck in the mouth on it) and this honor is not to be
conferred upon any, but such as are judicious and fidele, and able to employ
(courageously and sincerely) the common stock of Treasure, and discretion
belonging to the parish.

It is not, I conceive, yet out of your memory how accurately I heretofore
steered the affairs of Parochial Government; nor out of mine, with what
alacrity you submitted to it: My deportment (then correspondent to those times)
was a fair Character of square dealing, and was, I presume, a prime motive to
your thundering acclamations, (which the echo of this roof witnessed to the
next Parish) in re-electing me the principal Reformado of this Ecclesiastical
Polity. In the exact execution whereof, I intend (with the assistance of my
younger Brother, (whom I shall well educate for the next year) to use such
precise diligence (for the remainder of my time) as may cashiere many fears
and jealousies, and settle many things, (hitherto incompos'd) in such a
graceful posture, that the trust of you, that confide in me, shall not in the
least scruple be abused. But you must remember the old word Distingue tempora,
and then (regarding the turning round of the times) you will conceive that the
wind sits in another corner; and I must move by other Rules than formerly: for
I am now more spiritually illuminated and possessed with sounder principles. The
Civil Law is partly plundered, the Canons (old and new) have recoyl'd on the
Canoniers, the numerous Army of Articles is routed, the Oath ex Officio put out
of Office, and the bottomless etc. Oath is swallowed up. The Case thus
standing, and that you may have a right understanding of your Moderator, take
an Epitome of my Resolution; but withal take this fourfold advertisment
along with you.

First, that I will follow the present Fashion so far in my Discourse, as to
keep no Order.

Secondly, that my interspersion of Latin shall no way authorize the use of
that Bestiall Language in the Pulpit.

Thirdly, that if my phrase transcend your plumbeous Capacity, you shall esteem
it the fruit of my liberal education, before I ever handled the Sheeres, or
fingr'd the thimble.

Fourthly, That you, who (for solid edification) fall so nimbly to your
Brachigraphy, shall not let this Oration pass Grub-street without my
approbation, nor (if it may be) until a sweet Panegyric of my sister Hannah's
composing may be annexed unto it.

I begin with the Weathercock, which is an eminent, gilded, hollow, craking,
combed, and variable creature, and does so wonderfully sympathize with me in
all, and with the present turning times in some special respects, that I do
Order it to continue Statu quo prius; and the four Fanes adorned with the
initiall letters of my unspotted Name, shall be sedulous attendants upon it in
my Livery, to go which way soever it goes. From the Weathercock I should have
fallen immediately upon the Leads, but an Iron Cross hinders me in my way,
which (with all other Crosses moveable) shall be abolisht, that nothing may go
cross in our Design. The Leads I find profaned with the Images of corrupt
hands, irregular feet, and with unsanctified names; they shall therefore be
removed, purified with fire, and converted into Bullets to button the bosoms
of the common adversary, and to seal up the brazen foreheads of the
formidable Cavaliers. This being dispatched, I have made a fair through-fare to
the five Bells, which had, indeed been out of frame long since, were it not
that, sometimes they ring the Changes, (sweetly consenting therein with me)
and sometimes audaciously proclaim an unknown Victory to the over-credulous,
which inflames all their zeal and Faggots in an instant. There is an
impeachment as strong as a threefold cord, against four of the Bells.

First, they were baptized before the years of discretion.

Secondly, three times a day they pollute the tune of the fourth Psalm.

Thirdly, they have Idolatrous Inscriptions upon them, as (with a little of the
Sextons help) I have curiously discovered. For, upon the first Bell there is
peccatoris; on the second mei; on the third, miserere, and Domine upon the
fourth.

Now, judge you ( Brethren (who would seem, peradventure, to be as wise as
your Officer in chief) is not Domine miserere mei peccatoris, notorious and
gross Idolatry? are those words fit to be uttered by a Professor, unless it
be with a holy detestation of such puddle? Ah, I see by the devout shaking of
your heads, that your Brains are troubled about it, that your hearts abhor,
and ache to think upon such rotten trash. Well, it is high time, that these
four be no longer hanged, but Drawn, and Quartered, that they with the
abominable Brass upon the Monuments of our Idolatrous Ancestors, (I pass not
though an old Aunt of mine lies mouldering under one of them) may Concur for
the making of Ordinance to batter down the posterity of their Donors. The
Wheels (being but Hemicircular) shall Hang there like Meteors between Heaven
and Earth; but the Ropes may serve (the next Sessions) at the wooden Tripode
two miles out of Town, for the use of those that will not stretch their
endeavors for Independency the Liberties of the Dawes, (our beloved Allies)
will, by this means, be enlarged; and we will further confirm their
Incorporation, that from time to time they may make such Ordinances, as are
consistent with the Privileges of their house, and conducible to the been esse
of their Commonwealth, keeping their Courts ad libitum, in the upper Region of
the Tower, as we do here in the Vestry. The Clock and Dial, because they go
round, shall take their usual course, only by a pious fraud, they shall go
somewhat earlier in the morning and later at night, than Truth would admit of.
This shall be my godly Revenge upon three crook-legg'd youths of mine, who had
rather encounter (at home, with whole Brigades of Egyptian foot soldiers, than
advance a yards length (in a Holy cause) against a single Cavalier.

I have dwelt somewhat long in the Steeple: now we will come to Church, where
(in the first place) I see the Font taking up so much room that would be
capable of two double Taffata Gowns; which I confess, I should not so
strictly have observed, had not the discontented yoak-fellows of my Dyer, and
hot-Presser, (who are crowded up behind the door) drawn me to it. Away with
it, this Font is abominable, a Basin will be more apt for the service, since
it is not our happiness to enjoy such a blessed River as our dear brethren
and sisters at Hackney are washed withal. And those lofty Pewes which are
higher by the head and shoulders, than their Inferiors, shall be circumcised,
that our grave Matrons, and sweet heavenly minded sisters, (whose posture,
turning their faces westward, is most amiable) may have a more cheerful
influence upon us their Governors.

The Pulpit, (in respect of the form of it, (being almost round) is tolerable,
although my neighbor Zachary the Cooper, Caprecious vessel) could fashion
out one more seemly, and to better purpose; but the situation of it (looking
too much toward revolted York) shall suffer a Reformation, and at the Parish
charge, it shall be secured with a substantial Padlock, lest they, whom the
mere natural man calls profound, pious, loyal, and Orthodox Divines should
saucily intrude it. I can partly tell you the poor condition of those silly
Priests; As Soon as they ascend the Pulpit, they fall on their knees for divine
Assistance, as if they could not be cock-sure of it at all times: then they
have a premeditated prayer, not much exceeding a quarter of an hour, wherein
they petition for peace and unity, and pray for Kings, Queens, Princes, and
such kind of people, and supplicate our Savior Christ for choice blessings
upon Archbishops and Bishops, whom we have found (by the Spirit that we lead
about us) to be the strongest Limbs of Antichrist. After this mess comes the
Sermon, which is the greatest part of a weeks study, (written perhaps, over and
over) yet, may be delivered in an hour. Their Conclusions, (which we are
neither able, nor willing to understand, are confirmed by Scripture, Fathers,
and Reason. They consult with the Original Tongues, and such Authors as are
called Authentic and Classical, fetching their water from the Primitive
springs, because they (empty Casks) think they cannot have as pure nearer
home: So, by their great skill in Divinity, gracefully attended (forsooth) with
variety of humane learning, they will exhort us to study to be quiet, to try
the spirits, to be Charitable, moderate, obedient to the higher powers, and to
do things according to Order, with a great deal of such hungry thin stuff; I
have utterly done with them and theirs, and am heartily overjoyed, that ever I
thought of this happy Pad-lock.

The Pulpit-Cloth was the Legacy of a blind Zelot, as appears by that
Jesuiticall badge, (I. H. S.) upon it; for, as some of our learned Professors
do conceive, I. signifies Idolatry. H. Heresy, S. Superstition. Oh, here is
good work! What but flat Popery can be expected from a Pulpit aparreled with
such a Livery? These Letters of gold shall be delivered to the Finer to make
Silver withal, and the Velvet (because it deserves a better Wardrobe and the
costly infirmities of the Testator should be hidden by our Christian Charity)
shall be converted into Window-Cushions for my new-reformed Parlor, where I
intend frequently to entertain those immaculate Assemblies, which the
un-regenerate call Conventicles. The Houre-glasse shall be turned out of
doors; for our extemporall Teachers may not keep time with Clock or Glass;
and so, when they are out, (which is not very seldom) they can take leisure to
come in again; whereas, they that measure with meditations by the hour, are
often gravelled by complying with the Sand.

The Organs are of Leviticall, or Popish institution, and like the breath of a
Basilisk, they deter hence the two prime Grandees of the Parish, (the most
Celestial Almanack-Makers, and best tempered Potter, that ever lived by heaven
and earth.) They drown the Virgin-melody of the Gallerie, and middle Alley;
and against our wills bring our confused Notes into Order; therefore, though I
adventure my neck (as that desperado did in Worcesters Cathedral, and his
Predecessor at Cheap Side Cross) I will set them such a Flat that shall lay
them breathless on the pavement. This Romish merchandise will yield good
English Coin at Paul's or the next Cathedral that is not Bankerupt. The Table
of Degrees prohibited in Marriage is obsolete, and so is marriage it self as
here it has been used; for I see no ground to the contrary: but when all
things are common (as they ought to be) a man may marry, whom, when, where, and
as often as he will. This is a very short, but a sweet and comfortable
Doctrine to you (my dear and attentive Auditory) and so the sudden pricking
up of the ears does assure me.

Let us now, take a little survey of our Church-books. The Bible (which always
comes first to my sight and handling) has a dangerous Apochryphall Obstruction
in the very Bowels of it, which is of a Malignant influence upon the whole
Body. This is composed of such Histories, as bind not our credence, and
morality which shall not be the rule of our Practice; it must needs be
presently expurged. Yea, the Canon it self, in respect of Translation is not
free from infirmity (and indeed it is no marvel, since so many mitred heads
had their hands in the doing of it.) The Geneva version is far beyond it: But
old Hugh Broughton, if he might have been suffered, had exceeded them both; A
learned Synod, (without either root or branch of Episcopacy) must be the only
Aesculapius to cure this evil.

The Errata of the Book of Common prayer (as some call it) or rather the
Lithurgy of the Church of England, were they expressed at large, would over-bulke
the Bible; yet the ravenous Esau's of the world, had rather lose all their
Liberties and Proprieties (which are their Birthright) then one mess of this
red and black Pottage; I will not contaminate my lips, nor abuse your chaste
ears with so much as naming any errors that are in it; but refer you to
Rabbi Lewis Hughes (the glory of the last British Druides) and diverse others,
who have, already, smitten this Belphegor under the fifth rib. It further
behooves us that the singing Psalms be rescued from the back of such a Monster,
and from those other humane inventions Te Deum, Da pacem Domine, and Quicunque
vult: but, whosoever will that any (except the 150 Psalms) be continued, may
do well, (in my understanding) to defend Robert Wisedome's Preserve us Lord.

There is an error in John Jewels works, but it is an error with a witness,
and, although it be palliated over Jure Divine, yet it is instar omnium
errorum, and has in it the spawne of all Abominations; it is beyond pity, that
such a Gemme should ever be defiled with so base a Cognizance; He was a Bishop.
The very word Bishop, (I fear I offend in naming it so often) imparts all the
mischiefs that are Destructive to a Common Church or State. Your holy
indignation (brethren) is well expressed by the present groanings of your
spirits, but be comforted, for these stall-fed Lordly Prelates must come
shortly, to their fatal Banquet. Erasmus his Paraphrase has found the more
favor hitherto at my hands, because he sometime wrote a Tract in the praise of
foolishness; but when I remember some popish passages in his Colloquies, which
I read when I was at Merchant Taylers school; I cannot well resent his best
labors. The book of Deus and Rex is a pamphlet quite out of my books merely,
for the Oaths sake that is in it. These Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance are
binding things; the latter was imposed upon me when I was a novice, and it has
so hampered me this year, that I would fain, if possible, cast off these
manacles: for it is almost Hell it self to us that should be independent, to
be so pinioned.

The Book of thirty nine Articles is in many things diametrally opposite to our
fundamental Principles, it must necessarily be withdrawn, or farewell our
Diana for ever. All the aforementioned corrupt volumes shall be translated out of
the Church, and all the Isles thereof, into little Britain, or else into
Smith-field.

We have but one Manuscript, (I mean the Register) and that must be
Corrected; for the names of all those that were crossed at their Baptism, ring'd
at their Marriage, or prayed over at their Burial shall be cancelled. No Names
henceforth shall be engrossed here, unless they were first Registered in holy
Writ: nor will we keep a Record of the names of strange Preachers any more;
for, they may deliver good Doctrine in the City, who never had Orders or good
name in the Country.

The Communion Table has, long since, regained its ancient Name, and Site; and
I hope our nimble-joynted Mass Priests shall never be suffered to offer or
cringe there, any more: But I will be bold, with the round pillars that
environed it, (when the Leprous Superstition is scraped off) to make an
impregnable fence for my hospitable Buttery. I do well remember the Plate,
(he that can forget Plate this year, may be Ordered to forget it for ever.) I
know to what furnace it might be conveyed, to what Use and Form converted, and
by what means multiplied and faithfully secured; but there is such a Noli me
tangere upon it, that I dare not finger the twentieth part of it.

The Parish Cash yet, is ready to my hand, and I will presume to seize upon a
fleece of it, to maintain at the Church-doore, a guard of Long-tayl'd
Vociferadoes, such as Giles Cripple-gate, and Olaves old Jewry had, lest the
Conjuring Letany should rush in upon the fourth and sixth day of the week, (
Heathenishly called Wednesday and Friday) that Prayers be not read against
Pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy, etc. and, lest the Babylonian garment, (the
Surplice) be shouldered in, again among us; for, to Professors of our
Complexion, no smock is more odious, than that of the Whore of Rome, nor any
Petitions more terrible, than those that would obliterate our principal
Character.

Some of our Dim-eyed Ancestors could see unhappily, to make their Simplicity
Legible upon the Church-Walls, by setting up the Lords Prayer (as they termed
it) which is too narrow a directory, or Summary of our Petitions: The Ten
Commandments, which are not (I conceive) absolutely Obligatory now, under the
Gospel, and the Creed, which is not (I believe) Apostolical; nor am I bound
to stand to it. These shall, in good manners, give the Wall to choycer
Scriptures, and I will be the Master of the sentences, to select them. The
taking down of the popish pictures, out of the Windows, and bringing them,
(by a legal trial) to a second Martyrdom, was a laudable, and transparent
work of my immediate Predecessor; But, nil simul inventum and perfectum, Rome
was not built in a day, nor can it be demolisht in a year, (unless this great
year, or the next does it. There is one pretty scandalous Baby yet left in the
East-window; it has a trim Coat on, and an Orient luster a-about the head
on it.) The Sextons Grandam, (blind soul) who well remembers the setting up of
it) showed it me, and told me it was our Blessed Lady; but truly, if she were
my Mother, and as high as heaven, I will (as Duty binds me) make her Kiss her
mother earth once again. And the Angels on the roof of the Church, (though
they did cost five shillings a piece the gilding) shall have their Wings clipped,
and fall down to salute her. The day whereon this pious work shall be done,
may be called the Desumption of our Lady; and (if Authority will permit) it
shall be Callendered next unto my Birthday, which they call o Sapientia.

Queen ELIZABETH'S Monument was put up (at my charge) when the Regal
Government had fairer credit among us than now: and her Epitaph was one of my
Brother Jonathan's best Poems, before he abjured the University, or had a
thought of New England. I have had no small struggling within me about the
toleration or abolition of this Statue; and at last, have resolved it shall
continue, but with a Curtain to veil it, that we may regard, or dis-regard
it at our pleasure: For, methinks in Forty four years reign, she might (if
she pleased) have bated the Beast of Rome to better purpose, and wrought a more
through Reformation; yet, (notwithstanding Her Majesty's omissions of
sorrowful memory) of her successor (King James) had not been too wise and
learned, asswell as too peaceable, for our Generation, and his Divines too
sinewy for ours to grapple with at Hampton Court, we had finished that work
long ago; which never since, till now could meet with so fair an
opportunity. The Escutcheons that are quartered over our heads in the body of
the Church, are Emblemes of those honors which some of our noble Progenitors
purchased with the hazard of their blood, in defense of Religion, known Laws,
and liberty of the subject. I will give them leave to be hanged. But when I
take notice of the Royal Arms, and their Motto (Beati pacifici.) I cannot for
the present, but enteraine some mutinous, Disloyal, rebellious thoughts; and a
furious zeal would soon drive them into action, were it not that Conscience,
allegiance, and Honi Soit, upon the blew garter, did countermand it.

Some alteration would be of postures, and names as well as things; For truly,
I cannot, with an upright Conscience, condescend to kneeling at the Sacrament:
we are not not required to be so flexible in a superstitious adoration; my
advice is, that we either sit familiarly, or stand to it courageously; nor ought
our Gesture to be the same now, at the Gospel, Creed, or Glory be to the
Father, etc. as it was in the beginning. These and other like Gesticulations,
came first into this Country, from the City which stands on seven hills, and
thither (with all such Baggage) let them trudge again. As for names, I see no
warrant, but under the man of sins own Seal, that this Church should be
called Saint Clements; nor indeed, (as I have learned, since I was enlightened)
that it should be called a Church. We, only, can discern who are Saints, who
Reprobates; and it is not hard to find, who and what this Clement was, and yet
deal gently with him.

But I see an approaching Reformation in this very particular; the Parish
Clerks have already passed it by their weekly Bills, and other Underofficers
(as zealous as he that lash't a Car-man for whistling the tune of a Psalm to
his horse) do punish our Roman Harlots for crying Saint Thomas Onions,
(although they know such Egyptian Roots cannot be sanctified.) The Law is the
same concerning Saint John's Wort, and Carduus Benedictus. And for this
building, which hitherto we ignorantly called a Church it is indeed but an old
pile of Stones, (I hope to see more sumptuous, and magnificent Prisons ere
long) It was built at their charge who vainly, thought a decent Barn or Stable
too homely for a Christian Synagogue, and was consecrated (saving your
presence) by some Prelate, as Superstitious as the Founders. The verity of it
is, We are the Church, and this Fabric (till we are otherwise provided) is
but a meeting place, (where to our great grief) there is too often, a
miserable mixture of the profane with the godly; for redress whereof, there
is no other way then (in a tumultuous fashion) to present such a Petition as
Authority must not contradict.

The Ingens opus, and Masterpiece of all, now calls aloud for your quickened
attention, inflamed zeal; and well-setled endeavors; I mean the
discreet-election of an able, and sincere Pastor, whose model I have conceived
briefly thus.

He must not proceed from Wales, or either of the Universities; for then we
shall never understand him; nor yet from Jericho, lest the gravity of his beard
give us cause to suspect the truth of his Enthusiasmes, and inspirations; but
he shall be a a smooth, sweet young man, well descended (not from Levi, but) from
the Tribe of Gad, or Man-asses, and trained up in Amsterdam, the Isle of Silly,
or (if you please) in our own neighbor hood, where we have good choice of
such whose Mechanic professions have left them to make the Pulpit (as others
do the sword) their quum nemini. Here are Felt-makers that can roundly deal
with the block-heads, and neutrall Demi-casters of of the world: Cobblers who
can give good Rules for upright-walking, and handle Scripture to a Bristle:
Coach-men, who know how to lash the beastly enormities, and curb the
headstrong insolences of this brutish age, stoutly exhorting us to stand up
for the truth, lest the wheel of destruction roundly overrun us. We have
Weavers, that can sweetly inform us of the Shittle-swiftnesse of the time, and
practically tread out the vicissitude of all sublunary things, till the web of
our life be cut off. And here are Merchants of my Profession, who can separate
the pieces of Salvation from those of Damnation, measure out every man's
Portion, and cut it out by a thread, substantially pressing their points till
they have fashionably finished up their work, with a well-bottom'd conclusion.

Out of this Cross heap (wherewith we are so comfortably surrounded) we may
pick such a one, that with a Stentorian voice, (making more use of his Lungs,
and nose then nature requires) shall reprove our sins in that kind and
measure as we would have him, shall courageously sound an Alarm to Battle,
and tell us the event of a war before it begins, by expounding old Visions
and Prophesies, better than he that was in Pathmos. He shall not need to
travail for Orders to the Prelaticall Hierarchy, he shall receive Orders
from us: I have drawn up some of them already for him; and by these you may
judge of the whole; ex ungue leonem, as we used to say.

His Habit shall be a high crowned Hat, a black leather Cap, a sad medley
Cloak, and Jerkin of the same, Violet Hose, and Russet Stockings.

His Laudresse shall evidence his hatred of white Linen; and his Barber shall
so roundly indent with his Head, that our eyes may as well see his ears, as
our ears hear his Doctrine.

In his fathomlesse prayers he shall dispense much with the third Commandment,
and take the Lords name in vain ex tempore; cutting out more work for God in
an hour and a half, than a sober man can expect ever to be performed by him
that is most wise; and if at any time (forgetting himself) he pray for the
Kings Majesty, it shall be with such distractions, and Dilemmaes, that we can
hardly distinquish it from Treason.

His Text must never be divided (we shall make sufficient Divisions among our
selves) but he shall wander from it, as if it were not a tangible body, only
in case of pure necessity, he may (for a Moment) make it a place of retreat,
and then friske abroad again.

His Understanding shall be free from all Liberal Arts and Sciences: his
conversation from all humanity, and his Discourse from all figures, except
Hysteron proteron, Hyperbole, Tautalogia, and other Flowers of the like sent
and color.

He shall use no Language but his Mother Tongue, and the Hebrew, (if he has
attained to it) making choice of his Authors accordingly, such as Aben Ezra,
Rabbi David Kimchi, and the rest.

He must abominate the Greek Fathers, Chrysostom, Basil, and all the bundle of
such unwholesome herbs; also the Latins, whom the Pope-bellied Gray-beards of
the Town call Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, etc. The intricate Schoolmen,
as Aquinas, and our devilish learned Countryman, Alexander Halensis shall
not come within the sphere of his Torrid Brain, lest his Pia Matter be
confounded with their subtle distinctions; but (by special dispensation) he
may (for names sake) cast an eye sometimes upon Scotus: and; (when he has
married a sister) upon Cornalius a Lapide.

His English Authors should be curiously culled also: He must not so much as
name Whitgift, Boys, Hooker, nor any of the rabble of Anti-Brownists, or
Conformists: But his chief guides shall be Knox, Brown, Barrow, Robinson, and
that never sufficiently honored and admired Howes (not the Chronologer, but)
one of our late and best Translators) He was a man that feared not to come
close to the heels of truth; but was a laborious applyer of strong points to
the last, and had always a lift or two for the Back-slider: If any one stood
stobbornly on his Pantofles, he could work him as pliable as Wax; if there
were a Schism in his charge, both his Hands and Awle should make up the breach
in a zealous contraction; He well observed the footsteps of his Auditory, and
grafted much goodness into those that had gone aside, driving his Holy
instigations so home, that, wheresoever they went, they were sensible of them.
In a word, he was the hammer of all humane learning, a most industrious
converter of soales; and in a short space, did set forth more works in
Oxe-hides, than old Tostatus did all his life time. Oh -- I can never mention
his name, nor visit his monument in Finzbury, but presently these spiritual
pangs surprise me -- Oh -- He is gone, he is gone. But there is heavenly
comfort provided for us, or our posterity; for I was told, even now in any
Vision, that he shall come again, and teach on earth before the last day. And
now, heartily thanking you Holy Brethren for your present patience, I will
proceed where I left.

When our Souls are blessed with a Doctor of these, and the like rare
qualifications, the next considerable will be his stipend (for this Ox will
not be muzzled) which I conceive (under favor) should be the ampler, in regard
there will be little or no use of him for weddings, Churchings, and Burialls;
which, in our late purblind times, yielded the Incumbent (as the Lawyers called
him) a comfortable Revenue. I think well (with submission to your Judgments)
that we advance him to forty marks per annum but with this proviso, that our
benevolent Sisters shall not be inhibited their voluntary contribution of
money, (if the Plunderer has not sent it marching into the field) or Plate,
(if any be left upon the Cup-board) Linnens, and other necessaries, which I am
confident will amount to twice as much. This was the mere motion of my Reverend
Mother, and dear Sister, whose voice may be heard where mine cannot.

And whereas we never continue long in any one Opinion, but separate daily,
from Separation to Separation, I hold it expedient that once in every
fourteen days, (which shall be the new and full of the Moon, the true
Moderatrix of our brains) we have a solemn meeting in my sanstified parlour,
where our Prophet shall give us a concise exhortation of two hours long, or
some such matter, and then we may admonish him of such things as in the matter
or manner of his former Labors, were not correspondent to our humors, and may
direct him (for the future) how long, how broad, how high, and how deep he
shall teach us; how gently or tartly he shall handle our sores, and when he
shall restrain, when enlarge our Liberty. And then refreshing our selves in a
Christian manner, with a chirping cup of Canarie, and such good thing as the
Gentlewomen will minister unto us (being devoutly consecrated by a long-winded
benediction) every one shall depart home with such precise heedfulnes as may
prvent the scurrilous tongues of the Malignants; for, (I must tell you) we
have a sort of scoffing Ishmaelites, that will undertake to see sin where God
cannot; and with their black mouths will persecute the meekest Isaac upon the
earth.

These, with some other things (I know not well what) are the Compendium of my
thoughts, leaving nothing material to the care of my Successors, but the
subversion of the Crosse-Ile, the demolishing of the Arches, (if without danger
it be feisable) and the turning of the maine structure North, and South,
(which now most offensively stands East and West) or taking it all asunder for
a purer Edification. Now only remains, that in a pretty Diminitive Vote, you
please to give your Brotherly assent unto the premises. --

Never was Vestrie shaken with such a Thunderclap! the Air seldom suffers
such a holy violence; your loud Christian clamor brought this earth into such
a fit of trembling, that (I am partly persuaded) the Graves were in some doubt
they should be dispossessed of their Guests; But I am sure this Gale has driven
out Billows of joyful Tears at my eyes, and blown my zeal into an
extinguishable conflagration, which had wel-nigh puffed me up into another
Ecstasy. This is Vis unita indeed that can set all the Elements on work thus
at a clap. Your unanimous approbation, (my zealous brethren) obliges my
extremest abilities to the prosecution of my Intendments; resolving as long as
the old word (Magistratus indicat virum) stands firm, my demeanor shall
express me to the life, and make me famous to posterity.

And if the well-tuned Vox Populi of this Precinct will honor me (the next
Nativity-tide) to be your proper Common-Counsell man, my learned Oratorie in
Guild Hall and Pious Devotion in the whole Service, shall render me as
Pragmaticall, and Fanaticall a Member in the Civill-government, as possibly I
can be in the Ecclesiastical.

-- Smell insanivimus omnes.
FINIS.

