ENGLAND'S BACKWARDNESS Or a lingering PARTY In bringing back a lawful KING,
DELIVERED In a SERMON at Waltham Abbey Church in the County of Essex, at a
solemn fast.

By THOMAS REEVE D. D. Preacher of Gods Word in that Parish.

Aegre facimus, facimus tamen. LONDON, Printed for William Grantham, at the
black Bear in S. Paul's Church yard, near the little North Door, 1661.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Southampton, Lord high Treasurer of
England, and one of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council, length of
days, and increase of Honor.
Right Honorable and admired Peer,
WHat is man, if but mere man? where grace does not sanctify, what is natural
wisdom, but a subtle Cacodaemon? we may see it in this Synopsis of David's
troubles; what variety was there of strange prodigious Wits? the Prototype was
in David's time, the Antitype has been in our time. There was an Absalom that
took up arms against his natural Father; and what have we had, but Absalom
amongst us for these many years? Subjects (which are political Sons) appearing
in an hostile manner against their natural Sovereign, the true Father of the
Country? we have had the chariots and horsemen prepared, and men (persons of
servile spirits, and complying dispositions) to run before the Designer; yea,
the trumpets of sedition have been blown, and the popular perfidious cry has
been heard, Absalom reigns in Hebron; and our Land has been filled with as
many Spies, Intelligencers, Face-triers, Speech-latchers (the vermin of
corrupt Commonwealths) as ever Israel abounded with in Absaloms days. And as
Absaloms rebellion began with glorious pretexts of religion, and reformation,
so have not we been sprinkled with the Rebels holy Water? what was there in
this Nation for a great while, but paying of vows in Hebron, Lectures, Fasts,
Self-denying Ordinances; and telling the people, that the Form of Government in
this Nation was distempered; but if any had a cause, or suit, and they would
repair unto them, they would do them justice. Thus all the engines of execrable
policy were set on work. And as in those days there was a Zibah that betrayed
his dear Master M^phibosheth, so, have not we had many a Zibah? Yes, what have
we had but infinite treacherous servants and supplanting neighbors; which, to
gain the estates of renowned Noblemen, and worthy Patriots, have used all
manner of undermining practices, and blemishing informations? Si sat sit
accusasse, quis erit innocens? If a bare accusation be enough to make a man
guilty, who shall be innocent? yet a mere aspersion was enough for a
Sequestration; if this stratagem has cost me three thousand pounds, how many
Millions have there been drained, by these hellish contrivances, from many
innocent and eminent men in this Land? And as there was a Shimei that cursed
David, and had no better terms then bloody man, and Son of Belial, and telling
him that the justice of heaven did pursue him, and that he was taken in his
mischief; so have not we had as cursing a generation? Yes, what was the spittle
of many men's lips, but sirnames, and nicknames, Malignants, Delinquents, limbs
of Antichrist, hellish Fire brands; Cyprianus was called Caprianus, and
Athanasius, Sathanasius? no scandalous names they thought were ignominious
enough to avile us, revile us, and reproach us to the people, and this by men
that professed the spirit of meekness, and knew that it was not lawful to say
unto a brother, Racah; and did they not pronounce upon us, and say that we were
taken in our mischief, judged from heaven, and that the hand of the Lord was
lift up against us? Oh what ado was there with the righteous cause! and of
vengeance printed upon our brows by the stigmatizing finger of God Almighty.
These were a people of high revelations, and seemed to be Secretaries of State
to the hidden Councils, and Decrees of the great God. That party carried it in
that height, as if it had been Master of the Ordinance to the Lord of hosts, or
been the very Council of War in heaven, by authority to sentence poor
Malignants (as they called us) to be shot to death: And as Ahithophel was the
busy active man in that rebellion, so have not we had an abundance of
Mercurial brains, and dangerous Craftmasters in this Insurrection, such as have
advised Absalom to lie with his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel;
I mean, to counsel our State. Masters to do the most nesarious, detestable,
abominable things, which ever the Sun beheld? yea, to plunder; rifle, imprison,
gibbet, to make their own countrymen Vagabonds at home, to sell them for Slaves
beyond sea, to break in pieces the great Seal; nay, the Crowns, and Scepter, to
raze Palaces, to demolish Castles, to set up Eunuch Parliaments,
Hermaphroditical Committees, Cyclopical High Courts of Justice, to seiz upon
Church-land, to expel the most reverend Churchmen out of their just Cures; Oh
how have we had Anabaptistical and Phanatick principles of State delivered, as
the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom? these Ionadabs, these wily men, these
Ahithophels, were accounted as the Oracles of God in those days? And did this
rebellion go on only with a State-vapour? or a daring bravado? no, as in
Absaloms days, the battle was scattered over the face of the whole Country,
and there fell twenty thousand men, and the wood of Ephraim devoured more then
the sword; so our treason, was it not a most satal and destructive attempt to
the Nation? how many pitched battles were there fought? what horrid slaughters
were there committed, as if here, and elsewhere, there had been nothing but
slaughterhouses to be seen? What corner has not been sprinkled with blood? how
many mournful Families has this war caused? we might justly be called
Acheldamah. The losses of precious treasure is grievous, but the loss of men's
precious lives is an astonishing, dismaying Spectacle. Now (my honorable good
Lord) what shall the result of this hideous passage be, but to conclude with
Samuel, that Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. For if men
had not been bewitched, it could never have entered into the hearts of men, or
Christians, or especially such Christians as seem to defy Jesuits for
treason, and rebellion, to perpetrate such barbarous things upon their natural
Country, and Countrymen. Some say there are no Witches, and some say there are
no Rebels; those that are called Witches, there are that say, they are but
Venesitae, Poysoners, or Ventriloquae, Speakers through the belly; so those
which some call Rebels, are but such as have a rare art in a new way to take
away the enemies of State, and can speak through the belly in a mysterious way,
to cry up the liberties of the people; or if they be Witches they are to be
called but Sagae, the prime Wits of the time, or White-witches, that do more
good then hurt. But I doubt they will be found Maleficae, black Witches, and
their very practices will declare it; 1. as Witches are discontented people, so
these are Malcontents; 2. as Witches for the most part look ill, so these have
a bad physnomy, they look with glating eyes, and ominous countenances; 3. as
the Devils sucks a pap in Witches, so those have their consciences sucked; 4.
as Witches deny their Christendom, so these have denied all the ancient
principles of faith and morality. 5. as Witches enter into league with the
Devil, so these have their covenants, and engagements; 6. as Witches are fair,
and plausible in speech, so these have their enchanting language; 7. as Witches
are pernicious, they destroy cattle, and living souls; so these consume the
estates, and lives of men. 8. as Witches seldom repent, for it is a rare thing
to hear of a Witch to be a true penitent, so these seldom have remorse for
their most wicked, and wretched actions, it is a rare thing to hear of a Rebel
to turn true convert, some of the Paradoxes of their old Witchcraft will a long
time stick in their consciences; what a do had David with his Witches? they
had cast him out, and they would keep him out, it was a tedious thing unto them
to bring back their King; so what a do had we with our cunning people, they had
expelled a King, and how backward were they to reinstate him in his known, and
ancient rights? we had much strife with them to get them leave their old
sorceries. Some would not have had the King brought in at all, and some would
have had him brought in upon conditions: when they did it, they did it after an
irksome expectation, yea the Text may justly be applied unto them, Wherefore
then are ye the last to bring back the King?

But (peerless Peer) in the midst of this Tragical passage, this was the
comfort, the honor, the happiness, that when so great a part of the Nation
was under (as they use to say) ill hands, yet some were free from the
Witchcraft; for as in David's time some stood firm to him in them midst of the
rebellion; as Zadok, and Abiathar the Priests, Ittai the Gittite, that great
Statesman; Hushai the Archite, that renouned Country worthy, Barzillai the
Gileadite, Shobi the son of Nohash of Rabbah, and Machir the son of Ammiel of
Lodebar, etc. So there were amongst us some stable, and invariable to the King,
and the Kings cause, who were true Mourners all the time of his absence, and
never quiet till they saw him brought back; amongst whom I may reckon your
Lordship One, and a conspicuous One, you need not my pen to Characterize your
worth, wisdom, integrity, fidelity, constant affection, and unshaken loyalty
to your lawful, precious, and pious Prince, the whole Land is filled with the
Bruit, and fame of your high endowments, and your unspotted obedience to your
dread Sovereign; and truly (honored Lord) this is the motive of this
dedication; Had the Duke of Somerset been living, I should have made bold to
have made you two the joint Patrons of this worthless piece; but He (to whom I
was so infinite obliged, though I never saw his face) being translated to the
glorious presence of God Almighty, Let me humbly entreat your Honor (to whom I
am as much unknown, as I was unto him) to be the sole Shelter to this
wayfaring Pilgrim, which must travayle through the whole Nation, and perhaps
into some neighboring Countries. I love to choose Patrons by fame, as well as
familiarity, and report as acquaintance. Accept of your Suppliant Servant; who
does devote himself to the honoring of your high perfections, and does
prostrate his inconsiderable self, and these his unpolished labors at your
Lordships feet. Thus beseeching God long to preserve amongst us, such an
invaluable Patriot, and prizelesse Peer with all reverence to your Graces, and
ardent desires for the increase of your honor, submissively I take leave and
rest

My Lord, The vowed servant to your Honors person, and the high admirer of
your rich and precious qualifications THOMAS REEVE.

2 SAMUEL 19.12. Wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the King?


HEre is a King to be fetched home, and a people to be fetched out; the King
may come home, but, there are come that will not invite him home; no, when
others show their forwardness, they show their backwardness; averse, perverse
they are. Some are eager, and passionate to have him return.

-- acrius omnes Incumbunt generis lapsi sarcire ruinas; Virg. 4. Georg.
their hearts have sent Messengers to him, their desires have prepared Charrets
to convey him: if longings, and yearnings, could have brought him home, he had
been there long ago; their breasts are full of nothing but pantings, their lips
are full of nothing but earnest cries for his Return, they wish him among them.

Et gemitu, Ovid. 1. Met.
and lachrymis; and luctisono mugitu, With groans and tears, and doleful
plaints: saying, Oh that we could see the Kings face! oh that the Royal Throne
had the Royal Gemme to adorn it! oh that we could behold David in as much
luster and Majesty as ever! we could leap out of our houses, and leap out of
our Tribes to take a solemn journey about such an happy occasion. This Party
has filled the Land with suffrages to set forward the work, Virg. 9. Aeneid.
-- oneravitque aethera votis, and laden the Air with Votes: But

Quid prodest coelum votis implesse Neaera? Tibul l. 3.
What matter if one Party be forward, and another be backward? some were not so
propense as others were opposite. Mulciber in Trojam, Virg.
pro Troja stabat Apollo. The Tribes are at a difference, they cannot agree
upon the design. Martial.
Alia voce pscittacus, alia coturnix loquitur. The Birds have several notes,
and tunes. What love, and loyalty was there in the ten Tribes? How did they
consent together, and even contend one with another, that the work might be
concluded upon: nay, hastened to regain the sight of the King in his proper
place, and wonted Glory? All the people were at strife throughout all the
Tribes of Israel: saying, The King saved us out of the hands of our enemies,
and delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines, and now he is fled out of
the land for Absalon. And Absalon whom we anointed over us is dead in battle,
now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing back the King; Verse 9.10. Oh
generous expressions! Oh honorable motions! but are all as loyal in their
affections, and royal in their intentions? Zenod.
no, Unicum arbustum non alit duos Aerithacos. Cui quaeso, ut suadeas ne
vescentium dentibus edentulus invideat, and oculos caprearum talpa non
contemnat Jeron.
It is a rare thing to see a whole Land conspire together in the most worthy
Resolutions: They which want teeth and sight, hate them which can chew their
meat, and disinguish of colors. The Tribes of Israel are very fervent for a
King, but there is a Tribe, a sullen Tribe, which is not half so warm and
glowing. No, they had been so deep in Rebellion, in entertaining Absalon and
advancing his cause, applauding and anointing him, that they were ashamed and
afraid ever to look David in the face. Treason is a black crime, it will ever
have some of her swartinesse seem upon it, some of her foot will be cleaving to
her sides, it begins in passion, and is accompanied with consternation, it is
first Male-Actor, and does continue a Malecontent; if it has followed Absalon
when he was living, when he is dead, all affection to his cause shall not dye
with him; no, after men have been full of horrid plots and practices, they are
ever after full of horrid conceptions, and suspicions. Oh, if the right King
should come to his Throne, what shall become of our Estates, what shall become
of our heads? they which have deserved ill are troubled with a Megrim in their
brains, they are never quit of their fears and jealousies; they think that
all are as fierce, as they have been, and as cruel and merciless, as they have
been perfidious and treacherous. See it in this staggering and lingering Tribe
of Judah, they could readily join with the Usurper, but when they should do
right to their lawful King -- clausis cunctantur in aedibus omnes, they sit
musing in their houses with their doors shut; they cannot show their heads,
they cannot stir their feet. Let who will speak, Judah is silent; let who will
gather hands, Judah will not subscribe; let who will go, Judah will stay at
home; the Tribes of Israel make mentions, but Judah is deaf; the Tribes of
Israel express their desires, but Judah is dumb; the Tribes of Israel prepare
for the journey, but Judah is lame. Alas poor distrustful, delaying Judah,
Quae tantae tenuere morae? What made thee thus to protract the business? Sure
I am thou art very tardy, and slow-paced: thou art as the best of the Tribes,
and yet the last of the Tribes; last in the League, and Leaguer; neither thy
Presents, nor thy preparations, thy Messengers, nor thy Waggoners are ready;
the general cry cannot awaken thee, the general offer cannot incline thee. Ten
to one is nothing to thee, thou stand by thy self, when all others stand
against thee, stand before thee; thou may come in in time, but it is at thy
leisure, with a great deal of pausing and hesitating, thou art the hindmost,
and thou art the last. Thou do not appear of thy self; no, thou must be
sought, and wrought upon; thou movest not a foot, till thou be sent unto;
thou sendest not a Message to the King, but the King is enforced to send a
Message to thee. Stiff Judah, that thy King must bow to thee! Is this haughty
Judah! that thy King must Court thee! Is this Subject like? after thy high
Treason, is not this a kind of petty Treason? to abuse Majesty, and to make
thy Sovereign a Petitioner, a Sollicitour; this may be thy stomach, but it is
none of thy duty; it may be thy arrogancy, but it is none of thy Allegiance;
thou may face it out to the world, but thou will never answer it to God
Almighty; it is pride, it is disloyalty. Yet thus Princes are constrained
diverse times to be supplicants, and to bend to such as ought to bend their
knees to them: Kings may connive at this, but will God pardon it? What, to have
Leigmen, lofty Lordly men? Is there a more shameful, sinful thing then to see
imperious Inferiors? Lusty Subjects? no, were they Peers, or Dukes, they
might blush to see it in their garb, and tremble to put it into their account.
If David's heart smote him, that he cut off a lap of Saul's garment, then, their
hearts may grieve them that trample the Robe of Majesty under their feet. It
was a good speech (full of judgment, full of honor) of him, that said, A King
ought to come into his Kingdom upon his feet, and not upon his knees; for, may
every man boldly challenge his right, and must a King beg for his right?
Matchiavil may have such a principle, but I find no such fundamental rule in my
Bible; doubtless it has more in it of the aspiring Spirit, then the inspired
spirit. Yet my good King here in my Text, (happen how it will at Doomes-day) is
necessitated to how, and stoop, to send and seek, to use informations, and
instigations to get into his Throne; De facto it was so, though De jure it
ought not to be so. Yet for the present David is enforced to employ Messengers,
and those none of the meanest, even the reverend Priests, yea, the most
reverend High Priests, Zadoc, and Abiathar to consult, and contest with them,
why they should be so refractory, and stiff-necked with their King; and indeed
at their conference, they might do something; but out of their own consciences,
before they did just nothing. Well what Arguments do they use? Such as were
pregnant and convincing; First they press them upon the point of honor,
whether it stood with their reputation to neglect such a memorable Duty; would
they stand out, when all others yielded? No, They would be dishonored by the
Generality: For that the King should come home, it was a common bruit, a
National vote, The speech of all Israel was come to the King, even to his
house, v. 11. But for fear that this should not effectually persuade, they
fetch a stroke with the great hammer; they leave the argument of fame, and come
to the argument of shame, telling them, That they would be accounted more then
unreasonable, and unjust, even inhumane and unnatural, if they did it not: For
they told them, that they were not only of his Country, but his kindred, they
were his brethren, his bone and his flesh; he was born amongst them, and drew
his lineage from them, therefore if strangers will do so much, then shall men of
the same blood not join with them? Yes, For consanguinity sake they shall be
the first, and not the last. Wherefore then has David the least kindness from
you? wherefore are you in the rear to do a good office to your native King?
wherefore are ye the last in bringing back the King? Ye are my brethren, my
bone and my flesh, wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the King.

In the Text consider with me these particulars.

1. An Expostulation, Wherefore then, 2. The persons reasoned with, Ye, 3. The
unseasonableness of appearance, the last, 4. The action of moment discussed, to
bring back, 5. The person of quality to be reinstated, the King.
First for the Expostulation, Wherefore then? From hence observe, That man is
not Lord Paramount over his actions, but he is to be brought to an account;
wherefore is it said, That every man shall kiss the lips of him that gives a
right answer, Prove. 24.26. if man were not to answer for himself? This is
meant not only in respect of counsel, but likewise of convention. God says in
point of Religion, Declare that thou may be justified, I say 43.26. And so
the word does say in point of manners, Produce thy Reasons that thou may be
vindicated, The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, Prove. 14.8.
And how to understand his way, if men were not bound to maintain the
Judiciousnsse of his actions. The Apostle does speak of unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. and such are all those, which will not act by reason, or render a
reason of their actions. Job said, that he would not refuse to argue the equity
of his doings with his servants, when they did contend with him, Job 31.12.
When then we deny to be responsible to mankind in general to attest what we
have done. Virtus est recta ratio.
If Virtue be nothing else but rectified reason, then we should declare whether
we have kept within our measures, or be irregular, and exorbitant. Man's refined
reason should be shown in the defending of his own actions, as Tully, when he
was brought to the test for his demeanor, said, it was but reasonable that was
demanded, and they should find by his answer, that he had conversed with all
the Muses. Ratio est numerus, Cum omn bus Musis me rationem habere cogito
C^^^ad Attic.
Reason is a number, say the Philosophers; then every reasonable man should
bring in the bill of his whole life, and not be unwilling to show what an
Arithmetical Coversation he has had; for this is Rationem reddere, to exhibit
an account. To defend our actions, what is it but to purge, and purgare est
purum agere, To show our selves to be pure from the steines, Colum. l. l^b 3.
which some would fix upon us. Wherefore has man a tongue in his head, but to
be his own Advocate? it is as necessary to fence thy deeds, as to fence thy
head. So many eyes do not look upon us in vain, no, Magna quaedam respondere
munda. Man l. inseperabilis comes justutiae. Aristot.
We ought to give some satisfaction to the great world, that high Judiciary:
this same clearing of thy transactions, is the inseparable companion of
Justice. If thou be inculpable, thy innocence will answer for thee; if thou
have been culpable, and have renounced thy sins, thy reformation will answer
for thee; if thou have been culpable, and do remain culpable, the Judgment
of the world may be a preparation to thee for repentance to prevent the last
Judgment; howsoever answer thou must, for thy coins are not more necessary to
be tried, than thy works; thy evidence for thy land, is not more requisite,
then the evidence for thy life; that if it be possible thy Apology may be
ready, And thou may have the answer of a good conscience. Every man may be
put to this trial, and have an Interrogatory put to him as here, Wherefore then?

Application. This serves to reprove them, which do decline this search,
question our lives? no, who made you our Inspectors? no, we have men that are
ready to strike out those eyes that shall but look into them. Men must rather
submit to their actions, then they will submit to a discovery, or discerning of
their passages. How many sinful, shameful, absurd, abominable, senseless,
graceless, deplorable, detestable things have there been done, and yet none of
these will endure a scrutiny? They are Censurers of all other men, and yet no
men must be Judges of them: They act by humor, and live without control; No
probe shall be put into their wounds, no balance shall take the weight of their
facts: Herod. l. 3.
no, if Prexaspes meddle with the intemperance of Cambyses, it is enough to
have his own son shot to the heart in his presence: Cromer. l. 4.
If Bishop Stanistaus come to enquire into King Bolestaus list, and Tyranny, it
is enough for him to be slain at the high Altar, and the Soldiers to hew him to
pieces. Examples are infinite of this kind. Pertinocia, est inflexibil m^^ is
obstinatiae, nolle cedere miloribus. Cicero. Q^anto rigore suum co^^tur
defendere errorem.
Strike at an Asps hole, and thou art sure to be stung: Shave a Lion, and thou will feel the force of his teeth. Many men live as if there were not a
Superior to question them, or a wise man to pass sentence upon them. Pertinacy
does arise from an inflexible stubbornness, that men are not willing to yield
to their betters. It is to be admired, faith Jerome, That when a man has done
incongruous things, with what rigor he will defend his error. A fool is wiser
in his own eyes, then seven men that can render a reason, Prove. 26.16. And we
have a drove of these bruites, that though fools they are, yet there are no
wise men that can show them their want of reason, or by rendering a reason, can
bring them to reason. By this means it does come to pass, That wicked men do
rule, and holy men are slaves. But ought not all men to be brought to the bar?
^^^mpii regnent and pri serv^^^, August.
yes, why else do we read of such frequent disquisitions of men's behaviors in
holy Scripture. What is this that ye have done, Genesis 3.13. Why have thou not
obeyed the voice of the Lord? 1 Samuel 15.16. Wherefore transgress ye the
Commandments of the Lord that ye cannot prosper, 2 Chronicles. 24.20. But there is
no what, why, nor wherefore to be put to these men. Whatsoever they do, must be
taken up for authentic, and authoritative beyond dispute, or inquiry. But this
is but the superciliousness and self-conceitedness of men's natures, for by
their favor every man ought to endure an expostulation, and submit to an
experiment to be made of them, as here, Wherefore then?

Ye.

Now let us come to the persons reasoned with, Ye: ye that challenge the same
Pedigree,

-- Quo eadem genuerunt viscera, Ovid.
whom the same bowels brought forth, which have a propinquity of blood with me,
which are my brethren, my bones, and my flesh. Is this your reference to me,
and shall the Tribes of Israel be kinder unto me than ye? Is not this a just
crimination against you? Yes, assoil it, if ye can, Wherefore then are ye? From
hence observe, That it is a scandal for near Relations to fail in offices of
love. There is no greater grievance, then when a man is deserted of his own,
when Acquaintance, Affinity, and Alliance do stand at a distance.

-- dolus, an virtus quis in host requirat? Virgil 2 Aen.
It is no matter for an open enemy, whether he use craft or courage, but for a
professed friend to use any thing but integrity and sincerity, is shameful and
hateful: Id. ibid.
Oh it is an unsufferable thing, when

-- ipse doli fabricator Epeus, a man is deceived by his trusty confident:

-- quis fallere posset amantem? Virg. 4. Aenead.
Who can be treacherous to that heart, which is knit to a man in entire
affection. This was David's complaint, My lovers and Neighbors stood looking
upon my trouble, and my kinsmen stood afar of, Psalm 38.11. and this was it
that pierced Job to the quick; His brethren were far from him, his
acquaintance were utterly estranged, his kinsfolk failed him, and his familiars
forgot him, they which dwelt in his house counted him a stranger: he called his
servants, and they gave him no answer, though he entreated them with his mouth,
yea his breath was strange to his own wife; though he entreated her for the
childrens sake of his own body, Job 19.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Yea, this was our
Saviors groan; that he had no honor in his own Country, nor amongst his own
kin, Mark 6.4. Now what more inhumane, and prodigious, then that the ties of
nature should be loose twists? where there is (...) there should be (...) Naz.
Illa est vera fraternitas, quaenullis casibus frangitur. Seneca.
where a reciprocation in birth, there should be a reciprocation in respects.
That is true brotherhood, which is not rent asunder with any casualties;
strangeness in kindred is not only a repture in humanity, but a schism in
Nature. It is grievous, when there is a friend that is closer then a brother,
Prove. 18.24. when a man cannot go into his brothers house in the day of his
calamity, because better is a friend that is near, then a brother afar of,
Prove. 27.10. How do these violate all engagements? and raze out the very
Characters, which are engraven and imprinted in the womb; they dry up the
springs of pedigrees, and grind to powder the souls of their Progenitors. For,
did their Ancestors give them the same lineage to live as Aliens? Should
community of stock, and kindred not beget a community of correspondencie, and
benevolencie; Should these be averse, discrepant, diametrically opposite? no,
here is a ground for a rebuking, increpating, criminating expostulation, as
here, Wherefore then are ye?

Application.
This does serve to exhort all men, not to quench the incentives of Nature, not
to falsify Relations: for, why should any go about to dissolve those bands of
Adamant? or infringe that ingenerate League? Shall a kinsman fail in his trust?
or set his own nest on fire? Shall one foot tread upon another? or the right
hand cut off the left? no, the Apostle does cry out against them: which are
without natural affection, and the Spouse does complain against her own
consanguinitie for being unkind, The children of my mother were angry against
me. Aet tu, mi Fili?
Shall Brutus be stabbing his own fathers breast? Must Julia make peace between
her two children Caracalla and Gaeta, by wishing her self to be divided into
two parts if they continued in discord? Must Axuchus by much Oratory work a
reconciliation between Johannes Comnenus, and his own sister Anna Caesarissa?
Where, in the mean time, are all the prickles and sparkles of Nature? Have they
learned then Mother Tongue to express it to others, and can they no better
pronounce it amongst themselves? Do they call Kinsmen, and live as Savages? No,
these above all people, have endearing, and ingratiating obligations. If they
be thus unkest, and unkent, tetricall and wayward, they must have the check in
my Text, Wherefore then are ye?

The last.
Now let us come to the unseasonablenesse of the appearance, The LAST. From
hence observe that lingering does eclipse the honor of worthy Actions. It is
ill in good things to be taken in mora, in delay, as the Civilians say: will a
man sue for justice when the Court is risen? no, Vigilantibus non dormientibus
succurrit lex. The Law does help the wakefull, and not the sleepy. He that
observes the Wind and Rain, shall never sow; So a man must take his feed-time
for noble Attempts upon the first offer, and not stay for fair weather. In good
things the first opportunity is to be taken, for Deterior posterior dies, the
latter day is the worser. To every thing there is an appointed time. How then
art thou disappointed, if thou do neglect the appointed time? Will any set
forth on fishing, when the seas are frozen? or sow at Harvest? no, over-late
things are postdated: Every thing is beautiful in the season. Bern.
Volat verbum irrevocabile, volat tempus irremediabile, The word does fly and
cannot be recalled, time does fly, and cannot be remedied. Sicut capillus de
capite sic momentum non peribit de tempore: As an hair does not fall from the
Head in vain, so a moment of time shall not perish. Thou may perish, if thy
time does perish. No man does walk in the dark, no, it is too late, then to
begin a Journey. Esau lost a Blessing because he came not in time, and the
Wise Virgins lost their entrance, because they stayed till the Door was shut.
Opportune things are the most beneficial things. A man does lose much honor in
losing his just season. The best works are the earliest, and the forwarderst
things are the firmest; the first births are the honourablest, and the first
ripe fruits are the pleasantest. He that does things out of time, meets
rather with scorn then contempt, as the Trojanes that came to Tiberius, to
comfort him up for the death of his dear son Germanicus, two years after he
had been dead, he took it in such disdain, that he said, he wished the like
comfort to them for the death of their Valiant Hector, who had been dead above
a thousand years: Rhesus which came to help Priamus in the tenth year that the
Grecians had besieged Troy, the Citizens derided him, and said, he showed
himself, Qualis Trojae amicus fuit, what manner of friend he was to Troy. It is
a disparagement to prolong, or afterday good things, it is as it were to
administer Physic at the last gasp; or to bring a shore when the Building is
falling. As vinegar is to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard
to them that send him, Proverbs 10.26. Such an one as does deliver his message,
when the business is done. The slow Ass was not fit to be sacrificed: so the
delayer is not fit for any commendable enterprise. He that is long expected at
a Banquet is no welcome guest; he that has his work to do in the Close is no
approved paines-taker. These same hindermost men do carry a blemish with them,
as Judah here has a skar, because last. Wherefore then are ye the last?

Application.
This does serve to reprove Retarders, who do defer honorable Undertakings:
who either never appear at all, or do come nimis sero too too late: a
protracting generation, who cannot walk without their Guides, nor stir a foot
till all their Neighbors round about them have trodden out the way for them;
they are loath to be too forward, or to be called at the first: no, they halt
and loyter, and play the Truants: if they do present themselves at last, it is
at a very untimely season; they are the last, as if they had no will to the
work, or could be contented it should never be done. But are they thus backward
in sin, or base actions; no, there they are in the forefront, they fly with
Eagles wings, they send in their presents, cast in their Thimbles, and Bodkins,
appear in Buffe; call in all their friends to arm, and harness; have their
young Volunteers, and Maiden-Troops, and what not? Oh very quick, active,
serious, furious, accelerating, precipitating, mischievous, and scandalous
things they are! there they move navibus and quadrigis, with their Sea-forces,
and Landforces; Oh the holy Cause, the holy Covenant, made without either King
or Scripture; stand by it, dye by it, make no delay, use no tarrying, no,
Festinate viri, jamjam mora nulla est, Make have ye men of Gods right hand,
though ye do the same things that ye condemn the Jesuits for, yet this design
is sanctified in the Pulpit, and let their Zeal kindle you into a Jehu's heat;
March furiously, go in the strength of the Lord, and take with the Lord the
Wings of the Morning, let every man be Ocior c^rvis, and agente nimbos ocior
Euro, swifter then Hearts, or the tempestuous East Wind; Oh your day is dawned,
make no pausing, lose not a minute, but see ye be at your colors, at the first
beating of the Drum. Curse ye Meroz, curse the Inhabitants thereof, because
they came not forth to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty, the
execration of holy Church lay upon him, who if either absent, or not active,
and expedite in such a pious Cause. Corah is the foremost to head a Rebellion,
and Judas does lead the Van to betray his Master.

Tartessos fratrem medio Therone premebat. One press upon the heels of another:
every one would be a Leader; let it be a contrary act, yet there is striving
that a man may be a Prevaricator; let it be an harsh song, yet there is a
desire to be a Praecentor; let it be a bad Race, yet there is an ambition to be
a Prodromus, a Praecursor. But in matters of Virtue and Fame, and Honor there
is no such have; no, there men stand gazing, and expecting, as if they must be
drawn out, forced on, led forth, how many scruples and demurres, and fears and
jealousies are there? men are loath to show their faces, or lift up their feet,
or get into the way, or keep the way; a man would think they were undertaking a
Pilgrimage, or going to a gibbet, or called forth to fight with Giants and
Tigers. If they yield their presence at all, they are the last. But, on
beloved, learn more promptness in lawful and laudable things: it is a shame
in matters of justice and equity to be pawsers, as you may see here in bringing
Judah, who is disgraced for being the last. Wherefore then are ye the last?

To bring back. Now let us come to the action of moment discussed, to bring
back. Could Absalon draw multitudes to his party, and being drawn in, do they
not know how to get out? Cannot the seduced be reduced? Could the whole
country rise to drive forth, and cannot the whole Country rise to call home?
Or, would the other Tribes advance the work, and do Judah slacken it? Is the
Royal City most languishing toward the Royal Person? Is not this her scandal?
her infamy? Yes, was she the first to banish, and the last to bring back? How
is this urged upon her as her Reproach? Wherefore then are ye the last to bring
back? From hence observe, that a work of Restoration does come off with an
heaviness. It is an easy matter to rend, and to scatter, and to quench, and
deface, but it is not so easy a matter to stitch together, to gather up, to
kindle, to repair. This same work of Reformation and Redintegration, to renew
things in their first Beauty, and to restore them to their pristine splendor
does come off with a difficulty, it is Elephantis partus, as the birth of an
Elephant, long in the bringing forth. Hoc opus, hic labor est, -- This is the
work, this is the laborious Atchievment; it is a wonder to see, that -- aula
sepulta resurgit, a buried Court should rise again out of her Grave-cloathes.
Alexander at the motion of a Strumpet might, soon burn Persepolis, but neither
he, nor any of his Successors; could raise it again to her ancient Glory.
Aerostratus in a mad humor might consume in a night the magnificent Temple of
Diana; but to this day there is nothing to be seen of it but wasted Ruins:
Fortunat.
A disease is soon gotten, but health is not so soon again regained; it is an
hard thing to bring men to the restitution of ill-gotten goods, but it is an
harder thing to bring men to the restitution of decayed. Greatness. As he which
is fallen is like a lamp that is despised in the thought of him that is at
case, Job 12.5. so, that which is demolished is looked upon with an eye of
neglect in the thought of him, which minds nothing but his personal quiet, and
safety. Let David come to a state of distress, then every Which-scorning Nabal
can say, who is this David? who is this son of Ishai, 2 Samuel 25.10. then, Bow
down that we may pass over thee, Es. 5.^5: at that time these is rather
derision, then sympathy. If Jerusalem come to a weeping state, how many are
there, which will bring her first smiles into her cheeks? no, amongst all her
lovers there were none to comfort her, Lam. 1.2. Who shall feed the sheep of
slaughter? their own shepherds will not pity them, Zach. 11.5. By whom shall
Jacob arise, Zach. 7.5. God may lift him up, but man will not readily set him
upon his feet. No, men stand aloof from the sore, and puff at them which are
in extremity; The walls of Jerusalem being burnt, Nehemiah and all his Friends
were hard put to it to get them, rebuilt. People out of an high-brained fancy
may quickly pull down places of Judicature, and throw down Thrones, but it will
be no less then a miracle from Heaven to restore Judges as at the first, and
Princes as at the beginning. Es. 1.22. Behold the tears of such as were
oppressed, and they had no comforter, Eccles. 4.1. Many are of the mind of
Agesilaus, who being desired to stay his march, till his sick friend recovered,
he never regarded the motion, but went on with his march, only saying, Arduum
est misereri, and sapere, It is an hard thing to pity, and. to be wise and so
by many amongst us it is counted mere folly to be too compassionate. Many can
wound, few can heal, many can expel, few can bring back, Wherefore then are ye
the last to bring back?

Application.
This does serve to exhort men to forbear, from outrageous courses, many men
have no greater civility, then

-- ictu discludere turres
Disturbare domes, avellere signa, trabeisque.
Et monumenta virum demoliri, atque cicre.
Lucret. l. 7.
To throw down Towers, Palaces, Ensigns, Monuments, yea;

Diruta Martae suo Lyrnessia maenia vidi, Ovid. Ep. 3.
We have seen the walls or glorious Cities levelled by the hands of their own
Natives; their own Countrymen have been Pioneers and Batterers, to work their
own desolation; nay, such a City,

Quam neque finitimi valuerunt perdere Marsi.
Minacis aut Etrusca parsonae manus; Horat. Epod 16.

Which neither our neighboring Enemies, nor our most spightfull, full
outlandish foes could ever destroy, these have brought it to ruin. Oh what
wastes and spoils have there been in England and Ireland? It would make a
Barbarian lament to see how the Houses of Ivory have perished, and goodly
dwellings have been made possessions for Bitterns, and Cormorants, and
Scritch-owles; yea, a land that was once as Eden, the garden of God, has been
since left desolate like the wilderness; sure I am, that, Ovid. Ep. 2.


Luxuriat Phrygio sanguine piguis humus, Many a Field has been fattened with
the blood of the slain, and massacred. Now oh ye wild Furies, how long will
it be before we shall see these woeful skars of your blind and mad rage healed
up? No, tumult may root up that which moderation cannot in a long time replant.
The Fool may cast firebrands, and Arrows, and say, Am I not in sport? But the
wiseman cannot extinguish the burnings of these firebrands, nor cure the
piercings of these Arrows, which the fool has been the Author of. Multi
laedunt, nemo succurrit, nemo opitulatur. Hugu
Many men hurt, but few succor or help. When Jehoshuah the high Priest stood
before the Angel to procure remedy for Jerusalem, Satan stood at his right
hand, Zach. 3.1. So when some would redeem a Church or State out of thraldom,
there are Adversaries enough to continue her miseries, and increase her bonds.
How many soft bowels, and State-building hands are there in this land. Speech
cost nothing, and siding with a party is not very chargeable; many men will
subscribe their Names, be Confederates with the just cause, and vaunt and
vapor as highly as the best; but it is an hard thing to get a Commonwealth
Offering from them. No, they which are worth thousands, and have no charge of
Children, yet they will give away all that they have to strangers, or some new
created kinsman, rather than bestow ten Talents upon the Public, their
Natural Country that has bred them, and fed them, and stocked them, and
bestowed all their Honors upon them, get not a Legacy from them in their last
Will and Testament. His Epitaph will be this;

Hic jacet Triparcus, donec farcae sub hoc tumulo condiderunt, here lays
self-thirst, till the Destines laid him under this Tombestone. Therefore seeing
help does come in so slowly, let not damage be so rife; let this Boutefeau of
Nations leave casting of his Bals of wilde-fire; Vermin are not beloved, every
one hate a Woolf and a Crocadile. Nimrod the mighty hunter has no good report,
it made the tears to spring out of the eyes of Elisha to look but upon the face
of Hazael, who should slay young men with the sword, and dash in pieces Infants
against the stones, and rent in pieces women with child: Thou may est count
thy self an Hector by these things, but thou art but a Mastiff; for, What is
thy servant a Dog, that I should do such things? Thou had better be a
Dunghill carrier than to lay Cities in heaps; or be a Fox-hunter, then a
Kingchaser; for when David is driven from Jerusalem, Absalon does play mad
prankes, and thy poor Conscience is subject to the advice of Achitophel; thou
silly wretch, do thou know no God but thy Commander? then see thy Captain
General, and his Zanee at his elbow. Art not thou a rare Swordman under Absalon
and Achitophel. Give over thy trade therefore, for poor blind soul thou art
doing that, that the child that is unborn shall curse thee for; yea, that
after ages shall defy thee, and execrute thee for. For thou have nothing in
thy mind but wastes and ruins, pulling down of Nobles, and frighting, and
pursuing Kings but of the Nation, Egregiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla, thou
would feign have a great name for vilany, and be egregious for that which is
prodigious, and execrable; But when thou have done all thy mischief, who shall
make satisfaction for it? We know thy Venomous heart (in the state that thou
art in) very well, thou have nothing but poison in thy breast, but who shall
pull out the stings that thou have left in other men's sides? Thou art bad
enough thy self, and it is an hard thing to find good men enough to redress
that which thou have left deploreable; The best are not very forward to promote
good things; no, that which some have damnified, others will hardly repair; him
whom some have driven away, others will hardly bring back; no, they are the
last usually in such a work: Wherefore then are ye the last to bring back?

The King.
Now let us come to the person of quality to be reinstated, The King. It was
not to bring back a Patriot, or a Peer, but one more Precious than all the
Potentates of the Nation; one worth a whole Land, a King. From hence observe,
that a Nations Luster is a King. So long as a King is wanting, there is an
eclipse in the Hemisphere, but so soon as he is brought back, the whole
Dominion does shine. If Agar wept so for want of water, and Saul went so
sorrowing up and down for the want of his Fathers Asses, then how great may be
the National dolor for the want of a King? A Land without a King does seem to
be without ey-sight, for that thou may be unto us in stead of eyes, Number.
10.31. and unarmed, for Kings are the sheilds of the earth, Psalm. 47.9. and
without daylight, for a King is the Light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17. and without
her Capital member; for a King is the head of the Tribes, 1 Samuel 15.17. and
without motion, for he is the breath of the Nostrils, Lane 4.20. put all the
grandees, the high, and mighty Ones of a Land together: yet can they match a
King in Stature, no he is higher than Agag Number. 24.7. the rest are but
Hillocks, these are the Mountains of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.1. these are so great
that they are called Dignities, 2. Pet. 2.10. The foundations of the Earth, Ps.
82* 5. they are the shepherds to the sheep, Number 27.17. Nursing Father, which
bear the children in their Arms, or carry them in their bosoms, Number 11.12.
They are kind of bright Spirits in a Nation, for David is called an Angel of
God, and Cyrus an anointed Cherubin, yea the Deity it self has not a clerer
reflex upon earth, then a King, for I have said ye are Gods, Is. 82. very
Extracts of Gods Power, Superiority and Authority; The earth has not a Nobler
object of grandeur, then a King, for Excellent Majesty is added to him, Dan.
4.36. Oh how great is Eminency, Excellency, Summity, Sublimity. Pr^pollency,
Praepotency! It is said of Moses (that he might be set out as the principal of
the Jews) that he was as King of Joshurn, when the heads of the people, and
the Tribes of Israel were gathered together, Deuteronomy. 33.5. and of Job (to show
his potency) that he chose out the peoples way, and sat as chief, and was as a
King in the Army; Job 29.25. as if there were none above a King, or a King were
above all: Seeft thou a man diligent in his way he shall stand before Kings,
and not mean men, Pro. 22.29. as if all were mean men in comparison of Kings,
and there were no greater honor upon earth then to stand before Kings. He that
endeavored to set out himself with the greatest honor could say no more, then
I am the son of ancient Kings, Esa. 19.11. The Church can have no joyfuller
news then of a King coming unto her. Rejoice oh daughter of Sion, behold thy
King comes unto thee, Zach. 9.9. Is there a sadder judgment, that can light
upon a Nation, than the want of a King? No, They shall say, we have no King,
because we feared not the Lord, Hos. 10.3. As if God then had punished them to
purpose, laid on a braining blow, struck out their right eye, cut their very
heart strings in pieces, when he had deprived them of a King: Well, this is the
greatest punishment, and can there then be a greater blessing happen to a
Nation, then to enjoy the presence of a King? No, Oh tower of the flock, the
Strong hold of the daughter of Sion, unto the shall come the First Dominion,
the Kingdoms shall come unto the daughter of Jerusalem. Why do thou cry out?
It there no King thee. Micah 4.8, 9. confess that there are several sorts of
Governments, Democracy, the Government of the People; Aristocracy, the
Government by Nobles; Oligarchy, the Government by a few, as the Decemviri, the
Triumviri in Rome, and of later times amongst us; when the Pettitoes of a
Parliament, stood for the Representatives of a whole Nation; yet when all
Governments are reckoned up, Monarchy is the chiefest and best. Wretched we
that knew Kings so well, and lived so happily under them; yet for our
execrable, and incorrigible sins have drunk of all waters, been under the
Army of all Empericks, have tried the paces of all Hackneys, been sucked by all
Horseleeches, been scourged with all the whips of the Coriection-house, and
possessed (as it were) with all Devils; yet now we have had experience of all
these, which of all these (besides Monarchy) are so good, that they can have
our good word? No, I doubt, that they deserve rather a Sarcasme than a
Panegyric. Let men if they will preserve the skins of those Scorpions, which
have stung them, and lay them up for Relics: Some Humourists, and brainsick
people may do so, but I believe, that the greatest part of the Nation are not
so taken with them, that they will write Encomiastickes, and sing Paeans to the
honor of them; no, Difficile est Satyram nonscribere, it is hard thing to keep
patience at the thought of them. The land in general, -- Ora indignantia
solvit, speak of them with indignation, and detestation and good reason; for
their consciences, that they brought in new Oaths, a Directory, and
Lay Elders; and for their estates they brought in the blessed excise, Monthly
Taxes, and descimation after Composition; all new, new, that old England from
the first foundation of Government never heard of before; can a worthy Patriot
of the Land think of these without anguish? no, Alcides magno errore percitus,
he that has any regard to his principles, or privileges cannot but with a
kind of diserutiation, and vexation decest these innovations both in Religion,
and Government. For my part I am holy for Monarchy, not only because of the
Unity, Moderation, and Majesty that is in it (for these may be the Topictes of
politicians, as if every Statesman had a measuring rule in his brain, to line
and level, to draw out what Government he does think most convenient for
himself) but principally in respect of divine Authority. For I find that God
first set up this Government in the Father of Family, and afterward he
promised to Abraham that Kings should come out of his loins, Genesis 35.11. And
therefore Jacob prophesied by inspiration, that the Scepter should not depart
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet till Shiloh come, Genesis 49.10. yea
Balaam as bad a prophet as he was pronounced to the honor of Israel; That the
shout of a King was amongst them. Number. 23.21. and was it not foretold that in
the time of the Gospel, Kings should be their Nursing Fathers, and Queens
should be their Nursing Mothers, Es. 49.28: were the children of Israel ever in
a worse case then when they were without a King? No, it was threatened as a
curse, that many days should pass in Israel without a King, Hos. 3.4. and
when this happened what woeful effects followed? every man did that which was
good in his own eyes. Judges 18.13, 21. Then there were nothing but setting up
of Teraphims, robbing of houses, and outrageous lusts, as in the Levites wife.
This Government is so requisite, that very Heathens have magnified it. Nil
Monarchia melius. Nothing is better than Monarchy says Herodotus. Herodot. l.
3.
Monarchiae multum attribuunt ut optimo generi. Isorc. ad Nicor.
Men attribute much to Monarchy, as the best kind. Thucydides could say, Vt
plures apparere, siles frodigiosum est, sic plures Monarchas. As it is a
prodigious thing for many Suns to appear, so it is to have many Governors:
(...); Let there be one Lord, and one King says Homer in his first Illiad.
Thucid l. 6. in conc. Alcib.
Nulla communionis humane curatio majori mitiorque, quam regin, says Polit. in
Polit. There is no Government of humane Society greater or milder than Kingly.
I could abound in many more Authorities, but here is enough, both from the Law
of God, and the light of Nature, to show, that the most Conscionable and
Comfortable Covernment is Monarchical, Sure I am, we may in this Land with
wringing hands, and bleeding hearts, think of the pernicious, Nefarious,
flagitious practices, and outrages in the interval, that Monarchy was
interrupted, and other Governments took place enough for us forever to abhor
all Legislative Powers, but that of Monarchy. Therefore let who will honor the
Ring-taile, Ospray, Ostrich, Vultur; I honor the Eagle: There is no Government
like to Kingly. And it is a Lunacy, a Frenzy no to desire the best, and
choose the best, and replant the best, as it was, in Judah, when a King driven
out from them, not to bring him back. Wherefore then are ye the last to bring
back the King?

Application.
I could make several Applications of this point, as first, to show that man's
nature is wild, for he must be kept under by Government, there must be a King.

Secondly, That that man is inttactable, which is not been moratus well
ordered; for he has the means of a well composed life, there is a King.

Thirdly, that sin cannot ever escape scot-free, there will be vengeance for
it elsewhere; for here is punishment, there is a King.

Fourthly, That great is the Charge of Supreme Authority, there are thousands
to be answer for, for, why is one set over all, but to be responsible for all?
Yes, he is a King.

Fifthly, That high Dignity does belong to him in the chief place, for he is a
King.

Sixthly, That God is to be adored, for there is one upon Earth, that has
Reverence, Subjection and Loyalty, there is a King.

But I shall pass by these, and many other Applications, which might-justly be
drawn one of this word King, and shall only insist upon that which is most
pertinent to my Text, and the present occasion, which is this,

That true remorse sor Rebellion should carry with it a King secking affection.

Repentance does express it self in contraries, the sinful acts are turned
into dutiful acts; for how is it a transmentation, if there be not a
transformation in the desires? Yes, he that hated a KING, must honor him, and
he that has chased him from his Throne, must bring him back; else though he
has put off his Harness, and withdrawn his Ordnances; yet he does keep his
Drum, and his Trumpet; though he has sheathed his Sword, yet it is drawn naked
in his heart; He is not a Rebel in Action, but he is a Rebel in Resolution; an
injured King* therefore must be righted; and he that has been cast our, must
be sought out and brought back: Oh then that it is so hard a thing to find a
true penitent Rebel; some there are that perhaps have given over the WARS, but
have they given over their spite? They have left their Commands, but have they
left their Principles? They make no tumults, but willthey make satisfaction?
They seek not to destroy him, but will they seek to Enthrone him? No, they had
rather bring him to naught than bring him back. These same Kings Lands, and
Kings Rights are so sweet, that they cannot endure that the right Owner should
have a Reentry; there are too many sick of the Kings Evil.

They have been Kings so long, that they are loath that their Jura Regalia
should be taken out of their hands; it is Indignation to them to hear of the
Kings Name, but it would be Death to them to look on the King's Face. The
bringing of a King back, would bring them back indeed; they must loose their
Princely Houses, their Lordly Mannours, their rich Offices, their stately
Parkes, etc.

Do Lions use to part with preys, which they have carried home? No, there may
be many steps seen toward their Dens, but -- nulla retrorsum, none backward;

A man may easily conjecture what they will give to a King, which will not give
him the title of a Gerttleman, nor the patrimony of a yeomans son; were he of
their dieting, he should have far modicum slender commons, were he their
Alms-child; Pers. sat. 3.
he should receive every thing manu contracta with the Nigards fist, Lazras got
as much at the gate of Dives. They know his birth, Horat.
but like Foxes they provide only for their own cubs they knew where his Crown
land lay, but all the revenew of it goes to their coffers, little comes to his
purse. He may bless the bounty of strangers, rather then magnify the courresie
of his own Nation; what sumptuousness soever has been at their own tables to
gorge themselves, their Friends, and Favorites, Sycophants, and Parasites,
their Comrades in baseness, and accomplices in mischiefs, yet I doubt the King
can boast little of their largesses. The Smaritain has powered in all the Oils
and Wine into the half dead man's wounds, the rest have but gazed upon him and
past by; It is astonishment and horror, to think of the barbarous savageness
to the Father, and the brutish inhumanity to the son. And wherefore all this,
but as they had murdered a King so they would murder Kingship it self, and
behead the very office and calling of a King; fain they would have imitated the
Romans in keeping F^galia, feast for the utter exterpation of Kingly
government. And why so? Kingly power was, burdensome, burdensome? what the
rule of one King more, then of many? No, I doubt the shouldiers of this Nation
have found the weight trebled by many Governors beyond that it was by one.
Tappeal to the consciences of any impartial men, whether there was ever heard
of such taxes, and impossitions, venations, and skinnings, as there were by
these Butchers? they plagued the living, and they would if it were possible a
mortuo tributum exigere, require tribute from the dead, we have found the
proverb true, that Serpents nisi edat serpentem, non fiet Draco, a Serpent,
unless it do eat a Serpent, can never. be a Dragon; They were wholly given to
devouring, and raveiling bonus odor ex re qualibet. The odor was sweet though
it came from the bafest exactions, and I pray what a kennel of bounds, did they
keep to hunt the poor Common to death? was there ever heard of so many shirking
Officers, and rapations Servatours, as there was in their reign? if they were
such good rulers, I hope there are some memorable records that they lest behind
them of their worthy spirits; but I doubt it will trouble the wits of their
best friends to show one good deed conspicuous, and eminent, that they did in
their eighteen years supremacy; except they did count these good deeds, to help
beggars to honest men's estates, and to execute the innocent, that their
well-affected men might inherit. No marvel therefore that we should desire
these pious governors once more to Saint it over us, when we are minded to be
possessed, and to be tortured even to the death it self, we will call again for
the spirit called Legion; in the mean time let all the world judge, whether
Monarchy has not been more gentle in usage, and noble in expressions, then
ever was Poliarchy, under Poliarchy phere was nothing but invading men's
estates, rifling, and ^^undering, but under Monarchy what door was broken up?
what freeborn subject was cast out of his inheritance? was the name of
sequestration ever heard of? under Polyarchy what obstruction was there of
justice? No man could get right against a Saint of the cause: but under
Monarchy who was denied propriety, was there ever heard then of a Committee of
Indemnity? under Polyarchy there was nothing but conventings, and
imprisonments, but gibbets, and blood-axes, under Monarchy was there a man
suffered but by the known Laws of the Kingdom? was there ever heard of a high
Court of Justice? under Polyarchy there was nothing but profaning of Churches,
toleration of blasphemy, abusing of Almshouses, impeding of Merchandise,
pulling down of Palaces, rasing of Noble men's houses, what Patriot was there?
What benefactour? out of those millions of money which were drained, and wrested
out of this impoverished Nation, show one glorious Monument that they left
behind them, either to State or Church, or Universities, be it but a famous
Hospital, or a beautiful College, or a poor Library; what the best
government, and shall Herod the proud, and Nero the cruel exceed them in
magnificence? here are lean jaws indeed to live under, as it was said of
Tyberius Patroclus might then have been the Patriot, or Martials Paternus might
have been supreme Governor who couched down upon his treasures, lest any of
them should have been conveyed to public uses, such Governors are just like
Visbur the Gothist King who got wealth by extortion, and sacrilege, Largiris
nihil, incu^usque gazae, ut ma^nus D^aco quem canunt poetae custodem scithici
fuisse. Luci. Ma^^. l. ^^.
nihil autem praestari pereas ingentes divitias sudore, and sanguine pauperum
comparatus officere curavit Joh. Magnus. l. 7. but never did any famous work by
all those vast treasures, which were gotten with the sweat and blood of the
poor; these Governors when they should have given any thing to their country,
they were ready to say as Herachus did to the Saracens, shall we take our
childrens bread, Who Ensing, l. 7 c 9.
and feed dogs with it, when they should have given any thing to the Church;
they were ready to have said with Alexander Mammeae in templo quid facit aurum?
Sabel l 6. Aenead 7.
What should the Church do with gold? pitiful Contrymen, lamentable
Churchmen they were; the family must needs have been upon the starving point,
when the stewards name was inhospitalis; Nigard. Yet these were our rulers, and
these were all the Donatives, like beautiful Princes in so long a reign, that
they bestowed upon us. But under Monarchy was there no more munificence
expressed? Yes, then might have been seen pravus ^agis quam condus; there was
no close fist nor hiding eye, but the wide hand Deuteronomy. 15.8. and the bountiful
eye, Prove. 22.9 It was the age of sending portions, sowing besides all waters,
giving offerings of a fair eye, men delighted in nothing more then to be as
those that comforted the mourners; the poor were brought up with them as with
their Father, the whole land smelt of their sweet odours, they grudged at no
charge Silver and Gold was not regarded in those days, they were the people of
hospitality, and had began to hang all their Country with garlands, what was
the genious of that age, but to found Hospitals, build Churches, and to erect
Colleges, how many famous works had they done, and how many by this time would
they have done, if gorgon i^on and amazon; or if ye will, steel, bonnet, and
buff-coat, had not frighted them from what was intended; I could tell you their
names, but they have engraven them themselves in their everlasting Monuments;
Oh then they were men of beneficent spirits, heroic dispositions: Oh these
were the right Protestants, the building Protestants, they did not pluck down
popery only by the pick-axe, by digging up crosses, and dashing in pieces
imaged, and crying out against the mass, and calling the Pope Antichrist, and
telling fine stories, but they pulled down Popery by the trowel, in building as
fast as any Papist, and showing to all the earth that if pious works were a way
to Heaven, the Protestant Catholic would vye with the Roman Catholic, they
were ambitious to be firnamed the Hospitable as John of Alexandria was called
the Eleemosinary, their chiefest honors (with Alphonsus the tenth of Arragon)
they esteemed to be dona insignia, Sygeb. Chron.
hountifull gifts. Yea they were not only works of charity, Marin. l. 11. rer.
Hispan.
that those times were blessed with, but they abounded in every thing that
might bear the name of good.

If people were not blinded, and infatuated with an external holiness and
charmed with a few studied phrases, and apt to call primitive devotion Popish
superstition; they would say that that was the age of an operative says, and
of the power of godliness: for laying aside all passion, and partiality to a
particular cause, let men of any moderation, and conscience say if they can, if
there were not more piety and purity, justice, neighborhood, integrity,
fidelity, sincerity of doctrine; uncorruptness in Courts of judicature,
cherishing of learning, and advancement of trade; under kingly government, then
ever there was under the multiplicity of governments, which we had by our new
rulers. Kings dealt with us really, but Sphinx spoke very intricately. Oh it
was the enigmatical age, poor deluded people were taught to tell many a lie; as
that they did but hold up their hands to sight for their liberties, and yet
their hands are bound by Scripture that they must not fight for their
liberties, that they fought for the King and Parliament, and yet neither the
King, nor the better part of the Parliament ever gave them authority to do any
such courtesy for them; that they fought to preserve the King in his rights,
and prerogative, and yet allowed him neither rights, nor prerogative; that they
fought for the power of the Militia, and yet the King does bear the sword: that
they fought to separate the King from his evil Councellers, and yet they their
selves were but Counselors, and it is against reason that Counselors should
be Commanders, and that every one should not have libe^ty to choose his own
Counselors, and that fighting men should be counted better Counselors, then
they that did not fight till their throats are ready to be cut; that they
fought to make the King a glorious King, and yet when they had him in their
possession kept him as a prisoner; that they fought to pull down Archbishops
and Bishops, and yet they were ordained by a primitive institution: that they
fought to bring the King to his Parliament, and yet when they had him never
brought him to his Parliament; that they fought to bring mal^factors to condign
punishment, and yet no malefactors according to any known Law, nor Malignants
except to follow the King, and to discharge their Oath of Allegiance with all
their might, power, and ability, be malignancy; that they fought to settle the
Protestant Religion according to the best Reformed Churches, and yet the best
Reformed Churches cannot be private Cities, Cantons, and States, would the
Kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden, and the great Lutheran Princes in Germany, ever
allow of them to be so called? Are these (and many other) truths? they must
have larger consciences; and more capacious judgments, then I have to conceive
them, or, believe them? I believe them to be no more truths then Sarahs, non
risi timore perterita. I laughed not; being afraid, Genesis 18.15. or Abraham's,
Soror mea est, She is my Sister, Genesis 20.2. or Jacobs, Ego sum Primogenitus, I
am thy Firstborn, Gen 27.9, or the old Prophets speech to the young Prophet
from the Lord, Reduc eum in donum tuam, bring him into thy house, 1 Kings.
13.18. or the Father of the Blind man's speech, Quomodo autem nunc videat
neseimus, But how he does now see we know not, Ioh. 9.21. or the Devils
Praecipita te, scriptum est enim Angelis suis mandabit de te, ut tollant
manibus, ne impingas pedem in lapidem, Mat. 4.6. Cast thy self down headlong,
for it is written, he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to lift thee up
least thou do dash thy foot against a stone, Mat. 4 6. There may be some show
of truth in these things, but as far from the essence of truth, as Michals
pillow stuffed with goats hair was from the body of David. They are
blear-eyed, that will not see them falsehoods, and partial, and parasitical,
which will not acknowledge them to be so. The result is, if the fifth of
November were an unlawful attempt, why should the Protestant smell of the
Romish Gunpowder; If Equivocation be unlawful, why should we have new Jesuits
under colorable disguises. I am afraid that at the latter day of judgment
these things will be found to be worse Popery, then crossing Infants, or
Organs, or Cap, Cope, and Surplice: How can such be heard speaking against any
sin, when such palpable dissimulation is apparent; the grief is this, that if
Protestants may be allowed to wear this pocket-dagger, every Prince does stand
in fear of his life, which does reign over them; if they cannot preach them
into their own Paradoxes, there will be fighting to the worlds end; and they
shall be christened to be the Lords battles, as if they were waged against
Paynims and Infidels; in what streights does a King live, when he has
Anabaptists on the one side, which would destroy all Magistracy, and others,
which if they cannot subject Magistracy to their own bents, will fight it into
order, an odd weapon, I never find that Christ and his Apostles ever armed
Subjects thus against their lawful Sovereigns; lusty Popes indeed have done
thus, and this is plain Popery: I beseech you therefore by your hatr^d against
Popery, and your reverence to Protestancie, by the name of Authority, and the
fame of obedience, by the passion of Christ, which could have freed himself,
and by the patience of Martyrs which would not free themselves; by the miseries
of War, and the blessings of union; by the subjection of Pagans, and the
concord amongst Devils; by Christ's rebuking his Disciples when they would have
fire fetched from heaven, and by Christ's commanding S. Peter to put up his
sword into his Scabbard, by David's heart smiting him when he had cut off the
lap of Saul's garment, and by S. Paul's checking himself when he had called
Ananias painted wall, by the black infamy of this action, and the horrid
effects of it; by the certainty of divine providence, and the uncertainty of
events; by the thraldom which ye have long endured, and the pardon which ye
have obtained; by the assistance which ye may yield to your friends, and by the
plots which ye ought to prevent against your enemies; by the fruits of the
flesh, and the arm of flesh; by the propagation of truth, and the flourishing
of Trade; by the honor of your profession, and the obligation of your oaths;
by Christ's legacy of peace, and by the Gospel of peace; by prace in the time of
your pilgrimage, and by peace at the hour of your passage; that ye never list a
Soldier, nor set up a Flag, nor undertake a March, nor discharge a Canon
against a lawful Sovereign: Bella gerant alii, Let others if they will fight
against their just Princes, but let the Protestant have the honor of being a
peaceable, and patient Professor, for how else Subjects? how else Christians?
Blessed is he that is not condemned in that which he does allow, Romans 14.22.
Doubtless ye cannot but have inward convictions, self-smiting Consciences, The
fear that begets pain, and then there is a bloodier war within, then there
is without; it were well therefore that you would confess your error, purge
away the scandal of it by some Christian satisfaction; yea, to procure the
inward peace of your own souls, and to inform the souls of them whom ye have
misled, to pacify offended minds, and to give assurance to Prince, that ye
will hereafter prove truly loyal, that ye would defy, and execrate a thing so
abominable to the whole world; but if out of obstinacy, or modesty ye will not
do this, yet that we may for ever raze out of our breasts, the memory of all the
injuries and miseries which we have endured by this rash and fatal design; let
us from henceforth find you real Converts, learn war no more, study not
commotions, preach not up the Gantlet, and the Pole-axe; this is the way
whereby we may heartily forgive you, embrace you, and bless you; think how many
watchful and implacable enemies we have abroad, and how full the land is of
Sectaries, Heretics, Papists and Jews, and if ye have any apprehentions of
dangers, love to your Country, pity upon a distracted Church, fears that ye
may perish with us in a common fate, or desires for the preservation of
Religion, government, prosperity, lay down animosities, yield to conveniences,
let us and you, which differ but in a few things, and do equally lay open to
the general spite, for the same sword will draw blood from us both alike, if
ever Papist, or Anabaptist, or Phanatick, get the upper-hand agree in this one
fundamental of mutual preservation, that order shall never be disturbed, nor
authority assaulted, but our Contrymen shall sit quiet in their houses, and
Kings sit quiet in their Thrones; if ye have any grievances, debate them
kindly, argue them meekly, petition as much as ye will, dispute what ye can,
and what ye cannot convince by reason, submit to with quietness, but fight no
more, let us never hear your drum beating, nor your trumpet sounding, nor have
any more of your solemn League and Covenant, nor fighting for King and
Parliament, for Kings are sacred persons, and are not to be sacrificed unto
with Gunpowder; no, et Jesuits, or Devils, offer such oblations, but let not
Protestants have any such bloody victimes. If ye then have unroosted any such
Kings, do ye settle him, if ye were the first that drove him away, be not ye
the last to bring him back, For wherefore then are ye the last to bring back
the King.

Thus beloved have ye heard an expostulation about David's return, and ought
not we to have the like disquisition about our Kings return, has not the fate
been alike to both? yes, as David had his Absalom that conspired against him,
so have not we had many which have broken the yoke, and to all their other
disrespects have added rebellion to their sins? which with Absoloms feigning
lips have stolen away the hearts of the people, and with the complements of
putting forth of hands, endeering kisses, and large promises of high
reformation, that if they were made Judges in the Land, and any man had a cause
or suit, if they would lay down their grievances at their feet, they should
have speedy justice done them, Absalom would set up Committees enough to
redress the plaints of the people, and as Absalom paid his vows in Hebron, so
have not we had them that had their religious exercises and strict fasts? and
as Absalom had Achitophil the Gilonite to promote the work, so have not we had
them that had dangerous wits, Craftmasters, Achitophels enough. And as the
conspiracy grew strong for Absalom, so did not multitudes, and mutinies, and
^actions, and seditions grow strong and mightily encrea^e for oue male
contents. And has not the fright of this rebellion caused as much
consternation here as ever it did to Pavid, even to leave the Royal Palace, and
to pass over the river hid on, and to go up the mount of Olives weeping, and
has not the Kings Court been entered, and though not his concubines lain with,
yet his Royal revenue and Prerogative deftored? And has there not been a
Shimei to curse the King, and to call him bloody man, and son of B^lial; ve^,
how numerous, and venomous have the Pamphlets and Libels been to defame the
King, and blast his innocence? Thus far then they do agree, as face does
answer face in water, only they differ in this, that some of these
turbulencies, commotions, disgusts, disgraces happened in the fathers time, and
some in the sons; howsoever the son is still in his flight, and doubtful it is
when he shall return, for what a delaying, fluctuating, scrupling Nation have
we? they would, and they would not, they desire, and despair, they wish and
long, and again faint, and fear, all is ambiguity, and suspense,

Pugnaces Parthi dubium tenuere favorem. These warlike Parthians which have
been so used to booties and spoils, promise but a doubtful favor to the
business, they have been so used to garboises, that they are loath to hear of
peace, and to cut throats, that they are loath to sheath up their swords, they
act things not according to their duties, but their designs; not according to
their consciences, but their conveniences; not according to their judgments,
but their ambitions; they dream more of spoil, then restitution, and their own
profits, then the Nations peace, and of having their own turns served, then the
Kings return; there may be some candid, upright dealing men amongst them, which
seeing the miseries of their Nation have remorse, and shame for what has been
done; but for the generality of them, triplex Mercurius, there seems to be a
tripple headed Mercury amongst them, confounded they are in their resolutions.
Sybilla horrendus canit ambages, atque remugit, obscuris vera involvens. This
Sybil is in her trembling, variable answers, and loweth out of her den with a
mixture of truth, and obscurity. Few men satisfied, most men debating, and full
of ambiguities and perplexities, iisdem eliteris and Comoedia, and Tragoedia
compenitur; out of the same Letters, both a Comedy, and a Tragedy is
compounded; ye shall find such strange contraries wrought up together, that a
man may say as August. plus aloes quam mellis, there is more aloes then honey
in them; examine the ingredients, and ye shall find this diversity of simples
in the compound, they acount the Kings return not an absolute requisite thing,
but (...), as Strabo, a necessary evil.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. This same vulgar is divided
into several opinions, full of divisions and distractions,

Et libet; and timeo, nec adhuc exacta voluntas,
Et satis in dubio pectora nostra labant.
The thing pleases and frighteth, the will is not complete; but the breast
tossed with various conceptions. And are there not the like alterations,
disceptations, anxieties amongst a great part of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy,
Merchants, and common people in general; yes, hear them speak, if the King
should not return, what shall become of our oaths, protestations, exhausted
Nation, and decayed Trade? if the King should return? what shall become of the
violences offered to the father, and the outrages to the son, of the settling
of our purchases, and the confirmation of our preys? one Parliament has
granted our conveyances, and another may cancel them, and wring our new-forged
keys out of our hands. So that it is hard sailing through the whirlepool, here
are collateral winds blowing, insomuch that though the speech of all Israel be
come to the King to bring him home, yet Iudab sits in her tents muttering, and
stunning, and does not stir at all, or if that tribe does move at length, it
will be the last that appear; Wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the
King? and if he be brought back, I doubt there will be bitter heart-burnings,
why some are employed, and not others in the re-installing of him; yea I fear
that some seditious Shebah will blow a trumpet, and cry, to your tents, O
Israel, and that some haughty Ioab will be massacring an Amasa that he should
be commissioned to reduce the Country to peace, rather then his all deserving
self. I fear some turbulent spectacle or other to dismay the King upon his
return, yea, I suspect some Scotch receptions or English Stratagems, the
children are apt to strive together in the womb, men's hearts will be boiling,
their heads inventing, and their hands fatal. But away with all plots, and
projects, suppositions and oppositions, minings and counterminings, and
fervently, and faithfully, heartily and cordially, ingeniously and instantly,
bring back the King, abhorie to be out of the work, and be ashamed to be the
last, wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the King?

Think what ye have suffered for the want of him, what ye may enjoy in the
fruition of him, oh that ye could b humbled for the driving him away, oh that
ye could desire his return, oh that ye could prepare the highest joy that can
be to entertain him, oh that ye could be dejected for the expelling him, Is it
not an error to chase away a King? is it not an heinous sin to put a King to
flight? are Princes to be contested with, and in an armed way resisted? no;
away with this damned popery, all sober Protestants defy it, let the Vaticane
of Rome be stored with poisons, and pistols, dagges and daggers, engineers and
canoneers against their lawful Sovereigns, but let not the Reformed Church be
such an Armoury. The primitive Church (I tell you again) used no such Armoury,
in the height of martyrdom, though Cities and Castles were filled with
Christians, and they could have resisted (if they would) successefully. The
Scripture does allow no such artillery; doubtless if we may not curse the King
in our thoughts, we may nor crush him with our hands; if we may not meddle with
them which are given to change, we may not change both King, and government,
these three positions are Paradoxes.

First that the people make a King, for the people almost do but choose him,
the Ordinance do make him, and when he is once constituted a King he is out of
the power, and constraint of the people, he can neither be deposed nor opposed;
no, the Ordinance does secure him and his privileges. This is for a King by
election, and hereditary King has a greater privilege.

Secondly, that there is a Co ordination with Kings, for he which is supreme
can have no Co-ordination with hint; the best in the land, and the greatest
representatives at the highest are but grand Counselors, not joint Commanders.
Was it ever heard that Counselors were the principal men in an estate?
Authority and direction are two distinct things. All the Members may help in
execution of things, but still the head does maintain its honor.

Thirdly, that Kings in point of tyranny, and idolatry may be repressed, and
suppressed, rejected and ejected. I hear it, but I do not find it; Manasses I
am sure vomitted both these things, for he worshipped the host of heaven, and
made his children pass through the fire to the idol Molech, and filled the
streets of Jerusalem with blood, and yet no Prophet stirred up the people to
rebellion against him. Is it fit to say to Kings ye are wicked? or to Princes
ye are ungodly, Job. 34 18. No though Kings should be wicked, or ungodly, yet
we must not dispossess the Devil with another, or cure a Princes sin with a
greater crime of our own. Therefore against a King there is no rising up, Prove.
30.31. when a King was but set up by Prophecy obedience is enjoined toward
him. Thou Judah shall have the Scepter, thy brethren shall praise thee, thy
Fathers, children shall bow down before thee, thou shalt-be a Lions whelp that
shall come down from the spoil, thou shall couch down, and who shall rouse thee
up? Genesis 49.8, 9. And how do the Fathers children praise him, when they call
him enemy to the State? how do the Fathers children bow down before him, when
they stand up against him with spear and poleaxes? how do they fulfill that,
who shall rouse him up? when there are those that dare rouse him up, and clap
him up? Are there not mary spirits at this hour, and perhaps in this presence
so bitter, that when there is but a motion of the Kings return they are so
opposite, to it, that they wish never to hear his trumpets blowing, nor behold
his chariots stirring nor to see his royal face; no they had rather that he
were smitten with some mortal disease beyond sea, or drowned in his passage or
slain at his landing, then that he should enter the Nation freely to come with
pomp and triumph to his Throne. We have preached obedience these many years,
but we have but taught ferrum natare, iron to swim or but put our bread, as
Plato said in frigidum furmum into a cold Oven, but let the Viper delight in
biting (as the old Adage says) and Frogs in croking, but let all those who are
of these venomous and slate troubling humors express better dispositions.

Away therefore with all paradoxes, and let us once again embrace true Orthodox
Divinity, that Princes are to be obeyed. Let those which hold that Princes may
be resisted, desist from this cursed opinion, for this is but to keep the
firebrand still kindled in the Church. And let those which hold that there
ought to be no King upon earth but Christ at last be cured of this Lunasie; for
this is but to pull down lawful Kings, and to set up mongrel Princes of their
own faction. For will not men be aspiring to be Kings amongst the Phanaticks?
yea, there are none of them so humble but if they can they will wear the Crown,
Arthur hoped to have been a Prince, and some say Henry was anointed, and was
not John of Leyden, where this opinion was most rife an actual King? and a most
bloody one as ever was heard of? Oh that men therefore would leave their
delusions, and be guided by true inspiration. Kings there may be, and Kings
there must be, Oh therefore let us acknowledge the calling and submit to him,
who by the Law of God, nature and Nations ought to reign over us. Have a
reverend opinion of the name of a King, and honorable, and loyal thoughts to
the person of a King; yea and principally to your own lawful, indubitable, and
invaluable King, though he has been a long time obscured; yet let him come and
shine in his proper Horizon; though he has been driven out, yet let him be
brought back. For think that your Country will never be happy, nor your Church
blessed, till the Guardian of the Country, and the Patron of the Church, be
restored. Let others therefore stand upon their tiptoes to defy him, but be ye
ready to bend your knees and honor him, let others be forward to bind his
hands, but be ye ready to kiss his hand; let others go into the gunroom (if
they can) to shoot him back, but go ye to the tops of your turrets to see him
coming; let others wish his absence, but do ye pray for his return: say, oh
that the bringing of him back were concluded on, oh that the day were dawned
when he should set forward, oh that our ears might hear that he were upon our
shoars, and that our eyes could set him within our streets, oh that the city
were ecchoing to welcome him home, oh that his Court-gate were opening to
entertain him, oh that the Crown Imperial were setting upon his head. Walk not
with pleasure, eat not with contentment, sleep not with satisfaction, till ye
be happy in the sight of his princely face; He is the true heir to the Crown,
and would it not be an unspeakable comfort to see (as the Scripture says) the
inhertance of the father pass to the son? Numb. 27.7. We have had too much of
Usurpers, oh let us desire a Prince lineally descended. Blessed art thou O
Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles. He is eminent in virtues, and what a
blessing were it to us, to have a man after Gods own heart, made Captain over
Israel? he has been honored in foreign lands, and how should our Nation be
illustred to enjoy him, whom many Countries and Kingdoms have magnified, he
has high experience in State affairs, and what a glory would it be to us to
have such a Prince reigning over us, as has been famed through Christendom
for his deep and profound judgment, he is merciful, and what a joy would it be
to us, that after we have met with so many bloud-suckers, we might rest in the
bosom of such a tenderhearted father; he is valiant, and how would the
presence of such a puissant Prince fill the Land full of prowess, and make the
fear of us, and the dread of us, to fall upon all Nations; he is of a
magnificent spirit, of princely birth, and most princely qualifications, that
knows not (as I hear) how to be Prince enough in kindness, bounty, and all
manner of acts of honor, and Royalty, and if his beams be so bright in an
eclipse, what a glorious Prince will he be when he shines out in his full
strength, without opposition, or interposition. Away therefore with your
abject, indigent, needy. low-born Princes, thimbl-Prince, awle-Princes,
care-Princes, yard-wand, anvile, pestel, dyfat, brewfat-Princes, men that were
once not worth a Lordship, and yet durst challenge a Kingdom, scarce good
Cotragers, and yet durst nestle in Palaces, not able to pay their debts, and
now sharing Crown land. Is it not a foul blemish to see such lay hold on the
legislative power, and to impose laws, and taxes upon three such vast and
renowned Kingdoms. And on the contrary, would it not be the greatest fame and
luster to this Nation, to have royal blood, royal qualifications, royal
benificence, and royal authority joined together? yes, a supereminency of
excellency would happen to this Nation if we could get such a magnificent
Prince into the Throne. Oh then, now ye see the King, and his perfections, and
will ye invite him home, with demurres and deliberations, suspicions and
hesitations, detractions and protractions; no let him have that Prerogative,
that h^s birth, and your oaths, the laws of God, and the laws of the land do
allow him, and fetch him home with ^^gernesse, send for him with speed, call
for him with longing desires, pave the way for him with your humble obedience,
settle him in his Throne with a million of blessings desired to him, and
expected from him, be importunate and impatient till ye do enjoy him: stay not
till ye be led forth, but strive who shall go for most, for when a King is
wanting, what a solitary Kingdom is there? if then he has been compelled away
by violence, it is but duty to seek unto him to visit again his Native
Country. As it is a misery to be deprived of him, so it were a shame to be
the last in bringing him in, in bringing him home, in bringing him back;
Wherefore then are ye the last in bringing back the King?

In conclusion I beseech you all high and low, old and young, by the
brickilnesse that ye have wrought in, by the heavy Task masters which ye have
lived under, by the tempests of sorrows that ye have been dashed with, by the
blevv stripes that are yet to be seen upon your sides, by the dangerous state
that the Kingdom is now in, and by the infinite miseries that are even ready
to seiz upon it, that ye ^ax weary of other governments, and that ye suddenly
stop your ears against all enchanting Princes, which promise you a free state,
and yet keep you in chains, and tell you of liberties, but they are felt only
in loads, losses, and lashes, and speak highly of the propagation of the
Gospel, but plague your poor souls with nothing, but the preservation of all
Christianity, by schisms, heresies, and blasphemies. Oh therefore desire no
longer to be adopted children to such Fosterfathers, for Stepfathers could not
use you worse. And again I beseech you by the sweetness of peace, and the
blessing of justice by your civil liberties, and the liberty of conscience, by
the terror of the blood that has be ^^hed, and to preserve the land from the
effusion of more innocent blood, that ye resolutely oppose these incroaching
rulers, and that ye presently bring back your lawful King, so may the King
have his right, and the Kingdom may have her peace, the Church may become
holy, and the State may be made happy, justice may be restored, and trading
may flourish, your consciences may be pacified, and your souls may be saved,
which that they may be, the Lord grant for his mercies sake.

FINIS.

