GOOD NEWS From Banbury in Oxfordshire: Relating how two Troops of Horse, under
the command of my Lord Says two sons, pursued diverse Cavalleers as they fled
from Oxford toward Worcester, and took eight of them prisoners: With ^undry
other passages which have happened in those parrs this last week.

Also a great skirmish between the men of Coventry and the Kings party; in
which many of the Cavalleers were slain, and Killinsworth Castle taken from
them.

Whereunto is added, The Examination of Joshua Hill, and Augustine Harper,
taken at Northampton, in the presence of the Earl of Essex General of the
Army, September. 14. 1642.

LIKEWISE, A Letter sent from his Excellency, Robert Earl of Essex, etc. to
the Lord Major of the City of London.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wright. 20. September. 1642.

Good news from Banbury.
LOving brother,
we all remember our loves unto you and I have received your Letter and news,
for which I give you thanks, and am glad to hear that you are in good health,
as I praise God we all are. My desire is to let you understand what passages
have fallen out in these parts. This last week upon Thursday the eighth of
this month came two Troops of Horse to Banbury, under the command of my Lord
Says two sons, and upon Saturday the 10. day they had intelligence that the
Cavileers in Oxford were removing from thence toward Worcester, whereupon they
marched forth toward Chipingnorton unto Chapel of Heath, which place it was
supposed they would come over. The Country arose and went along with them, so
that they were (as I suppose) six hundred strong, where they continued most
part of the day; but the Cavalleers having warning of us came not, only we
took eight of them that were sent out for scouts, and our scouts discovered
the rest, which retreated back again toward Oxford upon the sight of them; so
the day being far spent we returned all home, and the Troops unto their quarter
to Banbury, which the Cavalleeres having notice of they came on along that way,
and came to Stow five miles from Chippingnorton on saturday night about twelve
a clock, where they were somewhat resisted by the watch, which killed one of
their Horses, and hurt some more, but being not able to withstand them they
were forced to give them entrance, when they presently disarmd the Town, and
took away twelve Muskets, and a load of Armor that the said Stow men had
taken the day before belonging as is supposed to Sir Willam Walter a great
delinquent in our County, living near to Chippingnorton, who was also taken
the same day at Broadway near Esum, and kept at one Mr. Stevens house in that
Town, whether the Cavalleers presently marched, and it being but a
Countrey-towne could not resist them, so they came and beset the house, there
being not above six men in the house, which shot at them, and killed (as is
credibly reported) 4. of them, one of whom was a Frenchman, and a chief
Commander. Sir William Walter being in an upper Chamber broke a bar out of
the Window and leapt down, and so escaped; whereupon the Cavalleers retreated,
and they that were in the house had time for to come forth, but they came back
a gain and plundered the house, and took away all the money and plate, and the
best goods they could find, and five Horses, and loaded it into a Cart to carry
it away; but finding that they could not make so much speed as they desired
with the Cart, left it about two miles from the Town and took the Horses and
the best of the goods that they could carry on Horseback and went to Pershow,
where they buried the Frenchman that was slain at Broadway, and from thence to
Saltwich, where we hear they still remain. The news of their coming to Stow
and Broadway was brought to Banbury upon Sunday by one of the clock in the
afternoon, and the Trumpet founded presently for the 2. Troops of Horse to
make ready presently to pursue them; they set forth from Banbury about 3. of
the clock, great store of the Town going with them, and the Country joined
with them still as they went along: they marched to Cambden that night, where
they came about 12. of the clock, and stayed there about 2. hours, whilst
their Horses baited, and then went forward until they came to Esum which is
28. miles from Banbury. The Country came in all the way they went, so that it
was supposed they were 1000. strong They still went forward 5. mile beyond
Esum, and then they had notice that they were all gone to the Town of Which, and
that it was not safe following them any further, for the Town was for the
Cavalleers, and that they had Ordnance in it, and the Country beyond it was
wholly for the King; besides it was Woodland-ground and full of dangerous
passages, that it was doubtful they might be set upon out of the Woods before
they came there; so they returned back again without doing any thing. The
Cavaleers that fled to Killingworth Castle, when they were driven from before
Coventrey came forth upon monday last, and the Town of Coventrey hearing of
them set upon them, where they had a hot skirmish for the time, and some men
slain on both sides, but the Cavaleers fled, and the City of Coventry have
taken the Castle, and the Ammunition in it. This day Collonell Brown with 500.
Dragoneres came to Banbury, and the 2. Troops of Horse went forth. This is the
substance and the truth of what has passed here this last week: so I rest

Your loving brother, S. R.

The Examination of Joshuah Hill, taken at Northampton, in the presence of the
Earl of ESSEX, General of the Army, September. 14.
THe King sent a Letter to Master Major of Nottingham, requiring one thousand
pound: And particular Warrants to diverse private men for two hundred pounds a
man and other ^^verall Sums. If this was not paid, the Cavalleeres threatened
to plunder.

After, His Majesty was pleased to send the Lord Newark to Master Major to
double the thousand pound.

Captain Leg said, that he thought Nottingham men were A Generation of Devils:
And said, if the knew a Roundhead he would knock him over the pate.

The House of one Mistress Piggot was plundered by warrant from His Majesty.

The Trained Bonds of the County of Nottingham being summoned in by warrant
from the Lord Newarke, were all disarmed by Cavalleers: Threatening any one that
refused, to pistol him.

Sergeant Bowne, and Alderman Toplady, have used all possible endeavors to
have taken away the life of one Master Hooper, Steward to the Countess of
Clare, in charging of him with high Treason, for not delivering up the Arms of
his Lady.

There were in and about Nottingham near 500 Irish Commanders, Irish and
Papists and increased daily.

John Hill.
September, 14.
September. 9. 1642.
THese are to certify all those whom it may concern, That I Augustine Harper
of Market-Harborow, being taken by the Cavalleers, who took away my Mare Saddle
and Bridle, and all the money in my Purse, and being brought before the Lord of
Carnarvan to be examined, Notwithstanding, they had no just occasion against
me, did abuse me with ill language, calling me round-headed rogue, and that I
was an enemy to the King; to which I answered, That I was as good a Subject to
his Majesty as his Lordship, He called for a Book, and said, he would try
that, and did tender me an Oath, whether I would fight for the King against the
Parliament, which I refusing to take, was committed to the custody of the
Cavaleers.

Augustine Harper.
Witness to the same,

Andrew Gill.



A Letter sent from his Excellency ROBERT Earl of Essex, to the Lord Major of
London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Received so great expression of affections both to the Cause, and to my
self, from the City of London, at my departure from you, that I cannot
despair, but to obtain my sune from you, that shall be an advantage to the
Commonwealth; upon a true judgment of the condition of our affairs, and of
that of the Enemy; I am confident that we may bring this business to a quick
and happy conclusion, God does bless us with so good success daily; and the
other part by their plundering and burning of Towns and houses, grow so odious
that they grow weaker, we stronger every where; yet are we in one great
straight, and such one, as if it be not speedily remedied, may dash all our
hopes, and endanger that peace and liberty which we so much labor for; our
treasure, which must maintain our Army, grows near an end; and you well
know our Army consiste of such as cannot be kept one day together without pay;
what a ruin it would bring upon us all if a disbanding should happen, I
leave to your judgments: My desire unto you is, That you would supply us with
a speedy loan of one hundred thousand pounds, which I am confident would
(with Gods blessing) bring these unhappy distractions to an end quickly: your
City has hitherto had the honor, next to God, to be the chiefest safety of
the Kingdom and Parliament; this will render you to all posterity the
finishers of this great work. If any thing of particular love or respect to me
may be any argument herein, I shall take it for the greatest honor that has
befalne me, and will oblige my self to acknovvledge it by the utmost and most
faithful endeavor of

Your faithful friend ESSEX.
From the Rendezvous at Northampton, 15. Sept. 1642.
FINIS.

