A RELATION OF THE Engagement of the Fleet of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND
under the Command of Genesis Blake, Genesis Deane, and Genesis Munke. With the Dutch
Fleet, under the Command of Van Trump.

Abstracted out of several Letters and Relations made to the Council of State.

And a List of the particulars of the Loss on both sides.

WITH The Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners of Prize Goods from Dover,
touching the said Fight between the English and the Dutch.

And the particulars of all the three Fights, on Friday, Saturday and Sunday
last.

And the Glorious Victory in taking, sinking, and total dispersing the
Hollanders Fleet, which was between four and 500 Sail.

Imprimatur,

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.

LONDON. Printed for ROBERT IBBITSON dwelling in Smithfield, near Hosier Lane.
1653.

A Relation of the late Engagement between the Fleets of the English and Dutch.
White-hal 20. Febr. 1652.
THere came an account of the success of our first Engaging with the Dutch
Fleet to this effect.

Upon Friday 18. instant as soon as day began to dawn, ours discovered the
Holland fleet, between Portland and the Isle of Wight, about seven leagues off
Portland North and by West, the wind North-west, which consisted of about 80
sail men of war besides the Merchant men, which were judged about 150 some say
many more, they all having the wind of us.

But about eight a clock the same morning Genesis Blake and Genesis Dean being both
of them aboard the Triumph, engaged the Enemy, the Dutch men of war bearing
upon them, but the rest of our Fleet endeavoring to follow, not above three or
four of them could get up, because they were to Lee-ward, so that the General
with those few were constrained to bear the first brunt holding play with no
less then 30 of the Dutch men of war, whereof seven at a time kept upon the
Triumph, and yet they continued till two a clock in the afternoon, being much
shattered in her Sales, but so tite in her Hulls, that she never so much as
pumpt for it.

It was ten a clock before any more of our fleet engaged, and then not above
half our number came up, the whole amounting to about 60 fail: after this the
dispute grew very hot, and so continued for the space of 4 or 5 hours, but
afterward the fight grew more moderate, holding play till night parted both
parties.

In this action the Lord was pleased so to prosper us, that we lost but one
ship called the Sampson, which was rendered unserviceable in the Fight, and then
her men being taken (...), she^ was sunk by her own Captain, having first sunk
the Enemy which maimed her, she was a Ship of 26 guns, her Captain is wounded,
his name is Captain Button: We had like to have lost the Prosperous commanded
by Cap. Barker, but she was retaken by Cap. V^^sey commander of the Merly^
Frigot.

The Advice F^^got was in hot service having 4 sail of Dutch which lay ^board
of her, yet she acquitted her self so well, that she sunk one of their Rear
Admiralls of 38 guns down by her side, and one ship more of 36 guns in the same
manner, but her Cap. is dangerously wounded, his name is Capt. John Day, there
are wounded also his Master and diverse other Officers; his Lieut, Boatswaine
and Corporal with about 35 more are slain and about 40 or 50 more wounded: The
Dutch boarded her once, and had got possession of her fore castle, but they
were beaten out again, her Hull, Masts and Rigging are so shattered, and her
Company so much disabled by so sharp and disadvantagious a confl^ct, having
coped with so many at once, that she was occasioned that night to make for
Portsmouth, there to repair.

The loss on our side is of diverse worthy, and precious men, in the Generals
own ship the Triumph which was so sharply engaged, there are between 80 and 100
killed and wounded whereof 4 of note, viz. Cap. Bal, the Genesis Secretary Mr.
Sparrow with the Master whose name is Broadrtdge and his Mate. The two Generals
was by an overruling providence preserved, otherwise greatly endangered, by a
bar of Iron which wounded General Blake on the left thigh, a little above the
knee, but not dangerously, and tore two pieces of the coat and Brechees of
Genesis Deane; all with the same shot.

In the Vanguard there was slain Cap. Mildmay with about 30 more killed and
wounded In the Fortune Cap. Tatnel. In the Prosperous Cap. Barker, Cap. Kirby,
and Cap. Deacons are wounded.

As to the Dutch loss, the exact and full particular is not yet known but thus
much is certain, we have taken one of their Vice Admiralls a ship of 1200 Tuns
and 44 piece of Ordnance 6 or 8 brass, it being one of their prime ships, This
vessel was found to have 100 men stain in her being delivered up to Cap.
Stokes, being much battered by the Lion who would have bit hard before if she
had had this Cap. in her, who is said to have been the bain of 3. of the Dutch
men of War, the Dragon also played her part very lustily. There was sunk and
burnt of the Dutch fleet in this encounter, one of their Vice Admirals, one of
the Rear Admirals, and nine more of their men of War. Seven or eight more so
maimed, that some of them were seen towed, what more may be is not yet known,
but our men were plying toward the Enemy, five leagues off the Isle of Wight.

And on Saturday 19. instant our fleet began with 2. Frigots to re-ingage them
about 10. a clock in the morning, but left again for a while, till the main
fleet came up, and then about one a clock the whole fleets were engaged, ours
having that day the wind, the Dutch being before, and setting their Merchant
men Eastward of Dunnose 6. leagues all along the Channel.

The 18. at night there came to the fleet the Diamond from Portsmouth 2.
Merchant men from the Downs, with the Saphyre Cap. Hill who informed that in
all there were 19 more coming from the Downs, the Assistance, the Advice and
the Oak are come into Portsmouth and some private men of War gone our thence.

From the Isle of Wight 19. instant, Also it is written that the same day being
Saturday the two Fleets were engaged again, within four leagues of the Island
plainly in veiw, that they begun about 12 of the clock, and spent some time
upon firing at each other at a distance, but afterward the Fight growing hot,
the Sea being calm, and Sea room enough, it was conceived somewhat in all
probability would be done to purpose, that ours pressed much after the enemy
before they could engage; that they have placed their Merchant men in the Van,
who are observed to hasten Eastward, that our ships were seen to come gallantly
except 10 or 12 which could not sail so fast, but were likely to get in
quickly, and that ours had the weather-gage of the enemy.

By another of the same date from the same Island, it is written farther thus,
That on Frydays engagement about 8 or 9 of the Dutch Vessels were observed to
be burnt: That on Saturday both Fleets in view of that Island were engaged
again: that there were about 4 leagues off in the trade-way: That some of our
headmost ships began the engagement about 12 of the clock that day, which the
Dutch endeavored to avoid: That the Dutch Fleet were of Men of War and of
Merchantmen (as was guessed) near 300: That ours seemed about 70. of which some
were not fully come up: That the Dutch placed their Merchantmen in the Van, who
appeared, endeavoring to sail on Eastward as far as they could, yet but
slowly, the wind being very still: That their Men of War engaged retreating,
and ours pressed on hard, being as fast as they could get up: That ours had
gotten the weathergage, and the fight waxed very hot, even while this Letter
was a penning, and the season and peace of the fight being considered, the
event is like to be very considerable.

A List of the particulars of the loss on both sides.
Loss of the Dutch party on Friday.
1 Vice Admiral ship sunk. 1 Rear Admiral ship sunk 9 more of their ships sunk
1 Vice Admiral ship taken 100 men slain in the Vice Admiral, Many hundreds of
the Dutch slain and wounded in several ships. 7 ships maimed so, that they
were feign to towe them.
On Saturday and Sunday.
The rest of the Holland fleet were taken, sunk, and totally dispersed, who in
all were between four and 500 fail.
Loss of the English.
The Sampson Frigot sunk The Prosperous taken, but was after re-taken. Cap.
John Day wounded The Mr. of the Advice wounded 35 slain in the Advice Frigot 40
and odd wounded in the Advice The Advice Frigot boarded, but the Dutch beaten
off again. The Advice Frigot come to Portsmouth to be mended. 80 and odd killed
and wounded in the Triumph Capt. Ball slain. Mr. Sparrow Secretary to the
Generals slain. Mr. Broadridge, Mr. of the Triumph flain Genesis Blake wounded on
the left thigh Genesis Deans coat and breeches torn. Capt. Mildmay slain 30 killed
and wounded in the Vangard Cap. Tatnell; Cap. Barker, Cap. Kirby, and Cap.
Deakons wounded. Cap. Lawson dead of his wounds.
The Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners for Prize-goods from Dover,
touching the fight between the English and Dutch Fleets.
Gentlemen,
THese serve only to advise you of what we have heard concerning the action
between our Fleet and the Hollanders, who first engaged on Friday last about
half Seas over of the Isle of Wight, which continued all day, and was a very
hot dispute: but what the event of it was there is not any certainty yet come;
only the general report of some that are arrived from thence, who can give no
particulars, but say we have had the best of it, and conceive 5 of their Men of
War that day to be taken.

This day came on shore one Thomas Prynne sent in with a prize; who was one of
the company of the Nightingale Frigot, who were last Saturday in the fight of
the Isle of Wight, who says they engaged with the whole Fleet of the
Hollanders about noon, and fought them the whole day, where one of the
Hollanders greatest Ships were taken, night coming on they parted.

On Sunday morning our Fleet had sight again of the Hollanders, and about nine
of the clock engaged again with their whole Fleet, which for an hours time was
very desperate; but at leng^h the enemy bore up before the wind, with all the
sail they could make, our Fleet chasing them so that they made a running fight;
who making such great sail, left their Merchant men a stern off them, who began
to straggle in a confused manner, some falling in amongst the thickest of our
Fleet, which in regard of the pursuit of the Hollanders, were forced to sink
some, and fire the rest. By all that we can gather, our Fleet is yet in chase
of them both to the Eastward and the Southward: the wind at present blows hard
at North, and North-east, so that those ships of the Hollanders that have
escaped are not able to get home. There is in our road afar off the Fairfax,
whereof Captain Lawson was Commander, who is slain, who has taken the
Vice Admiral of Holland prize; with him many other ships are seen in the Offing
conceived to be prize: by all that we have sound together, it is generally
concluded a total dispersing of the Hollanders Fleet, who were between four and
five hundred sail of Men of War and Merchantmen.

We hear not of the loss of any of our ships, only the ship Prosperous was
boarded and taken by the Hollanders, but was immediately again retaken by one
of our Frigots.

There is already brought into the Road three prizes, but we have no great
account of them. One is laden with Wine from Nantz, and the others with Salt
and Brandwine. We have not else,

Yours ready to serve you J. C. N.F.
Dutch Prize-Office Dover, Feb. 21. 1652. at three of the clock in the
afternoon.
FINIS.

