A RELATION of several HERESIES,

1 Jesuits. 2 Socinians. 3 Arminians. 4 Arians. 5 Adamites 6 Libertines. 7
Anti-scriptarians. 8 Soule-sleepers 9 Anabaptists. 10 Familists. 11 Expectants
and Seekers. 12 Divorcers. 13 Pellagians. 14 Millenaries. 15 Anti-Sabitarians.
16 Anti-Trinitarians. 17 Sabatarians. 18 Separatists 19 Apostolikes. 20
Antinomians.
Discovering the Original Ringleaders, and the time when they began to
spread: as also their dangerous Opinions, and Tenants.

Unto which is added some particulars of an Ordinance in debate, some heads of
which already Printed, For the preventing of the growing and spreading of
Heresy.

Publshed according to Order, by a wellwisher of Truth and Peace.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be sold in Popes head Alley. 1646.

A relation of Heresies, describing the Original Ringleaders of the same, and
the time when they first bgan to spread, with a discovery of those described in
our times, and first of the
Jesuits
THE Original of these, was one Loyola a Spanish soldier; they bear the name
of Jesus, but came from the Devil the Father of Lies.

This Order was confirmed by Paul the third Bishop of Rome. in Anno 1540.

Their Errors are many but the chief are these, viz.
1 They presumptuously arrogate to themselves the name of Jesus, a name above
all names, and their chief general equal with Christ.

2 These chiefly maintain the Popes temporal power, as well as his Spiritual,
whereby he may depose Kings.

3 They deny the oath of allegiance.

4 They do not teach it to be lawful to murder Christian Kings, but
meritorious also.

5 the Jesuits teach and maintain that the Pope only is Jure Divino a Bishop,
and that all others hold from him.

Socinians.
Socinianisme was so named from Lelius Socinus in Master Calvin's time his
opinions broached by letters,

First concerning God.
1 That there is no natural knowledge of God whereby to instant men to
acknowledge or believe the Deity.

1 That the Incarnation of Christ is repugnant to reason, and can no way
sufficiently be proved out of Scripture.

3 That Christ is not truly God, and that the belief of his Divine nature is
not agreeable to Scripture.

4 That Christ did not by his death satisfy for our sins.

5 That the Holy ghost is not God.

6 That it is repugnant to the word of God to believe three persons and one God.

7 That man in the state of innocence was not created in original
righteousness.

8 That the old Testament is not necessary for a Christian man, though it may
be profitably read.

Arminians.
So called from James Arminius of Leydon in the Low countries in the year 1605.

The errors concerning Prdestination.
1 THat in complete and not peremptory Election of singular persons is made by
reason of foreseen faith, repentance, sanctity and godliness, that this is the
gracious and Evangelicall worthiness, by which he that is chosen becomes
worthier then he that is not chosen: And therefore that faith, the obedience of
faith, Sanctity godliness and perseverance, are not the fruits, or effects of
the unchangeable Election unto Glory, but Conditions and Causes, without which
a thing is not brought to pass before required and foreseen, as already
performed by those who are completely to be chosen.

2 That all election to Salvation, is not unchangeable, but that some which are
Elected withstanding Gods decree may perish, and for ever do.

3 That in this life there is no fruit nor fence or certainty of immutable
Election unto Glory, but upon condition contingent and mutable.

4 That it is absurd to make an uncertain certainty that God out of his mere
just will has not decreed to leave any man in the fall of Adam and common
state of sin and damnation, or to pass over any in the communication of grace
necessary to faith and conversion.

5 That the cause why God sends the Gospel to one nation rather then to
another, is not the mere and only good pleasure of God, but because such a
nation is better and more worthy of the Gospel.

Further concerning the death of Christ and his Redemption.
1 THat God ordained his son to the death of the Cross without any certain or
determinate counsel to save any particular man expressly, etc.

2 That the will of God was not to establish a new covenant of grace by the
blood of Christ, but to procure the making again with men any covenant, either
of grace, or works.

3 That Christ by his death did not certainly merit for any man's salvation it
self, and faith by which this satisfaction of Christ may be fully applied unto
salvation, etc.

4 That the covenant of Grace which the Father by the mediation of the death of
Christ made with men, does not consist in their being justified before God, and
saved by faith in apprehending the merit of Christ, but in this the exaction of
perfect legal obedience being abrogated, reputes faith it self, and the
imperfect obedience of faith for the perfect obedience of the Law.

5 That all men are received into the state Reconciliation and grace of the
Covenant, and none condemned for Original sin.

6 That Christ neither did nor ought to die for those whom God dearly loved,
and chose unto eternal life, seeing such stood in no need of Christ's death.

With many other concerning man's corruptions, conversion, and the perseverance
of the Saints.

Arians
So called from Arius, Deacon of the Church of Alexandria who infected the
World with this Heresy, and was condemned by three hundred and eighteen
Bishops in the Council of Nice under the Emperor Constantine the great and
banished.

1 They deny the Trinity of persons.

2 They deny the son to be God.

3 They deny the eternal generation of the Son, which is they say against
reason and truth.

4 They deny Christ to be called God in respect of his Essence, but by reason
of his dominion.

5 They deny the Holy Ghost to be God.

These Heretics have been burnt amongst us heretofore, as in Anno 1611 March
the 18. One Bartholomew Legate, and the April following one Edward whightman
burnt at Litchfield for the same.

Adamites. Of this Heresy Saint Augustine makes mention.
1 They call the place of their meeting Paradise.

2 They pray, hear, and celebrate the commnion naked according to the
similitude of Adam before his fall.

But more lately practiced by a Piccard in Bohemia that came out of the Low
countries, and professed himself to be the Son of God, he taught this sect to
go naked, and to call him Adam, terming him and his Sect freemen, and all the
rest slaves that wear clothes.

Libertines that would abolish the Law.
The author of these by Pontanus is described to be one John Agricola who
spread this opinion in the year 1535. The particulars whereof follow;

The partiulars whereof follow.
1 That the Law was not given to Christian men.

2 The Law pertains to the wicked not to the Gospel.

3 The ten commandments not to be taught in the Church, because they that are
Regenerate need not the Law; because they do that duty willingly, being led by
the Spirit.

4 That there is no need of the Law to any part of our conversion.

5 It is sufficint for a wicked man to believe and not doubt of his Salvation.

6 Faith and the Gospel unknown to Moses.

7 That good works cannot avail for salvation, neievil works hinder.

8 That a Christian man cannot be known by his works.

9 That the Rule of the Law, is not a Rule of life.

Antiscripturians of old mentioned by a judicious Divine.
The Heretics that lived in former times raised up from the pit of hell by
Satan himself to disturb and destroy the faith of many, have called sundry of
these books of holy Scripture into question, and rejected them altogether as
Bastards, and Counterfeits.

1 Faustus the Manichee as Saint Augustine witneseth Aug. Con. Faust. Lib. 33.
cap. 3. Fren. lib. cap. 26. Epiph. Her. 32. Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. cap. 29.
was not ashamed to open his blasphemous mouth and affirm that many things in
them Testament were false.

2 The Ebionites would receive only the Gospel according Hiero Praefat. in
tit. Tertul. Lib. 5. adversus Marcion
to Matthew, the other three they despised and refused.

3 The Marchionites another detestable and damned Sect, used only Lukes
Gospel, and that also they miserably mangled, according to their own devilish
fancy.

4 The Tacians and other heretics called Severiani as Eusebius makes mention
in his History set at naught the Acts of the Apostles, and Paul's Epistles.

5 Marcion and Basilides refused both the Epistles unto Timothy, that to Titus
and the Hebrews; for whatsoever they saw to cross or contradict their
Heresies, they razed out of the Canon, and would not receive it as
Authentical; so that some have renounced the Epistle to the Hebrews, some the
latter Epistle of Peter, some the Epistle of James, some the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, and other the two latter familiar Epistles of John as not
agreeing with their heresies,

Anti-Scriptarians of our times.
1 That the Scriptures cannot be said to be the word of God, because there is
no word but Christ, etc.

2 That the Scriptures are unsufficient and uncertain, and they are not an
infallible rule of faith, etc.

3 That the pen men of Scripture every one writ as themselves conceived; they
were the Actions of their own spirits which moved them to write and speak.

4 That the Scriptures of the old Testament do not concern nor bind Christians
under the new, etc.

5 That right reason is the rule of faith, and we are to believe all the
Scriptures so far as they are agreeable to reason.

Soul-sleepers.
1 That the soul dies with the body, and all things shall have an end but God
only.

2 That the soul dies with the body, and was held in the time of Origin in
Arabia, much extinguished by his dispute presently after the birth: this
opinion is now raised again amongst us, and endeavored to be maintained in a
treatise lately published, entitled Man's mortality. One argument is out of
Genesis 3. 19. where it is said Adam shall return to dust again. I shall here end
with particulars, because Historians mention few other; and descend to our
times,

Anabaptists.
The chief author of the Errors held by these Anabaptists about the year 1524.
was according to Melancthon one Nicholas Storke, after much pains of preaching
by Doctor Luther in Saxony, and by a Scholar of Storks much dispersed, if
hystory be true; the practice of these opinions was attended by monstrous
cruelty.

The ancient Errors of these Anabaptists recorded by Bullinger and others in
the Church, are these;

1 That Christ did not assume his flesh and blood from the Virgin Mary.

2 That Christ is not true God, but only endued with more gifts then other men.

3 Our righteounesse not to depend upon faith in Christ, but upon the works of
Charity and Affliction.

4 They deny the doctrine of Original sin, and those that depend upon the
same.

They deny Baptism to Infants, because they are not capable of faith and
repentance.

6 They rebaptised those that were baptized in their Infancy.

7 They hold that before the ^^y of J^dgement the wicked should be destroyed,
and the godly only should reign alone.

8 They teach free will in spiritual things.

9 They separate from all other men as impure.

10 That Lay men may preach and administer Sacraments.

Errors in the Common wealth.
1 That it is unlawful for a Christian man to be a Magistrate.

2 That it is unlawful to punish any offender with death.

3 That a Christian man cannot with a safe conscience take an oath.

4 That it is unlawful to take up Arms for Laws and Civil Liberties.

Errors in Families.
1 That a Christian may not possess any thing proper to himself, but what he
has ought to be common.

2 That a wife of a contrary religion may be put away.

Familists.
The author of which Sect is more lately described to appear since 1600, which
was one David George of Delph, after him one Henry Nicholas born in Amsterdam.

1 Concerning God that there is no other Deity belonging unto God, but that
which men are partakers of in this life.

2 Concerning Christ, 1 That Christ is not God. 2 That Christ is not one man,
but an estate and condition in men.

3 Of Adam, that Adam was all that God was, and God all that Adam was.

4 Of Baptism, that none should be baptized until he was thirty years of age.

5 Concerning the word, that there was never truth preached since the Apostles
times before H. N.

6 Concerning the Resurrection: 1 the Resurrection of the body is a rising from
sin and wickedness. 2 That the dead shall rise and live in H. N. and in the
illuminated elders everlastingly, and reign upon the earth

7 Concerning the day of judgment, 1 That the day of judgment is in this
life. 2 That the joys of heaven are upon the earth.

8 Concerning marriage, that the marriage of such as are not enlightened with
true faith is filthy and polluted

9 Concerning H. N. 1 That he is raised from the dead, 2 He can no more err
then Moses or Christ. 3 He is the true prophet of God sent to blow the last
trumpet of Doctrine which shall be published upon the earth. 4 That he only
knows the true sense of Scripture. 5 that his books are of equal authority
with Scripture, 6 That the Scriptures are fulfilled in H. N. and his family. 7
H. N. knows the secrets of our hearts. 8 That all men must submit to him.

10 Concerning the illuminated Elders and Family, all illuminated Elders are
Godded with God, or Deified; and God in them hominified or become man, 2 the
disciples are Adams, and the illuminated Elders Christ's, 3 the eldest father of
the family is Christ himself, 4 That the estate of al such as are not of this
Sect, is a false being, the Antichrist, the wicked spirit, the Kingdom of hell,
and the Devil himself, 5 the Family of Love is perfect in this life, and
therefore ought not to pray for forgivenes of sin, 6 that their illuminated
Elders do not sin. 7 that they may join with any congregation, and live in any
state under any Magistrate in obedience though never so ungodly: 8 whatsoever
is taught by any other then their illuminated Elders, is false.

11 Concerning their congregation, 1 he that is one of them, is perfect as
Christ, 2 That it is lawful to do whatsoever the higher power commands. 3 it
is ridiculous to say God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy ghost, as
that they so saying should affirm three Gods, 4 that every man must first be in
an error, before he can come to the knowledge of the truth. 5 That heaven and
hell are present in this world, and that there is none other. 6 That they are
bound to give alms to none but of their Sect. 7 That they ought not to bury
their dead, because it is said let the dead bury their dead. 8 That none ought
to receive the Sacrament before he receives the whole ordinances, as 1 to be
admitted with a kiss; then his feet must, etc. 9 They ought not to say David's
Psalms as prayers being without sin, 10 That there ought to be no Sabbath
day, but all days alike. 11 That the Law of God is possible to be kept. 12
That it is expedient to manifest their whole hearts with all their counsels,
minds and will together, with their thoughts and doings, and exercises, bare
and naked, and not to cover or hide any thing before the children of Love.

1 That there is but one spirit or life in all creatures both in heaven earth
and hell, and that life which is one and the same in all creatures, is
absolutely and essentially God.

2 That all things whatsoever are the act of God; that all Creatures, Angels
and men, are at all times, in all works acted and ruled by the Spirit of God.

3 That nothing shall remain to eternity, but shall perish and come to nothing,
but the Deity that is now the life of all creatures.

4 That the Bible is a mere shadow, a false history, a confused, being
Allegory, being of no more authority then any other book or the Apochrypha.

5 They hold that all ordinances are but meat for babes, and that we should
live above them, and without the use of them.

6 That perfection in the highest degree both of grace and glory is to be
en^oyed in this life.

Expectants and Seekers.
1 That there is no Church nor Ordinances, nor Ministry in the world.

2 That it is the will of God, that miracles should attend the Ministry, as in
the Primitive times.

Divorcers,
That will put away their wives for small offense not regarding the word of our
Savior Mat. 19. 9. That whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
whoredom, commits adultery, and whosoever marries her that is divorced
commits adultery.

Pelagians.
From Pelagius a Welsh man, in Welsh his name was Morgan which signifies the
Sea; he lived in the year 416. in the time of the Emperor Theodosius the
younger; he was condemned in the Synod of Carthage Anno. 423. in which were
assembled 217 Bishops, Saint Augustine was one amongst them. His errors are
reported to be these.

1 That Adam had died although he had not sinned by the law of nature, and so
sin was not the cause of death.

2 Adams sin was only noxious to himself, and not to his posterity, that
there was no original sin.

3 Lust and Concupiscence were natural not evil but rather good, and that
sin was not propagated by generation.

4 Children have no original sin from their Parents.

5 Children of the faithful, though not baptized, saved; and enjoy everlasting
life, but not in heaven.

6 Men to have free will, even after sin sufficiently to do well without Gods
grace.

7 Grace to be obtained by the merit of our works.

8 Grace in Scripture not meant of pardon of sin, and giving the Holy ghost,
but the promulgation of Doctrine.

9 Faith only the knowledge of the Law and history, not a special work for
perseverance.

10 The Law of God to be satisfied by eternal obedience, not impossible for a
man to keep.

Millenaries.
1 That hold for Christ's personal reign.

2 That Christ shall come personally from heaven and reign with his Saints
upon earth a thousand years before the day of Judgment.

Antitrinitarians.
1 That in the Unity of the Godhead, there is not a Trinity of persons. etc.

2 That there are not three distinct persons in the Divine Essence, but only
three distinct offices, etc.

3 That Christ's humane nature is defiled with original sin as well as ours,
etc.

Anti-Sabbatarians.
That all days are alike to Christians under the new Testament, and they are
bound no more to observe the first day of the week then any other.

Sabbatarians.
That the Jewish Sabbath is still to be kept by Christians.

Separatists.
1 That it is as necessary to be joined in Church fellowship as with Christ the
head, and such a necessity as there is no expectation of Salvation without it.

2 That the Church of England and the Ministry thereof is Antichristian and of
the Devil, and that it is absolutely sinful, and unlawful to hear any of
them.

Apostolicks.
1 That many Christians in these days have more knowledge then the Apostles,
etc.

2 That there is a salvation to be revealed unknown to the Apostles themselves.

3 That in a small time God will raise up Apostles, men extraordinarily endued
with visible infallible gifts to preach the Gospel, etc.

4 That the gift of miracles is not ceased in these times.

5 That miracles are essential to the administration holden forth in the
commission of Baptism.

Errors touching free will.
1 There is no free will in man either to good or evil, either in his natural
or glorified estate.

2 That there is a power in man to resist grace, and that the grace which would
convert one man, would not convert another.

3 That regenerate men who have true grace, may fall totally and finally away.

Errors touching free Grace held by Antinomians.
1 That the moral Law is of no use to believers, etc.

2 That the Doctrine of repentance is a Soul-destroying doctrine.

3 That there ought to be no fasting days under the Gospel.

4 That believers have nothing to do to take care or to look to themselves, to
keep from sin, etc.

5 That God loves his children as well sinning as praying.

Errors touching the Resurrection.
1 Infants rise not again, because they are not capable of knowing God, and
therefore not of enjoying him.

2 That there is no Resurrection at all of the bodies of men after this life,
nor heaven, nor hell, nor Devils.

Errors touching Christ's dying for all.
1 That Christ dyed for all men, alike for the Reprobate as well as the elect,
and that not only sufficiently, but effectually, etc.

2 That Christ did only satisfy for the sins against the first covenant, not
for the sins against the second, etc.

3 Every man satisfies for himself for the sins against the second Covenant;
namely unbelief, etc.

4 That men may be saved without Christ, and the very heathens are saved if
they serve God according to that knowledge God has given them, though they
never heard of Christ.

5 That there is no Original sin in us; only Adams first sin was
Original.

6 That the guilt of Adams sin, is imputed to no man.

New Errors tending to Libertinisme.
1 That God has a hand in, and is the author of the sinfulness of his people.

2 That it is the will and command of God, that since the coming of his son,
a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish or Antichristian
consciences, and worship, be granted to all men in all nations and countries.

3 That no man was cast into hell for any sin, but only God would have it so.

4 That man had life before God breathed into him, and that which God breathed
into him was part of the Divine Essence, and shall return unto God again.

5 That the Prince of the Air that rules in the children of disobedience is
God, and that there is no other Spirit but one, which Spirit is God.

6 That God has not decreed all the actions of men, because men doing what God
decreed do not sin.

7 That God was never displeased with men, for if he were and pleased again,
there is a changeableness in God.

8 That God loves not one man more then another before the world, neither is
there any particular election, but only general and conditional, the
Scriptures no where speaking of reprobates, or reprobation.

There are many more recited by Master Edwards and Master Paget and others; but
this is not the way to decrease Errors by a violent furious repetition of them.
A discovery of fewer Errors solidly confuted, will, if done in the spirit of
Love, prove a better employment, then to discover hundreds and spend nothing
but wrath and fleshly carnal censures upon them; certainly it would be far
more acceptable to God and Jesus Christ to turn one that is going on in an
Error, then to discover one hundred for him to fall into. It is a great sin in
many to pry into Gods secrets; and it is as great a sin also in many, to set
too high a price upon Ignorance. I shall end with those Scripture admonitions
desiring they may be more seriously thought on then yet they are by both
parties.

But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts rejoice not etc.

James 3. 14.
This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and divelish.

15.
For where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
works.

16.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace.

18.
The heads of an Ordinance, presented to the Honorable House of Commons, by Mr.
Bacon, a Lawyer in Suffolk, and Master Taet, both of them Members of the same
House, and by their means was twice read, and referred to a Committee. For the
preventing of the growing and spreading of Heresies.
BE it ordained, that all such as shall from and after the date hereof,
willingly preach, teach, print or write, publish and maintain any such opinion
contrary to the Doctrines ensuing;

Viz. That God is present in all places, That God is, or that he is One in
three Persons, or does know or foreknow all things; or that he is Almighty, or
that he is perfectly Holy, Or that he is Eternal* Or that shall in like manner
publish That Christ is not God coequall with the Father; Or shall deny the
Manhood of Christ, Or that the Godhead and Manhood of Christ are several
Natures, Or that the Manhood of Christ is pure, unspotted of sin; Or that
shall publish, that Christ did not die, or rose from the dead nor is ascended
into Heaven bodily, Or that his death is meritorious in behalf of Believers. Or
that shall publish or maintain, as aforesaid, that Christ is not the Son of
God, Or that the Holy Ghost is not God, Or that the Scriptures are not the Word
of God, Or that the Bodies of Men shall not rise after they be dead, Or that
there is no day of Judgment after death.

Such publishing with obstinacy, shall be judged Felony, Such persons shall by
two witnesses be bound over by two Justices unto the Jail-deliver, and the
Delinquent shall be indicted for Felony; and upon finding the same indictment,
and that the party be found guilty, and shall not abjure his said error, he
shall suffer the pains of death without benefit of Clergy: But upon abjuring of
the said error, he shall upon two sufficient Sureties be bailed.

And be it further ordained, that if after abjuring the said errors, he shall
publish it again, he shall be indicted and put to death.

And be it further ordered, that if any person, shall wittingly and
presumptuosly, or contrary to admonition, blaspheme the name of God, or any of
the Holy Trinity, or shall impugn the word of God, such offenses shall be
adjudged Felony, and the Offender committed without Bail or Main-prize; and the
party being found guilty shall be branded in the left Cheek with the Letter B.
and upon the like offense the second time shall suffer death.

And be it further ordained, that all persons who shall publish any of the
several errors hereafter ensuing, viz. That all men shall be saved; That a man
by nature has free will to turn to God; that God may be worshipped by Pictures
or Images; or that the soul of any man after death goes neither to Heaven nor
Hell, but to Purgatory; or that the soul of man dies or sleeps when the body is
dead; or that the revelations or workings of the spirit are a rule for a
Christians life, though diverse from or contrary to to the written Word of God;
or that a man is bound to believe no more then by his reason he can comprehend;
or that the Moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments, is no rule of a
Christians life; or that God sees no sin in the justified; or that a believer
need not repent nor pray for the pardon of sin; or that the two Sacraments of
Baptism; and the Lords Supper are not Ordinances commanded by the Word of God;
or that the Baptizing of Infants is unlawful; or that such Baptizing is void,
and of none effect; or that such persons are to be Baptized again: and in
pursuance rhereof, shall baptize any person formerly baptized: or that the
observation of the Lords Day, as it is enjoined by the Ordinances and laws of
this Realm, is not according, or contrary to the Word of God, Or that it is not
lawful to join in public, or Family Prayer, or to teach children to pray; Or
that the Churches of England are not true Churches; Or that the Ministers or
Ordinances are not true Ministers or Ordinances, Or that the Church government
by Presbytery, is Antichristian or unlawful; Or that the Magistracy or power
of the Civil Magistrate by Law established in England, is unlawful; Or that
all the use of arms for public defense, (be the cause never so just) is
unlawful.

And in case the party so accused for any of the said errors be committed
before two Justices, the party so committed shall be ordered to renounce his
said error in the public Congregation of the Parish Church whence the
complaint comes; and in case he refuses or neglects the same at or upon the
day, time, and place appointed by the said Justices, that he shall be committed
to prison by the said Justices, until he shall find two Sureties, of subsidy
men that he shall not publish or maintain the said error or errors any more.

FINIS.

