A BRIEF, AND PERFECT Relation, Of the Answers and Replies of THOMAS Earl of
Strafford;

To the Articles exhibited against him, by the House of COMMONS on the
thirteenth of April, An. Dom. 1641.

LONDON Printed, 1647.

To the Reader.
READER,
HAVING employed the Author of this Tteatise to make these Collections for my
private information; And finding them to be beneficial for the Public, I
durst not wrong Posterity and my own Conscience, to conceal them for my own
use, without imparting them to the good of others: For, the solemn-Triall
therein described is so Paramount in the Equipage of all Circumstances; that
(as former Ages have been un-able) so, future are un-likely to produce a
parallel thereof. As for the Person himself; who, as a cunning Master of
Defense, waved the thrusts of such skillful and powerful Adversaries: Take his
Character in this Bookefrom his own Mouth; seeing, otherwise, whatsoever may
be spoken of him, is beneath what was spoken by him: So, that instead of other
Monopolies laid to his Charge, he may seem most guilty of engrossing so much
Worth and Ability into his own Bosom.

Behold here a Garden of the most and best Varieties; wherein points of Law
are interwoven with Acts of State, and the affairs of Ireland, as in the same
Fscutcheon, quartered with those of England: Herein, nothing false is Reported,
nothing trivial is Observed, nothing memorable is Omitted; for, the Net of his
Diligence was so cunningly and carefully spread over all the Transaction, that
if any passage escaped his notice, it may be concluded so small as
inconsiderable to be observed. The Pains in Collecting, Care in Preserving,
Cost in Publishing this Treatise are abundantly satisfied, if my
sincere-Intentions for the propagation of the Truth be welcomed with thy
cordial and candid acceptance thereof.

Thine S. R.

THE Proceedings against THOMAS, Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, in the Parliament at Westminster, An Dom. 1641.
SIR,
YOu have here the Diurnall of the whole Process against the Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, it was taken by the hand of a ready writer, a faithful ear, and
an understanding head. He was present at all the action, and I make no doubt of
the fidelity of his Relation, Which begins thus: THE House for the
appearance of the Lord Lieutenant, was the great Hall in Westminster, where
there was a Throne erected for the King, on each side whereof a Cabinet,
enclosed about with boards, and before with a Tarras: Before that were the
seats for the Lords of the upper House, and sacks of wool for the Judges,
before them ten stages of seats, extending farther then the midst of the Hall,
for the Gentlemen of the House of Commons: At the end of all was a Deske,
closed about and set apart for the Lord Lieutenant and his Council,

On Monday morning about seven of the clock, he came from Monday.
the Tower, accompanied with six Barges, wherein were one hundred soldiers of
the Tower, all with Partisans for his guard, and fifty pair of Oars: At his
landing at Westminster, there he was attended with two hundred of the
trayned-Band, and went in, guarded by them into the Hall: The entries at
White Hall, King-streete and Westminster, were guarded by the Constables and
watchmen, from four of the clock in the morning, to keep away all base and
idle persons.

The King, Queen and Prince, came to the House about nine of the clock, but
kept themselves private within their Closets, only the Prince came out once or
twice to the cloth of State; so that the King saw and heard all that passed,
but was seen of none; Some give the reason of this from the received practice
of England, in such Cases: Others say, that the Lords did entreat the King,
either to be absent, or to be there privately, lest pretentions might be made
hereafter, that his being there was either to threaten, or some otherways to
interrupt the course of Justice: A third sort, That the King was not willing to
be accessory to the Process, till it came to his Part, but rather chose to be
present, that he might note and understand what Violence, Rigor, or Injustice
happened: When the Lieutenant entered the Hall, the Porter of the Hall (whose
office it is) asked Master Maxwell whether the Axe should be carried before
him or not, who did answer that the King had expressly forbidden it, nor was it
the custom of England to use that Ceremony, but only when the Party accused
was to be put upon his Jury, Those of the upper House did sit with their heads
covered, those of the lower House uncovered: The Bishops upon the Saturday
before, did voluntarily decline the giving of their Suffrages in matters
Criminal, and of that nature, according to the provision of the Cannon-Law,
and practice of the Kingdom to this day, and therefore would not be present:
yet withal they gave in a Protestation that their absence should not prejudice
them of that or any other privilege competent to them, as the Lords Spiritual
in Parliament, which was accepted.

The Earl of Arundell, as Lord high-Steward of England, sat apart by himself,
and at the Lieutenants entry commanded the House to proceed: Master Pym being
speaker of the Committee for his accusation, gave in the same Articles which
were presented at his last being before the upper House, which being read, his
Replies were subjoyned and read also, the very same which were presented before
in the upper House: Some give the reason of this, because the lower House had
not heard those Accusations in pulique before: others, that the formality of
the Process required no less, however that day was spent in that exercise.

The Queen went from the House about eleven of the clock, The King and Prince
stayed till the meeting was dissolved, which was after two: The Lieutenant was
sent to the Tower by his Guard, and appointed to recurne upon Tuesday at nine
of the clock in the morning. The crowd of people was neither great nor
troublesome, all of them saluted him, and he them, with great humility and
courtesy, both at his entrance and at his return, therefore let fame pretend
what it please about the malice and discontent of the multitude, That if he
pass the stroke of Justice they will tear him in p^eces, yet I see there is
more in Rumor then in Sight and appearance, and in this Report, as in all
others of this nature, more is thrust upon the vulgar (who seem as well
fearful of punishment, as exempt from it, for all their great number) then
they do justly deserve.

On Tuesday in the morning he came accompanied, as before, to Westminster; and
having stayed in the Exchequer Chamber Tuesday.
till nine of the clock, the King, Queen and Prince came, as before upon the
first day.

Then Master Pym, being called for, aggravated the Charge Pyms first Charge.
which was given the day before, by a very ample Speech: It is impossible to
call to mind all the Hyperbolees, the Flashes and superlative Expressions that
he used, the maine points were: That it was a Treason far beyond the reach
of words, that he the Lieutenant, a native Subject and a Peer of England, the
prime Governor of Ireland, the Commander of his Majesty's Forces, and a
Protestant in Religion should have in such an impious and gross manner,
recompensed his Majesty's favors, abused his goodness, and drawn all his
Dominions into hazard and peril of their Religion, Lives, Goods and
Privileges: That one of these faults alone had been enough and too much for
the fullfilling of the exorbitancy and wickedness of any one man, And that no
punishment could be thought upon sufficient to expiat crimes of such a
transcendent nature.

The Lieutenant with no less moderation and wisdom, then the other with heat
and passion, spoke to his own defense, and that with such a measure of
Eloquence and Livelihood, that his very Enemies were affected with it and do
mervailously report of it.

He modestly recounted his services done to the King and Crown of England,
his endavours for advancement as well The Lieutenants Answer.
of the Honor as Commodity of both Kingdoms in general, but in particular
that of Ireland; How he had engreatned and advanced the Kings Revenues there,
Restored the Churches maintenance, Suppressed the Out-lawes, established
obedience to Royal authority, and impedited the Tyranny and Usurpation of
greater ones over the Commons, And for the effecting of all these Actions, he
mentioned himself the most weak and meanest Instrument, with a wonderful
Prudence, in a middle way, betwixt the affectation of baseness, or
dejectedness, and Allejance.

Master Pym, after the close of his Speech, told him that there were three new
Articles adjoined (by an after search) to his Three new Articles.
Charge, and desired that he might presently Reply to the same.

Whereunto the Lieutenant answered. It was very strange, that after the close
of the Process, and when matters were come to be scanned, and examined by
proof, that any new Charge should be given in; Yet lest he should seem to
decline the maintenance of his own Innocence, and the just defense of his
Honor, he was most willing to hear them and have them alleged, provided
that a convenient time might be assigned him to make his Replies against them,
as he had done to the other given in before.

But Master Pym excepted against this, and told him that the House did conceive
it to be dangerous to grant any farther Prorogation.

Upon this the Lords of the upper House (who did not think it fit as yet to
voice any particular in the audience of the House of Commons) did retire
themselves, and after a pretty time of stay, they returned and declared, That
they had found the Lieutenants suit to be equitable in desiring of further time
for answering; yet seeing the Articles themselves, neither for number nor
weight, seemed to be of that importance, but that he might furnish out a
present Answer, they thought it fitting to grant no delay.

The Lieutenant then (entreating them to pass by and pardon the weaknesses of
his extemporary Answers) desired to hear^ the Articles read which were these.

First, That he had within these two years withdrawn forty thousand pound
sterling, from the Exchequer in Ireland, and employed it to his own private
uses.

Secondly, That in the beginning of his Government, the Garrisons in Ireland
had been maintained by the English Treasury.

Thirdly, That he had advanced Popish and Infamous persons, as the Bishop of
Waterford and others, to the prime Rooms in the Church of Ireland.

To the first he answered, That thirty thousand pounds were set apart for the
Kings late service, at his own most special and most peremptory Commands, for
which he produced the Kings own Letter, already approved as his Acquittance at
the Exchequer board in Ireland.

To the second, That at the beginning of that Charge against him, as ever
before his time, the Garrisons had been burdensome to the Kingdom of
England, but that he had so improved it, and settled the Kings Revenue there,
that the like is not to be heard in all the times that are by past; For which
if the best endeavors of a Subject may justly expect any reward from his King
and Country) he craved leave to think that he rather deserved many thanks,
then the least punishment.

To the third, He attested all the Clergy in Ireland, if ever he had taken
upon him any particular meddling in advancing their Churchmen, or whether he
had done any thing concerning such affairs, but upon the special advise and
desire of the best and wisest of their number: For his part, when he
befriended the Bishop of Whaterford, he conceived of him, as a man of
Integrity and Learning, fit for such an employment; nor was there then the
least suspicion of those monstrous impieties, wherewith he was afterward
Charged. That he had now justly suffered for the same, and that he hoped they
would not lay a necessity upon him to Prophecy and Divine of the future
Conditions and Deportments of men: For others of the Church, suspected of
Popery, he knew none such, but should answer to the Particulars so far as
they concernd him, when they should happen to be alleged.

After this the House dissolved for that night, the kings Majesty and the
Prince having stayed all the time, and the Lord Lieutenant was appointed to
come thither again on Wednesday morning, at which time they are to proceed to
the first Article, to give an Oath to the witnesses, and to examine all the
Proofs whereon the Process was builded.

It will be a very hard matter for him to expect every man's testimony, and to
give his answers, either for full satisfaction or diminution of all
objections, which way of proceeding will spend at least a fortnight, if not a
greater space of time, yet it is thought the lower House are impatient of
delays: The expectations are exceeding various and different, about the event
of this great action; some think it will be impossible to escape the many and
great accusations laid to his Charge; Others, and that the greater number too,
are of opinion that he will be in no hazard of his Life, and that it will not
be possible to bring him into the compass of Treason (quod tam misere cupio ut
non credam) his adverse party is so great, and so far interessed both in
point of safety and honor against him, that Flectere si nequ^un^ ^u^eros, etc.
nothing will be left unassayed that may accelerate his Ruin.

He has all this time carried himself courageously, to the admiration (and
withal so moderately, that it is to the great satisfaction) of his very
enemies, so that he seems neither dejected with fear, nor to affect boldness
with confidence, but to carry himself with that constancy and resolution which
his Innocence and brave parts do promise.

The Irish Commissioners here, have hitherto absteined from giving in any
Remonstrance against the Lieutenant, and do still plead to have an immediate
dependence from the King, and not from the Parliament of England: There was a
report that the Parliament of Ireland had sent a Protestation against the Act
made the last year, for the Kings supply in his Expedicion against the Scots,
as a thing which was violently in part, and in part surreptitiously obtained
from them: But I have learned this to be an untruth. I had almost forgotten one
passage of Master Pym, who in the aggravation of the Lieutenants faults, had
this expression, That he was like the Whore in the Proverbs. He wiped his
mouth, and with a brazen face said he had done no evil.

To this the noble Lord Replied, That he wished his Innonocence might not be
taken for Impudence, That he hoped shortly to clear himself of all those
foul aspersions which his malicious Enemies had cast upon him, And he was
very confident that he should give the honorable Houses full satisfaction
concerning his life hitherto, and thought of nothing more hereafter then to
retire himself from all public employments.

Master Pym gave at this a great shout, and desired the House to take notice
what an injury he had done to the hnnourable House of Commons, in calling them
his malicious Enemies.

Whereupon the Lieutenant falling down upon his knees, humbly besought them
that they would not mistake him, and withal gave a large Panaegyrique of their
most just and moderate proceedings, protesting that if he himself had been
one of the house of Commons (as he had the honor once to be) he would not
have advised them to have done otherwise against his dearest friend: But
withal told them that he might justly say he had his own un-friends, which
he hoped in time to make known; nor did he all this time speak one bitter
word against Master Pym, though justly incensed, which has infinitely advanced
his Reputation.

I have been a daily hearer of these Proceedings against this great Personage,
now upon the Stage, therefore do presume I can give a reasonable account
thereof: The book of his Charge is extant in print, so it shall be needful
for me only to name the Articles as they were canvased: and those designed by
the House of Commons to be his Accusers, which were these that The names of his
Accusers.
follow.

Pym, Glin, Maynard, Whitlock* Lo. Digby, St. John's, Palmers, Sr. Wa. Earls,
S^roud, Seilden, Hampden, etc.

One of these began the speech, the rest after their Colleague has done,
follow in their turn, so that he has all of them to wrestle against, and yet
sufficiently able for them all; though by his agitation his Spirits are much
exhausted.

Master Glyn, after a large flourish, on Wednesday, told the Wednesday
Lords, That the Lord Strafford was impeached not with simple, but accumulative
Treason; For, though in each particular Article, Glyns Change.
such a monstrous Crime could not be deprehended, yet when all was conceived in
the Mass, and under one view, he should be undoubtedly found the most wicked
and exorbitant Traitor that ever was arraigned at that Bar, He added that
his Charge was for intending to subvert and change the fundamental Laws,
Liberties, and Privileges of both the Kingdoms, and to introduce an Arbitrary
and Tyrannical form of Government. This, he said, could not appear but by
the fruits, which were either in Expression or Action, The Expressions were
four.

First, That before several witnesses he had said at York, That Expres.
the Kings little finger should be heavier, to them, then the Loins of the
Laws.

To this the Lieutenant replied, That having spoken sufficiently before to his
justification in general, he would moreover add these few words, by their
Favors: That it did strike him to the heart to be attached of such a wicked
Crime, by such honorable Persons, yea that it wounded him deeper, in regard
that such Persons who were the Companions of his youth, and with whom he had
spent the best of his days, should now rise up in judgment against him, yet
he thanked God for it, it was not guilt but grief, that so much troubled him,
He added That it was a wonder how he had gotten strength sufficient in such
infirmity of body, and such anguish of mind, to collect his thoughts and say
any thing at all for himself: But the Almighty God, who knows him to be
innocent, had furnished him with some abilities to give testimony to the truth
and to a good Conscience: He therefore entreated, that if either in judgment
or in Memory, he should at any time fail, it might be imputed to his great
weakness, And although the Gentlemen his Accusers should seem more ready in
their Accusations, then himself in his defense, yet that might not prejudice
his Cause, who in very unequal terms, had to do with learned and eloquent
Lawyers, bred up a long time and inured to such judiciary pleadings, and whose
Rhetorik, he doubtted not, might present many things to their view in a
multiplying glass; He told them farther, that for these many years he had
been weary of public service, and that now it was his resolution, after he
had vindicated his honor, to retire himself, and enjoy his much longed for
privacy, And yet he could not but tell them so much, That it had been his
hearty wish and desire, rather voluntarily to have resigned his places of
Honor, like a ripe fruit falln from the Tree, then to be violently pulled from
thence, as a fruitless and unprofitable withered Branch.

To the Charge of Treason, he said, that under favor, he conceived that
although all the Articles contained in his impeachment were verified against
him, yet they would not all amount to Treason, neither simple nor accumulative:
For (said he) I do not understand by what interpretation of Law, the diversion
of Justice can be called a subversion of the same, or the exceeding of a
Commission, the usurpation of a new Power. To the particular he replied That
his words were clearly inverted, for that his expression was, That the little
finger of the Law (if not supported by the Regal Power, in granting Pardons
for poenalties of the same) was heavier then the Kings Loins. That this was
his expression he verified.

First by the occasion, for he spoke the words a long time since, to some men
who had layn imprisoned at York, and were then by the Kings favor set at
Liberty, whom he incited to thankefullnesse (by this expression) toward his
Majesty.

Secondly, by witnesses produced by him: In the examination of their witnesses
he convinced one of them of untruth, by interrogating him where he was when
the speech was heard, and how far distant from him, when the man had replied,
That he was twelve yards from him, He answered that it was impossible for him
to hear a man three yards off, by reason of a deafness that had held him 14
years, which being found true, the witness was rejected.

Another witness (Sir David Fowls (was brought against him, against whom he
excepted as his known and professed enemy; 'twas told him that he himself did
not use to admit of exceptions against witnesses, and therefore was to expect
the same measure.

He replied that Master Pym might one day perhaps be atached for persuading
the House of Commons to commit the same Crime that was laid upon him as a
Charge of Treason: But for all this the witness was received, because in
matter of Treason a man's enemy may witness against him pro Domino nostro Rege,
Though, I suppose the Kings advice was never asked for the present. This was
all that was done for that time.

On Thursday he was charged with the second Expression; Thursday.
That he said Ireland was a Conquered Kingdom, and that the King might
praescribe them what Law he pleased, Expres. 2.


This they aggravated as a prime note of his Tyrannical will and affection,
that would permit no Law to bound the Subject, but what himself and such as he
might draw up by sinistrous informations, from a gracious and well meaning
Prince, and if this were admitted, the whole Power and Liberty of the
Republique would be utterly lost. To this he replied, That neither was the
Expression in Straffords Reply.
those words nor in that sense spoken or meant by him; The first part of it
(said he) cannot be denied; To the second that he had said only, That the
King was the Lawgiver, which he hoped none could deny without incurring the
Crime of Treason; And that the Kings Sentence was a Law in matter not
determined by Acts of Parliament, which all but dsloyall Subjects would grant;
And that it had been ever his endeavor to have the Liberty of the Subject, and
the Royal Prerogative follow both in one Channel: If either of them crossed
other, we could expect nothing but a subversion of the Commonwealth, either by
Tyranny or Rebellion; That the Praerogative was like the first; the Liberty of
the Subject like the second Table, either both or neither can be preserved,
That in his duty he stood obliged first to the King, as Gods Anointed, then
in the second place to his Country, if it did not cross the Regal Power: And
therefore hoped that what he had spoken was so far from being Treason, that
he thought a thousand such Expressions would not make up one Felony.

On Friday the two other Expressions were followed; That Friday.
he said, He would not suffer his Ordinances to be disputed by Lawyers,
before inferior Judicatories, and that he would make Express. 3. and 4.
an Ast of State equivalent to an Act of Parliament.

To the first he said, that he had often said (more then once) that he would
not suffer his Ordinance to be contemned, because, in him, his Masters Honor
was wounded.

To the second, He thought a proportionable obedience was due to Acts of
State, as well as to Acts of Parliament, otherwise they were made in vain if
that both did not bind in one kind.

The Lord Cork (though his mortal Enemy) was now examined Corks two falls.
and admitted, as a witness, whom in his Deposition he convinced of two
shameful oversights: For Cork had declared 1 Interiyning.
upon his Oath, That the Lieutenant had caused to be interlined an Ordinance
against himself, and had caused some words to be scraped out, which words were
notwithstanding still found to be in the Sentence by an authentic Copy under
the hand of Sir Paul Davison, Clearke to the Councell-boord of Ireland.

Then Cork alleged, That he had advanced a Groom of 2 His Groom.
his to be a Preacher, who by a testimony from the University of Dublin he
verified to have been a Master of Arts, ten or twelve years before his
advancement, Adding withal, that my Lord of Cork was an excellent Scholar,
who was able to breed such Grooms.

Upon Satterday, having done with his Expressions, they canvased Satterday.
the first Article about his actions.

Against the Lives of the Kings Subjects, both in the Case of the Charge 1.
Lord Mount-Norris, and also of another of the Kings Subjects, both of whom he
had Sentenced to Death by Martial Law, contrary to all Law, and to the
manifest subversion of the Privileges of Subjects, Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right.

To the Lord Mount-Norris his Case, he Replied:

1. That though that Sentence had been un justly given and Strafford's Reply.
rigorously prosecuted against him, yet the greatest Crime that he could be
charged withal would but amount to Manslaughter, or Felony at the most.

2. That he hoped (though this were true) to obtain a Pardon from his
gracious Master the Kings Majesty, as well as Conway, and Sir Jacob Ashley had
lately done, for exercising Matiall Law in the Northern Army.

Then he Replied to all the parts of the Charge which were four.

1. That he had exercised Martial Law in time of Peace,

To this he Answered:

1. That all Armies have been, and must be, governed ever by Martial Law.

2. That there is a standing Army in Ireland, and therefore the Case is all one
in time of Peace or War; And that the Army might be undone if they should
not use Martial Law, but were to expect Remedy for the settling of a Mutiny, or
assurance of obedience from the Common Law.

3. That it had ever been the practice of the Deputies, particularly of
Wilmot, Faulkland, Chichester, yea Cork himself, and therefore was no new
thing, brought in by him; This he proved, both by the production of the
Military Ordinances and by diverse witnesses who knew Sentences given in that
kind by them.

4. That he had a particular warrant in his Commission for this Power.

5. That in the Lord Mount-Norris his Case, he was commanded to exercise the
same, by the Kings particular Letter, both which he caused to be read.

The second Charge was, That he was both Party and Judge Charge 2.
in the Lord Mount-Norris Cause.

To this he Replied, That he had sitten in judgment, because Straffords
Reply.
he was one sine quo non, the Judgment could not proceed without him, but
that he was not Judge but Party appeared.

1. Because he sat discovered all the time. 2. Because he refused to give his
own Opinion. 3. Because he did not give his Suffrage one way or other. 4.
Because he removed his Brother Sir George from having hand in the Process,
in regard of interest of blood.
The third Charge was, That he proceeded summarily in the Charge 3.
matter of the Lord Mount-Norris.

He Replied:

First, that he was not Judge in it, and that the Council of Srafford's Reply.
War was to be answerable in the justification of their own Proceedings.

Secondly, That after a long reasoning he had heard them say, that no delay
could safely be granted in Martial Courts. The fourth Charge was, That he had
not heard the Exceptions Charge 4.
made by Mount-Norris against his witnesses.

To this he answered, as before, That he was not Judge in the Straffords Reply.
Case, and that he remembers no Exceptions made against any witnesses, To which
he added, that as he had been regulated in his Proceedings, so he had been
moderate in the Execution of that Sentence; For, though the Lord Mount-Norris
justly deserved to die, yet he had obtained him the Kings Pardon, for the
saving of his life, and protested that he intended nothing by that Sentence,
but in some measure to repair his own Honor, and to give Mount-Norris fair
reproof, who was known to be of an exorbitant and licentious tongue and
Spirit: Adding, That if the house of Commons would go on the same way with
him, and assure him that the issue of his Charge, should be nothing else but to
admonish him for the time to come, he would thank them heartily for it, and
study amendment in all his pretended oversights. And whereas Mount-Norris
complained that he had jeeringly told him, when the Sentence was passed and
pronounced against him: That ere he lost his head, himself would lose his
hand; He answered, that he had been thought to be very insolent and
haughty, yet he was never so impertinent to use this expression; If any fault
were, it was for undervaluing himself in saying, That ere a hair of
Mount-Norris should perish, he would lose his hand: And truly (said he) if
Mount-Norris would say so to me now, even in the worst sense that can be
conceived, That ere I died he would lose his hand, I would take it very kindly
from him.

For the other man he avouched that he himself had voyced to hang him, both
because he was an arrant thief, and also had fled from his Colors, which by
the very Common Law (and to this effect he cited a Statute 20 Hen. 6. and 7.
Hen. 7.) That to fly from their Colors is felony. He concluded That seeing
he was not accessory to the Sentence against Mount-Norris, had not sat there
as Judge, had a power to keep Martiall-Courts by his Commission, had not
exercised the same till a new Command came from his Majesty, had done no more
then ever was practiced in Ireland, before his time, and had at last obtained
Mount-Norris his pardon, He hoped there was nothing accusable in him but his
too remiss and too moderate proceedings.

Master Glyn bitterly replied, That he knew the time when the Earl of
Strafford was no less active and stirring to enlarge Glynn's E^aculatio^
the liberty of the Subject, and advance the Petition of Right, then now he is
for extending his own Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government.

To this he Replied without the least semblance of passion, Strafford's Reply.
That if at any time he had done the least service to the House of Commons,
he thought his whole life well spent, nor could they ever so graciously reward
him as to give Commission to that Gentleman, to express so much before that
honorable Assembly: But withal if ever any such thing was done by him, he
entreated it might now be remembered, and might now serve to over balance some
slight and mean oversights committed by him, which he hoped should never
make him guilty of Treason, unless it were Treason for a man to have no more
wit and prudence then God and Nature had bestowed upon him. And so much for
Satterday.

Upon Monday he was charged with the sixth Article: That Monday
he h^d used a Tyrannical Government, not only over the Lives (as appeared by
the last) but also over the Lands and Goods of the Change A^t. 6.
Kings Subjects, as appeared by this Article; wherein he was Charged to have
disposessed the Lord Mount-Norris of a tenure of Lands, by a summary Process
before himself, contrary to all Law, and therefore had failed:

1. Against the Act. 7 Hen. 6. which provides all matters to be determined by
the Ordinary Judges. 2. Against the cautions sent to Ireland by King James,
expressly forbidding such power hereafter to be exercised. 3. Against the Kings
late Proclamation. 4. Against the practice of all Deputies before that time.
Withal they added, That it was a Tyranny that could not be expressed, to
exercise this power over the persons of the Peers of the Land, and their Goods.

To this he Replied, That for his part, in matter of Justice Strafford's Reply
(under favor he spoke it) he thought there was no distinction to be made
betwixt a Peer of the Land, and one of the Commons, except they did think
that either fear or faction should do something, which had no place in him.

To the Particulars.

1. That the Act of Hen. 6. answered it self sufficiently, both because it
excepted the Court of Requests (and that his proceedings were nothing else in
Ireland, and also makes an express Reservation of the Kings Prerogative, which
he said was his strength, because he derived his Commission from the King,
and that the Act was the most express warrant in the world for him.

2. That he had not failed against the cautions given by King James.

1. Because they were not Charged upon him.

2. Because they were never observed, nor could be by the Deputies to whom they
were given, which he proved both by witnesses and writings.

3. Because the Caution made rather for him then against him, in that it
contained the word hereafter, which manifestly employed that that power had
been sometimes before exercised in Ireland. And not only by himself, and
therefore thanked them for that testimony and hint.

4. That though the Cautions had been given to him, yet he had received an
express Command from the king his Master, to put that power in use, causing
the Kings Letter, for that pupose, to be read; and professing withal, that he
was tender to exercise that power, till the King (induced by the humble
Remonstrance of the meaner sort of people) had most peremptorily, and upon most
just reasons commanded him.

3. That he could not obey the Kings Proclamation fi^e years before it came
out, and that he wished from his heart, that they would but respect the Kings
Commands and Commissions, with that tenderness of affection and obedience as
he did his Proclamations.

4. He proved it to be the constant practice of all Deputies that went before
him.

It was objected that other Deputies had indeed upon suits of Charge
Equity determined, themselves, and matters of Debt; but never of Land.

He Replied, First that the same Authority reaches as Straffo^^'s Reply.
well to the one as to the other: Secondly that neither he nor they had ever
given Sentence, or determined any thing concerning matters of Inheritance, but
only concerning violent intrusion, which fell directly within a suit of Equity.
To which he added, First the Equity of that Court, that it proceeds upon the
same grounds and evidences of that of the Common Pleas, and that he had the
assistance of two of the learned Judges, in deciding the Controversy.

Secondly the profit of that Court, which dispatcheth the poor in a day or
two, whereas the Common Law would keep them so many years, which they are not
able to sustain.

Thirdly, the necessity of that Court in that Kingdom, which has been ever
governed by that way, and therefore impossible to debar the natives from it,
without great inconvenience, for it would utterly undo them, and none is
prejudiced by it but the Lawyers, And therefore seeing that he had done nothing
but what was customary, necessary and equitable; Commanded to it, and the
Sentence just; he hoped rather for thanks from the State, then a Charge for
his ill Deportment; withal he showed with what Extortion and Violence the Lord
Mount-Norris had taken seizure of that piece of Land, and made the playing of
his game to be very foul; and at last he added, That he had done no more in
Ireland, then the Court of Request in England usually does, And that the
Chancery Court in Ireland does the same daily, and the last Chancellor was
never Charged (said he) for such Proceedings, though this his Power and
Authority was less then mine; But the difference of the Person and his
Authority (it seems) differs the matter. And this was the business on
Monday.

On Tuesday they passed by the 7 Article, and the two first Tuesday Charge the
latter part of the eight Article. Lady Hibots Case.
parts of the 8, about the Lady Hibbotts Land; That he had violently thrust
her from her possession, by this Summary way of Justice, and afterward
purchased the land to his own use, by borrowing the name of Sir Robert
Meridith.

In this Probation, the testimony of the Gentlewomans own son was used, of
the Lord of Cork, and the Lord Mount-Norris, all his back-friends, or
professed Enemies; and yet they proved very little but what they took up upon
hearesayes, their prime Allegation was.

First, That though the major part of the Councell-Boord, had voted for the
Lady, yet the Lord Lieutenant had given Decrees against her.

Secondly, That all was done to his own behoof.

To the First, He produced the Sentence, under the hand Straffords Reply.
of the Clerk of the Councell-Boord, subscribed by the Major part.

To the Second, He attested that he had no under-dealing with Meridith, for
the Lady had got her own Lands back from the said Sir Robert Meridith: He also
declared at length, with what fraud and deceit the Lady had come to her Lands,
and upon what reasons they were restored.

After this Article, they fell upon the ninth; about the giving Charge Article
9.
of Commission to the Bishop of Down, and Connar, for apprehending all such
Persons, and presenting them before the Councell-Boord as contemned the
Ecclesiastical Ordinances.

This was aggravated as a point mainly against the Liberty of the Subject. To
this He Replied,

Fist, He produced the Primate of Irelands Testimony under Straffords Reply.
his hand (he being himself sick) that the same course had been used in
Ireland before, and that Bishop Mountgomery, his Predecessor in the
Bishopric of Methe, had had the same.

Secondly, He showed the Equity that such assistance should be given to
Churchmen, who otherwise, because of Papists and Schismatics, either to God
or the King, w^^ld have no Respect or Obedience given them in that Kingdom.

Thirdly, He proved, by two witnesses, that such Warrants were in use before
his time.

Fourthly, He said he had never granted any but that one, and had presently
within some few Months called the same in again; what (said he) was the
Bishop of Downs carriage in it, he had no reason to answer for, But he
presumed the Bishop could give a satisfactory answer for himself, when he
should be called in question; And so he concluded that a matter so just, so
necessary, so customary and practical before, He hoped should not be Charged
upon him as an Introduction of a new and Tyrannical Form of Government, And
therefore submitted himself to the Mercy of God, and the Equity of his Peers
in his Trial. And this was the work on Tuesday.

The ability of this brave Gentleman ravisheth his hearers with admiration,
though he be infinitely spent both in Body and Mind, by the continued and
almost un-interrupted Agitation. After the ninth Article was passed against the
Commission issued Wednesday Charge Art. 10.
in favor of the Bishop of Down and Connar; Upon Wednesday Master Glyn
proceeded to the tenth Article, the Charge was. That the Earl of Strafford,
having established an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, over the Lives,
Lands and Liberties of the Kings Subjects, his next desire was to make
intrusion upon the Crown it self, that by applying to his own use the
Public Revenues, he might be the more enabled to accomplish his disloyal
and traiterous intentions; To which end, having by a new book of Rates
enhaunced the Customs, he had gotten by advantage of his Lease, above twenty
six thousand pound yearly. This (they added) was a Crime of higher nature then
those contained in the Preceding Articles, Because in those there was some
color or pretext of Justice, here none; those in Particulars, this in
General; those against the Subject only, this against the King himself.

For the Proof of the Charge, they produced the Lease of the Duke of
Buckingham.

Which was read and compared with that Lease to the Duchess of Buckingham
(which the Lieutenant has now by Assignem^^t) and some differences shown
arising to the sum of two thousand pounds in the Dukes Lease, only the moity of
concealed and forfeited Goods were due to him, but the whole Goods to the
Duchess in her Lease; Again the Kings ships of prizes, did not pay Customs
in the Dukes Lease, in the Dutchesses they did; Again, the Impost of the Wines
(then belonging to the Earl of Carlisle) was not in the Dukes Lease, in the
Dutchesses it was; Lastly, whereas the Earl of Strafford paid but fourteen
thousand pounds per annum for the Custom, it was worth to him, as was apparent
by the books of the Exchequor, forty thousand pound. Witnesses were examined.

First Sir James Hay, who deposed that the Earl of Carlisle had an advantage of
one thousand six hundred pounds per an. by his Lease of Wines.

Secondly, The Lord Ranelaugh, who deposed that by the inspection of the books
of Accounts, he had found the Customs to be Anno 1636, thirty six thousand
pounds. Anno 1637, thirty nine thousand pounds. Anno 1638, fifty four thousand
pounds. Anno 1639, fifty nine thousand pounds.

With the Proof they concluded the Charge; That notwithstanding the Lord
Strafford pretended a great measure of Zeal and Honesty in his Majesty's
service, yet it is evident he had abused the trust put upon him, and by
withdrawing so great sums of money from the Crown, had weakened the King,
praejudiced the Subject of the Protection they were to expect from him, and had
been the cause that the extraordinary way of Impost and Monopolies had been
undertaken, for supplying of the Royal necessity: And that this Act,
therefore, ought to be enough to make the Charge and Impeachment of
High Treason laid against him.

The Lievetenants Reply was, That he conceived he had Strafford's Reply.
given full satisfaction to all hitherto brought against him, about that
pretended Arbitrary Government, nor would he spend time in vain Repetitions,
for the present Article, though in all its parts it were granted to be true,
yet he could not perceive, by what Interpretation of Law, it could imply the
least Act of Treason, and when it should be directly Charged upon him as a
point of Misdemeanour, Oppression or Felony, he made no doubt but he should
be very able to clear himself abundantly in that point also, yet lest any
prejudice might stick to his Honor, by these bold Assertions, He was content
to step so far out of the way as to give answer.

First, That it concerned him nothing what particulars in the Lease had past
betwixt the King and the Duchess of Buckingham, or whether she had obtained a
more easy Condition then the Duke her husband, especially seeing that same was
granted some years before his coming to that Government; yet thus much he
could say That the Duchess had paid thirty thousand pound fine, and therefore
no mervaile her yearly rent was the less.

Secondly, For the book of Rates (wherein the chief matter of Oppression and
Grievance seemed to rest) the same was there established by the Deputy
Faulkland, An. 1628, 3 years before his going into Ireland, and therefore it
was exceeding strange, in his apprehension, how that could rise up in judgment
against him.

Thirdly, That he had his Interest in the Customs by Assignation of a Lease
from the Duchess, which was given her before his Government, nor did he ever
hear it alleged as a Crime of Treason, for a man to make a good bargain for
himself.

Fourthly, That not of his own accord, but at the Kings special Command he
had undergone that Charge, on hopes that upon the enquiry into the worth
thereof, the Customs might be improved for the benefit of the Crown, and the
true value thereof discovered. This he proved by the Lord Cottington, and Sir
Arthur Ingram.

Fifthly, That when a new book of Rates was recommended to him by the
Councell-Board of England, in the time of his Lease, he so far preferred a
fear he had, That the Trade of Ireland might thereby be discouraged, before
his own Commodity, as he presumed, in all humility, to refuse the said book
of Rates, and tendered his Reasons thereof to the Kingdom and Councell-Board of
England.

Sixthly, That he never understood that the Customs could arise to those great
sums alleged, but though they should, yet his advantage was but small; for
first dividing the fourteen thounds he paid to the King, then five parts of
eight, which was yearly given in upon Oath (and that procured first by
himself) at the Exchequer Board, the other three parts divided amongst four
of them which were equal sharers in the Lease, would not amount to any great
sum of money; And therefore except it were Treason for him to have improved
the Kings Revennue, encouraged the Trade, and refused the new book of Rates,
he could in his own weak judgment discern none there, nor could he think
it a Crime, for him to take an Assignation of a Lease, granted before his
time, and to insist in the book of Rates used before his coming over; And
therefore was confident the Lords would rather take his Accusation as an
exercise of Rhetoric in the Gentlemen his Adversaries, then as a thing spoken
in good earnest by them.

The same day the eleventh Article, concerning Tobacco, was Charge. A^tic. 11.
Charged on, by the same man Master Glyn, after this manner: That for the
farther advancement of his Tyrannical and Avaritious Designs, he had, of
himself, established a Monopoly for the restraint of Tobacco in that Kingdom;
where they offered five particulars to the proof.

First, That he had restrained the Importation of Tobacco.

Secondly, That in the mean time he had brought in a great quantity himself,
and sold the same at exorbitant Prizes.

Thirdly, That of Tobacco, already imported, he had forbidden any to be sold,
but what was first sealed by his Officers.

Fourthly, That upon a pretended disobedience, he had punished a great number
of People, by Seizures, Imprisonments, Fineing, Whipping, Pillory. and such
like cruel and inhumane usages.

Fifthly, That by these means he had gained one hundred thousand pounds
yearly.

For Proof hereof

First, The Proclamation, for restrayning Tobacco, was read.

Secondly, The Proclamation about the sealing of the same.

Thirdly, Some witnesses, who declared that Ships had been restrained from
landing Tobacco.

Fourthly, Others who had known some Tobacco seized on as forfeited.

Fifthly, The Remonstrance of the House of Commons in Ireland, declaring that
the Earl had fold 500 Tun of Tobacco, which sold at 2 s. 6 d. per pound,
amounts to 100000 l.

They concluded the Charge: That he had sucked up the blood and eaten up the
Kings Liege-people, and had by this one point of Oppression, raised greater
sums to himself, then all the Kings Revenue, in that Kingdom extended unto:
And therefore was liable to the Crime of Treason, for troubling the Peace, and
bereaving the People of their goods, who were entrusted into his Care and
Government.

The Lievetenantss Reply was,

That his most secret thoughts were conscious of nothing but Straffords Reply.
of a sincere intention and endeavor to promote and advance the welfare of
that Kingdom; And withal he conceived (by their leaves) that nothing in that
Charge could have the least referrence to Treason; yet as he said before, for
removing of all prejudice, he was content to answer:

First, That long before his coming to Ireland, the same restraint had been of
Tobacco, and the same Impost of eighteen pence per pound, enjoined by King
James.

Secondly, That at that time, the Tradesmen for this Commodity paid but twenty
pounds a year to the Crown, for the Impost, but now 4000 l.

Thirdly, That the Parliament in Ireland 1628, had Petitioned to have this
Impost settled by an Act of State for ever afterward, as a part of the Revenue
of the Crown.

Fourthly, That he had express command from the King, for issuing those
Proclamations, and therefore could not Imagine more danger in them, then in
others for Monopolies in England, in the worst sense.

Fifthly, That the Proclamations were sent forth not by himself alone, but by
the whole Councell-Board of Ireland.

Sixthly, That for the contract of Tobacco, he was so tender of it, that it was
sent over hither, and seen and approved of by the Councell-Board of England,
before it was condiscended to in Ireland.

For the Proclamations; He told them it was his own opinion (and if he failed
in it, he humbly craved pardon, and hoped that it should not be Treason to
have no more judgment then God had bestowed on him) that the King was endued
by God, with a power, to make temporary Laws, and cause the same to be
promulgated for the good of his People, upon sudden emergent occasions; to
which Laws, obedience is due, till they be abrogared by ensuing Parliaments;
that he restrained no man from importing Tobacco, who was willing to pay the
appointed Impost; that for his part, he had never Traffict in all his time, in
that kind, nor had any part with the Contractors: And if any Tobacco was
seized on, it was upon Contempt of the Proclamations; And if any Person were
censured to the Pillory, or Whipping, it was for known Perjury, the ordinary
and usual punishment in such a Case: Concerning the Tobacco imported (he
said) no consideration was taken of the prices given for the Tobacco beyond
Seas, of the Kings Revenue of four thousand pound, of the Merchants pains and
danger, bringing the same home: For his part, if any advantage were made,
surely it was not his, nor could he annull every Contract or Lease made by the
King: And therefore, seeing his interest was none, he had done nothing but at
the Kings directions, and at the advice of the Councell-Board; seeing the same
Impost was in King James his time, and Petitioned for by themselves in Ireland:
He hoped the carriage in the business should be so far from a Crime of
Treason, that it should rather be thought no Crime at all. So much for
Wednesday.

Upon Thursday he was Charged with the twelfth Article, Thursday. Artic. 12.
Charge by Maynard.
concerning Flax, by Master Maynard, on this manner: That the Flax, being the
native and principal Commodity of that kingdom, was by him (the Lieutenant)
restrained, and the Subjects put to that which was unknown, yea impossible for
the Irish to make the same into Yarne, here they complained of three things.

First, That by Proclamation h^e had restrained selling of Flax.

Secondly, That he had ordered the making of Yarne of such and such lengths
and numbers of threads.

Thirdly, That the Native Irish, being unacquainted with such Customs, upon a
pretended disobedience, had all their Flax and Yarne seized on to his use,
whereby a great many families were reduced to such pennury that they died, by
great numbrrs in the fields for want of food.

For proof hereof they brought:

First, The Proclamation about the Restraint.

Secondly, The Warrant for seizing the forfeited goods.

Thirdly, The execution of this Warrant, proved by Sir John Clotworthy, Lord
Ranelaugh.

Fourthly, The Remonstrance from the house of Commons, in Ireland, That upon
the rigorous course and execution of this Warrant, many Persons died for want
of food. They concluded the Charge therefore: Though the Article did not
individually imply Treason, yet it did make very much for the Accumulation of
Treason.

The Lievetenants Reply was,

That as before he would and must ever repeat it, that nothing Straffords
Reply.
was in the Charge that contained Treason, To the matter it self he answered.

First, That the Proclamations issued forth, were grounded not only upon
convenience, but upon necessity, because that except some way had been taken
for ordering of Yarne, the Merchants had absolutely given over the Linnen-trade
in that Kingdom.

Secondly, That the Councell-Board was as liable to the Charge as himself,
amongst whom were, at that time, the Primate of Ireland, the Archbishop of
Dublin, Chancellor Loftis and the Lord Mount-Norris, all subscribers to the
Proclamation, men to them of known integrity and judgment.

Thirdly, That nothing was more common, then for the Councell-Board of Ireland
to give out Orders for reducing the natives to the English-Customes, and to
fine them for drawing their Horse by the tails, during their Corn, and such
like, and he conceived that to be a thing of the same nature.

Fourthly, That the special thing inducing him to it was, because he
perceived the trade of Wool to increase much in that Kingdom; He dissuaded by
all means the making of Woollen-Cloth, because of the infinite detriment that
might happen thereby to the Kingdom of England, and therefore thought this the
best way to encourage the way of Linen cloth; For the Warrant to seize upon
the goods, he affirmed the same to be necessary, because there should be no
contempt to Proclamations; But that any part thereof did accrue to him, he
flatly denied; If any rigor was used in the execution, he said not he, but
his Officers were to answer for it; for this might happen in the most just and
necessary commands, nor was there ever any complaint presented to him of any
such matter; For his part he had lost thirty thousand pounds in the
Manufacture, established by himself for the encouragement of others.

To that, that Persons died by this means, he Replied, that it was more then
ever he heard, or could think possible, yea that he was cleared by the
allegation it self, which says that the same happened since his coming from
Ireland.

To the Remonstrance of Ireland, He conceived that a Charge was but a slender
proof of a Charge, and that especially upon Interrogatories, not upon Oath,
seeing that privilege was not due to the House of Commons, neither here, nor
there; that he might say it in truth and modesty, he deserved much better of
that People, and might take up that in the Gospel. For which of all my good
Deeds etc. Yet he hoped to be better understood shortly, both here and
there, And for his part, though his pursuit had been very hot, yet God was his
witness he never intended to take the least Impression of Revenge, for those
discontents and affronts which had been eagerly put upon him, or to carry any
thing hence with him from that Bar, where so many foul Aspersions had been
unjustly thrown upon him, but only Gratuitas Cicatrices.

The same day a fresh man (Master Palmer) entered the Lists against Charge by
Mr. Palmer, latter part of the 15. Article seizing and laying soul diers upon
the Subjects.
him, who having past by, for warit of proof the thirteenth, fourteenth, and
part of the fifteenth Articles, insisted only upon the second part, for giving
Warrant to Sarjeant Savill, for seizing and laying Soldiers upon the Subjects,
he Charged thus. That the Lord Strafford, having by a Tyrannical Power
inverted the ordinary course of justice, and given immediate Sentence upon the
Lands and Goods of the Kings Subjects, under pretense of disobedience, had used
a Military way for redressing of the Contempt, and laid Soldiers upon the
Lands and Goods of the Kings Subjects, to their utter ruin. This Article (he
said) of it self did contain an individual Treason, so that if there were no
more then this, it were more then sufficient to convince him of his Impeachment.

Here he offered two things,

First, The proof of the point.

Secondly, By what Statute this Act of Tyranny, directly and by it self,
employed Treason: For the first, Sarjeant Savill was called, who produced the
copy of the Warrant upon which he had settled the Soldiers.

At this the Lieutenant rose, and humbly entreated the Lords Straffords Reply.
no evidence should be received against him, upon an Article of such
importance, but what might be thought authentic, and such a one, under
favor, he conceived that Copy not to be.

First, Because no transcript, but the Original only, can make faith before
the Kings Bench, in a matter of Debt, therefore far be it from them to
receive a most slender testimony, in matter of Life and Death, before the
supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom.

Secondly, If Copies be at any time received, they are such as are given in
upon Oath, to have been compared with the Originalls, which are upon Record,
such an one was not that Copy.

It was Replied by Master Glyn (for all of them spoke as occasion Glyns Speech.
served) that the House had but the day before admitted Copies as evidences,
much more should they do this, when it was prosecuted by the Officer himself,
who best knew it, having executed the same.

To this the Lieutenant answered, that all other Copies Straffords Reply.
ought to be received upon Oath, to have been compared with the Original, as
right reason requires, but that this was not so,; And for the Officer himself
producing it, that was the best Argument he could use, why it should not be
admitted: For (said he) Master Savill may be charged with Treason, for
seizing men of war upon the Kings Subjects, he has nothing for his defense
but a pretended Warrant from me: Now what he swears to my prejudice, is to
his own advantage, nor can a man by any equity in the world, be admitted to
testify against another, insuam justificationem,

The point seemed exceeding weighty, and in effect was the Serjant Savils Copy
of the Commission rejected.
groundworke of the whole Article, which not proved, nothing could evince him
to have been accessory to the Consequence. The upper House therefore adjourned
themselves, and went up to their own Court, and after a very hot contestation
between the factions, and above an hours stay, They returned and declared
that the Lords after mature deliberation, had resolved that the Copy should not
be admitted, and desired them to proceed to other proofs, which after a
little pause they did,

First, the Lord Ranelaugh affirms, that he heard of such a Warrant, and knew
sometimes three, sometimes five Soldiers Billeted by it.

Secondly, Master Clare declares the very same.

Thirdly, Another Deposes he had seen such a Warrant under the Deputies Hand
and Seal: And so much for the proof.

For the Statute, they alleged one of Edw. 3: 6. that whosoever should carry
about with them English Enemies, Irish Rebels, or Hooded-men, and sesse them
upon the Subject, should be punished as a Traitor. Another of Hen. 6. 7. That
whosoever should sesse men of war, in his Majesty's Dominions, should be
thought to make war against the King, and punished as a Traitor. They
concluded, It was evident the Lord Strafford had incurred the penalty and
breach of both the Statutes, and therefore desired the Lords should give out
judgment against him as a Traitor.

The Lord Lieverenants Reply was,

That in all the course of his life, he had intended nothing Strafford's Reply.
more, then the preservation of the Lives, Goods and welfare of the Kings
Subjects, and that he dared profess, that under no Deputy, more then under
himself, had there been a more free, and un-interrupted course of Justice.

To the Charge he answered.

First, That the Customs of Ireland differed exceedingly from the Customs of
England, and was clear by Cooks book, and therefore, though sessing of men
might seem strange here, yet not so there.

Secondly, That even in England he had known Soldiers pressed upon men, by
the Presidents of York and Wales, in case of known and open Contempts, and
that both in point of Outlary, and Rebellion, and also even for sums of Debt
between party and party, there is nothing more ordinary then these Sessings to
this day in Scotland, whereby the chief house of the owner is seized upon.

Thirdly, That to this day there has been nothing more ordinary in Ireland,
then for the Governors to appoint Soldiers, to put all manner of Sentences in
Execution, which he proved plainly to have been done frequently, and
familiarly exercised in Grandisons, Faulklands, Chichesters, Wilmots, Corks,
Evers, and all preceding Deputies times: And had even for Outlaries, for the
Kings debts in the Exchequer, of Collection, of Contribution money, and (which
comes home to the point) for peteet soms of money between party and party, so
that he mervailed qua front, or with what boldness it could be called an
Arbitrary Government lately brought in by him.

To this the Lord Dillon, Sir Adam Loftis, and Sir Arthur Teringham deposed;
the last of whom told, that in Faulklands time he knew twenty Soldiers Sessed
upon a man for refusing to pay sixteen shillings sterling.

Fourthly, that in his instructions for executing his Commissions, he has
express warrant for the same, as were in the Instructions to the Lord
Faulkland before him, both of which were produced and read.

Fifthly, That although all these Presidents were not, yet it were not possible
to govern the Kingdom of Ireland otherwise, which had been from all times
accustomed to such summary Proceedings.

Sixthly, that no testimony brought against him can prove that ever he gave
warrant to that effect, and for the Deeds of the Sarjeant at Arms, he did
conceive himself to be answerable for it.

As for the Acts of Parliament, he had reserved them to the dispute of his
Lawyers, but was content to say thus much for the present.

First, That it is a ground in the Civill-Law, that where the King is not
mentioned, there he cannot be included. But (with all distance to his sacred
Person be it spoken) he conceived himself to be in his Master the Kings
place (for so his Commission did run) in that Kingdom of Ireland.

Secondly, The words of the Statute are not applyable to him, for God knows,
he never went about in Person to lay Soldiers upon any of the Kings Subjects.

Thirdly, That the Kings own Soldiers, enquiring in a Customary way,
obedience to his Orders, could in no construction be called Irish-Rebells,
English-Enemies, or Hooded-men.

Fourthly, That the use and custom of the Law, was the best Interpreter
thereof, and for that he had already spoken enough.

Fifthly, That it savored more of praejudice then equity, to start out such an
old Statute against him, and none others, though culpable of the same fact, to
the overthrow and ruin of him and his Posterity.

Sixthly, That (under favor he conceived) for any Irish Custom, or upon any
Irish Statute, he was to be judged by the Peers of Ireland.

Seventhly, That Statute, of what force soever was Repealed.

First, By the tenth of Henry the seventh, where it is expressly declared,
nothing shall be reputed Treason hereafter, but what is so declared by the
present Statute, now not a word there of any such Treason.

Secondly, By the eleventh of queen Elizabeth, where expressly power is given
to the Deputy of Ireland, to sesse and lay Soldiers, although the same be
reputed Treason in any other.

To the Statute of Henry the sixth he Replied, that a slender answer might
serve; He hoped that no man would think him so inconsiderate to war against
the King of Britain and Ireland, by the sessing of five Soldiers, that he
had been charged by many for taking Arms for the King, but to that time,
never for taking Arms against him: And that he heartily wished that no man in
all his Majesty's Dominions, had more practices with Rebels and Rebellious
Designs against the King then himself. So much for Thursday. At the close he
desired the intermission of a day, that he might recollect his spirits and
strength against the next quarrel, and with some difficulty obtained rest till
Satterday.

Upon Saturday Master Palmer proceeded to the sixteenth Article, and Charged
thus. That the Lord Strafford, having established Saturday Charge Article 16 by
Master Palmer.
a Tyrannical and Independent Authority, by giving summary Decrees* and
Sentences, had deprived the Subject of all just Remedy; for in that Kingdom
there was none supreme to himself, to whom they might appeal; And lest their
just grievances might be made known to his Majesty, he had obtained a
Restraint, that no Complaint should be made of injustice or oppression done
there, till the first address had been made to himself, and that no person
should come out of that Kingdom but upon License obtained from himself.

For Proof of this,

First, The Instructions were read, whereby that Restraint was permitted.

Secondly, The Proclamation, That all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Undertakers,
Officers, or other Subjects that should resort into that Kingdom, should not
come from thence without a License from him.

Thirdly, That he had restrained the Earl of Desmond, because of a suit in
Law depending between the Earl and himself, till publication of the same was
passed.

Fourthly, That the Lord Roch, being informed against before the
Star Chamber, he would not License him to come into this Kingdom, till the
Sentence was passed against him.

Fifthly, That one Marcatee, having pretended a mind to travel, was denied a
License.

Sixthly, That the whole Commit for the Parliament, was Restrained this last
year by Deputy Wansford, which they said might be interpreted to be his fact,
both because they had such intelligence the one from the other, as also by the
Proclamation issued by him before.

Seventhly, That one Parry, servant to Chancellor Loftis was fined five hundred
pounds at his return, for departing Ireland without License.

Eighthly, That the Irish Remonstrance complained of this, as the greatest
innovation and thraldom put upon them since the time of the Conquest.

They concluded the Charge. That by this means, having taken off that
intelligence which should he between the King and his People, and having
deprived them of that Remedy which in reason they might expect from so just and
so Gracious a Prince, he had taken upon him a Royal and Independent Power,
and had faulted highly both against King and State.

The Lievetenants Reply was:

That he hoped to make it clear, that he had done nothing Straffords Reply.
in that particular, but what was Usual, Necessary, and just, and that he
should be very well able (by the Grace of God) not only of that, but of all
other his public actions, to give a reasonable Account, though not be free
from much weakness, yet certainly from all Malice and Treason.

To the Particulars,

First, For Instructions laid upon him, he was not so much Chargeable as those
of the Council of England, whereof there was a great many present who could
witness their commands, But lest any thing should seem unjustly enjoined by
them, or embraced by him, he desired that the reasons of their Instructions
might be read. which were; That it were In-justice to complain of Injuries, of
Oppression done in that Kingdom, till the first Deputies judgment were
informed, and trial made of his Integrity, that it would much discourage the
Ministers of State there, and expend the moneys of that Kingdom, if upon every
trifling business, Complaints should be admitted in England: And that if
justice were there denied by the Deputy, it should be lawful for any man to
come over.

Secondly, For the Proclamation. that the same was builded upon the Statute of
that Kingdom, the 25 of Hen. 6. which contained the same Restraint Verbatim.

Thirdly, That Anno 1628. the Agents for the Irish Nation had Petitioned for
the same from the King.

Fourthly, That the Deputy Faulkland, had set forth the same Proclamation.

Fifthly, that he had the Kings express Warrant for it, Anno 1634. which was
read.

Sixthly, That he had received the Warrant in January, yet the Proclamation
issued not out till September after.

Seventhly, That the whole Councell-Board of Ireland, had not only
condiscended, but also pressed him to it.

Eighthly, The necessity of the Kingdom required the same, for, if the
Gentlemen had the Ports open to go to Spain, and their Scholars to Doway,
Rhemes or St. Omers, it were likely that at their return they would put fire
both in Church and State, and produce very sad events, by practicing to
distemper both.

Ninthly, He conceived that the King, as great Master of the Family, might
restrain whom he pleased from departing his Kingdom without his privity, and
here it was not lawful for any to go from England without License, how much
more necessary was this from Ireland.

To the Proofs he answered:

First, For Desmond, He granted he was Restrained indeed, but not for any suit
of Law betwixt them, but because at that time he stood Charged with Treason
before the Council in Ireland, for practicing against the life of one Sir
Valentine Cook.

Secondly, For the Lord Roch, he has often times mervailed with what reason,
the man at that time could seek a License, seeing he was a Prisoner for debt
in the Castle of Dublin, and if he had granted a License unto him then, it had
been a far more just Charge of Treason then now.

Thirdly, For Marcattee he was afraid of his going to Spain and if he had told
him that he intended to go for England and complain of himself, he would not
have refused him Liberty, as he never did to any.

Fourthly, That the Committee of Irish was not restrained by him, and therefore
did not concern him at all.

Fifthly, That for Parry, he was fined indeed, But that it is expressly said in
his Sentence, that it was not for coming over without License (as is suggested)
but for sundry contempts against the Councell-Board in Ireland.

Sixthly, That he had Replied in the last Article, a Remonstrance was no proof
at all; He concluded that he hoped the least suspicion of Treason could not
accrue to him from the Article; For Oppression or Misdemeanor, when it was laid
to his Charge, he made no doubt but he should be able to answer it.

The same day a new man was hurried out against him, (Mr. Whitlock) Whitlooks
Charge Article 19
who having past over the 17 and 18 Articles, rests on the nineteenth, about
the Oath administered to the Scotts, in Ireland, and Charged thus:

That it was the height of his Tyranny, not only to dominiere over Oath to
Scotts in Ireland.
the Bodies, but also over the Consciences of men, to which purpose he had
enjoined an Oath to the Scots in Ireland, and because some out of tenderness
of Conscience did refuse to take the same, he had fined them in great sommes
of money, bannished a great nunber from that Kingdom, called all that Nation
Traitors and Rebels, and said, If ever he returned home from England, he
would root them out both stock and branch.

For Proof of this,

First, Sir Ja^my Mountgomery was produced, who declared at l^rge how that Oath
was contrived.

Secondly, Sir Robers Maxwell, of Orchyardon, who spoke to the same purpose.

Thirdly, Sir Jo. Clotworthy, who declared that a great number had fled the
Kingdom for fear of that Oath.

Fourthly, One Mr. Samuel, who deposed, that upon the tenth of October, 1638.
He heard the Deputy say these words, That if he returned, he would root them
out stock and branch.

They Concluded, That this was a point of the most Tyrannical and Arbitrary
Government, that before this time was ever heard of, not only to Lord it over
the Fortunes, but also over the Souls of men, And that it rested only in the
Parliament, which has the Legislative Power to enjoyne Oaths: And that
therefore this was one of the chief points he had done a against the
privileges and Liberty of the Subject.

The Lieutenant Replied:

That every new Article acquainted him with a new Treason, Straffords Reply.
that if he had done any thing in all his life acceptable to the King and the
Countray, he conceived it to be this. To these Particulars:

First, He desired the Lords would call to mind the condition of those times,
no man (pointing to my Lord Steward) knows better then your Lordshippe, who
had then the chiefest place in his Majesty's service; I would be very sorry to
rub (said he) old Sores, especially seeing I hope things are in a fair way to
a firm Peace, and I wish that I may not be deceived, that is, That it may be
so, only thus much I may say, we h^d then greater fears and apprehensions in
Ireland, lest the Scots in the Kingdom (who were above one hundred thousand
Souls) might have joined with their Country men at home, for the disturbance
of our Peace, mean time we detected a Treason of betraying of the Castle of
Knockfergus, to a great man in that Kingdom (whose name I now spare) by one
Freeman, who upon the discovery was executed.

The Councell-Board therefore in Ireland resolved to prescribe the Scots an
Oath, whereby they might declare their discontent at their Country-mens
proceedings, and obliege themselves to the Kings service; But while we were
about this; they, of their own accord, came to Dublin, to Petition for it, and
took it with a wonderful alacrity and heartinesse, so that it is a marvelous
falsehood for any man to say it was invented, or violently, enjoined by me.

Secondly, about the same time, the same Oath vrrbum verbo was by the Council
of England prescribed, to the Scots, at London and else where, which was no
small encouragement to us in Ireland.

Thirdly, I had (said he) which I never showed, because I had no need before
this time, a special Warrant from the King, all written with his own hand to
that effect; And when the King commands a matter not contrary to Law, truly I
(said he) do conceive it both contrary to Law and Conscience, not to yield him
all due obedience. For the Proof brought against him, there was nothing seemed
to be of any moment but the words.

For the first words, That he had called all the Nation Rebels and Traitors,
He said there was no proof at all, nor indeed could there be any, for if I
had said it (quoth he) I had been perfectly out of my wits; And, he thanked
God, such irrational-speeches used not to escape him: He honored that
Kingdom very much, because it was the native soil of our dread Sovereign,
his gracious Master, and because he knew a part, yea (he hoped) the greatest
part of them had been, and ever will be as loyal and dutifell to the King, as
any other of his Subjects; And of those too who h^d subscribed that unhappy
combination, he knew a great many had done it against their hearts and wills,
and would be ever ready upon occasion to remonstrate the same, by adhering to
the Kings service: So that this accusation was nothing but a wrestling and
perverting his words and meaning, of purpose to make him odious, and irritate a
whole Nation against him.

For the other words, they were proved only by one witness, which could make
no sufficient faith, and that witness too he would evince, if not of perjury,
yet of a notable mistake; For he had sworn positively that he had spoken
these words the tenth of October, whereas he was come out of Ireland into
England the twelfth of September before, and was at London the one and twentieth.

For those that had sled the Kingdom because of that Oath he knew none such,
and if they did, they fled into Scotland, which might sufficiently argue their
intentions and resolutions; For his part, if they were not willing to give that
testimony of their Loyalty to their Prince, although he had known of their
departure, he would have been very loath to have kept them against their
wills, but should have been gladly rid of them, and have made them a Bridge to
be gone rather then stay.

Upon Monday Master Whitlock proceeded to the 20 Article, Monday Article 20 the
next 5 crowded together.
and told him, that because the matter was intervenie^t, and consimilis
naturae, they had resolved to join the five next Articles together, because
all of them tended to one point or period, that is, to show what bad Design he
had to have subdued the Kingdoms both of Scotland and England by force of
Arms, and to reduce them to that arbitrary Government he had lately introduced
into Ireland.

The Lieutenant entreated that they would proceed according to the order
praescribed by the House, which was Article by Article; He said five Articles
were many, the matter weighty, his Memory Treacherous, his Judgment weak.

It was bitterly replied by Master Glyn, that it did not become Glyns Honey
comb interposed.
the Prisoner at the Bar, to praescribe them in what way they should give in
their Evidences.

The Lieutenant modestly answered, that if he stood in Strafford's Reply
his place, he would perhaps crave the like favor, unless his abilities did
furnish him with more strength then he could fi^de in himself; for his part he
was contented they should proceed any way, always provided they would grant
him a competent time for Replying.

Then Whitlock went on and told the Lords, that something in those Articles
concerned the Scottish, something the English Nation, that which concerned the
Scottish, he reduced to five heads.

First, That the Deputy had said at the Councell-Board, that the Scotts demands
contained sufficient matter to persuade to an offensive War.

Secondly, That the same demands did strike at the Root and Life of
Monarchical Government, and were only to be answered by the Sword.

Thirdly, That he had caused some Scottish goods and ships, to be seized on in
Ireland.

Fourthly, That he had engaged the Irish Parliament, by their Declaration, in
that war against the Scotts.

Fifthly, That by all possible means, he had put bad thoughts and suspicions
into his Majesty against his Scottish Subjects, and labored to make a
National-quarell between them and England, which, if the Kings piety, and the
Prudence of better affected Statesmen had not prevented, could not have been
soadered up again without much blood.

Concerning England, his speeches were either before or after the Parliament.

First, Before his Creature and Bosom-friend Sir George Ratcliffe, he had said
to Sir Robert King, when he was doubting how the King might have moneys to pay
his Armies, that the King had four hundred thousand pounds in his purse,
thirty thousand men in the field, and his Sword by his side, and if he wanted
money afterward who will pity him.

Secondly, That his brother Sir George Wentworth had said to Sir Robert
Berington, upon the dissolution of the last Parliament, that seeing the English
would not grant supply to the King, it seems they were weary of their Peace,
and desired to be conquered a second time.

Thirdly, That he himself, upon a dis^ourse with the Prima^e of Ireland, had
said, that he was much of the mind of those English Divines, who maintained
it lawful for a King, having tried the affection and benevolence of his
People, and then denied their help, upon an inevitable necessity and present
danger of the Kingdom, that he might use his Prerogative for his own supply,
and the defense of his Subjects.

Fourthly, To the Lord Conway, in a discourse he had said, that if the
Parliament (meaning the last Parliament) should not grant a competent supply,
that then the King was acquitted before God and Man, and might use the
Authority put into his hands.

Fifthly, That he did say at the Councell-Board, If the Parliament should deny
to help the King, he would take any other way he could for his Majesty's
service and assistance.

His expressions after the Parliament were two.

First, That the Parliament had forsaken the King, and that the King should not
suffer himself to be over masteredly the frowardness, obstinacy and
stubbornness of his People.

Secondly, That if his Majesty pleased to employ Forces, he had some in Ireland
that might serve to reduce this Kingdom.

The Proof for the Scots Particulars were these.

First, The Lord Traquiere, who was indeed very favorable to the Lord
Lieutenant, and spoke nothing to his disadvantage, but what was scrued from
him, with much difficul^y he told them, That when he gave in the demands, he
heard him say that it was high time for the King to put himself into a posture
of War, but that first all the Council of England said the same as well as
he. Secondly, That it was a double supposition. First, that the Demands were
truly given in. Secondly, That there was no other remedy left but Arms to
reduce them.

Secondly, The Earl of Mortons testimony (being sick himself) was produced,
and it was one and the same with the Article.

Thirdly, Sir Henry Vane was examined, who declared, that he had heard the
Lieutenant to advise the King to an offensive War, when his own judgment
was for a Defensive.

Fourthly the testimony of the Earl of Northumberland, was produced, which was
the very same with Sir Henry Vanes.

Fifthly, The Treasurer of England deposed the same with Troquiere.

Sixthly, One Bean, from Ireland, told that he had known Ships seized on
there, but by whose procurement or Warrant he knew not.

To the Articles about England,

First, Sir Robert King and the Lord Ranelaugh deposed the same, that Sir
Robert King and the Lord Ranelaugh had heard Sir George Ratcliffe speak those
words in the Article.

Secondly, Sir Robert Barrington, of Sir George Wentworth.

Thirdly, The Primates testimony (who is sick) was the same with the Article.

Fourthly, The Lord Conway deposed the same with this Article.

Fifthly, Sir Henry Vane deposed, He had heard those words spoken at the
Councell-Boord.

For the Words spoken after the Parliament, to the first.

Sir Tho. Jermyne, Lord Newburg, Earl of Bristoll, Earl of Holland, were
Examined, Bristoll did mince the matter, But Hollands testimony was express,
because of the exceeding great Love he carried to the Man.

For the last, which were the most dangerous speeches (about the reducing of
this Kingdom) there was only Sr. Henry Vanes testimony who declared only thus,
That he had either those words or the like.

Here some of the Lievetenants friends showed themselves.

1. The Lord Savill who desired of Sir Henry Vanes to know whether he said
their or this or that Kingdom, and withal said it was very hard to condemn a
man for Treason upon such peettit circumstances.

2. The Earl of South-hamton desired to know whether Sir Henry Vane would
swear those words positively or not, Sir Henry said positively either them or
the like, The Earl replied that under favor those or the like could not be
positive.

3, The Earl of Clare desired to know what could be meant by this Kingdom; for
his part (he said) he thought it meant of the Kingdom of Scotland, to which
the word this might very well be relative, that Kingdom being only mentioned
in the praeceding discourse. And that he was the more ready to be of that
opinion, because he could not see by what Grammatical construction it could be
gathered from his words, that he meant to reduce England, which neither then
was, neither is now (God be thanked) out of the way of obedience, nor upon
Rebellious courses.

They at last concluded the Charge, That the words were so monstrous that to
aggravate them, was to allay them, and therefore they would simply leave them to
the judgment of the Lords.

The Lieutenants Reply was,

That though the heaping up of those Articles had put him to Straffords Reply.
a great confusion, yet he would endeavor to bring his Answer into the best
method he could, and first he would reply to the Proof, then add something in
general for himself, in what a hard taking and lamentable condition he was,
to have his private discourses, his most intimate and bosom friends, searched
and sifted to the least circumstance, that he might seem guilty of that which,
by God's assiistance he should never be.

To the Lord Troqueeres and the Deputies depositions, he thought their proofs
did not much stick upon him, for upon the suppositions, first that the demands
were true, secondly, that they were not justifiable, thirdly, that no other
course could prevail: He could not see what other advice he could possibly
give the King then to put himself into a posture of War, especially seeing
then there was frequent reports of the Scotts invading or entering into England,
nor was he of any other mind then all the rest of the Councell-Board.

For that of Mortons, he does not positively remember the words, but if the
demands were read perhaps they would imply nothing less, and if so, how
otherwise to be answered but by the Sword? All other means being first
assayed, which is ever to be supposed.

For Sir Henry Vane and Northumberland's testimony, about persuading of an
offensive War, he said, He remembered it very well, and thought it as free
for him to give his opinion for an offensive, as they for a defensive War:
Opinions (said he) if they be attended with obstinacy or Pertinacy may make an
Heretic, but that they ever made a Traitor, he never heard till now, nor
(under favor) should I be an Heretic either (said he) for as I was then so
am I now, most willing to acknowledge my weakness and correct my errors,
whereof no man has more, or is more sensible of them then my self: yet, if
that opinion of mine had been followed, it might perhaps have spared us some
money (said he) and some Reputation too, of which we have been prodigal
enough.

For the last, about the Ships, it proves nothing but he would willingly
confess, that some ships were there detained and that by himself and his own
direction, as Vice Admiral of Connaugh, but it was at the command of the Lord
Admiral the Earl of Northumberland, and produced his Letter to that purpose.

To the English proofs, He mervailed much how Sir George Ratcliffe words could
be put upon him, Sir George (though alleged to be his bosom friend) yet had
thoughts of his own, and might have some other thoughts in his bosom, and be to
some other Expressions then Sir George Ratcliffe: No man (said he) can commit
Treason by his Attorney, and should I, by my friend Sir George, as by a Proxy.

For his Brother, He never knew him before so rash, but that was nothing to
him, except they could prove a nearer Identidy then nature had instituted, and
that his brothers words and his were all one, yet withal he conceived that his
Brothers words might be very well understood, of the Scotts conquering England,
but not at all of the Irish, and so he wished, with all his heart, that he had
not spoken something which is like Prophesy.

To the Primates Testimony (with all reverence to his integrity be it spoken)
he is but one witness and in Law can prove nothing, add to this (said he) that
it was a private discourse between him and me, and perhaps spoken by me
tentandi gratia, and how far this should be laid to a man's Charge, let your
Lordships Judge.

Yea, this seems to me against humanity it self, and will make the society of
men so dangerous and loathsome to us, that our dwelling houses will be turned
to Cells, and our Towns to Deserts: That which God and Nature, (our Tongues)
have bestowed upon us [for the greater comfort of venting our own conceptions,
or craving the advice of wiser and learneder men] shall become snares and
burdens to us, by a curious and needless fear, yet if my words be taken, said
he with all that went before and followed after, I see no danger in them.

To the Lord Conway I may Reply the same, with this addition, That it is a very
natural motion, for a man to preserve himself; every Creature has this
privilege, and shall we deny it to Monarchy, provided this be done in a
lawful, though in an extraordinary way, this grain of salt must be added to
season all my discourse.

To that of Sir Henry Vane, of offering my service to the King, I thank him
for the Testimony, and think he has done me much honor thereby, but if he or
any body else do suspect that his Majesty will employ me in unlawful
enterprises, I shall think them more liable to the Charge of Treason then my
self.

To the subsequent Testimonies, I shall not need to wrestle about them much,
only the last of Sir Henry Vane pinches, and lies sore upon me, but to that
which the Earl of Clare (and I thank him for it) has said already, give me
leave to add this, That the Testimony of one man is not a sufficient witness,
nor can a man be accused, much less condemned, of Treason, upon this, and for
that read the Star. of Hen 7. 12. and of Edw. 6. 5.

Now my Lords (said he) to give you further satisfaction, I shall desire all
the Lords of the Council, which were then present (only to the number of
eight) may be examined whether they heard these words or not, for the
Archbishop and Sir Francis Windebanke they cannot be had, Sir Henry Vane gives
the testimony, I deny it, four only remain.

First, the Earl of Northumberlands testimony, which was read, had declared
expressy that he had never heard those words, nor any like them from the Lord
Strafford, but he spoke with great honor and regard to the Kingdom of
England.

Secondly, the Marquess Hamilton, who declared upon his oath, that he had
never heard such words, but that he had heard the Lieutenant often say, that
the King was to rule his Royal power Candi^e and Cast, that it would never be
well for this Kingdom, till the Praerogative of the Crown, and the Privilege
of the Subject went in one pace together, and that Parliaments were the
happiest way to keep a correspondency between the King and People.

The very same was delivered by the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Cottington.

Now, my Lords, you may mervaile how these words rested only on the ears of
Sir Henry Vane, but my Lords, said he, that I may remove all scruple from you,
I will make it evident that there was not the least intention that the Irish
Army should set a foot in England, and then I hope you will conceive that I
had no meaning to reduce this Kingdom.

This he made clear by the testimony of Northumberland, the oaths of
Marquess Hamilton, Lord Cottington, Lord Treasurer, Sir Thomas Lucas, who only
were private to that matter.

For other of my words my Lords (said he) I desire you would not take them by
halves, if so, who should be free from Treason? Certainly, if such a praecedent
take footing, Westminster Hall shall be more troubled with Treason then with
Common Law, look therefore to the Antecedents and Consequents of my speeches,
and you shall find the state of the question clearly altered; the Antecedents
were upon an absolute or inevitable necessity, upon a present invasion, when
the remedy of a Parliament cannot be expected; the Consequents for the defense
of the Kingdom, with accounts afterward to the Parliament. The qualifications
too in a lawful, convenient, and ordinary way, so far as the present
necessity can permit. Add but these, and which of you are not of my mind? Is
the King endowed with no power from the Lord? Is he not publicus Inspector
Regni? Stands it not him in hand to do something on present necessities.

And that these were his words he often proved, over and over again, by the
Marquess, by the Lord Treasurer, Cottington, Sir Tho. Jermin^.

My Lords, what I have kept to the last (said he) is this, and I would entreat
you seriously to think of it; If a man's Table, his Bed, his House, his
Brother, his Friends (and that too after they have given an oath of secrecy) to
be raked to find out Treason against him, who never knew what it meant, what
earthly man shall pass free from Treason? Let my misfortune my Lords, be your
advertisement, your wise Ancestors were glad to put bands and limitts to this
Lion Treason, if you give him the large scope of words to range into, he will
at last pull you or yours all to pieces.

But my Lords, I did never think till now, that matter of Opinion should be
objected as matter of Treason.

For, first opinions are free, and men may argue both pro and con. in all
faculties without any stain of his reputation, otherwise all consultations
would be vain.

Secondly, I may be of another judgment then I declare my self to be of
opinion, perhaps to gain better Arguments for the maintenance of my own
Grounds.

Thirdly, Many, and my self often times, have propounded my Opinion, yet upon
hearing better judgments, have presently changed it.

Fourthly, We use to strain our opinions too high, sometimes, that we may
meet in a just moderation with those whom we conceive in the other extremity
to be too low.

Fifthly, It is expressly commanded by the Star. Hen. 6 9 that though a man
should say the King is not lawful heir to the Crown, and may be deposed, yet
he is not to be charged with Treason, but only with Felony, And I hope my
Lords, those words are of a more transcendent and superlative nature, then any
alleged by me to he spoken: But my Lords (said he) lay it to your hearts, it
must come to you, you and your posterity are they whom God and Nature, Birth
and Education have fitted to beautify the Royall-Throne, and to sustain the
weighty affairs of the Kingdom, If to give your opinions in Political
Agitatious shall be accounted Treason, who will be willing to serve the King,
or what a dilemma are you in; If, being sworn Counselors, you speak not your
minds freely you are convict of perjury, if you do, perhaps, of Treason. What
detriment! what Incommodity shall fall to King and Kingdom, if this be
permitted? Which of you hereafter will adventure, yea dare adventure, so much
as to help by your advise, unless you be weary of your lives, your estates,
your posterity, yea your very Honor; Let me never live longer then to see this
confusion, yea I may say it, this inhumanity in England, for my part (my Lords)
I here confess my self, I ever have, and ever shall speak my opinion freely,
in any thing that may concern the Honor and safety, either of my gracious King
or my dear Country, though the sword be two edged, fearing rather him that
kills the Soul, then him whose power reaches only to the body.

Nor do I see how I am culpable of Treason, unless it be treason for not
being infallible, and if it be so, my Lords, you have this rag of mortality
before you, laden with many infirmities; though you pull this into shreds, yet
there is no great loss, yea there may be a great gain, if by the same I may
seem to have dared too far, to give a testimony to the World of an Innocent
conscience toward God, and a Resolute loyalty toward my Prince [which have
ever been my only Pole-starres in the whole course of my life] and if by
spilling of mine, there be not a way found how to trace out the blood of the
Nobility (which I hope your Lordships will look too) there is no disadvantage
at all suffered by the loss of me. You have his very words as near as I could
recollect.

Tuesday was a day of Rest.

Upon Wednesday Whitlock Charged thus: That the praeceding Wednesday Whitlocks
Change.
Articles were of so high a consequence, and of so transcendent a Nature, that
nothing wanted to make up the perfect measure of the most horrid Treason, and
monstrous Attempt that ever, by a Native, was intended against his King and
Country: But putting these defigned projects into Extention, which had
undoubtedly happened to the ruin and subversion both of Church and State, had
not the clemency and goodness of the Prince, and the Piety and carfulness of
the well affected Peers timously foreseen and prevented the same; that still
the Principles of Tyrany and Oppression had lodged within his bosom, and
therefore had burst forth into these expressions and advises contained in the
following Articles, where first, in the twenty fifth, they Charged him with
three things.

First, That he had advised the King to a rigorous and unlawful exaction of
Ship Money.

Secondly, That he had given Council, that if the Shreeves should deny their
best endeavors, and assistances to that effect, they should be sent for and
fined by the Star Chamber, and Imp^isonment.

Thirdly, That when the Aldermen of London, had in all humility represented the
Causes why the Ship Money could not be collected amongst them, and had given in
the Reasons why they refused to give in a List of their names, within their
City, who were able to afford the Loan-money; He in a contemptuous and
Tyrannical manner, in the face of the Councell-Boord had said to the King,
Sir, These men because of their obstinacy and frowardness, deserved very well
to be fined, ransomed and laid by the heels: And it will never go well with
your service, until some of them be h^nged up for examples to other.

The Proofs were these:

First, The Bishop of London, Lord Treasurer, who declared that he remembered
the words very well, that the Lord Lieutenant had advised the King to cause
the Ship Money to be gathered in, but he remembered withal, that both himself
and all the Council had done the like, and that it was upon a present
necessity, and defect of money, for entertayning the Army, which (the condition
of the times considered) they all conceived, was by any means to be kept on
foot.

Secondly, Alderman Wiseman declared, that upon an humble Remonstrance made to
the Councell-Boord, the City would take it ill, if a Tax-role should be
delivered of their estates, who were thought able for the Loan-money; the Lord
Strafford said, they deserved to be fined, ransomed, and laid by the heels,
but for the words of hanging them up, he heard not at all.

Thirdly, the Earl of Barkeshire declared, that the Lord Strafford had said,
that upon the refusal of such a service enjoined by the Kings peremptory
command, it was his Opinion, they might be fined.

Fourthly, Alderman Garway attested the preceding words, and withal added,
that the Lord Lieutenant, to his best remembrance, had said, It were well for
the Kings service if some of theem were hanged up.

They closed the Charge, That by such undutifull expressions, he had injured
the propriety of the Subject, and had put such d^scontent upon the City, that
they were the less willing upon any occasion to concur for the advantage of
the Kings service.

The Lieutenant Replied:

First, That though all the Charge were, in the most strict Strafford's Reply.
and rigid way or sense verified against him, yet he could not conceive by
what interpretation of Law it could be rech't home to High Treason, And to that
common objection (that the treason was not individual but Accumulative) he
replied that under favor he thought to that manner, were as much as to say, no
Treason at all: Because,

First, That neither in Statute Law, Common Law, nor practice, there was ever,
till this time, heard of such a matter as Accumulative-Treason, or a Treason by
way of consequence, but that it is a word newly coined to attend a Charge newly
invented, such an one as never was before.

Secondly, That treason was a thing of a simple and specificative nature, and
therefore could not be so by accumulation, but either must be so in some, or
either of the Articles, or else could not be so at all.

Thirdly, He did conceive that it was against the first principles of Nature,
and false; therefore could not be so by Accumulation, but either must be so in
some or each of the Articles, or else could not be so at all. That a heap, or
Accumulation, should be and not be of Homo-geneous things, and thrrefore that
which, in its first being, is not treasonable, can never confer to make up an
accumulative Treason, Cumulus, an heap of Grain, so called because every, or
at least some of the individuals are grain; if otherways, an heap it may be,
but not an heap of grain: Just so, perhaps these Articles may make up an
heap of Felonies, Oppressions, Errors, Mis-demeanors, and such like (and to
the thing it self I shall give an answer when, under that name, they shall
be Charged against me) but they can no ways confer to the making up of
Treason, unless some, at the least, be Treason in the Individual.

Secondly, That the testimonies brought against him, were all of them single,
not two one way, and therefore could not make Faith in matter of Debt, much
less in matter of Life and Death; yea, that it was against the Statute
expressly, to impeach a man of High Treason under the evidence of two famous
witnesses, much less to adjudge and convince him upon attestation of one.

Thirdly, To the Lord-Treasurors testimony, he did with all his heart
condescend unto it, but upon these grounds only, that there was a present
necessity of money, that all the Councell-Boord had so voiced with him, yea
before himself, and he allwaies thought it presumption in a man, not to follow
the wiser and more judicious, And that there was then a Sentence of the
Star Chamber, for the right of paying Ship Money; for his part, he would
never be more prudent then his teachers, nor give judgment against the Judges,
And therefore he thought it not far amiss to advise the King for the
collecting of that, which by Law was his own, in such a present and urgent
necessity, and although his opinion (and it was no more) had been amiss, he
hoped, that though in case of Religion, being attended with stubbornness and
pertinacy, it might come home to Heresy, yet in his case opinion could not
reach so far as Treason; unless it be Treason for a man to speak his
judgment freely, when he is upon his oath to do the same.

Fourthly, For the words about ^ining, he had already acknowledged in his
general Answers to be true, but with these qualifications, that it was his
opinion only, that it was upon the refusal (as he conceived) of a just
service, that he had spoken them, by no means to praejudice the Citizens, but
to make them the more quick and active in the Kings service: that no ill
consequence at all happened upon them; that they were words might have been
spared indeed, but innocently, though suddenly, spoken; which he hoped might
proceed from a man of such a hasty and incircumspect humor as himself (made
so both by nature, and his much infirmity of body) without any mind at all to
Treason, And that if all Chollerick expressions, of that nature, should be
accounted treasonable, there would be more suits, of that kind, fly up and
down Westminster Hall, then Common Law.

Fifthly, To those words attested by the Alderman, he positively denied them,
and hoped they should never rise up against him in judgment, because the
testimony was single and not positive, but only to his best remembrance, and
that it was exceeding strange, that not any one man, neither of the Council or
other Aldermen were so quick to observe them, but only Alderman Garway, which
he thought sufficient to nullify that single testimony, except he could
demonstrate himself to have some rare and singular faculty of hearing.

In the Close, He desired the Lords, from his misfortune, to provide for their
own safety, and seriously to consider what a way was chalked out to ruin them,
both in their lives and their estates, if for every opinion given in Council,
or words suddenly or hastily spoken, they (who are borne to weild the great
affairs of the Kingdom) should be arraigned and sentenced as Traitors.

Then they went to the twenty sixth Article and Charged thus:

That the Lord Strafford, having by his wicked advices exhausted Charge Article
26
the Kings Treasury, did also Council him:

First, To imbase the Coin, by an allay of copper-money.

Secondly, To seize upon all the Bulloyne in the Mint.

Thirdly, That in discourse with some of the Aldermen, about that business, he
had said, the City was more ready to countenance and relieve the Rebels then
the King; and that the King of France did use to manage such businesses, not
by Treaties or Requests, but by sending forth his Commissaries to take Account
of men's Estates, accompanied with Troops of Horses.

The Proofs were.

First, Sir Thomas Edwards, who declared, that in discourse with the Lord
Strafford, having remonstrated unto him, that their goods were seized on beyond
Seas, because of the money taken out of the Mint; he told him that if the
Londoners suffered it, it was deservedly, because they had refused the King a
small Loan of money upon good security, and that he thought them more ready to
help the Rebels then the King.

Secondly, Mr. Palmer declared that he spoke something about the King of
France, but whether with relation to England or not, he did not remember.

Thirdly, Sir William Parkise attested in the same words, and withal that the
Lord Cottington was then present, and could declare the whole business.

Fourthly, Sir Ralph Freeman declared, that in a discourse with the Lord
Strafford he had said that the servants in the Mint-house would refuse to
work the Copper money, And he replied, that then it were well to send those
servants to the house of Correction.

They closed the Charge, That by such undutifull Council and words, he had
given more then sufficient proof, of his Design and purpose to subdue this
Kingdom, and subvert the fundamental Laws, and privileges of the same.

The Livetenants Reply.

First, That he had expected some proofs about the two Straffords Reply.
first particulars, but did hear of none, and that it was no small
disadvantage to him, to be charged with a great many odious crimes, by a book
printed, and flying from hand to hand, through the whole Kingdom, yet when
they came to prove there should be no such thing laid against him.

Secondly, About the Speeches. He ingeniously confessed that some such thing
might perhaps have escaped the door of his lips, when he saw their
backwardness to his Majesty's service, and as the times were (...) conditioned
he did not think it much amiss to call that faction by the name of Rebels,
But yet he thought he had abundantly satisfied for that oversight, (if it was
any) at York: For having understood there that the City of London were
willing to make a Loan of money, he there before the great council of the
Peers, expressed himself to this sense, That the Londoners had sufficiently
made up all their delays hitherto by their Act, that the King was obliged to
their forwardness, and that he himself should be as ready to serve them as
any poor Gentleman in England: About the other words he said, that being in
conference with some of the Londoners, there came at that time to his hands a
Letter from the Earl of Leicester, then at Paris, wherein were the Gazets
enclosed, reporting that the Cardinal had given some such order, as to leavy
money by forces, This he said he only told the Lord Cottington standing by
without the least application or intention concerning the English Affairs,
Cottington being examined upon this, declared the same in the same manner.

Thirdly, To Sir Ralph Freeman, he said, that his testemony did not concern
the Charge at all, nor did he think any thing amiss in it, though he had
said it; if the servants of the Mint refused to work, according to directions
they did deserve the house of correction, nor was it Treasonable to say the
King might use that house for the correction of his servants, as well as any
man in the City for theirs.

Fourthly, He said that there was no great likelihood that he had committed
real Acts of Treason, when his adverse party was content to trifle away so
much time about words, neither was there any Treason in them, though they had
been fully verified, and therefore in that (as in all other Articles) he
reserved a power for his Council to dispute in matter of Law.

They went to the twenty seveneth Article and charged thus, That immediately
after his appointment to be Livetenant to the Charge Article 27
Army here in England, he showed what Principles of Arbitrary government
lurked within his bosom, for by his own immediate authority, without and
against Law, he had laid Impost of money upon the Kings Subjects, where they
mention three particulars.

First, That he had imposed 8. d. per diem, upon the County of York, for
enterteining the train Band, there one whole Month.

Secondly, That he had sent out warrants for collecting the same, and
threatened to imprison such as should refuse to pay.

Thirdly, That he said that it was a Crime nigh to the Crime of high Treason,
Not to pay the same.

Fourthly, They added that in his general Replies, he had brought two things
for his defense, first, that this money was freely and Voluntarily offered by
those in Yorke-shire; secondly, that the great council of the Peers had notice
of the same.

To the first they answered that a petition was indeed preferred by the
Yorke-shire men, and a Months pay offered, but that the Lord Strafford had
refused to present the same upon this exception only, because in the same they
had petitioned for a Parliament whereby he evidently declared what little
Inclination he had to that way.

To the second they appeald to all the Lords present whether any such order did
pass, before the Council of the Peers at York.

The Proofs were.

First, A Warrant issued by Collonell Pennyman, for this money, and anorher by
S^r Edward Osborne.

Secondly, Master John Burrowes who declared that he was Clerk to the great
council but did remember of no order, and withal added that it might have
passed at that time, when he^ attended at Rippon,

Thirdly, Master Dunston who declared, that he had known that money Levied by
some Musketeers.

Fourthly, By Sir William Ingram who declared that he had heard the Livetenant
say, that to refuse the same, came nigh to the Crime of high Treason.

They concluded the Chrage that by these particulars, It was more then evident
what unhappy purposes and traiterous Designs he had to subdue this Kingdom,
and subvert the fundamental Laws and privileges.

First, To the Petition, That it was a true Petition, drawn Strafford's Reply.
up by the Yorkshire Gentlemen, and as true that he had refused to present
the same, because of that clause about the Parliament, but the matter was thus;
At his Majesty's coming to York it was thought necessary for the defense of
that County, to keep the Trained Bond on foot because the Enemy was upon the
borders, and therefore the King directed him to write to all the freeholders
in Yorkshire, to see what they would do for their own defense.

The time and place were designed by the King, but the night before the
meeting, a small number convented, and in a private and factious way, did draw
up that petition; upon the morrow at their appointed Diet, in presence of the
whole number, the Petition was presented to him, where he did advise them to
leave out that clause, and that because he knew the King out of his own
gracious disposition had intended to call a Parliament, which he desired should
rather be freely done, then upon the constraint and Importunity of Petitions,
moreover it would seem a mercenary thing in them at one and the same time to
offer a benevolence, and withal to petition for his favor upon this
Remonstrance they were all willing to recall the Petition and directed him by
word of mouth, to offer unto the King the months pay in their names, which he
did accordingly, in the presence of forty of them to their no small advantage.

This he proved by Sir William Pennyman, Sir Paul Neale, Sir George Wentworth,
Sir William Savill, Sir Thomas Danby, who all of them declared as much in ample
terms, and withal added that nothing was done upon better grounds, of
necessity and obedience then the offer of that money, and that they never had
heard any man grudge against it to this time.

For the second, about the council of Peers, he alleged that he never
made mention of any order of theirs, but he remembered very well it was twice
propounded before them, that the King had approved it at that time a Just and
necessary act, and none of the Council had contradicted it, which he
conceived as a tacit approbation and an order in Equivalence.

But though that had not been, yet there was nothing done in the business,
but at the special desires of the Gentlemen themselves, and for their
necessary defense and protection, yea though he had done it by himself alone,
yet he conceived he had so much power by his Commission, causing the
Commission to that effect to be read: That albeit he should mistake his
Commission and do some inferior Act beyond it (because Military proceedings
are not always warranted by the Common Law) yet it should not be imputed as
an Act of Treason to him.

And to this effect read a Statute of the seveneth of Henry the second.

To the Proofs.

First, Collonell Pennymans warrant, or Sir Edward Osbornes, it nothing
concerned him, and he doubted not but these worthy Gentlemen could Justify
their own Act, and that he had enough to do to answer his own Misdemeanors.

Secondly, For Sir John Burrowes, he was at Rippon when that Proposition was
made.

Thirdly, That as the warrant, so neither the Execution troubled him at all.

Fourthly, For Sir William Ingram, he was but a single testimony and that such
an one too as he could produce an evidence to testify, he had mistaken
himself in his testimony upon oath, if it were not to disadvantage the
Gentleman.

He concluded that he had done nothing in that business, but upon the
petition of that County, the Kings spetiall command, the connivence at least of
the great council, and upon a present necessity for the defense and safety of
the County. And so much for Wednesday.

Upon Thursday the Committee for the charge, declared that Thursday. Charge Sir
Walter Ecarles Observations.
they had done withal the Articles, and were content to wave the last for
reasons best known to themselves, only Sir Walter Earls added that he had
some observations to bring forth, upon the two and twenteeth Article which he
conceived might do much, to prove the Lord Straffords designs for Landing the
Irish forces in England.

And they were.

First, That in his Commission he had power to land them in Wales, or in any
part of England, or in Scotland, which were all together superfluous unless
there had been some purpose for the same.

Secondly, That within two days before the date of the Commission, Letters
were sent to the Lord Bridgewater, and Pembroke from Sir Francis Windebanke to
assist the Earl of Worcestor, in Levying forces for the Kings service, and
these might be supposed to have intended ajoyning with the Irish.

Thirdly, That the Lord Ranelaugh at the raising of the Irish Army, did fear,
such a Design as this.

Fourthly, That the town of Air in Scotland, where the Lord Strafford
pretended he would land those forces, was fortified with a Bulworke, a
Garrison, and Block-house which would prohibit landing there, that the Earl of
Argiles bounds were divided thence by the Sea, and that the Bar or entry into
the town, was very dangerous and shallow.

The Proofs were only the reading of the Commission granted to the Lord
Strafford.

The Livetenants Reply.

First That his Commission was the same Verbatim with Northumberlands for
England, and that it was drawn up by the Council board here, and sent over
unto him; So no more design in him then in the Gentlemen of the English Army,
nor no larger then that was put upon him.

Secondly, That this was the first time he heard of any such Letters, nor did
they concern him more then any of the House.

Thirdly, That he was not bound to purge the Lord Ranelaugh from all his
fears, and that he had his own fears too, which God forbid should be evidence
of Treason against any man, whatsoever.

Fourthly, That it seemed the Gentleman had better Information from that
Kingdom then himself, yet he would be confident to say at Air, there was
never such a thing as a Block-house or Garrison. But to remove all scruples,
(for indeed the Road or landing place is not there safe) he declared that it
was his intention to have landed some miles above Air, and made only his
Mag^zine of that town.

To the Earl of Argiles bounds he hoped the Gentleman knew, they came not on
foot out of Ireland, but had ships to waft and transport themselves and that
one of his prime Houses (Rosneth) was within some few miles of the same frith.

The Lord Digby finding Sir Walter Earls on ground did handsomely bring him
off, and told the Lords that all their proofs for that Article were not yet
ready, that this was a Superfaetation only, of the charge, and that in such a
business as the plotting of Treason, they must be content sometimes, with
dark Probabilities.

Then Master Glyn desired the Livetenant to resume his defense, Glyns
charitable speech.
that they might give a repetition of their Charge, and so close the process
so far as concerned the matter of Fact.

He replied that in his case all sl^cknesse is speed enough, the matter
touched him narrowly even in his life and estate, Straffords Reply.
yea in that which he esteemed above them both, his honor and his posterity,
and therefore he confessed he had no desire to ride post in such a business^.
That he knew the Gentlemen at the Bar, if they were in his case would think
the time little enough, except their more able Judgments could sooner dispatch
the matter in hand, And therefore he humbly entreated that that day might be
granted to him for strengthening himself, and recollecting his thoughts and
spirits, and tomorrow he would be ready with his last Replies for himself,
which after a little Ceremony and contestation, was condiscended unto by the
House of Commons.

Upon Friday morning, about eight of the clock, the Lieutenant Friday he was
hindered from coming by a sit of the stone.
of the Tower, and my Lords chamber-Groome came to the Hall, and gave
information to the House, upon Oath, that the Lord Strafford was taken with an
exceeding great pain, and fit of the Stone, and could not upon any conditions
stir out of his Bed.

Master Glyn Replied, That it was a token of his wilfulness, Glyn again.
not his weakness, that he had not sent a Doctor to testify the same.

The Lord Steward made answer, that a Doctor could not be had perhaps so soon
in the morning, nor was it possible for any Physician to give a certain
judgment concerning a man's disabilitie by the Stone; Because there is no
outward Symptoms that appear.

Master Glyn excepted, That if he did not appear upon Satterday morning, he
should lose the privilege to speak in his own defense afterward, and they
permitted to proceed.

The Lord Steward Replied, that the Lords had appointed four of their number
to go to the Tower and learn the just cause of his stay, and if by any means
he were able, he should be obliged to come then, if not, Humanity and common
equity would excuse him.

In the afternoon it was reported that he was dead, of which Report of my Lord
S^raff^rd's death.
there can be no better reason given, then the Humor and Genious of the times,
that dally with nothing oftener then untruths, and calumnies; And certainly
there are many men of shallow understanding, and weak affections, who either
will not; or cannot understand the Gentleman's worth, but out of fearful and
needless apprehensions, are so desirous to hear of his ruin any way, that
their busy tongues will dare to anticipate the stroke of Justice. Master Glyn
proffers new proofs concerning the two and twentieth Article.

Upon Satterday morning he presented himself at the Bar, Satterday.
where he expected nothing but repetitions of Charges and Defenses, but mean
while Master Glyn proffers some new proofs concerning the two and twentieth
Article, which the noble Lord refused, alleging the Process was closed;
Master Glyn answered, the Process is not closed, as long as the business
stands unrepealed; And that it did not become a Prisoner at the Bar to
prescribe a Method of proceeding to the House of Commons in England.

It was answered by the Lord Lieutenant, that he thought it stood him in hand
as nearly to maintain his life, as it did any to pursue him for it, yet he was
willing they should bring in new proofs, provided that he might have time to
make new Replies, and withal use some new witnesses in some Articles, that
concerns his justification.

The Lord Newarke, upon these motions desired the House might be adjourned;
after two hours stay, and a hot conflict among the Lords, they returned, and
the Lord Steward commanded the Order to be read, which consisted of two
Articles.

First, That it was granted unto them to bring in proofs concerning the two
and twentieth Article, so it was to the Lord Strafford to make his Replies, and
use his witnesses concerning the same.

Secondly, That if they went to no more Articles, no more should the Lord
Strafford; but if they did, that he might pitch upon any one Article as he
pleased.

The House of Commons presently declined all other Articles, and conceived the
Order expressly for them, restrayning him from all other Articles, except that
only.

He conceived the Order was for him, and said, that seeing they had picked out
their Article, it was against all common Equity to tie up his hands, and not
admit of a common rule for them both; They replied, that when the Article was
canvased they reserved witnesses till another time; He answered, that he had
done the same upon every Article; They Replied that the House had refused his
Reservation; He answered, nor had they passed an Order for theirs.

Upon this new contestation the House rose again, and was adjourned. It is
supposed that the House of Commons had the better ground, because they had
particularly named their witnesses in their Reservation, The Lord Strafford not
so, they pressed but one Article, he many: But such was the pleasure of the
Lords, that though the matter did not deserve to be much stood upon, yet after
two hours vehement agitation of the business in the upper-house, they
returned, and the Order was in his favor to this effect.

First, That both of them should wave their new ptoofes, and go immediately to
that which follows.

Secondly, If they would not do so* the Lords conceived themselves common
Judges to both, and therefore would not deny Strafford the liberty of pitching
upon what Article he pleased, as they had done.

Thirdly, That both of them should name their witnesses at the Bar instantly.

The Commons were much grieved at this, yet desired him to nominate his
witnesses, if he would make any benefit of the Order; He answered that he would
nominate after them, because they were first in order; they replied that he
knew their Article, they not his: He said he was to bring proofs about the
second, fifth, thirteenth, and the fifteenth Articles, and did desire them that
they would now proceed to nomination.

But they told him they could not embrace the Order, without advice of the
whole House, then on a sudden, a mighty noise followed of the whole House,
Withdraw, Withdraw, and was in so uncouth and tumultuous a confusion, that it
produced both admiration and fear in the beholders, wherein we might easily
feel the pulse of a distempered State; both the Houses brake up, not apointing
so much as the next Diet, each man's countenance spoke anger and discontent, and
nothing sounded in our ears all Sunday but terrors and affrightments, of a
present division and breach between the two Houses; That the House of Commons
would declare him a Traitor, and all such Lords too, as were his adherents,
That he should be no more heard in public, That (though parties and not his
Peers) they would vote in his Sentence, Monday spent in a conference betwixt
botb Houses.
That a Bill of Attainder should presently be drawn up against him, and that
nothing could content them but present execution, Big words flew up and down
all Monday.

That whole day was spent in a conference betwixt the Houses without any
meeting in the Hall, but the Lords (who had learned as it seems to force their
own ruin by his misfortune, and now conceive that Monarchy and Nobility are
of such Identidy, that one and the same is the diminution of both (kept fast to
their conclusion and would not pass from their Order, notwithstanding all the
many dangers represented, so that the house of Commons were constrained, at
last, to give way, and embrace the first part of the Order, by waving witnesses
on both sides.

This has been no small discouragement to his Enemies, for a more real
Demonstration of his party amongst the Lords, could not have been shown.

Upon Monday, some of the Lords went so high in their heat, as to tell the
House of Commons, that it was an un-naturall motion for the head to be governed
by the tail, That they hated Rebellion as bad as Treason, That the same blood
that ennobled their Ancestors, did move also in their veins, and therefore
they would never suffer themselves to be suppressed by a popular faction.

After a great deal of storm all was (as well as might be) soadered up
again, and Tuesday appointed to be the day for the Lieutenant to resume his
Defenses, for then their Charge, without any more proof, to be used on
eytherside.

Upon Tuesday the Lord Steward, at the entry told them the Tuesday
Lords had Ordered, that both their testimonies should be waved that they
should proceed immediately to what followed, so that that day might put an end
to what concerned the matter of Fact.

The Lord Lieutenant Replied, That in all humility and obedience, Straffords
Reply.
he would submit himself to that or any other their Decrees whatsoever, though
it should reach as far home unto him as his own life; but withal humbly
begged, That if hereafter he should be troubled (for they were to speak last)
with new matter, or with supplementall Proof, he might have leave to speak
something in his own Defense.

The Lord Steward answered, It was all the reason in the world.

The Lieutenant went on thus:

MY LORDS,

This day I stand before you Charged with High Treason, My Lord Straffords,
last speech in the Hall
the burden is heavy, yet far the more, in that it has borrowed the
Patrociny of the House of Commons; If they were not Interessed, I might
express a no less easy, then I do a safe issue and good success to the
business: but let neither my weakness plead my Innocence, nor their power
my guilt. If your Lordships will conceive of my Defenses, as they are in
themselves, without referrence to either (and I shall endeavor so to present
them) I hope to go away from hence as clearly justified, as I am now in the
testimony of a good Conference, by my self: My Lords, I have all along my
Charge watched to see that poisoned arrow of Treason, that some men would feign
have to be feathered in my heart, and that deadly cup of wine, that has so
intoxicated some petcy misalleaged Errors, as to put them in the elevation of
High Treason, but in truth it has not been my quickness to discern any such
Monster yet within my breast; though now perhaps, by a sinistrous Information,
sticking to my clothes: They tell me of a two fold Treason, one against the
Statute, another by the Common-Lawe; this direct, that consecutive; this
individual, that Accumulative; this in it self, that by way of construction.

For the first, I must and do acknowledge, that if I had the least suspicion
of my own guilt, I would spare your Lordships the pains, cast the first stone
at my self, and pass Sentence of condemnation against my self: And whether it
be so or not, I refer my self to your Lordships judgment and Declaration:
You, and only you (under the favor and protection of my gracious Master) are
my Judges, under favor none of the Commons are my Peers, nor can they be my
Judges; I shall ever celebrate the providence and wisdom of your noble
Ancestors, who have put the keys of Life and Death (so far as concerns you
and your posterity) into your own hands, not into the hands of your inferiors:
None but your own selves know the rate of your noble blood, none but your
selves must hold the balance in dispencing the same.

I shall proceed in repeating my Defenses, as they are reduceable to these two
maine points of Treason, and for Treason against the Statute (which is the only
Treason in effect) nothing is alleged for that, but the fifteenth, two and
twentieth, and twenty seventh Articles. Here he brought the sum of all his
Replies made to these three Articles before, and almost in the same words as
before; only that testimony of Sir Hen^y Vanes, because it seemed pressing, he
stood upon it and alleged five Reasons for the nullifying thereof.

First, That it was but a single testimony, and would not make Faith in a
matter of Debt, much less in a matter of Life and Death, yea that it was
expressly against the Statute to impeach (much less to condemn him) upon
High Treason, under the testimony of two famous witnesses.

Secondly, That he was dubious in it, and expressed it with an as I do remember,
and such, or such like words.

Thirdly, That all the Council of eight, except himself, disclaim the words,
as if by a singular providence they had taken hold of his ears only.

Fourthly, That at that time the King had levied no forces in Ireland, and
therefore he could not be possibly so impudent as to say to the King that he
had an Army there which he might employ for the reducing this Kingdom.

Fifthly, That he had proved by witnesses beyond all exceptions (Marquess
Hamilton, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Northumberland, Lord Cottington, Sir
William Pennyman, and Sir Arthur Terringham) that there was never the least
intention to land those Forces in England. He went on

So much for the Articles that concern Individual Treason.

To make up the Constructive-Treason, or Treason by way of Accumulation; Many
Articles are brought against me, as if in an heap of Felonies or Misdemeanors
(for in their conceit they reach no higher) some prolificall seed apt to
produce what is treasonable, could lurk: Here I am charged to have designed
the ruin and overthrowe both of Religion and State: The first seems rather
to have been used to make me odious then guilty, for there is not the least
proof alleged concerning my confederacy with the Popish-faction, nor could
there be any indeed; never a servent in Authority beneath the King my Master,
was ever more hated and maligned by those men then my self, and that for an
Impartial and strict executing of the Laws against them.

Here your Lordships may observe that the greater number of the witnesses used
against me, either from Ireland or from Yorkshire, were men of that Religion:
But for my own Resolution (I thank God) I am ready every hour of the day to
seal my disaffection to the Church of Rome, with my dearest blood.

But, my Lords, give me leave here to pour forth the grief of my Soul before
you, these proceeding against me seem to be exceeding rigorous, and to have
more of praejudice then equity, that upon a supposed Charge of my Hypocrisy or
Errors in Religion, I should be made so monstrously odious to three Kingdoms;
A great many thousand eyes have seen my Accusations, whose ears shall never
hear, that when it came to the upshot I was never accused of them, Is this
fair dealing amongst Christians? but I have lost nothing by that: Popular
applause was ever nothing in my conceit, the uprightness and integrity of a
good Conscience, was and ever shall be my continual feast; and if I can be
justified in your Lordships judgments from this grand imputation (as I hope
now I am, seeing these Gentlemen have thrown down the Bucklers) I shall
account my self justified by the whole Kingdom, because by you, who are the
Epitomy, the better part, yea the very Soul and life of the Kingdom.

As for my Design against the State, I dare plead as much Innocence here, as
in matter of my Religion: I have ever admired the wisdom of our Ancestors, who
have so fixed the pillars of this Monarchy, that each of them keep a due
proportion and measure with other, and have so handsomely tied up the nerves and
sinnews of the State, that the strayning of any one may bring danger and sorrow
to the whole economy. The Praerogative of the Crown, and the Propriety of the
Subject, have such mutual relations, this takes protection from that, that
foundation and nourishment from this. And as on the Lute, if any one string be
too high or too lowly wound up, you have lost the Harmony, so here the excess
of a Prerogative is oppression of pretended Liberty in the Subject, Disorder
and Anarchy. The Praerogative must be used as God does his omnipotency, upon
extraordinary occasions; the Laws (answerable to that potentia ligata in
Creaturis) must have place at other times: And yet there must be a
Praerogative, if there must be extraordinary occasions; the Propriety of the
Subject is ever to be maintained, if it go in equal pace with this: They are
fellows and companions that have and ever must be inseparable in a well
governd Kingdom; and no way so fitting, so natural to nourish and entertayne
both, as the frequent use of Parliaments: By those a commerce and acquaintance
is kept, betwixt the King and Subject, these thoughts have gone along with me
these fourteen yeerers of my public employments, and shall God willing to my
Grave; God, his Majesty, and my own Conscience, yea and all those who have
been most Accessory to my inward thoughts and opinions can bear me witness,
that I ever did inculcate this; That the happiness of a Kingdom consists in a
just poize of the Kings Praerogative, and the Subjects Liberty. And that things
would never go well till They went hand in hand together.

I thank God for it, by my Masters favor, and the providence of my Ancestors,
I have an estate, which so interresseth me in the Commonwealth, that I have no
great mind to be a slave, but a Subject; nor could I wish the Cards to be
shuffled over again, upon hopes to fall upon a better Set: nor did I ever
nourish such base, mercenary thoughts, as to become a Pander to the Tyranny and
Ambition of the greatest man living: no, I have and ever shall aim at a fair,
but a bounded Liberty, remembering allwaies that I am a freeman, yet a Subject:
that I have a Right, but under a Monarch. But it has been my misfortune now
when I am gray headed, to be Charged by the Mistakers of the times, who are now
so highly bent, that all appears to them to be in the extreme for Monarchy,
which is not for themselves: Hence it is that designs, words, yea Intentions
are brought out for real Demonstrations for my misdemeanors, such a
multiplying glass is a praejudicate opinion.

The Articles contain Expressions and Actions: My Expressions either in
Ireland or England: My Actions either before or after these late stirs (in
this order he went through the whole Charge, from the first Article to the
last, in an excellent Method, and repeated all the sums and heads of what was
spoken by him before, only added in the twenty eighth Article) if that one
Article had been proved against him, it contained more weighty matter then all
the Charge besides: And it had not only been Treason in him, but also vilany
to have betrayed the trust of his Majesty's Army. Yet because the Gentlemen had
been sparing (by reason of the times) to insist upon that Article, though it
might concern him much, he resolved to keep the same Method, and not utter
the least expression that might seem to disturb the happy agreement intended,
though he wished the same might deceive his expectation: only thus much he
admired, how himself, being an Incendiary against the Scotts, in the twenty
third Article, is now become their Confederate in the twenty eighth Article, or
how he could be Charged for betraying New Castle, and for fighting with the
Scots at Newbourne too, seeting fighting with them was no possible means for
betraying the Town, but to hinder their passage thither.

That he never advised War farther (then in his poor judgment) concerned
the very life of the Kings Authority, and the safety and honor of his
Kingdoms: Nor saw he what advantage could be made by a War in Scotland,
where nothing could be gained but many hard blows: For his part, he honored
the Nation, but he wished they might be ever under their own Clymate, and had
no desire they should be too well acquainted with, the better soil of,
England: but he thought that Article had been added in jest, or as a
supernumerary, and he very little suspected to be reaconed a Confederate with
the Scotts, and wished (as he hoped it was) that every Englishman were as
free from that imputation as himself [closing his Defense with this speech.]

My Lords, You see what may be alleged for this Constructive, rather
Destructive Treason. For my part, I have not the judgment to conceive that
such a Treason is agreeable either with the fundamental grounds of reason, or
Law; not of Reason, for how can that be Treason in the lump or mass, which
is not so in any of the parts? Or how can that make a thing Treasonable, which
in it self is not so: Not of Law, since neither Statute, Common-Lawe, nor
practice, has from the beginning of this Government ever mentioned such a
thing; and where, my Lords, has this fire, without the least appearance of any
smoke lien hid so many hundred years, and now breaks forth into a violent
flame to destroy me and my Posterity from the Earth? My Lords, do we not live
by Laws, and must we be punished by Laws before they be made? Far better
were it to live by no Laws at all, but to be governed by those Characters of
discretion and virtue, that Nature has stamped in us, then to put this
necessity of Divination upon a man, and to accuse him of the breach of Law
before it be a Law at all. If a Water-man upon the Thames split his Boat by
grating on an Anchor, and the same have a Buy appending to it, he is to charge
his own Inobservance, but if it has none, the owner of the Anchor is to pay
the loss.

My Lords, if this Crime which they call arbitrary-Treason, had been marked by
any discerner of the Law, the ignorance thereof should be no excuse for me,
but if it be no Law at all how can it in rigor or strictness it self
condemn me: Beware you do not awake these sleeping Lions, by the searching out
some neglected Moth-eaten Records, they may one day tear you and your
Posterity in pieces: It was your Ancestors care to chain them up within the
Baracadoes of Statutes be not you ambitious to be more skillful and curious
then your forefathers in the Art of killing.

My Lords, it is my present misfortune, for ever yours; and it is not the
smallest part of my grief, that not the Crime of Treason, but my other sins
(which are exceeding many) have presented me before this Bar, and except your
Lordships wisdoms provide for it, it may be the shedding of my blood, may
make way for the tracing of yours; You, your estates, your Posterities lie at
the stake. If such learned Gentlemen as these, whose tongues are well
acquainted with such Proceedings shall be started out against you, if your
friends, your Council denied access unto you, if your professed enemies
admitted to witness against you, if every word, Intention or Circumstance of
yours be sifted and alleged as Treasonable, not because of a Statute, but
because of a Consequence, or construction of Lawyers peeced up in an high
Rhetorical strain, and a number of supposed probabilities: I leave it to your
Lordshippes consideration to foresee what may be the issue of such dangerous
and Recent Praecedences.

These Gentlemen tell me they speak in defense of the Commonwealth, against
my Arbitrary Laws, give me leave to say it, I speak in defense of the
Commonwealth, against their arbitrary-Treason, for if this latitude be
admitted, what praejudice shall follow to King and Country, if you and your
Posterity, be by the same, disenabled from the greatest affairs of the
Kingdom; for my poor self, were it not for your Lordships interest, and the
interest of a Saint in Heaven who has left me here two Pledges on Earth, [At
this his breath stopped, and he shed tears abundantly, in mentioning his wife,
which moved his very Enemies to Compassion] I should never take the pains to
keep up this Ruinous Cottage of mine, it is laden with such infirmities, that
in truth I have no great pleasure to carry it about with me any longer: Nor
could I ever leave it in a better time then this, when I hope the better part
of the World would perhaps think, that by this my misfortune I had given a
testimony of my Integrity to God, my King and Country: I thank God, I count
not the afflictions of this present life compatable to that glory, which is to
be revealed in the time to come.

My Lords, My Lords, my Lords, Something more I had to say, but my Voice and
Spirits fail me, only I do in all humility and submission cast my self down
before your Lordships feet, and desire that I might be a Pharos to keep you
from Shipwreck; do not put such Rocks in your own way, which no prudency, no
circumspection can eschew or satisfy, but by your utter ruin; and whether
your judgments in my Case (I wish it were not the Case of ye all) be either
for life or death, it shall be righteous in my eyes, and received with a Te
Deum Laudamus, (and then he lifted up his eyes and said) In te Domine confido,
ne confundar in aeternum.

This he spoke with an Imitable life and grace, you have his very words as
near as I can remember, only with so much loss and detriment as has perished
by transcribing the Copy from his own mouth, But you desire imp^rtialitie,
and indeed you have it, and with some grains too of allowance, for I was so
affrayd of my own affection to the Gentleman, that I rather bowed to the other
extremity, and therefore have set down his defenses rather to his disadvantage
by my rude pen, then in the native color, to his eternal glory, and the
Confusion of his Enemies. The Repetion of the charge did not spend much time,
they proceeded orderly Article by Article, in the very same words and matter as
before, only there were some remarkable flashes that passed from Master Glyn
(who was the man) in the time of their handling.

He told them that he should represent the Lord Strafford as cunning in his
reylys as he had been crafty in his Actions, that he waved all that was
material, and insisted only upon the Secondary Proofs, that it was more then
evident throughout all his charge how he had endeavored to bring in an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical form of Government over the lives, the lands, and
liberties, of the Kings Subjects, yea had exercised a tyranny ever their
consciences too, by the oath administered in Ireland, and though his Malicious
Designs had taken no effect, yet no thanks to him, but to the goodness of the
King and the Vigilance of the Peers, had they pleased, it had been too late
to have punished him, for no rule of Law had been left whereby to Censure him,
after the death and expiration of the Laws, And if the Intention of Gvido Faux
might be thought Treason, though the House was not blown up, then this
Intention of his may admit the same censure.

He closed that throughout all his defenses he had pretended either warrants
from the King, or else the Kings Praerogative, and what was this else but to
draw up a cloud, and exhale the Vapor for the eclipsing of the bright Son,
by the Jelousies or Repinings of his subjects; if the strength of his piety and
Justice should not dispell all these mists and send them down to their
original, That the very standing and falling of these three Kingdoms stood
upon this Process, All of which do conceive their safety so far intressed
in his just punnishment, that no settling of their peace or quiet could be
expected, without this, that rhey hoped the Law should never protect him, who
had gone about to subvert all Law; Nor the Nobility (who had the same blood
moving in their veins) by submitting themselves to his base Tyranny, loose
that privilege and liberty, which their Ancestors had bought with their
dearest lives. Though there was no Treason for his Stat, was it the less
Monstrous? For there was none for so many hundreds of years that durstever
adventure upon such Insolences, to occasion such a Statute: And were not the
fundamental grounds, and rules, and government sufficient to rise up in
Judgment against him; without the making a particular Statute: This he said
he left to the dispute of the Law and concluded, That seeing they had found
out the Jonah who these many years had tossed and hazarded the Ship of the
Commonwealth, with continual storms and tempests, there could no calmes be
expected, but by casting him out into the Seas, which in all Justice they must
and do expect from their hands, who are entrusted by the body of the Kingdom
to do the same. The Aggravation of the offense he said, he had left to
Master Pym, who here spoke that Speech which is now in Print.

It was a sport to see how Master Pym in his Speeech was fearfully out, and
constreined to pull out his papers and read with a great deal of confusion
and disorder, before he could recollect himself; which failing of his Memory
was nosmall advantage to the Lieutenant, because by this means, the house
perceived it was a premeditated slash, not grounded upon the Lievetenants last
answer, but resolved on before, whatsoever he should say for his own
justification, but the Lieutenant was nor suffered to Reply a word either to
Glyn or Pym. Because the last word must be theirs. And so with Tuesday ended
the matter of Fact. On Thursday the dispute in Law is expected.

Upon Wednesday we were bigg with expectation for the matter of Law, having
done before with the matter of fact, but it seems the house of Commons had
perceived a great Defection of their party, and a great increase of the Lord
Straffords friends, in both the houses occasioned by his insinuating, honest
and witty defenses, and therefore they resolved of no more hearing in public,
therefore it was thought upon by his accusers to draw up a Bill of attainder,
and present the same to the Lords, whereby first the matter of fact should be
declared to have been sufficiently proved, and then in the matter of Law that
he had incurred the censure of treason, for intending to subvert the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, for though (said they) he cannot be
charged by Letter of Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third. yet he is
within the compass of the Salvo, whereby it is provided that the King and
Parliament has power to determine what is Treasonable and what not, and that
they were confident the Lords would ratify, and approve of this Bill of theirs
and give Judgment accordingly.

The motion was stoutly opposed by three great Lawyers (all members of the
House) Seilden, Holborne and Bridgeman, who made it manifest that the Salvo 25
of Edward 3 was repealed and that no man could now be convict of Treason, but
by the Letter of that statute: But being put to voice it was carried for the
Bill, and a Committee appointed for to draw it up.

This gave occasion of much talk abroad and they who were otherwise the Lord
Straffords enemies could not find equity enough in the Bill of Attainder. Some
could not conceive what difference Imaginable was betwixt the Bill and the
Charge, presented before, for in the Charge he was accused of Treason; and the
Bill (though they had no Legislative power,) seemed nothing but an Affirmation
of the same. Others (who would have the Bill understood of a Definitive
sentence, because it was consecutive to the Proofs) were not satisfied but that
it was against all practice, that the Commons should give sentence upon the
death of a peer And that it was against Common equity too; that the party
accusant should give the Judgment, if the complayners were admmitted to be
Judges; A third sort gave it out that this was no Sentence against the Lord
Strafford but only a passing of a new act of Parliament about a matter not
hitherto declared Treasonable, but yet these doubted that by declaring the
matter of fact, to be approved, and applying the censure to it, in reference
to the Lord Strafford it would ever be thought a Sentence against him, to
blemish his own fame and the blood of his posterity, Moreover that if they were
about to make an new act, it were strange to punish a man for the breach of
such a Statute as was not yet extant in Rerum natura, which should in reason
refer only to future obedience, And (what is more strange) though there were
a new Statute; yet by what Authority the Parliament has or could declare any
Individual or Accumulative Act which is already to be Treasonable, which
must be Treason by virtue of a Statute; or else no Treason at all, now there
is none can be brought except the twenty fifth of Edward the third whereof the
Letter of that Stattute cannot by their own Confession, nor was not so much as
once alleged against the Lord Strafford; and for the Salvo or Proviso (which
they mainly insisted on) the same stands repeald by two posteriour Acts of
Parlyament.

You have the Mutterings of all sorts of People.

The Lords fe^ring the proceedings as a beaten path trodden out to the ruin of
their own Lives and Estates, told the house of Commons in their conference upon
Thursday that they would go on the same way they did already, and according to
the order of the house give full audience to the Lord Straffords council in
matter of Law, and that they themselves, as competent Judges, would by
themselv^s only give Sentence in the cause, nor was there any course suitable
to the practice and Stat. of the Kingdom, the safety of the Nobility, or to
Equity or Common Justice.

It was replied by them of the lower House, that they were resolved to go on
with their Bill, and if the same should be rejected by the Lords, they feared
a Rupture and Division might follow, to the utter Ruin and Desolation of the
whole Kingdom, that no content would be given to the subject, (and this was a
strong Argument indeed, yet better beseeming Partiality and violence, then the
pretended Justice and piety of the times) unless the man who had so much
intruded upon their right, and discontented the people, might be punished as a
Traitor; And for the practice of the Kingdom, that no man had ever found such
a Favorable hearing, and that the Process against Essex, Norfolk, and
somerset, were all of them closed up in one day.

Upon Friday the Lords gave answer that they could expect nothing from the
House of Commons, but what should tend to the peace and Preservation of the
Kingdom, nor was there a more forceable way then to preserve the Laws and
Customs thereof, least innovation so much complained of by them, might
unhappily be found among themselves that the subjects should have all that
Justice could afford, but that an act of Injustice would never give
satisfaction to the world, nor safety to themselves, the eyes of all foreign
States being fixed upon the businesie now in agitation, and the wisdom of our
Nation either to be much advanced or depressed by their Judgments in this
case; That the Process against Norfolk and Essex, (for Somerset was convict
only of felony and had not so much Animad version to save himself by his
Book) were for Direct and formal Treasons, comprised in one or two
Individual Acts, but this against the Lord Strafford only Arbitrary and
Accumulative, to be pict out of the twenty eight Articles. And therefore that
it was impossible to have a full examination of them all, to give Sentence
against him, And those noble men were charged with some Actual breach of
Statutes, formerly made, but here a new Staute was to be made or else he to
be found guiltless, They concluded that they had given order for his
appearance on Saturday, And that in the great Hall at Westminster where the
House of Commons might if they pleased be present.

After some deliberation with the House, the Conferrers answered, that since
the Lords had so resolved, they would not deny to be there present, and to
hear what his Council could say for him, but to reply any more in public
they neither could nor would, because of the Bill already past, only if the
Lords should take any scruple in the matter of Law, they would be ready to
give them satisfaction by a private Conferrence, (so they willingly declined to
do what indeed they could not possibly do) that is, to give public
satisfaction in the matter of Law.

Upon Saturday they conveened in the great Hall, but they that were of the
Committee, for the great charge did not stand at the Bar, as before, but sat
promiscuously with the rest of their fellows, so that a mouth was not oppened
in the behalf of the House of Commons, all that day: After they were set, the
Lord Steward told the Lieutenant, that the Lords had resolved to give him a
fair hearing in the matter of Law, And therefore desired that the council
might keep that distance, Moderation and respect, to the Judicatorie, that was
sitting, and not at all to meddle with the matter of fact.

The Lieutenant Replied, That in all humility he did acknowledge that favor
from the Lords, and that it was such an one too, as he could not but expect
from such Honorable Peers, and Just persons, in whose integrity and
goodness, (under that which he had placed above) he had reposed his chiefest
confidence; for his council they knew much better then himself, what
concerned the point of Discretion and Reverence, and that he doubted not but
that they would give all satisfaction and obedience.

Then his Council were called to the Bar, Master Lane the Princes Attorney,
Master Gardener Recorder of London, Master Lo, and Master Lightfoote: Master
Lane spoke, and much to this Sense and Purpose.

My Lords there is an heavy Charge lies on me and my fellows, nothing less
then to defend the life, the estate, the Reputation, yea the posterity of this
Honorable person at the Bar, If therefore we shall be more pressing we
hope your Lordshipps will interpret this our forwardness to be for Honor and
Conscience sake, in a matter that concerns both so nearly; But it shall be
our endeavor to carry our selves with our best respects to your Lordships, and
withal content and satisfaction to the honorable House of Commons, and
because your Lordships mentioned the matter of fact, one thing I dare be bold
to say, that all the time of this Noble Lords defenses, he did not so much as
crave any one of our opinions, yea or acquainted us with any thing that tended
that way: And for the matter of Law, those Statutes cited by himself, were
none of our stock, but taken up at his own adventure; Nor do I speak this to
derogate from the pertinency of those Statutes (for they shall be the subject
of my discourse) but that the Nobleman be not disappointed of your right
conceptions, and his own due praise.

My Lords, It is your pleasure we meddle not with matter of Fact, and indeed
we need not meddle at all with it, because we hope it is already done, and
that sufficiently to our hands, yet the matter of Law does so naturally arise
out of the matter of Fact, that of necessity (under your Lordships favors) we
must somewhat grate on this, if we speak of that, nor do I conceive it
possible for us to speak advantageously enough for the Lord Straffords just
defense, unless the whole matter of Fact be determined, either as proved or
not proved, or at least some states of questions agreed upon, where we may fix
and settle our Agreements, and therefore it is my Lords, that I have chosen not
at all to touch the matter of Law (until your Lordships shall be pleased to
chalk me out a way) unless it be to clear your judgments in one Statute
only, viz. 25. Ed. 3. because when the same was alleged by the Lord Strafford
in his own Defense, that not being convict of the Letter thereof, he could not
be convict of Treason: I remember the Salvo of that Statute was much insisted
upon by those from the House of Commons, as much conducing to their own ends.
My Lords, I will first speak of the Statute it self, and then of its Salvo or
Provision: The Statute is, (That if any man shall intend the death of the King,
his Queen, their Children: Kill the Chancellor, or the Judge upon the Bench,
imbase the Kings coin, or counterfeit the broad-Seale, etc. he shall be
convicted and punished as a Traitor) that the Lord Strafford comes within the
Letter of this Statute is not so much as once alleged, nor indeed it cannot
be with any reason, All that can be said is, that by Relation or by Argument a
minore admajus, he may be drawn thither, yet that this cannot be, I humbly
offer these considerations.

First, This is a Declarative Law, and such are not to be taken by way of
Consequence, Equity or Construction, but by the Letter only, otherwise they
should imply a contradiction to themselves, and be no more Declarative-Lawes,
but Laws of Construction, or Constitutive.

Secondly, This is a poenall Law, and such (if our grounds hitherto
unquestioned hold good) can admit of no Constructions or Inferences, for
poenalties are to persuade the keeping of known Laws, not of Laws
conjecturall, ambiguous, and by consequence, which perhaps the most learned may
not in their disputes question, much less the Subject (who is not obliged to
interpret the Statute) doubt of in the point of obedience, yea rather without
any doubt, he is to obey the Letter of the Statute, and conceive (and that
truly) that he is not liable to the Poenalty.

Thirdly, We have a notable Law 13 Eliz. Cap. 2. whereby it is declared, that
the bringing in of Bulls from Rome, to stir up the Subject to Mutiny and
Rebellion, shall be punished as Treason: Now if by interpretation or by
consequence, this sense might have been thrust upon the praeceding Statutes,
the making of this had been supersluous, yea the Persons then charged with
that Crime, might have been impeached of Treason, even before the making of
this Act.

Anno 21 of Ed. 3. We have a Statute declaring, That for a servant to kill his
Master, is an Act of Treason, and in the three and twentieth year of the same
King, a Process of Treason was framed against a man for killing his Father,
grounded upon the same Argument A minori admajus: But it was found (and the
Sentence is yet in the Records) that although in the 21 year of Ed 3. that
Argument might have been admitted, yet in the 27 it could not, by reason of
the Declarative Law, interveining in the 25 year, and this Case comes very
home to the point in Law.

My Lords, I will not demand what kind of offense it may be, for a man to
subvert the fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, the Crime doubtless is
unnatural and Monstrous, and the punishment must keep the same proportion,
only I presume to offer these few things to your Lordships considerations.

First, That one or more Acts of Injustice, whether maliciously or ignorantly
done, can in no sense of Law be called the subversion of the fundamental
Laws; if so, as many Judges (perhaps) so many Traitors, It is very incident to
man's nature to err, nor does the Lord Sttafford plead his innocence in
oversights, but in Treason.

Secondly, I do remember the Case of John de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk, this
man in the twenty eighth of Henry the sixth, was Charged by the house of
Commons, with Articles of Treason, and those too very like to these against my
Lord Strafford.

1. That he had given the King bad advices. 2. That he had embased his Coin.
3. That he had cessed men of war. 4. That he had given out summary Decrees.
5. That he had Imposed Taxes. 6. That he had corrupted the Fountains of
Justice. 7. That he had persuaded the King to unnecessary war, and to the
giving over of Anjoy in France, Ovum Ovo.
And for all these, though he was Charged with High Treason, for wronging the
right of the Subject, and subverting the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
yet after a long Agitation, the matter was found by the Lords of Parliament,
not to imply Treason, but only Felony. Add to this another, who in the twenty
third of Henry the eighth, was Charged for subverting the English Laws, and
yet no Treason Charged upon him. Add to both the Charge of Richard Larks,
pleaded at the Common Pleas, who was Charged with Treason, for subverting the
Law, but convicted only of Felony, by which you may see, My Lords, what to
this time has been subverting the Laws.

Thirdly, It is very considerable, that the Lord Strafford is not Charged to
have subverted, but only to have intended to subvert the fundamental Laws,
and this I conceive, if there were no more, might keep him free from that
Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third: For although as touching the
King, his Queen and Children, intention is treasonable; yet in all other
things there mentioned, there must be action beside intention, for it is not
said, if a man do intend to kill a Chancellor, it shall be Treason, but only
if he does kill him; and if he does actually counterfeit the broad-Seale, And
although a man should prepare a Furnace, make ready his Stamp, melt his
Bullion, yet if he gives not the Kings impression upon the Coin, all his
intentions, yea, his praeparations will not serve to make up a Treason.

And this (under favor) may serve to answer the Case of Guido Faux, lately
objected, unless it be alleged that the Lord Strafford had as real an
intention against the Kings life as Faux had,: For though the intention in that
Case be Treason by the Statute, yet in all other things there is no Treason
without the Action, so immence and vast a difference both is, and ought to be,
betwixt a project against the Royall-blood, and all things else of a lower and
under nature.

Ye see therefore my Lords, that the body of the Statute cannot stick against
the Lord Strafford, neither in Letter, nor in consequence, this is not, that
must not be; all that can be said is, that his Fact may be Treason by the
Common-Lawe: For my part I profess my ignorance, who ever thought the
common-lawe might declare, but never make a Treason, that is; It might be
presupposed that there is a Statute whereupon to build a Declaration, and
therefore to say there is no Statute for it, is to say it is no Treason at all.
The Statute ever makes the Treason: and to be declared to be Treason, either by
Common-Lawe, or by Parliament, are but two different ways of Proceedings, and
must both resolve into one Principle, yea, which comes home to the point, in
the one and twentieth of Edward the third. To kill a man employed in the Kings
War was Treason, and the twenty third, To kill the Kings Messenger was
Treason by Declaration of the Common-Lawe, but always by reason of the
Statute, yet none of these are now Treasons but Felonies only, by reason of the
interveining Statute the twenty fifth of Edward the third, such has ever been
thought the force of its Letter and Declaration, And so I will leave it, and
speak a word or two of the Salvo, which is this. That because all Particulars
could not be then defined, therefore what the Parliament should declare to be
Treasonable in time to come, should be punished as a Treason.

And according to this Reservative, in the eighth year of King Richard the
second, one was Charged before the Kings Bench, was afterward referred to the
Parliament, and there, though the Fact was not contained in the body of the
Statute, yet because of the Proviso before mentioned, it was adjudged Treason.

In the eleventh year of the same King, the Duke of Ireland, and Nevill
Archbishop of York were impeached of High Treason, by Gloucester, Arundell
and Warwick, and notwithstanding the Statute, were convicted thereof by the
Salvo. But in the one and twentieth of the same Richard the second, the tide
turned, and the King had such a hand with the Parliament, that the Sentence was
recalled, and those three noblemen themselves adjudged Traitors. Again, in
the first of Henry the fourth his Successor, that Revocation of the one and
twentieth of Richard the second was repealed, and the Sentence of the eleventh
of his Reign established; such were the tossings too and fro of Treason, and
all because of that uncertain Proviso.

Therefore it was, That in the same Parliament, the first of Henry the fourth,
A Petition was preferred by the Nobility, to have Treason limited within some
Statute.

Because they knew not what to speak or what to do, for fear thereof, And in
the tenth Chapter an Act was made, upon this Petition, that that Salvo should
be holden Repealed in all times to come, and nothing esteemed Treason but what
was Literally contained in the Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third,
and therefore it is said in the Records, That there was great joy at the making
of this Act, in that the drawn Sword hanging over every man's head, by this
slender thread of a consequence, or illation, was moved by that Act. Add to
this, that in the first of queen Mar^, the first chapter, the same is repeated,
That no man shall be punished in life or estate as a Traitor, but for the Crime
contained in the Stat. 25 Ed. 3. without the least mention of a pretended Salvo.

The Earl of Northumberlands Case comes nigh to the point, he was Charged with
Treason, the fifth of Henry the fourth, and if the Statute of the first of Henry
the fourth, the first chapter, whereby this Proviso is Repealed had not
interveend, no doubt he had been condemned of Treason, but he was only convict
of Felony, and that because he could not be drawn within the Letter of the
Statute of the twenty fifth of Edw. the third, And I dare confidently say it,
that since that Act was made, the first of Henry the fourth, the first chapter,
whereby the Proviso is Repealed, no man has ever been declared a Traitor,
either by King or Parliament, except it were upon that or some other Statute,
literally, and declaratively taken. These two things I do offer to your
Lordships considerations. That the Lord Strafford cannot be impeached of
Treason by the Statute of the twenty fifth of Ed. the third, and that the Salvo
contained in the same, stands Repealed almost two hundred years ago, And this
is all I conceive to be necessary for that Statute which was alleged by the
Lord Strafford in his Defense for matter of Fact.

Then the Recorder spoke some few words to this purpose, That The Recorder.
what was spoken upon the Statute; was because it seemed inseparable from the
matter of Fact, that they could proceed no further till a State were afforded
them, that to do otherwise they conceived might be very praejudiciall unto my
Lord Strafford.

First, In that they should suppose that to be done, which is not proved to be.

Secondly, That the matter of Law arises so naturally from the matter of Fact,
that it will be impossible to separate one from the other.

Thirdly, That it is the course of all Judicatories, first to settle the
Verdict. and upon that to fix the Arguments, otherwise he could conceive no
possible way of proceeding, And therefore, in the Lord Straffords name, he most
humbly entreated, that the Lords would either wholly determine the matter of
Fact (or whether Treason or not; for then all other proceedings in Law were
unnecessary, but whether done or not done) or else to give them some States of
the question whereunto they might confine themselves.

Upon this motion the House was adjourned for that day, nor has it met since,
for the House of Commons are turned to their old bias, and will hear of
nothing but the Bill of Attainder, but the Lords seem to be more resolute then
before, because they find that they have no Authority to declare a Treason in
a fact already past, the Salvo of the twenty fifth of Edward the third being
Repealed, withal that if the Bill of Attainder should proceed, the King has
as great power to hinder that at the last blow as any other Stat. but I hope
the Lords will disburthen him of that envy.

All they which stand obliged to the Lord Strafford, in blood affection, or
deserving, and all who have been interessed with him in the Kings service, and
many too, who both hate his person and dislike his proceedings, will doubtless
look to it, and tender their own safety, all of them in likelihood being
subject to the Charge of Treason if ever they chance to be called to do the
King service in any place of importance.

I cannot express how much the voice of the multitude is now altered from what
it was lately, nothing now talked of what should be done, but only of what must
be done: so that if the Lord Strafford dies, his very enemies will confess
that it is done more for necessity then for Justice, and rather for the
satisfaction of rancorous apprehensions, then for any guiltiness in the Cause.

Thursday last (viz.) April 29. was designed for the Agitation Thursday.
of the long intermitted business concerning the Lieutenant, And the way was
this.

The Lords did meet at the great Hall at Westminster, about nine of the clock,
not in their Robes, nor did the Lord Steward The fo^mality ^f a conference.
sit upon his sack, but with the rest promiscously, nor did the Committee for
the House of Commons, stand at the Bar, but sat with the rest of their
fellows, and the Earl of Strafford sat behind the place where he used to sit
before, The reason of these changes were, because the Diet was appointed, not
for a meeting but for a Conference, so curious are we (and that is all) about
formalities: The King, Queen and Prince were there, according to their
custom, not a man spoke a word in the house all the time, but only Master St.
John the Kings Solicitor, one of the Committee, whose drift and purpose was to
furnish the Lords with reasons why the House of Commons had proceeded with a
Bill of Attaindor: And withal to reply to what the Lord Strafford had spoken,
either by himself or his Council, in matter of Law.

The Speech is in Print.

If it were not without my Sphere to give my opinion of Master St. John's
speech, it should be this, That he spoke little or nothing to purpose, except
in his fifth or sixth Arguments, and in them, I believe without his book, if
not, I should conceive it better and safer to live under the Laws of any other
Nation then these of England, where all Law is, at last, resolved into an
Arbitrary power, and that by these very men, who so much elsewhere enveigh
against it: Of the Presidents which seem to pinch hardest) many of them were
since the Proviso Repealed (which is an Argument, in my apprehension of the
pleaders penury) others nothing to purpose, as that of Felony, etc. to the
other few, if Lawyers, can give satisfaction; I am confident Master St. John
did rather advantage then hurt the Earl by his pleading.

The next news which we expect to hear is, with what Resolution he went out of
this World, for it is concluded amongst the major part of his Judges, that one
must die for the people, It were well if the blood of one two or three could
satisfy. The Bill, for certain, is past the higher House, to which it is
thought the King will be persuaded to give way: The Scaffold is built upon the
Tower Hill, God grant him mercy for his other sins, and I hope he will easily
answer that of Treason; He dies, as we hear, upon the twenty third Article,
for the words attested by Sir Henry Vane, though his Majesty publicly
protested the words were never spoken by him.

Upon the close of Master St. John's speech the House dissolved, nor was there a
word spoken but by Master St. John's, only the Lord Lieutenant used the last
part of his Rhetorique, and by a dumb eloquence, Manibus ad Syderatensis, all
along Master St. John's speech, made his Replies with a deep silence.

Upon Friday he Petitioned the Lords to be heard again, and that because his
Lawyers had not fully spoken at their last meeting, but this was denied him,
because the House were to have the last speech, nor were they content to speak
again.

Upon this information, or what else is not known, the King (it seems fearing
the Inconstancy of the Lords) came to the House on Saturday, at ten of the
clock, and having called for the House of Commons spoke much to this effect.

THAT He had sincerely, without Affection The Kings speech to the House of
Commons.
or Partiality endeavored to inform himself concerning the Livetenants
Charge; and had, at length seriously pondered with himself both concerning the
matter of Fact, and the matter of Law; and now it stood him in hand to clear
their judgments; then to exonerate his own Conscience: For them, He had two
things to declare.

First, That there was never such a project, nor had the Lord Strafford ever
offered such advise, for the transporting of the Irish Army into England; so
that in nothing the Livetenant had been more misunderstood then in that: Which
imputation did, in no small measure, reflect on himself (the King) as if he
had intended to make War upon his own good Subjects, which thought (he said)
was far enough from his breast; nor could any man in probability think so
unworthily of him, who had perceived how graciously he had dealt with his
Subjects elsewhere, that had deserved a great deal worse.

Secondly, That the Lieutenant had never advized him to establish an Arbitrary
Government; nor, if he had, should he have escaped condign punishment; nor
would any of his good Subjects ever think otherwise, unless they conceived him
either to be a fool or a Tyrant; that he either could not, or would not
discern such wickedness. He was well content (he said) with that Authority
and Power which God had put into his hands; nor should he ever think it his
Praerogative to intrude upon the Propriety of the Subject.

For himself and his own Conscience (he said) he was now to Declare; That in
his own judgment there was nothing in the Process against the Lieutenant
that deserved the censure of Treason: Oversights and Mis-demeanors there were,
in such a measure, that he confessed the Lord Strafford was never worthy
hereafter to bear any Office in his kingdoms, no not so much as of a
Constable; but was to be answerable for all his Errors when they were to be
charged upon him, and to this none of them should concur with greater
alacrity then himself; That he hoped none of them would deny to give him the
privilege of the first Voice, which was, That he would never, in heart nor
hand, concur with them to punish this man as a Traitor, and desired therefore
that they would think of some other way how the business might be composed;
Nor should it ever be less dear to him (though with the loss of his dearest
blood) to protect the Innocent then to punish the Guilty.

At the House of Commons startled, and adjorned themselves till Monday, diverse
censures are Past upon the Kings speech, even of those that love his houour,
some think he was drawn to this by a certain foreknowledge of the Lords
facility to give way to the Commons, and that it was better to express
themselves then, (if by that means he could hinder the sentence) then to
countermand the Execution thereof when it was passed, and so draw all the envy
upon himself, others are of opinion (which is more probable) that this has
been a plot of the Kings bosom enemies, to set him at ods with his suj^cts,
that thereby they might sish the more securely in these troubled waters. The
reason is, because it is very likely the Lord Strafford might have passed free
by the voices of the Lords, but now howsoever the matter falls out, all the
blame will be imputed to the King, for if he be condemned, it will be no
thanks to the King; if Justified, that will cerrtinly be laid to the King
too, as who by his threats and menaces has forestalled the voices of his
Nobilty; It is conceived by wise men (and such as wish no evil to my Lord
Strafford) that it had been far better both for the King and him: to have
first tried the utmost of the Lords; for the King, because it was both possible
and probable that he migh have gained the Declaration of the Lords for him, If
not, it was time enough to Interpose his own power afterward; for the Lord
Strafford, because it has made the House of Commons a great deal the more
pressing fearing by the Kings Peremptory answer (from whom in regard of the
advantage of the times, they expected nothing but a Concedimus omnia) that
there is some plot under hand. And these thoughts produced the late tumults of
the Londoners of which more by and by, And it is verily thought that for these
two reasons the Lievetenants seeming friends, but indeed Real enemies, have
put the King upon this way hoping thereby that the Lords should find occasion
to pretend necessity of doing that, which perhaps in regard of common equity,
or the Kings dipleasure they could nor durst have done, howsoever Facta est
alia, the King is now so far engaged, that with respect to honor and
conscience he connot retire, for if the Praecedure be by a legislative power.
It falls directly upon him, nor can he give his assent, If by a Judiciary,
then must he either hinder the execution, or be said to have Charged himself
with Injustice.

This has produced Strange alterations, even the marriage of the Prince of
Orange, (done on Sunday last, May the second, with ordinary Solemnity) is now
exceedingly hateful to the Commons, which so much before desired it; some say
the Praecipitation of that marriage Imports no good; others that the Parliament
had condiscended to that marriage, but did not expect that Acceleration; a
third sort, that the party is mean enough if not too low for the King of
Englands eldest Daughter, All of them; that the Dutchmen have offered money to
the King for a new service of war, and have thereby bought this Honor, This
is increased by the landing of a Dutchman who is to be Gentleman of the Kings
Horses: And shortly with us the Hollander will be no less odious then the
Spanyard. Oh the wonderful changes of the untoward, unconstant, and giddy
multitude! How unhappy a time it is to know what Liberty means? and to get the
Rheins cast upon their own necks, it ranges madly up and down nec modum tenens
nec terminum, nor is capable of subsistence till it has lost it self, and
what it so much affects, Liberty; So knives are put into the hands of children,
who discern no danger, but affect them for their splendour and glittering: so
Poison into the mou^hs of fools, which is Judged only by the taste and
sweetness. But it seems the Judgment of this Kingdom cannot be prevented,
and because they have sinned against themselves, by abusing their plenty and
fatness, It is the just judgment of God, that they be the executioners of
his Judgments upon themselves.

Before I tell you of Monday and Tuesdayes madness, I must tell you when and
whence this fury has its first motion.

Upon the Thursday before, a great many Apprentises beset the Spanish
Ambassadors house near Bishops-gate, threatening to pull it down, and kill the
man; the Mayor of London coms amongst them, and with a great deal of pains,
persuaded them to retire home, and afterward entered into the Ambassadors
House, at his coming in, the Ambassador desired him to pull down his sword
which was carried before him, because he was now where the King of Spain had
Jurisdiction; That being done he told the Lord Mayor that in all his life time
he had never seen such a barbarous attempt, and desired to know whether
England were a civil Nation or no, where the Law of Nations were so
monstrously violated, The Mayor replied that they were of the base and rascally
sort of people, and entreated the tumult might not be imputed to the town, the
Ambassador answered that he could hardly acknowledge that to be a town, yea
scarce a society of men where there was so little Civility and Government. The
Mayor told him that the people were discontent because Mass was said in his
house, The Ambassodar replied, that the English Ambassador; had the free
exercise of his Religion at Madrid, and that he would rather forgo his life
then any of those privileges due to him by Paction, and the Law of Nations.
The Mayor answered, they were the more incensed against him, because the
Londoners popishly affected, were permited to come into his house (...) Mass,
which was beyond both law and custom, The Ambassador replied that if the Mayor
would keep them without doors he would promise to send for none of them, but
if they came once within his doors, he could not in Praeservation of his
Conscience, or his Masters honor deny them either access to his Religion, or
safeguard to their persons, as far as in him lay: upon this a guard was
appointed to attend the Ambassadors house, whether to keep out papists, or to
preserve them that were within, or to let in others is yet to be disputed.

The storm was quiet from thence till Monday, when the people being inflamed
again, by the Kings speech, came to Westminster with the number of five or six
Thousand having weapons and battoones in their hands, at the entering of every
Coach some cried Justice others execution, a third man told his fellows that
both were to be conjoined, and that Justice and execution was the noble word;
upon which (quasi dato signo) all the rabble cried aloud with one voice Justice
and Execution, with a wonderful strange noise, some went to the Coach side and
told the Lords that they must and would have justice done upon the Deputy. In
particular above 1000 of them beset the Lord Stewards Coach; and demanded
Justice and execution of him, Justice, said they, we have gotten already and
we only desire (and must have it) Execution. The Lord Steward replied they
should have Justice and Execution, and desired them only to forbear and have
patience a while; no said they we have had too much patience, we will not
suffer longer, and therefore my Lord before you go from us you must grant us
execution, the Lord Steward told them he was going to the House to that
effect, and that they should have all content, But whilst they were about to
deteine him longer, some of the greatest power amongst them said, we will take
his word for once and with difficulty enough made passage for him.

The Lords Stayed within till twelve of the clock, nor was there any course
taken in the mean time for dissolving of the multitude, the greatest part went
home the back way by water, only when the Lord Holland, Lord Chamberlain, and
Bristowe, came out to their Coach, all of them called Justice and Execution,
but when thy perceived that Bristowe was in the Coach they drew near to the
Coach side and told him, for you my Lord Bristowe we know you are an Apostate
from the cause of Christ, and our mortal Enemy, we do not therefore crave
justice from you, but shall (God willing) crave justice upon you and your false
son the Lord Digby.

Let a man cast his eyes back now, but for some few months past, and he shall
see what trust may be reposed in the favor of the giddy multitude, unless a
man shall resolve to quitt all Religion and Honesty, and to mould and fashion
his Conscience to the present distemper and fancy of the people, neither can
he do so safely, when so much hazard lies in the Inconstancy of their
Conceptions.

After this they drew up all the names of those either in the House of Commons,
or the House of Lords. Whom they Imagined to favor the Lieutenant: and gave
them the Title of Straffordians with this close, that all those, and all other
enemies to the Commonwealth should perish with him, and did post up the paper
at the gate of Westminster, as if the old Democratie of Room, and the
Tribunitiall power thereof in Cippo proscribere, were now renewed and revived.

A Copy of the Paper, posted up at the Corner of the wall of Sr. Will. Brunkards
house, in the old Palace-yeard, in Westminster, Monday 3 May 1641.
1. Lo. Digby. The names of the Straffordians posted.
2. Lo. Compton. 3. Lo, Buckhurst. 4. Sr. Rob. Hatton. 5. Sr. Tho. Fanshaw, 6.
Sr. Edw: Alford. 7. Sr. Nich. Slanning. 8. Sr. Tho. Danby. 9. Sr. Geo.
Wentworth. 10. Sr. Peter Wentworth. 11. Sr. Frederick Cornwallis. 12. Sr. Will.
Carnaby. 13. Sr. Richard Winn. 14. Sr. Garvis Clifton. 15. Sr. William
Withrington. 16. Sr. William Pennyman. 17. Sr. Patrik Curwent. 18. Sr. Rich.
Lee. 19. Sr. Hen. Slingsby. 20. Sr. Will. Portman. 21. Mr. Garvis Hollis. 22.
Mr. Sydney Godolphin. 23. Mr. Cook. 24. Mr. Coventry. 25. Mr. Ben. Weston. 26.
Mr. Will. Weston. 27. Mr. Seldom. 28. Mr. Alford. 29. Mr. Floyd. 30. Mr.
Herbert. 31. Cap. Digby. 32. Serjant Hide. 33. Mr. Tailor. 34. Mr. Griffith.
35. Mr. Scowen. 36. Mr. Bridgeman. 37. Mr. Fettiplass. 38. Dr. Turner. 39. Cap.
Cha. Price. 40. Dr. Parry Civilian. 41. Mr. Arundell. 42. Mr. Newport. 43. Mr.
Holborne. 44. Mr. Noell. 45. Mr. Kirton. 46. Mr. Pollard. 47. Mr. Price. 48.
Mr. Travannion. 49. Mr. Jane. 50. Mr. Edgecombe. 51. Mr. Chitchley. 52. Mr.
Mallery. 53. Mr. Porter. 54. Mr. White. Secret. E. D. 55. Mr. Warwick.
This and more shall be done to the Enemies of Justice, afore-written.

Nor stayed they here, one of them in the height of his fury cried out
(Horresco referens) if we get not satisfaction of the Lieutenant, we will
have it of the King; or as some say worse; If we have not the Livetenants
life, we will have the Kings. Oh impious Mouth! Oh un-naturall Miscreant! This
man was marked by a Gentleman of the Innes of Court, and four or five,
requested by him, to bear witness of the words. Nor did he stay here, but
the Gentleman (with fidelity and courage enough) went to the fellow and kindly
invited him to a pint of wine, the fellow suspecting nothing went along with
him, but in the mean time he sent for a Constable, in whose hearing he asked
him how he durst spoke such words as those; he like a mad man replied that
he would maintain them, whereupon ^ee was apprehended by the Constable, and
Committed to the Gate House, where he was three or four times examined
yesternight; some report that he freely confessed his words, and withal
threatened to show great Authority for them, even within the Gates of the Court:
this day I hear little of him, but some say, the business will be slubbered
over with this. That he said only, If we get not satisfaction of the
L^vetenant, we will go to the King, and it is likely this will be the Issue
of the business, least this zeal should be quenched in the breeding and
beginning, whose very surcharge and excess is lawdable, yea necessary, in a
time of Reformation. Add to this, that if this man should suffer it might
settle and calm the forwardness of the people, before the whole business be
ended about the Earl of Strafford.

They have further threatened that after Wednesday they will shut up their
shopps, and never rest from petitioning, till not only the Livetenants matter,
but also all things else that concern a Reformation, be fully perfected.

The house of Commons sat all that day, (Monday) till Monday Protestation.
8 at night, nor were they Idle all that time, but brought forth that
Protestation, or band of Association (as they term it) which is now in print,
it was then drawun up, and without further process or delay before they came
out subscribed by the whole House, except the Lord Digby, and an Uncle or
Friend of his.

It is thought by some (whose heads are not green) that it is very like a
Covenant in Scotland, but that must be left to furrher time and wiser heads,
if that Comment that perhaps will follow, be not worse then the text, it may
in probability happen out to be canonical enough, but the too general Phrase
in it, lies very open to have senses (pro re nata) thrust upon them, which may,
be very justly suspected to have been intended; where the oath and Lawgiver,
is the party, only some have observed two remarkable things upon this.

First, Some think it Strange that Seeing the House of Commons have lately
fined the Convocation House, upon this ground especially that they enjoined an
oath, which is a Legislative power (say they) and only due to Parliaments How
they at this time, (as if all the Legislative power were in them) without the advice of the Lords (I say not of the Church, though in matters
Ecclesiastical) or approbation of the King (which is conceived to be a mighty
encroachment upon his Praerogative) should offer either to praescribe, or
subscribe such an oath as if it were essential to our Reformation, ever to be
done by the people, without Authority of the Superior powers, and yet before
it pass in a Stat. It must come in by a Bill usteron proteron, but parhaps it
is hoped that by this Anti-dated subscription, they shall find out the more
easy passage for the Bill when it comes to be Propounded.

Secondly, That the House of Commons were four hours pleading, upon that one
expression in the Protestation, [The true reformed Religion expressed in the
Doctrine of the Church of England] Some who were more tender toward the Church,
desiring that the word discipline, might be adjoined to the word Doctrine, but
others mainly opposed that, reasoning that no discipline could be admitted but
all to be esteemed as Popish that was not contained in the Doctrine, that is
in the word of God, which party at the last did prevail though the other
affirmed that there was more express warrant in the word of God for Bishops,
then for ruling Elders, but if some Hint be not there intended against the
Duanes and Chapters the liturgies, and ceremonies, yea the very Bishops of the
Church of England, let any man judge, and of what dangerous consequence that
may be, if those who pretend to have authority in all Church affairs, may be
permitted to give Sentence is not difficult to determine.

This day the people met again but in smaller number, they have threatened to
come to morrow with all rheir maine forces, and not to desist till the
Lieutenant be executed, and their other petitions obtained, the oath was
likewise presented to the Lords, and some say all of them (except the eight
Recus^nt Lords, and four of the Bishops) have signed the same, but others say
they have only admitted the Bill which is more likely. I think it is Lncan
tells us the tale, That when the 100 handed Giant Briareus (whom the
Mithologizers of Poems use as a Type of the multitude) was first brought into
the world, his Father Jupiter desired Mercury, to set his Scheme, and calculate
the Stars of his Nativity; no Father said Mercury; that is needless, a
little time will show his disposition, for so many hands cannot be long Idle;
A very lively Idoea of this business now in Agitation, your self may make the
application by the events.

Upon Saturday, May the eighth, the Bill against the Lord Saturday May 8.
Strafford past the Lords, there were forty five present, of which nyneteene
voiced for him, and twenty six against him, the greatest part of his friends
absented themselves upon pretense, (whether true or suppositious) that they
feared the multitude, otherwise his suffrages had more then counterpoised the
voters for his death.

In the Bill he is condemned of Treason, and all his English Lands (the other
part of the Coat is left for those in Ireland) forfeited, with an especial
Proviso, that this Act shall in no ways be forceable against others, then if
it never had been made; which to his friends of Judgment smells Strongly of a
particular hatred against him, as if the same common way of Justice should not
equally strike against all (which it should do in true Justice) but that
Crimes did differ in their Subjects.

Two ways there were to have proceeded against him, by a Legislative, or by a
Judiciary power, both did strike home alike at his life and his estate, both
alike ready, both sure by reason of the proofs, the Difference only this; this
might have been done without the King, that only by him, because this a
Sentence, that a Statute; A man would think the Judiciary way had been the
more sure, and that the King would rather have connived, and not exercised his
Praerogative by a Reprivall, then to have Interessed himself in the
Legislative proceedings, by consenting to the Act against him; In whom the
world conceived (for by past and future services) he had so great an Interrest:
But they (it seems) notwithstanding his Majesty's late Attestation, of the
Gentleman's Innocence in point of Treason, were more confident of his gracious
Inclination to Justify their own Act; And more desirous too that he should
demonstrate his willingness in punishing such transgressors, and therefore the
Bill went on by the Statute.

The same day another Bill passed both the Houses, that because of the
important businesses of the Kingdom, the Parliament should not be broken up by
the King without the specall advise and consent of both the Houses, till all
their grievances were redressed and their safety provided for, which space of
time, for any thing I know, may last till doomes day; some would have had the
prefinition of 5, some 7, some 9, years put to it; others Replied that this
would be both odious and dangerous; odious in that it should seem so long a
Parliament; Dangerous, in the same time may happen out possible to be longer;
some think it an honor (I rather a fatality, or to sweeten the word a
Providence) that both their Bills should pass at once, as if [Generatio unius,
were Corruption Alterius.] And this new Governwent should take life from the
death of the Earl of Strafford.

In the afternoon the House of Commons desired access to the King in the
Banqueting House, and having stayed there an hour for his coming, in three
words they propounded these two great Bills, desiring that he would give his
Royal Assent to them both, (Quod si non prosint singula, Juncta Juvant)
Withal humbly showing that the present danger of the Kingdom could admit of
no delays, The King told them they should expect an answer on Monday morning.

The Court at this time was surcharged with a confluence of People, quasi
Civitas tota sedibus suis mota, as if the whole City was come to petition for
Justice, a Government indeed worse then a Democrasie, where the people do not
rule but play the Tyrants, If there were no Monarchy there needs no conscience
to obey it; But where it is, and cannot protect it self, the good subject must
either forget himself, or his loyalty; A two edged sword killing either the
body or the soul, nor in this are men in better ease then the winged Fishes,
that our Southern Mariners tell us of which, if they swim beneath the water
are cath'd by the Dolphin, if they fly above for refuge, are snatched away by
the hungry Ravenous fowls, (Lord help then the times, or help our patience,
and Resolutions, give us either redress in thee, or confidence in thee.)

The wiser sort conceived these two Bills too big for them to desire at once,
and that both of them together might procure a flat denial, but the more
courageous knew the readyer way by far, having often had experience of his
Majesty's readiness to grant just desires; resolving that he that expects to
loose the day, is beaten at his own diffidence, and it is the quality of some
men to swallowe Camells upon a sudden, who (if you give them leisure, will
perchance streine at a Gnatt. Their Resolutions may aim at this but despair
to remedy that, nature gives the reason, Omne agens se exercet, intra sphaeram
Activitatis, dangers if they come but straggling upon us we may collect our
spirits well enough, and easily resist them, but if they come by whole troops
Amazement and fear admitts of no consultation for the future, but only intends
to decline the present and pressing hazard, whereon the ancient Gauls made
their first on-setts, with valor beyond the courage of men; and with fearful
cryings and shouts belying rheir own Animosity, to stupify and quell that of
the enemy.

Sunday, All the day the King was resolute never to give Sunday.
way to the Bill against the Lord Strafford telling them withal that it seemd
strange to him, that the man could not die, unless he, and he only by giving
Sentence the Kings Legislative way should condemn him, the Lord Pembrok
brought the King a piece of Scripture, 2. Sam. 19. from the 5. to the 9. verse,
the words indeed became a Joab rather then himself till he had scattered the
force of the Kings (not eldest son yet eldest) daughter, the Kingdom of
Scotland; here is some Analogy with Absolon and in nothing else, for David was
sorry for shedding the nocent, they not sorry for shedding the Innocent blood,
though the Issue be not the same.

Four Bishops were sent for by the King, the Primate of Ireland, the Bishop of
Durham, Lincoln and Carlisle, some Four Bishops.
say (and I do rather believe it) that the King was desirous the Bill should
be voiced again, and argued, the Bishops had their suffrages in the Admission
though not in the approbation of the Bill, others think in regard the Primate
was there, (who had no Interest in this Kingdom) it was to resolve the Kings
Conscience; for my part I see not how they should do this, seeing the
business was grounded upon a case in Law, which none of them (unless the
Bishop of Lincoln had learned when he was Lord Keeper) could possibly
discuss; for if the King was tender in it, how could they persuade him to give
way, if not, what needed their Resolutions?

But it may be that they persuaded him, that in Conscience he might prefer
the opinion of the Judges before his own, And that if (though with some
reluctation) they thought upon their oaths, the Proceedings to be lawful,
he might give way to them, This is not unlikely because the judges were sent
for the same time, and it seems for the same service, And if it be so; I
admire, (and adore too) the wonderful providence of God, who in his
praeparatory Act, to his unlawful Judgment (which undoubtedly will follow)
suffers not only the King and the Country, but the Church too, (as if her Cup
were not yet full) to be involved.

But could this be to the matter of fact, the King I am sure knew him to be
free from any the least intention of subverting the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, And could the Bishops satisfy thy scruple too, it may be they are
persuaded, that the Proofs might be taken Implicitly from the House of
Commons, as the Law from the Judges; It is reported indeed that they besought
the King with many tears to give way, and that to prevent the ruin of the
Kingdom, which these Statesmen (who will be ever content with the longest
life for themselves, till by piece meal they be thrust from all) did see
would necessarily follow: well, I dare prophecy to them they shall not want
their Reward, neither from King nor people, for the next tumult of people shall
be against their Liturgies, Surplices, and Church ornaments. And seeing they
have now over-perswaded the King in this, if they can procure him then to
protect themselves, from those imminent dangers which hang over their heads,
they shall do a miracle. sed quos pordere vult Jupiter, dementat. some body
else will persuade the King that to satisfy the Common People, and to prevent
the Ruin of the Kingdom, Bishoprics, Deanes, Prebends, and all Cathedrals
must down, Sedomen avertat Deus optimus.

Sund^y, All day nothing sounded in the King ears, but fears, terrors, and
threatenings of worse and worse, the noise of Drums, and Trumpets were Imagined
to be heard of rebelling people from every Corner of the Kingdom, yea
Apprentices, Cobblers, and fruiterers, presented thmselves as all ready running
into the Kings Bedchamber.

After they had wrestled him breathless, and (as they do with great fishes)
given him scope of Line, wherein to spend his strength, at last victus dedit
manus, being overcome with such uncessant Importunities he yielded up the
Bucklers, And about nine of the clock at night (oh deplorable necessity of the
times or rather oh the frailty of humane nature I that can neither foresee nor
sustain this necessity) the King promised to sign both the Bills the next
morning, which was accordingly done, and a Commission drawn up for his (I do
not care in what relation you take the word) Execution. Ingentes Curae stupent,
loquuntur leves.

Though I had resolved with the Painter (who could not express his grief
sufficiently in weeping for his daughter) here to have drawn the Curteine, yet
it will not be, something must overflow.

Consider the Gentleman as a man, his Judgment, Memory, Eloquence, real
perfections in this age of appearances, consider him as a Subject, his Loyalty,
his Courage, his Integrity to King and Country, in these disloyal and
faint-hearted times; consider him as a Christian, his love to the Church, his
respect to Churchmen, in this profane and overweening Generation; let Worth,
Honesty, and Religion weep his funerals, who suffers for all, and yet by all,
yea as an Enemy to all these; talk not to me hereafter of Justice, Equity or
Conscience, they are but names, and those scornful and empty names too; It is
Power, Faction and Interest that are the managers of humane affairs, and
swaies the times; I defy all History to furnish us with the like Parallel, of a
man accused by his Country, by reason of his noble and eager desires to
maintain them in plenty and reputation; convicted by the Church for his
actual performance and serious intention to restore both the Dignities and
Revennues thereof; his Prince even forced to condemn him, after his Integrity
to persuade due obedience, and to protect royal Authority; Happy, yea thrice
happy he, whose Innocence was wedded to his Perfection, and both of them (for
so it shall ever be in my Calendar) crowned with Martyrdom: Forgive I entreat
you these broken Expressions of a passionate Soul, my obliegements to the
Gentleman were little, my expectation from him nothing, only an ingenious,
though perhaps, a simple thought of the present Crimes, and future punishment
of this Kingdom (unless God be more merciful) whether from the privation of
his Life, or merit of his Death has extorted thus much from me; Remember the
story of Innocent Socrates.

You desire me to be present and see the Catastrophae of the business; I
should pluck out mine eyes if I thought they had so much cruelty to behold such
a spectacle; you may think it courage, but I inhumanity: My own sins do
too much interest me in his sufferings, though I be not accessory by my sight.
The zealous Pilgrims of the Turkish Religion, after they had seen the blessed
spectacle of Mahomets-Tombe, at Mecca, do presently make themselves blind by
continual poaring upon hot burning Bricks, so destroying the optick-nerves, as
thinking themselves unworthy ever afterward to look upon any worldly object;
I leave your self Sir to make the application, I dare ingeniously say it, that
all my sufferings to this time (and I have not been without a round share of
them) did never touch me so nearly, as the sufferings of Justice, Religion and
Loyalty, by this one Fact: Not for any evil consequence to me (God knows) I am
beneath the reach of Fortune, and can easily change my Clymate, but for that
Cloud which hangs over the Public, and will not, I fear be dissolved till
the measures of Deservings be made up Brim full.

What turbulency, what confusion is within me, you may easily guess by these
symptoms that are without, those raw and indigested expressions; it is my
daily labor to obtein the Mastery of my self and my affections, but upon such
extraordinary times and occasions, they grow too strong for me, I must give
way and retire before I get new strength again: Hence it is, that though at
the Lord Straffords last departure, out of this World, I might have been
assured of his Mantle, that is, the doubling of his Perfections upon me, and of
a capacity to admit of the least of them, yet I could not have attended his
Execution; my heart was too weak, and my eyes too blind to behold such a
woeful spectacle, but be you assured he will not die like one of the vulgar,
nor like one of those wanton Coursers who can rush fiercely into the battle,
yet withal start at his own shadow: He has done and can do greater things
then die, and that too without any in-decorum. As he has lived for the real
Demonstration of his service and fidelity, so he can die for the pretended
safety of his Sovereign, and that in a strange way too, as if the head could
not be safe, but by cutting off the right hand.

Sir, your desires have obliged me to untie my wounds, yet scarce bound up,
and by reflection upon that sad object, to fall a bleeding again; nor can I
grant your suite to make that great Lord speak in his own dialect. Pythagoras
transmutation could not have found out a sit lodging for that noble Soul, nor
does nature give us wonders every day, nor streyne hereselfe ambitiously to
show forth the utmost reach of her perfections or master piece, and to present
us with such a rare conjunction of such a courage attended with loyalty to
danger: wisdom accompanied with eloquence to admiration: What could not that
man think? What think and not speak? What speak and not do? But I will not
be too Rhetorical, that Speech or rather blemish Printed and pretended to be
spoken by him in the Tower, is as like him as he was to a Pedant his Soul now
laughs (if that natural sense could reach so high) at that poor injury, it
does exceedingly well become the charity of the times, not only to perturbe his
rest, but also by belying his Expressions, to make his own hands the
scatterers of his own dust, and his own Tongue, the Trumpet of his own
infamy: That Speech is a foist and a ly, His other Speech on the Scaffold, and
with it, his Letter to the King, you shall find at the end of this Letter, in
the best way we could get it, something of his greatness appears in his
phrase, and as much life too as could, by snatches, be gathered from his mouth,
yet it comes far short of that grace which ^t had when it was delivered by
himself, what by the escapes of the Observers, What by the Faint-heartednesse
of the Press, which durst not speak freely, for fear of Arbitrary Treason.

Two observable Expressions I had from an understanding Auditor,

First, Sir George Wentworth* weeping extremely upon the Scaffold, was thus
checked by him: Brother, what do you see in me that deserves these tears?
does my fear betray my guiltiness? or my too much boldness any Atheism?
Think now (and this is the third time) that you do accompany me to my
Marriage Bed: Nor did I ever throw off my clothes with such freedom and
content, as in this my preparation to my Grave, That Stock [pointing to the
block appointed for his Execution] must be my pillow; here must I rest, and
rest from all my labors; no thoughts of envy, no dreams of Treason,
Jealousies of foes, cares for the King, the State or my self shall interrupt
this nap; therefore Brother, with me, pity mine enemies, who beside their
intention have made me blessed; rejoice in my Innocence, rejoice in my
Happiness.

Secondly, Kneeling down upon the Scaffold he made this Protestation, I hope
Gentlemen you do think that neither fear of loss, nor love to Reputation
will cause me to belly God and my own Conscience, for now I am in the door
going out, and my next step must be from time to eternity, either of Peace or
Pain; to clear my self to you all, I do solemnly protest before God, I am
not guilty (so far as I can understand) of that great Crime laid to my
Charge, nor have ever had the least inclination or intention to damnify or
praejudice the King, the State the Laws or Religion of this Kingdom, but with
my best endeavors to serve all, and to support all [So might God be merciful
to his Soul.] His words did justify him more there then in Westminster Hall,
and made such a deep impression in the hearers, that a great many of those who
cried out for Justice against him (after their fury was spent, and their
madness strewed with cold blood) wished their tongues had been cut out of
their heads before they had opened their mouths against him; others most
ignobly imputed this to his effronted boldness, and are so persuaded of their
own infallibility, that they mervailed he believed not his Actions to be Errors
upon their Word, and did not confess their opinions of him to be truth it
self; A kind of People they are beyond the cure of Bedlam, and nothing but
the whipping post, or letting blood can do them good, or bring them remedy,
Vexatio tantum dabit Intellectum, it is nothing but sense will teach them
judgment, and affliction Charity, and both these I fear are hastening on apace.

His Countenance was in a middle posture, betwixt dejection and boldness, a
man may call it, even courage and Innocence it self, without any fear of
Critticks, nor could his very Enemies through their multiplying glasses,
perceive the least affectation of disguise in him; never man looked death, more
stately, in the face; never man trembled more at his sins, such were his
contritions for his oversights, and such his immovable confidence of Gods
Pardon and his Mercy.

His Prayers ravished all the standers by, that they could not judge whether to
prefer his zeal or his poenitency; yea, the Primate of Ireland (who is no
complementer) reported afterward to the King, that he had then first learned
to make supplications aright to Godward, and withal told his Majesty that he
had seen many die, but never such a white Soul (this was his own expression)
return to 'its maker; At which words the King was pleased to turn himself
about and offer a tear to his Memory. -- Tantorum mercede laborum. --

And because mis-report, about him and my Lords-Grace of Canterbury, has
wandered as far as Cambridge, give me leave to add the story of that mistake*
It was reported here by the divulgers of such slanders, that a little before
his death, he had charged all his misfortunes, oversights and misdemeanors upon
the Archbishop of Canterbury, as the prime Author, and had bitterly cursed the
day of their first acquaintance; A pretty invention it was, to charge the Axe
again, and to furnish the People with lungs and voices to cry for another
Sacrifice; yea, to stain this Martirs long white Robe, with the Innocent blood
of another Heroes. Oh ye sonns of men! How long will ye love vanity and seek
after leasing?

For this cause I was the more Inquisitive to learn out the truth of this
particular, and had it thus related to me by a worthy divine Doctor Wimberly,
who dyning with my Lord of Canterbury the day after the Earl of Straffords
Execution, had it from his own mouth. And my Lords grace it seems having heard
of the mistake, did at every period take the Lieutenant of the Tower, then
present, his Attestation and Approbation.

That the Lord Strafford the night before the Execution had sent for the
Lieutenant of the Tower and asked him whether it were possible he might
speak with the Archbishop; the Lieutenant told him he might not do it
without order from the Parliament. Master Lieutenant, said he, you shall
here what passes betwixt us; it is not a time now either for him to plot
Haerisy, or me to plot Treason, The Lieutenant answered that he was limited,
and therefore desired his Lordship would Petition the Parliament for that
favor, no (said he) I have gotten my dispatch from them, and will trouble
them no more; I am now petitioning an higher Court, where neither partiality
can be expected, nor error feared, But my Lord (said he) turning to the
Primate of Ireland, then present, what I should have spoken to my Lords grace
of Canterbury, you shall desire the Archbishop to lend me his prayers this
night, and to give me his blessing when I do go abroad to morrow, and to be
in his window that by my last farewell I may give him thanks for this, and all
other his former favors.

The Primate having delivered the message without delay, the Archbishop
replied that in conscience he was bound to the first, and in duty and
obligation to the second, but he feared his weakness and passion would not
lend him eyes to behold his last departure.

The next morning at his coming forth he drew near to the Archbishops
lodgings? and said to the Lieutenant, though I do not see the Archbishop,
yet give me leave I pray you to do my last observance toward his rooms; in the
mean time the Archbishop, advertized of his approach, came out to the window;
then the Earl bowing himself to the ground, my Lord said he, your prayers
and your blessing, the Archbishop lift up his hand and bestowed both, but
overcome with grief fell to the ground in Animi Diliquio. The Earl proceeding
a little farther, bowed the second time saying, Farewell my Lord; God protect
your Innocence.

To this relation the Lord of Canterbury added, that it might perhaps seem an
effeminacy and softness unbecoming him, to be so cast down, but he hoped by
Gods Assistance and his own Innocence, that when he came to his own Execution
(which he daily longed for) that the world should perceive he had been more
sencible of the Lord Straffords loss, then of his own; and good reason it
should be so (said he) for the Gentleman was more serviceable to the Church
(He would not mention the State) then either himself or any of all the
Churchmen had ever been.

And that there may be a slaughter-Goat for the sins of the people in
Scotland, to wait upon this report, they have fained another of the same meal,
that the Archbishop of Canterbury casts back all his misdemeanors upon the
Bishop of Ross, as if either the Lord Strafford had been tutored by the
Ach-Bishop, or he by the Bishop of Ross, in the King and Countries service; I
did think that both of them had past their pupilage and could not have been
bended to execute the directions of any man living, but only their own Masters,
but this is a fair advertisement to the Bishop of Ross, to make himself the
Scapegoat. H^^ fugenate D^o.

Give me leave to adjoyne one thing more, when he was marching to the Scaffold
more like the General in the head of an Army, to breath victory, then like a
condemned man to undergo the Sentence of Death, the Lieutenant of the Tower
desired him to take Coach, for fear the people should rush in upon him and
tear him in pieces, No (said he) Master Lieutenant I dare look death in the
face, and I hope the People too, have you a care that I do not escape, and I
care not how I die, whether by the hand of the Executioner, or the madness and
fury of the People. If that may give them better content, it is all one to me.

It is but diminutive to call it a wonder, it is something above, that his
thoughts and expressions should be so present with him, no more putrefaction in
them, then if he had been about some ordinary business: His Alacrity, his
Devotion did amaze; yea, tear in pieces the hearts of all those about him, who
had the least Grace or Humanity in them.

Too much Perfection indeed to be lost at one blow, but this Age was not worthy
of it, nor shall any after Age, I think, ever enjoy the like, that only which
is possible is the object of the will, and therefore I will not endeavor to
find out words for expressing this wonder of the times; only I leave his
virtues to speak the rest, to the Admiration of Ours, and Compassion of
succeeding Ages.

A Letter to a Friend.
Believe me Sir. This blessed departure of his has put me in love with
Scaffolds more then death bedds, Let it be my P^radox (if not Prophetical to
me) that it is the best kind of Dissolution, provided there be Innocence to
uphold the Conscience, And (with good men at least) to maintain the Reputation
afterward: Here you are attended with the Pregnancy of Judgment and Memory,
not weakened nor clouded with tedious and giddy sicknesses: Here you have a
time praefixed and must of necessity concentricate your self and your best
resolution; elsewhere nature is unwilling to find a Suspension, abhorring its
own Destruction, (Imo quam multos in medio scelere mors occupavit and medium
secuit crimen) Here a moment ends the Pain, which parhaps not 7 Apprentiships
elsewhere; and here, if any where, we find pity, yea deservings both with God,
and good men; but he that sent us hither must prescribe us the way of our
return.

Upon that very day of the Execution in the afternoon (Abyssus abyssum
invocat, Blood calls for blood) there happened a conflict betwixt the Scotts and
English Army, no certain number yet reported, nor what occasion, (some say six
score, some three score Scotts, some twenty, some thirty English) only the
matter it self was represented by the General, (the Lord Holland) upon a
letter from Sir John Conniers to the Parliament upon Friday with a mighty
regret, that he had been appointed for peace, but that unhappy rub had fallen
out much contrary to his desire.

The King sent a letter the day before the Execution, by the Prince to the
uper-house desiring the Rigor of that Sentence might be remitted, but it was
sent back unbroken up, for fear either to refuse the King or discontent the
people, God forbid his Majesty should give so slender an ear to their
Petitions.

The Lord Straffords Children are restored to all his estate, and if they
petition for it shall be to his Honors too, the House of Commons have been
as forward in this as any else, whether to make some recompense to them, or to
give proof to the Nobilytie (least they shauld be scared by the example) that
not so much the means as the man was aimed at. But it will be a question
whether they can restore that head too, when the Kingdom shall need its
service. It is to be feared that his great Abilites will shortly be more
understood by our want of them then our fruition, so dark is man's
understanding in Preserving that which is virtuous and useful amongst us.

Virtutem Incolumem odimus.

The Earl of Straffords Letter to his Majesty.
IT has been my greatest grief, in all my troubles, to be taken as a person
that should endeavor to present and set things amiss between your Majesty and
your People, and to have given Council tending to the disquiet of your Majesty
and your three Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that such an attempt (my private condition considered) had
been a great madness, seeing through your gracious favor, I was so provided
as I could not expect in any kind to mend my Fortune, or to please my mind
more then by resting where your bounteous hand had placed me: nay, the
business is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty it is well known,
that my poor and humble advices concluded still in this, That your Majesty
should never be happy till there were a right-understanding procured betwixt
you and them: no other means to effect and settle this happiness, but by the
Council and Assent of the Parliament: and no way to prevent the growing evils
of this State, but by putting your self entirely upon the Loyalty and
good-Affection of your Subjects.

Yet (such is my misfortune) the Truth finds little credit, the Contrary (it
seems) generally believed, and my self reputed the Cause of this great
separation betwixt you and your People: Under a heavier Censure then this, I am
persuaded no Gentleman can suffer, and now I understand that the minds of men
are the more incensed against me, notwithstanding your Majesty has declared,
That in your Princely opinion, I am not guilty of Treason, nor are you
satisfied in Conscience to pass the Bill: This brings me into a great
Straight. Here is before me the ruin of my Children and Family, hitherto
untouc't in all the branches of it with any foul Crime. Here are before me the
many evils which may befall your sacred Person and the whole Kingdom, should
your self and the Parliament be less satisfied the one with the other than is
necessary for the King and People. Here are before me the things most valued,
most feared, by mortal men [Life and Death:] To say Sir, there has not been
a conflict within me, about these things, were to make my self less man then
(God knows) my infirmities will give me leave, and to call a destruction upon
my self and my young children, where the intentions (at least) of my heart,
have been innocent of this great Offense (may be believed) would find no
easy consent from flesh and blood,

But, out of much sadness, I am come to a Resolution of that which I take to
be best becoming me, that is, To look upon that which is principally to be
considered in it self, and that is doubtless the prosperity of your sacred
Person and the Commonwealth, infinitely to be preferred before any man's
private interest: And therefore, in few words, as I have put my self wholly
upon the Honor and Justice of my Peers, so clearly as I wish your Majesty had
been pleased to have spared that Declaration of yours on Satterday last, and
to have left me entirely to their Lordships; So now (to set your Majesty's
Conscience at Liberty) I do most humbly beseech You, for the preventing of
such mischiefs as may happen by your Refusal, to pass the Bill; by this
means to remove (praised be God I cannot say this accursed, but I confess)
this unfortunate thing forth of the way, toward that blessed Agreement which
God, I trust, shall for ever establish betwixt you and your Subjects: Sir, My
consent herein shall acquit you more to God, then all the world can do beside;
To a willing man there is no injury done, And as by Gods-grace I forgive all
the world, with a calmnesse and meekness of infinite contentment to my
dislodging Soul, so Sir, I can give the Life of this world, with all
cheerfulness Immaginable, in the just acknowledgment of your exceeding
favors, and only beg that, in your goodness, you would vouchsafe to cast your
gracious Regard upon my poor Son and his three sisters, less or more, and
no otherwise, then their unfortunate Father shall appeate more or less guilty
of this Death. God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most Humble and Faithful Subject and Servant STRAFFORD.
Tower May 9. 1641.

The Petition of THOMAS Earl of Strafford, to the right-Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, in the Parliament at Westminster, 1641.
Shows,
THAT seeing it is the good will and pleasure of God that your Petitioner is
now shortly to pay that duty which we all owe to our frail Nature; He shall in
all Christian patience and Charity conform and submit to that Justice, in a
comfortable assurance of the great hope laid up for us, in the Mercy and Merits
of our Savior, Blessed for ever.

Only he humbly craves to return your Lordships most humble thanks for your
noble Compassion toward those Innocent Children who now with his last blessing
he commits to the protection of Almighty God, beseeching your Lordships to
finish your pious Intentions toward them, and desiring that the reward
thereof, may be given you by him, who is able to give above all that we are
able either to ask or think, wherein I trust the honorable House of Commons
will afford rheir Christian assistance.

And so beseeching your Lordships charitably to forgive all his omissions and
infirmities, he does heartily and truly recommend your Lordships to the Mercies
of our heavenly Father, that for his goodness he may protect you in every good
work, Amen
There was a foolish, ridiculous and scandalous Speech printed, which was
pretended to have been spoken by the Earl of Strafford, to certain Lords,
before his coming out of the Tower, which is protested against, and avowed to
be false by the Lord Primate of Ireland, E of Cleveland, E of Newport, Lo.
Rich, Sir William B^lfoure, Sir William Wentworth, Sir George Wentworth, Dr.
Carre, Dr Price. -- De Mortuis nil nisi verunt.

The Paper containing the Heads of the Lord Straffords last Speech, written
with his own hand, as it was left upon the Scaffold, falling out of his Bosom.
1. Come to pay the last Debt we owe to sin. 2. Rise to Righteousness. 3.
Dye willingly. 4. Forgive all. 5. Submit to Justice, but, in my intentions,
Innocent from subverting, etc. 6. Wishing nothing but good Prosperity to King
and People. 7. Acquit the King constreined. 8. Beseech to Repent. 9. Strange
way to write the beginning of Reformation and settlement of a Kingdom in
blood. 10. Beseech that demand may rest there. 11. Call not blood on
themselves. 12. Die in the Faith of the Church. 13. Pray for it, and desire
their Prayers with me.

A true-copy of his Speech delivered on the Scaffold.
My L. Primate of Ireland.
IT is my very great comfort that I have your Lordship by me this day, in
regard I have been known to you these many years, and I do thank God and
your Lordship for it that you are here, I should be very glad to obtain so
much silence as to be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not, the noise is
so great. My Lords, I am come hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty
God, to pay that last debt I owe to sin; which is death, and by the blessing
of that God, to rise again through the mirrits of Jesus Christ to
righteousness and life aeternall. [Heere he was a little interrupted.]

My Lords, I am come hither to submit to that Judgment which has passed
against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I thank God, I do
freely forgive all the world, a forgiveness, that is not spoken from the teeth
outward (as they say) but from the very heart; I speak it in the presence of
Almighty God, before whom I stand, that there is not a displeasing thought
arising in me toward any man living. I thank God I can say it, and truly too,
my conscience bearing me witness, that in all my employment since I had the
Honor to serve his Majesty, I never had any thing in the purpose of my heart
but what tended to the Joint and Individual prosperity of King, and people;
although it has been my ill fortune to be misconstrued.

I am not the first that has suffered in this kind, it is the common portion
of us all, while we are in this life to err, Righteous Judgment we must wait
for in another place, for here we are very subject to be mis-judged one of
another; there is one thing that I desire to free my self of, and I am very
confident (speaking it now with so much cheerfullnesse) that I shall obtain
your Christian charity in the belief of it. I was so far from being against
Parliaments, That I did always think the Parliaments of England, were the
most happy constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived under, and the best
means under God to make the King and people happy.

For my Death I here acquit all the world, and beseech the God of Heaven
heartily to forgive them that contrived it, though in the Intentions and
purposes of my heart I am not guilty of what I die for; And my Lord Primate it
is a great comfort for me, that his Majesty conceives me not merriting so
severe and heavy a punishment as is the utmost execution of this Sentence. I do
infinitely rejoice in this mercy of his, and I beseech God return it into his
own bosom, that he may find mercy when he stands most in need of it. I wish
this Kingdom all the Prosperity and happiness in the world, I did it living,
and now dying it is my wish, I do most humbly recommend this to every one who
hears me, and desire they would lay their hands upon their hearts, and
consider seriously whether the beginning of the happiness and reformation of a
Kingdom should be written in Letters of blood; consider this when you are at
your homes, and let me be never so unhappy, as that the last drop of my blood
should rise up in Judgment against any one of you, But I fear you are in a
wrong way.

My Lords I have but one word more, and with that I shall end. I profess that
I die a true and obedient Son to the Church of England, wherein I was borne
and in which I was bred. Peace and prosperity be ever to it.

It has been objected (if it were an objection worth the answering) that I
have been inclined to Popery, but I say truly from my heart, that from the
time that I was one and twenty years of age to this present, going now upon
forty nine, I never had in my heart to doubt of this Religion of the Church of
England; Nor ever had any man the boldness to suggest any such thing to me,
to the best of my remembrance, and so being reconciled, by the merrits of Jesus
Christ my Savior, into whose bosom I hope I shall shortly be gathered, to
those eternal happinesses which shall never have end; I desire heartily the
forgiveness, of every man, for any rash or unadvised words, or any thing done
amiss, and so my Lords and Gentlemen Farewell; Farewell all the things of this
world.

I desire that you would be silent and join with me in prayer, and I trust in
God we shall all meet and live eternally in heaven, there to receive the
Accomplishment of all happiness, where every tear shall be wiped away from
our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts; and so God bless this
Kingdom, and Jesus have mercy on my Soul.

Then turning himself about he Saluted all the noble men; and took a solemn
leave of all considerable persons upon the Scaffold, giving them his hand.

After that he said, Gentlemen, I would say my prayers, and entreat you all
to pray with me, and for me; then his Chaplain laid the book of Common Prayer
upon the Chair before him, as he kneeled down, on which he prayed almost a
quarter of an hour, and then as long or longer without the Book, and
concluded with the Lords prayer.

Standing up he espies his Brother, Sir George Wentworth, and calls him to him
saying, Brother we must part, remember me to my sister, and to my wife, and
carry my blessing to my Son, and charge him that he fear God, and continue
an obedient Son to the Church of England, and warn him that he bears no
private grudge or revenge toward any man concerning me; And bid him beware that
he meddle not with Church Livings, for that will prove a moth and canker to
him in his estate, and wish him to content himself to be a Servant to his
Country, not aiming at higher Preferments.

Aliter] To his Son Master Wentworth he commends himself, and gives him
charge to serve his God, to submit to his King with all faith and Allegiance in
things temporal, to the Church in things Spiritual, charge him again and
again, as he will answer it to him in heaven, never to meddle with the
Patrimony of the Church, for if he did, it would be a Canker to eat up the
rest of his Estate.

Carry my blessing also to my daughter Anne, and Arabella, charge them to serve
and fear God, and he will bless them; not forgetting my little Infant, who
yet knows neither good nor evil and cannot speak for it self, God speak
for it, and bless it; now said he I have nigh done, one Stroke will make my
wife husbandlesse, my dear children fatherless, and my poor Servants
Masterlesse, and will separate me from my dear brother, and all my friends.
But let God be to you and them all in all.

After this going to take off his doublet and to make himself unready, he
said, I thank God I am not afraid of Death, nor daunted with any
discouragement rising from any fears, but do as cheerfully put off my doublet
at this time, as ever I did when I went to bed; then he put off his Doublet,
wound up his hair with his hands, and put on a white Cap.

Then he called, where is the man that is to do this last office? (meaning
the executioner) call him to me; when he came and asked him forgiveness, he
told him he forgave him and all the world: then kneeling down by the block; he
went to prayer again himself, The Primate of Ireland kneeling on the one
side, and the Minister on the other: To the which Minister, after prayer, he
turned himself, having done prayer, and spoke some few words softly, having
his hands lifted up, and closed with the Ministers hands.

Then bowing himself to lay his head upon the block, he told the Executioner
that he would first lay down his head to try the fitness of the block, and
take it up again before he would lay it down for good and all: And so he did;
and before he laid it down again, he told the Executioner that he would give
him warning when to strike by stretching forth his hands; And presently laying
down his neck upon the block, and stretching forth his hands, the Executioner
struck off his head at one blow, and taking it up in his hand showed it to all
the people: And said. God save the King.

His body was afterward embalmed, and appointed to be carried into Yorkshire,
there to be buried amongst his Ancestors.

He left these three Instructions for his Son in Writing.

First, That he should continue still to be brought up under those Governors
to whom he had committed him; As being the best he could pick out of all those
within his knowledge, and that he should not change them, unless they were
weary of him; that he should rather want himself, then they should want any
thing they could desire.

Secondly, He charged him as he would answer it at the last day, not to put
himself upon any public employments till he was thirty years of age at
least: And then if his Prince should call him to Public Service, he should
carefully undertake it, to testify his obedience, and withal to be faithful
and sincere to his Master, though he should come to the same end that himself
did.

Thirdly, That he should never lay any hand upon any thing that belonged to the
Church; He foresaw that ruin was like to come upon the Revennues of the
Church, and that parhaps they might be shared amongst the Nobility, and Gentry:
But if his Son meddled with any of it, he wished the curse of God might follow
him, and all them, to the Destruction of the most Apostolical Church upon
Earth*

FINIS.

