August, 17. 1642.

A RELATION FROM BELFAST IN IRELAND, SENT TO A FRIEND, MENTIONING SOME late
success against the Rebels, by Colonel Clotworthy, about Mount-Joy, in the
County of Tyrone, WITH A LETTER OF THE Deputy Lieutenants of Devonshire, to the
Gentlemen of Cornwall.

London Printed for John Bartlet. 1642.

A Relation from Belfast, sent to a friend, mentioning some late success
against the Rebels, by Colonel Clotworthy, about Mount-joy, in the County of
Tyrone.
Worthy Sir,
SInce my last to you, of the eleventh of July from Mount-joy, Colonel
Clotworthy had some business to call him over to Antrem, where after his stay
for two days, he was returning back to Mount-joy by water, where he met on the
Lough with a great storm, yet was resolved to venture onwards notwithstanding,
and therefore cast Anchor near an Island in the Lough, called Rams Island,
intending there to land, and stay till the storm was over, but when he was
going to land there, a violent storm forced him back again to Antrem, where
he that night received certain intelligence, that had he landed according to
his intention in that Island, he had been cut off, for many of the Rebels had
gotten thither for shelter, and might easily have prejudiced him, he not
expecting to meet any there, and the company with him not being many; but thus
did Gods immediate hand interpose and divert what otherwise was very near.
This storm also lost five of Colonel Clotworthies Boats, he had built for
the Lough but he by setting men on work, presently to repair them, has made
up all his former number, which is 12, large boats that will carry above 60.
men a piece, and the Admirail the Sidny, which also he has built, and with
these Botes and Barks he is able to carry on any part of the Lough side near
a 1000. men, which does so distract and torment the Rebels, that they have no
quiet there abouts; hereby also we have all our victuals easily transported,
and our Ammunition, (carrying now by land only to Antrim) and thence by water
in these Boats we convey it to any part joining to the Lough, which is of
ex^ng advantage to us.

As soon as the Lough was calm Colonel Clotworthy went to Montjoy, to that
part of his Regiment ^e left there, and presently upon his coming, having
notice the enemy was within seven or eight miles, he took 400. of his men,
leaving some in garrison in the Forts, and mounted 40. more with Firelockes, on
Horses he had formerly taken from the enemy, and with this 440. men he marched
all night and came timely to the Legar of the Rebels, where he found most of
them in their beds, and thereby had opportunity to cut many of them off before
they could get to their Arms (and run away) which presently they did, though
there were a 1000. of them; and as we are certainly informed Sir Philem Oneale
was there also, and ran among the rest, but in Colonel Clotworthies first
charge, they shot Colonol Ocane, (who is counted their most skilful Commander,
who came from beyond Sea to them) him they shot in the Leg, killed his Lieutenant
Colonel, who was one of the chief of the O Quines, and diverse of his
Captains, and about 60. of their common soldiers; had their horse been any
thing good more execution might have been done upon them, but they were only
such as Colonel Clot: took from the enemy, and had not one Shoe upon them all,
yet served to bring home a pray of 600. Cowes, which that night they brought
home to the Leager at Mount-joy: So God blessed that days work exceedingly,
let him only be acknowledged for it.

Within two days after, Colonel Clotworthy hearing the Rogues had a Camp at
Mony-more, he began his March at midnight with 500. of his men, and came to
their Camp by break of the day, where there was not many of the Rebels, and
those but inconsiderable fellows, had the cutting of them off, and just as he
was coming, the rogues were going to kill one hundred and twenty poor English
and Scots prisoners they had in their hands, but by Gods providence his coming
was so seasonable, that he relieved and rescued all of them, and cut off those
were going to destroy them: Thus did the Lord bring on them, what they intended
for others: after this, Colonel Clotworthy returned to the Leaguer at
Mount-joy, where he stay, expecting some help from others to come and join with
him, to March up further into the Country, God having so blessed him, that
with half his Regiment he has cleared twelve miles about him, save only
Charlamount, which is kept with a few of the enemy, but we are in hope shortly
to salute it, for my Lord Conway is going forth from hence, having with him
400. men; a piece of my Lord Ards, Lord Clandeboyes, and Colonel Chichesters
Regiments, who with 600. of his own men, and 300. Horse, March through the
Country to Mount-joy to Colonel Clotworthy, who with five or six hundred of
his men also, March thence with them, and all our provisions, both of Victuals
and Ammunition, we sent to Antrem, that thence by the Lough it might be
conveyed to us to Mount-joy, where we intend (God willing) to be on Wednesday
next, what success the Lord is pleased to give us, you shall hear at our
return, in the mean time, Farewell.

From Belfast, the 28, of July, 1642.
A Letter of the Deputy Lieutenants of Devonshire, to the Gent. of Cornwall.
SIRS,
WHen Religion, liberty, property, and our Laws lie at the stake, he deserves
an execration that appears not a defender: we know the attempts that are now
on foot: for the destruction of all is not confined to the Northern parts, but
the storm runs mainly hither. That wisdom has no life, that foresees a
danger to fear it, not to prevent it. We know our safeties are bound up with
yours, and not only that, but our affections to our Religion and Country,
commands our expressions, and ensuing resolutions, which are, that on all
occasions we shall be ready according to our Protestation, and the commands of
both Houses of Parliament, and as far as the safety of the Country will permit
to be assistant to you for the maintenance of the Ordinance of Parliament, and
the opposing the Commission of Array, which enslave not only persons,
properties, but consciences, in informing men, as it is probable, to fight
against these that have been, and are the known defenders of our liberties: If
we are linkt together, we can hardly be ruined; Let us contract a mutual
assistance, that we may so do, is the desire of, etc.

FINIS.

