Reformatio Legum proposita. Staple-Inne Hall upon Friday the fifteenth day of
February 1649.
With the Heads of certain other Proposals to beconsulted upon at the next
general Meeting there to be held upon Friday the 24 of May 1650, at one aclock
in the afternoon; Where all Attorneys and Officers that wish well to the
Reformation of the Proceedings at Law, are desired to attend to put an end to
that work; Whereby it is hoped that the Clyent will be much secured, the
Creditor and Purchaser fully provided for, the charge of Suits greatly abated,
and the Process of Law much shortened, which is earnestly desired by the
Proposers, the Attorneys of the Court of Common Pleas.
THat Fines upon all Original Writs might be taken away, for the Reasons in
the said Proposal.

2 That the Plaintiff may proceed to judgment against the Defendant, if he
shall not appear and plead upon two Summons returned executed by the Sheriff:
or else that the party at his own election may take out a Capias, and if that
be returned non est invent. ^hen an Exigent as after Judgment, and Trials or
nisi prius may be had and sued forth upon the venire as formerly upon the
habeas corpora, in such form and for such Reasons as in the second Proposal is
set down.

3 That the Process in Replevin should be shortened, and a Nonsute therein made
peremptory in such form as is proposed.

4 That Ejectments may be brought against the Tenants in possession, and that
upon the Trial the Entry, Lease, and Ouster may be admitted in all cases, and
the Title only insisted upon; and that the possession by the execution thereof
may be settled wiithout the help of the Chancery.

5 That the Common Bar, New Assignment, and Recital of the Original Writ may
be taken away, and the place assigned in the Court.

6 That for the Reasons in this Proposal, there should be but one post
terminum paid for the fyling of any Writ, and that the Plaintiff may sue forth
and syle Original Writs to warrant Judgments at any time before the same
assigned for error.

7 That the want of a Warrant of Attorney may be no cause to reverse any
judgment.

8 That for the Reasons in this Proposal Six able Secondaries may be joined to
the Prothonotaries, to dispatch the Business of the Office, and share Fees
with the Prothonotaries.

9 That Dammage-clear may be taken away, being a full tenth part of such
Damage that the plaintiff recovers, and for which he has no costs allowed
him, nor receives any benefit.

10 That for the Security of Creditors and Purchasers, one general Office of
Enrolment may be instituted in or near London, and particular Offices in each
County established, and that no Estate, Judgment, etc. should be good against
Creditors and Purchasers, but from the time of Enrolment only, that Tenant in
tail should be empowered to sell, and the Statute de Donis conditionalibus
repealed.

11 That the benefit of Seizures upon Outlawries should be first to satisfy the
plaintiff, and after to the benefit of the Commonwealth.

12 That Writs of Error shall be returnable at 8 days, if so many in Term, but
if not so many, then the first Return of the ensuing Term, and to assign
Errors within four days without seiri facias, and no supersedeas but upon
depositing the Debt and Damage recovered, or good Bail, and if brought for
delay and the matter not difficult, and abide argument, then to pay treble
costs.

These ensuing, among others, are intended to be proposed at the next Meeting.
THat Actions of Debt and Detinue, as the case requires, may be brought for
Legacies at Common Law, and the same to be recovered with costs and damages.

2 That the Heir may be subject to the Debt of his Ancestor to the value of
the land descending, as well after as before alienation.

3 That where Debtors that have visible Estates to pay their debts, shall
continue above a year in execution, and not dispose the same for the payment of
their debts, a Writ in the nature of a fieri facias may be issued to the
Sheriff whereby he shall be empowered to sell the Debtors Lands for the
satisfying the debt and damage, and the prisoner upon the plaintiffes
satisfaction thereby to be discharged.

4 That in all cases where Executors or Administrators shall suffer judgment by
nihil dicit non sum informatus or confession, assets shall be presumed, and
execurion issue immediately against their own persons and estates, and that upon
all Trials of plene administravit, they shall deliver in Inventories upon their
own Oaths, otherwise assets ^o be presumed.

5 That an action of Trespass or Detinue may lie at Common Law for Tithes as
well before as after setting forth, and damages and costs therein to be
reovered.

6 That every Attorney that shall disburse any more then the charges that shall
happen in one Term and Vacation for his Client, shall not only be in the
condition of an unlawful maintayner of Suits, but also have no remedy to
recover the same at Law.

7 That tender of amends with costs may be a good plea in Bar in all actions
of Trespass and Replevin, as well after impounding or action brought as
before, so it be done before pleading.

8 That where the husband dies seized, the wife may continue in possession in
common with the Heir till he assign her Dowre to the full third part.

9 That solvit ad diem or nil debet may be a good plea to a Bill or other
simple Obligation to which there is no condition annexed.


