PLAIN ENGLISH TO THE PARLIAMENT and ARMY, and to the rest of the PEOPLE.

To Convince the obstinate. Vndeceive the simple. Vindicate the innocent.
Settle the wavering.


By John Redingstone.

Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold, in pictures of
silver.

January 12. 1648. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hil^, and are to be sold over against Thomases
Hospital in Southwark, M.DC.XLIX.

Plain English to the PARLIAMENT AND ARMY, And to the rest of the PEOPLE.
IT is evident that the higher powers, Rulers, Kings, Rev. 13.
etc. When contrary to their constitution, they pervert Justice, and become a
terror to good works; and justify the wicked in their evil: such tyrants are
not only abomination to the Lord, but by the testimony of the Gospel, they do
forfeit their authority also: And in this very case the Apostle Paul calls
Ananias a whited wall, Act. 23.3, 4, 5.
not High Priest nor Ruler (and gives the reason) for sit thou to judge me
after the Law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the Law: affirming,
that he knew not that he was the high Priest ( viz. because he had forfeited
his calling, and the Apostle spoke truth) saying, It is written thou shall not
speak evil of the Ruler of my People: Therefore what Ruler so ever wilfully and
publicly perverts the Law, introducing an arbitrary, tyrannical and unjust
cause, acting against the public good and safety, to the ruin of the People,
loses his power, and cease to be Ruler, and ought to be declared and
proceeded against for such a one. For doublesse the Apostles practice, and the
Scripture is a good rule to walk by; For all Scripture is given by inspiration
of God; and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3.6.

2. Whereas the King, not regarding the public good and safety of the People,
did introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical course; and endeavored, with an
high hand, by force of arms to subvert Salus populi, and the destruction of
the Kingdom; setting up his Standard, and waging an open war upon the
Parliament, and against all his good and loyal Subjects; persisting in full
opposition to the Parliaments humble suits and Declarations made unto him,
Parl. Decl. 20 May, 1642.
showing that whenever the King makes war upon the Parliament, it is a
breach of the trust reposed in him by his People; contrary to his Oath; and
tending to the dissolution of his Government. That whosoever shall serve and
assist him in such war, are Traitors by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
11 Rul. 2. 1 Hen. 4.
and have been so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament: Therefore we may see by
the Parliaments Declaration, and the Kings practices compared, that the King is
wholly elapsed in his splendour, dignity, honor, Kingly power, Majesty, and
stands guilty of all the precious blood, rapines, and ruins of millions of
People in these three Kingdoms, and has disobliged the Parliament, Army and
People of their allegiance to him; and this may be a good reason why the right
honorable the Lord Fairfax his Excellency, and this Army, took their
Commissions only for defense of the Parliament and Kingdom, and have done
most righteously in so doing.

God sealing to their endeavors, by his blessing, with extraordinary success,
to the subduing of the King, with all his traiterous forces, and made the King
their conquered, and captivated prisoner, who has not minded, lex talionis,
and that he that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God; And
that Adoni-bezek, 2. Sam. 23.3
though a heathen King, acknowledged, saying, As I have done, so God has
requited me; and they brought him to Jerusalem, Judge. 1.6, 7.

3. The King perverting his duty, rejecting the fear of God, despising good
council, when seasonably given him, by them of whom he ought to have received
it, and wholly adheared to, and followed perverse, foolish, slanderous, wicked,
proud, haughty, deceitful, murtherous men's councels; who endeavored utterly
to root out, extirpate, and extinguish the very name and being of all those who
were the faithful of the Land, and endeavored a through reformation of all
wicked, unrighteous practices, in the King, his family, and Kingdoms;
therefore the King with all his heathen adherents, took council together,
against the Lord, and against his anointed, Psalm. 2.
saying, let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast their cords from us; and
making war upon them; they compass the camp of the Saints about, Rev. 20.9.
and the beloved City, Mount Zion; The habitation of the Saints, where the
Saints receive their Commission from the great King, King of Kings, to have a
two edged sword in their hands, to execute judgment upon the Heathen, and
punishment upon the people; To bind their Kings with chains, Psalm. 149.
and their Nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon them the judgment
written, This honor have all the Saints. Hence then we see what a type of Holy
Writ lies upon our Parliament and Army, to execute judgment upon the King and
his wicked Adherents? although others have been so exemplary before them? Also
we may see how Mr Prynne does play the Jesuit by his most scandalous and false
Pamphlets, endeavoring to subvert others to the disturbance of the public
welfare and safety of the Kingdom; not minding that Salus populi is Suprema
lex, and that he may in due time justly suffer as an evil doer, according to
his demerits, and be taught, That it is an abomination to Kings to commit
wickedness, for the Throne is established in righteousness, Prove. 16.12.

4. And surely all the Kings false dealings pretending the Kingdoms welfare
and safety, sealed with most solemn abjurations and execrations against
Himself, his Throne and Posterity, thereby to hide his iniquity from the eyes
of the people, the more easily to seduce them to belief, and to join with
him, was the highest cruelty and means that could be, to bring Gods heavy
wrath upon his own head, and to remove the Throne from himself and his
posterity; For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain: And mercy and truth preserve the King. As a roaring Lion, Prove. 20:28:
Cap. 28.15, etc.
and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over his people. And are not such
destructive beasts to be taken and destroyed? Again, the Prince that wants
understanding is a great Oppressor; it is much that Mr Prynne does not remember
this truth ever since the King suffered his ears to be cut off. Again, a man
that does violence to the blood of any person, shall fly to the pit, let no man
stay him. God makes no distinction of King or Beggar, he is no Respecter of
persons; But the soul that sins it shall dye, no man ought to stay him from
it: King Ahab and Queen Jezebeel must dye, because Naboth is unjustly cast
off, and his Vineyard taken from him; Moreover the dogs must eat her flesh,
and lick up his blood also, in that very plat of ground: It is very strange
that Mr Prynne cannot mind this truth, not knowing that the King did not only
shed much private or particular men's blood, his own being one, but has
publicly bereaved multitudes of his most faithful people of their lives and
estates for many years together: And can unrighteous war extenuate his
fault? Was not that the utter ruin of Hanun the King of Ammon, and his
Kingdom? although what he acted was not against his own Subjects; but David's
servants only defacing them in show, hair and habits? And can we think that
God has forgot to be just? Ahab and Jezebeel's sin was colored over with as
much piety as might be: But God will not be mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap^: Gal. 6. Psalm. 110.
God will strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, and his instruments to
execute the judgment, written, This honor have all the Saints, Psalm. 149.

5. And is it not the Parliaments and Armies duty, now God has delivered the
King into their hands, and left him at their dispose, to execute the judgment
written upon him and his Adherents? And to secure themselves and the people,
who have always stuck close unto them in their greatest distresses? Has not
the King been a corrupt fountain, poisoning every stream and rivolet he has
had access unto? And will he not do so still if he be not cut off? Has not
this husband adulterated his bed, and spent his strength with strangers, being
fallen into a loathsome and poisonous disease (worse then King Vriah's
leprosy) and is sick unto death? Has not this Father murtherd a multitude of
his best children, and would gladly kill all the rest? Is it not then high time
for the Kingdom to have a Bill of divorce? And also to have him brought to a
just trial? That God and all the world may be witnesses, they will give him no
further opportunity or means, either by cohabitation or communion with them to
destroy them? And do not their spirits groan, and their backs bow under the
burden of their irrepairable loss?

6. Also now God has by his singular goodness, through greatest difficulties,
given the faithful of the Land some rest and peace with their Lives, Estates,
Laws, Liberties and Privileges, anciently and inherently in themselves; but
with much expense of blood, loss of friends, and hardship regained by right of
conquest: Is it not then their duty to keep that which God has repossest them
of? Did not Jephtha and Israel do so with that which was the Amorites by
original right; they only won it by the sword, and did wear it, Judge. 11.19,
20. etc.

7. And does not the eminency of the Kings person aggravate his sin and
judgment? And has it not made him successes? And was it not Coniah King of
Judahs case? As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son of Jehojakim King
of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet will I pluck him thence. Write
this man childlesse (to wit in respect of kingly Government, else not) a man
that shall not prosper in his days, Jer. 22.24, 30.

8. Nor could the Army any longer defer to seclude from the Parliaments
fellowship; all such who undermined and disappointed their proceedings for the
executing of Justice, and settling of the Kingdom, and that those who are
faithful might act freely for the Kingdom, in judgment and righteousness:
Wisdom is better then weapons of war, but one sinner destroieth much good.
And is it not great wisdom to execute judgment speedily, and to preserve the
Kingdom, as much as may be from further war, by executing the judgment written.

9. We know the Parliament have the King authoritatively with them, both for
the making and executing of Law in its royal power, office and capacity, they
have the Sword, the Scepter and the Seal, that they may do justly, love mercy,
and walk humbly with God, Mic. 6.8. And has it not been in this sense, the
King cannot deceive, nor be deceived, never dies, can neither do, nor take
wrong? and is it not in this sense we have fought for the King and Parliament,
when the King was in personal opposition unto both? And is it not most
righteous and just, that his Person in this sense should be subject unto the
power authoritative.

10. And is it not evident that the Kings transgression is transcendent unto
Saul's? who did only spare Gods enemies, and yet his Kingdom was taken from
him, and given unto David; but our King has slain and destroyed the Lords
dearest friends, his first borne, his peculiar treasure and jewels, most dear
and tender unto him, He that touches them, touches the apple of his eye;
these are his truly anointed ones, He has reproved Kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.

11. And many have added this evil u^ to all their sins, to ask them such a
King to rule over them (as M. Prin and many others) one who is corrupted,
stained and rejected of God, and not without blemish as Saul was, when desired
by the people, and yet God says, that in so doing they had rejected him. And
the people did very sensibly confess the Lords justice, and wrath against
them, for that they had added this evil (of asking them a King) unto all their
sins, entreating Samuel to pray unto the Lord his God for them, that they die
not. O that all the people in England, who are guilty in this kind, were but
as sensible of Gods wrath against them, and that they would entreat the Lords
Prophets and anointed ones, to pray unto the Lord their God for them; and that
they did but know, that the Lord for this same purpose has raised up the King,
that he may show his power in him. And that the name of the Lord may be
declared throughout all the earth, And now let all the world take notice and
know, that the Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake,
because it has pleased him to make them his people, only fear the Lord and
serve him in truth with all your heart: For consider how great things he has
done for you, 1 Samuel 12. Had ever any Parliament and Army the like experience
of the Lords goodness unto them? And is it not that you may execute Justice,
and that righteousness may run down like a mighty stream? And that the Lords
people may be set free from all tyrants and oppressors hands, every one freely
enjoying their Rights, Privileges and Liberties, only be very courageous in
doing the work of the Lord, and love him with all your hearts, for he has
promised, he will never leave you nor forsake you: So that you may boldly say,
The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. But as
all those who will not walk in Gods way and counsel, according to the truth
plainly and sincerely set forth unto them, If ye shall still do wickedly ye
shall be consumed both ye and your King, 1 Samuel 12. ult.

FINIS.

