AN EXACT And full RELATION Of all the proceedings between the Cavaliers, and
the Northamptonshire forces at Banbury.

With the present state and condition which that Country is in at this present.

Whereunto is added the Articles of agreement, made at Banbury, for a
Pacification, and settling of the Peace of that County, by the Commissioners of
Array and the Deputy Lieutenants of the said County.

Ian. 4. Printed for I. Wright in the Old-Bailey, 1643.

A TRVE RELATION of the present Condition of BANBURY.
Brother,
MY desire is to let you understand the state and condition that our County is
in at this present. It was true that you heard, that Northamptonshire men came
into Banbury, but they stayed not, for the Major having yielded the Town
before unto the King, would not show them any countenance, and so they left the
Town presently, and went away again the same day that they came in. And my
Lord of Northampton came in upon the morrow, and took possession of the Town
and Castle, where he has continued ever since, until it was Tuesday night
last 22. day, and then drew all his Forces out of the Town toward Oxford in
the night, but only his Foot, and they went all into the Castle, and carried
in all the provision that they could come by in thither, and left the Town
open. Northamptonshire men kept themselves together all this while, and came
again to Byfield, a Town six miles from Banbury, where they lay for a week:
but so soon as they heard that my Lord of Northampton was gone out of Banbury,
they presently advanced forward, and made for Banbury again, and came before
the Town upon Wednesday in the afternoon about three of the clock, and came
into the Town over the Bridge. They in the Castle having four Pieces of
Ordnance, shot at them as fast as they could all the time that they came in,
but yet it pleased God to preserve them, that they came all safe into the
Town, only one Horse killed, and a man hurt, and one man killed with Musket shot
after they came into Town. They continued in the Town that night and all day,
on the morrow they were as was supposed about four thousand, all Countrymen,
but one hundred of Seamen: among them they brought two small Pieces into the
Town with them, and sent to Northampton for one more bigger, which came in
upon Thursday about twelve a clock. They shot at the Castle with their
Musketeers all day Thursday, and it was supposed they killed some that were upon
the walls; and likewise they shot from the walls all day, and with the Ordnance
from the Castle, but killed none, but hurt two or three. And upon Thursday night
they planted their great Piece against the Castle wall, and the two smaller
Pieces against the Gate, but could not force it to make any entrance at all* In
the mean time, my Lord of Northampton brought all the Kings strength of Horse
from Oxford, and came to Dedington, within four miles of Banbury, on Thursday
night, where they lay all night in the Field: which Northampton shire men
hearing and seeing they could not do any good at the Castle, left the Town
again, and marched away about four a clock in the morning with their
Ordnance, and the Kings Army of Horse came in on Friday, and quaild all the
Country over on Friday night, but returned toward Oxford again in the
morning, only leaving some to keep Garrison in Ba^bury; and so now our
Condition is worse ^hen ever it was: for many showed themselves forward to
join with Northampton shire men, And now they being gone again, we are in
more fears then ever we were. I pray God in mercy look upon us, and put it
into the heart of our King and Parliament, that there may be an accommodation
for Peace, for otherwise our Country will be wholly ruinated in a short time:
We cannot enjoy any thing that is our own. The Town of Banbury, for the most
part the chiefest men, are wholly undone all already, and we in the Country
cannot long subsist: For we have great Taxes laid upon us, and if we will not
pay them, our Selves and Goods are both taken away, I praise God I have my
liberty yet, but do not know how long I shall enjoy it, for I am in great
fear of my self. I pray you send me a Grammar for my Boy; and I would entreat
you to send me word how the City does stand affected: We hear, that it is
much divided, and the greater and stronger party is for the King, and that the
Parliament is broken up. I pray you send me the truth as near as you can of
all things, as also concerning the Earl of Essex proceedings, for we cannot
hear any thing from him, which does much discourage our County at this present.

29. December. 1642. So I rest your Brother to command, S. R.

Vicesimo tertio die December. 1642.
An Agreement made the day above at Banbury in the County of Chester, for a
Pacification, and settling of the Peace of that County, by us whose Names are
subscribed, Authorized hereunto by the Lords and Gentlemen nominated,
Commissioners of Array, and Deputy Lieutenants of the sa^d County.
1. IT is agreed that there be an absolute Cessation of Arms from henceforth
within this County, and no Arms be taken up to offend one another, but by the
consent of the King and both Houses of Parliament, unles it be to resist forces
brought into the County.

2. That all but 200. of either side shall be disbanded to morrow, being
Saturday, and on Monday all the rest on both sides, both Horse and Foot shall
be disbanded.

3. That all Prisoners on both sides be enlarged, as for Master Morton, who is
now Prisoner at Manchester, the Gentlemen appointed Deputy Lieutenants, do
declare, that he was taken without their privitie, or encouragement, by some
Manchester Troops, upon a private quarrel, for taking powder, and other goods
belonging to one of Manchester, yet they will use the utmost endeavors to
procure his enlargement, and do desire the like endeavors be used by the
Lords and others, Commissioners of Array, for enlarging Master Daniel of
Dasbury.

4. That the Fortifications of Chester, Namptuich, St^pford* N^^^ford, or any
Town in Cheshire, lately made by either part, be presently demolished.

5. That all Goods and Arms, taken on both sides, now remaining in the County
in specie, be forthwith restored, and for all others that are taken out of the
County, it is promised on both parts, that since the benefit of this
Pacification redounds to the whole County, that they will use their utmost
endeavors for a joint contribution of the County, toward satisfaction to the
owners.

6. That the Lords and Gentlemen, Commissioners of Array, before the eighth day
of January next, procute from his Majesty a Letter, thereby declaring, That in
regard a Peace is made in the County, he will send no Forces into this County;
and if any other person shall contrary to such Declarations bring Forces into
the County (passage for Forces without doing any Hostile act only excepted)
the said Lords and Gentlemen, will join to resist them, and if any Forces,
without the consent of the King and both Houses of Parliament, shall come into
this County (the passages Forces without doing any Hostile act only excepted)
the said Gentlemen nominated Deputy Lieutenants, will join to resist them, and
use their utmost endeavors therein.

7. In regard by the blessing of God, there is to be a Peace within the County
if this agreement be. It is agreed that the Commissioners of Array, shall not
any further put the Commission of Array in execution, nor the Gen^lemen
nominated Deputy Lieutenants the Ordinance of the Militia, or execute their
Commission.

8. Lastly, All the said parties do agree and promise each to other, in the
word of a Gentleman, as they desire to prosper; that as well themselves, as
also all their friends, tenants, servants, and all others in whom they have any
interest, shall as much as in them lies, perform the Agreement; And it is
further desired, that all the said parties join in a Petition to His M^jestie,
and both Houses of Parliament, for putting an end to the greatest distractions
and miseries fallen upon this Kingdom, by making a speedy Peace: And it is
agreed that Sir George Booth, and all others within this County, who have
appeared as Commissioners of Array, or as Deputy Lieutenants, by reason of the
Ordinance of Parliament, shall with all convenient speed subscribe this
Agreement.

Robert Kilmurrey. Orlando Br^dgeman. William Marbury. Henry Mainwaring.


FINIS.

