A Relation of what passed in Connaught between His Majesty's Forces under the
Command of Brigadier Sarsfield, and the Rebels Led by the Lord VVeyer, the
Colonels Floyd, Russel, etc. upon the Army Decamping from Allardstown.
OGaras's Regiment of Foot, Colonel Luttrell's of Horse, Sir N. o Neil's of
Dragoons were ordered to march under the Command of Brigadier Sarsfield, upon
intelligence brought to His Majesty that Schomberg had sent a Party to
strengthen the Rebels in the Province of Connaught, which they by that time had
almost overrun. The Brigadier had likewise Commission to join to His Body such
of the King's Troops as lay most convenient in his March. With this Strength he
ventured to make several Detachments, one of two hundred Foot to aid the
Gentlemen of the Country, who with the new raised Mobile had Blocked up
James-town then in the enemies hands. Upon his Arrival at Athlone, the Key of
that Province, he sent another Party to take possession of another Pass betwixt
Boil and Sligoe, upon the Curlew Mountain, to cut of all communication from
the Garrisons of James-Town and Boil, with that of Sligoe, he then advanced
into the Country, and from Roscommon sent another Party of 90 Horse, and 80
Dragoons, under the Command of Colonel Henry L^^trell, to prevent the Enemies
burning or destroying all places they should think fit to abandon upon his
approach. In their March they overtook, and put to flight a party of two
hundred Horse of the ^^^^y, with a prey they had taken of a thousand head of
Cattle. Luttrell pursued them fourteen miles* obliging them to quit their Prey,
and run back in full speed to the Boil, and endeavored yet further th^^ night
toward Slygo, but were prevented by Major ^^^^k Bourke, who Commanded the
Detachment sent by Sarsfield to secure that Pass. The Lord Weyer who commanded
that party of the Enemy, and above fifteen of his men were killed, and several
wounded (...) ^ndeavouring to force it. The day before Colonel ^loyd from
Sligo, with a party of Rebels attempted to come up to Boil, but was two
several times beaten back with loss. The party commanded by Weyer, prevented in
their design of going to Sligo, retired strait to Ja^^^-town, and joined the
Enemies Garrison. The next morning they all abandoned that place, and marched
toward the County of Cavan, either to join S^homberg's at Dundalk, or make
their way thorough to ^^^^^^illen. But those of ours that blocked up Jamestown
having timely notice pursued them so close that they were Forced like Hard
Hunted deer to take soil and swim three Rivers in which there were 80 drowned
and several killed, nor do we find of 400 Horse and Dragoones of which number
that party consisted, ten got Home together, Sarsfield still continued his
March to Boil, and thence to Sligoe, when he had reached Collooney six miles
short of the end of his March finding that the Enemy had broke the Bridge of
Ballysedare a mile and a half on the other side of Coloony, and being well
informed of the Country he sent a detatchment of three hundred Foot, seventy
Horse and one hundred Dragoones under the Command of Colonel Lutterell a
private way about by the Mountain Foot in order to cut off those that sustained
the Bridge, and at the same time advanced to it with his Party to amuse The
Enemy, whilst Luttrell came round, at which time Mr. Talandier Lieutenant Coll.
to Sir N: o N. was wounded in the Groin Luttrells guide carried him nearer
Sligoe then Sarsfield designed, where he met with a Party coming from Sligoe
under the command of Coll. Russel, and at the same time those at the Bridge
finding that Lutrell was got round, Returned under the Command of Coll. Lloyd,
so that they were both in the Rear and Front of Luttrell whose Dragoones and
Foot were not yet got quite up to him by reason of a long Defile, upon which he
divided what Horse he had, making half of them Face those in their Rear, and
with the other half he himself charged those in his Front, and upon the first
Onset broke both the Parties, killing Fifty upon the place the rest he pursued
in sight of Sligoe, at the same time Sarsfield made up the Bridge the Enemy had
abandoned with Ioyces and Planks he had provided for that purpose and Marched
with all diligence to Relieve Luttrell who had before he could get up to him,
beaten the Enemy again that had rallied at the Barriers of the Town, which were
well maintained by some French Foot, By this time Sarsfield was come up and all
the Horse and Foot that were in the Town Ran away with Lloyd and Russel, except
some four or 500 that shut themselves up within a Fort in the further end of
the Town which immediately was Blocked up and Trenches being opened in five days
before it, on the 5th they Capitulated to march to Inniskillen, which was
Granted by Sarsfield his men being spent by a long march, in bad way and ill
weather, which continued while they lay in the Trenches. As soon as Sarsfield
became Master of the Town, he Ordered it imediatly to be Fortifyed and the
Fortifications are already so far advanced and the place ^o capable of being
made strong, that the whole Pro^ince is hereby secured under His Majesty's
Obedience.

Imprimatur.

Will. Talbott.


