Remarkable Passages from York: Friday, July 8. 1642. Concerning the marching
of horse and foot toward HVLL. And, the manner of that Counties appearance on
Heworth Moore, on Thursday last before His Majesty. With the Copy of a Warrant
from the Right Honorable the Earl of LINSEY, General of His Majesty's Forces,
To Sir Thomas Metham Knight, for the completing of His Regiments.
ON Sunday last about three a clock in the morning, the Trumpet went about to
call out the troop of horse here, which marched presently away toward Hull,
which put us all in great fear, by reason of the suddenness of it, which we
heard after was caused by the coming in of the Holland ship. The company of
foot which attended the Kings Majesty, marched upon Monday and Tuesday, upon
Wednesday the King went himself; all this week passage betwixt Hull and York is
stopped and hindered: Two Proclamations was here published, one, that none should
give any relief to Sir John Hotham* the other, that the King will pardon all
the Soldiers that will submit to Him, and give them a Months pay in hand till
he can otherwise employ them, and provide for them; there was also another,
that none of the Magazines should be removed from the places where they are,
but kept and employed by His Majesty's Commissioners.

Upon Thursday directions were given to the Gentlemen who appeared with their
horses, to go to Heworth Moore, there to attend His Majesty's pleasure, who
about two a clock in the afternoon came thither; at their coming, His Majesty
commanded that the Gentlemen should divide themselves one way, and their men
another way, that He might view them, which was done accordingly; but upon the
view, those who appeared, and were not enrolled, were but a small number, not
much above fourscore, whereupon it was suggested to the King, that not half of
the County was summoned, and it was thereupon concluded that the
Head-Constables should be called on to give an account of their service, and
that there should be another Summons.

From thence His Majesty (accompanied with the Prince, the Duke, and the
Prince Electour) rid directly to Beverley, whither His carriage was gone before.

There are nine Irish Rebels which were taken by the Scots, and brought to the
King, gone from hence this day toward London, the King refers them to the
Parliament, the high Sheriff was to take care for their safe bringing up.

Also, on Monday last Sir Thomas Methams Regiment was commanded suddenly to
march, his company being to be made up of the Trained Bands, as appears by
the ensuing Warrant from the Lord General, over some companies there are
strangers placed Officers.

BY virtue of a Warrant from the Right Honorable, East Riding, Com. Ebor.
the Earl of Linsey, General of His Majesty's forces for the completing of
the Regiment of the Trained Bands now under my command; and for that you have
neglected this service, in sending ignorant and untrained men, and sparing
(without any command or direction) such as formerly have been trained, and
served under me; These are therefore by virtue of the said Warrant, straightly in
His Majesty's Name to command you, that upon sight hereof, you Summon and bring
all such persons that be able of body, as well private as common, formerly set
in my Muster Rolls, now inhabiting and residing in your several Townships; And
also all such as upon the Summons for this service, have either fled or
absented themselves, and them with their Arms that are wanting in your several
Constableries, personally upon the sight hereof to bring to me to Newland near
Cottingham, where I am with my Regiment for His Majesty's special service; as
also, some of the ablest men of body in your Townships, to be in the places of
diverse impotent, lame, and unfit for service; And further to certify unto me
the Names of all the private men charged with Arms within your several
Constableries, which be either dead or removed, and without partiality or
affection bring such as are fit for supply, And if any by you so summoned shall
refuse to obey, that then you forthwith convey them to His Majesty's Goal at
the Castle of York, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, till they be by
due course of Law from thence delivered: Whereof fail you not at your utmost
peril.

Newland. Given under my hand and seal this seventh of July, 1642. THO. METHAM.
To the chief Constable of Owze and Darwent, and to all and every the petty
Constables of Elvington, Dunington, Grimston, Heslington, Foulforth, cum
Foulforth Nayburn, Stillingfleet, Dighton, and to every of them.



London, Printed by Luke Norton and John Field for Ralph Rounthwait. July 12.
1642.


