A RELATION OF THE SUNDRY OCCVRRENCES IN IRELAND From the Fleet of Ships set
out by the Adventurers of the Additionall Forces by SEA.

With the Names of the Ships, and the Commanders of them, and their several
burdens, and number of Men in every Ship.

Also the Names of the Commanders of the Landforces, under the command of the
Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook, all set out by the said Adventurers,

Also a true Copy, of most wicked Verses written in form of a Ballad, defying
the English, being found in a Rebels pocket, and sent among other papers to the
Adventurers.

Hereunto is added, the true Copy of a Letter sent from Colonel Goring to his
Majesty, which Letter was intercepted by the way, and now published.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Hen. Overton, 1642.

A Relation of the sundry Occurrences in Ireland, from the Fleet of Ships set
out by the Adventurers of the additionall Forces by Sea.
AFter a long passage from London we arrived the 10 of july last at Kinsale
with 10 sail of our fleet, where the Right Honorable Alexander, Lord Forbes
our Commander, next unto the Right Honorable Lord Brook, received intelligence
that the Town of Bandonbridge wherein were 7000 English Protestants was in
great want of Ammunition, and that the Lord Muskery (the chief Rebel) withal
his Forces, intended within 5 or 6 days to set upon the said Town, to take it
and to put all the English to the Sword, such is the rage malice and hatred of
those Rebels against them that they would not spare man woman nor hild. But by
the good providence of Almighty God, we arived in the very rick of time to the
great joy and comfort of the English, and to the terror of the Rebels,
preventing them from their intended design.

The Lord Forbes lost no time in the exercising of his men, and the 15 of July
with 800 Land and Seamen corragiously marched toward Bandon for the relief of
it, and other Castles thereabouts who were blockt up by the Rebels.

The inhabitants of Bandon upon sight of the relief came unto them from the
Parliament, and the Adventurers in the additional Forces by Sea for Ireland,
with good store of Ammunition, as Muskets, Powder, Shot and other necessaries
were much revived, leaping for joy, and returned public thanks to Almighty God
for his great mercy and goodness to them, in sending this supply in such their
great straight and misery. Master Peter's our Minister preached at Bandon, much
encouraging the Inhabitants.

The 16 of July the Lord Forbes with his 800 men, and 200 Foot and 70 Horse of
Ban^on, marched from thence to clear the Country of Rebels, that the English
might reap and gather in their harvest; As also for the relief of Raph Barry
Castle being from King fale as we marched about 25 English miles; and in our
march we set upon an English Town called Cloughnieilty, which the Rebels
formerly took and possessed, which Town we took, and killed of the Rebels about
200, and had much pillage in it of Corn and Cattle, and there the Lord Forbes
left 3. Companies of his men to guard the Town and village.

From thence we marched with 700 men, and the troop of Horse for Raph Barry
Castle to relieve Master Feak, and about 100 English that were blockt up. We
furnished them with Men, Cow, Horse, Sheep, Ammunition, etc. And left them in
good condition to defend themselves against the Rebels, the Castle being very
strong of it self, and lying within a mile of the Town of Rosse.

When our Soldiers were at dinner, news came that General Maccarte Tego
Downing, and some of Lord Muskery his Forces about 7000 Foot, and 300 Horse
were fall upon our three Companies, left at Cloughnieilty, and that they were
in great danger, whereupon the Lord Forbes together with his Captain and
Soldiers with more then ordinary valor, courage and resolution, hastened to
relieve them: and coming in sight of the Rebels Army, and seeing two of our
Colors playing in a little breast work beleagured with 1000 Rebels about
them; we marched up near them, and gave five to one of our Field Pieces of
Ordnance, which made the Rebels retreat, whereby we rescued two of our sai^
Companies, the third being Captain Weldon an old Soldier, but over
Adventurous and more relying upon his own valor, then harkening to the advice
of other Captains to retreat, very valiantly set upon the Rebels, and after
he had killed many of them in the battle was slain himself, together with
about h^lfe his Company.

As soon as we had rescued our two Companies, we fell upon the Rebels who were
in fair order of battle with diverse Colors flying, and after some fight with
them, the Lord Forbes commanded to open to the right and left, and shot a piece
of Ordinance at them, whereupon they run away and were so routed that we slew
many of them upon our pursuit, and following them so close diverse we forced
into the Sea, others got into an Island, some into Bogs and Mountains, and it
was miraculous, and the great mercy of God that so great a defeat, upon so many
by so small a number was wrought in so short a time, and not one of our men
lost, in this march we verily believe that there is 800 Rebels slain, some
think 12 or 500 and amongst them many of the chief Rebels and Commanders were
slain in this Battle; the booty we took from the Rebels upon this defeat,
was ^000 Sheep 200 Cowes, and 50 Horse and Arms where with we marched to
Bandon, and their left the booty to relieve the Town. From Bandon we marched to
Timoleage and burnt the Town and Abbey, and from thence came to Kingsale, where
we found two of our other Ships returned, which were sent to guard the Coast,
and to relieve Baltimore, and Castle-Haven, where were about 4. or 500. English.

The Frigate Penington. Captain Clark Commander has done very good service a
Baltimore by a stratagem having taken 17. Rebels there, some were the
principal of them one Captain Mac-Carte, Dermon and Clouke Tego Downing
besides some others worth 500. l. Per Annum (as we are informed) they offer to
supply provisions for our Fleet, and a good ransom only to spare their lives,
we are now Shipping our men abord and so going to Baltimore.

We are informed that Galloway is out in Rebellion again so it is intended that
so soon as the Lord Forbes meets with the rest of the Fleet, and is complete,
after he shall have releived some Castles in the way, and cleared the Country.
We shall endeavor to relieve Galloway Castle, and to set upon that Town if God
prosper us we hope to carry it.

It is reported that the L. Randelo, Lord President of Conaught, has done
great service since the Rebellion, having got about 400 English, together at
Atlon. And Roscoman and has fired the Country, 20 or 40 miles about, and has
enriched his men with the spoil taken from the Rebels, and upon a late supply
of 2000. men from Dublin it is hoped he will clear most part of that provence
of Conaught, and march to Galloway to join with our Sea and Land forces, to
beleager the Town.

The Lord Forbes with the other Commanders intend to lose no time, but to do
their uttermost in helping to reduce the Rebels to their due obedience to his
Majesty, and the Crown of England, it being high time, their insolences, and
cruelties were curbed, they commonly calling us Parliament dogs, and London
Prentises, and say their commission for their Rebellion is better then ours,
but we hope God will enable us to help to quell their impudent cruelty.

Two of our Fleet are gone to Duncannon Castle and Dublin, to convoy some
provisions and to bring advice of the state of the Country, the Lord Forbers is
petioned from diverse places for his aid and supply, his Lordship will give them
the best aid he can one after another, we hope this Fleet will do much good to
this bleeding Kingdom, and relieve many poor drouping souls, and we hope our
great Armies in Lempster, and Vlster, will with Gods blessing clear those
parts, and march into Monster to clear those parts of these prosidious Rebels,
which he of his infinite mercy grant for the advancement of the Gospel, and
the good of all His Majesty's Dominions.

The names of Ships employed by the Adventurers in the Additionall forces by
Sea for Ireland from London.
Ships. Commanders. Burden. Seamen. 1 Speedwell, Cap. Benjamin Peter's. 400 tun.
120. 2 Zant-Merchant, Cap. Thomas Rainborow. 400 tun. 120. 3 Good Hope, Cap.
William Thomson. 400 tun. 120. 4 Achilles, Cap. Nicholas Simonson. 260 tun. 78.
5 George Bonaventure, Cap. Robert Sackrey. 240 tun. 72. 6 Mary Bonaventure,
Cap. George Richardson. 240 tun. 72, 7 Hope well, Cap. Edward Thomson. 200 tun.
60. 8 Katherin, Cap. Samuel Andrews. 180 tun. 54. 9 Penington, Cap. Thomas
Clark. 130 tun. 39. 10 Dolphin, Cap. Edward Dorrington. 80 tun. 24. 11
Christopher, Cap. John Seaman. 70 tun. 21. 12 William and Thomas, Cap. John
Daniel. 70 tun. 21. 13 Intelligence, Cap. Anthony Euerist. 70 tun. 21. 14
Willing-mind. Cap. John Kichiner. 40 tun. 12. 15 Raphe, Cap. Ralph Richardson.
40 tun. 12. 16 Lion, Cap. Lodowick Dick. 500 tun. 150. 17 Lorne, Cap. Andrew
Rain. 100 tun. 30. 18 Prosperous, Cap. John Harison. 160 tun. 46.

The Commanders of the Landforces, set out by the Adventurers in the
additionall Forces by Sea for Ireland, under the command of the Right
Honorable Robert Lord Brook.
RObert Lord Brook, his Company 100 men. Alexander Lord Forbes his Company 100
men. John Humphrey Serjeant-Major, his Company 100 men. Captain Giles Beaton,
his Company 100 men. Captain Nicholas Crisp, his Company 100 men. Captain
William Weldon, his Company 100 men. Captain Hugh Price, his Company 100 men.
Captain William Hull, his Company 100 men. Captain Thomas Long, his Company
100 men. Captain John Anderson, his Company 100 men,
One hundred men a Company, besides all Officers.

The 2 Companies 100 men a piece.
Captain Lodowick Dick, with his Company of one hundred men. Captain John
Glen with his Company one hundred men.
To the mere irreligious murderer William Srintleger, Head and Governor of
this paganicall English Army in the Kingdom of Ireland.
WHereas we the Peers and Nobles of Ireland have with mutual minds consented
to stand for our religion (God helping) and to maintain this war as well in
the beginning as to the end thereof, against you Protestants and Puritants; the
cause is just on our side, you wholly bent to extirpate us out of this
Kingdom, our native soil, and to draw us mistaken wretches, (our God and his
Commandments despised) to puritanisme: and in so much as you allege that we
rebel against our King, (The Lord protect and save him and his excellent Lady
by the grace of God Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender
of of the Faith, etc, and his royal Crown) we answer that his Majesty well
pleased with the true information of things formerly ill constituted by the
unspeakable ignorance of the two never sufficiently torment, Luther and Calvin,
with the liberty of religion and safety of poor Ireland long sunked in the
bottomless debt of calamity by your means, now deemed to be exalted to the
high ascence of felicity: to the sufficient proof of the aforementioned
premises, we wish your presence at an appointed time and place, either to show
your skilful experiment in martial discipline, or to avouch by a grant
demonstrated your favor with His Majesty, which is absurd, considering your
conwardize and defect of courage, and all hope banished, Your valor in
despair, the true presage of your utter overthrow and downfall, as you bold
it a common proverb amonst your selves, Not to you only this is im^ted, but
also to your wicked confederates feared and presented in this. Kingdom.
Therefore desiring you all in general for your own profit, and willing you in
His Majesty's name to submit your selves, and so by consequence to be converted
to the holy Catholic; otherwise hide your heads under the sheltring walls of
Cities, etc.

A kind of a Ballad, briefly expressing the pride of Englishmen in this
Kingdom: an example to all men to be content with whatsoever they have; with
their speech in the beginning of these Wars.
To the Tune of, Ha, for my pride I must perish.
THe mother of your evils your souls will receive,
Hither you came surely us poor to deceive,
But such a good token to you we will send
That soonly will teach you your lives to amend,
Your God^ars and Gamers, you rich that are most,
Your wives and children shall pay for the roast.
Our anger weel write in blood of your men,
And bravely weel tune it in cries of women.
Your faith you have sold for pottage and bread.
In chese your sermons and songs you have read,
Your deeds in despair: I need not to tell
The portent of your downfall, you know it full well:
Our soldiers and male men are valiant and stout,
Our women and female are fair and devout,
Our riches were Heaven, and you were the God,
And so we permitted until you were sod.
From Ireland to England, but what to do there?
Your pride and presumption not kept any where.
From England your succor I hardly believe,
Will come long longed such rogues to relieve,
Your King you have banished, and despised the Crown,
But surely believe me your pride weel pull down.
Linckt in your Saddles a Horse you ride,
The sight of us Irish you dare not abide.
Away good man, good masters away,
On yonder great Hill are a hundred this day.
I vow and protest good Gossip it is well,
To old Master Langthon this wonder weel tell.
And stumbling and stambling away they do trot
Their wives being weak to hang the black pot.
The day you shall curse when first you begun,
And say with your selves our race we have run.
With Gentlemen's murder our minds were content,
But fainting in heart, we lately repent.
In Cork my Lord President shunneth the field,
His soldiers in treason from harm to shield.
Of English bastards in Bandon a crew,
In prison enclosed for death is their due,
In Warlike affairs among all the rest,
William Hull Crookbackd accounted the best.
The chief to instruct to march with a rope,
In order of hanging, grant Jesu that scope.
Long time by misfortune we were your poor slaves,
You dancing in Courts, we mourning in Caves,
In some of our Lands, of our buildings of all,
When we should our selves you Lords we did call;
But being too much over-mastered by pride
At you and your folly we scoff and deride.
For when the beginning of the Rebels began;
From one to another they oftentimes ran,
Prithee our Dermon come hither I say,
And tell me from market what heard you this day,
In troth good master of help is no way,
But that we must perish and wholly decay.
Why so? our Dermon, you make me to fret,
My limbs are trembling; on fear they are set
In Bandon proclaimed and fully set forth,
That many Rebels keep camps in the Norch.
These news amazd them when first he did blaze,
That the^ were undone and in a bad case
Through fear and despair in Cities they heap,
The fruit of their mischeifes by dying to reap.
Good wife take some Bacon and bread, do not want,
I rather should perish than that should be scant.
Their Cows and their Oxen we took for the rent,
And they with the pox for the Devil are sent.
Weel hunt William Sintleger like a broune Fox,
And you Lewis Boil go shrub with a pox,
My Lord of Barrimore go charge to the Beef;
In faith by your Kinsmen an arrant great thief.
By riches ill gotten preferment they gained,
They like to be killed by them disdained.
Your Statutes not settled on any sure ground.
Your wealth did augment, and others confound.
Your fashions are handsome, complete I confess,
But all being curious your faith did oppress.
But whether to kill them it is doubtful to say,
Or else to ship them and send them away.
Cornelius Mahony.

A Letter sent from Colonel Goring to His Majesty.
SIR,
AS it is my duty, according to Your Majesty's commands, I have ensured this
Fort for Your Majesty, and will sacrifice my life in Your service; The Castle
of Portland has in like manner surrendered; so that if we be beleagured, we
may notwithstanding be supplied out of Your Majesty's fertile Island, not
doubting to cut off all obstacles to the contrary. Sir, we lie near Your
furious adversaries, who we now expect daily, therefore in my opinion your best
design will be to draw what Forces you can, or the greatest part thereof well
appointed with Ammunition and provision toward () and there incamp where you
shall see the flower of your English Chivalry repair to Your Majesty, and this
will divert their Forces, yet I leave these considerations to the more solid
judgments of Your Majesty, and your Council of War, Your Majesty's Fly-boat is
returned with good success I hope of their last voyage, as I understand by
Your Majesty's intelligencer, I would not presume to open the packets, yet I
had a copy of the Contents abstracted which puts me in a good hope of such
auxiliarys as by divine assistance shall inthronize Your Majesty again,
Charles the first by Gods assistance the most puissant Monarch of any Prince
that ever swayd the Scepter in these Occidentall Europian Isles in despite and
maugre all antimonarchists, for which end the prayers and endeavors of your
Majesty's most humble and dutiful Subject and servant shall ever be intendent
at your Majesty's sacred feet,

Co. Goring.

FINIS.

