A RELATION Of the Entrance of the Swedish Army Into the Territories of the
King of DENMARK*

And the taking of some notable Towns therein; the said Swedes having
denounciated open War against the King of Denmark, for his unjust Taxations
and Dealings with them.

Extracted out of a Letter from a Merchant-Adventurer in the City of Hamburgh.

Wherein we may take notice of Gods providence in frustrating the King of
Denmarks Design to assist our King against the PARLIAMENT.

Published by Order.

LONDON, Printed by Rich. Cotes, and Jo. Raworth.

December. 30. 1644.

A Relation of the entrance of the Swedish Army into the Territories of the
King of Denmark.
I Hope the Commissioners from the Parliament, and Committee at London, will
effect much good from the King of Denmark, seeing the Swedes have denunciated
open War against the King, for his unjust Taxations and dealings with them:
General Dorstenson, with the greatest part of the Swedes Army, are come down
into the Holstein Land; the came unexpectedly, having Marched with such
celerity, as never was known; they have Marched within these sixteen days,
above a hundred Dutch miles: Their counsels and determinations have been so
privately ordered, that none knew of their intentions, until they came into
the King of Denmarks Territories: They have besieged and taken Crimp; which
place has been of great consequence to the King of Denmark, but was not
provided to withstand the Power of the Swedes. It is conceived they will
re-Fortifie the said Town, and leave a Garrison there. It is likewise
reported, That the General was before Kiel on Wednesday last, and has taken
in a House (which belongs to the King of Denmark) near adjacent to the Town,
and at length has also taken Kiel. It is conceived that he will find great
Treasure in the Town; reports are various, some say ten hundred thousand
Rixdollors, but I think, if he find half the sum, he will be contented,
and Advance into the bowels of the King of Denmarkes Country. They are all in
security, and have not made any preparation to withstand the Army of the
Swedes; so it is probable, that they will ruinate his Country before the King
will be able to collect an Army which can oppose them.

It is likewise reported, That the Swedes have entered Denmark on the other
side, they having had an Army of seven or eight thousand men in readiness upon
Borders of his Country, so that while he raises Forces to oppose the one
Army, the other will over-runne and ruin great part of his Country. The
Swedes General has sent a Messenger to this Town of Hamborough, to inform
the Senate, that he intends no hurt to them or their Inhabitants, and that if
any prejudice should ensue unto them by the insolent and disorderly carriage of
his Soldiers, he would bring them to demerited punishment. The Duke of
Holstein has declared himself to be Newtrall, so the Swedes fear not any
opposition.

It is almost incredible, to think of the great quantity of Ammunition, Arms,
Gold and Silver, with other rich Booties that they have already taken.

REader,
take notice of this, That one hundred Dutch Miles, is four hundred English
Miles; for an Army to March in the space of sixteen days, was so great a
thing that the like was never heard of before

FINIS.

