Remarkable Passages from Nottingham, Lichfield, Leicester, and Cambridge:
Declaring what the Kings Standard is, and the time and manner of its setting
up. Also how Lichfield and Tamworth are disarmed, and the Lord Gray his house
disarmed and pillaged by the traitorous Cavaliers. Together with some other
Remarkable Occurrents.
A Letter from a Gentleman near Nottingham, to a friend in London.
I Received your last Letter and Books, for which I thank you, as also D. D.
for his. I came on Wednesday night last from the Court at Nottingham, where I
saw the King set up his Standard on Monday night before: The manner whereof was
this: His Majesty came into the Castle-yard, accompanied with the Prince, Duke,
Prince Robert, and Maurice his brother; the Duke of Richmond, and diverse other
Courtiers and Cavaliers: and finding out the highest pointed hill in the Yard,
from whence it might be perspicuous, the Standard was brought in, and there
erected: At which all the Courtiers and Spectators flung up their caps, and
whooped, crying, God save King Charles, and hang up the Roundheads, and so
whooped the King to his lodgings. After which the Standard was thence removed
to the highest Tower of the Castle, where it hangs blowing, and so must, till
the King advances his Camp for ward; then it removes with him. It is a long
pole like a May Pole, dyed red, on the upper end whereof hangs a large silk
flag, (in form of a Scutchion) with a Red Cross, and two Lion Passants upon
two Crowns. The Prince Robert was next day made General of the Horse, and had
a Ribbon and George delivered him, and so had the Duke of York. And the King
made Declaration, that who so would go that afternoon with Prince Robert
against Coventry and Warwick, it should be acceptable service. Whereupon he and
diverse went away thither, where the King had sent about 600. Horse and Foot a
week before, who had on Saturday and Sunday last been beaten by the men of
Coventry (who keep the Cavaliers out) having slain one, and wounded diverse of
them, and themselves lost two or three. Warwick Castle keeps them off, where
twelve men have been slain, most of the Kings side. There is no considerable
party at Nottingham to do any thing: Monday and Tuesday very few came in; but
there is great expectation of multitudes from Wales and Westmerland. Yorkshire
stands firm. Drums beat about Nottingham for Volunteers, for the King will be
at Lincoln this night, where all the Gentry are summoned to meet him. Troops
of Horse are coming to be billeted in our County, we fear outrages by them.
They commit rapine and spoil already about Nottingham, having ransackt
Gentlemen's houses, made one Master Needhams own Cart bring away to Nottingham,
bedding, linen, pewter, butter, bacon, cheese, and other things out of his
house. He is accounted a Roundhead. So at York, sixteen of them beset a
Knights house, (whom the King had dis-Justiced) broke in, sought for the
Knight, whom they would have slain, as themselves declared; but he getting
away, (by the help of his servants) they took 70. l. in money, his plate, and
diverse other things, and so returned. Some of them are apprehended. They give
out that Roundheads estates shall be free prize, and indeed against them is
the quarrel, whom the Lord I hope will protect. My house is much threatened,
and I do verily expect an assault, for which I have prepared to defend my
self. We think the Parliaments Forces too slow in coming down.

An Information from Leicester.
UPon Friday the 26. day of Aug. 1642. the same morning that the Earls of
Dorset, Southampton, Sir John Culpepper, and Sir William Vvedall set out from
the King with a message to the high Court of Parliament, pretending some
willingness in His Majesty to have persons chose of both sides to treat about
a Peace between His Majesty and the Parliament; Prince Robert, (who has need
enough of the Parliaments help to re-possesse him in his Kingdom, and estates
in the Palatinate) together with Master Hastings, and many Cavaliers, went to
my Lord Gray the Earl of Stamford his house, from whence they took all his
Arms, and took away and spoiled all his goods, and also the clothes of his
Chaplain, who was feign to fly for his life: And some chief ones asked, Where
are the brats, the young children, swearing God damn them they would kill
them, that there might be no more of the breed of them: but God stirred up some
friends to succor them. They have also disarmed many of the Inhabitants
thereabout, and taken away many of their goods, but no doubt their account is
at hand. Amen Lord.

From Lichfield.
THe Lord Paget and his followers have gathered 3. or 400. of the scum and
refuge of the Country, and billeted them in Lichfield, a place more pliable to
yield to wicked men's designs, then most other places, by reason of the
Cathedral, debaucht fellows that have infected the town, and the want of
powerful preaching ever since Reformation, where the Cavaliers and their scums
have disarmed every man in the town, (Master Noble, a Parliament man, and the
two Bailiffes, and Sheriffs not excepted) and seized upon the Magazine of the
City, and exercise their soldiers with their Arms. They also on a sudden
surprised Tamworth, a great market town, and have served them in the like
manner: caused Master Blake, a godly Minister to fly, sent Master Black the
Schoolmaster to the King, and imprisoned about four or six honest eminent men
in the Castle there, because (as they say) they are Roundheads. All which
might have been prevented, had that populous town stood upon her guard, and
sent out scouts (as valiant Bermingham does) For Gods and the Parliaments
enemies are stout and courageous, where they are feared, and not opposed; but
feeble and cowardly where manfully withstood. Then be courageous, oh England;
let us labor and pray for courage; as well as for victory, and God will
destroy all those that rise up against his people, (because they are such)
reproachfully calling them Roundheads. Even so be it. Amen Lord.

THere is certain intelligence that the Lord Paget, Aug. 29.
Sir Thomas Holt, and many great ones, having gathered together in Lichfield
Close or Palace for refuge, hearing that my Lo: Brooks was coming against
them, they and all the Cavaliers and soldiers most manfully fled for fear, and
so have left the town, but the poor townsmen are cheated of their Arms.

The same day certain intelligence came to the Parliament of the valiant
Northamptonshire men's discomfiting 300. Troopers going from Nottingham to
Oxford, intending to pillage Daventrye as they went, but many of them were
killed, about forty of them taken prisoners, and the rest fled, God be praised
for it.

An extract of a Letter from an honest Scholar of Cambridge, to one in
Woodstreet, dated Aug. 30.
SIr, I thank you for your good intelligence, and for a requital, take this
good news: There came hither 400. Volunteers, Citizens of London, well armed,
last night, who have taken the Earl of Carlisle, Doctor Stern, and other
malignants, prisoners, and have also beset most of the Colleges in Town, for
all which, praised be the Lord of Hosts: for now they begin to shake and
quiver, that not long since were a terror to others. And take notice of this,
as the sum of my late studies, That that side which consists of good
religious men, take up Arms at the call of God, (the call of supreme Authority
which resides in Parliament, and the call of Necessity is the call of God) for
the maintenance of Piety and Learning, of the privilege of Parliaments, (the
old and best Government of England) and propriety of the Subject, and for the
safety of the Kings Person, which is now in great danger, having God, all the
godly and their prayers on their side, must needs prevail against that party
that is Papisticall and Atheistical, which opposes all these, and whose
quarrel is chiefly against those that have most of God in them, who they are
foolishly pleased to call Roundheads. I wish they would repent and come in
before they are confounded. Thus desiring to hear from you by the return of
the Carryer, I rest,

Aug. ^0. Yours.

London, Printed for T. Underhill. Sept. 1. 1642.


