A Relation of a terrible Monster taken by a Fisherman near Wollage, July the
15. 1642. and is now to be seen in Kings street, Westminster.

The shape whereof is like a Toad, and may be called a Toad-fish; But that
which makes it a Monster, is, that it has hands with fingers like a man, and
is chested like a man.

Being near five foot long, and three foot over, the thickness of an ordinary
man.

The following Discourse will describe him more particularly.

Whereunto is added, A Relation of a bloody Encounter betwixt the Lord
Faulconbridge and Sir John Hotham, wherein the Duke of Richmond is hurt, and
the Lord Faulconbridge taken prisoner.

With some other Misselanies of memory both by sea and land, with some
Foreign Occurrences.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Butter. 1642.

A Relation of a terrible Monster called a Toad-fish, etc.
GOD shows his wonders in the deep, (says the royal Prophet) but those
wonders are never with our wonder, when once they leave their wonted stations,
and come (upon what message God knows) to visit us in an unknown world: their
shapes being as miraculous to us, as our element unnatural unto them. But to
the purpose. Friday morning, July 15. between 4. and 5. of the clock in the
morning, a little above Wollage, one Thomas West, casting his net upon the
coming in of the tide, for Salmon; upon the drawing in of the net, (whose
weight and difficulty in dragging portended to him good tidings) on a sudden he
found a strange alteration: he sees in the net a Fiend, not a Fish; at the
least a Monster, not an ordinary creature. Had not his companion had a better
resolution, he would rather have been rid of his net, then troubled with his
guest, so deeply was he struck with the odious shape of it. I now proceed to
its shape and dimensions. It is by the vote of diverse Gentlemen of great
quality that went to see it, such a monstrous creature as scarce can be
believed ever to have been seen: this morning brought alive into Glove-Alley in
Kings street. It is called a Toad-fish, and with good reason; for the head and
eyes, when it lies upon its belly, do perfectly resemble a Toad. But here lies
the wonder, turn him up, or but a little raise his head, and you shall behold
the perfect breast and chest of a man: nay you may evidently tell as many ribs,
both short and long, as are in a man, and of the same jointure and feature; and
two as perfect hands as any man whatsoever. By which it is evident that he
swims upright, beating the water with his hands, as we all know how the Toad
marches with his snowt upwards. His mouth very broad, with three ranks of
sharp teeth; whereby it is probable that it is a devouring, ravenous, and
prey-booting fish; yet is its mouth the very emblem of a Toad, as likewise its
eyes. A Butchers wife coming in hastily to see it, and hearing at the first
that there was a strange fish to be seen, and being upon it in the stable
where it lay before she was aware, thrusting in among others, started from it
with a shreek, crying, Oh the devil in the shape of a great fish, swounded,
and was feign to be carried out. The dimensions of the fish are these: He is in
length well-nigh five foot, in breadth a yard over, having on each side two
huge fins, in likeness much like a Thornback, his tail a foot in length, as
it were all of Whale-bone.

Now the coming up of this monster into the fresh river, and so nigh the
shore, is more then remarkable, (never any of this strange kind ever having
been seen by any age before:) For Pliny, the Naturallist, although he
confesses that there is no creature or vermin upon the earth, but has its
like in the seas, and that there is a Toad-fish, yet this Author averreth, that
that fish never comes near the shore, but is constantly in the depth of the
Ocean, as is the Sharke, the Flaile-fish, and others of that noxious kind, and
that he never saw or heard of any taken upon any Coast save one, which was in
the year that Nero (that never-sufficiently detested Tyrant) was borne in, of
which he has this note, that Monstrum praecessit monstro: and plainly divined
that its arrival was ominous, as indeed all Histories do with constant
consent maintain and write, that all unusual births either in men or bruit
creatures, in sea or upon land, especially out of their seasons, have ever been
the forerunners and sad harbingers of great commotions and tumults in States
and Kingdoms, if not mournful Heralds of utter desolation: Witness the
Heifer calving of a Lamb upon the Altar in Jerusalem, (mentioned by Josephus)
some half a year before the dismal sacking, firing, and final subversion of
that beautiful and renowned City by Vespasian. A mares foling of a colt with
two heads at Vitellius (that beast) his entrance into the Roman Empire, who
did much mischiefs in his wicked reign. A Whales coming ashoare at Diepe, a
little before Francis the first was taken prisoner at the bataile of Pavia by
Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain.

These unnatural accidentss though dumb, do notwithstanding speak the
supernatural intentions and purposes of the Divine powers, chiefly when they
meet just at that time when distractions, jars, and distempers are a foot in
a Commonweal or Kingcome: Messengers of Justice they were ever accounted;
nay, they have without missing ever proved themselves to be the same. God in
his mercy grant that this ugly monster may not for our sins prove the like to
us, seeing the diverse sins which are by diverse Divines comprised in the nature
of a toade, reign, and have their swinge in our Nation. It is further observed
by those that profess skill in Prognostication, that of how much the monster
is of feature or fashion, hateful and odious, so much it portends danger the
more dreadful and universal; God defend their observation may not hold in us,
but surely a creature (if a creature we may call it, though truly it goes
something against the hair, considering its detestible ugly shape) I say a
creature more displeasing, and at which humane blood may rise, I never saw with
my eye, nor desire to see again.

LORD we beseech thee turn thy back upon our sins, and thy favorable aspect
upon our miseries, very likely with more haste then good speed to light upon
us. Unite (good God) Head and Members, King and Parliament, increase their
loyal affections to him, his royal approbation to them and their proceedings,
whence may proceed in our time His Majesty's content and all our securities,
and let all true-hearted, plaine-dealing, and plaine-meaning Subjects say Amen.

Diverse Occurrences from HULL and other places taken July. 15th. 1642.
FROM Hull is reported this present Friday at Westminster, that the King
intending to build a Sconce or Halfe-moone near Hull, to the intent to keep
aid from them either of men or moneys, in the side of Lincolnshire, he
committed the charge of that enterprise to my Lo: Falconbridge: the same Lo:
proceeding with all diligence in raising the Halfe-moone to make batteries upon
it, and placing his Ordnance against it, my Lord Rich being in his company, on
Tuesday night a Scotch Knight and Captain, with 500. men and four field
pieces, issued out of Hull, set upon my Lo: of Falconbridge, who received him
very stoutly, and maintained a long and hot skirmish, three hours, in which my
Lord Duke of Richmond fighting very valiantly is wounded; my Lord forced them
to retreat and quit his works; but being more valiant then advised, pursued so
far that he had his horse shot under him, and by that means was taken prisoner
and carried into Hull: The King sent from Beverley more aid to the Halfe-moone,
so that for such a piece it is very strong. His Majesty is very sorry at the
wounding of the Duke, and said openly, that they had drawn his own blood
already.

This morning went 200. Volunteeres all armed through Lincolnes-Inne-fields,
having red and yellow feathers, and ribbonds in their hats, and went directly to
the waterside to take shipping for Hull this very day. God send my Lord of
Holland, and his associate, well with their message, that they may deliver it
unto the Kings content, but these are but bad signs of it, diverse were slain
and hurt of both sides in this attempt and defense spoken of, but no number
named.

London, July 16. 1642.
RIchard Nevill Esquire, of Billingbeare, Gentleman in Ordinary of his
Majesty's Privy Chamber, was sent with an hundred gallant Horse, Tuesday, July
the 12. unto the aid and assistance of Master Henry Hastings, High Sheriff of
Leicester shire.

The Earl of Warwick has sent again unto the House, earnestly desiring them
to consider in what case he stands in as touching moneys and victuals; his
soldiers and seamen daily complaining of their wants in both: and as touching
victuals, his Majesty has given express command unto all his victuallers at
Chattam, and elsewhere, to send in none of any sort or quantity soever, upon
pain of his high displeasure, and there peril.

News from Foreign parts, July 16.
THe Swedes have lately taken from Piccolomini 8000. pounds worth of Gunpowder,
abundance of soldiers coats, and other provision; in which he has lost many
men. Likewise the Emperor is fled from Vienna. All Austria (his hereditary
country) is revolted from him, and Hungary likewise.

FINIS.

