THE REBELS LETTER TO THE POPE.
Wherein they present unto him their Late Purchases by the Sword in Ireland,
praying his Benediction for their future Proceedings.

Sent and communicated by an Irish Priest unto his friends here in England.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed January 20. 1642.

A LETTER FROM THE Chieftains of the Irish Rebels unto the POPE.
MOst holy Father, Forasmuch as we being lately moved and stirred up by the
instinct and will of Almighty God, to recover this Kingdom from the heavy yoke
of the English, who for many years past by force have kept under, and
suppressed both our Religion and Nation; Have now, making use of the advantages
of the time, while the Heretics are in civil discord, with great courage and
alacrity broke our bonds, and welnigh totally freed our selves from their yoke:
We therefore now have thought it our duty to declare unto your Holiness, that
it has always been, and ever shall be, our principal care and endeavor to
revive the State of the Catholic Church here almost extinguished, and to
restore her ruins; as reputing it with our selves for our part and duty to
spend and employ our very lives and all our substance in the propagation and
enlargement of the same: To which also we have been the more willingly induced
(if not compelled) for that if we had not used this timely prevention against
mischief, we were like to have expected a worse estate and being here, then
that which the Turks afford unto their Christian Subjects: insomuch that we
must have left either our country, lives, or Religion; Wherefore being at this
point, unto whom with more right and hope can we make our recourse for help and
assistance then unto thee our spiritual Father on earth, that under the Wings
of thy favor and benediction, we may find security in all our enterprises:
Which thing we hope to obtain of your Holiness, by the example of others who
have never sought in vain for grace and favor from your holy See in their need
and affliction; Unto thee therefore, the common Father of mercy unto all the
sons of the Church, as unto our only refuge and most safe Sanctuary we make
this our address, most humbly beseeching that thou will hear our sighs,
receive our prayers, and grant our requests, that the mouths may be stopped,
and the force broken of them that hate thee, and threaten to hinder the
re-edification of the broken walls of our Jerusalem. Wherein if your Holiness
will vouchsafe credit unto us (without arrogance be it spoken) never any of our
predecessors since the time our Kingdom first came into the hands of the
English, have been more forward and gone further in the propagation of the holy
faith first brought in unto us by our holy Apostle St. Patrick then our selves;
and to cherish, amplify, and spread the same, having now welnigh cast off the
heretical yoke of the English, whereunder it lay almost extinguished and
buried in these parts: For in these our endeavors we desire and aim at no
other thing then the defense of the Catholic faith, and of the glory of the
Roman See, in the reflourishing of the same in this Kingdom. Wherefore let your
Holiness vouchsafe to incline to these Petitions of us, who contemning honors
and profits whatsoever, desire not to live a day longer, then that they may see
the Church of Rome flourish throughout the Universe.

Now in the first place, our request is, that for the better increase of the
faith, to those Ecclesiastical Sees that are void in this Kingdom, such may
be preferred who are eminent for learning, and policy, who together with us
take great pains in the promotion and advancing forward of the Catholic
Cause, being such whom we with the most Reverend Bishop of Cork, have
nominated and commended, as Pastors fit to instruct thy flock, both with the
Word, and by their own example; lest otherwise men, perhaps coming with more
ambition and authority then worth, intrude themselves into the managing of the
Catholic Cause in this Kingdom: To which request we are moved by the great
loss of many fallen away to the Adversary, which here we have suffered
through the paucitie of Pastors in either Province of Mounster, which
contains Eleven Bishoprics, all under the Metropolis of Cassills: The
reverend Bishop of Cork being also wholly worn out and spent with age and
labor. And this we the more boldly crave, for that those that have been
elected, consecrated, and sent from your sacred See to possess the places void
in these parts, are by us (with the assistance of Almighty God) so defended
and secured, that they may with safety watch over and tend the flocks
committed to their charge.

Moreover, We desire that as your predecessors, Pius Quintus, and Gregory
the thirteenth, of happy memory, published and sent their Bulls of
Excommunication against the late Queen of England, and her Adherents; Even so
that your Holiness would vouchsafe at this time to denounce and send forth the
like Sentence against all our heretical Opposers, for the furtherance and
advancement of this War, and the facilitating of a happy and wished
consummation of the same.

And lastly, with the greatest affection of our hearts that we are able, we
commend and commit unto your sanctity, this your Kingdom, that depends on
your self only (under God) together with our selves as your humble Subjects,
and the bearers hereof our Ambassadors unto your Holiness, who will more fully
by word of mouth what we (assisted with their help and doctrine) have
achieved in this War, Praying that your Holiness will vouchsafe unto them
undoubted credit and belief.

Given in our Catholic Camp the 20th of December 1641. Stilo novo. Your
Holinesses most obedient Sons and most faithful Subjects; Oneale Omaghon.
Mac Cartie More. Mac Donogh Macquire.


FINIS.

