THE REBELS OF IRELANDS WICKED CONSPIRACY AGAINST Kingsaile in the province of
Mounst^ere, and County of Cork.

WITH The Relation of a bloody Act committed upon the bodies of a Gentlewoman
and her man, traveling that way.

ALSO, A SPEECH Spoken by the Earl of Tyrone to the Rebels in the Woods.

Here also is related the place of their abode, and how they got thithes being
in the County of Dublin, five miles from the City, it being the South part of
Ireland.

printed for William Field, 1641.

THE REBELS Conspiracy against Kingsaile in the Province Mounsteere, and the
County of Cork.
Upon the 18. of December came the rebels toward Kingsale, thinking to have
entered into the City by policy, but not knowing of the watchword, which was,
God protect true protestants, they were interrupted of their purpose.

Then they marched twenty miles from the City, and the next evening, their
Colonel by name, Hankscomb, sent spies abroad to see how they were fortified
who were taken by Captain Roberts, an Englishman.

Then did the aforesaid Colonel send other spies which were taken also, then
perceived he how the matter went: wherefore he resolutely went on, and at
this time does besiege Kingsaile, where without the City, they committed a
bloody outrage, to the terror of all those which have heard it, according to
the Relation of many Ministers upon the last (...) day, beside the report which
came from thence upon Tuesday, being the 20 of December.

A gentlewoman not knowing of the besiege, accompanied only with her man, made
toward Kingsaile, who were taken by the rebels: who first of all did hang up
the man, then did they cea^e upon the Gentlewoman, and plucking off her head
covering, four of them vvound the hair of their head about their skanes, and
stuck them into the ground, and afterward the aforesaid four had their will
of her, and afterward ripped up her belly to see whether she were with child or
no. This was done within four miles of Kingsaile.

A SPEECH Made By the Earl of Tyrone to the Rebels in the woods.
How it does rejoice me to s^e St. Patrick^ Banner flourish, by noble and free
spirits.

How am I clothed with admiration to see the noble actions by you so
courageously performed.

Go on, go on, brave spirits, and let the world tremble hearing of your
undanted actions, and expert Chivalry.

Swim, swim, unto your desires through Seas of blood, and let the Heretics
be the sole object of your hate: as yet you have done bravely, the God of
Battle crovvning you with unparalleled victory.

As I said before, so I e^courage you again to go on, and daily delight my
sense of seeing with bloody spectaeles: bear upon your swords a bloody
Ensign, each point being covered with the heart of an Heretic. It is not
unknown to you all how my Father suffered, and how I was forced to fly: it is
not unknown to you all, how vvilling I am in your defense to lose my dearest
and blood: it is not unknown to you all what pains I have taken in your
defense. First leaving of Spain to succor you. Secondly, by providing forces
to assist you, and thirdly, what affection I have borne toward you. Wherefore
as you have bin, so alw^is be valiant, for my own part I will out dare the
bullets of your enemies, and will spit in the face of all cowards which are
amongst you, I spoke it not because I feared your hitherto continued noble acts
would cease from practice, but the more nobly to encourage you.

Then turned he himself about to Sir Hugh Oneal^ and spoke thus unto him. For
your own part Sir, I shall owe my future fortunes to your service, or rather
friendship; for by you J live, by you I am in safety, to conclude, by you I
hope to attain unto that, which by my foes heretofore I was put by.

Wherefore as you have bin, so continue* so may you command him hereafter.
which heretofore has bin terrified by those, which we now will bend our forces
against.

Those which have debarred our friends of their accustomed freedom, and made
them more then tributary slaves.

Wherefore take my words, as spoken from a friend, fight couragionsly, and live
famous eternally: consider that Religion urges you unto it: consider that
freedom from bondage urges you unto it: consider that your intimate friend
entreats you unto it, who desires to live no longer then you may be happy.

The place of most of the Rebels habitation heing Karloh in the County of
Dublin.
THe rebels, most of them J mean at this present time have their habitation in
Karloh, five miles from the City of Dublin: in the south part of Ireland, many
villages thereabout they have burned down by fire.

Very strong they are, and will not easily be repelled, and have many Engines
of war. At the first coming to that place, they shot down most of the houses,
the place now is their own, and are like to keep that, and they will have
many other places, unless sudden aid, which the Protestants pray may speedily
be sent unto them; else are they like to be utterly destroyed and England lose
its privilege of Traffic there.

Verses made by a s^uldier.
Come send forth aid, do that without excuse,
And then reform you of every foul abuse,
you shall have time, no doubt, then make good speed
Its good to stench the wound that still does bleed.
When rebels hunt, and seek revenge in blood,
Its good to haste, their force may be with stood,
And by collecting of our force together,
We doubt but Christ will send us safely thither;
The winds shall serve the waters calm, shall be,
If we this thing perform with courage free,
pick hence those Lidgers proud papisticall,
They still pro^ect, they seek to work our fall:
They blaze such rumors, and such miste they cast,
To hinder us to circumvent our haste:
That so they may obtain a longer time
To bring in forces to subvert our climb.
Now haste with speed, now let it acted be,
press soldiers now with courage bold and free.
FINIS.

