INNOCENCE CLEARED, True worth Predicated, AGAINST FALSE ASPERTIONS: IN A
LETTER SENT To Mr Henry Burton.

From a Christian Friend; In Defense of Dr Bastwick, one of his Quondam Fellow
sufferers.

Romans 2.1.3. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, that
Judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou
that judge do the same things. And think thou this, O man, that judge
them that do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the
Judgment of God?

James 4.10, 11. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift
you up. Speak not evil one of another (brethren) he that speaks evil of his
brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the
Law; but if thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer of the Law but a Judge.

Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

London, Printed by John Macock. 1645.

To the impartial Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Delight not to show my self in Print, yet as it is my duty to admonish a
brother, which in this ensuing Letter I have done, so the like obligation lies
upon me to publish it, that I might clear the innocence and predicate the worth
of that Godly, Learned, Gentleman Dr. Bastwick: A man on whom the Independents
have privately, and publicly, laid loads of defamations; for it satisfied them
not to give him reproachful language to his face, (which was sad to hear, and
even a shame to repeat) but they set forth in Print, known untruths, premed
tated Lies, to make him odious to the World: witness Lieut. Col. John Lilburne
his book; accusing him for an ungrateful man (which is a vice, not only
hateful to God and all good men, but to the very heathens) which charge of his
against the Doctor was most falfe. I hen came out another under the name of a
Presbyterian, (but whether in truth, or thew for feme particular benefit may be
suspected) and he accuses him to be a proud selfe-conceited man, etc. yea he
takes the boldness to lay this deep charge upon him in the name of all his
godly Presbyterian friends; which accusation all the Doctors godly Presbyterian
friends and acquaintance, that I know (and I am no stranger to the most of
them) do utterly disavow; and for this Presbyterian (if one, for I do not think
he is) he drives the Innependents design, as may be proved, for when this
Letter was framing, an Independent said to some that I know, that he and others
of his parry were to meet that day, to draw a moderate Letter to be sent to
Doctor Bastwick. But the Letter was never sent unto him; only a day or two
after this meeting, a booke-feller brought a written book, made ready for the
Press, and showed it to the Doctor, saying as a neighbor, and a friend, he
gave him a fight of it, for he was to put it in Print; then this was no Letter,
sent unto him, as on the frontispice of his book, he falsely pretends, but at
is plain the Author thereof, call him what they will, consulted with the
Independents about this Letter, and they and he together, framed it after such
a manner, as they supposed would make their design no way suspected, yet by
the course he took, and the printing, but not sending it to the Doctor, every
man may perceive this Letter was writ and published merely to defame Doctor
Bastwick. And that coming forth under the name of a Presbyterian, it might
render him the more infamous. But this wrought not effectually, and therefore
one of his quondam fellow sufferers, he comes out against him, and with his
full strength aiming at his head, that so (if possible) he might strike him
down in the opinion of all men, never to rise again; (but the hand is too
feeble) he presented this holy, worthy, learned Doctor to the people as a mad
man, casting many reproaches upon him, and amongst his accusations, p. the 24
He complains of stinging netles in the Doctors Book, but one sharper then all
the rest: whatsoever construction he makes of the Doctors words there, they are
no more but this, Doctor Bastwick out of his pious zeal for Gods glory, and
carnest desire of the Churches peace and tranquillity writ against Independency,
and exhorts magistrates, masters of families, and parents of children, to
labor to keep the people from error, that are under their charge, and with
faithful Abraham to instruct their families in the knowledge, fear, and
worship of the true God, and with holy Joshua, Josh 24.15. to see that they and
their house do serve the Lord: surely this is no bad Council nor will never
sting a well grounded, settled, established Christian. For if a father presents
wholesome food, that which he knows is good for his child, but the child either
out of ignorance of wantonness refusech to taste of the meet, because he sees
variety of other dishes, and so set out and garnished, that they seem pleasant
to the eye, and to be desired; like to the forbidden fruit Genesis 3.6. And if a
learned Physician tell the father that those dishes which seem so pleasant to
the eve, are mingled with such ingredients as will prove very pernicious to his
child's health, he is a sl^p father and not a loving father, that causes not
his child to forbear to taste of any of those dishes; and that persuadeth him
not to eat of such food, as he knows is wholesome and good for nourishment,
and that (...) is no Incendiary for advising the father for the welfare of his
child; this is the result of all, and directly Dr Bastwicks case. Courteous
Reader, it may be some will censure me for being too large, but Seneca and many
excellent Authors have delivered their minds in Letters far more prolix^^
(...) now (...) a Petitioner unto thee for a license to add a few words more,
to let thee know, that I perceiving the Independents grand design is to use
all means publicly to reproach disgrace (...) and falsely accuse this worthy
sufferer and faithful servant of the Lord, (who the glory of God the ultimate
end of all his endeavors) I could do no less then present to the public view
of all men, the real worth, and unfamed goodness, which I know to be in the
Gentleman. This I have done in faithfulness without flattery, and I assure
thee in the presence of the Lord (who knows all things) I speak the truth, I
lie not; that Dr. Bastwick nor (...) on living and know of this Letter until
it was sent to Mr. Burton; neither does Dr Bastwick yet know that there was any
such Letter writ, sent, or is to be published; I beseech thee read, consider,
judge impartially.

Farewell. Thine in the Lord, B. S.

To the Reverend and Honored Mr Henry Burton, etc.
SIR,
SOme few days since a book entitled Vindiciae Veritatis, came into my hand
subscribed with your name, which deliberately I perused, and was grieved at
heart to read such lines from Mr. Henry Burton, against his quondam
fellow-sufferer (Doctor Bastwicke) I meddle not with your Arguments about
Presbyterian dependant, and Presbyterian independent: but I question the
selfeishnes, the false accusing, the fiery spirit, the aspersing Language,
which you have scattered in several pages of your book against your
fellow-sufferer. Sir, God has bestowed on Doctor Bastwicke, your self, and
others, extraordinary gifts, for to you it was given, not only to believe, but
to suffer for his sake; yea, and to suffer at one time, yea and at that time
for one cause, (your judgment then being different to that it is now) so that
there was an oneness in the cause, and sufferings; O then why maintain you
not this oneness still! (at least in your affections) but page the second, you
seem your self to insinuate this question (for say you,) How comes it to
pass that my two fellow sufferers, and my self, should fall at this ods? was
it by any divine providence ominated, or presaged, by your two standing on one
Pillory, and mine alone on the other, that we should come upon one Theater, to
become spectacles to the world by mutual digladiations, as if the one Pillory
should contend with the other? thus you. Sir before I answer your question, I
beseech you in all christian love give me leave to advise you: O take heed,
take heed, how you harbor such a thought, as to charge divine providence with
your humane frailties, and self seeking Vindications, make not God the author
of your divisions, who is a God of unity, peace, and love; it is true by way of
permission, there is no evil in a City, that the Lord has not done: Amos 3.6.
and the Scripture tells us, it must needs be that offenses come; but woe be to
that man, by whom the offense comes: and therefore I cannot but deal
ingenuously with you, and for answer to your question, tell you, what Godly,
holy selfe-denying men, not only converts in part, as you censure all of a
contrary judgment to your self to be, but some of your own judgment have
said, which is this, That it came to pass by your unadvised thrusting your
self in, to contend with Mr. Prynne by name, one of your quondam fellow
sufferers, whereas according to all rules of friendship you were the unfittest
man for that work of any, there being many other sober minded christians
besides Mr. Henry Burton: and as some of your own party have said, more able
to defend, and maintain their cause then your self; but for my part I
question not your abilities; but this is very clear, that you, and you only
did make this odds, with your fellow-sufferer: and so primarily and originally
you have caused all the difference between you, by proclaiming all of a
contrary judgment to your self, though otherwise never so godly, to be
enemies to the government of the Lord Jesus Christ; which opinion Doctor
Bastwicke Learnedly and Christianly confuted and reproved, naming no man: Sir I
honor you, and in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ beseech you, who am a
fellow-sufferer with you, and that in as deep a measure as any, though not to
blood; lay this to heart, that you have had a hand in causing offenses in the
Church by your unchristianing and censuring the dear people of God. O pull
down every high thought that exalts itself! and humble your self before the
Lord for this miscarriage, lest you be liable to that woe pronounced, Mat.
18.7. Thus in christian love I have faithfully and truly, as in the sight of
God, answered your question. But you will say, how make you good that charge in
the beginning of your Letter? Sir, I shall do it from your own writings, for
I find in them that your chief labor and pains is spent to vindicate and
exalt your self; for the Arguments of difference they are but coldly and
unsatisfactorily handled; but when you come to your self, who you say have
been unsufferably wronged, then you are so heated, that while you seem to
blame the Doctor, you forget your promise, page 2. where you say, [you will
answer him in soberness and in the spirit of meekness and love] and you fall
into unadvised, unseemly, unbrotherly Language, and false accusations against
Doctor Bastwicke: But you have been provoked not a little [for say you] the
Doctor speaks of a grave man, with a white basket-hilted beard [though not
naming any, yet you were the man aimed at.] Why, good Sir, if you were: Here is
gravity acknowledged, which speaks a reverence borne to the man, though a
dislike of his uncharitable and unwarrantable writings: But the Doctor
expresses himself with a scurrilous Epithet (say you.) I deny it, for it is
but a harmless jest, and no other; it can never hurt you; and truly a meek
hearted Moses, would have passed it by, and have taken no notice of it, nor
have made such acclamation about a merry word. But it is a disgrace which you
cannot bear; O! Oh! self appears exceedingly in all your lines; and because
you have made such an outcry, and make a man an offender for a word, take a
view of your own Language to your quondam fellow-sufferer, worthy Doctor
Bastwick, but before I give you in your Catalogue of unsavory words, I here
protest in the presence of God [who knows the secrets of all hearts, and from
whose eyes nothing can be hid] that neither Doctor Bastwick, nor any mortal
man, as yet, does know of this Letter unto you: for the noble Doctor did ride
into the Country before your book came forth, and is not yet returned, so that
he has never seen your book, therefore no instigation from him has procured
me to write; but when I saw how all along your book, you falsely accused that
deserving Gentleman, laboring to take away his good name, which Solomon says,
is better then precious ointment; Ecclesi. 7.1. And I having had such
experience [as none in England has had more] of the Doctors worth, Zeal for
Gods glory, and Christian Conversation; it made me that I durst not be silent,
lest I should be partaker with you in your sin. And for the Doctors
expressions in his books, which you make so much ado about, I assure you the
many affronts, the base unworthy Language, that he has from time to time
undergone, from many both men and women, of your judgment, vilifying,
reviling, and scorning him to his face some of them being of no mean account
amongst you, was the cause of them; for before he had published any book
[onely they heard he was writing against their opinion] they daily abused him
most unworthily, for which he privately in Christian love reproved them, but
when he saw that his silence and patience did no good, this caused him to make
his Postscript, and the other book truly relating their unchristian Carriage,
and laughing at their unreprovable folly. And does not God laugh at the wicked,
who will go on in their sinful and perverse ways, and will not be reproved;
see Prove. 1.25.26. Truly Mr. Burton, I am confident had you been so provoked
by the Contrary party, as Doctor Bastwick has been by your party, your spirit
would not have brookt it, with so much patience as he has done.

Sir, this by the way being premised, I beseech you now take and peruse the
catalogue of all your unbrotherly Invectives against your quondam
fellow-sufferer. You render him to the world an Hypocrite, page 17. (one that
has but fair flourishes of holiness) page 18. You conclude him an Adversary
to Christ's King dome, and an open enemy and persecuter of the Church. Page 20,
you charge him with doing wrong, and walking scandalously, to the great offense
and shame of the very name of Christian Religion. Page 21. You make him to be
worse then a natural Heathen, a base, and barbarous man. Page 25. You aver,
and do seem to take upon you to prove him one of the greatest Incendiaries in
the Land. Page 28. You speak of him as of a dishonest man, and subtily calling
him Serpent. You then run your self out of breath with calumnies, page 29,
telling him, he is a hollow-hearted man, has a shallow brain, which in plain
English is a Fool, And that not only his heart is divided, but his head, etc.
So that by your railing Rhetoric you present him to the world, a mad man. You
say not as Ioab, he has smote you in the fifth rib; but I dare say and affirm
it, you have unchristianly and causlesly labored to wound him in the head, the
most excellent part of man; And all this hot and furious pursuit after the good
Doctor, is for nothing else but because he played with your Beard. But, page 28.
you seem to have a further charge against your brother, in that he speaks of
some that did set in the frontispieces of their Books, Christ's words, Mat.
10.34, 35, 36. And because he [out of respect to the Author] named no man; but
with Christian wisdom reproved the unseasonablenesse of applying that place of
Scripture, in a time when divisions are already so great and many amongst
brethren; insomuch that every man, especially such a one as you, should improve
all your time, graces, knowledge, wit and learning, to make up these breaches,
and to compose the sad differences. For certainly, to urge such places of
Scripture in a time of so great distractions, will give too too much
encouragement to the ruder sort of your party, who are not afraid to do
whatsoever seems good in their eyes, and to say they will have liberty of
conscience, now they have the sword in their own hands, [for thus some of them
have said] yea, where they think themselves strong, if a Minister preach
against their way, they rise up against that man to destroy him. This I speak
of, because, page 24. you mention a late mis-rule at Colchester [but you do not
say it was your party that was so unruly] you call it, the Doctors Town of
Colchester. The Doctor indeed for many years lived in that Town, and did much
good among the people, and there I had the happiness to enjoy his society very
frequently: But the Prelate of Canterbury by his Purseuvants fetched him from
thence above eleven years agone, and cast him into prison, since which time he
was never in Colchester. But you say, upon his Books, and T.E. his preaching,
this mis-rule happened. Sir, the mentioning of this disorder, in my judgment
discovers some weakness in you; for it may be a great disadvantage to your
Cause, and ratifies what the Doctor has said of your party: for, because a
Gentleman has written against their way, and that the Ministers do preach
against it, conceiving there is not any ground for it in Gods word; was this a
sufficient warrant for them to rise and make a tumult: wherefore did they come
into the Congregation? for they knew before they came, that Mr. T.E. was of a
contrary judgment to them, and they at other times will not endure to hear
any other Ministers but their own: so that it is plain, they then came on
purpose to make a disturbance in the Congregation. I hear in that Town
several Opinions do increase, and this action of theirs speaks loud in the
ears of every sober-minded Christian. Where that party is strong, they will
not suffer any of a contrary opinion to write, or preach any thing against
their way. Sir, I never heard of this uprore, until I read of it in your Book:
but the last night I spoke with some that were at Colchester at that time when
the Independents so molested the people, (to the shame indeed of the very name
of Christian Religion) And they told me, That had not the Magistrates aided the
Minister, it was feared they would have killed him. We see what it is like to
come to where they have power. Sir, you preach, and write, and other of your
Ministers preach publicly against the Presbyterian way, and you are not in
danger of your lives, nor are you molested when you preach publicly; and yet,
as with one consent, you have of late set your selves to preach up your way,
where ever you come; truly it is time for a settled Government, when your party
comes to this height, that they will not suffer any thing to be preached or
writ against their way, but they will rise, (they will give Laws at last, if
this goon) I know there are some truly Godly, that are different in judgments:
but there are, we see by this president, and that tumultuous Company that
abused Doctor Bastwick at Westminster, many of your judgment that misaply our
Saviors words, Mat. 10.34, 5, 36. And therefore I am of this mind, and many
who are godly and wise do agree with me, and the Doctor herein, that this was
not a time nor leason for such as desire the peace of Gods Church, to urge that
Scripture; so that all things considered, you complain causlessely against the
Doctor still. O Mr. Burton! I humbly entreat you bethink your self what you
have done; you blame bitter speaking (and it is blame worthy in any) but you
know the Apostle says, he is inexcusable, whosoever he be, that judges
another, and does the same thing, Romans 2.1. This is your case, the Lord lay
your sin open before your own face as it lies open to the view of all men,
and to every impartial Christian. Sir, I would draw to an end, but I cannot
with the discharge of a good conscience conclude, until I have declared unto
you, the truth of what I know, concerning Doctor Bastwick, with whom I have had
the honor to enjoy intimate acquaintance above this twenty years: and if I
should say no more of him then this in general, (which without all partiality
I speak in the presence of God) I know him to be a man whose whole frame of
foul is set against all sin; this might be enough to wipe away those black
Calumnies which you have labored to besmeare both his soul and body with; for
indeed you have struck your stroks so, as aiming to hit both; therefore give
me leave to speak a little more particularly, to manifest his inocency and set
forth his integrity. First, for his shows of holiness they are no flourish
but the fruits of his sincerity to God; his natural inclination is to be
merry, yet with sobriety [allow a few drams of lawful mirth to his
constitution] he is a man not easily provoked to wrath; he is a man, of an
aimable, loving, and courteous carriage; and however malice may seek to
detract from him, yet I can truly say, and many of the poorest of Gods people,
which tries humility, can testify the same with me, That he is of a most
sweet, humble spirit, pitiful to all, but transcendently compasionate to the
poor people of God; an honest man, and just in all his actions; one of them,
David speaks of, Psalm. 15.4. A man much in meditation, and walks closely
with his God; so that he may defy the Devil, or any man, in that particular,
who shall accuse him, as a scandalous walker.

He traveled for nine years together into other Countries, and has as large
and ample testimonies from all the reformed Churches where he lived beyond the
seas, for his godly life and blameless conversation, and his abilities in
learning, as ever I saw or read of any man; also he has as ample a testimony
from the magestrates and ministers of the town of Colchester, for his godly
life, quiet, and peacable conversation, whilst he lived amongst them; and what
I speak is not from hearsay, but all of my own Knowledge, through the
intimate and long acquaintance I have had with him. He has several Languages
in perfection, so as he is able to do service, to the Church and State at home,
and abroad. O Sir! much more may be said in the due commendations of this your
quondam fellow-sufferer, and that without flattery, for the gifts and graces of
God are to be acknowledged and honored in an enemy, much more in a friend, and
sufferer; and God has given to Doctor Bastwicke a rich portion of spiritual
and natural endowments; and will you, good Sir, suffer your self to be so
far transported with passion, as to deny the graces of God that is in him,
because he is not of your Judgment, or because he played too familiarly with
your beard; the Lord show you the evil of your so doing; and give you a
self-derving heart, a sorrowful, humble, and contrite spirit, for the offense
you have occasioned in the Church of God, and strengthen you so with his might,
that now you may spend your whole endeavors to make up the sad breaches
amongst Gods people. This shall be the daily prayer of;

Sir, Your faithful friend to serve you in the Lord, B. S.


