ACT Containing the tenor of the Band for securing the Peace of the KINGDOM.
AT Edinburgh the twenty sixth day of January, the year of God One thousand six
hundred and forty nine years. The Estates of Parliament taking to their
consideration the Acts and Precepts of the late Committee of Estates, for
citing certain persons to give surety for the Peace of the Kingdom, according
to the Band presented to them; And that several Persons accordingly were
conveened before them, and did give satisfaction thereanent. They do therefore
ratify and approve the said Acts, Precepts and Bands; and what has followed
therepon; and now considering that it is necessary toward the settling, and
securing of the Peace of the Kingdom, that the like course be prosecute, They
do therefore Appoint and Ordain Precepts to be issued out, for citing such
persons as were upon the late Engagement, or others as they shall think
expedient, to compeir before them or their Committees, having power for that
effect, to give surety and to subscribe the Band and Declaration, whereof the
tenor follows. Whereas I (...) am conveened to find surety for keeping of
the Peace of the Kingdom, Therefore to testify my ready obedience to that
which is so just and reasonable, And to witness my desire to hinder and prevent
any danger or disturbance which may arise to this Kingdom, and to clear my
resolutions; I Declare, That I do acknowledge, the indiction, meeting, and
constitution, the lawfulness, freedom, and authority of the Parliament of this
Kingdom, conveened on the fourth of January One thousand, six hundred and
forty nine years; And that I shall not any manner of way call the same in
question. And I the said (...) As principal and (...) as Cautioner and suerty
for me, faithfully bind and obliges us conjunctly and severally, and our
heirs, That I the said (...) shall neither directly nor indirectly, consult, or
act in any thing tending to the diminution of the authority of the said
Parliament, or of the Committees of Estates that shall be appointed by them for
the public affairs: And that I shall not rise in Arms, or in any hostile way
oppose their proceedings, for the prosecution of the Cause and Covenant, or
concur with, assist, keep intelligence or correspondence with any invaders of
this Kingdom, or risers in Arms within the same, against the fore said
proceedings of the forementionate Parliament or Committees. And if I shall hear
or know of any thing which may derogate from, or prejudge them in any sort, I
shall as soon as I can possibly reveal the same to some of their own number to
be communicate to the rest. And that I shall neither by my self, nor others by
my knowledge or direction do, or suffer any thing to be done that I can let or
hinder, which may disturb the present quiet or Peace of this Kingdom, or
proceedings of these Judicatories as aforesaid, or which may prosecute the said
late Engagement and expedition into England, or break the Union betwixt the
Kingdoms, under the pain of (...) Consenting these presents be Rgistrate in the
Books of Parliament, or of the Committee of Estates, That all execution,
personal, and real may pass hereupon, which has been ordinary in the like
cases, or which the Parliament or Committee shall think fit, and to that effect
constitutes (...) My Pror. promitten de Rato, etc. Likeas, The Estates Ordains
every Nobleman (being cited) to give the surety foresaid, And to find Caution
under the pain of an hundred thousand Merks* And every Barron of quality under
the pain of fifty thousand Merks ad Minimum, and other persons according to
their several degrees and ability. With certification, that whosoever refuse
or fail herein, shall be holden and estimate as enemies to, and disturbers of
the Peace of the Kingdom; And to be proceeded against accordingly, as the
Parliament or their Committees shall think fit.

William Scot, Cler. Parl.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty,
1649.


