ACT For raising four Months Supply.
At Edinburgh, the twenty seventh day of April 1689.
FOrasmuch as the Estates of this Kingdom finding it necessary, as well for the
security of the Protestant Religion, as for the common Safety and Defense of
the Kingdom, against Foreign Invasions, and Intestine Insur^^^tions, that a
competent number of Forces be raised and kept up within the same; They have
Ordained certain Troops of Horse to be Levied from the several Shires, and upon
the voluntary offers of sundry Noblemen and Gentlemen, Have given Warrant for
Levying some Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse and Dragoons; and seeing
these Forces cannot be kept up and maintained, without a considerable Charge
and Expense; And the Cess Imposed by all former Acts, being now extinct, and
not due in time coming; Therefore the said Estates in this Juncture, Do Ordain
the sum of Two hundredth and eighty eight Thousand Pounds Scots, to be Raised
and Uplifted from the Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom, at the Term of
Whitsunday next, according to the proportions Imposed upon each Shire and
Burgh, by the Act of Convention o^ Estates in the Year 1667. And for the
effectual and speedy In-bringing of the said ^mposition, The Estates Do Nominat
and Appoint, the Persons after-named, to be Commissioners within the respective
Shires, for Ordering and Uplifting of the same, viz.

For the Shire of Edinburgh.

The Earl of Lauderdail, the Earl of Lothian, the Viscount of Tarbet, the Lord
Ross, the Lord Torphichen, the Master of Balmerino, Sir John Baird of Newbyth,
John Wauchop of Edmistoun, Sir John Maitland of Ravelrig, Sir George Mckenzie
of Shank, Sir John Foulis of Ravelstoun, Robert Dundass of Arnistoun, Sir
Alexander Gibson of Pentland, Sir John Clark of Pennycook, Sir William Drummond
of Halthrondain, Sir Patrick Nisbet of Dean, Sir John Young of Leny, Sir
William Murray of Newtown, Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun, Sir John Ramsay of
Whitehill, Sir Robert Baird of Sauchton-hall, Sir William Binning of
Wallie-foord, Sir James Dick of Priestfield, Thomas Craig of Riccartoun,
Alexander Nisbet of Craigentinny, Sir Robert Miln of Barntoun, Patrick Hamilton
of Falla, John Cunninghame of Woodhall, Mr. Roderick Mckenzie of Prestounhall,
John Foulis of Ratho, James Baird younger of Sauchtounhall, James Murray of
Dewchar, Charles Murray of Hadden, Mr. James Hunter of Murrays, John Scot of
Malleny, Andrew Brown of Braid, (...) Burnet of Carlops, the eldest Baillie of
Mussel Burgh for the time, and the eldest Baillie of Dalkeith for the time.

For the Shire of Haddingtoun.

The Earl of Wintoun, The Earl of Tweddale, the Lord Belhaven, Sir John Hall of
Dunglass, Sir Patrick Hepburn of Black-castle, Sir John Sinclar of Lochend,
Archibald Murray of Spot, Robert Hamilton of Pressmenan, Mr. Robert Lauder of
Beilmouth, James Hamilton of Heatherwick, William Hepburn of Beanstoun, Patrick
Hepburn of Smeatoun, Sir William Baird of Newbyth, Sir George Suittie of
Balgone, William Nisbet of Dirletoun, George (...) Hay of Lin^^^^ (...), Sir
John Law^^^^^ ^ountain^^, (...), Sir Robert Sinclar of Stevinson, the Lord of
(...), the Land of Lamingtoun, James Oswald of Fingletoun, James Durhame of
Luffness.

For the Shire of Berwick.

The Marquess of Douglass, the Lord Ross, the Lord Harcarss, the Lord
Mersingtoun, Sir John Sinclar of Longformacus, Sir John Hume of Blackader, Sir
James Don of N^wtoun, Sir James Cockburn of that ilk, Sir Robert Stuart of
Allanbank, Sir John Hall of Dunglass, Sir William Scot of Harden, Sir James
Rocheid of Innerleith, Sir Patrick Hume of Lumsdean, George Hume of Wedderburn,
John Swinton of that Ilk. John Rentoun of Lambertoun, John Ker of Moristoun,
John Ker of ^avers, George Ramsay of Edingtoun, (...) Edgar of Wedderlie, Mr.
Alex^ Brown of Thornidykes, John Hume of Ninewals, George Hume of Kimmerghame,
Mr. John Belshes of Tofts, Robert Brown of Blackburn, (...) Hume of Hundwood,
Patrick Wardlaw of Berrie-haugh, Walter Pringle of Greenknow, George Hume of
Bassindain, William Cockburn of Caldrie, George Hume of St. Leonards, Master
James Daes of Colding knows, Master David Hume of Crosstig, Master James
Douglas of Earnslaw, Alexander Hume of Abbay, John Watson of Jardenfield,
Alexander Trotter of Kettlesheil, Thomas Rocheid of Whitsomhill, Sir Archibald
Cockburn of Langtoun, and Sir Patrick Hume of Polwort.

For the Shire of Roxburgh.

The Marquess of Dowglass, the Earl of Lothian, the Lord Newbottle, the Lord
Jedburgh, the Lord Rutherfoord, Sir William Ker of Greenhead, Sir William Scot
of Harden, Sir William Elliot of Stobs, Sir Francis Scot, Sir John Scot of
Ancrum, Sir Robert Pringle of Stitchel, the Lairds of Cliftoun, Chatto, and
Frogden, Sir William Bennet of Grubit, Sir Patrick Scot, Sir John Riddel of
that Ilk, Sir James Don of Newtoun, (...) Pringle younger of St^tchel, James
Don of Smelholm, the Lord of Rutherfoord, Patrick Don of Ottenburn, Sir
William Dowglass of Cavers, Robert Scot of Horsliehill, the Duchess of
Buccleucghs Chamberlain for the time, the Earl of Roxburghs Chamberlain for the
time, (...) Ker of Littledean, William Ainslie of Blackhill, William Scot of
Rae-burn, (...) Rutherford of Tev^otvail, Robert Elliot of Middlemmiln, the
Provost of Jedbu^gh for the time, Robert Faa Baillie of Melross, (...)
Hallyburton of Muirhouslaw younger, (...) Rutherford younger of Faringtoun, the
Lord of Edgarstoun, and the Baillie of the Regality of Jedburgh Forest.

For the Shire of Selkirk.

The Earl of Tarras, the Lord of Drummelzier, Sir Francis Scot, George Pringle
elder of Torwoodlie, the Lord of Torwoodlie younger, Hugh Scot of
Gallowsheils, the Lord of Muslie younger, the Lairds of Gilme^^cleugh and
Middlestead elder and younger, Sir William Scot elder and younger, the Lord of
Sintoun, the Lord of Breadmeadows elder, the Lord of Sundhope, the Lord of
Philiphaugh, Baillie Mitchelhil, the Lord of Wall Baillie or Chamberlain to
the Duchess of Buccleugh.

For the Shire of Peebles.

The Duke of Queensberry, the Earl of Mortoun, Lord William Dowglass,
Lieutennant-General Dowglass, the Lord of Drummelzier, the Lord of
Blackbarrony elder, the Lairds of Stenhops elder and younger, the Lord of
Dawick, the Lord of Posso, the Lord of Haystoun, the Lord of Hartrie, the
Lord of Whitslead, the Lord of Polmood, the Lord of Hackshay yo^^^ (...) the
Lord of Kirkoord, the Lord of Scotstoun^ (...) of Spittlehaugh, the Lord of
Cringlty* the La^^^^ (...) of Slipperfield, Doctor Penniecook of Roman^ (...)
of Manerhall, John Balfour of Kailzea, the Lord of Ho^seburgh younger, the
Lord of Little-Ormistoun, the Lord of Blyth, the Lord of Cardronna, the
Provost of Peebles for the time.

For the Shire of Lanerk.

The Duke of Hamilton, the Marquess of Dowglass, John Lord Carmichael,
Alexander Lord Blantire, Archibalo Earl of Forfar, Sir Daniel Carm^chael of
Mauldslie, John Weir of Newtoun, William Baillie of Hardingtoun, Alexander
Menzies elder and younger of Culteraws, Alexander Bertoun of Nisbet, James
Lockhart of Annistoun, James Somervel of Gladstains, John Baillie younger of
Walstoun, William Denholm of Westsheil, Sir William Lockhart of Carstairs, Mr
Andrew Kennedy of Clowburn, Sir John Carmichael of Bonyntoun, William Baillie
of Littlegil, James Lockhart of Cleghorn, George Baillie of Jer^iswood, the
Lord of Lie, John Hamilton younger of Halcraig, Walter Lockhart of Kirktoun,
Samuel Doug^ass of Hassilside* Robert Kenne^y of Au^htefardel, (...) Ballandine
of Craigmuir, William Lawrie of Blackwood, Andrew Hay of Craignethen, William
Hamilton of Raploch, James Young of Netherfield, Master Hugh Dalrymple of (...)
John Hamilton of Barnclu^th, the Baillies of Hamiltoun for the time, Master
John Kincaid of Corsbasket, Sir William Maxwel of Calderwood, The Lord of
Torrence, Sir William Fleming of Ferme, James Hamilton of Aikenhead, Gabriel
Hamilton of Westburn, (...) Corbet of Towcorse, (...) Robertoun of Bedlay, John
Walkinshaw of Borrowfield, Mr. Henry Baillie of Carderoch, the Baillie of the
Regality of Glasgow for the time, the Lord of Braidisholm, the Lord of
Auchinvoul, and (...) Hamilton of Airdrie, (...) Mui^head of Stevinson, Mr.
Archibald Nisbit of Carsin, the Lord of Cle^lingtoun, the Lord of Dalzell,
Sir John Harper of Cambusnethem William Hamilton of Wishaw, Thomas Stuart of
Cul^ness, William Stuart of Allantoun, James Stuart of Hartwood, and the Lord
of Lamingtoun.

For the Sheriffdom of Nithisdail and Dumfries.

The Duke of Queensberry, the Earl of Annandail, the Lord Drumlanrig, Sir James
Dowglass of Kelhead, Sir Thomas Kilpatrick of ^lossburn, Sir Robert Lawrie of
Maxweltoun, Sir Patrick Maxwel of Sprinkel, the Lord of Holmains, the Lord of
Craigdarroch, the Lord of Dornick, the Lord of Capinoch, the Lord of
Gernsalloch elder, Sir James Johnstoun of ^esteraw, the Lord of Lamerscails,
James Johnston of Corhead, John Johnston younger of Westeraw, the Lord of
Craigs, the Lord of Stu^^toun, Andrew Johnston younger of Lockerbie, the Lord
of Brekinside, Archibald Murray younger of Dumcrief, the Lord of Dormonth, the
Lord of Brydkirk, the Lord of ^rawfordtoun, the Lord of Enoch, the Lord of
Eccles, William Johnstoun of Grantoun, and Mr. Hugh Maxwel of Dalswintoun.

For the Shetiffdom of Wigtoun.

The Lord Gairlies, Robert Mcdowgal younger of Logan, James Dalrymple of
Dunragit, Patrick Herron of Little-park, James Val^ange of Possils, John
Mcculloch of Grainge, Sir Andrew Agnew Sheriff of Wigtoun, Patrick Agnew of
Sheuchan, John Stuart of Fisgil, Sir John Dalrymple of Stair, the Lord of
Logan elder, the Lord of Donskey, the Lord of Ca^^lesteuart, the Lord of
Craichlaw younger, the Lord of Mochrum, the Lord of Garthland, sir William
Maxwel of Monreith, sir Charles Hay of Park, James Agnew of Lochnaw, John Vans
of Barnbarroch.

(...) the Sheriffdom of Air. (...) ^ames Montgomry of Skelmorly, William Blair
of (...) thereof, David Cunninghame younger of Robert^and the Lord of (...)
^lder and younger, the Lord of Pearstoun younger, the Lord of Rowallan, the
Lord of Crawfordland, Mr. Alexander Crawford of Fergushill, the Lord of
Kilbirnie, the Lord of Corshil, the Lord of Kelburn, the Lord of Grainge;
Captain William Hamilton of Ladyland; Hugh Stevinson of Mountgreenand; Allan
Lord Cathcart; Allan Mr. of Cathcart; Major Hugh Buntine; Hugh Montgomrie of
Colts-field; the Magistrates of Air and Irving for the time being; the Earl of
Eglintoun; the Earl of Dundonnald; sir William Cunninghame of Capringtoun; sir
William Cunninghame of Cunninghame-head; Mr. Francis Montgomry of Giftan; Mr.
Thomas Cochran of Polkellie; (...) Crawford of Carse; Mr. David Cunninghame of
Milcraig; Ronald Chalmers of Polwharne; Richard Cunninghame of Bedlane; the
Lord of Dreghorn elder; Charles Lord Creightoun; David Blair of Adamtoun; John
Blair younger of Adamtoun; David Boswell of Auchinleck; Mr. William Fullertoun
of that Ilk; the Lord of Logan of that Ilk; Robert Dickson of Sornbeg; Mungo
Campbel younger of Nether-place; sir George Campbel of Cesnock, sir John
Dalrymple younger of Stair; Mr. James Dalrymple of Killoch; William Cochran
younger of Ochiltrie; John Chalmers of Gathgirth; George Ross of Galstoun, Hugh
Archibald of D^nkeith; John Alexander of Boghall, the Earl of Cassils, the Lord
Bargany, the Master of Bargany, the Lord of Cairltoun, Quintin Mcilvain of
Grimat, James Whiteford of Dunduff, John Muir of Auchindrain, Hugh Blair of
Blairstoun, Allan Chalmer of Sanchrie, Mr. John Ferguson of Barclonachan, James
Cunninghame of A^cket, (...) Eccles of Kildonan, and (...) Boyd of Trochrig,
Fergus Mccubin of Knockdollian, and Mr. Rory Mckenzie of Dalvennan.

For the Sheriff^om of Dumbartoun.

The Earl of Argile, the Earl of Dundonnald, the Lord Boyd, sir Umphray
Colquhoun of Luss, Mr. William Cochran of Kilmaronock, John Houstoun younger of
that Ilk, Archibald Mccaulay of Ardincaple, John Napier of Kilmahew, John
Hadden of Glenegies, John Dowglass of Mayns, Claud Hamilton of Barns, Alexander
Gartshore of that Ilk, William Stirling of Law, Nicol Buntine of Airdoch,
William Colquhoun of Craigtoun, James Hamilton of Hutcheson, John Campbel
Captain of Carrick, Andrew Colquhoun of Garscadden, Hugh Crawford of Cloberhil,
John Campbel of Ardintinie, Mr. James Smallet of Pillenflet; Will. Noble of
Fairnie; Will. Semple of Dulmoock; John Graham of Galingade, John Whitehill of
Keppoch, John Spreul of Milntoune.

FOR The Sherifdom of Bute.

The Duke of Hamiltoun His Grace, The Baillie of Arran for the time, The Earl
of Argyl, The Earl of Eglingtoun, Ninian Banantyn of Kayms, and Bannatyne
Younger of Kaymes, Charles Stewart, of Killcatton, David Boil of Kelburn Mr.
John Stuart of Escog, Archbald Steuart, of Kinwhinlick, Ninian Stuart of
La^giezian Robert Stuart of Mcknack, John Stuart of Linhael, Culbert Stuart, of
Ardinho, Archibald Glass, Sherif-depute of Bute, Robert Ballinden of Lewbass,
Sir James Montgomery, of Skelmorlie, The Magistrates of Rothsey for the time,
and Sir James Stuart Sherif of Bute.

For the Sherifdom of Ranfrew.

The Earl of Glencarne, The Earl of Dundonnald, The Lord Montgomerie, The Lord
Ross, The Lord Blantyre, The Lairds of Houstoun Elder and Younger, Sir John
Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Archibald Stuart of Blackhall, The Lairds of Grinock
Elder and Younger, The Lairds of Craigens Elder and Younger, John Porterfield
of Duchill, Patrick Fleyming of Barochan, Alexander Porterfeild of Fullwood,
Thomas Crawford of Crafordsburn Elder and Younger, Patrick Maxwell of New-wark,
John Caldwell of that ilk, James Hamilton of Aikenhead, George Houstoun of
Johnstoun, Robert Pollock of that ilk, (...) Bannantyne of Kellie, George
Hutcheson of Scotstoun, William Muir of Glanderstoun, Lawrence (...)
Bl^thswood, G^vin Cochran of Craigmuir, Ja^^^ (...) of Fingletoun, John Shaw of
Bargarren Young (...) Cochran of Fergusly John M^xwell Younger (...) (...)
Pollo^k of Falside, the P^ovost and (...) the Baillies of Paisl^^^

For the Sheriffdom of Stirling.

The Earl of Mar, the Earl of Callender, The Lord Elphinstoun, The Lord
Cardross, The Lord Forre^^er, the Lord of Houstoun, The Lord of Wood-head,
the Lord of Bardo^^ie, the Lord of Kilcroych, the Lord of Ballendalloch, The
Lord of Bearcrofts, The Lord of Powes, The Lord of Gargonnock, The Lord of
Goger, (...) Cunningham of Boquhan, Sir Hugh Paterson of Binnockburn, The Lord
of Polmais, The Lord of Herbertshire, Sir Alexander Hope of Kerss, (...)
Livingstoun of Glentirren, and (...) Erskine of Balgowne, Mr. William
Livingstoun of Kilsyth, The Lord of West-quarter, (...) Glass of Sauchie,
(...) Hadden of Myrtoun.

For the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow.

The Duke of Hamilton, The Earl of Linlithgow, The Lord Livingstoun, The Lord
Torphichen, The Lord Cardross, The Lord of Dundas, The Lord of Riccartoun,
The Lord of Bonhard, The Lord of Livingstoun, The Lord of Barbachlay, Thomas
Sharp of Houstoun, John Dundas of Dudingstoun, Mr. William Dundas of Kincavil,
John Dundas of Mane^, James Monteith of Auldca^hie, Thomas Hamil^oun of
Boighead, John Hamilton of Dechmount, S^r John Dalrymple, Mr. William
Hamiltoun, Sir William Hope, John Fairholm of Cra^giehall, George Hamiltoun of
Binning, Robert Anstruther of Wrae, (...) Marjoribanks of Balbardie, Thomas
Baillie of Pollkennet.

FOR the Sheriffdom of Perth.

John Marquess of Athol, David Viscount of Stormont, Andrew Lord Rollo, David
Lord Ruthven, Sir Col^n Campbel of Aberurchel, James Graham of Orch^ll, John
Hadden of Glenagies, Sir Robert Murray of Abercairnie, Sir Patrick Murray of
Auchtertyre, Adam Drummond of Meginch, Alexander Spittel of L^uchat, Thomas Hay
of Ba^l-housie, Sir John Stewart of G^^^ntullie, ^u^go Campbel of Burn-bank,
Sir Thomas Moncrief of that Ilk, The Lord of Weem Y^unger, M^. Patrick Ker of
Kilmount, Colin Campbel of Mo^zie, James Pearson of Kippenross, Patrick Hay of
K^^kland, (...) Moncreif of Tippermalloch, Mr. John Blair of Bal^^yll,
Archibaid Napper of Boquhaple, Mr. Francis Mountgomrie of Inchlesslie, David
Drummond of Cultmalundie, James Stuart Younger of Ardvorlick, John Campbel of
Clachick, John Drummond of Blair, Alexander Duncan of Lundie, (...) Campbel of
Bagersho, Mr. Robert Anderson of Coless, (...) Oliphant of Clashbeny (...) Hay
of Leyes E^^er, James Ogilvie of Cluny, William Stuart of Ballide, Thomas
Stuart of Ste^toun, Patrick Stuart of Ballechan, Sir James Campbell of Lawers,
Sir ^ohn Murray of Drumca^rn, Colin Campbell of Munzie, Thomas Stuart of
Ladywall, D^vid H^l^burton of Pitcu^r, ^ohn Gray of Cr^chie, (...) Halyburton
of Fotherince, James Blair of Ardbiair, John Michel of Byres, James Graham of
G^rvoch, Patrick Smith of Methven, Walter Stewart of Kincarachie, John Murray
of Pitcullan, Mr. James Elphingstoun of Comrie, John Buchannan of Arnpryer,
Alexander Stuart of Annat, Mr. David Graham Tutor of Gor^hie, John Murray of
Stravan William Paton of Pannholes, John William^on of Bar^hill, John Murray of
Arthurstoun, Mr. Patrick Murray of Dollorie, Charles Stuart of Rotmel, The
Lord of Strowan Robertion, Sir William Stirling of Airdoch, John Stuart of
Fass, (...) Kinloch of Gourdie, (...) Murray of Keilor; Donald Robertion of
Killachangie, James Stuart Younger of Orart, Henry Murray of Lochlain.

For the Sheriffdom of Kincardin.

The Earl of Marishal, The Earl of Southe^k. The Viscount of Arbuthnet, Sir
Charles Ramsay of Balmain, Sir Alexander Falconer of Glenfarquhar, Sir David
Carnagie of Pittarro. The Lord of Lauristoun, The Lord of Leyes, The Lord of
Balbigno, The Lord of Halgreen. The Lord of Elsick, The Lord of Pitgarvie,
Alexander Arbuthnet of Knox, George Keith of Whiteriggs Sheriff-depute. Mr.
J^mes Falconer of Phesdo, John Douglas of Tilliwhillie, William Barclay of
Balmaqueen, William Ramsay of VVoodstoun, and John Barclay of Iohnstoun.

(...) ^^^dom of Aberdeen.

(...) Marishal, William Lord Keith, Charles Earl (...) ^^^muir, John Earl of
Kintore, William Lord In^^^ (...) ^he Master his son; Alexander Lord Saltoun,
and (...) Master of Salt^^n, (...) Pitsligo, and the Mr. his son, The Lord
Frazer, Sir Alexander Seat^^ (...) ^^medden, Sir John Forbes of Craigievarr,
Sir James Baird of Auchmedden, Sir George Gordon of Edinglassie, John Gordon
Younger of ^echil, Alexander Gordon Tutor of Pitlurg, Sir James Gordoun of
Lessmore, The Lord of Udny Younger, Robert Udny of Auchterallan, Sir George
Skeen of Fintry, Patrick Dun of Taartie, Mr. Alexander Forbes of Foverame,
Samuel Forbes Younger of Foverame, John Ross of Roschil, (...) Frazer of
Strichen, Sir Henry Guthrie of King-edward, James Keith of Tilligonie, Sir
William Keith of Ludquharne, John Forbes of Leslie, Sir John Forbes of Munimusk
Elder, William Forbes of Munimusk Younger, (...) Leith of whyte-haugh Alexander
Cumming of Culter, (...) Elphingstoun of Glaicke Younger, The Lord of Dyce
Younger, Mr. James Gray of Balgouny, Alexander Skeen of that Ilk, Sir Thomas
Burnet of Leyes, Robert Gordoun of Cluny, James Innes of Drumgask, Adam Gordon
of Achinachie, Francis Ross of Achlossin; Sir Robert Innes of Kinnermonie, John
Gordon of Brachlie (...) Forbes Younger of Echt, Mr. Thomas Gordon of
Crimonmogate, (...) Gordon of Badinscoth, William Gray of Creichie, William
Thoirs Younger of Muiresk, John Gordon of Nethermuir; Thomas Forbes of
VVatertoun; Charles Gordon of Bre^ack, Adam Gordon of Glenbucket, John Gordon
of Hallhead, Mr. Robert Irvine, of Cults, (...) Forbes of Tulloch, James Gordon
of Bodome (...) Caddel of Aswanly, Sir Charles Maitland of Pitrichie, Thomas
Forbes of Echt, George Morlson of Pitfour, Arthur Forbes of Bruix, George
Garrioch younger of Kinstarret, James More of Stenywood, Mr. James Elphingstoun
of Logiedurno, Patrick Lesly of Kincraigie, Alexander Ross of Tillisnaught,
William Forbes of Camphell, Mr. James Keith of Auquhorsk, Andrew Watson
Baillie in Peterhead, Alexander Donaldson of Litledrumwhindle, James Gordon of
Daach, Robert Burnet of Elrick, James Forbes of Savack, John Logie of Bodom
(...) Leith of Newlands (...) Lesly of Little-wartle, The Lord of Graigievarr
Younger, Robert Sympson of Thornstoun, The Lord of Balflig Younger, George
Paton of Grandum, Thomas M^nzies of Kinmundie, Henry Forbes of Boyndlie, John
Udny of Cultercullen, Mr. Robert Innes of Blairtoun, and Sir Alexander Forbes
of Tolquhon.

FOR the Shire of Innerness.

The Lord Lovat, The Lord of M^intosh, Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder Lodovick
Grant of that Ilk, George Cuthbert of Castelhill, Duncan Forbes of Col^oden,
William Mcintosh of Borland, Mr. William Robertson of Inshes, Donald Mcintosh
of Keillochie, Thomas Chevise of Muirtoun, The Lord of Strichen, The Lord of
Rillick, Mr. Hugh Fr^zer Lord of Escogdel, Duncan Mcpherson of Cluny, The
Lord of Calder Younger, The of Mcdonald, The Lord of Mccleod, The Lord of
Glengarie, William Frazer of Foyl, Hugh Frazer of Belleskin, Hugh Frazer of
Ballenain.

For the Sheriffdom of Nairn,

Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder, Hugh Ross of Killrawick, John Hay of Lochloy,
Alexander Campbel Younger of Calder, David Broddie of Lethen, Alexander Ross of
Clava, David Sutherland of Kinsterie, Archibald Campbel of Kaitcastle,
Alexander Dumbar or Boath, and William Campbel of Dellnice.

FOR the Sheriffdom of Cromartie,

'George Viscount of Tarbet, Mr. Kenneth Mckenzie of Cromartie, Sir George
Mckenzie of Rosehaugh, Alexander Urquhart of Newhal, and John Urquhart Fiar
thereof his son, George Dalias of St. Martins, and Mr. James Dallas Younger
thereof his son, Wiilliam Urquhart of Braelangual, Alexander Clunes of
Dunskeith, Andrew Frazer of Bannens, and James Frazer of Brae.

FOR the Shire of Argyl.

The Earl of Argyl, Sir Colin Campbel of Ardkinlass, Archibald Lamont of that
Ilk, Archibald Campbel of Strathure, John Campbel Captain of Carrick, John
Campbel Captain of Duncon, Colin Campbel of Ellengreg, Archibald Lamont of
Silvercraigs, Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck, The Lord of Barbreck, The
Captain of Craigneish, Alexander Campbel of Kilmartine, Archibald Mcclachlan of
Craignitarriff, Colin Campbel of Testennen (...) Campbel of Melfort, John
Campbel Tutor of Innerliver, Angus Campbel of Kiberry, Archibald Campbel of
Dounay, Lord Neil Campbel, Sir Hugh Ca^^^ (...) Baillie of Muckarn, or the
Baillie thereof for the tim^ (...) Campbel of Inverraw, The Tutor of
Dunstaffnish, (...) Campbel of Barcalten, Dowgal Campbel of Clanmackri^^ (...)
Alexander Campbel Younger of Caddel, Dowgal Camp^^^ (...) the Baillie of
Kintyre for the time, Walter Campbel of Skipinich; (...) Campbel of
Glencarradel; Duncan Campbel of Blarntibert, John Campbel of Killadallage; The
Lord of Lergie; The Lord of Loup; Archibald Campbel of Ouchtomor; and the
Baillie of Ilay for the time; Donald Campbel of Ballinaly; Lauchlan Campbel of
Dail; The Baillie of Jura, the Baillie of Collensy; and the Magistrates of
Innerary.

FOR the Shirreffdom of Fyfe.

The Earl of Mortoun; The Earl of Levin; The Lord Melvil; The Lord Colvil; The
Master of Burghlie; Sir Alexander Bruce of Broom-hal; Sir Charles Hacket of
Pitfirren; Sir Henry Wardlaw of Pittrevie; (...) Monteith of Randefoord; (...)
Henderson of Fordel, Mr. Alexander Spittel of Lewchet; James Robertson of
Newbigging; Mr. John Dempster of Pitliver, (...) of Spencerfield; Sir Philip
Aust^uther of that Ilk, James watson of Athernie (...) Durhame of Largo, Sir
Alexander Erskine of Cambo, (...) Lindsay of Wormistoun, Mr. James Lumsdain of
Sravithie, (...) Dudingstoun of Sam^foord, (...) Fotheringham of Lawhill, David
Scot of Scotsta^bit, Mr. Robert Smith of Giblistoun, William A^struther of
that Ilk, Robert Hamilton of Kilbrankmont, John Skeen of Halyeards Elder, (...)
of Bogie, (...) Weyms of Kuttelhill, Dowglass of Strendry, White of Bannochie,
Robert Dowglass of Kirknes, David Beaton of Balfour, Sir David A^not of that
Ilk, (...) Moncrief of Reddie, Mr. Archibald Hope of Rankeilo^, Sir John Ayton
of that Ilk, (...) Hay of Naughtoun, Nai^n of Samefoord, George Moncrieff of
Sachope, Mr. Robert Lermonth of Balcomie, John Aiton of Kinnaldy, (...) Melvil
of Cassingray, James Carmichael of Balinblea, Robert Gedd of Balridge, and
James Lindsay of Caevle.

For the Shire of Kinross.

John Lord Burghlie, The Lord Colvil, the Master of Burghlie, Sir David Arnot
of that Ilk, Robert Dowglass of Kirkness, Sir John Malcolm of Innerteil, John
Hallyday of Tilleybole, (...) Lindsay of Dowhill, James Rankine of Colden,
George Berril Portioner of K^^neswood, Patrick Robertson of Smiddihill, the
Baillie of Kinross for the time, and Sir William Bruce of Kinress.

For the Shire of Forfar.

The Earl of Southesk, the Earl of Airlie, the Earl of Panmure, the Viscount of
Arbuthnet, the Lord Glames, the Lord Ogilvie, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh,
Sir Patrick Lion of Carss, Mr. Henry Mauld of Kellie, Mr. James Carnegie of
Phinheaven, David Lindsay of Edziel, James Carnegie of B^lnamoon, David
Halyburton of Pitcur, James Scot of Logie, David Fotheringhame of Pourie, Sir
John Wood of Boningtoun, (...) Duncan of Lundy, William Durhame sometime of
Ardoun, now of Grange, James Crichton of Ruthven, Gilbert Auchinleck of that
Ilk, John Guthry of that Ilk, Alexander Carnegie Shirreff-deput of Forfar. John
Ouchterlony of Guynd, Mr. John Wishart of Logie, Robert Young of Auldbar, John
Ogilvy of Pitmeves, David Grahame of Fintray, (...) Gray of Crichy, and David
Erskine of Dun.

For the Sheriffdom of Bamff.

The Earl of Airly, the Earl of Finlator, Sir. Patrick Ogilvy of Boyn, Sir
James Baird of Auchmedden, Sir George Gordon of Edinglassie, the Lord of
Troop, George Keith of Northfield, (...) Grant of Denluguss, Walter Stuart of
Boig, James Ogilvy of Puldavie, Thomas Ogilvy in Boigtoun, Alexander Hay of
Arnbath, Mr. John and Alexander Abercombies, elder and younger of Glassach;
John Ogilvie of Kempcairn, Ogilvie younger of Kempcairn, Thomas Gordon of
Cranach (...) Innes of Edingeith; (...) Stuart of Kilmach, (...) Anderson
younger of Westertoun, the Lord of Park Gordon, Provost Stuart, Baillie John
Gordon, the Lord of Grant, Patrick Grant of Elchies, Alexander Duff of Bracco,
Alexander Duff of Kethmore, Patrick Stuart of Tanachy, (...) Hay of Raneis
(...) Ogilvie of Cantly, Alexander Gordon of Auchynachie, and John Gordon of
Dallowchy.

For the Stewartry of Kircudbright.

The Viscount of Kenmure, Richard Murray of Burghtoun, Heugh Mcguffock of
Rusco, Alexander Gordon of Earlstoun, William Gordon of Shiremure, Adam Newal
of Barskeoch (...), Pa^^^^k Murdoch of Cumlodan, Robert Brown of (...) ^^^vell,
Edward Maxwel of Hills, Robert Greirson of D^ls^^^ (...) William M^gie of
Balmagie, Thomas Greirson of Bar^^^^ (...) John Ewart of Mulloch, John Carson
of Balmangan, (...) The Magistrates of Kircudbright, and Rodger Gordon of (...)

For the Shireffdom of Sutherland.

The Earl of Suther^a^^ the Lord Strathnaver, the Lord Duffus, William
Sutherland of Invercaslie, Sir Rober^ Gordon of Embo, Adam Gordon of Dolfolly,
Mr. John Gordon of Carrel, Alexander Sucherland of Prousie, Robert Gray of
Subo, Patrick Dumbar of Sidere, Robert Murray of Pulrossie, Angus Mckay of
Melnes, William M^kay of Bo^ley, Angus Mckay of Bighouse, Heugh Monro of
Eribol, John Monro of Inverran.

For the Shireffdom of Caithness,

Sir James Sinclar of May, Sir George Sinclar of Clyth, John Sinclar of Murtle,
Wliam Sinclar of Dunbeath, (...) Sinclar of Brimes, David Murray of Clerden,
Mr. James Innes of Sand-side, Mr. Alexander Calder of Augingail, Robert Campbel
of Brenegleis, John Sinclar of Fr^shwick, Laurence Caddel of Lyneger, George
Sutherland of Forse, John Sinclar of Ulbster, Robert Sinclar of Duren, Robert
Campbel of Dalgavoch, the Sheriff-Deput of Caithness for the time, Alexander
Smart of Wester, the Baillies of Thurso for the time, William Dumbar of
Hemprigs, John Sinclar of Stirkcog, James Sutherland of Ausedale, Mr Robert
Dumbar of O^kinga^^, John Sinclar younger of Dumbeath, Patrick Sinclar of
Southdun, (...) Sinclar of Brabster, (...) Sinclar of Hempster, James Sinclar
of Lybster, and James Sinclar of Hoy.

For the Sheriffdom of Elgi^.

The Lord Duffus, the Lord of Grant, the Sheriff of Murray, The Lord of
Innes, Sir Robert Gordon, the Lord of Brody, the Lord of Grange, the Lord of
Gramshill younger, the Lord of Altar, the Lord of Dumphail elder or younger,
Sir James Calder of Muirtoun, Charles Mckenzie of Ironside, the Lord of
Cubine, Thomas Urquhart of Bunjardge, William Duff of Diple, William Broddie of
Cantfield, John Dumbar of Bogs, and Thomas Tulloch of Taunachie.

For the Sheriffdom of Orkney and Zetland.

Sir Archibald Stua^t of Borrow, Robert Stuart of New-work, William Bellenden
of Sten-house, John Stuart of Burgh, William Douglass of Egilshaw, James
Baickie of Tankerness, James Grahame of Grahames-hall, Henry Grahame of
Brackness, David Craig of Over-sandy, William Craigie of Gairsie, Laurence
Sinclar of Quendal, Laurence Stuart of Bigtoun, Robert Bruce of Sounburgh,
Andrew Bruce Tutor of Muness, Thomas Lesly of Vstenes, John G^ffart of Busta,
and James Oliphant of Ure.

For the Sheriffdom of Clackmannan.

The Earl of Mar, George Viscount of Tarbet, the Lord of Alva, John Keirie of
Gogar, Robert Myln of Tilliallan, George Abercrombie of (...) Bruce of Kennet,
the Lord of Tillicoutrie, the Lord of Tilliebody, Mr. Francis Mastertown of
Pa^kmiln, George Stirling, the Baillie of Alloway for the time.

For the Sheriffdom of Ross.

The Viscount of Tarbet, The Lord of Balnagown, The Lord of Fowlis younger,
the Lord of Mcintosh, Sir George Monro of Culrain, Sir Alexander M^kenzie of
Coul, Sir Rory M^ke^zie of Findon Sheriff Deput, Sir Donald Baine of Tulloch,
Alexander Mckenzie of Balnaduthie, Alexander M^kenzie of Gareloch, Alexander
M^kenzie of Apelcross, Ro^y M^kenzie of Reidcastle; (...) Monro of Newmore,
David Fearn of Tarliggie, Mr. John Bayne of Delnice, Hector Monro of Drummond,
John Monro of Fyers, George Ross of Morinchie, Kenneth Mckenzie of Scatwel,
John Forrester of Culnauld, Walter Ross of Cowillich, Malcolm Ross of Kindice,
Mr. David Fearn of Pitcalzeon, Donald Ross of Knockgar^ie, William Ross of
Aldie, Alexander Ross younge^ of Pitkenie; Mr. James M^culloh of Piltoun,
Alexander Ross of Little-tarrel, Colin Robertson of Kindice, Alexander Ross of
Easterfearn, Rory Dingwal of Cambuscurry upper, Rory Mcleod of Cambuscurry
nether the Provost or eldest Baillie of Tain being for the time, Alexander
Monro of Ardullie, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh, (...) whiladrum Kenneth
M^kenzie of Dagmaleuke, Murdoch (...) Mckenzie of Terrardan, Murdo Mckenzie of
Ardross; and (...)

ANd Ordains the first Meeting of the said Commissi^^^^ (...) be at the Head
Burghs thereof, upon the fourteenth day of May next. And appoints the Major
Part of the said Commissioners named for the Respective Shires, to be a Quorum
at their first Meeting: Who are hereby Empowered to name their Conveener, and
to appoint the next Diet of Meeting, and the Major Part of such as shall meet at
the second Diet; or upon Advertisement from the Conveener at any other Diet to
be a Quorum, with Power to the said Conveeners for the said Shires
respective, to call the Commissioners foresaid, at such Dyets thereafter, as
they shall think necessary, for the effectual Execution of this Act. And for the
Burghs, the Estates do Nominat and Appoint the Magistrates of the same for the
time being; with Power to them to choose Stent-Masters within their respective
bounds: which Commissioners of Shires and Burghs are hereby ordained to accept
and discharge their Trust, as they shall be answerable: And they do hereby
Empower the said Commissioners, to prescribe and set down such Rules and
Orders, within the Respective Shires and Burghs, as may be most effectual for
the speedy and easy raising, levyeing and bringing in of the said Imposition,
and ordaining and doing every other thing that may concern the same, and to
name their own Clerks and Collectors, for ingathering of the said Imposition,
for whom they are to be answerable, and to allow them such Fees as they shall
think fit: Which Fees are hereby declared to be over and above the foresaid
Imposition, and no part thereof.

ANd the Estates do Ordain all Execution Real and Personal, to pass at the
Instance of the Collector-General, and the Collectors of the Respective Shires
and Burghs against all persons deficient in Payment of their Proportions, as
was in use formerly against these deficient in Payment of Cess; And also
impowers the Commissioners, by their Officers to Arrest Poynd and Distrenzie
the Goods, and imprison the Persons of the deficients, ay and while they make
Payment of their just Proportions and necessary Expenses: And for the more
ready and Effectual Payment, do also Empower the Commissioners and
Collector-General; to quarter upon Deficients, with this express Proviso, that
every Horseman that shall be upon the place, shall have only free single quarter
allotted to him upon the persons deficient, or by quartering in Burghs, and
Villages, as the Commissioners shall Appoint to be satisfied, and paid by the
Deficients, and not by those on whom they are quartered, except where they
themselves are deficient: And in that case to have fifteen sh^lling scots a day
from the time of presenting the Order to the Collector, upon whom they are to
quarter until he give them a List of the Deficients, and the Sums wherein they
are deficie^t, and thereafter to quarter upon the Deficients: And each
Dragooner to have ten shilling scots a day, and each Footman to have four
shilling scots, or his Diet, as the Commissioners shall order, and the
Commanders of the Party of Horse Dragooners or Foot, to have only double
Quarters or Pay of an Horseman, Dragooner or Footman, as he serves. And
Declares that in order to the Quarters and Matters Relating to the Inbringing
of this Imposition, any three of the Commissioners shall be a Quorum, and who
are empowered to proportion upon, and raise from the Deficients the Expense and
Charge of their Deficiency, and to see payment made to these, on whom the
Soldiers are quartered, who were not deficient: And further the Estates
Declare that all Officers, and Soldiers, Horse Dragooners and Foot* shall make
due and punctual payment of their Quarters, Local and Transient, as the same
shall be appointed by the foresaids Commissioners, according to the Rates of
the Country. And in case the Soldiers do not pay their Quarters, that the
Quarters be stated betwixt the Quarter Masters or other Officers, and any two
of the Commissioners, and the Accounts being stated and fitted, that they be
paid or allowed by the respective Collectors, in the first end of what is due
by the Shire or Burgh, where the said Quarters are owing, Providing the said
Quarters do not exceed two parts of their pay, and which Stated Accounts are to
be allowed to the respective Collectors by the Collector General, and to be by
him retained off the first end of the Troops or Companys pay: And in case the
Officers remove before their Accounts can be stated, In that case the
Collectors of the Shires and Burghs are to retain, what after Trial (...) sha^^
find resting, till the Accounts be stated in manner fore^^^^ (...) that no
persons liable in any part of this Imposition, shall (...) charges or Receipts
of the same, after five years from the date (...) ^^^^igence has been done by
Denunciation before elapsing of the (...) this Act to be Printed and Published
at the Mercat Cross of (...) Crosses of the Head Burghs of the Several Shires.
And for that Effect, appoints Printed Copies thereof to be sent to the
Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires, that they may cause Publish the same
accordingly. Extracted forth of the Records of the Meeting of the Estates, by me

Al. Gibson, Cls.
At Edinburgh, the first day of May, 1689.
The Committee of Estates do Require the several Sheriff Clerks upon Receipt of
the Act abovewritten, Immediately to dispatch Intimations under their hands to
the Readers, in the several Paroch Churches and Meeting Houses in the Shire, to
be read on the Lords Day, immediately after Divine Service, giving Advertisement
of the first Diet of Meeting of the Commissioners, for ordering the said
Imposition upon the fourteenth day of May instant at the Head Burgh of the
Shire. Extracted forth of the Records of the Committee of Estates, by me

Al. Gibson, Cls.



Edinburgh, Printed in the Year, 1689.


