A REMEDY FOR Uncleanness.

OR, Certain Queries propounded to his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR.

By a Person of quality.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1658.

To his HIGHNESS the LORD PROTECTOR.
MY LORD!
I Am not able to divine what suggestions or thoughts of heart these Queries
may raise in your Highness, which makes me for the present veil my face, and
sit down in expectation. I call Heaven and Earth to witness, no carnal end, or
fleshly respect excites me to Query, but an innocent and righteous design to
promote the ruin and extirpation (by this conceived remedy) of those impure
and unnatural abominations so frequently practiced in your Famous City of
London, and else where throughout the Nation. Whereof no probable cause, or
ground can be assigned more proper, then a denial of this suggested means to
prevent them. What is it my Lord, but this rigid restraint and limitation that
makes it matter of scorn and reproach to young gallants to marry, and come
under the holy Ordinance of God: that foments those domestic differences and
contentions so frequently lamented amongst us, that makes almost every assize
record the murder of many innocent children. Does not the blood of many
thousand infants cry against the rigor of those laws? not permitting their
Fathers to espouse their Mothers, and legitimate them unto the world. Is it
credible, my Lord, that the note of infamy should only rest upon Christendom?
The whole Turkish Empire, if my intelligence and reading fail me not, where
this means is used, does not recount the death of so many innocents inhumanly
destroyed by the cruel hands of their own parents, as England does.

May it suffice, my Lord, so far as it relates to your part, that the Christian
world has been deprived so long already of her lawful liberty, by the
interposall of Antichristian power; who according as 'twas prophesied of them
have forbid to marry, which Luther the great father of Reformation bitterly
inveighed against; though the reformed Churches have been so unhappy, as not to
take the Alarm from him.

My Lord, I know custom is not the mistress of your actions; you have learned
to stand for Religion, equity, and reason, against moldy Laws, and rotten
Records; and given ample demonstration that your Lordship is not of the number
of those slavish and ignoble spirited men, more ready to stoop down to every
worm-eaten custom, then to the precept of reason and rule of righteousness.

My Lord, the eyes of a considerable part of Christendom are upon you:
something verily is expected from you that shall answer (not to disparage your
own virtue) the miracle of your rise and exaltation: no less then the ruin of
Turk or Pope, or something of that grand concernment can give satisfaction.
Reason and religion persuades me it is but inclining to the querist and
investing men (so far as your authority extends) with that right the law of
nature and grace has given them, and you shall need no other Ram to batter the
walls of Rome and Constantinople, and make the territories of the Reformed
religion equally extensive with them both.

It Is well known, my Lord, nothing has stretched the Turkish Empire to that
breadth that now it is, so much as Polygamy; and if we have but an historical
faith, your Lordship cannot be ignorant, that a considerable Country upon this
score alone apostatized from christian faith, and fell away to the Mohammedan,
preferring the liberty of the Alchoran before the now practiced restraint of
the Gospel; though the large dominions of Prester John do still retain them
both.

I shall not give your Lordship any further divertisement, but humbly recommend
the ensuing Queries to the grave consideration of your most High person, and
the gracious presence of God be with you, and the wisdom of Heaven direct you,
is the unfeigned prayer. Of

MY LORD! Your Highness, though unknown, yet most humble servant.

A REMEDY FOR Uncleanness.
AS Temperance is accounted amongst the Heathens a Cardinal virtue, so in
sacred writ a grace of the Spirit? a temperate man is one well composed in body
and mind; one that is not exorbitant in his desires, but in whom all things
move as in their proper Sphere. He is as a river running within its banks; he
is the lively image of his Creator, and in all his demands is as innocent as
his mother the Earth, when she craves the showers to make her fruitful; the
abstenious lives of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are lively
patterns of this virtue; who spent not their days upon Earth, like the men of
this generation, in riot and excess, gluttony and drunkenness; but by their
sobriety and abstinence commended the holiness of their lives, to the imitation
of succeeding ages. What greater monsters in the world then those whom
intemperance has made; they are as a people not of humane race or kind, acting
in the pursuit of their sensual appetites beyond the bounds of common justice
and honesty. I have thought them like hunters, that scruple not the breaking
down their neighbors fence, to pursue their own game. If temperance were more
in credit amongst men, I question not the reduction of things to their
primitive beauty, purity, and order. And that love and amity would then
advance, and take the wall of hatred, revenge, and injury: What is the great
incentive and provocation to uncleanness, and all those abominations not to be
named amongst us, but that the bounds and limits for enjoying the creature set
by this abstenuous virtue, are passed over in-observed; and by their
intemperance, riot, and excess, impose a kind of necessity upon themselves of
becoming sinners and transgressors of the laws of holiness.

Although temperance has appeared in the first place, yet shall I proceed to
the proposal of some humble Queries appertaining to the discovery of another
remedy besides it: and the reason inducing me hereunto, is; that although a man
be as temperate as in this life it is possible for him; yet may it not alone
seem sufficient for the good men. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and Solomon, as
temperate as the Earth had any, took Sanctuary at other means besides it.



Tim. 3 2. [That a Bishop be the husband of one wife] does not strongly imply,
that other men that are at liberty from Ministerial engagements may have more,
if they themselves see cause.

Paul's judgment in the case be binding to all ages and sorts of men in that
principal place [Let every man have his 1 Cor. 7.2.
own wife] being only spoken by permission, and not by commandment at his own
acknowledgment.

Whether Paul's advice in the forementioned place,

Whether Paul in the New Testament, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife,
etc. that is to maintain propriety only, that a man should not desire another
man's, but might have more of his own if he pleased; otherwise it might be
interpreted a sin to have more houses and oxen then one, they being both in the
singular number as well as the wife.

Whether that must not needs be lawful and imitable for us, which was
practiced by the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, and no where reproved or
disanull'd by either Propher, Apostle, or Christ. For amongst all the sins and
provocations of the Jewish nation, Polygamy is not so much as whispered: now to
think the Lord Christ (who was faithful in all things, and did not spare that
nation above all others, whom he came to reclaim from all their sin and
wickedness) judged it a sin, and yet not censure it in the least, being so
spreading and epidemical, is to make him unfaithful in the great concernments
of his office.

Whether Polygamy carry with it any repugnancy to the rites, there should be
any superadded law in grace against that which is no sin in nature.

Whether that which God himself signifies to be the fruit of his bounty and
goodness, Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.8. [ and I gave thee thy masters house,
and thy masters wives, and if that had been too little, etc. Where God speaks
immediately by his Prophet of multiplicity of wives, not only by way of
connivence and toleration, but as the issue of his goodness, and the
expresseness of his will: this wrought up David's sin to the highest
aggravation, to have to do with another man's, the Lord having allowed him so
many wives of his own.

Whether a Concubine was a term of reproach in Israel, or in plain English a
Whore: as some now no wiser then needs must phrase it. First, because then many
of the Patriarchs, and sons of other good men must needs prove illegitimate,
and their parents fall under the greatest imputation: To pass this censure
upon them, what were it but to besmear the beautiful faces of the Fathers of
the faithful; and the most excellent servants of God, to take that Crown of
glory from their heads which God has set upon them, and lay it in the dust.

Whether God has not left the law of nature to it is own carving,

Whether that ordinary and common allegation that is so frequently made in
defense of Monogamy, malum in se, to receive the least countenance from God;
for the least space or tract of time, for ends how great soever were to
tolerate evil that good might come of it, besides the Land of Judea (even
then when Polygamy was most in use) was as populous, for the like quantity and
proportion of ground as any part of the world is at this day; witness that
great sight 'twixt Abijah and Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13.17. where on Israel's side
there fell down five hundred thousand chosen men.

Whether Luther, the Father of reformation,

Whether the Laws made in Queen Elizabeth's time, and since touching adultery be
just and rational, because they make that adultery which God never made, viz.
If a married man have carnal knowledge of a single woman, and not only so,
Moses, but refusing and rejecting the remedies propounded by the Law, the
Querie is made, Whether it were not equitable, before they inflict so severe
punishment as is provided by our Laws in this case, to afford men the same
means of prevention, as under the Legal dispensation was tolerated and allowed
them.

Whether there be any thing material in that 19. of Matthew. against Polygamy:
because the question is demanded of our Savior out of design to ensnare him
concerning divorce, a thing of a far different nature: whether then it can be
supposed his answer concerning one thing should be binding and effectual to
another of a quite contrary subject: the saying it self being framed and
calculated by Christ, to reprove that readiness and forwardness in the Jews to
divorce upon every slight occasion. And as cutting as this his answer seems to
be to the Pharisees upon the demand of the Disciples, our Savior seems to be
more favorable. For when they told him [If it be so, it is good not to marry]
he replies, [That all men cannot receive this saying, but those to whom it is
given] so least they should stumble at marriage, he removes it out of their way
by his mild and gentle answer: and in the next verse, [He that is able to
receive it, let him receive it]: Complying with that of Saint Paul, that one
man has one gift, and another, another; leaving them in this at liberty as he
found them, least he should seem to cross nature, or infringe the Laws thereof,
which he himself had made.

Whether to forbid plurality of wives under the Gospel, That his Yoke was
easy, and his burden light.

Whether it may not stand with a gracious Spirit,

Whether Polygamy by the strictest rules of reason and equity,

Whether that passage; [They two shall be one flesh] have any thing in it
considerable against Polygamy: or whether in the sense of that Scripture, one
man may not be one flesh with two women: As in the body of Christ there are
many members, yet but one body, by our Saviors own Logic. Why should many
wives with one husband be denied to be one flesh, any more then the other; our
Savior himself alluding to marriage, to make good his argument in that kind.

FINIS.

