Natures Dowry: OR THE PEOPLES NATIVE LIBERTY ASSERTED.

Art thou called, being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may be made
free, use it rather,

1 Cor. 7.21. Ovis non est propter pastorem; sed pastor ovi inservit.

Warneri Proverb. Pers. 16. Quin et mortalem summum fortuna repent
Reddidit, e summo ut regno famul optumus essit.
Fortune the low soon lifts to the highest degree,
That made great Kings they should good servants be.
Ennius VIII. Annali. By L. S.

LONDON, Printed for W. R. at the sign of the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard,
1652.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THis Treatise, I assure thee, is no more dipped in passion, then the Sun is
drowned in the clouds, which are so far below him. The Author of it desired,
whilst he asserted other men's liberty, himself to be ruled by reason, bearing
in mind that sentence, Reges alios, si ratio te rexerit, Thou shall govern
others, if reason guide thee.

It was occasioned by a question, which a worthy Member both of the Parliament
and Committee of State above three years since propounded to me. Within short
time after I provided this answer, and at my first opportunity presented it
unto him. He judged that it deserved to be made of public use, and offered it
to the Press; yet Lucina was not so propitious as to bring it to light; the
Printer not daring to undertake it, unles the Author had been present to
superintend the work. I publish this discourse after I have so long suppressed
it, because the usefulness thereof is still in date, in that it explaneth many
Scriptures which are still by many wrested into false senses: and because there
is now a more convenient opportunity then formerly. Farewell.

L. S.

Natures Dowry, OR, The Peoples Native Liberty asserted, etc.
CHAP. 1. Certain Theses concerning the freedom, and authority of any Nation.
WHereas some have concluded that an absolute Monarchy is the best of
Governments, because it imitateth that by which God rules the Universe; I
conceive their reason is feeble and impotent; and that they considered not that
men may abuse their authority and power, which liberty is impossible to God.

All authority, unless God determine otherwise by choosing out one or more to
rule over the rest, (which now a days we have no reason to expect) is
fundamentally and radically in the people.

A conquered people, unless they be obliged to the Conqueror, by consenting
formerly to be subject to him, in their own persons, or in their Forefathers;
or after the conquest voluntarily took upon them his yoke, without conditions,
or else upon stipulation; are warranted by the light of natural reason to
endeavor the recovery of their liberty: and likewise after a composition, when
the Conqueror in his own person, or in his posterity, neglects the terms
upon which they submitted to him.

That Kings should be ex se uati, (as Tiberius said of Curtius Rufus) That
nature or conquest should be a sufficient title to dominion; and that an
illegal force may not by force be lawfully removed; are opinions which the
clear light of reason never smiled upon.

Should any one with Tacitus Annal. lib. 3.
Tiberius, be sine miseratione, sine ira, obstinatus, claususque ne quo adfectu
perumperetur, by a reserved and merciless obstinacy shut up, and baracado'd
against the laws, counsel and prayers; I see not but a people may warrantably
go about to break such an one, seeing he will not be bended by reason.

CHAP. 2. Monarchy is not by Divine right.
I Shall in the first place show that Monarchical Government is not of
absolute necessity, 'The Peravians have thus much notice of the general
deluge, that the Country was overwhelmed with waters, and all men perished
except seven. The chief of these seven was Mangocaga, whose posterity governed
themselves for some time in Aristocr at icall state. See Heylyn in his
Description of Peruana, I cannot assent to Diodorus Siculus, telling us (
Biblioth, Hist. l. 2.) that there were Kings in Asia long before Ninus,
especially if (as some Authors conceive) his Ninus be the same with Nimrod.
I mean not here a physical necessity (for to such a Monarchy cannot pretend)
nor a necessity of coaction (seeing that excludes choice) but a moral
necessity hinged upon the Law of God. Most clear it is, that neither the Law of
Nature, which is written upon the tables of men's minds by the finger of God,
nor yet any positive Law which God superadded to the Law of Nature, determines
any Nation to that form of Government. Turn over the Scripture, which has
omitted none of Gods commandments that are now in force, and show me a precept
for it. None will be so impudent as to affirm that there is any express
commandment for Monarchy in the written word of God: neither is there so much
as a shadow of any Virtuall (or Consequentiall) injunction thereof; unless it
be clear by natural reason that Monarchy is the best of Governments for all
Nations at all times, howsoever their circumstances vary. It is clear (I
acknowledge) both by the light of Natural reason, and by the Scripture, that
men are bound in Conscience to prefer that form of Government, which they know
to be the best for them. but that Monarchy should by the light of natural
reason be discovered to be the best of Governments, and that for all Nations,
and at all times, I cannot consent; because the world after the flood till
Nimrods days Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10.9. For the
understanding of that phrase, compare with this Scripture, Ier. 16.16. Lament.
4.18. Mich. 7.2. Pro. 1.17. That of Arist. in the first of his Politics, is a
good comment likewise upon Nimrod's hunting; (...), etc.
had no Monarch, neither oeccumenicall, nor provincial; and because Monarchy
then came into the World, not by choice Diodorus Siculus informs us that the
Kings of Egypt were in all their actions confined by their Laws, and
particularly, (...). Biblioth. Histor. l. 1. The same Historiographer, speaking
of the K. of the Aethiopians, says, (...). Biblioth. Hist. l. 3.
but by intrusion and usurpation, by force and conquest; because the Israelites
had a mixed Government; and the most flourishing States amongst the Papists, and
all reformed Churches, together with such Heathenish Commonwealths as have most
abounded in perspicacitie and wisdom, have ever preferred other forms of
Government before it. Aristotle likewise determines ( Polit. 3.) that a King
ought to have power to protect the Laws, but not such power as may render him
more potent than the Kingdom.

Obj. The main argument which opposes what I have delivered in this Chapter,
is bottomed upon part of the 7th. comma of the 4. Chapter of Genesis which in our
translation says, Ana unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over
him. The Argument propounded in full dimensions, has this stature.

That civil government, which God instituted in the beginning of the World,
stands by divine right throughout all ages. But God instituted absolute
Monarchy in the beginning of the World. Ergo.

The Assumption seems to be warranted by that Scripture before produced.

God (say my Antagonists) gave to the eldest Son after his Fathers death,
Monarchical authority over his brethren. Into this sense they construe that
sentence, And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.

Ans. The proposition of the syllogism before exhibited, is very impotent:
neither can I divine with what crutch my Antagonists can support it.

There is not the like reason for Monarchy in after-ages, as in the infancy of
the world, unless it be as casie for one man to govern a Nation, as to govern a
Family. There was truth, though no sincerity in that speech of Tiberius, se in
partem curarum ab Augusto vocatum, experiendo didicisse, quam arduum, quam
subjectum fortunae cuncta regendi onus.

The Kings which God appointed the Israelites, after they had cast off him from
ruling over them, were not absolute Monarchs.

I shall now explain, whether those words before quoted (in Genesis 4.7.) warrant
what was assumed, to wit, a divine institution of Monarchy.

The words in the Original are capable of this construction, The desire of it
(that is, of sin) is unto thee, but thou shall rule over it. Compare Romans 6.12.
The affixes (I confess) differ in gender from the word for sin; but so also
does robets, the word for lies. Ainsworth well observes other such
differences in other texts of Scripture.

Amongst the Hebrew Scholiasts Raesi, Bechai, Nachmanides, and Abarbinel, as
also the Author of Thargum Jerus. are very full for that sense which I have
propounded. According to these Interpreters teschukatho, which in our English
translation is, his desire, means the desire of sin, to wit jetser haraugh,
an evil frame or temper of soul and jeiser haraugh is not by the Hebrew Doctors
confined to the minds, though by many learned Authors it be rendered mala
cogitatio. Abarbinel upon that place in Genesis before quoted, having before
interpreted tejchukah to be jets^^ haraugh, says, (...) because the body
inciteth a man to sin.
body, (we call it concupiscence, which fitly interprets the word teschukah)
which (say they) instigated and tempted Cain to sin, and which he should
vanquish, would he repent. Becanus is clearly of the same sense; Dixit Dominus
ad Cain: Nonne, sibene egeris, recipies; sin autem male, statim in foribus
peccatum tuum aderit? sub te erit appetitus ejus (peccati scilicet) and tu
dominaberis illius (appetitus scilicet quo ad peccatum propendes, and
alliceris.) Thus the Author now quoted, Theol. Scholast. part. 2. tract 1. cap.
2. p. 50.

But let us suppose the affixes of the sentence quoted to be referred to Abel,
who is not mentioned in the 5.6. nor in the preceding part of the 7. verse, yet
cannot the word for desire in this verse import a subjection of Abel to his
Brother Cain as an absolute Monarch, or a King.

In Genesis 3.16. it is said of Eve, thy desire shall be to thy husband; and he
shall rule over her.

Polit. 1.
Aristotle tells us, that a man rules his wife and his children, but both as
those who are free (or not servile.) But not with the same manner of Government
((...).) but his wife politically, and his children after the manner of a King.

The word for desire (says Ainsworth) implies a desirous affection, as
appears by Cant. 7.10. The Apostle seems to allude to it in 1 These. 2.8.
Whereas Onkelos, for (...), and ye shall be as Gods, says, (...), and ye shall
be as Princes, (which is agreeable enough to the Original) the Serpent by
Gods, not meaning the S. Trinity, as Eve construed him, but the fallen Angels,
who whilst they stood, had experimental knowledge of good, and since their
fall, of evil; and which are called (...), and (...), see also Romans 8.38.
Colos. 2.15. and Ephesians. 2 2. where the Prince of the Air, or of darkness (for
(...) will also without wresting, admit of that construction) may fitly enough
signifi^, the chief of the fallen Angels, or all the fallen Angels.
according to our English translation, principalities, powers, and rulers of
the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6.12.) Abarbinel Upon Genesis 3.5.
conceiving him to speak of earthly Princes says, (...) Onkelos here is not to
be allowed, because then there were no Princes in the world: which words (I
conceive) are not to be determined precisely to the time in which the Serpent
tempted Eve, but to be extended to the whole time of Adams life, if not to all
the time before the Flood. But I shall seem to have spent needless labor in
discovering the weakness of the Minor, seeing there is not the like reason for
Monarchy now as in the beginning of the World: and especially (which I desire
all men to take notice of) in that the authority which they attribute to Cain
over Abel, affords us as firm an Argument for an absolute Monarchy of the
eldest Son over his brethren throughout all ages, as for Monarchy to be
continued in the World.

The authority of the eldest Son over his brethren which God instituted in
the beginning of the World, stands by divine right throughout all ages.

But God in the beginning of the World appointed the eldest Son to be an
absolute Monarch over his Brethren. Ergo, Every eldest Son in every age (and
so now a days) is an absolute Monarch (after his Fathers death) over his
Brethren.

Let none therefore henceforth, who force that Scripture for the assertion of
Monarchy, dare to affirm, That any one by divine right ought to have larger
authority over others, then every eldest Son after his Fathers death has
over his brethren.

CHAP. 3. Monarchy is so far from standing by divine right, as that it falls
short of some other forms of Government.
MOnarchy is worse then some other governments, 1 Because one cannot discern so
much as many of equal parts.

Object. It may be objected, that this reason implies that all in a
Commonwealth who have attained to years of discretion, ought to be admitted to
Vote about every State-business.

Ans. I deny the consequence; in that the managing of all public affairs by
the Votes of the whole people, especially in populous Commonwealths, is a thing
altogether impossible: both because it would almost wholly withdraw men from
their private concernments, and likewise retard the dispatching of those
businesses in which they have a joynt-interest.

2 (...), etc. Arist. Po.lit. 3.
Because there are but few in comparison, who are able to judge in State
affairs. Those who are themselves unfit for that task, may be able to make
choice of others sufficiently accomplished.

2 Because when the Monarch is wicked, the Government of the State must needs
be evil, in that he is not divided against himself; because he will not act
against himself: but when Authority is betrusted with many, the good, though
fewer, sometimes out-wit the rest.

Plato (in his 9 de legibus) perceived the weight and moment of this and the
preceding reason, telling us, that it is necessary for men to appoint Laws and
to observe them; unless they be mindid to differ nothing from the most savage
Beasts. And assigning this cause thereof, (...), etc. No man is by Nature so
accomplished, as that he may be able to discern what things conduce most to the
public good; and when he knows what is best, always be able and willing to
perform it, Plato points these reasons in his ensuing discourse.

3 Because there is more reason to fear that one man, then that a whole
multitude should be malignantly affected. Aristatle tells me ( Polit. 3. c.
11.) that as much water cannot so soon be viciated as a lesser quantity; so
neither are a multitude so easily as one man corrupted in their judgment by
anger, or any other passion. His words are these, (...).

Obj. Here it may be objected that we have more reason also to hope that one
man, then that a multitude will be well-affected.

Ans. 1. I answer, The more authority and power any one has in his hands, by
so much he is more tempted to acts of violence. An absolute Monarch, who has
no law but his own will, may more easily miscarry, then those who have only
their portions in the Government of a Nation.

Ans. 2. There is far more danger from an ill-affected Monarch, then when only
part of those who are in authority, are vitiated.

4. Because no one will dare to say unto an absolute Monarch, what do thou?
When Cambyses inquired of his Lawyers, whether there was any Law which permited
a man, being willing, to marry his Sifler? they answered, That they found no
Law, which permitted a Brother to marry a Sister: but that they found another
Law, v.z. that it was lawful for the King of the Persians to do what he
pleased. See Herodo'us in his Thalia.


And one who never hears that question from another, it is much to be feared,
will forget to propound it to himself. He will be ready to conceive that with
Jupiter, he has Therius perpetually placed by him, so that whatsoever he does,
must needs be right and just.

Iezebel thought it a question unbeseeming a Princely spirit. She concluded
that Ahab drooped below himself, when he boggled at the taking away of Naboth's
vineyard. Memento mihi omnia and in omnes licere. Thus Caius in Suet mius. I
may add, That a Monarchy set led in any one for term of life, is more
dangerous, then if the time were limited.

Those who expect that their authority should expire before their lives, will
be restrained in some measure by a fear of their successors who may call them
to an account, in case they manage not their trust as it becomes them. Those
who are to give an account only to God, are tempted to licentiousness, in that
men are not wont to be much awed by an invisible Magistrate. Plato tells us,
that when any one ((...)) is not bound to give an account (of his actions and
omissions) but governs a City as he lifleth, (without any controller) he
cannot persist in such a mind throughout his life, as to prefer the public
good before his private advantage. Plato 9. de leg.


CHAP. 4. That One man should have a larger share in the Government of a State
then all the rest who are interested therein, is not enjoined by the Word of
God.
A King is not a necessary ingredient of the Government of a State. Were a true
and visible King of absolute necessity, the Israelites had sinned in that
throughout so many ages after they came into the Promised-Land, they set not a
King over them. We must tax many other well-ordered States of a sin of
omission in point of civil government, if we underprop the Scepter by divine
right. As a King is not necessary by virtue of any divine precept, so neither
in order to the well-managing of civil affairs: as the flourishing condition of
many States which are without Kings, assures us.

CHAP. 5. The necessity of Tribunals is evinced.
I Shall in this Chapter, that I may make way. for my ensuing discourse,
explain the necessity of Judges and Tribunals. The Babylonian Gemara of the
Tractate called Sanhedrin, in the 7 Chapter, tells us, That as God enjoined
the Israelites to set up judiciary Courts in all their villages and cities, so
likewise he commanded the Sons of Noah to erect Tribunals in all their villages
and cities. The place is quoted by learned Seldom in that incomparable work De
jure Natural. and Gent. l. 7. c. 5. This Law they must needs affirm to be given
to those who lived before the deluge, as well as to Neah's posterity, seeing
they make it part of the Law of Nature. The eating of flesh with the life
thereof was as unlawful for Adam and the rest of the old world, as for those
who lived since the Flood; but needed not to be forbidden to them explicitly
viva voce, (as Genesis 9.4.) in that they were not permitted at all to eat flesh.
The setting apart of some time for Gods worship is enjoined by he law of
nature, and was in some degreee put into practice by Gods children from the
Creation, See Seder. Olam Rabba c. 5. Philo de v^. ta Mesis l. 1. Tertull.
adversus Judaeos. A hae^s. in Synopsi sacr. Scrip. upon Exodus Eusebius.
Demonstrat. Evangel. c. 6. Justin. Hist. lib. 36.
though the Sabbath was not observed till the Israelites came into the
Wilderness.

That ((...)) Houses of Judgments, or Tribunals, should be constituted for all
people, is clearly part of the Law of Nature. For otherwise that punishment
which the Law of Nature demands for certain offenses, as murder, etc. could
not be regularly executed.

Plato (in his 9. book of Laws) in several cases appoints those that are
naturally allied to the person that is murdered, to inflict death upon the
murderer; and so likewise some of the kindred of the party ravished, to kill
the ravisher.

But these constitutions border upon the making a man a Judge in his own cause.
If any one be killed by chance-medley, those whose affections Nature has
engaged to the person that is slain, will be tempted to misconstrue it into
murder.

Jacob cursed the wrath of Simeon and Levi who revenged the ravishing of their
Sister Dinah upon the Sechemites, Genesis 49.7. Suppose also those who sustained
the greatest loss in the party murdered, to neglect the executing of
punishment: the city or Country, in which it was committed, is exposed to Gods
wrath for bloodshed which goes unpunished.

We shall be more at a loss in the executing of penalties for the breach of
some other of the precepts which are said to be given to Noah, as idolatry and
blasphemy, and the eating of flesh with the life thereof; unless tribunals be
erected.

In these offenses the wrong is not done especially to this or that man, nor
this or that Family, but immediately to God the Lord of all, and by way of
reflection in regard of Gods wrath, and by bad examples, to the whole people.

The main argument which seems to infer that Tribunalls, or the exercize of
civil judicature, is not enforced by the Law of Nature, is, that it was not so
from the beginning. In the Sacred History of the World before the deluge, we
have no instance of any humane censures. And Metam. l. 1.
Ovid tells us that those who lived in the first or golden age, erant sine
judice tuti. His meaning (I conceive) is, that they were free from humane
censures. That which this Author in his description of the golden age,
delivers to this purpose, makes me much suspect that for some considerable
time after the Creation, there were no Courts of justice established: nor any
humane censures; whether by the eldest of a Family, or by the multitude, or any
autorized to that purpose. In his work now praised, we may often discern a
truth recorded in the Scripture, through the cloud of his Poetry.

In the beginning of his first book, we have the History of the Creation; and
in that, man last of all created. His Gygantomachia was occasioned by the
building of the Tower of Babel. He mentions also the deluge; That piece of
his Poetry took its rise from Noah's Flood:
For it was not confined to this or that patch of ground, but overwhelmed all
mankind, save Deucalion and Pyrrha-Lucian also tells us, that Deucalion with
his Wife and Children were saved in a great Ark which he had; and that two of
every kind of living creatures came to him, and were received into the Ark, and
preserved in it. And Plutarch makes mention of a Dove sent by Deucalion out of
the Ark, and bringing news of the abatement of the waters. In the beginning of
his 8 book we have Samson's hair given to Nisus In the same book we have the
destruction of Sodom, and the change of the soil thereabout: and Let with his
Wife under the names of Philemon and Baucis, fetched out thence by Angels,
under the Poetical vizard of Jupiter and Mercury. We have Lots incest alluded
to in Cynaras and Myrrha, l. 10. In the beginning of the 12. book Iphigenia,
when she was fastened to the Altar, and about to be sacrificed, is changed for
a Do: which shadoweth out unto us Isaac excused for a Ram. In the same book
Cygnus slaying 7000. men, and feigned to be impenetrable, is a resemblance of
Samson. In that I find so much of divine story in this Poet, I conjecture that
his Poem about the four ages has some tincture from holy writ. The Image which
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, is one ingredient of it: and man's integrity
before his fall, another See Salmas. de U u^is, c. 11. p. 303.
: and the condition of mankind for some time after our fall, a third. It was
usual with the Heathen (as we may observe both from their Poets, and See
Justine, l. 36. Tacitus, Histor. lib. 5.
Prosaicall writers, and from those two excellent treatises written by a late
Author which discover unto us the Banian Religion, and the Religion of the
Persees) to mangle those truths which are contained in the Word of God, and
likewise to confound, and blend them together: which is very familiar likewise
with the penmen of the Alcoran. But it is easy for the most part to perceive
the Sun through their clouds. I shall easily grant that men for some time after
their fall in our first Parents, lived after their own manner, being restrained
by no Courts of Justice: but we cannot infer from thence that such Courts are
not necessary: nor yet that they are not by divine right. God might out of his
secret counsel for some time connive at such an omission: after what manner he
permitted the Israelites writing a Bill of Divorce, to put away their Wives:
Those who lived in the former times of the World, ought to have set out some
time for God, in which servants might have been exempted from such works, as
^re not of necessity, nor charity, nor piety.
or as he connived at the setting of no certain time apart for his worship,
till himself made choice of a day when the Israelites were brought into the
Wilderness: or as for a long time he connived at Polygamie.

CHAP. 6. Other jurisdiction is necessary now a days, besides that wherein the
Law of Nature has invested Masters of Families.
THe next question to be discussed, is, whether the exercise of jurisdiction be
confined by a birth-privilege to certain persons, (...) (says Aristotle)
(...). Polit. l. 1.
Every house is governed by the Eldest, as also the colonies (which are
propagated from it) in regard of their ( cognation, or) kindred. But clear it
is that now a days authority cannot be dispensed according to this principle.

We have no records by which we can be informed who by way of inheritance and
birthright, as all are reckoned from Noah, should have a preeminence above the
rest. Neither can one man (though Firmicus tells us that a certain positure
of the Stars designeth a man to an universal Monarchy) be so Atlantic, as
to bear upon his shoulders the government of the Universe. Nor yet can it be
known, who in this or that Country in regard of a descent from Noah, should
have advantage of the rest in order to jurisdiction and government. Neither are
the Eldest always the wisest. Diodorus Siculus (B^blict. Hist. lib. 3.)
speaking of the Inhabitants of an Island in the Southern Ocean, says, (...).
The eldest in every company bears rule over it, as a King: and all the rest
obey. Though there be a vast difference between bearing ruse over a certain
company of men, (whether their associating of themselves together take its rise
meetly from the harmony of their minds, or from their occupation) and the
government of a Nation; yet no wise man will conceive that their practice is
perpetually to be imitated.
Those who manage the public affairs of any people, ought to be such as have
animi vires, and strict as pondere mentes.

That sentence of Aristotle before praised is to be understood of a Family
living apart from the rest of mankind; as See Tulliein O^a^. pro P. Sextio,
Juvenal Salyr. 15.
did some in the first Ages of the World, and for some generations after the
Deluge, and perhaps upon some extraordinary occasions in later times. But that
any Master of a Family at any time before the Flood passed a sentence of death
upon any appertaining to his Family, cannot be proved out of any monuments of
antiquity now extant. Neither does it appear, whether Judah pronounced sentence
of death upon Thamar by virtue of any authority which he had over her as
belonging to his Family, or by virtue of some Law consented to by his
Forefathers, or according to the Law and manner of the Country in which he
lived, or out of rashness. Some of the Hebrew Doctors affirm that Judah
intended not that Thamar should be burned to death, but only stigmatized in the
forehead for an harlot.

What authority soever a Master of a Family may challenge by the Law of nature
over his children and servants, and those who by marriage are ingrafted into his
Family, whilst he is a sojourner among a Nation into which he is not
incorporated; clear it is that those who have their share in any Country, and a
settled abode among others, have no title to such authority, in that they are
tempted to partiality, and may expose their neighbors to divine justice, by
neglecting judgments, or by giving unjust sentence of death, and the same ways
weaken the Country in which they live, and expose it to a common enemy. Homer
(in the Iota of his Odyss.) makes it a badge of rude and uncivil people, to
live together in the same Country, and not to imbodie themselves into a
Society, nor have any public jurisdiction; saying of the Cyclopes, -- (...)
(...).


They give laws every one of them to his Wives and children, neither regard
one another. Most agreeable it is to the light of Nature, that those who
inhabit the same Country, and so nigh together that they are without
inconveniencie capable of a common government, so combine and associate the
strengths of their minds and estates, as that they may be Herodotus says of
the Thracions, who by some are called (...), because every man w^^ a Law to
himself: that if they had either, been all of one mind, or under one K. they
had been invincible.
in a positure of defense against a common Enemy, and homebred disturbances:
which cannot be effected without common laws, and public execution of
justice. Plato de Legibus, l. 9.
(...).

Men must of necessity establish laws, and observe them, or not at all differ
from the most savage beasts.

CHAP. 7. Magistracy stands by divine right.
IT remains doubtful, whether people who live together, may lawfully retain
an Isocracie among them, having all of them suffrages of equal value in the
censuring of Delinquents, and the managing of such affairs as conduce to their
public safety; or be bound by the law of Nature, or any of Gods positive laws
to set Governors and Magistrates over them?

We inquire not now of Magistracy fettered in the circumstances of hic and
nunc, determined to time and place; (for there is no doubt but among the
Israelites not only Magistracy, but also certain forms of Magistracy were by
divine right; moreover that certain persons also bare rule among them by divine
right, and that without the mediation of any humane choice) nor yet of
Magistracy during the time for which it is established by men, that is, of
Magistracy with a presupposition of humane consent, by which in some form or
other it was erected, and is for some time to be continued: seeing that Gods
Law requires that men stand to their agreements, and the Scripture says, Romans
13.1.
The powers that be, are ordained of God; and 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: but whether
God has commanded all Nations at all times to have Magistrates, Judges, or
State-Officers? The question is, that I may further explain the state of it;
whether Iso^rasie be lawful, or men be bound by the Law of God to set up a
Magistracy, to prefer some to bear rule over the rest? The Scripture does not
extricate us in this controversy by any general precept. Nor yet if we search
the History of the World before the Flood, shall we find any foot-step of
Magistracy, or of humane censures. We have much wickedness mentioned in the
gross, Genesis 6.5. and some sins specified elsewhere, but no intimation of any
punishment inflicted by any humane judicature. The murdering of Abel, Genesis 4.8,
and according to some Interpreters murder committed by Lamech, Genesis 4.23. and
idolatry according to some of the Hebrew Doctors, Genesis 4.26. I should otherwise
interpret the two places last quoted; but Lamech's rash speech deserved a
censure. We have Polygamie likewise mentioned v. 19. of the same chap. but
which some deny to have been a sin in Lamech.
That of Cain, It shall come to pass, every one that finds me shall slay me,
imports not that he feared any judiciary sentence; but only a rude and
boystrous inflicting of punishment; that it was permittted to every one to
punish so heinous a delinquent: and that he expected not any regular
proceedings of justice against him. But I take notice that in regard of the
present, he feared where no fear was, departing from the presence of his
Parents; neither was likely to prophecy after what manner punishments should
afterward be dispensed. I conceive, he expressed a fear of men only, and not
of beasts. His speech was rash and inconsiderate, having a tincture from his
guilty conscience.

If we consult with the light of reason, it will inform us that in large
countries Magistracy is necessary; because in such the Inhabitants (though all
who are servile and indigent be excluded) cannot convene so often as virtue is to
be rewarded and encouraged, or as disorders are to be repressed, and vice to be
punished; nor yet so often as the preservation of their common safety requires.

It is clear also from the written word of God, that all public affairs ought
to be managed in such a way as may conduce most to Gods glory and the public
good.

Moreover God appointed a few in his own peculiar people to govern the rest.
Such likewise at all times has been the custom almost of all Nations.

CHAP. 8. The qualifications of those who ought to vote in the dispencing of
Authority. The major part of suffrages is equivalently the whole number. Those
who are incapable of Voting, are tied to subjection.
ARistotle well observes, (...). Polic. 3.
that all are not Citizens who inhabit the City, seeing Strangers and Servants
have their share in habitation.

He frequently excludes those who are indigent, from bearing sway in a
Commonwealth. Unequal it is that Helots and those who have no estates, should
have equal authority with those who are wealthy, in making Laws which concern
men's estates; in that by their private condition they are much tempted to
favor theft and encroachment.

Seeing men are by an innate and hereditary distemper biased toward wicked
practices; indigent people who are not restrained from injustice by any self
interest, but on the contrary tempted to rapine and perfidiousness, are
altogether unfit to manage the public affairs of a Nation. If they have power
in their hands, they are fit to squeese their neighbors; or if they want power
themselves, through envy and hope of sharing in the prey, ready to betray them
to foreiners, if an opportunity be offered. Good nature excepteth some, and
Religion others in Christian Commonwealths from this rude and barbarous
disposition: but the Character which I have given, fitteth the most of those
who are indigent in every nation. It necessarily follows, that they are unfit
to be trusted with a Legislative power, or offices of judicature and
government, or to Vote in the choice of those to whom such authority and power
shall be committed.

It remains that only such as have an ingenuous subsistence in the Country to
be governed, have a title to vote in the dispencing of authority, whether for
the preserving of the whole body from foreign invasions, and homebred tumults,
or for the restraining of vice, and encouraging of virtue. Neither ought any so
qualified to be debaried from that privilege, unless they have discovered
themselves to be malignantly affected toward the public good.

Whereas those who choose State-officers, and such also as by their votes
immediately order the public affairs of a City, or Country, are apt to be
divided among themselves, in that they differ in their judgments, and in their
ends; the light of reason tells us, that the major part of the suffrages is
equivalently the whole number.

It cannot be expected that all the members of a Society should agree about
the means which are most effectual to the promoting of their public welfare:
Neither can the lesser number of those who have equal authority, be of more
value than, or of equal with the greater. That strife may be avoided, the
number of those who suffrage must be odd, or else some one of them have a
casting voice granted him, in case the numbers of those who are divided, be
equal: and the major part of the suffrages must bear sway, as if the rest
concurred with them. That Maxim, (Quod ad omnes spectat, ab omnibus debet
approbari,) What concerns all, ought to be approved by all; is satisfied, by
a consent of the greater part, which is equivalently the whole number. If a
lesser part of those who vote, forcibly resist a greater; unless that which is
concluded by the prevailing number of votes, be repugnant to the Law of God,
they infringe the Law of Nature, and likewise the positive Law of God; and so
have no reason to expect that God should go along with them in their
enterprises.

More doubtful it is, whether those Inhabitants of a City, which are upon due
grounds debarred from bearing Office, and from the choice of Officers, be bound
in conscience to submit to those who are invested in lawful authority; and to
the wholesome Laws which are enacted by those who according to the Law of nature
have a Legislative power, either fundamentally, or else derivatively residing
in them.

Whereas Gods Law leaves men indifferent to several courses which may be
taken for the preservation of their lives, and liberties, and livelihoods; when
they have once consented that one certain course not repugnant to the word of
God, and convenient for the obtaining of any of these ends, shall be used: and
have compromitted to any person or persons the executing of their Law: God
requires that they submit to the person, or persons, to whom they have
betrusted authority, till their grant expire, so he or they transgress not the
bounds of the Commission, but execute the agreement.

But the Question is, whether those who are hindered from voting in the molding
and forming of the government of the City which they inhabit; be obliged
likewise to subjection?

The truth of the negative part being supposed, those who did not agree to a
Law enacted, neither directly, nor yet virtually, as included in the major part
of those who voted; should not be determined by God's Commandments to submit
to that Law, as it is the Law of man: though they be obliged to observe the
matter of it, when it is contained likewise in the Law of God.

Men by virtue of the 8. precept, are warranted to defend their estates
according to their abilities, were there no humane Law superadded: and should
have no further advantage according to the former supposition, by superadding
an humane law, against such as were not permitted to vote in the enacting
thereof, but only that they agree to preserve their livelihoods answerably to
the Law of God, against all who shall invade them. They might without any
former Law or agreement warrantably vindicate one another from injuries, as
Abraham did Lot; but moreover are by an agreement mutually engaged.

But I conceive that such of the people, as have title to vote in the choice of
a Representative, or of other Governors, or by themselves immediately to
establish Laws; have another advantage against those, who by the meanness of
their condition, or by their misdemeanors, are debarred from those privileges.

Forasmuch as the meanest Inhabitants of a City reap some benefit from the
well-tempered government thereof; most equal it is that they should submit
unto those Laws which conduce to the preservation of public safety. And
forasmuch as God has exempted none who offend, from humane censures; Some are
bound to be accomptable for their demeanors to the Magistrate, who by divine
providence, or by their own delinquency were rendered unfit to have an
influence into the choice of him. God requires that evil doers be punished:
but has left unto men the specifying of the punishment, whether it be
capital, or more gentle. Such then as are justly hindered from voting about
the kinds of penalties that are used in the City which they inhabit: when they
offend, must suffer in such a way as is agreed upon by others. The will of God
is, that those who have done evil, submit to lawful punishment, rather than
resist lawful authority.

CHAP. 9. All Civil Authority, unless God determine other wise, by choosing out
one or more to Rule over the rest: which now a days we have no reason to
expect, is fundamentally and radically in the People.
WHereas some tell us of an absolute Monarchy before the Deluge; I conceive
with the best Historians, that none can prove that there was any such
Government in the World before Nimrods incroachment and usurpation. We have no
shadow thereof intimated in the written word of God; nor in any humane writing
of approved credit. Had any one before Nimrod used Monarchical authority, it
is probable the Scripture should have given us notice thereof; as it does of
Nimrods Tyranny.

But clear enough it is, that although there should have been Kings, otherwise
than as every man is a Prince over his own family; to wit, such as reign now a
days; before the deluge, yea so soon as the World through the increase of
mankind was capable of such: they could have no sufficient title to reign,
unless through Gods immediate choice, or by the choice of the people.

Conquest, unless the Conqueror was provoked by some injuries, It is not the
first blow that makes the War Invasive, (for that no wise Prince will stay
for) but the first Provocation, or at least the first Preparation. See the
Embassage of Charles the 8th. the French K. to Henry the seventh, K. of
England; in the Lord Verulam's Henry the seventh.
or real dangers, such as were a just occasion of a war; can give no better
a title to authority, than thest to another man's goods. Neither ought the
Conqueror, though he was provoked to the War, to use violence, longer than it
shall be necessary for the securing of himself from violence. (...).


Succession in a Kingdom, which has it is rise from a Conquest, unless the
consent of the People supervene; is no better a title than mere Conquest: since
a continuance in doing wrong, cannot make that which is Wrong, to become right.

When God makes choice of Governors for a people, he suspendeth the Peoples
authority, but takes it not quite away: they have liberty to dispense
authority, so soon as God cease to interpose.

When a Monarchy, or Aristocracie is founded upon the Peoples choice, the
authority is actually in one, or some few; but radically in the People.

If any incroach, and usurp authority by force, the right still remains in
the people: greater thefts no more than lesser, alienating the right or title
to the thing which is invaded.

Solon, though he permitted not such whose revenue amounted not to so much as
200 measures of aride and liquide fruicts, (who were called Thetes) to bear any
Office in the Commonwealth; yet gave them authority to be present in the
Assemblies of the City, and to vote (in the choosing of Officers, and) in
matters of judicature. And he suffered those to appeal to the people, who
thought they were wronged by the Magistrates. See Plutarch in the life of Solon.

But this perhaps was to profane authority by immoderate popularity.

Whereas Demetrius the son of Antigonus, surnamed Gonates, after he had
reigned a short time, left a young son called Philip: the Macedonians
preferred one Antigonus Cousin to the deceased King, to be King Philips
Protector, and the chief manager of his warlike affairs, but after having
experience of him, Plutarch in his Paulus Aemilius.
made him their King.

Timoleon, when he had delivered Syracusa from former tyranny, made it a free
City: as Plutarch witnesses in his life.

Plutarch in the life of Marcus Cato.
The Roman Censors, one of which was a Patrician, the other a Plebeian: had
power to degrade a Knight; or to eject any one out of the Senate, who lived
intemperately and disorderly.

Plutarch in the life of C. Marius.
The Senators of Rome, when Saturninus was Tribune of the People; swear that
they would observe, what the People should vote. Agamemnon in Euripides says
of himself;
(...).
(...).
which Sentence I find thus translated in our English Interpreter of Plutarch,
in the life of Nicias: In outward show of stately pomp, all others I exceed,
And yet the Peoples underling I am in very deed.


CHAP. 10. Kings agreeably to the Law of God, may in some Cases be forcibly
resisted by their Subjects; and likewise deposed.
A Competency of the light of natural reason will discover (unless it be
overcast with passion) that it is as lawful for a conquered People by violence
to recover their Liberty, as it is for any man to extort his goods out of the
hand of a Felon, who is running away with them: as it was for David to rescue
his goods and wives out of the hands of the Amalekites, who had plundered
Ziglag. Scarce any will dare to affirm that possession is sufficient to give a
just title.

Neither is it less clear that a conquered people, which submitted upon terms
to the Conqueror, whether in their own persons, or in their forefathers; are no
longer engaged to subjection by their submission, than the Conqueror, and his
Successors observe the Conditions, upon which subjection was promised. The
Peoples promise in their stipulation cannot pretend to bind them any longer,
than the terms upon which they promised, are observed. Were it otherwise, there
should remain no difference between an absolute, and a conditional submission.

I acknowledge, if the infringement of the conditions on the Conquerours part
be in such particulars only, as are not momentous to the impairing of the
public welfare, and there be no danger of further encroachment: much more if
there be a likelihood of redress and reparation: (...). Arist. Polit. lib. 2.
Especially when violent proceedings threaten greater disadvantages to the
present age, or to succeeding generations: it is better for the People to
continue in subjection, than to endeavor a change.

In some cases it may be their prudence to pardon their Prince not observing
his stipulation: but their promise is out of date, and cannot bind them to
further subjection.

A People, whose Ancestors have for themselves, and their posterity, either
gratis, or upon inconvenient articles promised subjection and obeisance to any
one and his heirs; may lawfully (as Mr. Cnox and Bachanan well perceived)
renounce the engagement, and cast off the yoke.

Gods proceedings with the Israelites in the case of Saul's breach of Covenant
with the Gibeonites, have seemed unto some to countenance the negative.

God punished Saul in his posterity for violating that Covenant, which the
Israelites against his commandment before their passage over Jordan, had made
with the Gibeonites.

Here it may be answered, that although a People be bound to observe a bad
Covenant made by their Forefathers, which is not much inconvenient, yet in
some cases it may be necessary that the Covenant be broken.

Learned Mr. Seldom intimates, that such agreements made by a People, as are
repugnant to the Law of God, whether natural or positive, do not bind, De Iure
Naturali and Gentium juxta Disciplinam Ebraeorum. l. 1. c. 8.

Should any by their own, or by their Forefathers Oath, stand engaged to the
observance of such Laws as establish Heathenism, Mahumedanism, Judaism, or
Popery; such a Law cannot without sin be kept, and may without sin be violated.

Civil inconveniences which accrue through the observance of a Covenant, may
rise so high as to warrant the reassuming of liberty.

If any Prince go about to destroy Religion, he affords unto his subjects a
just occasion of resisting him.

If Religion be established by an humane Law, the Prince may be questioned for
incroachment in case he oppose it, as well as for violating other terms of his
agreement with his people.

It may be Objected, That the infringment of such a Law, though it violate the
Princes agreement and consent to that Law; yet perhaps may not encroach upon
the conditions for which the People promised subjection to him.

1 I Answer, That no People ought to engage their subjection to another, unless
he condescend to be regulated by those Laws to which he shall give his consent:
and in case they accept of any one for their King upon other terms, their
posterity are not bound to stand to so imprudent a compact.

2 That should a people be guilty of such an omission in their stipulation with
a Conqueror, or any whom they should prefer to bear rule over them; his
consenting to a Law which is for their advantage, is an act of grace and
favor, by which he devesteth himself of some part of his prerogative, which
was settled upon him by his first agreement with the people, and adds it unto
their privileges, so that a Law may be called an additionall stipulation. And
were it otherwise, it would scarce be worth his subjects labor to meet for the
enacting of Laws, since their Prince should be left free to dispense with them
at his pleasure.

3 A Law which is beneficial to the subject, gives him an interest in some
privilege, for which he may contend as lawfully as for any thing else which is
his own. And it seems clear to the light of reason, that any one who has
power, may defend his own by the ruin of an incroacher, when otherwise he
cannot be secure.

The controversy touching resistance to be made against a Prince, who opposes
Religion, when it is not established by an humane Law, is more perplexed.

Suppose a Prince to make it his study to give a check-mate to Religion; or,
though he affect not an utter extirpation thereof, yet by his good will to
allow it no existence but with subordination to his own designs. Suppose him
to prefer his carnal interests, when they stand in competition with Religion;
and to assay the jumbling together and blending of heaven and earth, rather
than he will not attain his self ends.

Suppose also that there is no humane Law to control him: I doubt not but in
this case the Law of God warranteth the taking up of Arms against him. My
reasons are these which follow:

1 Because God has no where throughout the scripture forbidden us to resist
such rulers as are a terror to good works. There is no sin which is not
prohibited in the scripture.

2 Because every believer has, and every man ought to have a propriety in true
Religion. Who will dare to deny that the great Senate House of heaven can give
a propriety, as effectually as any Parliament upon earth? The Israelites had
nothing besides the great Seal of heaven, to justify their driving out of the
Cananites from the Land which they had in possession, and that was sufficient,
Iud. 11.24. Every man has as firm a Commission to dispossess his spiritual
enemies, and to worship God in sincerity truth.

And all who have effected this, have a propriety in true Religion, and the
exercise thereof; and may Lawfully resist all those who go about to restrain
them from the free use of it.

The sixth word in the Decalogue takes care for the preservation of man's life,
is an hedge about his body to restrain the incursions of the Sons of violence;
which none can break thorough, but he shall get a prick in his Conscience, and
(that I may allude to what the Apostle speaks in another sense) pierce
thorough his soul with many sorrows.

It forbids men to take away the life, to hinder the health, and strength,
and to hasten the death of themselves, or other men, unless for the executing
of a judiciarie sentence: and requires all men to preserve other men's lives,
but their own in the first place, unless they can lay them out with advantage
to Gods honor: as by fighting his Battles, and helping him against his Enemies;
or by suffering for a good cause, when they are not at all likely to defend
themselves by action; or by way of exchange (if an opportuniy be offered) for
the life or lives of some other, who can do God better service. By virtue of
this precept a man is bound in conscience to defend his life if he be able,
against all malicious plots by which. it is undermined, and unjust practices by
which it is assaulted: and if he fail herein, he is in the conspiracy against
himself, accessory to his own death, guilty of self-murder.

In like manner by the 8th. Commandment we are not only forbidden to invade
that to which we have no right, but enjoined also to preserve and defend our
own livelyhoods from Harpies, from all who would unjustly snatch them from us.

Every man is an Island, or a little world; and has somewhat which he may call
his own, and which he not only lawfully may, but also out of duty to God ought
to defend from acts of violence according to his abilities, against all other
men in the Universe. We are autorised by the Law or Nature to oppose force
against violence. See Isidore O^^g. l. 5. Cicero in orat. pro Milone. Iuven.
Satyr. 15. Livie lib. 42.


That War is just (as a politic writer says well, though in some other points
he miscary) that is necessary; and those arms are religious, when there is no
hope left elsewhere, but in them.

Object. Some will here Object, that I open a gap to sedition and tumults; many
being apt without due occasion to pick quarrels against those whom God has
placed in lawful authority over them.

Ans. Such a determination as I have given of the question which is the subject
of this chapter, cannot smile upon sedition, and encourage it; as permitting
men to make forcible resistance against superiors, only upon just occasions,
and when they cannot obtain a redress by ordinary proceedings. That in this
sentence I am orthodox, a learned and juditious author Camero in his Myrothec.
Evang. upon Romans 10.15.
will bear me witness in these words which follow.

Hoc non est seditioni in urbe vel castris favere, quod civis ultra and
injussus in rebellem and proditorem Magistratum, miles in perduellem
Centurionem vel Decurionem suum insurgit, si nulla alia via and ratione
occurrit malo potest, tum duntaxat pervertitur ordo and regnat (...), quum
extra hujusmodi casum tantum quis sibi permittit and licere putat.

I so far expressed the sense of these words, in what I have already answered
to the objection, that I shall not need to construe them.

But moreover, if any shall suck poison from those truths, whence they might
gather honey, were they of well tempred spirits; they will be somewhat
restrained by the disadvantage upon which they should engage against those who
are possessed of authority, and by their want of divine assistance in an
unlawful enterprise. And if any shall be so foolhardy, and fondly resolute,
as to engage against God and man, against Law and Religion, and against their
own safety; let us rather trust God for the backing of his vicegerents here
upon earth so long as they approve themselves to him, than make a lie our
refuge. And though God may sometimes seem to sleep and not appear in his own
cause, to wit, when due authority is opposed upon empty pretenses, (Talera
veritatem, licit amara sit) pick not quarrels with truth, because it is bitter,
being wrested by mis application to countenance selfish designs, and unjust
proceedings.

What I have hitherto spoken touching the lawfulness of resisting Princes upon
the occasion now mentioned, is plentifully confirmed by some examples in
Scripture; and by the demenours of the Jews toward those who reigned over them
without Gods immediate appointment; and likewise by the practices of
Christians. I shall premise, that if it be lawful for one subject, or for one
inconsiderable number to resist a Prince, then much more for a whole state.

David should have troubled God with a needless and impertinent question,
asking whether the men of Keilah would deliver him up into Saul's hand? unless
he intended there to secure himself from Saul's mischievous practices; and to
offend him rather than not to defend himself. Saul and his men might easily
have sealled the walls of Keilah, should David have used no resistance: and in
case he had resisted Saul's force, an arrow or a stone would have made no
distinction between Saul and his men.

Did not Azariah the Priest think it lawful to resist King Uzziah, in the
defense of the Ceremonial Law, 2 Chronicles. 26.17.
when he followed him into the Temple, attended with no fewer then 80 Priests,
and those valiant men? Were not the 80 Priests, which accompanied Uzziah, of
the same sense and judgment?

The Jews themselves by their demeanors toward Alexander Iannaeus, (who
together with his Predecessor, and those who succeeded him, are in the Talmud
called Kings of Israel, because they were not of the Family of David) declare
that they thought it lawful for them not only to depose, but also to inflict
capital punishment upon those who reigned over them without Gods immediate
appointment.

Alexander Iannaeus was King over the Jews, Joseph. Antiq. Indaic. l. 13. c.
20. Gem. Sanhed. c. 2. He was convented by the Sanhedrim, Gem. Sanhed. c. 2.

The Jews raised war against him, neither would be satisfied with any terms
without his death; Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. l. 13. c. 21, and 22.

Schammai rebuked the rest of the Sanhedrin, and King Hireanus, showing favor
to Herod, Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 14. cap. 17.

I shall now briefly explain, how Gods people in the younger times of Christian
Religion, by their practices testified that they thought it lawful to resist
those who were in authority over them, when they went about to destroy, or to
deprave Religion, or to impedite the advancement thereof.

Whereas the Christians in Constantinople, who believed that the Son was
con-substantiall to the Father, after the death of Eusebius their Bishop, made
choice of one to succeed him, who had been his Predecessor, but was ejected by
a Council, which the Emperor convocated to that purpose, Paul by name; but the
Arians of Constantinople at the same time elected Macedonius into the
Patriarkship; Socrat. Hist Eccles. l. 2. c. 12.
And Constantius sent Hermogenes, with a military force to expel Paul from the
Church of Constantinople: some who adhered to Paul, fired the house in which
Hermogenes quartered, and haling him out, slew him. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 13. Sozomen. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 6.

The Constantinopolitans endeavored to defend Paul their Patriark aforenamed
against Philip President of Constantinople, when they suspected something to be
decreed against him by their Emperor Constantius. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 16.

The Romans by violence ejecting Felix out of the Sea of Rome, Constantius
against his mind restores unto them Liberius, whom he had banished. Socrat.
Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 37.

The Inhabitants of Mantinium out of their fervent zeal for Religion, resisted
four troops of Soldiers which were sent against them according to the Emperors
order, and were victorious. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 38.

The Samosateans would by force have attempted to preserve their Bishop
Eusebius from banishment, to which Valens their Emperor had destinated him;
had they not been diswaded by the same Eusebius. Theodorit. Hist. Eccles. l. 4.
c. 13.

The Christians of Alexandria resisted the Emperor Martian, and his military
force, Evagrius Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 5.

It is sufficiently known, how Ambrose Bishop of Millain opposed the Emperor.
See Niceph. Calistius l. 12. c. 42.

It is observable that the Christians whom I have now mentioned, when omnia
Caesar erat, and whilst the profession of Christian Religion was confirmed by
no humane laws but the Edicts of Emperors; in the behalf of Religion resisted
those who had the Posse of the world in their hands.

That in the elder times of Christian Religion the Papists, and likewise many
Protestants of the Church of Scotland have approved these practices of the
primitive Christans, and other of higher opposition against Princes, for
default in Government, whether respecting Religion, or civil affairs; is
sufficiently discovered by Lysimachus Nicanor, in his Epistle congratulatory to
the Covenanters in Scotland. See especially, p. 12. 40. 41. 54.

-- Ridentem dicere verum,
Quid vetat?
The sense of our English Senators touching the liableness of Kings to forcible
resistance and deposition, is so clear from that Vote in the beginning of our
Civil dissentions, to wit, That the King, if he raised Forces against his
Parliament, forfeited his Trust; and by some other Votes and Actions, that it
needs no Comment to explain it.

He that desires to read more touching the Peoples Liberty in point of
resistance to be made against those that invade their right, may see Plutarch
in the Lives of the Gracehi.

CHAP. 11. Kings may render themselves obnoxious to the penalty of death
according to the Law of God, in some cases to be inflicted by public
authority, in other by private men.
THat Law, Genesis 9.6. Whose sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
reaches all the Sons of Noah, Princes themselves, though they be taller than
their Brethren by the head and shoulders.

Whosoever sheddeth man's blood voluntarily and of his own accord, not out of an
error, nor as an executioner of a penalty, nor yet in his own defense, his
blood shall be shed See Oakelos his Chaldee Paraphrase, and the Mauritanian
Jews Arabic translation set out by Erpenius.
by a judiciary sentence. This is the meaning of that Law.

The Hebrew Doctors have some glosses here which destroy the Text. According to
some of them, he who by himself shedded man's blood, was to be punished with
death: but if he hired another, or employed his servants to shed blood, or
exposed one bound, to a Lion, or other savage beasts, he was to be esteemed an
homicide, and deserved death to be inflicted of God; but was not necessarily to
be adjudged to death by the sentence of the Magistrate.

They leave to the King, and likewise to the Sanhedrin, a liberty to punish
such with death, or to exempt them.

Certainly he who commits murder by a proxy, is more guilty than if he had
shed blood immediately, in that he has propagated the sin.

Some of them determine, that, if an Israelite slew a stranger (though he was
proselytus domicilis) he was not to be condemned to death for it, because he
was not ((...)) his neighbor.

These considered not that strangers also bear the Image of God; and that God
was the Lord of all mankind.

The Sanheds. c. 9.
Misna of the Talmud tells us, that when a homicide is mingled with others,
they are all free, that is (as I conceive) when many men strike a man so that
it cannot be known that what was done by any one of them, killed him.

This exception has no more warrant from the word of God than have the two
former.

Who so sheddeth man's blood, whether by himself immediately, or by the
ministry of some other, whether a strangers or a neighbors; whether alone or
with the help of others, is a son of death.

No Mortal is excused by his greatness. Plato is very orthodox in this point.
(...). And speaking of an homicide, (...). He urges afterward the in flicting
of this penalty, especially upon such as shall kill any of their kindred.
An homicide (as he determines l. 9 de leg.) must be punished with death.

He passes the same sentence upon a Sranger killing a Stranger, and a Citizen
killing a Stranger, and a Stranger killing a Citizen, as upon one Citizen
killing another, and upon a man killing another with his own hand, or
otherwise. He excepteth not any so offending from capital punishment.

That it is not left arbitrary to the Magistrate to punish or pardon Murder,
is cleared by the 33. Section of Number. 35. where it is written, that The Land
cannot be clear sed from the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. Upon which place says More Nevochim, Part. 3. cap. 41.
Maimonides, (as he is construed by Buxtorf agreeably to the sense of the
Hebrew.) Propterea licet interfectus per horas vel dies aliquot adhuc vixerit,
locutus fuerit, sanumque intellectum retinuerit, testatusque fuerit, se ei
condonare and remittere, non auditur, sed necessario anima pro anima danda est,
aequaliter pro parvo and magno, servo and F lio ingenuorum, seu filio nobilium.
libero, sapiente and stulto. Take notice from this gloss, that the murderer
ought necessarily to be put to death, though the person murdered live some days
after he receive the wound: which is contrary to the sense of some other Hebrew
Doctors.

God in diverse places of Scripture requires that capital punishment be
inflicted, as for murder so for some other crimes: neither are Kings excepted
from those Laws in any part of the written word which is now extant.

Princes in some other cases are liable to capital punishment to be inflicted
by private men.

When a Prince attempteth to murder another, the person invaded may lawfully
kill him in his own defense, and is bound by the 6. Commandment to do it,
rather than suffer himself to be murdered. David's great guard intimates, that
he would rather have killed Saul, than have suffered himself to be killed by
him.

Lib. 9 de leg.
Plato makes it lawful for a man to kill a Thief who by night enters his
house to steal; That is, when he pursaeth a young woman betrothed, to defile
her, says R. Schem. Tof. The wifes n^kedness is the husbands nakedness: but
Maimonides his words are more comprehensive, than that Interpreter makes them.
That place in Plato's Laws, before quoted, provideth for the chastity of both
Sexes, whether mariedor single: Maimonides his words are capable of the same
constiuction; adam sometimes being of as large a Signification, as bomo. That
testimony which have added out of the Misua, prevails with me to think, that
Maimonid. under adam comprehended both Sexes.
or one that attempteth at any time after what manner soever to spoil him of
his goods; or one who invadeth his chastity, or has defiled some other
related to him.

Maimonides says, It is unlawful to kill a man who has purposed to commit
any wickedness, before he has done it, unless in these 2 cases, (...) when he
pursues a man to kill him, and when he pursues a man's nakedness to uncover it.

The Misna in Sanbedr. c. 8. paragr. 7. to the same purpose These are they whom
they hinder from sin by the loss of their life: him that pursues another
with an intention to kill him, and him that pursues a maid, and him that
pusueth a young woman that is betrothed.

Should one pursue another to kill him, all Israel (according to the sense of
our Hebrew Doctors) was bound to rescue the person who was pursued, if it could
not be effected otherwise, by the death of the pursuer.

Should any one deliver an Israelite or his goods into the power of the
Heathen, it was lawful (say See Maimonid. and Moses Mikotsi, quoted by Mr.
Seldom De Jur. Nature. and Gent. juxta Discipl. Hebr. li. 4. c. 3.
the same Writers) for any one to kill the Traitor. It is as great a fault to
betray the goods and lives of Christians into the hands of Papists.

CHAP. 12. The injunction of subjection to the higher powers, is but a brittle
Argument for the impunity of Tyrants.
Chrysostom takes notice that the Apostle [ Romans 13.1.] does not say, there
is no ruler but of God; but that he spoke of the office, saying, there is no
power but of God; all the powers that be are ordained of God.

According to this Doctor, the scope of the Apostle is not to inhibit men from
resisting Tyrants, but to bridle-in unruly spirits, which are altogether
impatient of any authority.

I may add, that this Scripture likewise opposes those who could be contented
to submit unto such Magistrates, as will countenance their licentious courses,
but cannot endure such as go about to restrain sin, and to encourage religion.

If by powers be meant, such as are invested in authority; the trope used will
chastise all such as resist Magistrates who are duly called to the exercise of
authority, neither abuse the authority wherewith they are betrusted; and so
discover themselves to be enemies to authority it self: but the peoples hands
are not tied, when authority is usurped, or the ends thereof neglected.

What we read Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. according to Mr. Calvin, and Buchanan,
binds us only to submit our selves to the Edicts of Princes, when they
enjoin us what is agreeable to the Law of God. And indeed the reasons which
enforce our subjection to the higher powers, and the motives which incite us to
our duty, expressed in 3. and 4. verses of the Chapter before quoted, byase us
into that sense.

For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.

We must be subject to rulers, because they are not a terror to good works: and
because they are a terror to the evil.

We have afterward a double motive to the subjection which is enjoined us. Do
that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the power. But if thou do
that which is evil, be afraid: for the Magistrate bears not the sword in
vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil.

That injunction ( Romans 13.1.) cannot pretend to bind us to the observance of
the Magistrate, when he is a terror to good works, but not to evil: when those
who do evil, have praise of him; and those who do good, are discountenanced,
and punished by him.

The reasons of a Law, whether divine, or humane, are the measure of the
latitude of it. Civil Courts of Equity are appointed to exempt us from the
literal severity of humane Laws, where it is not accompanied with the reasons
thereof.

The Holy Ghost (as we see) in the Scripture exhibited requires subjection to
be given only to those who are legitimately called to the exercise of
government; and to such only so long as they rule well. Tyranny is not
ordained of God, nor supported by the other reasons for which subjection is
enjoined, or by the motives thereunto, before mentioned.

Beza understands by the higher powers, both the supreme and inferior
Magistrates.

Buchanan conceives that we are no more tied to be subject to Kings, then to
inferior Officers, by virtue of that Scripture.

The Author of the Appostolicall Constitutions (l. 7. c. 17.) in the Latin
interpreter's judgment expresses the same sense. His words are these, (...).
Thou shall fear the King, knowing that the choice is of the Lord: thou shall
honor his Magistrates, as the Ministers of God, for they are the revengers of
all iniquity.

The Latin interpreter in the Margent directs us to Romans 13. and the word
used by the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, is (...), as Romans 13.3.
not (...), as the 1. Pet. 2.14. I doubt not but in Romans 13.3. the supreme and
subordinate rulers are alike to be understood.

The reasons which back the authority of Rulers, make alike for both. Peter in
his first Epistle c. 2.13, 14. presses upon us alike submission to the supreme
Magistrate, and to subordinate Rulers. To this Scripture (I think) the Author
of the Apostolical Constitutions alludeth in the place before quoted.

Scarce any will deny, but a man in some cases may resist, and likewise kill an
inferior Magistrate without offense to God. Who will doubt, should a Constable
rob upon the Highway, but a traveller upon whom he makes an onset, may
lawfully, if it be necessary to the defense of his own life, or of his goods,
make opposition to the utmost of his ability?

If any distinguish between such an one's person and his Office, I answer, that
the same distinction may be applied to the King himself, as well as to his
ministers. There is a vast distance between the opposing of authority, and the
resisting of the person invested therein, who abuses it, or otherwise
misdemeaneth himself.

Quest. Some will be ready here to ask, whether the Christians were not bound
in Conscience to be subject unto the Romans Emperors, though they were
Heathens, and Tyrants; ruling according to their own wills, and not called to
the exercise of Authority by Gods immediate choice, nor yet by the Choice of
the Major part of the people.

Ans. I conceive (but with submission to better judgments) that those
Christians who lived under the Heathenish Emperors, but wanted strength to
defend themselves, were by that precept, Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject
unto the higher powers, obliged to sit still, and to endeavor nothing against
those who had the sword in their hands. My reason is this (but the cause
depends not upon it) The Holy Ghost there injoyneth not only a visible
obedience, but also such a temperament of spirit, as is patient of lawful
Government, and cheerfully ready to submit unto it; of which those fall short
who forcibly resist unlawful Government; when in all probability the
opposition which they make, will only exasperate and not dispell the evil
which they groan under. Those who in such circumstances use resistance,
discover themselves to be of unruly spirits: (which frame of mind is forbidden)
in that they proceed wholly according to passion; and not according to the
dictate of a sober and well-ordered judgment. But the injunction according to
the immediate sense of it, requires only subjection unto the powers which are
ordained of God: and I know not with what spectacles any one can discern
tyranny to be of that number.

Children (says Enchicid^e. 37.
Epictetus) must yield to a Father in all things, and when he revileth or
strikes them, must patiently bear it, because, by Nature they stand related to
a Father, as a Father, not to a Father as good.

Subjects are not so rigorously tied to submit to their Prince, in that their
engagement is not natural but adventitious.

CHAP. 13. The 15 Section of Psalm 105. vindicated from mis-interpretation.
THat negative precept, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm,
if rightly understood, will not contradict those Theses which I before
propounded.

That Scripture conceives that we cannot without sin offer injury to the
Lords Anointed. This is the mind of it.

It points at Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as we may gather from the context,
compared with the History of their lives. God reproved Pharaoh for Abram's
sake, Genesis 12.17. And Abimelech for Abraham's sake, Genesis 20.3. God restrained
Abimelech from hurting Isaac, Genesis 26. God reproved Laban for Jacobs sake, Genesis
31.24.

R. Alsheach upon that comma of the Psalmist before quoted, tells us that
Laban was King of Mesopotamia, and that he was Cushan-Rishathaim. He with some
other who affirm the same, had no reason to conceive that Laban should be the
Cushan-Rishathaim, who is mentioned Judge. 3. nor more ground to think that
Laban had that name. But those who were wealthy, especially if they had great
families, had the name of Princes. The children of Heth called Abraham a mighty
Prince, Genesis 23.6.

It Is as easy a matter to make good that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were the
Lords Anointed, as that God reproved Kings for their sakes.

I cannot close with those Hebrew Doctors, who tell us that the whole world set
Abraham a King over them, but shall show that in several respects, he, with
Isaac and Jacob, might fitly be called the Lords Anointed.

1. There is an Anointing with the Spirit, sealing to our hearts the promises
of God, (2 Cor. 1.21.) in which they had a large portion.

2. They were Anointed with the Spirit of Illumination and of Holiness, and so
became Prophets, and Kings and Priests unto their God. Every true believer has
his conscience so illuminated, that he is a Prophet to himself, and is so
sanctified that he has victory and dominion over his lusts, and offers up
himself a living sacrifice to God. See 1 John 4.6. Heb. 8.10, 11. 1. Pet. 2.9.
Rev. 5.10. Romans 12.1.

3. All those three Worthies before-named were Prophets, as some of our Hebrew
Doctors have observed.

Abrah^m is expressly called a Prophet, Genesis 20.7. Isaac prophesied in the
benedictions which he gave to his Sons, Genesis 27. And Jacob prophesied Genesis 49.

This Exposition is very well acquainted with that Text of the Psalmist. The
end of the Verse commenteth upon the beginning, and tells us in what sense
they were called the Lords Anointed. See Ger. 20.7.

Aben-Ezra upon Psalm. 105.15. construeth the word Anointed into a double sense,
viz. Princes and Prophets, but the same Scholiast upon Genesis 23.6. says that
Abraham was called a Prince of God, because, he was a Prophet. As he was a
Prophet, he was lifted up into a degree of dignity above those who were not
Prophets, as the word which is translated a Prince, imports. And so I
conceive with Onkelos, that he is there signified to be a Prince before the
Lord, rather then a great Prince, although he was truly great, because he was
so highly honored of God. In the same notion the Priests are called Princes of
God, 1 Chronicles. 24.5. And Rachels prayers for Children, the wrestlings of God,
Genesis 30.8. But by the mountains of God, Psalm. 36.7. are meant great mountains,
and by the Cedars of God, Psalm. 80.11. tall Cedars; The flame of God, Cantic.
8, 6. is a most vehement flame. In this Scripture the Hebrew for God, is Iah,
in those two places in the Psalms, El, in the other three places quoted,
Elohim, (Gods.) Strength or greatness is an essential attribute of God, but the
Prophets and Priests were dignified by and in the presence of the three sacred
persons, and Rachel powered out her prayers before the blessed Trinity.

It is competently clear from what I have said upon Psalm. 105.15. that by Gods
Anointed there are meant such as were not Kings, but over their own Families;
and that those who were commanded not to hurt them, neither to do them harm,
were not in subjection to them; and the matter of the Commandment is, that
they should offer them no wrrong.

The strength of this precept does not so tie the hands of Princes, but that
they have liberty upon some occasions to make War against other Princes who are
without the circumference of their dominion, and endeavor to subdue them; nor
yet so confine Subjects, that they may not lawfully defend their right against
their Princes.

I acknowledge that men are by the impetuousnes of a native distemper, till
such time as it be restrained and bridled by grace, carried on to envy such as
God has placed in authority over them. Moses and Aaron, because they were
highly in favor with God, were envied and hated by a great party of the
Israelites. Far be it from me to countenance this Anarchicall humor. We sin,
if we withdraw from any, whilst they have lawful authority over us, and rule
well, our due subjection: yet I see not that they are so baracadoed by the Law
of God against all opposition, that it should be unlawful upon any occasion
whatsoever to resist, or to question them.

CHAP. 14. An Argument, which is wont to be drawn from 1. Sam. 24.6. and c.
26.9, 10, 11. is propounded.
THe main pillar by which Tyranny is supported remains still unshaken, viz.
David's Authority or testimony for the unlawfullness of killing Saul, when God
had delivered him up into his hands, which is expressed, 1 Samuel 24.6. c. 26.9,
10, 11.

And he said unto his Men (in the former of these Scriptures) the Lord forbid
that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed to stretch forth
my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord.

And David said to Abishai (in the other place quoted) destroy him not: for who
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless.

David said further more, as the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his
day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into Battle and perish.

The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the Lords
Anointed.

Many now a days in their familiar discourses allege for Tyrants immunity from
censures, especially from deposition and capital punishment, the example of
Saul and his successors in the Kingdom.

This their argument should scarce have any show of a foundation in Saul,
should have in regard of him no firmer basis then a Castle in the air, were
they not beholden to the text that I have now quoted.

Whereas God requires that those who have committed murder Genesis 9.6. Compare
also the 6 Commandment with the scope of it.
be put to death Romans 13.
by the Magistrate: and has made it Compare the 6. Commandment with the scope
of it.
a man's duty to kill another if he can, rather than to suffer himself to be
murdered.

David seems to except all violence which is offered by tyrants, even that
which amounts to the endangering of other men's lives, from such rough and
austere replies, and to leave unto their subjects (or rather their vassals) no
weapons but prayers and tears, flight and lurking holes wherewith to defend
themselves.

This Argument though nothing should be added to its stature, would prove the
Goliath of those who love to dispute themselves into slavery, or else to share
with Tyrants in their authority; but is somewhat heightened and strengthened by
some circumstances in Which David stood, viz. his frequent dangers in regard of
Saul, (by whom he was restlesly pursued) and the dignity of his own person.

David, lest Abishai should have conceived that although it was unlawful for a
private man to stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed, yet one
anointed might stretch forth his hand against another, after he had said 1 Samuel
26.9.
Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be gniltless?
adds, The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords
Anointed, says Abarbinel upon the place, He intimates, that it was obvious to
think, that although it was a fault in some one to stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, yet not in David who was himself also the anointed
of the Lord.

That David should cause the Amalekite to be put to death, who witnessed
against himself that he had slain Saul, contributeth no more to the preserving
of the lives of Kings then of other men, in that the party who accused himself
could not pretend to any authority by which he might adjudge Saul to death, nor
yet plead that he slew him in his own defense.

CHAP. 15. One of the premises from which some conclude that all Kings are by
divine right exempted from legal censures, and forcible resistance, is
convicted of falsitie.
IT is taken for granted in the argument which is founded upon those places in
Samuel which were produced in the last Chapter, that there is as good reason
that all other Kings as that Saul should be exempted from humane censures and
forcible resistance, which supposition I shall acknowledge to be Truths
legitimate offspring, and Aeagle-like to sore above the mists and clouds of
ignorance and falsehood, if it can with an undazled and undaunted eye behold the
Sun of reason. But you shall clearly perceive it to blink, when it is brought
to the trial.

There are many reasons sure, for which Saul being compared with other Kings,
had a large advantage in the cases now mentioned.

1 Because he reigned by Gods immediate appointment. God made choice of Saul to
be Captain over his people Israel, 1 Samuel 9.16, 17.

Those Kings who were chosen and autorized immediately by God, had a vast
advantage, being compared with such as should be chosen by men. When God
suspended the people from the act of Electing, he suspended them also from the
act of Deposing, otherwise they might presently have pulled down him whom God
had set up.

I acknowledge a difference between the prohibiting people from deposing a
Prince (enthroned immediately by God himself) quam diu been se gesserit, so
long as he demeaned himself as it became a prince, and an absolute debarring of
them from going about to alter their condition, howsoever such a Prince should
carry himself.

A King by his mandate giving one title to some place in a society, that have
Laws by which they are enabled (unless a supetiour power interpose) to eject
any member of their corporation for certain misdemeanors, or because they
retain not those qualifications which are required in a member of such a body
(though permitted otherwise both by the Laws of God and men) is not wont to
reserve the party whom he has preferred, to his immediate jurisdiction, but
leaves him to stand or fall by the statutes of the society into which he is
admitted.

But neither may I omit a difference between the supreme Magistrate and earthly
Monarchs in this particular. So boundless are the knowledge and power of God,
that he sees all the Delinquencies of the great ones, and can punish them
immediately by himself without any interruption of his affairs.

That God, whose breath like a stream of Brimstone kindles Tophet, stands
not in need of any instruments for the executing of his wrath upon Kings, and
sometimes himself immediately inflicteth vengeance, sometimes is pleased to
assign unto men that office out of the sovereignty of his will.

What we read, Deuteronomy. 17.20. leaves us doubtful, whether God upon any
occasions autorised the Israclites to reject their Kings, or their posterity.
He might out of a displeasure conceived against the King permit his subjects or
strangers to offer such violence unto him, as he did not approve of. Himself
likewise by a penal sentence might translate the Kingdom from one Family to
another.

One of the reasons which moved David to swear, As the Lord lives, the Lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into
baettell and perish, was, unless Abarbinel misconstrue him, because he knew
that the Lord had Anonited him King.

Most certain it is that Saul could not (without injustice) be deposed by
humane authority, much less suffer capital punishments by any humane censures,
so long as he demeaned himself so as it became him: in which respect he had a
large advantage being compared with other Kings who were men's creatures, viz.
not elected immediately by God himself, much more above such whose sword is all
the title by which they can pretend to the Scepter.

Those are as free, as can be imagined, to recover their liberty, who are
enslaved by conquest; an unlawful violence may lawfully be removed.

A people may set a King over them for some short time, so that his authority
must needs soon expire; or with no firmer commission then durante beneplacito,
so that his Kingdom shall not be more steadfast than one of those houses whose
foundations are said in the waves, the inhabitants whereof may expect to be
tossed to and fro without intermission, unless they can congeale the billows
into a sleep.

The Authority which is perpetuated by the tenor of the Patent, may in some
cases be recalled both with more wisdom and Religion, then it was granted, as I
before showed.

CHAP. 16. That Presumption, viz. That there is as good reason that all other
Kings as well as Saul, should be exempted from humane censures, and violent
resistance, is by another reason refuted. The Sin of the Israelites in asking a
King, is explained negatively and affirmatively. The 14. and 15. Verses of
Deuteron. 17. are enlightened.
GOD, though he granted unto the Israelites a King after the manner of other
Nations, and according to the Genius of their request, might deservedly abridge
them from that liberty of unthroning Tyrants, which he granted unto other
Nations: in that they tendered to him such a Petition, as was both in the
substance and the circumstances thereof exceedingly unlawful and sinful. God
gave them a King in his anger, Hos. 13.11.

God threatens by Samuel (1 Samuel 8.18.) that he would not hear the Israelites
crying out to him for relief under the burden of their royal pressures.

This Scripture informs us that God determined they should suffer in the
things wherein they sinned. Here is measure for measure.

That I may explain the sin of the Isra lites in its full dimensions, I shall
premise, That a King is not a necessary ingredient of the Government of a
People, (which Thesis I have already proved:) Moreover, that the Israelites
were not obliged by any divine precept to set over them a King: And lastly,
that although a King had been necessary for other Nations in regard of Civil
occasions, yet could not he be necessary for the Israelites.

The Israelites were not necessitated by any divine precept to set over them a
King of their own choosing, nor yet to ask a King of God.

Three things (says R. Jehuda) were enjoined the Israelites, G^m. Sanhedr. c.
2.
which they should do after their entrance into the Holy Land: to set a King
over them, to cut off the seed of Amaleck, and to build a Temple. Schickard
also ( De Jure Regio Hebraeorum, c. 1. Theor. 1.) affirms, that God commanded
the Israelites to set a King over them, Deuteronomy. 17.15.

Dei mandatum e^at eligere Regem.
The title of that Theoreme is yet more hardy, affirming that God had commanded
the Israelites to choose them a King.

But if we accurately examine that comma in Deuteronomie quoted by Schickard,
we shall find that God did not at all permit, much less command the Israelites
to choose a King, but reserved that choice to himself. Neither is there any
expression in Deuteronomy. 17. which might countenance their asking of a King, but
clearly what should have diverted them from that attempt.

It Is probable also that those words, Thou shall in any wise set him him King
over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose, (consider well the scope of them)
contain only one precept, which is negative, viz. That they should not set
over them a King whom the Lord did not choose: and certain, that if an
affirmative precept be likewise intended in them; the reason was not, that God
took complacency in their setting over them a King, but that his choice might
be regarded. Their acquiescing in Gods choice should be the pith and kernel of
the precept, and the setting up of a King only the husk and shell of it. It
was needless to enjoin them to s^t a King over them, when they intemperately
desired Kingly Government. God did not antecedently, nor simply enjoin them to
set a King over them, but (if at all) in reference to the choice that he should
make. And he chus'd a King for them, not out of any complacencie which he took
in their request, but out of condescension to the hardness of their hearts.

Again, The Book which Samue! wrote touching the manner of the Kingdom, (1 Samuel
10.15) showed what authority the K. should have over the people, and what
punishment he should inslict upon those who disobeyed his commands, and was
laid up before the Lord, viz. in the Ark, as R. Levi Bell Gersom commenteth
upon the place.
though a King should have been necessary for other Nations, yet not for the
Israelites. God had undertaken to rule over them in a more peculiar way then
over the Nations, had promised to go before them, and to fight their battles,
and had given them Judges, and directed them by his Prophets.

The Israelites in the times of the Judges before Samuel, seemed to be of this
opinion.

This last Thesis is cleared by 1 Samuel 10.19. And ye have this day rejected
your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities, and your
tribulations.

The Israelites in desiring a King, did not act in the virtue of any divine
commandment, nor out of any Civil necessity, or Stateexigency, but out of an
unbridled humor, out of a Ca^exie and evil frame of spirit. I cannot think
with some of the Hebrew Doctors in Siphre, that they desired a King who would
bring in Idolatrous worship; nor with R. Nissim, that their offense was in
asking a King, not only to fight their battails, but also to judge them,
(seeing all judicature was not entailed upon their great Sanhedrin and their
inferior judges, it was not necessary that their request should encroach upon
those Courts of justice, which were established by Divine right) nor yet with
some other, that their sin consisted in desiring a King who should make laws
and rule according to his pleasure, not submitting himself unto the Law of God,
seeing that we have no hint that they were guilty of this crime.

They offended (as I conceive with Maimonidas) in that there was a spirit of
murmuring in their asking of a King. They were not contented with that
Government which God had appointed them. God permitted them not to ask a King,
but commanded them to set over them a King whom the Lord should chose. Deuteronomy.
17.14, 15. God foretells their repining against the present Government, and
here, as in some other cases, condescendeth to the hardness of their hearts in
granting them a King, but confineth them to one whom himself should choose.

R. Nehorai (in the Gemara of Sanhedrin c. 2.) expresses the same sense of
that place in Deuteronomy. viz. That in regard of their murmuring, which is intimated
in those words, And shall say, I will set a King over me, like as all the
Nations that are round about me, the Lord said, Thou shall in any wise set him
King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose.

Those Doctors, whose opinions I rejected, mistook, as conceiving that God
absolutely commanded the Israelites to set over them a King; and sinned not, in
the matter of their request, but only in the circumstances thereof. Had there
been such a commandment, their forefathers had sinned in omitting it,
throughout the time after they were possessed of Canaan, till they asked a King.

See Nathmanides upon Genesis 49.10.
They sinned also in rejecting Samuel, one who was endewed with the Spirit of
prophecy, and eminent in holiness. Besides that they expressed a desire that
some other should rule over them, 1 Samuel 8.5. Unless they were supinely
ignorant, or understood by revelation that God would not settle the Kingdom at
its beginning upon Judah, they could no expect a king who was not of that tribe.

They had an itching desire to be like unto other Natations, in with there was a
spice and tincture of Idolatry. They chose rather to be governed after the
manner of the heathen, then in that way which God had prescribed them, being
taken with the pomp and luster of a visible King. As they had formerly adored
the Gods of the Nations, so now they idolize their government: as they had
often cast off Jehovah from being their God, so now they cast him off from
being their King.

R. Eliezer (in the Gemara of Sanhedr. c. 2.) says, the Elders sinned not in
asking a King, but the common people were perverse in affecting to be like
other Nations.

The beginnning of this sentence is already refuted: the remainder in part
makes for my purpose. The same who desired a King, affected also to be like
other Nations, 1 Samuel 8.5. and. 20. and were therein perverse, but sinned
likewise in the matter of their request. It was impossible for the Israelites
to ask a King with such circumstances as not to sin, in that the request it
self implied a rejecting of God from bearing rule over them.

They had not the same liberty with other Nations in this particular, in that
God had vouchsafed to reign over them in a peculiar manner.

Forasmuch as the Israelites so haynously provoked God in asking a King, it was
just with him to abridge them or the Liberty of deposing Tyrannical Kings
which he left to other Nations: that they might have enough of Kingly
government, which they had so much thirsted after.

CHAP. 17. A third reason is opposed against that proposition, or presumption,
which was examined in the two last Chapters.
SHould we grant that David's sparing of Saul, when he was delivered into his
hands, was approved off by God, yet the times in which he lived, will suggest
an exception of Tyrants now a days from Saul's Privilege, and of subjects whose
lives are unjustly sought after by their Princes, from David's Liberty.

No one will doubt but in the times in which the spirit of Prophecy
flourished, God dispensed oftener with the matter of his Laws then we have
notice given us in the Scriptures.

God remitted unto Cain the sentence of death due to him for his Murder. Genesis
4.15. That Law, Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth man's blood, By man shall his blood be
shed, was not then first given, but only repeated and enforced by a vocal
promulgation. God permitted the Isralites to spoil the Egyptians, Exodus 11.2.
And some of those of whom they borrowed jewels, perhaps had no influence into
their pressures. If all Gods providential dispensations should have been
written, I suppose that even the World it self could not contain the Books
that should be written.

I cannot conceive that it will seem strange to any who are not sworn to hold
their conclusions, that Saul should by some un-written dispensation be exempted
from some penalties, to which otherwise he should have been liable, or that
David by some countermand which was not committed to writing, should be
inhibited from killing Saul, which otherwise he might have done in his own
defense: Upon 1 Samuel 26.
Abarbinel says by way of conjecture, that David received from Samuel at
Naioth in Ramah, what he says to Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.10. God had promised David
the Kingdom, and so virtually at least that he would deliver him out of the
hands of Saul: and that his information, out of supposition that he sinned not
in sparing Saul, was ich'd out by some divine light not recorded in Scripture,
since otherwise he might have conceived that God had decreed he should by his
Sword hew out his way to the Kingdom, that Gods promise was to be accomplished
by his killing of Saul, when he was delivered into his hands. It is probable
enough, that God by some revelation not contained in the Scriptures now extant,
signified unto David, that himself without his help would shorten Saul's days,
and admonished him expressly, or by consequence not to lay violent hands upon
his Master the Lords anointed. I am confident that the History of some
privileges which were granted to Saul, and those who by Gods appointment
succeeded him in the Kingdom, perished with that book which Samuel wrote
concerning the manner of the Kingdom, and laid up before the Lord, 1 Samuel
10.25.

That Book was of divine authority, but not joined to the other Scriptures, in
that it would be of little use after the Kingdom expired: and Gods Providence
ordered that those divine Writings which should be transmitted to all
posterity, should be comprehended in such a volume as would be portable, and
might be easily purchased. When I before spoke of unwritten dispensations and
precepts, I meant such as were not inserted in the Scriptures, which should be
preserved as a perpetual rule of our lives. And perhaps there was never but
for some short time, any unwritten tradition, but in this sense.

It is is probable enough that the Book of which Samuel makes mention,
perished with the first Temple. The sacred Writings (as Elias Levita
witnesses) were not gathered into one Volume, till after the Babylonian
captivity.

Seeing the Scripture now extant exempted not Saul from violent resistance
which might endanger or take away his life, when the life of any of his
Subjects, which he unjustly sought after, could not be preserved upon other
terms, we must grant, unless we resolve to be irrational, that David sinned in
sparing Saul, or else that his omissions were warranted by some divine precept
or permission which is not now extant.

No divine command or permission from which there resulted any privilege to
Saul alone, or to him and those who succeeded him in the Kingdom Deuteronomy. 30.11,
12, 13, 14.
could be longer in force then it was transmitted to Posterity by undoubted
authority.

And indeed all of the Reformed Religion acknowledge the written word of God
now extant to be a sufficient rule of our religious actions, and omissions.

CHAP. 18. The remainder of the premises in that Syllogism which is built upon
David's carriage toward Saul by those who have endeavored to support Tyranny,
is examined.
THe other proposition to be examined, is, That Saul was free from humane
censures, and violent resistance: for so much is wont to be assumed as
warranted by David's carriage toward Saul. But he must have better eyes then
ever had Lyneeus, who can see any thing in those Texts of Samuel which I
produced in the 10th Chapter, whence it may be concluded, that Saul, if he had
committed such sins, as according to Gods Law were to be punished with death,
might not by the great Sanhedrin, (or if there had been no such Court by divine
institution, by the major part of the people) be deposed, and put to death, or
punished with death without other deposition: unless there be the like reason
that any one should be exempted from humane censures, and from resistance to be
made by a private person, whose life he invadeth, which (that I may not deny it
to be true) none that I have met with have urged.

I shall now examine, whether we may infallibly conclude from David's testimony,
that Saul's Subjects were bound by Gods Law rather to suffer themselves to be
murdered by him, then to slay him in their own defense.

David expresses his own judgment touching Gods will, which was contrary to
the sense of his followers, some of which undoubtedly were not strangers to the
Spirit of God.

R. David Kimchi upon those words, 1 Samuel 24.10. (...) and bad me kill thee,
(where our English translation supplyeth the sense by some, and some of the
Hebrew Doctors, by every one of my men) says, And our Rabbines of blessed
memory interpret it, and say, the Scripture says, when one comes to murdor
thee, consent to kill him, as for instance, if a Thief be found in a Cave, as
if he (David) should have said, I had liberty, being also able to kill thee,
bad not my Soul spared thee. The same Doctor a little after upon those words,
(...) (i.e.) but mine eye spared thee, according to our English translation;
and according to Jonathan Ben Vriel in some copies, my Soul spared thee;
according to David Kimchi, my soul, or mine eye spared thee) says, It was
lawful for me to kill thee, because thou did pursue me, and the rule is,
consent thou to kill him, that comes to kill thee.

Those Hebrew Doctors which Kimchi mentions (and which be does not
gainst-say) though they mis-construe David, yet certify us that in their
opinion the Scripture bad David kill Saul. And indeed so much was enjoined in
the 6th Commandment: whether he was countermanded by God, who without doubt
can dispense with the Commandementts of the 2d. Table, according to the
materialitie of them, the two last being excepted, I dispute not in this place.

Abarbinel, though upon 1 Samuel 26, he conjectures that God by Samuel might have
warned Davia to spare Saul, and foretold that himself would shorten his days,
saw so little warrant from the Scripture for David's clemency toward Saul,
that he says upon Chapter 24. of the same book, without doubt David in his
professions to his servants about the sparing of Saul, and in slaying the
Amalekite who feigned that he had killed Saul, and in putting to death those
who murdered Ishbosheth, had an eye upon his own condition.

And Upon 1 Samuel 24.6.
Ralbag also determines that it was lawful for him to have slain Saul,
because he pursued him, but spared him ((...)) out of an Hyperbole of clemency,
and because the killing of Saul would have been of bad consequence to himself,
who (as he knew) should succeed in the Kingdom.

That David's interest should insensibly biase him into a tender care of Kings,
was not a thing impossible.

Men's affections often make their judgments partial. But whether David's
conscience dictating that he ought to spare Saul, was erroneous? and if it was
erroneous, by what means it was seduced, are questions which I shall not
adventure to determine. But give me leave to conceive (till I shall be
otherwise informed) that David either sinned in the sparing of Saul, or else
his clemency was warranted by some divine precept, or permission, which is not
now extant in the Scriptures transmitted to us, and which in all probability
was peculiarly given to David; his followers seem to have thought it lawful
for him to kill Saul. I doubt not but David would rather have slain Saul, than
have suffered himself to be killed by him. When he spared him in the Cave, he
might perhaps conceive, that such his clemency (though he had no encouragement
from Saul's former carriage to expect such an event) would conciliate unto him
Saul's affection; but when he again pursued him with 3000. men (1 Samuel 26.)
could not have so much as a shadow of a reason to harbor any hopes of a
reconciliation, yet spared him being delivered the second time into his hands.
David himself after this repetition of his indulgence and clemency toward
Saul, said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. Who
can doubt but David ought rather to have killed Saul pursuing him, and being
delivered into his hands, when in regard of his power and implacableness he had
no other so probable way left him to secure himself, as by escaping to the Land
of the Philistines, whom he had provoked by slaying many of their Nation, had
not God by some precept, which is not contained in the Scriptures now extant,
enjoined him to preserve himself by flight only, and not by laying violent
hands upon Saul, when it was in his power to avoid him; or at least promised to
preserve him, though he offered no violence to Saul. David, though he had a
promise of divine protection, might say in his heart, All men are Liars.

CHAP. 19. Another Objection propounded, and answered.
ANother arrow out of the same quiver is wont to be shot against the Abetters
of the just liberty of the people.

David's regrets of Conscience for his cutting off Saul's skirt, 1 Samuel 24.5
seem at the first sight much to countenance the impunity of Tyrants.

Some will conclude from hence, that royalty by an essential privilege is
exempted from all opposition, since scarce any is less then the cutting off the
skirt of a garment.

This reason has in it the more show, because it is not very probable that God
by any private admonition, which is neither expressly, nor virtually contained
in the Scripture, should inhibite David from an act of no greater importance.

I answer, Besides that there are many reasons which evince that Saul, much
rather then such as now a days exercise Kingly Government, should have been
excepted from all manner of opposition, and he might perhaps have received from
Samuel some general instruction, out of which he concluded, that he ought not
to have offered to Saul so much violence as the cutting off his skirt, and his
own interest might perhaps somewhat bend his judgment toward the dealing
gently with Kings, and his conscience would strike him as well for a seeming as
for a real iniquity. The Hebrew Doctors tell us, that David in that action
offended, because he exposed Saul in his old age to danger of taking cold, and
without any due end spoiled him of part of his garment, and was suitably
punished in his old age, according to what we read, 1 Kings 1.1. And they
covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat.

CHAP. 20. That Argument which in favor of Tyrants, is forced out of Psalm
51.6. is refuted.
THat of David in the Psalter is wont to be alleged, as if it sided with those
who would place Kings above the reach of Civil Authority, Against thee only
have I sinned, Psalm 51.6.

This testimony, if rightly understood, will not seem to exempt the Kings of
the Nations, nor yet David and his successors from humane censure.

R. David Kimchi's Gloss upon the place, is, that the thing was done insecret,
none but God being privy to it.

David's Messengers to Bathsheba knew not his intention in sending for her,
neither did Ioab comprehend the reasons for which he willed the death of Vriah,
men judged that he caused Vriah to be slain, because he had transgressed his
commandment. Kimchi Sen. the Father of this Doctor who now spoke, thus
commenteth upon the place, Had Vriah been living, my sin had been against thee
and him. But seeing he is dead, against thee only have I sinned, I confess to
thee the sin, because all my sin is left unto thee, neither do I seek pardon of
any but thee for the matter of Bathsheba and Vriah, whose death I caused.

Another Author says upon the place, that David accounted his sins against
men, how great or grievous soever they were, as nothing in comparison of his
sin against God, and therefore said, Against thee, thee only have I sinned.
According to this gloss, to sin only against God, is the same that to sin
chiefly against him.

That wrong which David had done to men, vanished and disappeared, being
compared with that wrong which he had done to God. That which cut David to the
heart, was that he had sinned against God. Vbi dolor, ibi digitus. David mainly
bewaileth the offending of so good, gracious, and indulgent a Father.

When the same part (says Hippocrates) is affected at the same time with
several pains, the greater (swalloweth up) obscureth the other.

Again most certain it is, that sin according to its formality is only against
God, being a breach of his Law. Adultery and Murder had not been sins had not
God forbidden them.

Any sinner, as well as Kings, may say unto God, Against thee only have I
sinned. Sin, though according to its formality it be only against the Law of
God, yet may be punished by Earthly Magistrates, as it is hurtful to a Common
wealth.

CHAP. 21. The impotency of that Argument, which in favor of Tyrants is drawn
from Eccles. 8.2.
THe second comma, of Eccles. 8. at the first sight may seem much to
countenance Tyranny, especial in our English translation, where the words are
these, I (counsel thee) to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of
the Oath of God.

The Later part of the section is translated by Coch, and sum intentionem
juramenti Dei, and chiefly the intention of the oath of God. An Oath here (as
this learned Author explaineth himself in his notes upon the place) is whereby
any one cites God as his witness and judge, that with a good Conscience,
because God has so commanded, he will obey the King, and seek his good, and
the good of the Commonwealth,

I doubt not but some will be ready to conclude from hence, that it is not
lawful upon any account to resist the edicts of Kings.

I acknowledge that the Hebrew is capable of our English translation, and
likewise of that construction which Coch assigns it.

We may admit of our English translation without detriment to the cause, with
this provifoe, that Kings be legitimately invested in their authority, and be a
terror to evil works, and an encouragement to good, and manage well the
affairs of the Commonwealth.

That all these conditions are to be taken in, is clear from Romans 13. and the
6. and 8. Commandments.

Coch has these words upon Eccles. 8.2. Os Regis serva, h. e. fac quodcunque
ex Regis ore prodit: quicquid jubet and statuit pro ea potestate quam habet
divina ordinatione. Regard the Kings mouth, that is, do whatsoever he
commands and appoints, out of that authority which he has by divine
ordination.

No one has from God any authority to do evil, neither has any one now a
days a just title to royal authority, but through the approbation of the
people.

I find in Elisha Galico upon the place, this gloss, I am the mouth of the King
of Kings, of Jehovah, wherefore observe the words which I speak, (and as our
Doctors say,) because thou art sworn to the observance of the Law, when thou
come into the world, (to wit, as say our Doctors of blessed memorte) they
adjure a man (in this form) Hevi tsadik veal tehi rashaugh, be thou righteous,
and be not wicked.

One interpretation in Rasi imports this sense, I say it is necessary and
meet to observe the mouth of the King of the world, because we swear unto him
in Horeb, to keep his Commandments.

Hierome varieth but little from that interpretation which I have now
propounded out of Rasi, his construction of the Text running thus, Ego os Regis
observo, and praecepta juramenti Dei, I observe the mouth of the King, and the
commandments of the oath of God. R. Levi in Midrasch has the same
interpretation of the beginning of the Verse. Any eschmor, etc. (says this
Doctor) I will observe the mouth of the King of Kings, that holy blessed one.
that mouth which said, I am the Lord thy God, etc.

Another interpretation which I find in Rasi, is this, I say, It is meet to
observe the commandment of the Kings of the Nations, so they cause us not to
transgress the oath which we swear to God.

Elisha Galico (before quoted) to the same sense, I say observe the mouth of
the King, but chiefly the (...) without any note of an Apocope.
matter of the oath of God, that is, the Law which we swear to observe at Mount
Sinay.

Learned Broughton, and Tremellius and Junius express the same sense, though
they differ in some Grammatical punctilio's.

I say, regard the Kings mouth: yet after the Oath of God, Broughton.

The Latter part of the verse is rendered in Latin by the other interpreters now
mentioned, Sed pro ratione juramenti Dei.

Their note upon it is thus, Moderatio obsequti quod homines debent
potestatibus: parendum est, inquit, sed non nisi boua side and conseientia:
quia non est potestas nisi a Deo; ac proinde jus non habet homines ab obsequio
avocandi, quod Deus a suis jure jurando exigit, and illi side data se
exhibituros receperunt. That which follows in the fourth verse, ( viz. Where
the word of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What do
thou!) is by Elisha Galico applied to Jehovah the King of Kings, but is spoken
I conceive of an earthly Prince, yet implies not that he is (...), such an one
as may not be called to an account for his actions, but that we ought when he
commands what is backed by the law of God, to obey him, not only out of
Religion, which in such cases requires our loyalty, but likewise out of
prudence, because he has power, and bears not the Sword in vain; See Elisha
Galico upon Eccles. 8.3.
moreover according to some interpreters, that it is wisdom in a private man,
when the Magistrate enjoyneth what is repugnant to Gods will, to remove out of
his dominions, rather then contest with him, which they conceive to be imported
by the word Telec in the foregoing verse.

'That it is dangerous to resist Kings, because they have power; is the sense
of that Scripture according to Abarbinel. That we ought to beware of resisting
them, because they do whatsoever pleases them, is the mind of that Section,
according to Eben-Ezra: The scope of the words is, (as I conceive comparing
them with the foregoing verses of the same chapter, and especially with the end
of the 3d. verse) that as we tender our own safety, we ought not to withstand
the Magistrate in his edicts which are consonant to the word of God.

CHAP. 22. The endeavors of the Israelites toward David, and the Kings of his
Family, afford no solid Argument to prove that Princes may not lastfully be
called to account, nor forcible resisted, when they have discovered themselves
to be unworthy of their Authority.
ANother Argument by which some contend that Kings are exempted from humane
censures, and forcible opposition, is drawn from the constant submission of all
Israel to David and Solomon, and of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin to the
Kings of Judah, though by many of them they were burdened with excessive taxes,
and by some of them with the yoke of Idolatrous worship, Deuteronomy. 1^.59.
to which whosoever assayed to seduce them, was to be punished with death
according to their municipall Laws, which were enacted immediately by the
Senate House of heaven.

What I have already delivered in the former Chapters, is sufficient for the
removal of this argument.

1 These Kings had their call to government immediately from God himself. The
Lord commanded Samuel to Anoint David, 1 Samuel 16.12.

The Lord settled the Kingdom upon David's posterity, 2 Samuel 7.16. Psalm. 89.31,
32, 33. 1 Kings 11.36.

If one of the Kings of the Family of David had many Sons, the firstborn
succeeded in the Kingdom, with analogy to that precept Dent. 21.17. That the
eldest Son should enjoy a double portion. Maimon. Hal. Malech. c. 1. Sect. 1.
The eldest Son had the advantage of his Brethren, as well in the occupying
of the Kingdom, as in the inheritance of his Fathers goods.

The first born alone succeeded in the whole authority of the Kingdom, that the
honor of the Family might be preserved entire, and not be shattered into
pieces, and that the people should be subject to one Lord rather than to many.

The Israelites (as Hal. Mcl. c. Sect. 10.
Marmamides witnesses) ought to have refused him that, in regard to his
birthright, had the next title to the Crown, unless he was pious and feared the
Lord.

Omnis potestas, and omne officium in Israel haereditarium est ad filies and
nepotes in aeternum; modo filius impleat locum patris sui cum sapientia and
pietate. Quod si pietate tantum and non sapientia ipsi par sit perficiunt
nihilominus officio paterno, and docent id quid deest. At penes quem nulla est
pietas, quamvis saptentissimus esset, non promovetur tamen ad ullum officierum
in universo Israel.

Thus the Hebrew Doctor before-quoted, as he is taught to speak Latin by a
learned Writer, whose translation I use, because it cannot be bettered. If this
Doctor speak truth, it will unavoidably follow, that the wicked Kings of Judah
used deep dissimulation, before they were inaugurated, or that the great
Sanhedrin neglected their duty, or that they wanted power to execute it.

This knot is somewhat morose, and will not easily be untied. The public
influence of Kingly authority might be a just ground of some exceptions from
the usual way of hereditary propagation. The Eldest Son with the Israelites,
though he were grossly wicked, inherited a double portion of his Fathers
estate: we cannot hence conclude that the Kingdom perpetually descended upon
the Eldest Son, howsoever he was qualified; because it respected not so much
one man's private benefit, as the welfare of the people.

The case of Solomon who was preferred before Adonijah his Elder Brother, will
not extricate us, in that the choice was made by God himself, 1 Chronicles. 28.5, 6,
7. Gods dispencing with any of his positive Laws, conferreth not the like
privilege upon his creatures.

Though we are left in the dark in that Quaere, to wit, whether the Sanhedrin
had authority to reject the heir apparent of the Kingdom from reigning over
them for his want of religion, yet I shall make it clear that the Kings
aforementioned, were more established in their authority (against humane
opposition) by their call to it, then any can be by a violent invasion thereof,
or by the mere choice of men.

David and Solomon were expressly called to be Kings, and the Kingdom was settled
upon Solomon's posterity be Gods immediate appointment, 1 Chronicles. 28.7. When God
gave unto Jeroboam ten Tribes, he confirmed unto Solomon's posterity the Kingdom
of Judah, 1 Kings 11.36. If the Sandhedrin could lawfully hinder their Kings
firstborn Son from reigning over them, when he was not an heir of his
Fathers virtues, that authority was given them by Gods Commandment, or
permission: and it should remain that they were determined by God himself to
prefer to the Kingdom him that had the next title by descent being duly
qualified, and one of Solomon's posterity, though all of them were egregiously
wicked.

God secured the Kingdom for Solomon's posterity against those iniquities
wherewith they should provoke his divine Majesty, 2 Samuel 7.14.15.16. That the
grant of the Kingdom was not conditional as to Saul, is cleared by that
Scripture, and by 1 King. 11.36. The History of the Kings of Judah informs
us, that some of them provoked God as deeply as did Saul, from whom he took
away the Kingdom. God did not preserve them from provoking him as did Saul: but
showed them more visible favor, by continuing the Kingdom in their posterity.
That condition which is expressed in 1 Chronicles. 28.7. in those words, I will
establish his Kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my Commandments, and
my judgments, as at this day; had respect unto the Kingdom, as it was entire
over the 12 Tribes, but not to every part of it; as we may gather from what
has been spoken, and by comparing it with 1 King. 11. v. 12, and 13. That of
the Psalmist ( Psalm. 132.12.) If thy children will keep my Covenant and my
testimony, etc. imports that David's posterity, unless they revolted from
God (as did Solomon) should reign over the 12 Tribes, but moreover that their
Line and Succession should not be interrupted (as it was for the King of
Manasseh and some other of their Kings) by captivity, until the coming of
Shiloh.

Here it may be inquired, how the establishing of David's Kingdom for ever,
which is promised 2 Samuel 7.16. can consist with those events which have befaln
his posterity; as the Babylonian captivity, and the bereaving of them of all
outward and visible Dominion.

That I may not confine the promise to Christ's spiritual Kingdom, the word
Olam, which is there used, does not always denote eternity, or a duration till
the end of the World; but in general a duration hidden from man, whether
infinite or finite.

See Munster de side Christinorum.
Part of the Ceremonial Law is said to be (...) an ordinance for ever, Numb.
10.8. (...) for ever, Exodus 21.6. is till the next Jubilee, according to Rasi,
Aben-Ezra, Bechai, and Abarbinel upon those words, and the Talmud in Kidushin.
Abarbinel tells us that because 50 years were counted one Age, or Generation,
the fiftieth year which is the year of Jubilee, is called Olam.

According to his construction (...) shall supply the place of See Psalm. 18.50.
(...): and indeed it is wont to signify ad, which is thence derived. But I
should rather conceive that for ever there according to the gramaticall
account, is the same that for the present generation.

The Servant whose Ear was bored through, when the generation was renewed (as
Aben-Ezra speaks) to wit, in the year of Jubilee was to be set at liberty.

(...) For ever, in 2 Chronicles. 23.7. seems to signify the time in which the
Ceremonial Law should continue in force. (...) For evermore, is until Shiloh
come, Psalm. 132.12.

We cannot determine out of those Scriptures before-quoted, to wit, 2 Samuel
7.16. Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33, 1 King 11.36. Whether David and Solomon, and the
Kings of Judah, were liable to deposition and capital punishment by their
Subjects for tyranny, murder, and other gross delinquencies, without an
express permission or injunction from God.

God might punish their persons in such sort, yet not cause his mercy to depart
from them, as he took it away from Saul, whose posterity he secluded from
succeeding in the Kingdom.

But it is clear that those Kings had a large advantage (as I showed before
concerning Saul) being compared with such as came to a Kingdom merely by
Conquest, or by humane choice, in that they were not liable to deposition, so
long as their carriage was worthy of their office.

Abarbinel expresses the same sense in his Preface to his Comment upon 2 Samuel
15. Absalom (says he there) intended not to slay David, neither ascended it
into his heart, neither did Israel agree at all to rebel against their King,
and to kill him: far be it from them, for who shall stretch forth his hand
against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless.

The other two Arguments, which I used against such as denied Saul to be
privileged above the Kings of other Nations, in the 16. and 17 Chapter, make
equually for David and Solomon, and the Kings of Judah.

If Saul and the Kings of the Family of David were exempted from deposition,
and capital punishment, and forcible resistance, yet not by a common
Crown-privilege, but by a special grant from God, directly expressed, or at
least implied by the manner of their call to the Kingdom, and some other
reasons which were peculiar to them.

This assertion has already been sufficiently confirmed, but is much
countenanced also See Chap. 6.
by the demeanor of the Jews toward their Kings which were not of the Family
of David, in the times of the second Temple.

Another reason for which David with his successors of his lineage seem to have
been privileged above the Kings of other Nations, is that they were types of
christ, whose Kingdom should endure:

It is very considerable likewise that the Sanhedrin, and that such among the
Israelites as desired a reformation in the Church or State, or both, might want
strength to oppose their Kings; and that through the just ordination of divine
Providence, in that they had preferred earthly Kings before the Monarch of
heaven and earth. Neither can I doubt but the major part of the people would
the rather bear with wicked Kings in that themselves were addicted to the like
wickedness.

I shall now examine what the Hebrew Doctors say in this point touching matter
of right, and what the Scripture witnesses touching matter of fact. The kings
of the Family of David judge and are judged, says the Babylonian Talmud in the
tractate of the Mischnah called Sanhedr. Chapt. 2. Sect 2.

That the Kings of the Family of David were not exempted from that Law, Deuteronomy.
25.2. which required that a certain number of stripes should be inflicted upon
those who deserved to be beaten, but were for certain faults liable to it, is
affirmed by Mabimon Hal. Melach. c. 3. Sect. 4. in the Talmud Sanhedr. c. 19.
and in other Tractates thereof, and in several other writings of the Hebrew
Doctors.

That those who reigned over the Israelites, were as obnoxious to censure for
some other faults, as for those three which were wont to be reckoned up by the
Hebrew Doctors, viz. the multiplying of Wives, Gold and Silver, and Horses; is
so clear to such as will not jurare in verba Magistrorum, that it needs no
proof.

Neither could this Law be executed without the endangering of their lives in
case they resisted. If the Kings of the Jews for multiplying Wives, Gold and
Silver, and horses, were to be punished with stripes, then by the rule of
proportion for the greatest fault with death, and they might be deposed when
they were notoriously wicked, as the next heir of the Kingdom might by his
wickedness be debarred from reigning, unless they were exempted for the reasons
before mentioned, which agrees not to any Princes now a days.

God foretells in 1 Samuel 8. how their Kings should demean themselves, but
does not there or elsewhere authorize them to use such acts of violence.

Mischpat in 1 Samuel 8.11. signifies the Manner or Custom, as in 1 Samuel 2.13.
not Right and Authority, as in c. 10.25.

That the Kings of Judah were not liable to be censured by the Sanhedrin in
such manner as the Hebrew Doctors affirm, because we read not in the Scripture
that they were so censured, or because they never were so censured, is an
argument not so substantive but it will fall of it self, without opposition. We
may conclude much rather that we ought to assent to that piece of history in
those writers, in that it is not contradicted in the word of God? some of them
(I conjecture) had been brought to their trialls and censures by the Sanhedrin,
nisi impunitatis Cupido retinuisset, maginis semper conatibus adversa.

That I may now speak touching matter of fact, we shall find in the practice of
the Israelites, in the times of David, and Rehodoam, and Iehoram, might we
lawfully make the examples of actions and omissions, our rules; enough to
warrant the taking up of Arms against Kings, when they neglect the executing of
justice, or squeese their Subjects by immoderate taxes, or impose upon them too
heavy servitude.

That method which Absalom used to steal away he peoples hearts from his
Father, 2 Samuel 15.2, 3, 4. being compared with his success, makes us
conjecture that those who joined themselves to him in the conspiracy, thought
it lawful for them to wrest authority out of David's hands, and to settle it
upon Absalom by the sword, that justice might be more freely dispensed. David
was old, neither deputed any, (if we may believe Absalom) to hear those who had
controversies with other men. Absalom promises that he, were he made judge in
the Land, would do justice; and meant, as it is probable, by himself
immediately, not by his ministers. It appears that they intended not only to
strip David of his Authority, but also to take away his life, from 2. and 4.
verses of the 2 Samuel 17. compared together. Abarbinel conceives that neither
Absalom, nor the Elders of Israel, nor the rest of the People who sided with
him in the conspiracy, had any thought to divest David of his Crown and
Dignity, but to substitute Absalom to him for the executing of the Royal
Authority during his life, and for his successor afterward. Absalom was
induced (says this Doctor) to that attempt, because David had sworn unto
Bathsheba that Solomon should reign after him, and sit on his Throne in his
stead, as also because he suspected that David would cause Solomon to be placed
in the Kingdom during his own life, and after he was once King, who should say
unto him, what do thou?

The people consented to Absalom (says the same Author) because he was David's
eldest Son after the death of Amnon, and was of the fittest age both to judge
them, and to fight their Battles, to with about Rasi and R. Kim. fasten the
epoch of the 40. years which are mentioned 2 Samuel 15.7. In the Iraelites
asking a King of Samuel; and Kimchi adds that Saul reigned with Samuel 1
year, and two years alone, and that the other 37 years belonged to the reign of
David. Ralbag and R. Ieschaiah make mention of this opinion, but seem to have
thought that the 40 years began with David's Kingdom, Ralbag also conjectureth
that it was prophesied of David's Kingdom that it should stand only 40 years,
and Absalom concluded these years now expired, that the Kingdom should depart
from david, and that he should bring to pass his Intention of killing him.
These 40 years (says Abarbinel) could not begin at Saul's inauguration, for
that was above 50 years past. He reckons that David had reigned al most 40
years, and that Absalom was born at Hebron in the beginning of David's Kingdom.
40 years, and because they were disaffected toward Solomon, both by reason of
David's Adultery with Bathsheba, and his killing of Vriah, and likewise that he
was but a Child about 9 years old, that is, because they thought him unfit to
govern, and feared a curse upon his Government in regard of the sins of his
Parents.

Ahithophel (according to the same commentator) conjectured Not much unlike to
this is the deliberation of Ioab, in the Author now praised, who suspected
should Absalom be suffered to escape with life his Father might perhaps make
him being his eldest Son his successor in the Kingdom, and himself should be
the Butt for his enmlty and hatted.
that David, to buy his peace would consent that Absalom his eldest Son should
succeed him in the Kingdom, and that he would retain an enmity and hatred
against himself, and therefore suggested such Counsels, as might debar a
reconciliation, and cut off David. His advice in 2 Samuel 26.21. tended to the
preventing of all thoughts touching a reconciliation (but moreover to inmind
the people of David's sin with Bathsheba, and to beget in them an expectation of
divine revenge to be executed upon David, wherein they should be much confirmed
by Nathans prophecy, 2 Samuel 12.11, 12.) and that other part of his Counsel in
the 2 Samuel 17.1, 2. to the taking away of David's life.

Absalom (says the same Author) consented to the former part of Ahithophel's
advice, which was that he should go in unto his Fathers Concubines, lest the
Israelites should revolt from him before he perfected an agreement with his
father: but the other part of his Counsel, which was to kill David, he
abhorred, and therefore consulted with Hushai, and preferred his advice.

The same Doctor says upon 2 Samuel 17.4. that it pleased Absalom and the
elders of Israel, that Anithophel and the young men should go after David, but
Absalom did not acquiesce in Ahithophel's advising him to smite David, and
therefore inquired the judgment of Hushai.

But the Scripture affords no hint for Absoloms disliking of any part of
Ahithophel's counsel, before he had consulted with Hushai.

Were Abarbinel right in his conjecture, yet the Israelites thought it lawful
to translate by violence the exercise of Royal authority from David to
Absalom, wherefore scarce any Prince though of Methuselah's years, would desire
to be disburthened: and to appoint their King a successor against his mind,
though he were a Prophet, and therefore likely to have received punctual
instructions from God touching the propagation of the Kingdom.

The ten tribes rebelled against Rehoboam, because he would not abate somewhat
of the grievous servitude which his Father had imposed upon them, 2 Chronicles. 10.
Their revolting is not resolved into Ahijahs prophecy, but the harsh answer
which Rehoboam returned to them.

Libnah revolted from Jehoram, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his
Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 21.10. But see especially the instances before produced in
the tenth Chapter.

To be inserted in Chapter 9. after those words, From violence.
Whilst people are Malignant, they are not to be permitted to suffrage in state
affairs, neither indeed would it become them, or prove for their welfare: for
(...), servilis pravitas, as Plato in Alcibade primo, (...). Caeterum antequam
virtus adsit, Conducit viro, non solum puero, regia meliore, quam regere, Plato
ibid.

But as soon as they are reformed, they ought to be trusted with their votes:
for (...) Liberalis virtus. ibid.

This to be inserted in Chap. 9. after these Words, can give no better a title
to authority, than thest to another man's Goods.
Mem. That what I have out Elias Levita, and Broughton, who undoubtedly
followed him, (in Chap. 17. p. l.) to be contradicted, as it fastneth upon Ezra
the collecting of the Scripture into one body. That probably was needless.

I cannot consent to Arist. telling us, ( Polit. l. 1. c. 8.) that a War
undertaken to compel men to subjection, who being more fit to obey then to
command, are unwilling to submit themselves to such as are more able to govern,
is agreeable to the Law of Nature: and putting no difference in point of
justice between the subduing of these and the hunting of Wild beasts.

FINIS.
Behold the Wonder of this Age.

If thou observ'st these Rules, and take my Physic,
'Twill keep thee from the Pox, Plague, Cough, or Tysick,
Consumptions, Dropsies, nay, the truth to tell ye,
From all griefs either i'th'head; back, or belly.

