AN EXACT RELATION OF The last News from the Quarters OF His Excellency, The
Lord General of The Scottish Army.

Dated from Sunderland March 12. 1643.

Fully relating every days Passage, from their passing over the River of Tine,
their taking of Sunderland, and a vast quantity of Coals appertaining to
Delinquents.

With Propositions to the City of London for the sending out Shipping for
Coals from thence: And sundry other Proceedings of that Army in their marching
toward Duresme, and in mannaging the Siege against Newcastle. From February
27. to March 12. 1643.

Printed for L. BLAIRLOCK, and are to be sold at his Shop near Temple-Barre.
1644.

SJR,
IT has not been want of good will, but of leisure and opportunity to
accomplish my promise, whereto I obliged my self when I parted with you: I wish
you knew how often I have fancied thankfulness to you in my mind, for that
great favor I found from you, but a stranger to me: Pardon my inability
hitherto, and accept of this enclosed Account of the condition of this Army,
and of the affairs of it. I am put into much hastiness, otherwise I might add
much of circumstances, and relations of sundry other matters: For the present
you may know that we are Masters of a vast quantity of Coals belonging to this
Port, most of it appertaining to Delinquents, which will be (I hope) a
comfortable supply to LONDON: But if you have any friends that intend hither
for Coals, advise them to bring some provisions for the Army, especially
six-shillings Beer, Hay, or Oats: The Army is this day marched toward the
Enemy at Duresme, and his Excellency intends to visit them if they will stay
by it; The English Commissioners intend to remain here till it please God we
can get Newcastle, which by Gods blessing, either when the Enemies Army now in
the field is defeated, or the weather a little warmer, will be suddenly.

Sunderland, March 12 1643. Sir I am Your very affectionate friend. W. R.

An exact Account of the Scots passing over the River Tine, taking of
Sunderland, and other Proceedings: With the present Condition of the SCOTS Army:
From the 27. of February till the 12. of March. 1643.
IT being resolved as most conducible to our affairs, that the greatest part
of this Army should pass the River Tyne, that so we might the better
understand, what course the Enemy meant to take, and do accordingly. On the
28. of Febr. with 15. Regiments of Foot, and 6. Regiments of Horse, we passed
the River Tyne at several Fordes near Bywell and Oringham, which if we had
not done that day, the sudden alteration of the weather had made it for some
time impossible to us, leaving behind 5. Regiments of Foot, and some Troops of
Horse, under command of Sir James Lumsdaine, General Major of the Forces on
the other side Tyne: After we had passed Tyne, we found the River of Darwen so
high by the sudden thaw, that only half of the Army could pass it on
Thursday, the other part being forced to stay till Friday, when they also
passed over with the Carriages, and so we directed our March toward Sunderland,
it being very necessary for supply of the Army, and receiving Intelligence,
that we should have that Haven secured, near which we came on Saturday night,
March the second: And resting the Lords day, the Enemy crossed the River and
left it, so we entered on Monday without striking one blow.

In this March from Tine to Sunderland, notwithstanding the many straight and
disadvantagious passages (which were so narrow, that sometimes the people were:
constrained to march one by one, as in a string: and if God had given our
enemies hearts, we might either have been cut in pieces, or stopped) but we
found no opposition from the enemy, and scarcely obtained a sight of them,
only a Body of Horse appeared upon our Rear, at our passing over the River of
Wear, at New-Bridge, but interrupted us not. We remained in our Quarters on
Monday and Tuesday, taking what care we could for supply of Provisions in this
Enemies Country, for so we find it, not receiving any intelligence or willing
supply from them. But it is no wonder we find not many friends, when there
are so few men, the whole Country being in Arms, either willingly or
forcedly: so great a power has the Cathedral here. On Wednesday the sixth of
March the Enemy having united their Forces, and received an accession of
strength by Sir Charles Lucas, who brought 21. Troops from Yorke-shire, and by
1500. Foot, from Cumberland, they drew their Forces to a place about two or
three Miles to the West of Sunderland, and showed themselves upon the top of
Worme-Hill: This Army was accordingly drawn forth; and both lay at about half
a miles distance, on Wednesday night in the fields, on thursday morning they
were again drawn up something nearer, the Enemy still keeping to the
advantage of his ground upon the Hill, so that notwithstanding the nearness of
some part of both Armies, being not above a quarter of a Mile distant, we could
not without very great disadvantage engage this Army, in regard of the
impassable Hedges and Ditches betwixt us, so that likewise after the Armies had
faced each other that day, they remained in the fields that night also: on
Friday morning some little Skirmishes there was, betwixt some small parties of
Horse, wherein that little advantage that was, fell to us, taking some few
Prisoners, by whom we understood, that they had on Thursday night drawn off
their Canon, and withdrawn their Foot, and left a full body of Horse which
faced us in the morning till about ten of the Clock, and then taking the
advantage of a very thick storm of Snow, which lasted two or three hours,
(and in as sore a manner sure as ever was seen) marched away, and this Army,
through the illness of the weather and ways, rendered incapable of pursuing;
they also having so great a strength of horse in the Rear, and we not supplied
with Provisions to (...) whereupon (...) Friday night this Army returned to
their Quarters. We since understand by good hands, that the Enemies lying in
the field two nights, was almost as bad as a Battle to them, many of their Men
and Horse dying, but more running away. We likewise sustained some little
loss by the extremity of the weather, but nothing near theirs. We hear they
lost eight hundred Horse one way or other these two nights.

They are now in Durham, and this Army as yet about Sunderland; only seven
Regiments are (for the enlarging the Quarters by reason of the want of
provision) on the North side of the River of Wear, toward Newcastle.

The Enemy on Friday night cut the New-Bridge, but it can be little
disadvantage to this Army, which (being now supplied with some Provisions,
which came happily yesterday in two ships with meal from Scotland, and
Captain Carres ship of Cheese and Butter from London) will march to morrow,
being the 12. of March, upon some Design not certainly known by any but the
chief Commanders. The Lord go along with them.

FINIS.
This is Licensed, and Entered according to Order.


