A LETTER From a person of quality residing in Kinsale, With an Attestation of
the Officers of the Parliaments Army in Munster, in vindication of the Lord of
INCHIQVIN, Lord President of that Province.

ALSO, Another Letter from Colonel William Jephson, relating the present state
and condition of IRELAND.

Published by special Command.

LONDON: Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 15. Sept.
1646.

A Letter from a person of quality residing at Kinsale, and an Attestation of
the Officers of the Parliaments Army in Munster, in vindication of the Lord of
Inchiquin, Lord President of that Province.
SIR,
Upon notice of sundry false reports cast abroad, whereby the honor and
integrity of the Lord of Inchiquin, Lord President of this Province, was
endeavored as maliciously as undeservedly to be traduced, The Officers of this
Army (who have been eye witnesses of his Lordships actions and proceedings, and
are very sensible how innocently his Lordship suffers herein) took into their
serious consideration, how necessary and meet it was for them to declare their
knowledges in each particular, as well for the vindication of his Lordship, who
it has pleased Almighty God in his providence to make a principal instrument
in preserving the remnant of the poor Protestants here, and in preventing the
designs of these bloody Rebels in the continuing of the unnatural War
there) as also for the honor and service of the Parliament (in preserving
persons of honor and quality by them eminently employed, from unjust
aspersions, which may be conceived to reflect with no small prejudice upon
their affairs, in relation to the public.) And thereupon they did unanimously
make this Attestation, which you shall herewith receive, to be published there
where the scandals were raised, as ye see occasion.

I have no news to certify you of, save that by the unhappy loss of
Bunratty, (soon after Lieutenant Colonel Mac Adam was slain) the Rebels are
at liberty, and now in preparation to fall upon us, and in their hopes of a
sudden peace to be concluded between the Lord of Ormond and them; and of the
slow coming of supplies unto us, they have swallowed us up already in their own
conceits, but they shall be sure to find the best resistance that it shall
please God to enable us to give them, and that very faithfully. And so Sir this
being to no other purpose, I rest,

Your very loving friend, B. S.
Kinsale, August 2. 1646.
To my very loving friend Thomas Betswohth Esquire, Agent for the Province of
Munster.
FInding in a private Pamphlet, a scandalous passage which may eclipse the
honor and reputation of the Right Honorable the Lord Barron of Inchiquin, now
Lord President of Munster, in that he did not formerly take in the Castle of
Blarny, so near the Garrison of Cork, as though his Lordship had overslipt
opportunities to have taken in the same; And whereas we hear it has been
suggested into England, that his Lordship has had some secret correspondencie
with the Irish, whereby he has, during these Wars, been extraordinarily
favorable unto them in some points; And whereas in the third place another
scandal has bin endeavored to be fastened on his Lordship, That he has
converted the entertainment due to the Soldier and Officer of the Army, and
which might have bin conveniently paid them, into his own purse, and
transported several sums of money into foreign parts. We therefore, whose
names are underwritten, make this ensuing attestation, to vindicate (as in
justice we ought) his Lordships honor, and do confidently and truly aver, in
answer to the first scandal (against all foule-mouthed detractors,) That upon
the death of the late Lord President, a great debate arising at a Council of
War at Downraile, who should have the power of commanding the Army, and
ordering the War until some Commission should come from the State at Dublin,
or out of England, the general Vote cast the weight on the Lord of Inchiquins
shoulders, who undertaking the War, prosecuted the War against the Rebels,
by taking several Castles in that then plentiful Country, called Roches
Country, thereby (besides the weakening of the Rebels) his Lordship gained
means to maintain the Army which was then like to be distressed, there being
scarce any provision in the stores, as also he lay ready to receive the Enemy,
which his Lordship heard by intelligence were falling out of the County of
Limricke, into the County of Cork that way, and thereby his Lordship obtained
by Gods providence those two remarkable Victories of Newtowne and Liscarroll,
in either of which (especially the latter) had the Rebels prevailed, or not
been opposed until they came over the black water, our interest in Munster was
likely to be lost; from Liscarroll his Lordship returned back to Cork with a
resolution to fall on Blarny, but that resolution being debated at a General
Council of War at Cork, it was by a General consent concluded, It was
neither seasonable nor feasible, by reason of the mortallitie of the Soldiers,
who died in multitudes, and want of Victuals to carry the Army forth to lie in
the field; for his Lordship was then so necessitated, that to maintain the
Soldiers he was constrained to billet them on the several Towns, they giving
them but one meal a day for about twelve weeks together, and to send about one
thousand Horse and Foot to quarter at Downraile and Malloe, under the command
of Major General Jephson, to live by gaining their own subsistence by taking
now and then some small preys from the Rebels: all the succeeding winter his
Lordship was forced likewise to employ all the forces in preying several parts
of the Country to gain a livelihood for them (no supplies coming out of
England to relieve him) and in sending some part of the Army to relieve
Rathbarry in the West, or to fetch off diverse distressed English, who were
besieged by the Irish of those parts: And after that the Army that lay in the
several Garrisons of Cork, Kinsale, Bandon, Malloe, and Downraile; was
employed in burning and harrowing all Muskry in several places at once, to
dis-inable them to maintain a siege threatened against Cork, and to which end
they had provided several sorts of grain in great quantities in that Country,
and in Mac Donoghs Country, the Army still rather decreasing then otherwise,
and no supplies coming out of England, yet his Lordship carried as convenient
a number as he could of Horse and Foot to relieve Capaquine, (a Garrlson of
ours in the County of Waterford) to stop the Enemy from falling on it; and
after that, the Army was sent in May into Ibawne, where diverse Castles were
taken, and thereby the Army sti^l refreshed, That being done, and the Army
retiring, the Garrisons being spent out and not able to diet the Soldiers any
longer, his Lordship was constrained (to keep the Soldier from disorder at
home, and to encourage them by getting somewhat abroad) to march toward
Kilmalock, and doubting that that part of the Country would not afford any
store of prey, his Lordship sent Major Story with a good party into Kerry
(which was a Country full of Cattle) to bring a prey from thence, and to bring
it to the Leaguer of Kilmalock, where still wants oppressed, and so his
Lordship was constrained to return home, and Sir Charles Vavasor went to his
former design to Cloghleigh, which though he took, yet he unfortunately lost
presently after, with most of his men, which much weakened the Army; and yet his
Lordship advanced in the end of July the same year to releeve Lismore
(besieged by the Rebels) which he did, and strengthened that Garrison, and
after his return the Army was sent again into Ibawne to reap the plentiful
Harvest, they at their being there the May before found would then be, which
much disadvantaged the Rebels; and (besides the sustinance it gave the Army) it
releeved the two Towns of Kinsale and Bandon, the latter whereof had it not
been for that work had perished, together with the Soldiers; (the Inhabitants
all of them were in that penury and want) while these things were in action the
Cessation came in, during which time no Hostile attempts were made on either
side, and so his Lordship could not but forbear Blarny, which during the times
of former open Hostility was most strongly guarded with Horse and Foot, besides
a considerable part of the enemy still in the Country to releeve it. After the
Cessation when his Lordship reassumed the War, the Army here was very weak,
and he (still expecting aid out of England) did with the advice of many
Counsels of War forbear any attempt against Blarny, though a great eyesore
unto him; and the Irish still threatening to sit down before Cork, and to
besiege it; his Lordships chiefest endeavors was to raise what men he could
possible in these parts, and to fortify the Towns that they might not find
him so altogether unprovided as they hoped they should, as also to borrow money
where possible he could procure any, even from the English that were left,
engaging his Honor for satisfaction upon the first landing of any supplies:
All these his Lordships wants, the many Remonstrances sent from the Counsel of
War here to Mr. Speaker, the often sending of Agents to both the Honorable
Houses can too lamentably speak; In the year last past the Earl of
Castle-haven came down with a Potent Army, took all our out-Garrisons,
besieged Youghall, which with much trouble and cost, by contribution of the
well-disposed English in our other Garrisons though not in the best condition)
was defended, releeved, and the Rebels raised their Siege in November; At which
time by reason of the nakedness of the Soldier, and many wants, the Army was
not able to be in the Field; And if his Lordship had been better supplied then
he was it was held not safe (the Rebels being retired but to the confines of
our Quarters) And in December his Lordship was entreated by the Commanders and
Officers to make his address in person to the Honorable Houses for supplies;
All which passages show convincingly how almost impossible it was for his
Lordship to take in Blarny, for he had still his hands full of other business
of no small consequence, besides his great wants, that he was compelled to
abstain from falling on that place though somewhat obnoxious.

For the said second aspertion, though generals are difficult to be wiped off,
because particular enumerations of defenses are not of the same latitude with
the general accusation; yet we who have been usual eye witnesses of his
Lordships Actions, and of the entercourses his Lordship has had with the
Jrish, and we with whom he has advised, when his Lordship treated with any of
them, can justly assert, as we do here profess, That no man could deal more
advisedly with them to the best of our understandings, and to the advantage of
the Army, then his Lordship did from time to time, and none did or could
prosecute his own Nation and Kindred more then his Lordship did those of his
Nation and Kindred, whom he found disaffected to the Work he had undertaken
for the suppressing of the Rebels; We can demonstrate by particulars his
Lordships dis-affections to the Irish, as his turning the Irish out of the
walled Towns, his taking of his Uncles Castle of Ballimartre, and burning it,
his hanging a Popish Deane there, and a Friar in Cork before the turning out
of the Citizens out of the Town, as also diverse other particulars.

To the third and sharpest stinge of a viperous tongue, we likewise (whose
fortunes were not so great as to lose or forbear our entertainements) because
we have received from his Lordship all just satisfaction as far as we saw the
money come in, can testify for his Lordship that he has made many hard shifts
to procure money and means for the Army, and that he turned what he received
or procured to the best advantage of the carrying on of the War. We were not
so blind but we could see and discern what came in, nor were we so
Meale-mouthed as to hold our peace; if we saw any money assigned for our
relief drop into another man's purse, for never was any money or provision
that came for the use of the Army disposed of, but his Lordship participated to
some of the Commanders and Officers in chief, how he could and would
distribute it to the Garrison Soldiers and Officers; Nay, we can confidently,
because knowingly, say, That his Lordship has diverse times disbursed of his
own moneys, and borrowed of his nearest friends to defray the Charge of the
Army when in want, and to keep the Soldiers together from murmering, Neither
did ever Soldiers better comply with a General then these here did with his
Lordship, even in the midst of their wants; and when their pay was (as diverse
times of necessity it was) shortened, saying publicly, That if his Lordship
had it we should not want, God send him more. All the particulars herein
contained are known by some or other of us, whose names are hereunto
subscribed, the greatest part of them to most of us. All of them are come unto
us by such information from one another as we have reason to believe them to be
true; and there is no one thing in this instrument which any of us knows to
be untrue.

Dated at Cork the second of August. 1646. Signed by THe Lord of Broghill,
Lieu. Genesis of the Horse. William Jephson, Sergeant Major General. Tho. Serle,
Col. and Governor of Bandon. William Brocket, Col. and Governor of Kinsale.
Sir Percy Smith Knight, and Gov. of Youghall. Fran. Courtney Col. Will.
Kinsmill, Lieut. Col. to the Lord President. Walter Croker, Lieut. Col to Sir
Hardresse Walter. Sir Will. Courtney Knight. Peregrin Baanistre. Agmundisham
Muschampe, Gov. of the Fort of Cork. Tho. Dowrich. Antho. Hovenden. Nicholas
Purden. Dan. Boulton. Philip Common. Arth. Bettesworth. John Steeres. Josiah
Harloe. Henry Rogers. John Hodder. James Perey. Edmund Hulle. Allex. Pigot.
Anth. Stougton. Daniel Watkins. Will. Farding. Will. Holcombe. Warham St.
Ledger. Hugh Croker. Henry Peisly. Sir Robert Travers Knight, Judge-Martiall.


A Letter from Col. William Jephson to a Person of quality at Westminster.
SIr,
since I writ my last we have taken Piltowne by storm, which was a very strong
place, and (after a serious view thereof) I much admired that it proved so
feasible, for our men were first to gain a strong out-worke of earth, Moated
about 20. Foot from the bottom of the Graffe; as likewise a strong walled
court of at least 12. Foot high, and after that another small Court of equal
strength with the former before they could approach the Castle; of all which
notwithstanding they presently possessed themselves, with the loss of some men,
and wounding about 20. but when they had taken all these, they found it a very
difficult task to enter the Castle it self, and whilst they were endeavoring
with bars of Iron to force a passage; the Rogues from the top of the
Battlements threw down stones so fast upon the heads of our men below, that
they hurt many of them, yet in spite of all these brushes at last they got
into the lower rooms, but the Rogues still defended it, and brake down the
stone stairs to p^event our men from getting up to them; we therefore finding,
that without much mischief it was impossible to get them down; We were forced
to lay Powder below, and blow them and the Castle up together, which we did
last night: My Lord President at his first Summons thereof promised them fair
Quarter, if they would surrender it before he discharged three Pieces of
Ordnance against it, which they refusing were by that means afterward (the
Soldiers being also incenst) deprived of all their lives, it being taken by
storm, only the women and children were turned out by the Rebels of their own
accord; Sir, upon the peace concluded between the Lord of Ormond, and the
Rebels, there are great differences arising amongst them, the Popes Nuncio and
the Clergy being much against it, and the Laiety for it; if our supplies of
men and other necessaries so long expected, and often represented thither,
arrive at us in time, we shall not doubt but to give a good account of our
endeavors, but if they be delayed it will be impossible for us to advance the
interest of the State here as we desire; and therefore we are hopeful we shall
have supplies by the next fair wind. I have no more at present, but that I am

Your most faithful and affectionate Servant. William Jephson.
Youghall 20. August, 1646.
FINIS.

