A REMONSTRANCE Concerning The Grievances, and Maladies of the Kingdom of
ENGLAND: RIGHTLY Stated in X POSITIONS.

With Remedies prescribed for the speedy help of each of them: VIZ. The King,
The Parliament, The Army, The Assembly of Divines. The Citizens of London, The
People in General. The Apostate Roundheads The Newters, The Cavaliers, The
Scots.


Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Hickman, 1648.

Maladies and Remedies.
1.
THE Scots (to dispatch them first, because they have furthest home) are a
people that would be thought more wise than honest, and yet, because it is no
wisdom to renounce honesty, none therefore are greater pretenders to it. They
are singular School men in State-matters, and can distinguish to a bristles
breadth, for instance; They can break their Faith and keep their Covenant, come
like Brethren to help the English, and never strike stroke for them, but at
New Castle and Cannon Froome, the one to keep it, the other to leave it,
because it was worth no more; and yet hate with perfect hatred, those that did
better service, because they did so. The old Model and they whilst it was on
foot, were then scarce Brethren, but now they and the Old Model men against
the Army, are sworn Sisters. They Marched to Hereford and back again, and all
the way coming and going, took the wind of the Enemies Garrisons, as if the
plague had been in them. If the Parliament wished them advance Southward, they
retreated Northward by a Scotch figure, because the North of England, is the
South of Scotland, And lay just so long before Newark, till by private
confabulation, the King came to their Leaguer, and then and there broke their
word (but kept Covenant with the Parliaments Commissioners, against their
promise carrying away the King to Newcastl^, in all post haste, as if they had
meant to have invited him to Edinburgh, in freedom, honor, and safety, but no
such matter my Lord, touching the Kings dignity and greatness, the Covenant
only binds on this side Tweed, for beyond it he is little enough, but it
seems they have bargained with him like the two Tribes and half, so they may
have all beyond Jordan, they will see him in safe possession of Canaan, therefore
for that end must there needs be a personal Treaty, and an invitation of him
(whom they will here invite into Scotland) to London, in honor, safety, and
freedom, the Kings own words, fiddle and stick, which makes Pragmaticus (the
Court jester) ready to leap out of his skin for joy to hear this tune played
upon the Scotch Bag-pipes, so that he will go near to want a Theme, to rhyme
upon next week, being reconciled to this loyal faternity. But they tell you
the reason (and for my part I believe them) why they would have the King
entertained at our cost, because they say their happiness is in him, for you
must consider the two great wheels of the Scotch engine is now in perpetual
motion, the one to make England Scotland in matters Ecclesiastical, so that It
is, and It is not so, in Scotland, were urged in the Assembly like ipse dixit
in the Schools: the other is to make Scotland England in things civil, and
though an English man in Scotland must not untie the Kings shoe latchet, yet
they stick not to propose to have the third part of offices about him here.
They cry out of the abuse offered a single Commissioner at Hampton Court, and
that no repare is made, the whilst they sanctuary Knox, and nose us with
Cheesley those arch incendiaries, that in whole volumes abused the whole state
of England, with breach of privilege of Parliament to boot, which by Covenant
is to be maintained, and they punished, but a trick at maw will help that,
for they can in their printed Papers (those Scotch spectacles to blind English
men) take the Covenant in pieces and quote it in abstract Propositions leaving
out the principal verb still, the conditionate coherence of one thing with
another, so that the reason why they so cry up themselves (wherein they have an
excellent faculty) for transcendent Covenanters, is, because they do by the
Covenant, as some sectaries of these times do by the scriptures, bring their
sense to it, and not take sense from it. And for most part what is their
religion? Presbytery, they do by it as the Jews did by the Temple, worship it
instead of God, and though swearing lying and dissembling, be even national
vices amongst them, yet by virtue of this bare badge they cry up themselves for
the people of the Lord, as if heaven also could be caught by craft, but forma
dat esse is a maxim undeniable with them, they are the best Christians and
Covenanters because the best Presbyterians, which they make their
staulking-horse to catch city and country, and the Assembly also, and their
skreene to be-spatter the English Parliament, except the eleven Members, whose
devotion to Presbytery and the old Model, prefers them in favor above the
rest. From State Presbyters, Libera nos.

The Remedy.
Let us do them all good Offices, and keep them at all due distances mix not
interests, keep Covenant in the entire plain English sense of it, avoid their
tedious Haran^s, pond speeches, and voluminous Papers, which they only speak
to the Parliament first, to the end that after they may speak them in print to
the People, which they know so great a body as the Parliament, pressed with
infinite and weighty businesses cannot suddenly answer, and so think to carry
the cause by cajoling the vulgar, and to devide betwixt the body real and
representative, and then the towne's their own; too much Serpentine wisdom to
stand with the innocence of Doves. Think not the worse of Presbytery because
they Idolize it, but let power of godliness and purity of worship go hand in
hand. Let (in a word) the Parliament be true to their trust, and England to it
self

II,
Next Vous-avez, Cavaliers, it is fit these two should go together since
Pragmaticus says the Scots are turned Royallists) these degenerate English
men, that fight to be slaves, but had more wit than to stand to it. For the
ingenuousest of them say, that if the King had got the better, the Kingdom had
been undone, they see so far now into his disposition, and yet they in hope
to be sprinkled with Court holy water, are content to sell their birthright,
which their Progenitors nobly purchased with their blood, and they as ignobly
sell it with theirs. They complain of compounding, which yet is a Cheaper
tenure to hold by then disseising, which had fallen to our share if they had
been paramount, as themselves stick not to say, and threaten to try us all for
Traitors at the King's Bench bar, where proud Banks and pricket Heath must
have given sentence, and then there had been old work for new Tiburne. The
two German Princes must have been denizoned with the Estates of
Northumberland and Pembrooke and their blew Ribbands to boot; as judging most
fit, that they should ride on horseback that fought for St. George.

The Remedy.
Though the Cavaliers be overcome, yet let them have what they ^ought for,
viz. slavery and bondage. Those of them whose Ancestors gained their Honors by
fighting for their Country, let them now lose theirs for fighting against it, a
doom which their own forefathers would pass upon them, were they alive, to
see such degenerate stemmes grow out of such Noble stocks, for Nobility and
Gentry ought not to descend by propagation without derivation, not by blood but
by virtue. And those of them who Citizen like bought their Arms and Honors,
let them all be reversed till they renew their Pattents at the old rate, and
compound at Heralds Hall for their forfeited honors, by shameful deserting
their Country, more worth than all the Kings in Christendom.

III.
The next that takes the Stage is the Newter, that long tail'd vermin which is
not begotten, but engendered, of fear and converousnesse, that like the Drawer
at Saint Dunstance bids all welcome, and is indeed now for the Parliament, and
damn him anon for the King, like the picture that side-wayes has two faces,
but forthright none; He is one that asks leave of the Cavaliers Garrison to
lend a small sum to the Parliament, the better unsuspected to befriend them
with intelligence, and yet brings his money by stealth too, as if he were
afraid of Overseers, when as he has made his peace beforehand, and there
pays in a little, with a great deal of perjured protestations, and ever after
takes himself for a friend to the Cause, and is ready to bind any man to his
good behavior that thinks otherwise of him, confidently pretending to all
those Parliament Declarations that promise reparation, as if his name were in
them, intitling himself to future indemnity for his little goodwill, in his
foure-penny friendship.

The Remedy.
Let these half-faced groats, be for ever reckoned amongst clipped silver, and
never go for current coin that are so light in the balance, there is as much
difference between ciphers and figures, as between something and nothing. Lay
no weight upon them, for they will deceive you at a dead lift, I wish there be
not too many such in the Parliament, that hunt with the Hound and run with the
Hare, that factor for the King, by virtue of the Commonwealths trust, throw
such Jonasses overboard, or they will sinck the ship. The Minorite Cavaliers,
that but lived in the Enemies Garrisons, did less hurt then some Newters that
lived out of them, therefore I know not why they also should not compound, or
at least pay double Excize, as well for Newtrality as the other for bare
Malignancy; being equally hurtful, let them both go for Delinquents in
Concreto. I mean Verb Newters, that can stand in construction without a
Nominative case, men of note and name, that have talents of estate, reputation,
etc. to use, and hide them in Napkins. Who therefore, as they are not much
richer, so nor much poorer for the times, at least, not for their good wills.

IV.
In the arse of these, follows the Apostate Round head, dow baked Patriot, a
weed that grows up and down, both among people and Parliament: A sort of men
that out of private and personal dis-satisfaction, misprision, and jealousy,
have lost their first love, and received circumcision, because they see the
Parliaments Road will never bring them to Mahomets Paradise, for instead of
liberty, and property, they looked for pleasure and plenty, and failing thereof
they desert the Cause, being like them that followed Christ for loaves.
State-Arminians, that dreaming of an universal redemption, at first came
flying into the flock, with the wings of free will and common grace, which in
this Sunshine of recesse being melted, Icarus-like, they are fallen from heaven
to earth, totally, if not finally, opening their mouths against the Parliament
and Army, like hounds upon a stop, having no way else to cover their shame,
whose principles founder with long travel, and they like jades tire before
they come to their journeyes end.

The Remedy.
Of all men these ought to be branded in the forehead never to be confided in,
such murmering spies that wanting faith to go thorow-stitch, endeavor to set
the people in a mutiny at the skirts of Canaan, that their Carcass^s may fall
in the wilderness, These should do well to repent (if possible this sin may
be forgiven them) and do their first works. for salvation will come some other
way to England, but they and their fathers house shall perish.

V.
Now to consider the People in general, under no other notion then as English
men. These are too little sensible of the good they have gained. Because they
have not all they would, therefore they despise all they have, thinking that
reformation may be done in a day (though it was many years undoing) and
without charge, both which are impossible, the Jews found it so when they came
out of Babylon, the Samaritans will not let the work go on smoothly either of
the Temple or City, Church or Commonwealth: think you the devil lies dead in
a ditch? nothing less, his strong opposition is the hopefullest argument of a
happy settlement, and reformation though the times and means too, be both in
the hands of God. They listen too much to reports against their best friends
and believe them too easily, not discerning the times, nor the guize of men,
who now being put by other shifts, make lies their refuge.

The Remedy.
Believe it is the Lords work, as once you did in the days of thanksgiving,
and that therefore it is fit to stay the Lords leisure, for faith (especially
j^yned with hope) makes not have, murmr not against Moses and Aaron, who can
neither make more have not better speed than God gives leave, such wilderness
sins in the people have been no small impediment to the Parliament, weakening
their hands and hearts. Own your representative body (though not every member
of it) notwithstanding the Scots insinuations in their printed papers, or
Preg^icus his scurrility in his printed Pamphlets: Put not impossibilities upon
the Parliament, nor expect them not from them. Value safety above profit, and
therefore force them not to disband the Army, against their own reason, and to
your apparent ruin, for whenever it is disbanded, and the Parliament ended,
for which the King bid staire, then has England scene her best days, until
things be much more securely settled, then appears at present in the face of
affairs or dispositions of people, principally the Cavaliers, whose tongues
betrays their hearts, by whose folly I hope we shall learn to be wise.

VI.
After the people of England, if that be their proper place, who had almost
been above and before them, come the Citizens of London, a place it cannot be
denied considerable, and a people that when time was, did good service, but of
late some were about to play Tadgell good cow, and had stroke all down with
her foot but for her tyeband: purse-proud they are, and insolent withal, vying
it with the Parliament, inferior in nothing but petitioning, and hardly in
that, for therein they were so remonstrative, as if the Sword had indicted them,
the Mace penned them, and the Cap of maintenance delivered them, demanding from
the Parliament what they had commanded from them. Insomuch as that great
land-Leviathan, The Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council in Common Council
assembled, had almost swallowed up the three estates of the Kingdom, but that
Englands Army came to the rescue, whereby the supreme power is yet preserved at
Westminster which had else been translated to London, for less then a petty
Principality will not content them, they must not only command within, but
without their liberties, even the whole line of communication, and so
consequently our Legislators: Westminster and Southwarke lackying by his
Lordships horse as worthy no higher promotion in the Militia. They entertain
treaty with foreign agents instead of factors, and look as if they meant to
set up for themselves and trade alone. Our brethren the Scots court them with
letters and long speeches, as the only rising Sun: And his Majesty
temporiseth too, granting them all their Propositions without ifs, or ands, but
none of those that appertain to the Kingdom in general, as being not so much
in favor.

The Remedy.
Do not affront the whole Kingdom in dispising their Parliament, whether if I
be not deceived, you also send your Burgesses like other Corporations. Be
contented with your membership in the body, exalt not your selves above your
brethren, take (if you will) the highest place under the head, but strive not
to be above it, for so your footing will be too slippery to stand firm. Every
star moves best in its proper orb. Swell not till you break, by laboring
to bring the supreme powel under your civil sword, its neither consonant to
rules of discretion, nor laws of hospitality to conquer those you ought to
protect. Let not your mutability be recorded in the history of this age as in
former, where you are called Weather-cocke Citizens; persevere to the end, lose
not your reward, he not ambitious like the great Earl of Warwick, to do and
undo, lest at last you undo your selves; what assurance can you have in the
King that never kept his word with the Commonwealth. I tell you betime, lest
you repent too late, when you are engaged in unextricable difficulties,
massacres, and exactions. Find him not money to disband the Army, nor power or
force to dissolve the Parliament, for then good night at noon. I know neither
of these counsels please you because you are prejudiced against both; but when
you put on your goons, lay aside pride and passion, which are therefore the
worst counselors, because the greatest flatterers. Please not your selves to
your own ruin and the Kingdoms, Court holy water will soon dry up. If you
were better read in story, you would be better taught then to desire the King
amongst you in freedom, honor, and safety, much less upon his own terms, or
so much to countenance those that do so. Graspe not more then you can hold, let
Naboth enjoy his vineyard, an enforced subordination amongst equals is nothing
so firm a ^ye as a voluntary association, especially in Militia's. Put not
your worst affected Citizens in offices of greatest trust. Enviously quarrel
not the Parliament for every hundred or thousand pound they bestow, though upon
their own Members, either in recompense of their service, or repair of their
losses, who have ventured their lives, lost their estates, born the brunt and
heat of the day in a seven years hard service to maintain your freedoms and
the Kingdoms, banished from their own homes, wives and children, when as you
enjoy yours all this while, and yet I deny you not your share in the honor and
success of the war, nor do you grudge them theirs, who for the public suffer
not a little in their own private condition. I mean those of them that intend
their trust more then design, which I know many do, and some do not, eating
worse meat, and in a worse manner then their very servants were wont to do at
home, where also they had elbow room, that now are fain to keep house in a
Chamber.

VII.
As touching the Assembly of Divines they are better read in books then men,
and in this age of different opinions, they do like those at the confusion of
languages, sort themselves with whosoever they be that jumpe with them in
judgment, and think them honest and infallible in all things else that his
right in Presbytery though they but pretend to it, for such there are that are
neither Presbyterrians, nor Independents, but cry up the one, because it cries
down the other, and consequently the Army that new model, which they hate for
their virtues, not for their vices, their victories, not their tenets, But the
greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men, nor see not the furthest into a
millstone. Some men read Matchiavell to do him, but they to undo him. There
are Protestant Jesuits of the short robe, that can so disguise themselves as to
cozen them of the long, and draw them (by an erroneous credulity) to be really
theirs, by but seeming that they are not.

The Remedy.
All Is not gold that glisters, nor all true Englishmen or Patriots that are
friends to Presbytery, or foes to the Army. Believe it, there are many Lay
Lord-bishops still alive, that go disguised in Presbyterian visors, because
they know it is in vain to strive against the stream, until the wind blow
right for them. Who ever he is that is an Englishman, and entrusted for the
Commonwealth, if he factor for the King, he holds his principles as well
Ecclesiastical as civil, and intends the Prerogatives of both, time will tell
you so, though they do not; if God deceive them not, they will deceive you; but
hitherto they have missed their mark, traveled with iniquity, conceived
mischief, and brought forth a lie, and so I am confident will ever do. Only
take you heed of partaking in other men's sins, call not evil good, nor good
evil, but distinguish; Cry down error, but not the Army, lest you change the
actors, but not the tragedy, and cry up Presbytery, but not all Presbyterians,
lest as wise as you are, at last you conclude with a non putarem.

VIII.
The Army are men probatum est, and that both in their effects and defects, and
Englishmen also, the Kingdom have cause to say so, though too many are loath
to speak out their commendations for fear of discommending themselves.
Emulation as it tends toward imitation is a virtue, but as to envy a vice. In
the way of their profession they have done rare things, both as good Soldiers
and true Patriots, in overcomming open enemies, and disappointing secret ones;
but they are nothing so good at book-worke, as at sword-play; it cannot be
denied but they make foul work with Scripture and Pulpits, we never read of
Centurion preachers, and yet one built a Synagogue, and had so great a faith
that Christ himself marvelled at it, but he had deep humility withal* and yet
a great Commander, moving in his sphere as a Soldier, and not out of it. The
other is renowned for a devout man, fearing God with all his house (there
indeed it seems he taught as a pater familias) a giver of alms and frequent
in prayer, but neither before nor after Peter came to him, do we read that he
took upon him to preach: It seems though they were both gracious men, yet
neither of them was a Gifted Brother. They abound in Victories, and so they do
in Errors, it is pity they should do so, that they who have been the Lords
Host, and fought his Battles, should now be the Devils seeds-men and sow his
Tares.

The Remedy.
Be not so bitter against the Assembly, and the rest of those that are reverend
and godly Ministers in the Land, because of Ordination, you know not what
spirits ye are of, nor whose Design you drive therein; they have the same Seal
for their Ministry that Paul had for his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9.2. they have by
it converted not a few to Christ, and that too as the truth is in Jesus, which
we do not find to be the property of Antichrist or his Ministers. An orderly
call adds both beauty and efficacy to the Word preached. Take h^ed by
disparaging them or their Function in the eyes or ears of their People, you
weaken not their hands in the Lords work, for which they ought to be had in
estimation, or of being an occasion of putting out such lights, who have shaken
the kingdom of Darkness, and by the blessing of God upon their labors have
made England famous for powerful Preaching and professing in all the Christian
World, and those of you that are sons and not bastards, I am confident under
God have had them for your fathers. Beware of a spirit of Antichrist amongst
your selves, it is he that (...) to both Swords, and whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, viz. false Doctrine and Error, and the
reason is rendered, because they receive not the love of the truth, which is not
then so light a matter as you take it for, when as the Gospel of peace (if it
understand it self aright) bids us contend for it, against men of heretical
judgments. Dote not so much upon the word gifted Brethren, it is a proud word
since extraordinaries ceased, and makes grace a younger brother, those of you
that are gracious, communicate your graces and spiritual experiences unto
edification as fellow members and private Christians, and be not many Masters
in opinion, do not the work of an Office in the Church (I speak not of cases
extraordinary, which have their extraordinary privileges and dispensations)
without being an Officer of the Church, one of those that Christ has ordained.
Gifts no more entitle men to public Offices in the Church than in the
Commonwealth or Army without a call. An outward call is not nothing. Study not
confusion, God is not at all the God of it, and least of all in his Church.
There is no better nor no worse argument against you the that of Christ. The
tree is known by its fruits. Some of your Converts shave soon and talked with,
full of opinion, but very empty of grace and the vital Principles of Religion,
put them upon dispute (...) but upon Christian communion, and they have not a
word to say. The good old (...) that is not ashamed of faith and repentance is
the man of sulstance, your proselytes must ^eeds be strange creatures, that are
strangers to the sincere milk of the Word, borne and bred amongst foolish
janglings, for your Sermons which tends to singularity and plurality of
opinions, conduce not to devotion but to disputation, which old M. Dod (whose
very name is precious for his practical piety) was wont to say, made his heart
the worse a long time after. And indeed a practical hearted Christian loves not
to hear Truth doubted, for that makes faith take wind, and the whole Soul
consequently fare the worse, but knows they are ordained to other use, viz. to
be a whet-stone to our graces not to our wits. Such preaching disputants hatch
addle eggs, fill empty hearts with empty notions. How forcible are right words,
but what does your arguing avail? but to distune the soul. Opinion begets
pride, and that keeps out every thing but it self. If you will needs preach,
then preach Truth and not Error, as you will answer it at the dreadful day of
judgment, and gather the sense of Scripture from its scope and drift,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual; and not incoherently making it
speak what it never meant. You have been victorious over Error, therefore let
not Error at last get victory over you, like the Israelites that having
conquered Idolaters, worshipped their Idols. Cry not up liberty of Conscience
to the loss of conscience, and countenancing licentiousness of opinion, see
ye not how his Majesty himself pretends deeply to it, for the setting up
Prerogative and Episcopacy, what Snake may not lie bid under that herb? when
once its grown a word in fashion. Liberty of conscience will be as common, as
not guilty at the Assizes, and of equal credit. Divine Truth is always the
same, of an inflexible nature, varies not according to men's judgments, shall
the judgment of a man be the rule of Gods unerring Truth? Truth is truth, and
error error, whether ^en think it to be so or no* principles of nature vary not
like languages, and if they be inviolable; and indispensible, much more is
Divinity, for the known will of God is obliging, which way soever it be
revealed, whether by nature, or by the word, though against nature, as when
Abraham was commanded to kill his son; or (...) nature, as in the union of the
two natures in one person, or the being of three persons in one God-bead, nay,
of the two, the word it the more forcible and binding, because nature is so
much defaced; therefore was the Law given to the Israelites the more obliging,
and their sins* the more provoking. Opinion ought not to be the rule of things,
but the nature of the thing it self. There is a Truth of God, and that but one,
which we must maintain in the death (else the Martyrs dyed in vain, if for but
opposing another lawful liberty) not only in resisting impiety, but in
oppugning heresy. Thus says the Lord, Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the ways, and
see, ask for the old paths, where is the good way and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest for your souls.

IX.
The Parliament, I mean those of them which are true to their trust, are
unhappy in taking so much pains for a thanklesse people; whilst they were
unanimous touching Church and Commonwealth, they had men's hearts, hands, and
purses, but divisions and designs of men of different judgments, and sinister
ends amongst them broke their credits, and the good and bad are ever since
reckoned alike by people once prejudiced, that walk by opinion and report more
then by judgment, apt to turn with every wind, and pick quarrels with their
best friends, as well as their worst, without discerning or difference-making,
looking at every slip or failing through a multiplying-glasse, and are so taken
up with fault-finding, that they forget to pray for them, either making them
Idols or dunghils, vilipending the state and stay of the Kingdom, who indeed
are justly punished, but unjustly neglected and deserted.

The Remedy.
Adjourn as soon as possibly You can with convenience and safety, for there is
as much need of Parliament and Patriots in the Country as in the Houses. Rid
Your hands of all supernumerary business, that either is not worthy the
supreme cognizance, or necessary in its own nature to be transacted; both for
your ease, reputation, and the better dispatch of greater matters, much
prejudiced by interposition of lesser. Make the Laws more intelligible and
less captious, and their administration with more ease and less charge. But
be sure you make Laws amongst your selves, as well within doors as without.
Let each Member have his Shihholeth, those that ought to be for the
Commonwealth and are for the King, brand and eject them; such as oppose good,
and pr^move bad motions. But you will say, every man must have liberty of
speech by privilege of Parliament.

Answ. That is an abused Maxim, like that, The King can do no wrong. which is
much to the Subjects advantage, as all Law ought to be, if rightly understood,
which is thus: The King of England has no absolute, arbitrary, personal power
of will, whereby to oppress his Subjects, or violate their right, but only a
power of office, he must dispense his government legally, and juridically for
the public and private weal of his people* else what he does is void. But by
Court Logic, its turned to the Law-language of the Medes and Persians, That
its right for him to do what he will, and that therefore what he does is right.
So touching freedom of speech in Parliament, the true genuine sense of it is.
That the Subject there, as in a sacred Sanctuary, in the discharge of his
public trust, may speak with liberty, for, and not against it, question,
dispute, condemn the irregularities of whomsoever, or in what office soever,
for reducement or punishment, as the wisdom and justice of the Parliament see
most fit and necessary; but it (as the other) is w^ested to a quite contrary
meaning, viz. that Parliament Men may in Parliament with open face factor for
the King against the Commen-wealth, and no man must say, Why do you so? As the
end of all Government is common good and not hurt, so is it the Parliaments and
their privileges most of all, else whilist the People fight against
destructive Prerogative they fight for destructive Privileges, which
d^ub^lesse was never the intent of the Covenant, nor them that either made it
or took it. Those Members therefore that plead for a Negative Voice, and a
regal Militia, and such like, tending to absoluteness, heterogenian to the
frame of public pol cy, and their particular trust, throw them over the Bar
like knavish Atturneys that betray their Clients cause either for hope of
favor, or fear of dis-favor thinking to escape well enough with you because they
are of you, and with the King because they are for him, who knows an Oliver
from a Rowland Let an Oath be administered upon a solemn Fast to the whole
Houses, at the beginning of each Parliament and Session, in stead of those of
All^ageance and Supremacy; that no man shall directly or indirectly move or
debate any thing, but according to his best judgment and conscience for the
public good and according to his trust, and not against it, (for such liberty
tends to slavery, which is a solecisme in reason and nature) without fear or
flattery, prejudice or partiality, both in Parliament and Committees, and let
it be read over every Monday morning before prayer, but trust men never the
more, for though it may awe some to be honest, yet it will perhaps set others
more at liberty to be dishonest therefore be not charmed into security by it,
but second it with Parliamentary Laws and Rules of proceeding which being
transgressed, punishment may ensue; for whilst all Members ( quatenus Members)
are alike honest, trusty, and faithful, and so must be counted under breach of
privilege; the eye of reason and the Commonwealth is put out: Again, own your
friends that have fought for you and stood to you, study not too much winning
your Enemies by fair compliance, who do but jear you for it, and impute it not
to your goodness but pusillanimity, still taking as much thought how to cut
your throats as ever, do not only punish these Traitors to God and their
Country in their purses but also in their Honors; for justice and example
sake reverse some Scutcheons, let no Commander on the Kings side wear the Title
of his Military Place or Office. Let somewhat of honor be conferred upon your
deserving Partisans, for posterity to take notice of, and be encouraged by,
valor and virtue was wont to make Gentlemen: in this Age of Reformation revive
it, bestow both Arms and Honors on those that have merited them, else you
will have all Tradesmen or Courtiers and no Soldiers or Common-wee althsmen,
when they fee money and favor can only prefer them; honorable rewards to
some spirits are wore pleasing than pecuniary, and to you more profitable.
Study all just ways how to keep your friends and win more, for you must look
for after-claps, and if deserving men be not in some good measure rewarded and
regarded for what is past, they will hardly come upon a new score, for a man
that is privy to his own merits, shall have much to do patiently to put up with
the utter neglect of them, even the nobliest spirits, do hardliest brook it.
Self d^niall is one of the graces, none of the virtues.

X.
The King having long since pawned both the word of a King and a Gentleman, and
never yet redeemed them (for Peter Martyr observes, That at Rome its a maxim
that Merchants, not Kings are to keep their words, and Popery and he have been
long bed-fellows) how to charm our English credulities, in his papers he calls
God to witness, another state stratagem (it seems he is not witness to oaths
and promises) for nothing must be left unsaid or unassaid, and vouches
conscience for the continuing of Archbishops, Bishops and their lands, because
of the great Charter, and the curse of the superstitions donors. So that the
Ecclesiastical part of Magna Charta may not be violated, nor Popish Episcopal
lands alienated, but the civil or secular part of it may without offense, his
peoples liberty, property, and estates too fans scruple. Rare Chimistry, in
conscience, that can distinguish without a difference, whereas indeed the root
of the matter grows out of that old rotten maxim, No Bishop, no King. He that
can break his word when he will, and make conscience but of what he will,
well he may ruin me, but he shall never deceive me, whose nature is so
apparently disagreeing to his office, and the duties belonging thereunto.

From the Bishops, whose abolition he tells you in his message from the Isle of
Wight, he cannot consent to, he falls down to the Militia, and does as
unclearly consent to that, as he clearly dissented from the other; for first
having laid a firm foundation of it to be inherent in the Crown (as if the
interest of the King were diverse from that of the Kingdom, and the Crown or
Court to be preferred to the Commonwealth and its safety) by a strong
assertion, though he can neither press men, nor raise moneys; and therefore
cannot give his consent to alienate it from the Crown, and that because of his
trust, which he is careful to keep, but not to perform. Yea so tender is he
of the Commonwealth, that he will not part with the Militia no not to it self;
but to give an infallible evidence of his intentions, he will and he will not
as to himself depart with it during his reign, for first he says, he will
consent to an act that the whole power of the Militia shall during that time be
ordered and disposed by the two Houses, and after he comes with a mental
reservation, and says, that neither his Majesty, nor any other (by any
authority derived only from him) shall execute, etc. also that patents and
commissions must go as formerly, viz. in his name, which to grant, it seems in
court construction, is to yield the right of the Militia to be in the Crown,
the thing he mainly drives at, for thereby he gains more de jure, then he loses
de facto, and therefore the more is it to be avoided, and the legal intentions
of such forms of Law, and the terms thereof (bordering upon the Crown) both
in this and other things of like nature ought to be made more explicate both to
the vulgar peoples better understanding and Kings also, who only talk of a
trust to delude the people, and make it a stalking horse to compass their
wills, and make themselves absolute, for what bears their image or
superscription, it seems according to the Court-creed is believed to be
absolutely and inseperably theirs, as if the Crown were neither from, nor for
the people, upon these terms, in time, our monice will be pretended to as
well as our Laws, if care be not taken to prevent it. All monopolies have
legal pretenses, specially prerogative the worst of all, wherewith his Majesty
is so inpetuously principled, that he is not counsellable in things touching
comm n and public good in a regular understanding of them according to the end
and ordination of government. If the Militia be a flower of the Crown, pray,
take it out, and stick a jewel in the room on it which is both of more Majesty
and less danger. From the Militia h^ passes to the Armies arrears, and in time
proffers to pay them 400000. l. a great sum (it seems he has been lustily
promised, and well advised, during his abode at Hamptor-Court) but nothing to a
willing mind, for so he hopes either to disband them (and then he knows how
to re-inburse that money, and as much more as will pay his arrtars also) or to
win them to himself when he himself becomes their play master. And though he
cannot depart with the Militia from the Crown, yet with the Court of Wards be
can, though that also is invested in the Crown for protection and that of
Infants, but this he is content to have taken away if it seem grievous, not the
other though it be so, to all. In the close he minds them of that which of
all other must not be forgotten, The dissolving this Parliament to make way for
another by due elections, that is, wherein his partisans, Cavalliers and
malignants, may be both elected and electors, and so undo all that either is
already or shall hereafter be done by this, and then we have span a long thread
to little purpose, rare sophistry and King-craft. But I hope the people of
England understand their interest better then thus to pull down their props,
and being the house upon their heads, and that they will not take seemings for
Beings, not shadows for reallities. Take heed of disguises and Court-masks,
after so many blows and bullets; be not fooled with fair words, and false
sires.

The Remedy.
Bele^ve your self a Subject, as well as a Sovereigne, and know that honesty
is the best policy, stand not on your head and shake your heels against heaven.
Take God more into your counsels and your people into your care: It has ever
been the fault of Kings to study and practice polity more then piety, which
has brought so great miseries on on many of them, and some to untimely ends
and what came of then after God knows: what will it advantage you to gain the
whole world (of power, and that power never so absolute) and lose your precious
soul, you must dye as well as other men and leave your Crown behind you when
you go to the grave. Sure Kings either think they may sin cum privilegio, or
that those things which are sins in other men, (...) lying, dissembling,
oppression, murder, rapine, swearing, forswearing, are not so in them. Play not
with your conscience which one day will be serious with you, pretend not
protection when you intend destruction, be not deceived, God will not be
mocked. How can you expect to be believed that never kept your word till this
Parliament, nor now if you could have broken it, the end (...) whereof has
been the cause of all this Civil war and blood shed, besides, you still reta^
the same principles, entertain the same counselors, and adbere to the same
friends. It Is t^ (...) Kings are called Gods, so are Devils to, therefore hear
not your self upon that, as if there were no excellemy in God but power and
Sovereignty, whereas he has other attributes and properties besides that are
honorable, and that he is to be honored for, as goodness, mercy, (...)
protection, faithfulness imitate him in these, so shall you be Gods indeed,
and though you must ^ye like men, yet shall you be as the Angels, for as ill
Kings their condemnation is greater, so are good Kings their glorification
higher by how much their talent and stewardship on earth is (...) others.

Im. G.M.

FINIS.

