ACT Condemning the Transactions concerning the KINGS MAJESTY, Whilst He was
at Newcastle, in the years, 1646. and 1647.
At Edinburgh, 20. February, 1661.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering the many sad and dangerous consequences
that do accompany the neglect and contempt of lawful Authority; And that among
the other Judgments, wherewith it pleases Almighty GOD to visit such who
resist the Powers, and oppose the commands of those entrusted by Him, as His
VICEGERENTS, for the Government of His people, they are ofttimes left to their
own counsels, to do that which highly provokes GOD to wrath, renders themselves
justly odious to the world, and hateful to their posterity. Whereof there is
too doolfull an experiment in an Act of the printed Records of Parliament, of
the si^teenth of January, 1647. entitled, Declaration of the Kingdom of
Scotland, concerning the KINGS MAJESTY'S Person. Which being now taken into
consideration, The Estates of Parliament do find and Declare, That it was
carried on, and concluded by a prevalent party, against the judgment of many
of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects; And that it is a most sinful, disloyal, and
unworthy Act, contrary to the will and commandment of GOD; contrary to all
Laws, Divine and Humane; contrary to the Duty and Allegiance of Subjects;
contrary to all the rules of Justice, Honor, Gratitude and Humanity; and
highly reflecting on the honor of this ancient Kingdom, and the reputation of
his* Majesty's good Subjects therein. And therefore the KINGS MAJESTY, with
advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does hereby Annual and
Condemn the same for ever: And ordains it to be expunged out of all Records,
and never to be remembered again, but with due abhorrence and detestation.

And the Estates of Parliament, conceiving themselves obliged in conscience, to
make the truth of this business, and the manner of the carrying of it, known to
the World, for the just vindication of this Kingdom, and His Majesty's Dutyfull
and Loyal Subjects, who otherwise may seem to be comprehended and concluded in
it. They do therefore, from their certain knowledge, declare, That even in that
Parliament, (from which many of his Majesty's good Subjects were debarred, for
their affection and adherence to His Majesty's service and commands) there was
a considerable number of worthy Patriots, of all Estates, who, at the passing
of that base Act, gave a public testimony and disassent from it. Which is here
recorded for their due honor; And for which their memory will in all ages
receive a famous celebration; And that there were diverse others, who, upon the
pretexts of Reformation and assurances of the safety of His Majesty's Person,
being inveigled, were in the simplicity of their hearts drawn along for the
time; But shortly thereafter, being convinced of their error, did embrace the
first opportunity to expiate the same, by freely hazarding their lives and
fortunes in the year 1648. to redeem His Majesty from these restraints and
dangers, which by that impious Act He was driven into. And therefore, His
Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, does Declare, that the Act of
Parliament foresaid, of the si^teenth of January, 1647. is not to be looked
upon as the Deed of the Kingdom, but as the Act of a few disloyal and seditious
persons, who, having upon specious, but false pretenses, screwed themselves
into the Government; did, by force of Arms, keep the same; And from the
conscience of their own guiltiness, being afraid of the justice of His
Majesty's Government, did violently carry on that Act. And in further owning
thereof, did in the said year 1648. rise in Arms, in opposition to those who
endeavored to restore His Majesty to His Government, and to relieve Him from
the imprisonment and hazard he was then lying under, as the natural effects of
that unworthy transaction, so justly hereby condemned.

And for the further clearing of the sense of this Kingdom, as to that base and
treacherous act, and the aspersions, which have been thereupon raised as if
there had been previous Transactions and Bargains of money for carrying on of
the same, The Estates of Parliament declare, They do abominate the very thought
of any such thing; and that if at any time hereafter, there shall be discovery
of any such wickedness (which they are confident GOD Almighty will in His
Justice bring to light, (if it be true) and wherein they earnestly entreat the
concurrence of all His Majesty's dutyful and loyal Subjects) The persons guilty
thereof, shall without mercy be pursued as the vildest of Traitors, and shall be
incapable of the benefit of any Act of Pardon, Oblivion, or Indemnity for ever.

A. Primerose. Cls. Reg:

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
166^


