A REMONSTRANCE Concerning the MISDEMEANOVRS of some of The Scots Soldiers in
the County of York.

Subscribed by diverse Gentlemen of the Committee of Sequestrations in that
County; And sent up to Thomas Westrop Esquire (public Agent) to be presented
to the House of Commons.

December 6. 1646.
THis Remonstrance is Appointed to be printed, and is signed, by

Richard Win, Edmond Hall, Thomas Bate, Henry Lyle, Thomas Peers, John
Humfray.
Sub. Com. Seq.



LONDON, Printed for T. V. 1646.

A Remonstrance concerning the Misdemeanors of some of the Scots Soldiers in
the County of York.
Sir,
THere is but little possibility that the Scots will leave us this winter, for
they have charged horses to go to Newcastle for more arms, and planted
themselves by Troops in several places of the Country: I will give you some
particulars of their deportment.

Five Soldiers quartered with a Widow of Hutton a fortnight together, and
though they had twelve pence a day allowed them for diet, they paid her only
six shilling for them all, she told them they must provide other quarters, for
she was not able to maintain them at that rate, they answered they would;
bought a six penny loaf, caused her give them milk to it, and went into the
fields, brought home a fat sheep where with they supplied their lean Commons:
Thus are quarters paid, Easton men were forced to pay a penny per diem for
every shilling that wanted of their Assesse; thus are moneys collected.

A Soldier at Hemlington broke his Landlords head, cut his servants lip, threw
the meat about the table, broke the Pales, Kettles, and Piggons, because his
Landlord would not give him two shillings per day, and bid him complain if he
durst; thus is the Country abused; the Officers have double pay for themselves
and unseen soldiers.

The Post boy of Durnton was robbed by the soldiers of Worshall, and his horse
and purse taken from him; no wonder though letters miscarry.

A Gisbrough man had two Horses and three pound in money taken from his
servant, by one Hamilton, as he was coming from Thrisk Market, the man and
horse was found out by the owner, and complaint made to the Captain but no
restitution; whereupon a Petition was presented to the Lieutenant General upon
Saturday was seven night at Gisbrough, who seemed to be very much offended, and
commanded that the party should be brought before him, but he was kept close
enough till the Lieutenant General removed, and that very day the Captain and
three more fell upon the owner (being Constable) and beat him very sore, three
swords being drawn upon him at once, and had slain him at his own door, if
very good help had not been presently made, since which time the Constable is
forced to abandon his own house; this is sharp law.

The Country at the same time when the Lieutenant General was at Grisbrough,
was about to present a Petition wherein was represented their great sufferings
by the Scottish Army in particular expressions: and their humble suite for the
removal of the two Regiments before the Petitioners were totally consumed; but
the Lieutenant General was gone by three of the clock in the morning, whereby
the Countries intentions was prevented, yet three men were sent after him to
Richmond with the Petition; but of their success I cannot write because the
Messengers are not yet returned that I hear of.

The Justices of Peace of our Wapentakes, and other substantial Inhabitants
have quite left the Country. It would mollify an Adamantine heart, to hear
the bitter complaint^ and rufull moanes that are ecchoed out in every quarter;
this is but cold comfort to hungry souls that have sold their goods, borrowed
moneys, and morgaged their lands to satisfy the soldiers: I wish the
Commanders of that army would read the fifth Chapter of Nehemiah, and make him
their pattern; or that they would make a general (not a particular use) of the
Covenant, they would then find that delinquents are not brought to condign
punishment, but protected and quartered amongst us, that the liberty of the
subject is not maintained, but grosely abused. God in mersend them out of this
Kingdom, that the Country be not totally consumed, nor like to this poor
Wapentake in a ready way to ruin and beggary, diverse that have lived in an
honest and substantial way, wanting bread to put in their childrens mouths
when they cry out for hunger; Sir no more for the present, but that I am,

Your Worships most humble Servant, Tho. Bate.
Stampton. 20. November. 1646.
Upon a meeting of us whose names are subscribed we do not only ratify what
is within written but also Certify,
THat one Bogden a Woollen Draper of Rippon, was slain near Cattericke bridge
upon the tenth of November last, by four Scots, who took both his horse and
money.

That upon several complaints of the country, the Lieutenant General has
issued some Orders for regulating the soldier, but to no purpose, for both
Officer and soldier exact to their liking, some a third more, some half, or
to speak more properly every man what he please; and when one man is utterly
wasted and his estate spent, (as in every township some fall daily) then they
enforce the rest of the Inhabitants of that Township to pay the decayed man's
proportion, which tends to the general ruin of all; and if a Landlord
complain to any superior Officer, for the exaction of the soldier, he is
referred to make peace with the soldier, and that is his doom. We have
entreated Mr. Lyle, to repair to the Committee at York with the Petition and
answer of the Lieutenant General, who will report their result to you and so
rest,

Dated at Ayton 21 November 1646. Your very humble Servant^, Rich. Win.
Edmond Hall. Thomas Bate. Henry Lyle. Thomas Peers. John Humfray.


For the Worshipful Thomas Westrop, Esquire. London.
FINIS.

