AN ACT FOR The Leavying of HORSE and FOOT, TO Be put out by the SHIRES and
BURGHS.

AND The List of the Colonells, with their several Numbers of HORSE and FOOT.

Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Evan Tyler, and reprinted at London for Joseph
Hunscot. 1648.

Edinburgh 4 May, 1648.
FOr as much as the Estates of Parliament considering the great and imminent
dangers to Religion, the Covenant, his Majesty's Person and authority, and
peace of his Kingdoms, have thought fit, and accordingly given order, That
this Kingdom be put in a posture of War, and that the Colonells and
Committees of War in the several Shires be careful in listing and
exercising the able sensible persons within their bounds, and providing them
with Arms, that they may be in readiness to send forth such number of horse
and foot as the Parliament or their Committees shall call for. And now finding
that the Town of Berwick is seized on, and that the dangers are nearer to us
then formerly, whether from Sectaries or Malignants, and that it is our duty to
make use of the power and strength of the Kingdom for its preservation and
safety, and for preventing those evils wherewith we are threatened, have
thought it therefore fitting to require the several Colonells and Committees
of War of the Shires on this side Tay, to meet upon the ninth of this
instant, and these on this side of Spey upon the twelfth, and those upon the
North side thereof upon the sixteenth day of the same month, and at their said
meetings, to take present course for listing and inrolling the particular
numbers of men, horse and foot, according to the list hereunto subjoyned. And
that they appoint and nominate under officers to the foot, viz.
Lievtenant-Colonells, Majors, and Captains: and that they cause the heritors,
propter wodsetters, liferenters and others subject in out putting of horse and
foot conform to the Acts of Parliament, put out their proportion of horse and
foot well armed, the foot, two parts with muskets, and third part pikes, and
all with swords, with two Dollors of Levie-money, and twenty days provision to
each soldier, and to all officers under a Captain conform to the Scotts
establishment, at two part pay horse and foot: And that for carrying of the
necessary provision of their forces, They provide a sufficient baggage-horse
for every Twelve men: And that a strong and able man with sword and half pike
be appointed to attend each two baggage-horse, who is to have a soldiers pay:
And that the heretors, liferenters, and others aforesaid of the several Shires
who are liable to the putting out of men, be Ordained to bring their several
proportions of horse and foot Armed and provided as aforesaid, to the place of
Randevouz in each Shire, under the pains following, viz. Under the pain of
400. marks for each deficient horsman, And under the pain of 100. l. for each
deficient footman not brought to the foresaid Randevouz, which are hereby
Ordained to be keept at the dyets following viz. All the Shires on this side
Tay upon the 24. of this Month, and these upon the South side of Spey upon the
27. and those upon the North side of Spey upon the last of this Month, and
Ordaines the said Colonells and Committees in the several Shires to have their
proportions of Horse and Foot Armed and provided as aforesaid, in readiness at
the place of Rendezvous, and at the diets respective before mentioned, to march
according to such orders as shall then be sent to them, under the penalties
aforesaid: And for the more speedy and effectual raising of the said Foot and
Horse, the Estates of Parliament gives power and command to the Colonells, with
assistance of such of the Committee of the Shire as will join with them; and
are hereby commanded to be assisting to them, to seize and distraine the goods
of any Heretories and others aforesaid, who are deficient in out putting either
of their Horse or foor, viz. For every horseman wanting at the day of Randevouz
the sum of 400. Marks from every Heretor and others aforeseid, who are liable
to put him out. And for every Footman wanting, the sum of 100. l. And further
the said Estates declares, that the Heretors and others aforesaid failing in
putting out of their proportions shall be esteemed as enemies to, and hinderers
of the public service of the Kingdom, in persuance of the ends of the
Covenant, and notwithstanding some persons may be hereby overburdened in
respect of the means of their Rents, and multitude of Tenants, living upon
their lands: Yet the Estates Ordains the foresaid Number of men provided as
aforesaid to be put out by them, and in case any of them sinde themselves
thereby prejudiced, and make their complaint known to the Committee of the
Shire, in that case the said Estates Ordaines the Committee of the Shire to
cast up the account, what the price of the aforesaid Arms, Levi-money and the
price of Baggage horse will amount to, and so to provide for their relief,
that the burden may be equally upon the whole Heretories and others aforesaid
according to their Rent, as in the maintenance. And because the said Estates
having after calculation, found that the number of horse according to the
proportion of the Levy in Anno 1644. are to be raised, will not exceed 2700.
And seeing the present service will necessarily require a greater number of
Horse, and that the Shires of this Kingdom will hardly be able to raise the
same: Therefore the said estates have ordained that each Regiment of horse
shall consist of 180. Troopers, to be framed in three Troops, and commanded by
a Colonel, Major and Rutemaster, and the Colonel to have the nomination of all
his under Officers; Providing, the Lieutenant or Cornet be appointed with
advice of the Committee of the Shire, out of the which the Troop is to be
levied: And Ordains the Regiment to be made up in manner following, viz. The
present Rutemaster to have assigned to them locally out of some Shire or
Shires, the number of 80. Troopers, according as is set down in the List
hereunto subjoyned, which Troopers the said Rutemasters are to receive at the
day and place of Rendezvozes of the foresaid Shire or Shires before written;
and shall give sufficient security to leavy upon their own charges as many
Troopers well mounted, and Armed, as with the Troops they presently have, shall
make 160 in the whole; and that they shall have the said Troopers so to be
listed upon their own charges at the foresaid day and place of Randezvouz,
under the pain of 400. Marks for each deficient Trooper: And for such
Noblemen and Gentlemen designed Colonells, who have no Troops presently, the
Estates Ordaines them to receive the number of 80. Troopers from the Shire
assigned to them for that purpose, as is contained in the foresaid subjoyned
List; and to find sufficient surety for leavying the number of 100. Troopers
upon their own charges, and to bring them to a Randezvouz at (...) upon the 10.
day of June next, under the pain of four hundred Marks for each deficient
well mounted and armed Trooper: And in case any Colonel shall upon his own
charges raise 60. horse more to make up the fourth Troop, the Estates of
Parliament allows him to have a Lieut. Colonel; and what further Troopers the
Colonel or his Officers shall leavy upon their own charges, they shall have
entertainment therefore as the rest of the Army; And the Estates of Parliament
ordains the foresaid Committees to use all diligence for performing the
foresaid duties entrusted to them, as they will testify their affection to
Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom, and that they fail not to make report
to the Parliament, or the Committee of Estates in this Kingdom, within six
days after the days of Rendezvous respective above written, assigned by the
Parliament to the Shires respective, as is aforesaid: And if the Committees of
Shires be remiss in their meetings, or in putting their Orders in execution,
that the Colonells with such of the Committee as are willing to join with them,
conveen upon all occasion for putting their orders to execution, and for doing
every thing that may further the Levies, being always accomptable for their
proceedings to the Parliament, or Committee of Estates; and if any person or
persons of what degree, quality, or condition soever, shall offer to oppose, or
obstruct by violence the resolutions of the Parliament, or Committees thereof,
the said Committees and Colonells have power to use all means to compel them,
and if need be, to pursue the raisers of the tumults, and public opposers of
the Resolutions of the Estates in a hostile way by the strength of the Shire;
and if the Insurrection or opposition come to that height that the Shire where
it falls out is not able to suppress the same, that the Colonels, Committees,
and Commanders of the next adjacent Shires, on all Quarters, join for
suppressing thereof as they shall receive advertisement. And further, the said
Estates upon consideration of the great abuses in former Leavies, committed by
Officers in taking of money from the Heritors, and others aforesaid, who are
liable in putting out of Men, Horse, or Foot in place of their said men;
Declares, that whatsoever Officer shall be found to have done so, shall not
only be cashiered from his charge, but also branded with a mark of infamy and
disgrace: And that the said whole Forces may be kept in the better order and
discipline, the said Estates Ordaines all Officers constantly to attend their
said charges, and that none of them upon any pretext whatsoever be absent the
space of one month, with certification to the contraveeners hereof, that their
places shall be declared vacant, and another established in their charge. And
the Estates of Parliament declares, that whatsoever Officer or Soldier shall
be found guilty of taking at their own hand, horse, or any other guides from
the Subjects of this Kindome, they shall die for it without mercy. And for the
better regulating of the putting forth Horse and Foot of such as will not fall
to put forth an whole Horse or Footeman: It is declared, that the greatest Rent
of these to be joined for making up an horse, shall provide the horse, and the
rest that joyneth to contribute, according to 160 l. for ilk Horsman; and who
have the maniest men to to provide the Footman, and the remanent that joyneth
to contribute, with him according to 40. l. for ilk Footman for their outreik
of Arms, and whole furniture belonging to them with their twenty days
provision: And where the Rent, or number of men are equal, to cast lots.

Follows the List of the Horse and Foot, to be put out by the several Shires
and Burghs of the Kingdom, with the names of the Colonels of the Foot.
OVt of the Sheriffdomes of Roxburgh and Selkirk 2000. Foot, and 200. Horse:
Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Roxburgh, the Earl of Bucleuche, or his
brother the Earl of Louthian, or in case of his refusal to accept the Sheriff
of Tevitduil, or Richard Douglas his son.

Out of the Sheriffdome of Berwick 1200. Foot and 100. Horse, Colonel for the
Foot, the Earl of H^m^.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Hadingtoun 1200. Foot and 100. Horse, Colonels for
the Foot, the Lord Zester and Lord of Wanchtoun, and in case of Wanchtouns
refusal, the Lord Zester to be Colonel for the whole.

Item, out of the Sheriffdom of Edingburgh to Land 1200. Foot, and 100. Horse,
Colonels to the Foot, the Lord Balmarino, or in case he accept not, the Lord
of Collingtoun and the Lord Cransto^^.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow 500. Foot, and 60. Horse; and out of the
Sheriffdom of Pe^bles 400. Foot, and 40. Horse* Colonel for the Foot of their
two Shires, the Lord B^rgany.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Dumfreis 1200. Foot and 120. Horse, Colonels for the
Foot, the Earl of Dumfreis, and the Lord of Kethead.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun 1200. Foot, and 120. Horse, Colonels for the
Foot, the Lord Gairleis, and the young Lord of Lag.

Out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and R^^frew, 2000. Foot, and 240. Horse,
Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Glencairn, the Lord Ross, and the Lord
Cochrane.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Lanireck 1500. Foot and 200. horse, Colonel for the
Foot, the Lord Duke of Hammiltoun.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Sterling and Clakman^an 1000. Foot, and 120. Horse,
and the Town of Stirling exemed (in regard of the pestilence) from the one half
of their proportion, extending to (...) Colonel for the Foot, the Earl of
Callender.

Out of the Sheriffdoms of Fyffe and Ki^rosher 1500. Foot and 240. horse:
Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Kellie and the Lord Elcho, and the Estates
of Parliament, remits to any Committ^^ of the Shire, which is to be equal of
the Gentry and Burrows of the Shire, to proportion the ease granted by the
Parliament to to this Shire.

Item, For the Sheriffdom of Perth 2400. Foot, and 240. Horse, the Town of
Perth and Culros to be taken in consideration by the Committee of the Shire,
inregard of the former vastations by the Plague, and all other places in the
Shire, which are now waste by the same or by the War; And the Estates declares,
that what the Committee shall deduce in respect of wasted lands, shall be
deduced to the Shire: And also declares, that the heritors of these wasted
lands shall only be liable to put out their proportion according to the fourth
man they have presently. The Colonels of the Foot, the Earl of Atholl, the
Earl of Tullibardine and Sir James Drummond younger of Machanie.

Out of the Sheriffdome of Forfar, 1500. Foot, and 140. Horse, the Town of
Breichen excimed of 30. men of their former Levy, Colonel for the Foot, the
Lord Carnegie.

Out of the Sheriffdome of Kincardine, and the Earl of Merschellis part of
Aberdeen 1200. Foot, and 100. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, George Keith,
brother to the Earl of Marschall and Colonel Harie Mauld.

Out of the rest of the Sheriffdome of Aberdeen, and out of the Sheriffdome of
Ba^ff, 1600. Foot, and 240. Horse, the Town of Aberdeen to be exeimed from 60.
of their proportion in regard of their vastation by the Pestilence. The Town of
Culane of 6* and the Town of Bamff of 7. Colonells for the Foot, The Lord Bamff
or his son, and the Master of Forbes: and the Estates of Parliament remits to
the Committee of 24. to divide the proportion of Horse and Foot wh^ Kilcardine,
Aberdeen and Bamff shall put out.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Elgin^, N^^rne, and that part of Innernes on this
side Ness, 1500. Foot, and 120 Horse. The Town of Nairne to be exeemed of the
two parts of three of their former proportion. The Town of Forres to be exeemed
of 6 then, and the Town of Innernes and Elg^ne to put out their fourth man upon
the Oaths of the Magistrates and Ministers: Colonel for the Foot, the Earl of
Murray. And the Estates of Parliament recommends to the Committee of War of
the Shire to have consideration of the vastation of the Sheriffdom of Nairne,
and the like consideration for the Town of Innernes, in respect of its great
and extraordinary condition.

Out of the Earl of Seaforth and Lord L^is division of Innernes. 1000. Foot,
and 120. Horse, Colonel for the Foot the Barron of Kilrao^. And the Estates of
Parliament remits to the Committee of 24. to make an just division betwixt the
Earl of Seaforth and Lord L^ division foresaid.

Out of the Earl of Seaforths part of Innernes, Sutherland and C^^hnes 1600.
Foot, and 120. Horse, Colonells for the Foot, the Earl of Sutherland, or incase
of his refusal, the Lord of Duffus, and the Lord of ^kill, and in case both
Sutherland and Duffus refuse, the Lord of L^r, so in this case the Lairds of
(...) and (...) to be Colonells, and the Estates remits to the Committee of 24
to cl^ this division.

Out of the Marquis of Argyles division of ^es and Badzenoche, 1000. Foot,
Colonel, the Lord of Macheleoud or his brother Rorie.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Bute, 50. Foot.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Dumbartan in place of their Foot 40. Horse, and this
case of their former Leavies to be given to these Parishes who has had greatest
lost by the Enemy. And in particular, the Barrony and Parrochine of Lenzie, and
each Horsman to be rated at 160. l. and the Town of Dumbartan to be exeemed
from Ten of their old proportion.

The Sheriffdom of Argyle exeemed.

Out of the Sheriffdom of Orkney 1000. Foot, Colonel, the Earl of Morton or
any that he shall appoint who is capable thereof, according to the Laws of this
Kingdom.

Follows the List of the Colonels of Horse, with their proportions of Horse out
of the several Shires.
The Earl of Arroll, out of the Sherifdom of Aberdeen, 80. Horse.

The Earl of Merschell, out of the Sherifdom of Kincardine. 54. horse, and part
of Aberdeen 26. Horse, (...) 80. Horse.

The Earl of Buchane, out of the Sheriffdome of Forfar, 70. Horse, and out of
the Sheriffdom of Bamff, 10. inde. 80. Horse.

The Earl of Dumserling, out of the Sheriffdome of Fyfe. 80. Horse.

The Earl of Landerdail, out of the Sheriffdom of of Hadintan, 80. Horse.

The Earl Traquair, out of the Sheriffdom of Peebles. 40. Horse, and out of the
Sheriffdom of Drumfreis. 40. Horse. inde 80. Horse.

The Earl of Dalhoussie or his son, out of the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh. 80.
Horse.

The Earl of Lanerek, out of the Sheriffdoom of Lanerk, 80. Horse.

The Vicount of Kenmure; out of the Sheriffdom of of Wigtonne and
Kirkendbright, 80. Horse.

The Vicount of Dudhope, out of the Sheriffdom of Forfar 70. Horse, and out of
the Sheriffdom of Bamff, 10. Horse, inde 80. Horse.

The Vicount of Fendraught, out of the rest of the Sheriffdoms of Aberdeen and
Bamff, not formerly assigned 80. Horse.

The Lord Sinclare, out of the Sheriffdom of Fyfe 80. Horse.

The Lord Spynie, out of the Sheriffdoms of Stirling and Clackmannan, 80 Horse.

The Lord Balcarras, out of the Sheriffdom of Fyfe 80 Horse.

The Lord Mountg^mery, out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew 80 Horse.

The Lord Levinstonne, out of the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh 80. horse, and out of
the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow 60. horse, inde 80. horse.

Lieutenant General David Lesly out of the Sheriffedom of Pearth, 80. horse.

General Major Midletonne, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk, 80.
horse.

Colonel Sir John Broune, out of the Sheriffdomes of Roxburgh and Selkirk 40.
Horse, out of the Sheriffdom of Berwick 20. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of
Hadingtoune 20. Horse, inde 80. Horse.

Colonel Robert Montgumrie, out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew. 80.
Horse.

Colonel Hary Barcley, out of a part of Aberdeen Shire, and Bamff 80. Horse.

Colonel James Merser of Aldie, out of the Sheriffdom of Pearth 80. Horse.

Colonel William Lockhart of (...) out of the Sheriffdom of Lanerk 80. Horse.

Colonel Sr. William Keith of Ludquhairne, out of the Sheriffdoms of Stirling
and Clakmannan 40. Horse, out of the Sheriffdom of Lanerk 20. Horse, and out of
the Sheriffdom of Dunbartan 20. Horse, inde 80. horse.

Colonel Alex. Stranchane out of the Sheriffdom of Pearth 80. horse.

Colonel Gilbert Ker, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 80. Horse.

Col. Sir Mungo Murray, out of the Sheriffdom of Dumfreis 80. Horse.

Col. David Barcley, out of Innernes and Murray 80. Horse.

Col. William Urry, out of the Sheriffdom of Kenfrew 40. Horse; out of the
Sheriffdom of Dumbartan 20. horse, and to receive 4000, Marks money, inde 80.
Horse.

Col. Hugh Frasar out of the rest of the Sheriffdom of Innernes 80. horse.

Col. Innes younger of that ilk, out of the Sheriffdoms of Elgine and Nairne
40. Horse, and the rest of Innernes and Sutherland 40 Horse inde 80. Horse

Col. Innes Quartermaster, out of the Sheriffdoms of Elgine, Nairn, and that
part of Innernes one this side Nesse, 80. horse.

Col. John Home, out of the Sheriffdom of Berwick 80. horse.

Col. James Macdowell of Garthland, out of the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun 40. horse,
and out of the next adjacent of Air to Wigtoun 40 horse, inde 80. horse.

And the Estates of Parliament Ordain the Cleark of Register to cause Print the
foresaid Act abovementioned, with the Lists respective abovewritten, thereto
subjoyned.

Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist.

FINIS.

