THE CONVERTS LETTER To his old friends.

Or the Apology of a Commander of the Kings Party, for di^^^ting of that
party, and bearing Arms for the PARLIAMENT.

Wherein is showed, that those pretenses, of Defending the Protestant Religion,
the fundamental Laws, the Liberties of the Subjects etc. on that party, are
but specious. What Irish, and Papists, have been ^o^oured and ^^^ifly entrusted.

How if that Army does conquer, as it is now molded, Popery and Tyranny, of
necessity must be introduced. With the lawfullnesse of bearing defensive Arms
by the PARLIAMENT.

Veritas non querit Angulos.

Romans the 16.17.18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
Divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned and
avoid them. For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their
own Belly and by good words and fair speeches deceive the Hearts of the
simple.

Printed and Published according to Order.

LONDON Printed for H. Twyford at the three Daggers in Fleet Street MAY 30.
1645.

The Apology of a Commander of the Kings, for diserting that party, and
bearing Arms for the Parliament, with the reasons that induced him thereto.
To all my old fellow Protestant Soldiers, in the Kings Army these.
Fellows in Arms,
NEver had any man greater confidence of the Kings own integrity, and power of
himself, in the managing of his own business then I had. But now, my fears
too truly tell me otherwise in point of power; And I very much pity many
honest, and sound Protestants amongst you, great enemies to Popery, which are
engaged on that party, out of the same confidence that I was; Whom I wish
(though never that occasion, to pry into the secrets of the times, which I have
had) to consider well with themselves, and they shall find Prince Rup^^t and
his Accomplices fight, even so much for the Privileges, and Liberties of the
Subjects, as the Papists do, for the Protestant Religion. I lay nothing of
this on the King, God forbid (in an injurious way) I should touch so much as
the skirt of his garment. But it is apparent, there are those who buzze into
his Majesty's ears extreme (pretended) injury in point of Prerogative, etc.
which in effect is but to engage him, in opinionated necessity, to make use of
their help, to right himself. And under color thereof to draw his Majesty (as
pretended principle) by accident to countenance the Malignant designs of
Papists, and public disturbers of the Peace, to accomplish their own ends. And
lest I should be thought a general Satyrist rather then to tell particular
truths, I shall descend to some particulars.

I know, that most of you which have Commissions in that Army have in them this
specious clause incerted; For defense of the Kings Royal Person and Authority,
the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Subjects,
and privileges of the Parliament. But how far these Commissions in these
particulars are pursued, I shall offer by the occurrences, since time is the
best teller of truth, in things of this nature.

I shall draw my first observation from Ireland, which will show how far this is
pursued in matter of Religion; And herein (I must confess) I did think the
Rebellion in that Kingdom to be an act of their own, without any allowance
from England, although it was always alleged by the Irish, that they had the
Kings Commission for it; That they were the Queens Soldiers: that they fought
for their religion, etc.

He that does but consider how, and on what terms, the Cessation there was
made (pretended to be an act of necessity) how many of the Irish Rebels were
drawn over into England under the name of the Protestant Army there? Such as
Welsh his Regiment of horse; The recruit of St. Legers Regiment of foot, now
the Duke of Yorks regiment. Osullivan (the Lord of Muskeries Cook) his Troop,
with many others which have butchered the Protestants in that Kingdom. He that
does but consider with himself, what Irish have been always Liegers about the
King, viz. The Lord Taffe, the Lord of Costeloe, Sir John Dungan, Garrat
Talbot, George Evelin, Mr. Robinson, Mr. William Brent, Philip Roch, Doctor
Meara (Physician to Prince Rupert) Rob. Welsh, Rich-Power, Captain O Bryan,
Major o Neil, Edmond Keogh Butler, etc. besides English Papists (the bellows
and fomenters of war) cannot but remember: that the statutes inacted in this
Kingdom against popish Recusants, have been well put in execution according to
the Kings Proclamation about this time three years to that purpose. 10. Aug.
1642.
Or shall we not think this Proclamation was set forth merely to delude the
people.

He that does but remember how many thousands of the Kings loyal Protestant
Subjects of Ireland, were bereaved of their lives and estates, without any
provocation or injury offered. And how the King by act of Parliament, granted
the power and care of Reducement of that Kingdom to the Parliament of England,
cannot but think very strangely of the pacification in that Kingdom, made or to
be made, on such dishonorable terms, when as no satisfaction shall be made
for the effusion of so much innocent blood, or for the poor Protestant
Inhabitants losses, be they never so great.

He that does but consider, how the Irish papists and Rebels, have been
honored, and trusted both in England and Ireland, and what immunities have
been granted them, viz. Muskery must be made President of Mounster and Thomond;
The Parliament of Ireland must be allowed to be held at Kilkenny, the
Metropolis of Rebellion; Poynings act must be reversed, which is, that no Act
of Parliament shall pass until it be first certified into England, and allowed
of by the King and his Council, so as the Irish shall by this have liberty to
make what acts they please. The Protestant party (if they dare adventure their
throats) must come to Kilkenny to the Parliament. Edmond Fitzgerrald (otherwise
called Edmond o Clenlas) must be made a Barroner, for the good service he did
in Ireland, in raising and maintaining a Troop of horse, and a foot Company in
rebellion all the wars against the Protestants. Robert Welsh, and Rich. Power
must be Knighted, as part of their Irish Court agents, and have great commands
conferred on them, one to command a Brigade of horse in England and the other
to be made a Colonel, and then Governor of Bartley in the place of Colonel
Veale, a Protestant, that must be suspected and put forth. Bryan o Neale,
Edmund Butler, Garrat Talbot (another part of their Irish Court agents) must be
Knighted at least, if not Baronets, and great commands must be conferred on
them.

He that does but remember, how at the beginning of this Parliament, the four
main Jesuiticall spirits of this Kingdom were banished by act of Parliament
with the Kings own consent, viz. Sir, John Winter Walt. Mountague, Sir Toby
Mathews, and Sir Kenelm Digby; And yet of these, how much Winter is honored
and trusted now, is publicly known, insomuch that Protestants in Bristoll
must be shot to death for refusing to go under his command. And Walt. Mountague
(though a known Jesuit, and taken in London as a spy) must be thought in
exchange worthy of a Captain and Lieutenant of horse, more then the Earl of
Cleaveland, that is a Peer of the Realm, and commanded a Brigade of horse, if
what was offered may be believed.

He that does but consider what Garrisons on the Kings party are, and have been
entrusted in the hands of Papists viz. In Oxford, the Kings head quarter, Sir
Arthur Aston must be Governor, and Colonel Gage (since shine) his assistant.
In Bristoll the next grand Garrison, the Lord Herbert, the Lord Rivers, the
Lord Sturton etc must have the superintendent, or directive power, Mounsier
Garnier (a French Papists of the Queens placing) is Major of the Town, and a
Jesuit (as I am informed) is the Governors Capt Lieutenant. In Basing are the
Marquess of Winchester and his retinue; In the Forest of Deane, are Sir Jo.
Winter and his. In Barkley Castle. Colonel Power (as I named before) and
Slowley his Major. In Nunny Castle, Captain Pratar, etc. These all in these
places have the command. And by these in one corner of the Kingdom, you may
judge of other Parts, as Expede Herculem, by the dimension of the foot the
whole body.

He that does but consider (besides these) in the Armies who are most entrusted
or respected, shall find them to be most Papists. Such as

Colonel William Arundel of Warder and his horse Regiment, all Papists. Robert
Bret Lievtenant-Collonel to Courtney made a Barronet. Peter Treviltan, Major of
foot to Prince Maurice. Major Webb* sometimes to be Major General for
Dorsetshire. Richard Hunt, Lievtenant-Collonel to the Queens Regiment of foot.
Cum multis alis^ quos nunc per scribere longum est.

These, you know, I presume, which are all within my knowledge; besides
Captains and others of meaner command, And besides Irish, Scottish, Dutch, and
French papists amongst the Cavalry, which for number are like the Locusts in
Egypt. These are only in my memory, and I believe I here mention in particular
an inconsiderable number of them in comparison with the whole. If I might
believe some of the Irish Rebel Co^missionets who told it me themselves, and I
declared is much to several persons. It is intend^d (...) ^and 10000 of the
Irish Rebels in England suddenly. And if this be (...) way or these the persons
b^ whom the Protestant Religion is (...). O^^ ^f these are any Symptoms or
tokens (...) of the times.

^

I take the word defense to be correlative to the word offense. And as in the
word, so in the matter; there can be no defense without offense, or injury
first offered. Yet this was that pretense of defense, under color whereof the
Rebels of Ireland massacred, plundered, and expelled the Protestants for no
other offense, then for teaching them civility, and how to live like
Christians. So as here is the first offense offered by Papi^ts cloaked in the
name of defense, and under color of maintaining their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties.

I profess I thought really the King intended (according to his several
Protestations, Vows and Declarations, with seeming innovations made by
Parliament and their party) to perform all these things pretended, which
engaged me to serve amongst you.

1. Because it was said to maintain the Protestant Religion established by
law, which was sound in all fundamental points of doctrine. Howsoever it was
in discipline, I did not then so well consider. 2. That it was to maintain the
fundamental Laws established, legally, under seeming presidents of authority
and antiquity. To which I saw no answer, although there were one published. 3.
Because they were engaged amongst you persons of great honor and fortunes,
reputed good Protestants, whom I thought in this monarchical government,
settled by law would not longer assist the King in this war, then whiles he
maintained the Protestant Religion, and governed by the Laws. 4. That so long
as there was no other proper strength but Protestants and subjects. And that
army trusted in the hands of such; There was no danger of popery, or tyranny,
if the King should prevail by the sword, although some few Papists were made
use of, as a ministerial hand only.
And for my part I assure you charity binds me to the same opinion of the
reallity of the Kings own intentions in the same still, though I am otherwise
satisfied of his power in performance thereof, for when I consider.

1. What power and influence a beloved Queen may have on the Kings actions;
Which was Solomon's case and our sad experience can witness. 2. What Councillors
and advisers are again most in favor, beloved, honored and trusted which
projected the greivances that begot, these Wars and which were the primitive
cause of our miseries. 3. That by the occurrences, it does plainly appear the
Irish Wars, were set on foot by the same Counsels. 4. That the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, are made a stalking horse to creep under covert, rather
then a path to walk by. And that it strayned at to make an unlimited
prerogative in the King for their own ends. 5. That al^ Commanders in the Kings
army are by degrees new molded, for the most part. And that army put into the
hands of the two Princes, Papists, foreigners, or such as have betrayed their
trusts to ambition or avarice. 6. That oppression and injury by plundering and
otherwise, is rather palliated then punished. And all Laws (but what the will
of every man by the sword does administer) become dead letters. 7. That such
numbers of Auxillary Forces, as Papists, French, Irish. Dutch, etc. are brought
in and entrusted when as Protestants are suspected, put forth, and
discountenanced. 8. That of necessity that army, (as now it is) in all humane
probability must produce popery and Tyranny by constraint of their power, if
the sword thereof prevail, these things being considered and the fair
carriage on the Parliament side, I presume it will satisfy all indifferent
persons on your party, as well as me, that the Parliament aymeth at nothing but
those ends which are religious, honorable just, legal, and according to their
Covenant. For defense of the Kings Royal person and authority in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdom
with their own just rights and privileges, etc.
The Parliament is that great Court of justice and Council of State which was
freely convened and consented unto to continue by the Kings own express
authority and confirmation; That by the ancient and known privileges of the
same has power to raise the Posse Regni as a Sheriff by the Common Law, has
to raise the Posse Comitatus, to obvene and suppress all insurrections and
disorders, and to execute justice. In whose Ordinances the Kings employed
(though not express) assent, is declared by law: Which are to be obeyed more
then the orders or rules of any other Court of Justice. It has jurisdiction
and cognizance over all persons, and in all causes, in these his Majesty's
Dominions. The Members whereof, in duty (if not by oath) more then the Judges
in other Courts, ought not to defer, or delay to do justice, Neque propter
magnum sigilum neque propter parvum, although the Kings express Commands were
against it.

So long as their is on there party no quarrel but defense, and nothing else
aimed at, but to pursue the Covenant, which is the same, the King himself took
in Scotland. So long as there is, no other end, but to defend the ancient Laws,
and Liberties established. And to reform the Church of England, in discipline
according to the pattern of other Protestant Churches, which are allowed by
those Protestants under the Hierarchy to be found in doctrine in all parts of
the essence of Religion, and in discipline not so subject to tirannicall
oppression and exorbitancy. So long as Episcopacy, the Church government so
much stood for by you (though alleged to be ancient) is not Iure divino, but
polliticall, confessed by the author of the New distemper, allowed to be
printed at Oxford, and the same, which the best reason, and authority
authentic do speak. So long as the Litturgie or book of Common prayer
established by Law in Edward the sixths time, (if all in it were good and
without exception,) were but a thing indifferent and then put to the question,
whether it were better to expunge the old Litturgy or Mass Book, or to
compose a new. When although it was carried at present (wanting our experience)
that it was better to expunge the old. Yet D. Ridley B. of London, since a
Martyr in the Church (for the same reasons now thought fit) and many others
were then for erecting a new one. So long as any prayers according to found
doctrine, and the word of God coming from the sincerity of the heart and true
devotion, may be as good and effectual to salvation, as the Book of Common
Prayer (if all in it were good and without offense.) It is more safe in this
quarrel to join with the Parliament, and their party, be they for the
Presbiteriall or Independent discipline, being both Protestants sound in
doctrine, then to join with the Papists, that are neither sound in doctrine
nor discipline.

The Scots they first bear defensive Arms, for defense of their Religion,
Laws, and Liberties; where no effusion of blood was; And this is approved of
in the ^ct of pacification in that Kingdom by the King himself to be a
laudable undertaking.

The Irish they bear Arms on the same pretense, and shed the blood of many
thousands of innocent persons without any provocation; A hundred thousand
computed at least
yet this must be hushed up, approved of under a Pacification, and many of them
are honored and specially entrusted for it. And must the English tamely lie
still, and suffer Religion, Laws, Liberties, and themselves to be trampled on
by persons disaffected; only out of a Conscientious scruple, that they ought
not to bear Arms against the Anointed of the Lord (as is said) when the King
is made but the cloak to their designs, although it be to defend the
Religion, Laws, and Liberties (which truly lie at stake) from innovation.
David (that was a man after Gods own heart) in a private quarrel as to
himself, made not this scruple, when he offered the King of Gath to go up to
battle against Saul; And at most he was engaged but in his own private
defense, from tirranny and oppression.

Much more may be done when the Public Cause of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties are endangered. Kings commands in a Monarchichall government, are
like the Laws of God in the two Tables, which declare their full will, and
their subjects duty. Their wills are so settled in the Laws established, that
they are to be obeyed in their commands, but so far, as they are agreeable to
the Laws and noe further. The very heathen (by the light of nature only) did
confess, and allow it to be the most just, and honorable quarrel in the world
to fight pro aris, and f^^ls, for their Gods and Country. And Propatria mori
pulchrum. that it was a gallant thing to dye for their Country.

The most strict Divines under the Gospel (though in a private quarrel hold
it fit to turn the other care to the smiter rather than smite again) yet noe
ways allow us to tolerate injuries offered unto God. Nehemiah ^.^3. Maccah
13.1^.
We must not (...) we see Religion, Laws, and Liberty trampled on, lie still
in the ditch and cry God help only, (when God has given us power) without
using the means to establish them; And to expect deliverance by the immediate
hand of God, in a miraculous way as of old time. Math. 4.5.6.
When the devil tempted our Savior to throw himself from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, The Devine observes, That Christ would not cast himself down (though
he might have saved himself, D^. Su^t^in his D^^^^e^^^re 14
without the Ministrye of Angles) to show us not to seek supernatural means,
when God does lend us natural. We tempt him when we seek health without a
medicine, or victory without a combat, we tempt him, when by reason or
counsel we may avoid some evil, and yet explore his power; And last of all we
tempt him when we enquire to far into his wisdom, or require that unlawfully,
which he is wo^t to offer by means. And therefore when the cause is just the
authority lawful, the intent good that God may be glorified a right continued,
I^^. 235.
and imminent dangers avoided at is and may be lawful for Christians to take
Arms, And so to do is nothing contrary (as some have dreamed) to Christian
Peace etc. with this ca^tion, That, (...) desire of superiority be not the
cause of our taking Arms. Iam. 136.


It was the course in the primitive Church to stand up at the reahearsall of
the Creed with their hands on their swords as ready to defend that faith. It
is according to the law of nature, Vim vi repellere, for every creature to
defend themselves from injury, much more the public state or Church and
Common weal. It is a trespass justifiable by the Common Law to kill another,
se defendendo, in defense of himself, or his goods. By the Matriall Law Kings
in the dark are not distinguished from enemies but by the Word* which is the
Law. Neither are they to be known, but by the Laws (which distinguish Kings
from other men) in these times of darkness.

The King is the ^^^untain of justice, from whence by the Co^mom Law and
Christian charity, is p^es^med can (...) stream. He is a (...) of the Church,
^^x under Christ in these his Majesty's Do^^^nions But if the fountain branch
into two streams by suffocation on pollution o^ the old channel I will leave
the polluted or muddy stream, and swimm ^o s^ake in the clear o^e if the bead
be disaffecte by any the members is (with all d^^ reverence to the h^ad) I will
join with those member least disaffected to cu^eth^ rest and endeavor to take
of that distemper from the head. And if by experimental practice, it appear
that any member be incurable. To save the head, and the r^st of the body. I say
Enserceidendum est ne pars sincera tra^^tur. Let it b^ cut off, least it pu^r
fi^ the ^est. If the King therefore by evil Council and adv^ce personally
comma^d^^^ on thing, Acts. 4.19.
the Laws e^ta^^l shed and the Gospel bi^ the contrary, I will honor the
King but obey the Law, Acts. 5.29.
and the Gospel in which is the Kings employed assent And the Parliament also,
which ^s the Kings highest Court of justice and Council of state, can best
expound interpret and give vigor to the Laws: And do desire the fl^u^ishing
of the true light of the Gospel. Therefore I say, with Moses unto such ^s are
of the Parliament, and their party who I now bele^ve, and perceive to manage
their business with sincerity, Dread not nor be affraide for your God fights
for you, Deuteronomy. 29.30.
but go on, and prosper. And I desire to ^oyne with you in the work. For
salvation belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing is with his people.
Farewell and I am in charity still. Psalm. 3.8.


W.R.
April. the 4. 1645.
FINIS

