THE FULLNESS OF GODS LOVE Manifested: OR, A Treatise discovering the Love of
God, in giving Christ for All, and in affording means of Grace to All: Wherein
also the 9. Chapter to the Romans, and other places of Scripture (usually urged
against the universality of Gods Love to Mankind) are cleared.

And diverse Objections of the like nature answered.

By L. S.

1 John 4.8 9. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love.

In this is manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

Printed in the year 1643.

To the READER.
MY endeavor (in this little Treatise) is to manifest to thee both by
Scripture and Reason, the full, free, universal, and individual Love of God
to Mankind, is giving his Son to death for then, that they might live; and
in affording abundant means to discover himself full of Love, Grace, and
Goodness to them: And notwithstanding many Books have been written, wherein
this Love of God has been evidently manifested, yet does this truth still
find many enemies and opposers, even of such as have a zeal of God, (but not
according to knowledge:) and the ground of this their error I find to be a
misunderstanding of certain places of Scripture, which seemingly contradict
this Doctrine; which Scriptures have not been answered in any Book that I
have seen written on this subject of Gods Love. Therefore according to my
ability I have not only proved this Doctrine by the testimony of diverse
plain places of Scripture, but have also cleared those other places which are
more difficult, from being confederate with the opposers of the fore mentioned
truth, Not that I assume any infallibility in the expesition of those hard
places of Scripture, but only declare my thoughts: And therein I have not
only satisfied the Letter, and (I hope) the scope and meaning of the places,
which the contrary expositions have failed to do, but have also done it
without any the least derogation from, or impeachment to the Excellent Nature,
and most glorious Attributes of the Almighty God, as his Mercy, Justice,
sincerity, Love, grace and goodness, all which the contrary Expositions and
Opinions do directly fight against. For there is an inseparable unity between
the Attributes of GOD, which men not considering, and so going about to advance
one without the rest, destroy all. For instance, to advance power without
justice, goodness, love, and mercy, is not to advance the power of God, but to
attribute that to God, which neither is, nor can be in him; And the like may be
said of all his Attributes: And as they all are inseparable in God, so do they
inseparably concur in all his actions and dispensations toward his creatures.

Now I desire thee for thine own good seriously to peruse this ensuing
Treatise, without prejudice or partiality, too much in use in these times; for
generally men see with other men's eyes, and hear with other men's ears, and
not their own; yet we know that every man must give an account to God for
himself; and therefore that every man should try and judge for himself, is
necessary, equal, and excellent. We should not prostrate and debase our
understandings to the judgments and opinions of others, and thereby suffer
them to be adulterate and corrupted: We should preserve in our selves a
natural freedom and Nobility of spirit in this respect, like the noble
Bereans, unto whom though Paul preached a new Doctrine, a Doctrine every where
spoken against and persecuted, yet did they with all readiness of mind
receive it, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether the things were so as
Paul had told them.

If we receive or believe any thing, because it is in authority, credit, or
practice, in the country, or place where we were borne or bred; or reject any
thing from the contrary reason, it matters not what we believe or what we
reject.

Do any of the Rulers believe in him, was the old and corrupt Plea of the
proud and hypocritical Pharisees, who would neither receive the truth
themselves, nor suffer others; they would seek and receive honor one from
another, and reject that truth which had the testimony and honor of God alone.

The world was never unfurnished of men possessed with this Antichristian spirit;
that having concluded certain Principles and prescript Forms, would subject;
all other men's judgments, consciences, and practices thereunto, upon the
greatest penalties, without further trial or examination, it being ever a
mark and politic practice of false Religions so to do: for they know that
upon due trial their Doctrines would be found vain and groundless;
therefore trial is to them as the shadow of death. Whereas it is proper,
natural, and Christian-like for us to weigh, try, and examine all things, all
the reasons for and against, with freedom and ingenuity of spirit; and hold
fast that only which is good; and nothing is good to us but what we find
good upon trial.

Therefore I say try all things, and so try what is here written, and embrace
or reject it as thou shall find it consonant or dissonant to truth; which is
the desire of him that desires thy increase in the truth, and thy good in all
things,

L. S.

THE FULNESS OF GODS LOVE Manifested, in giving Christ for All.
THat God is infinite in Love, in Goodness, and in Mercy; the Scriptures
plainly declare, the daily dispensations of God toward his Creatures
manifestly demonstrate, and all Men confess; but if the love of God be limited
to a few, it is far from being Infinite: he that does good, or shows mercy to
one in misery, and passes by another in the like condition in every respect,
the defect must be in his heart, or in his ability; now we know that it is not
for want of ability of God show not mercy to all, and to ascribe it to his
heart, his disposition, will, or pleasure, is to blaspheme his excellent name
and nature: for what God is in his attributes, or what we attribute to be
inseparable from his nature, as Justice, mercy, love, sincerity, faithfullnes,
and goodness; he must be to all he that is love it self, goodness it self,
must needs be loving and good to all: So that it is not suitable to God to pick
and choose amongst men in showing mercy, for he may as well cease to be, as to
withhold mercy from any one in misery, so far as it is consistent with his
other attributes; this universal love of God is that which I intend to Write
of, which I shall manifest by proving these two particulars: First, that God
gave his Son to death, that all through him might have life. And secondly,
that he affords all men sufficient means to discover himself good and gracious
to them, thereby to beget goodness and grace in them: And first I shall begin
with the first of these; That the love of God, manifested in giving his only
begotten Son to death, was to the whole lump of mankind, and this appears by
what is written, John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. God so loved the World, that is, all mankind, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever [of them] believed in him should not
perish but live eternally.

1 Obj. By World is meant the World of the Elect.

I Answer, that the Elect in their own sense shall all believe, but this word
whosoever, intimates that many of this world here meant may not believe, for
if by World here you will understand the Elect only, then this will be the
sense of the words, God so loved the world of the Elect, that whosoever of this
world of the Elect believes in him, should not perish, etc.

2 Obj. By World is meant the whole lump of mankind, but those that are not
elect can never believe, for God will never give them faith, and therefore
though God does thus proclaim his love to all, yet seeing it is impossible
that any other then the elect should believe, this Text does not hinder, but
that the death of Christ may still be limited to the elect.

Answ. Then the love of God to the greatest part of the world may be thus
expressed, such and so great is the love of God toward you, that when you do
that which is impossible for you ever to perform, viz. believe, then you shall
obtain that from him, which he cannot in justice bestow upon you, viz.
remission of sins and eternal life. And that I may illustrate the absurdity of
this Objection, consider what is written in Romans 3 25, 26. whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God, to declare I say, at this time his righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of those that believe in Jesus; in which
words, we may perceive that God does proceed in the Gospel in such a way, as
he may declare his righteousness in justifying of sinners; and moreover that
that God could not be just, and the justifier of the ungodly, but through the
death of his Son, for without blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. Now if
God has so loved the world, that he has given his Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have eternal life, then the Son must die
for all, otherwise if those he did not dye for should believe an hundred
times, yet must they die in their sins, yea they are as far from Salvation
as ever they were, and so this opinion does contradict the word of God, denying
that God has so loved men, or so given Christ that all men may have life
through says; for God is able no more, nor no further to extend the glad
tidings of life, peace, and remission of sins, then the death of Christ
(which is the ground of the Gospel) does extend; For he may as well pardon and
remit the sins of all Men, without relation to the blood and Sacrifice of his
Son, as he way preach and proffer remission of sins, or eternal life to all or
any man, for whom Christ did not shed his blood; but as God will not do that
which is unjust, so neither will he profer to do it, for in him justice, and
mercy are inseparable, that is, he is merciful, justice, and just mercy,
therefore his mercy in proclaiming salvation to all, must be just in the
execution, which could not be if offered and not intended to all; the justice
of his mercy must extend as far as the mercy of his justice: so that he
which makes him merciful to offer unto all and not as just to give where, and
as he offers, destroies both justice and mercy, which is a flat denial of
God. Therefore (I say) that as the Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness, so
must the Son of man be lifted up in the Ministry of the Gospel, as a
universal ground and object of faith for all men, Ioh. 3.14.

Another Text for this purpose is 1 Cor. 15.3. where the Apostle speaking to
the Corinthians says For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received, how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures: In
which words consider, first what it was that he delivered to these Corinthians,
and that is, that Christ dyed for their sins, And secondly, when he delivered
this unto them, and that was first of all; Now if Christ had not died for all,
Paul could not have concluded that Christ had dyed for them, for they were at
that time Gentiles carried away with dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12.2. Fornicators,
Adulterers, Thieves, Drunkards, and the like, 1 Cor. 6.9.10.11. And Paul spoke
not from any special Revelation of God concerning these men in particular, but
he spoke according to the Scriptures, which foretold the death of Jesus Christ.

Now if it be objected, that Paul does not say, for your sins, but for our
sins, joining himself with the rest who were believers at that time, or with
the Elect?

I answer, First, that this could be no glad tidings to the Corinthians that
Christ dyed for Paul and others, if they were not included, and if Paul were
not able to prove by the Scriptures, that Christ dyed for them whilst they
were sinners, then they could not receive it, nor stand in it, nor be saved by
it, as the former verses express, for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God; for we cannot believe that of which we have not heard.
Again, 2 Cor. 5.4. It is said, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead:
Paul with the rest that sent that Epistle, having in the former Verses spoken
of being besides themselves toward God, and sober for the Corinthians cause,
tells them that the love of Christ did constrain them, and why so, because they
did judge that they were dead; and how do they prove that they were dead, they
tell them that all were dead, and therefore they were dead; and that all were
dead appears in that Christ dyed for all, and this I conceive to be the
meaning of these words: If one dyed for all, then were all dead. 1 Timothy 2.1.
We are exhorted to make Prayers and supplication for all men, and the reason
is declared in verse. 4. God would have all to be saved; and that his desire is
that all should be saved, he has fully manifested in giving Christ a ransom
for all, Verse. 6. Now it is not the will of God that any should be saved, for
whom Christ did not die, and our Prayers must be made according to the will of
God, therefore if Christ dyed not for all, we cannot pray in faith for any,
much less for all.

If we have a ground in the Scriptures to pray for the Salvation of all men,
then if we do pray in faith for all, or any man, they or he so prayed for,
shall certainly be saved.

To which I answer, that God has not in the Scriptures declared absolutely or
peremptorily that he will save all men, but he has declared, and that truly
and sincerely, that he would have all men to be saved; he speaks in the
Optative Mood, he wills it, he desires it: And in this also we must understand
that God speaks after the manner of men: now what men desire they use means to
accomplish, so God wills and desires the salvation of men, (that is) he puts
forth himself in ways and means, to accomplish it, and suitable to this must
our Prayers for men be, that God would be pleased to manifest the Gospel of
grace to them, which is able to save their souls, that he would bring them
(that is) that he would use means to bring them from darkness to light from the
power of Satan unto himself, Mat. 9.37, 38.

Object. We must pray for all, (that is) for all sorts.

Answ. If we are to pray for all sorts, and not for all of all sorts, then (I
say) we cannot pray for one of any sort, for that person whatsoever he be (if
any be excepted may be the man for whom we ought not to pray, so this
principle does state a man in an impossibility of fullfilling the mind of
Christ, for he would have us pray for all, and we must pray in faith, or we
were better to hold our peace, for we shall never obtain any thing of God; we
must not doubt James 1. now if God leaves the thing dubitable and unresolved,
concerning persons in unbelief, whom he would have saved, and who not, then I
must be in doubt also, unless I will be wiseabove that which is written: and
so I can pray for the salvation of no man whatsoever.

Again, 1 Ioh. 2.1. My little children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not; but if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. The words are plain, only be
pleased to consider, that this Epistle was written in general to all
believers, such as had attained to the knowledge of the truth; and he tells
them, that Christ is a propitiation for their sins, and not for theirs only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. The spirit of God foreseeing that men
would endeavor to hide themselves under the mists and clouds of vain
interpretations, labors to anticipate them by such full and evident
expressions, as may no way be avoided with any show or color of ground, and
therefore he puts in, the whole world, the world in an universal and
individual consideration; so that no man can without offering great violence
and injury to the Text, put any other interpretation upon it.

Again, in 1 Ioh. 5.10.11.12. it is said, that he that believes on the Son of
God, has the witness in himself: he that believes not God, has made him a
liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son: and this is
the record that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son; he that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life.
Here we see that the Apostle affirms, that the unbeleever makes God a liar, in
not believing that God has given him eternal life.

Ob. If God has given him eternal life, he shall certainly live, and not come
into condemnation.

The answer to this objection is in the latter end of the 11. and 12 verses,
in these words, And this life is in his Son etc. As if he should have said, he
that believes not, makes God a liar, in not believing that God has given his
Son as a means of eternal life to all men, or in not believing that God
has given him eternal life in his Son: All that God requires of us is, to
receive the Son in whom this life is; to believe the record of God, that he
has given us eternal life in him: and he that receives the Son, receives
life; and he that receives him not, the wrath of God abides on him, because he
receives him not, Ioh. 3.36.

Again, 1 Ioh. 4 8.9. the Apostle says, He that loves not knows not God,
for God is love: In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because
that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live
through him. Here are three things considerable in this Text; first, the
description of the divine nature, in these words, God is love: Secondly, the
manifestation thereof, he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him: and lastly, a principal ground and reason of the want
of love, in those persons that love not God, they know him not who is love, and
has manifested the same in sending his Son into the world, that they might
live through him.

If it be objected, That the Apostle wrote this to believers, and therefore
when he says, he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might
live through him, he therein has relation only to such.

I answer, that the Apostle wrote this to Believers is true, but when he
says, he that loves not knows not God, for God is love, he has relation
to unbeleevers, and intimates such persons as are ignorant of God and of his
love toward them, manifested in the Gospel. And if these words, (God sent his
Son into the World that we might live through him) should only respect
believers, then would there be no argument therein to convince those persons
that do not love God, as is intended: for of what force would it be with any
man that does not love God, or reason to persuade him thereunto, or to convince
him of sin in not loving, to tell him that God is love, and has manifested
the same in sending his Son into the world, that other men (but not that he)
might live through him? wherefore we must understand the Apostle in this place,
as if he should have said thus, There be many persons in the World that love
not God, but if they did but know and consider what he is, and what love he
has manifested toward them, in sending his only begotten Son into the
World, that they (through him) might have life, it would be a strong motive
and persuasion with them to love him.

To this purpose of Christ's dying for all, you may further consider these
Scriptures: 2 Pet. 2.1. where wicked men which perish are charged with denying
the Lord that bought them. Heb. 2.9. where it is said that Christ tasted death
for every man. Ioh. 12.48. where Christ is said to come into the world to save
the word. Ioh. 6.51. where it is said, that he gave his flesh for the life of
the world. 1 Ioh. 4.14. where he is termed the Savior of the world. Ioh. 1.29.
where he is called, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the word:
and diverse other places there are to the same effect.

Further, consider these reasons or arguments: God has commanded that the
Gospel be preached to all men, Mark 16.15. Go preach the gospel (says he) to
every creature: and the Gospel is glad tidings of good things, Romans 10.15. viz.
remission of sins, Luke 24.47. Salvation Heb. 2.3. and everlasting life, Ioh.
5.40. Now if the glad tidings (which are to be preached to every creature) be
the Gospel, in believing which we have life, and for refusing of which we
perish, then Christ must dye for all, for there is no reconciliation without a
propitiation; without blood no remission, without death no life for sinful
creatures: for God has no peace nor remission for that man, for whom Christ
did not dye: and God would not proffer (with reverence be it spoken) more then
he has to bestow: Therefore seeing the gospel is to be preached to all, God
has strengthened himself in Christ accordingly, in giving him for all.

Again, if God command the gospel to be preached to all, and Christ dyed only
for some (the gospel being Christ crucified for their sins, 1 Cor. 15.1, 3.)
then God commands a lie to be preached to the most part of men, (which were
blasphemy to affirm.)

Again, if Christ dyed not for all, and God do not discover for whom he did
die, then the Gospel (viz) Christ crucified, cannot be preached to any man.

Object. The Gospel is to be preached among all, but not to all, nor any in
particular in unbelief; we must tell them Christ died for sinners and no more.

Answ. If Christ died for sinners, and by sinners we understand only some
selected ones, then no man has ground from the Gospel of grace to believe,
that Christ died for him, and so cannot establish his soul in the love and
grace of God; For Faich comes by hearing, and if the Gospel say no more but
Christ died for some, then all we can believe is but that Christ died for
some, which may be, and we perish in our sins; now how shall we believe the
grace of God in the Gospel, if the Gospel give so uncertain a sound? for as we
cannot believe that of which we have not heard, so neither can we believe more
of any thing then what we have heard.

Obj. Its further objected, that we may tell them all, that if they believe
they shall be saved.

Answ. Then I would desire an answer to this one Question, what men are to
believe? Some say that we are to believe that Christ died for us, if so, then
as the blind-man said to Christ, Joh. 9.36. who is he that I may believe in
him? so may we say, where has God so spoken, that Christ has dyed for us,
that we may believe? They tell us that if we believe that he died for us, then
he did die for us, as if faith did beget truth, and not truth beget Faith. The
thing to be believed must be true, before I believe it: for it is the Gospel of
truth that begets faith in us, and it always begets a faith in its own
likeness; therefore although Christ died for Sinners (if all be not included)
there is no sufficient ground for any man from the word of truth to believe
that Christ dyed for him, and so whereas the Gospel is to be Preached to every
man, this doctrine will not enable the Ministers thereof to preach it to any
man, for the Gospel being Christ crucified, extends no further then the Cross
extends; and when they come to a company of people without faith, to preach
Christ to them, they know not whether Christ dyed for any one of them or not,
and therefore are unable to say to any one of them, that Christ died for their
sins; and there is no other name given under Heaven whereby men can have
life; therefore this Doctrine of Christ's dying only for some, shuts up the
Gospel of grace from the World, and stops the mouths of men from declaring the
same.

Obj. The Gospel must not be preached to men absolutely, but with this
condition, if they be converted and repent; for before they repent we must
press the law upon them, and tell them that the benefit of Christ does not
pertain to them.

Answ. We find in the second of the Thessalonians, 1. and 8, that Christ in
flaming fire will render vengeance to such as obey not the Gospel, and Joh.
3.18. he that believes not, is said to be condemned already, and that because
he does not believe in the name of the only begotten Son of God; and so when
Christ gave Commission to Preach the Gospel to all the World, Mark. 16.16. he
adds, he that believes not shall be damned; now if such men as are never
converted, are to be condemned for not believing; then certainly the Gospel
belongs to them, and is a truth in reference to them, before they repent and be
converted; and what they are bound to believe, the Ministers of Christ-are
bound to declare to them: and besides, the Gospel is to convert men, and to
turn them from darkness to light, to teach them to deny ungodliness and
worldlines, and therefore is to be preached to men unconverted, men in
blindness and darkness. Besides, if it told men that if they repent, they may
and ought to believe that Christ dyed for them; it is all one in effect, as if
they should be told that they may and ought to believe that Christ dyed for
them, though they never repent: for what Christ did was done before they
repented, and their repenting makes it never the more to be; and if Christ did
not die for them when they were unconverted, it were a vain thing for them to
believe in him, though they should repent and be converted.

Obj. If men were able to repent when they would, then we could not preach the
Gospel to all men upon this condition (if they repent and be converted) but
repentance is the gift of God, and men cannot turn themselves, therefore we
may tell them, that if they repent and be converted, they may believe that
Christ dyed for them; seeing we we know that God will give Repentance to none
but such as CHIRST dyed for.

Answ. Then we should speak to the most of men to this effect, do that which
is impossible for you ever to perform, to wit Repent, and then you may believe
that which is not true, to wit, that Christ dyed for your sins; a very poor
encouragement to, or ground of repentance. And for pressing the Law on men
unconverted, I would feign know how they can press it upon others and exempt
themselves from the sentence of it; for if the Law be alive (considered alone
without reference to Christ) then all must perish, small sinners as well as
great, seeing all are sinful and unjust; and this pressing the Law before
Faith, and exhorting penitents only (as penitents) to believe, does teach men
to lay the ground and foundation of their faith in themselves, and so their
faith is stronger or weaker, as they appear to themselves better or worse men.
Must be pressed to repentance, love, and holiness, from the love and grace of
God toward them as sinners; they must not first believe because they are good,
but they must be good because they believe: Paul the chief of sinners obtained
mercy, and so became a pattern of the large extent of the love of God, that no
man might exclude himself from his grace and mercy in Christ; and Christ
conversed with Publicans and Harlots, thereby to show his desire of the good,
and Salvation of Sinners, and to reprove the error of the Pharisees, that
thought that Christ should save and respect such only as were Pharisaically
holy and reformed; whereas Christ tells them that (he coming to save sinners)
the more sinful men were, the more proper it was for him to apply himself, to
recover, reform, and save them by his grace.

Secondly, all men are called upon to believe, that they may have life, Acts
17.30. now God would not call upon all to believe if there was not a Christ
crucisied for all to believe in.

Thirdly, Unbelievers are threatened with eternal death and ruin for their
unbelief, Joh. 3.18.36. Matthew. 10.14.15. 2 These. 1.8, 9. now if Christ died not
for all those for whom he did not die should rather be threatened with
condemnation for believing, then for unbelief; yea, certainly in whatsoever
God condemns them, he would justify them in this, that they did not believe
that Christ dyed for their sins, for to have believed that (if Christ did not
dye for them) had been to believe a lie, then which nothing can be no more
contrary to the God of Truth.

Fourthly, those men which perish, are chargedwith neglect of salvation, Heb.
2.3. and putting from them the word of eternal life, Acts 13.46. and for not
receiving the truth in the love thereof, that they might be saved, 2 Thessa.
2.10. and for not coming to Christ that they may have life, John 5.40. These
and the like expressions are used, concerning such as neglect and reject the
Gopell; by which it evidently appears, that there was life and salvation in
the Gospel for them; for they could not put that from them, which was never
there for them; Christ would not blame them, for not coming to him that they
might have Life, if there had been no life in him for them if they had come;
and there is life in him for none for whom he did not die; the receiving of no
truth whatsoever would save them, if Christ had not shed his blood for them;
seeing without blood there is no Remission, therefore it is clear that Christ
has given himself to the death for all, and is become a complete means of
life to all.

Object. Christ would not pray for the world, much less would he die for the
same, Joh. 17.9.

For Answer to this Objection, consider these two particulars. First, who they
were that Christ prayed for. Secondly, what it was that Christ prayed for. The
persons for whom Christ prayed, were those whom God had given him out of the
world, verse. the 6. such as had received the word of God, and did know and
believe that he was sent of God, ver. the 8. such as the world did hate, verse
the 14. such as Christ sent out into the world, verse. the 18. whereby it
appears, that the persons prayed for were such as did at that time bebelieve,
and so were given to Christ; for the World loved them as well as others, whilst
they were in unbelief, and were of the World: And it further appears that it
were the Disciples of Christ only, which were there said to be given and prayed
for, if you consider the 12. Verse, Those that thou have given me have I kept,
and none of them is lost but the Son of Perdition; compared with the 20. Verse.
where it is said, Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word; Now Christ needs not to enlarge his prayer,
for those that should afterward believe, if they had been included in the
former words, those which thou have given me, for that would have been a vain
repetition. Secondly, consider what Christ prayed for, (viz) that they might be
one, and that they might be kept from the evil of the World; now Christ did
not desire nor endeavor to make unity between believers and unbelievers, but
the contrary, and there was no need of Christ's prayer, that Unbelievers (though
elect) should be kept from the evil of the World, for the World could not
discern any thing in the Elect (during their unbelief) which should cause them
to have an evil eye toward them; and if by evil we understand the
corruption of the World, then they were of those that made the times corrupt,
and so Christ would have prayed his Father to have delivered them out of the
evil or wickedness of the world, rather then to keep them from it; and so
the reason is evident by what has been said, why Christ excluded the
unbelieving World out of his prayer, seeing he took occasion from the enmity
of the world against his people, to make this prayer unto his Father, which
prayer was in no sense proper for the unbelieving World.

And moreover, he excepted the world in no other respect, but as they were
considered opposing their own Salvation, not that he would not have all to be
saved, but that the World might not prevail against his work in hand, the
divulging of the Gospel, which was to be done by his Disciples; (therefore is
he so earnest for them, that the evil of the world might not prevail over
them in their Ministry in his absence) that thereby the world might know that
he was sent of God, verse. 21. therefore their Salvation was more employed in
these words (I pray not for the World) then their condemnation.

Obj Many men were in Hell that very time that Christ did die, and therefore it
is a foolish thing to think that Christ dyed for them.

First I Answer, that no man is yet in Hell, neither shall any be there until
the Judgment, for God does not hang first, and judge after; and therefore we
see the Scriptures refers the punishment of men until the last day, so Paul
writes to the Thessalouians, seeing (says he) it is a righteous thing with God
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that are
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with
his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and on them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and
to be admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. verse. so
Matthew. 25. when the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all his holy Angels
with him, and shall sit upon the Throne of his glory, then he shall pronounce
the sentence of death on the wicked; Go ye Cursed into everlasting fire, etc.
And that place, Luke 16. where Dives is said to be in Hell fire, is a Parable,
and proves no more that there was any such thing, then that which is written
Judges 9. does prove that the Trees did walk and talk one to another: or that
which is written, 2 Esdras 4. does prove, that the Trees took Council to war
against the Sea, to make them more woods, or the Floods of the Sea to subdue
the Woods of the plain, to make them another Country. And besides, if we
reason from that parable of Dives, that proved his body also to be in Hell,
which all grant to remain in the grave, until the Resurrection. But the scope
and end of a parable is only to be Considered and Reasoned from.

But if it should be granted that many men were in hell at that very time that
Christ dyed, yet were it not a foolish thing to believe that Christ died for
them as some affirm; for Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, and all that grace, means and mercy which God ever since the fall did
extend to Adam and his posterity, was in reference to Christ, and the death of
Christ does declare the righteousness of God in all his love and goodness to
sinful men that are dead, that he was just, though gracious, loving, and
merciful to them.

And besides, seeing that men do likewise affirm, that there were many
righteous in Heaven when Christ dyed, as there were many wicked in Hell; they
may as well affirm it to be a vain thing to believe that Christ dyed for those
that were in Heaven before, as for those that were in Hell before, but neither
of these is true, yet if they were both true, the Objection from thence will
vanish, if we consider that the life and death of all men arises from the well
using or abusing that mercy and favor which is afforded them in reference to
the Blood of Christ.

Obj. If Christ had shed his blood for all, surely he would have afforded the
Gospel; (he would publish this glad tidings) to all, seeing, without faith in
his blood all men shall perish for whom he died, for he that believes not
shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. and there is salvation in no other, neither is
there any other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved,
Acts 4.12. and without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin Romans 14.33.

First I Answer, that Faith in Christ is not required of those that never heard
of Christ: for the justice of Gods mercy, requires no man to do that which is
impossible for him to perform, for in so doing God would be a hard master,
expecting to reap where he has not sown, and to gather where he has not
strawed; now no Man can believe that of which he has not heard, nor never
could, if he be considered in reference to that perfect state and condition
wherein he was made; and if God should condemn men (that never heard of
Christ) for not keeping the Law, then he would require most, where he has
bestowed least, contrary to that which is written, Luke 12.48. where much is
given, much is required, and to that Act. 17.30. where God is said (in the
times of ignorance) to wink at that vanity and superstition, which (upon the
preaching of the Gospel) he required all men every where to repent of. When I
say men shall not be condemned for not keeping the law, my meaning is that they
shall not be condemned because they are not perfectly holy, just and good, as
the Law is, for he that fails in one tittle, is incapable of Justificaon by
the Law, so that the Law condems all men, in that all are sinners; and the Law
admits of no repentance, if it be considered alone without reference to Christ;
yet men are to be judged by the Law, as it is qualified by the love and grace
of God in Christ; so the Jews were to be judged by the Law which was given
them of God; and the Gentiles by the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2.12.
for when God has (by the means which he affords) discovered what is good, and
what is evil, what is just, and what is unjust; if men apply themselves (with
sincerity and uprightness of heart, in love and obedience to God and his
truth) to that which is holy, just, and good, they shall surely be accepted,
for God is no respecter of persons but in every Nation he that fears him and
works righteousness, shall be accepted with him; and the mercy of Gods
Justice, and the Justice of Gods mercy in Christ to lost men, requires of them
according to what he affords them, and not according to what they have not,
although they once had it, and in what he affords them also. If he were not
rich in mercy and ready to pardon, no man would ever be justified or saved by
him: and for that which is written, Mark 16.16. if we take notice of what
precedes, we may easily perceive that these words, he that believes not shall
be damned, have respect only to such as have the gospel preached to them; for
in the former Verse he gives commission to his Disciples to go into all the
World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, and then (when the gospel was
plainly and powerfully declared) he that Believed and was Baptized should be
saved, and he that believed not should be damned; he that believes not shall
be damned, as he that believes not makes God a liar, 1 John. 5.20. now he
that never heard of the Gospel does not make God a liar, though he do not
believe, no more shall that man be condemned for unbelief, that never heard of
the gospel. And for that which is written, Acts the 4.12. that there is
Salvation in non but Christ, and that there is no other name under Heaven given
amongst men, whereby they must be saved; the Apostles were to preach (where
ever they came) Salvation by Christ alone, neither was or is there salvation in
or by any other name, though men might and may be saved by that name that never
came to the knowledge of it: for that Hebr. 11.6. it speaks not of faith in
Christ, but of faith in God; as the latter part of the verse. does evidently
demonstrate, the words are these, for he that comes to God, must believe
that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, so that
without faith in God no man can be saved, for that Romans 14.23. the Apostle
there concludes, that whatever a man acts or performs, conceiving it unlawful,
he sins in what he does, though the thing be lawful in it self, (and might be
done by a man that had knowledge) as that was which Paul spoke of in that
place: but the place speaks not of faith in Christ, only it would have men to
be fully persuaded in their hearts of the lawfullnes of what they do, and
likewise to refrain things lawful in themselves, rather then to be a
stumbling block to their weak Brother: and so much for this Objection.

Object. Christ dyed for all, but not intentionally, he taking the nature of
man upon him, his death must needs extend to all of that nature in the
sufficiency of it; but neither God in giving Christ, nor Christ in giving
himself, ever intended the benefits of his death, remission of sins and
eternal life to any, but the Elect.

Answ. First I answer by way of concession, that God never intended the
benefits of Christ's death to any but the Elect if we take Election according to
the Scriptures, for it is the will of the Father that those, and none but those
that believe should have eternal life, and believers only are the objects and
Subjects of Gods Election: for Election looks not on men in Adam, but in
Christ. I speak only of such as have the Gospel plainly and powerfully
preached to them: but seeing most men do conceive that God does elect some men
to life in unbelief, and leaves the rest, we shall state the Question thus:
Whether God did ever really intend that those men which perish and are damned,
should have believed, and so have come to life? And to this I answer
affirmatively, for it was showed before that God commanded all men to believe
in his Son that they might be saved. Mark. 16.15, 16. Ioh 12.36.37. That he
threatens all those which believe not with everlasting destruction from his
presence, and the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.7, 8. and that because they
belive not, Joh. 3.18. and because they received not the truth in the love
thereof, that they might besaved, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, as 2
These. 2.10.12. That he pittieth those that perish through the abuse of his
grace extended toward them, Psalm. 81.8.13. Matthew. 23.37. Luke 19.41.42.
Therefore it evidently appears that he intended the benefits of his death
(viz.) remission of sins, and eternal life to those, who by trusting inlying
vanities, for sake their own mercies, Jonah 2.8. and drawing back to perdition,
Heb. 10 39. as well as to those, who believe to the saving of their souls, Heb.
10.39. But yet further consider these Scriptures, Joh. 3.17. God sent not his
Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might
be saved, This Scripture which sets forth the act of Gods love in sending his
Son into the World, declares also his end and intention therein negatively,
not to condemn the World affirmatively, but that the World through him might
be saved. Again, John. 12.47. If any man hear my words and believe not, Judge
him not, for I came not into the world to judge the world, but to save the
World. Why will not Christ judge those men that hear his words and believe
not? because he came to save them. Again, Ioh. 5.34.40. Christ speaking to the
obstinate Jews says unto them, these things speak I unto you, (for what end)
that ye may be saved: And ye will not come to me that ye may have life,
Neither does Christ herein expresle his own desires and intentions of the
salvation of those obstinate Jews, but the will and intention of his Father
also, For he came not down from Heaven to do his own will, but the will of
the Father which sent him: therefore it appears that as the death of Christ
was extended to all, so likewise the benefits thereof were both by the Father
and the Son intended for all.

Object. If God sent his Son, and it be his desire to save all men, and yet all
men are not saved, then God misseth his end and is disappointed of his desire,
which is very unsuiteable to him.

Answ. If God had sent his Son with an absolute and peremptory resolution to
save all men, whether they did receive him or reject him, then all must be
saved, or God disappointed, which cannot be, for he does whatsoever he will,
and if he work in this sense who can hinder? but God in sending of his Son
did intend he should be a sufficient means to save all; and so to save them if
they did not resist and despise this grace of his, which if they did, he
resolved to condemn them, and not to save them by his Son.

And whereas it is said that God is unwilling that any should perish, and that
he desires the salvation of all; I conceive it is thus to be understood, he is
not willing that any should perish for want of sufficient means of recovery,
and he desires the salvation of all as they are in a lost condition, unable to
help themselves: but not as they are considered malicious contemnen of all
grace and savor, means and mercies, for that were to set his attributes at
variance and divide God in himself; the mercy of whose justice is to afford
means of help to that which cannot help it self, and the justice of whose
mercy is to condemn him that refuses such help, and to save him that
receives it; so that his mercy cannot desire the salvation of all, but his
justice must afford the means of accomplishment; and when his justice affords
means, his mercy is said to desire, for as what men desire, they use means to
accomplish, so what God uses means to accomplish he is said to desire; neither
is God disappointed if men neglect this means, for the justice of Gods mercy
is to render to every man according to his deeds, whether good or evil; as the
mercy of his justice is to provide means of life or salvation, so that God is
not disappointed in the condemnation of any, for his mercy affords them
means, and his justice condemns them for contempt thereof, so that as God
cannot work against himself so therein he is neither crossed nor contradicted,
but remains in his attributes entire and complete.

The next thing I shall speak of, is the sufficiency of the means of grace, or
the sufficiency of the means which God affords to work grace or faith in
every man; That the Gospel was never published to men with plainness and
power, but they were thereby enabled to believe and yield obedience

That God does enlighten, invite, persuade and draw all men to himself so
far, and so sufficiently, that did they improve the Talent and price that God
puts into their hands they should certainly come to life and glory.

It will be needful (before I proceed further) to declare what I mean by
grace, and what I mean by the sufficiency of the means of grace. Grace I
conceive to be an humble and thankful apprehension of the free love, favor,
and goodness of God: and when I speak of the sufficiency of the means which
God affoords to work grace in every man: I mean that God (by one means or
other) does discover himself to every man to be good and gracious. Now whereas
it is urged, that men cannot believe, they that so affirm say in effect that
men have no ground to believe; for did they apprehend a ground for faith, they
would never persuade themselves nor others that they could not believe: but if
they would have men to believe that the truth of which they cannot evidence or
demonstrate to them, then it is a very proper and ready way for them to
anticipate their understandings, and prevent them from inquiry, by telling them
that they cannot believe, and that faith is beyond reason, and that God must
persuade their hearts, and so cause them to cease to exercise their
understandings, that they may work their affections to receive and embrace it
upon trust: and when they have so done, to tell them that God has persuaded
their hearts. Men say that faith is supernatural, but how can it be above
nature to believe that which we see sufficient ground to believe; and to
believe any thing, of which we have no plain ground and reason, is so far from
being above nature, that it is below it, and proper to fools, and not to
reasonable men. It is true, that faith is the evidence or assurance of things
not seen, but the certainty of the things not seen, must be evidenced or
manifested to us by things that do appear, or we cannot believe them: the
means of grace which we now have, is not so great, nor so clear, as the
means which was afforded in the time of Christ and his Apostles; and some
others enjoy not so great means as we: but God requires of every man according
to what he has, and not according to what he has not. When the Author to the
Hebrews does declare to the Jews the danger of neglecting the Gospel, he
urges it from this Reason, that it was evidently declared and confirmed to
them, being first spoken by the Lord himself, and then confirmed to them by
those which heard him, God also bearing them witness (that they spoke truth)
with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Spirit,
according to his own will. Now how can we think that those men could not
believe that had the Gospel so evidenced and confirmed before their eyes; or
how could the signs and miracles be an aggravation of their sin in not
believing, if they had not been a sufficient means to procure their believing;
and if they were a sufficient means it must be so in reference to their
natural faculties; as Act. 8.16. the Samaritans gave heed with one accord to
the things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.
And again, Acts 9.33.34.35. When Peter had healed Aeneas, who had been sick
of the Palsy eight years, all that dwelt at Lidda and Saron saw him, and
turned to the Lord. Again, when Peter raised Dorcas from the dead, it was
known throughout all Ioppa, and many believed in the Lord, verse. 42. and
therefore the Disciples (which Christ sent out to preach) were commanded to
tarry in Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high, Luke 24.49.
which power was, the gifts of the holy Spirit enabling them by signs and
miracles, to evidence and demonstrate to every man's understanding and
conscience (where they came) the truth of the things they declared; as Acts
1.4.5.8. compared with chap. 2. verse. 3.4. so that with great power did the
Lord give witness to the things spoken by Christ and his messengers, which
miracles had been needless, if faith had been a supernatural gift immediately
infused by God. We have the Scriptures, we see the wonderful works of God, and
partake of his goodness every moment, and yet can we not believe, and from
thence be persuaded to love, serve, and obey the Lord? to love, serve, and obey
him, I say; for to believe that Christ was sent of God to dye for our sins,
or to believe God to be good and gracious, if I am not thereby persuaded to
love, serve, and obey him, my faith is nothing, it is dead being alone. Now let
us further consider what is written Romans 10.14. how shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and
how shall they preach except they be sent? plainly intimating, that there is a
possibility for men to believe in Christ, when they hear him preached by the
Messengers of God, and therefore in the 17. verse he concludes that faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; so the gospel is termed the Word
of faith, Romans 10.8. the preaching of the gospel the preaching of faith, Gal.
1.23. hearing of the gospel the hearing of faith preached, Gal. 3.2.5. and when
the gospel was preached to the gentiles, God is said to have opend the door of
faith unto them, Acts 14.27. and where God affoords the gospel he affoords
faith, as Paul speaks in the like case Act. 17.31. whereof he has afforded
faith to all men etc.

Again, the gospel is termed the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. the
power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.18.24. and God is said to save
those which believe by the foolishness of preaching verse. 21. Now if the Word
of God, the gospel, be declared unto men, and yet they thereby not enabled to
believe, then how is it the power of God to their salvation? they being to
perish if they believe not, Mark 16.16. for that means which is the power of
God to an end, must needs be sufficient for that end.

Oh. You see it was not sufficient, for all did not believe.

Ans. It was powerful enough to enable all that heard, to believe, and yield
obedience to it; and so powerful in none that it was impossible they should
reject it, and so the same means which proves inefectuall to one, may cause
another to believe, as appears, Mat. 11.21.

Object. It is the power of God only to those that are called, 1 Cor. 1.24.

Answ. Paul speaks in this place, what acceptance the gospel had amongst the
sons of men, how different their thoughts were of it, in the 18. verse he
says, it is to them that perish foolishness, to us which are saved the power
of God. In the 23.24. verses he says, the unbelieving Jews did stumble at it,
and the unbelieving Greeks accounted it foolishness, but the believing both
of Jews and Greeks, did esteem it the wildome of God, and the power of God:
the unbelievers did not esteem rightly of it, the believers did; but if the
gospel were the power of God only to believers, and to unbelievers a dead
Letter, then unbelievers were as right in their thoughts (to whom it was
foolishness) as Believers to whom it was the wisdom and power of God: yea it
had bin foolishness in unbelievers to have esteemed it any other then
foolishnes in point of their salvation, as a means unto which end it was
propounded to them: for their condition was more desperate considered with this
means then before, it being unable to bring them to faith, and so to life, and
yet bringing condemnation on them for their unbelief, 2 These. 1.8.

Again, God upbraids one people with another, Mat. 11.20.21.22. then began he
to upbraid those Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because
they repented not; We untothee Corazin, and woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if
the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon,
they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes; but I say unto you,
it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of Judgment, then
for you, etc

Now God would not upbraid one people with another, if there were some special
means afforded to the one and not to the other, (which made all the
difference) for without that means, then Tire and Sidon could not repent, and
with it Corazin and Bethsaida could not but repent; but the words do plainly
manifest, that the same means that was afforded to Corazin and Bethsaida, (who
repented not) would have caused Tire and Sidon to repent, and thereupon Christ
upbraids those Cities.

Again Romans 2.4, 5. The Apostle has these words, despisest thou the riches
of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance, etc. Whereby we see that God
labors by the riches of his goodness, forbearance and long suffering, to lead
those men to repentance, which notwithstanding treasure up to themselves wrath,
against the day of wrath. Now it is a vain thing (and far from God) to
exercise forbearance, and long suffering in expectation of impossibilities, to
wait when the Creature will do that which is impossible for him to perform;
and then the forbearance of God could not (in any sense) be said to lead
wicked men to repentance, but to destruction and ruin, for if God forbear
never so long they cannot repent, and the wrath of God comes on them for
despising his patience and forbearance and so the for bearance of God, (instead
of being rich in goodness) is rendered by this doctrine, rich in wrath, in fire
and brimstone; and such goodness might well be despised. If a Prince should make
great and rich promises to a subject, if he would run a hundred miles in one
hour, and withal threaten to inflict some heavy punishment on him if he do
it not, when he knew it impossible for him ever to run twenty, and then to
wait many days on him for his performance; he in his punishment being to pay
for every hours forbearance, if in the end he did it not, might not such
pretended goodness well be despised, and he also that should pretend it to be
goodness. But I say it is evident by the forenamed place, that whilst God did
exercise his goodness, long-suffering and forbearance toward them, they might
have repented, and therefore the wrath and indignation of God comes on them,
for not obeying the truth, but obeying unrighteousnes, verse the 8.

Again, if the gospel were not sufficient to enable men to believe, then it
were as weak (in point of Salvation) as the Law, for the Law was holy, just,
and good, Romans 7.12. and if it could have given life, righteousness should have
been by it, Gal. 3.21. but none could be justified by the deeds of the Law,
Gal. 3.11, 12. because it was weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3. Now that which
was impossible to the Law being weak (not in it self) but through the
weakness of the flesh, GOD sending his Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh to die for sin, thereby condemning sin in the flesh, and supplied
that weakness of men in the flesh, and so made the way by faith to salvation
feasible to the Sons of men, verse. 3,4. and Gal. 3.22.24. The ministry of the
Law is termed, the ministry of the Letter, of death of condemnation; the
ministry of the Gospel is termed, the ministry of the Spirit, of life, of
righteousness, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. Now these different terms do evidently
demonstrate, that righteousness, life, and salvation, which was impossible for
men (in respect of their weakness) to attain by the Law, is made possible by
the gospel, notwithstanding their weakness; and if men in the state of nature
were unable to believe the gospel when they hear it preached by the Ministers
of Christ, then it would be the Ministry of life and righteousness no more
then the Law was, for the Law was not the Ministry of death in respect of it
self (for Moses describes the righteousness of the law, that the man which
does these things shall live by them, Romans 10.5.) but in respect of the
weakness of men to perform it; and Paul putting the gospel in opposition to
the law, says, that the righteousness of faith speaks on this wise, say not
in thy heart who shall ascend into Heaven (that is to bring Christ down from
above) or who shall descend into the deep (that is, to bring up Christ again
from the dead) but what says it, the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and
in thy heart; that is, the word of faith which we preach, that if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, verse 6, 7, 8 9. but if men
could not believe it when it was preached to them, it could not be said to be
nigh them, but as unpossible, and as far out of their power, as it would be
for them to ascend up to Heaven to bring Christ from above; or descend into the
deep, to bring up Christ again from the dead. And whereas it is said to be
nigh, it might be more properly said to be far off: so then the gospel is the
Ministry of life, not in it self only, but in respect of men's power to
believe it when it is preached, or declared to them; otherwise it would be all
one to be under the Law and under grace, neither would the Gospel bring
salvation any more then the law, Tit. 2.11. but would unavoydably cause wrath
to come upon the sons of men, as the Law did, Romans 4.15. and would leave them
under the dominion of sin as the Law did, Romans 6 14. for as the Law threatened
death, so does the gospel, Mark 16.16. and the same power which God puts forth
(as is conceived) to enable men to believe, would have enabled them to keep
the Law; For it is conceived that (besides the preaching of the gospel and Gods
bearing witness to it, by signs and wonders) there was a special and
almighty power, exercised by God in all them that did believe, which power (I
say) would have enabled them to keep the Law, so that there would be no
difference between the Law and the gospel, and so Christ died in vain, Gal.
2.21.

Again God in the Ministry of the Gospel, called all men every where to
repent, Act. 17.30 To believe and yield obedience to the Gospel upon pain of
eternal death, Mark. 16.16 Ioh. 12.48. 1 These. 1.8.2. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 2.3. 10
28 29. 1 Ioh. 5.10. Ioh. 3.18.36. Romans 2.45. Now I cannot see how it can stand
with that goodness and sweetness which dwells in God, and that fullness and
riches of mercies which the Scriptures manifest to be in him, to require
impossibilities of his creatures, and then in flaming fire to render vengeance
to them for not performance.

Ob^ect. God may do whatever he will, and who shall question him.

Answ. It Is true, God may do whatever he will, but he will do all things like
himself, suiteable to his nature. For though God be infinite in power, yet is
his power so full of goodness, that it can effect nothing which is not agreeable
to his goodness; and those that advance the power of God without his goodness,
do deny both his power and goodness: Now he proclaims himself in his Word to
be love to the Sons of men love in the abstract to those which do neither love
him nor know him, 1 Ioh. 4.8. gracious, long suffering, abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, etc. Exodus 34.6, 7. Jonah 4.2. Numb.
14.18. Slow to anger and plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 103.8. ready to pardon, and
of great kindness, Nehemiah 9.17 31. full of compassion, Psalm. 86.15. he
delights to exercise loving kindness, Jer. 9.24. with him is mercy, Nehem.
13.22, Psalm. 57.10.117.2. 2 Samuel 24.14. 1 Chronicles. 21.13. Psalm. 119.156. Dan
9.18. great goodness, Nehemiah 9.25.35. multitude of mercies, Psalm.
5.7.106.7.45. manifold mercies, Nehem. 9.10.27. Lam. 3.32. a multitude of
tender mercies, Psalm. 51.1.69.1. he is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. abundant in
mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3. he delights in mercy, Mich. 7.18. his tender mercies are
over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. the earth is full of his mercy, Psalm. 119.64.
he has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, Ezekiel. 18.32. on the death
of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.11. but that they should turn and live, ver. 11. he is
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2
Pet. 3.9. he would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth,
1 Timothy 2.4. Here is a cloud of witnesses of the riches of the grace and love of
God to lost men, to miserable men, and all the proceedings of God with his
creatures, are agreeable to it: but how unsuteable hereunto it would be for him
to require impossibilities of them upon pain of eternal death in Hell fire, I
leave the Reader to judge.

Object. God is good and merciful to lost men, in that he sends them Rain and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with joy and gladness; Act. 14.^7. in
that he bestows many outward mercies on them, and uses much outward means
with them, though he afford them not means sufficient to enable them to believe
and live acceptably in the use of all.

Answ God requires these men to employ all the mercies they receive in his
service To feed the hungry, cloth the naked, visit the sick. Marth. 25.42.43
he requires an improvement of every Talent that he delivers to them. Mat. 25
27.30. and as God accepts according to what men have, 2 Cor. 8.12. so will he
judge men according to what they have received from him, where he gives much,
he will require much Luke 12.48. and God requires inward and cordial
obedience, where he affords such mercies and means, (as men call outward
mercies) which they not performing, the curse of God is pronounced against
them, and so the more mercies, and the more means they have had here, the
greater miseries; and the greater torments hereafter, the sweeter the
blessings, the more bitter the cursings for ever, every short and fading mercy,
proves a lasting and eternal misery, yea Christ himself the gift of God, the
mercy of mercies, is to such men (according to this Objection) the greatest of
all miseries, and that of invincible and unavoydable necessity, now that is
strange mercy and goodness which does unavoidably bring misery on them that
receive it, that man is most happy that partakes least of it, there being no
fruit to be had therein, seeing the end thereof is death.

Object. God required men to keep the Law, which they could not do, and yet
he was as full of love and grace then as now.

Answ. The Covenant of God in Christ was confirmed four hundred and thirty
years before the Law was given, Gal. 3.17. Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness, Genesis 15.6. Rom 4.3. Neither did the
coming in of the Law make void the promise, Gal. 3.17. but still men were
justified by faith, during the time of the Law, now the Law was holy just and
good, Romans 7.12. and God made man just and good, Eccles 7.29. Genesis 1.31. but
he falling in Adam from that primitive purity and perfection, became prone to
all kind of evil, and subject to death. Now the Law did not bring death upon
us, but did discover what we were liable to if it had never bin given, it did
manifest what the Law of our creation did require: It was not ordained to
drown men in Hell, but to drive them to Christ, Gal. 3.24. It was added
because of transgression, Gal. 3.19. to keep from sin, to discover sin^ to show
us our weakness, and inability to stand before God in our own righteousness,
Romans 3.19, 20 23. (least we should trust in our selves and be deceived) that
so we might trust in the mercy and grace of God alone, so that Gods end in
giving the Law was full of love and goodness The Law was never alone in the
World that a man must needs have stood or fell to that Master. We might have
appealed from the Law to the gospel; but there is no appeal from the gospel;
the Law did only pronounce that death upon us which we were liable to before
it was given, but the gospel pronounces eternal death in Hell fire on those
that obey is not, which punishment we were not liable to, either in relation
to Adams sin, or the Law: for the sentence on Adam was, In dying thou shall dye
the death, Genesis 2.17. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, and so
death passed over all men, Romans 5.12. Chap. 3.19. And the Law went no further,
as the Scriptures do evidently manifest, where the penalties of the Law are
expressed. Not that I do conceive that wicked men which dyed under the law
shall escape the judgment of Hell, but the Law will not pronounce it on them,
but the gospel, Romans 2.16. For to love God with all our hearts, and our
neighbor as our selves, was the substance of the Law. Now though men could not
perform this so, as to be justified in relation to the Law, yet they might so
perform it as to be righteous in relation to the gospel and grace of God in
Christ, even in the time of the Law. Now that we were not to have perished in
Hell fire in relation to Adams sin or the Law. Consider, we all dyed in Adam,
and Christ to redeem (nor to prevent) us from death, suffered death, he hung
on a Tree and so was made a curse for us, and delivered us from the curse of
the Law, Gal. 3.13. Deuteronomy. 21 23. That we through him might receive the
blessing, Gal. 3.14. And if we had bin to suffer in Hell in relation to Adam
or the Law, then Christ also should have suffered in Hell for us, to have
redeemed us from thence, which he did not: The resurrection of the dead comes
by Christ, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. who by death overcame him that had the power of
death, Heb. 2.14. So that we should for ever have perished in the grave (had
not Christ dyed and rose again) and never have risen from the dead, to receive
the sentence of a second death. And this may serve for answer to this Objection
about our inability, (and Gods requiring of us) to keep the Law.

Again, if the most of men where the Gospel came were unable to believe, then
the Gospel or Christ crucified could not be a Gospel of grace, bringing
salvation to all men, Tit. 2.11. and 3 4. nor glad tidings of great joy to all
people, Luke 2.10, 11. For if men could have no benefit by Christ unless they
came to him, and their condemnation were aggravated for not coming, and God
gave them not where with all to come, the case (I say being so with the most of
them) the love of God toward them in the Gospel was no other then such as the
charity which James speaks of, Iam. 2.15, 16. If a Brother or a Sister be naked
and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be
ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye give them not those things that are
needful to the body, what does it profit? Now if God injoined them to love in
deed and in truth and not in word and in tongue, 1 John, 3.18. It is far from
God himself so to do, if he would not have us to bid a man be clothed and
warmed, and not give him wherewithal, how much less will he in the gospel of
his love and grace to the Sons of Men, bid them to repent and believe that they
may be saved, and give them not wherewithal? Yea further, where it is said,
God so loved the World, Joh. 3.16. It were then more proper to say, God so
hated the world, and whereas God proclaims himself in the gospel to be love,
to be gracious and merciful to lost men, this Doctrine proclaims him to be
wrath, hatred, anger, etc. to the Sons of men, for if salvation were not to be
had by Christ, but through faith, and condemnation came upon them through
unbelief, and the condition of men were such, that they could not believe, and
God afforded them no power, then the eternal ruin and damnation of the most
part of them, was an inevitable effect of the death of Christ, so that this
Doctrine tends to the subversion of the free grace of God in the gospel.

Again, God sent his Son, and the Son in obedience to the Father came to
save men, even those which perish, Ioh. 3.17.12.47. Act. 3 26. now it were
absurd to think that Christ was sent, and came to do that, which being come
he used not means sufficient to accomplish: for that were to deny the wisdom
of God, which always makes choice and use of means sufficient to effect the
ends proposed by it; yet this must needs be concluded, if men could not believe
the gospel when it was preached and published to them by Christ, for faith is
held as absolutely necessary to salvation as the blood of Christ, (seeing God
requires those that hear the gospel, to believe it, upon pain of condemnation
in hell fire:) now if Christ has given himself for any, to whom he has not
given means sufficient to beget faith their condition is as desperate as if he
had never given himself for them, according to the old Proverb, As good
nothing as never the nearer: for if I know two things, equally and individually
absolute by me to be performed, to effect one and the same end, if I do the
one, and leave the other undone, it is as impossible the thing should be
effected, as if I had done nothing at all: but when ever God propounds means
to effect an end, the means is sufficient to accomplish the same: But God did
propound means to save those which notwithstanding did perish; Therefore the
means used was sufficient to accomplish their salvation, though they perished
through the wilful neglect of it, Ioh. 5.34.40. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. but if all the
means used with those that perish were insufficient to save them, then the end
of God in using the means could not be to save them, as the Scriptures plainly
declare it was; for that end which the means cannot possibly produce, cannot be
the end of God in the means; and seeing God having sent his Son, requires all
men (unto whom he is preached with power) to believe upon pain of damnation in
hell, it being unpossible for the most of those that hear him preached to
believe; hellfire must needs follow the giving of Christ (as has been already
declared;) and therefore the ruin and destruction of the most of men may be
more truly and properly said to be Gods end in giving Christ unto them
(according to this doctrine) then the salvation of them, as the Scriptures
evidently demonstrate.

Again, men are charged with the neglect of salvation; now, how can that be
neglected which was impossible to be obtained?

Again, those that reject the gospel, or means of grace, are said to be
guilty of the blood of their souls, Act. 18.6. whereas if the means used with
them were not every way sufficient to bring them to life, their rejecting of it
could not make them guilty of their own death and ruin.

Again, God bemoanes and laments men that perish, because they did not make use
of the means which he affoorded them for their recovery: O that my people had
hearkened unto me, and that Israel had walked in my ways; but my people would
not hearken unto me, and Israel would none of me, Psalm. 81. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? Jer. 13.27. O that thou had
known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace; how often would I
have gathered thy children as a hen gathers her chickens, and ye would not?
Luke 19.41, 42. Matthew. 23.37. These things have I spoken unto you that ye might
be saved, and ye will not come unto me that ye may have life. Joh. 5.34.40 yea,
moreover God protests and swears, that he has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, Ezech. 33.11. in the death of him that dies, Ezech. 18.32. Now what
can uphold the sincerity of God (which were blasphemy to question) in these
lamentations, protestations, and professions, less then an endeavor by a
means sufficient to save them.

Ob. This is to overthrow free grace.

Ans. I do not hold it less free because I hold it more full; neither can I
conceive how it can be thought the less free to any man, because it is
extended to every man, unless his eye be evil because God is good; I conceive
this does advance free grace upon the throne of its glory proclaiming and
discovering God gracious and merciful to all the sons of men, thereby to beget
in them good thoughts of God, and to cause them to comprehend and confide in
his love.

Ob. This is to advance the creature, and to give him occasion of boasting.

Ans. This objection deceives many simple-hearted and well-meaning people,
because it has a specious pretense of humility, in advancing God, and throwing
down the creature, though in truth it dishonors God, and fills men with
pride and vanity. The Scribes and Pharisees would pay tithes of Mint, Annise,
and Cummin, and neglect Judgment, Mercy, and Faith; so many men boast (and no
more but boast) of making themselves nothing, whilst they overthrow the
justice, mercy, and faith of God, they strain at a gnat (yea at a shadow) and
swallow a Camel: for i deny the creature to have any thing but what he
receives of God, and boasting is proper for him that has something which he
has not received, 1 Cor. 4.7. Christ (I say) who is the object of faith, is
the gift of God and the gospel (which is the means of faith) is of God, and
what the creature is he is of God; now seeing what the creature has and is, he
thus receives of God, there is no ground of boasting, or of this objection.

Again Luke 17.10. Christ tells his Disciples, He that has nothing but what
he has received, and does nothing but his duty, has no ground to boast of
what he has, or of what he does.
that when they had done all those things that were commanded them, they should
say, they were unprofitable servants, they had done that which was their duty
to do; plainly intimating that no man has ground to boast that does nothing
but his duty.

Ob. Though what I have, I have of God, yet seeing another man has received as
much as I which man believes not, or does not obey, I may thank my self that
I believe, or do obey.

Ans. This conclusion seems very strange, as though grace received were no
grace, if there were a possibility in the receiver to have rejected, resisted,
or abused it, when it was manifested or declared.

Again, whence is it that it is so hard and difficult for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven? Mark 10.23. for if God does so work in men both
to will and to do, that they are altogether passive, (as men generally
conceive) then it was as easy for a rich man to receive and obey the gospel,
as a poor man; for, as David speaks of darkness, that it hides not from God,
but that the night shines as the day and that darkness and light are both
alike to him, Psalm. 139.12. so may I say in this case, that if it be that
Almighty power which raised Christ from the dead, which is exercised in a
special manner toward every one that believes (as is usually urged from Romans
8.11.) then riches and poverty are both alike to it, and it is as easy for one
to enter into the Kingdom of heaven as the other; for without this special
grace (say they) (not the common and ordinary means which he affoords all men
where the gospel is preached) we may as well raise our selves from the dead as
believe the gospel: and with this special grace and almighty power we cannot
but believe and yield obedience to the truth Now seeing that where God is the
sole agent, all things are alike easy to be performed, what life remains
there in the words of Christ according to this doctrine) but we may see in the
history, that this young man came to Christ with strong desires and affections
to attain eternal life, for he came running, and kneeled down to him, and
asked him, saying, good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal
life, verse. 17. Christ answers him, Do not commit adultery, do not kill,
do not steal, do not bear false witness; honor thy father and mother,
verse. 19. the young man replies, that he had observed all these from his youth,
verse. 20. and the Scripture says, that Christ beholding him loved him, and
said unto him, one thing thou lackest, goo thy way, sell whatsoever thou have
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; and come take up
thy cross and follow me, verse. 21. But the young man was sad at this saying,
and went away grieved, for he had great possessions, verse. 22. whereupon
Christ tells his disciples, that it was difficult thing for a rish man to enter
into the King dome of God, verse. 23. the reason is, because whosoever will be
his disciple must forsake all, and follow him, Luke 14.33. whosoever will
partake of heavenly treasure must part with all his earthly, Mark 10.21. as
Peter and the rest of the Disciples had done, verse. 28. doubtless the young
man would have parted with much for Christ, but this word All, spoils all; it
being a very hard thing for him that has much, to forsake all.

Again, God forbids men to have respect of persons in judgment, Prove. 24.23.
Deuteronomy. 1.16.17.19. Levit. 19.15. and he declares in his word, that he will
Judge every man according to his works, Prove. 24.12. Job 34.11. Psalm. 62.12.
Jer. 32.19. Romans 2.6. Rev. 22.12. without respect of persons, Col. 3.25. as
Peter writes unto Believers, in the 1 Pet. 1.17. and he that will give
righteousness, judgment, without respect of persons, must consider every
circumstance, he must consider the means and opportunities to do, or not to
do, as well as the thing done or not done, and accordingly Christ in the
parable does as much commend him, that by two talents had got other two, as he
that by five had got five, because they were alike profitable according to the
price that was put into their hands: But if God give faith to one man and not
to another, and yet require faith of both alike at the day of Judgment; if God
open one man's eyes to see, his ears to hear, and overpower his heart to the
obedience of his will; and so leaves the other, that he can neither see, hear,
nor be obedient, and then require obedience from both alike at the day of
Judgment; how then does God Judge without respect of persons? he might then
be said to judge men according to his own work, but not according to their
works, as in Mat. 25.35. and in diverse other places he is said to do. The
Saints are promised to walk with Christ in white, for they are worthy, Rev.
3.4. those that endure tribulations and persecutions for Christ's sake, God
accounts them worthy of his Kingdom, 2 These. 1.5. and of the world to come,
Luke 20.35. and to escape the evils which shall overtake the wicked, Chapt.
21.36. not that they merit or deserve any thing at the hands of God, for when
they have done all, they arebut unprofitable servants, they have done but what
was their duty to do; Luke 17.10. but God is pleased to account themworthy,
they being worthy only comparatively, being compared with the wicked, covetous,
unbelieving, etc. whom the Scripture calls unworthy, Mat. 10.37.22.8. of good,
and worthy of evil, Rev. 16.6, and therefore Paul says to the Saints, it is a
just thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them which trouble you, and
to you that are troubled rest with us, 2 These. 1.6, 7. but if that special
power which God puts forth to the one and not to the other make all the
difference, then no man is more worthy or unworthy then another, for if he
whcih now perishes for his disobedience, had partaken of that special grace
of God, he would have been obedient and so have been saved; and he that was
obedient, if he had had no more means then the other, he would have bin
altogether as wicked as he; so then consider the thing done or not done, with
the means afforded, and all men are alike worthy both of Heaven and Hell, for
there being no difference between them, but what God himself has wrought,
there can be no difference in their sentence, if they be judged according to
their works, and God will do nothing which shall be any way unsuitable to
that righteousness and impartiality which he professes that he does and will
exercise toward the sons of men.

Again Proverbes 1.20. wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the
streots, she cries in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the
Gates in the City, she opens her words, saying, how long ye simple ones
will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools
hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof; behold I will pour out my spirit
unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I have called, and ye
rofused: I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at
naught all my counsel, and would nene of my repooofe: I also will laugh at
your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind, when distress and
anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, for that they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
Counsel, they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own devices; for the turning away,
or ease of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall
destroy them; but who so hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil. In these words, first we perceive that wisdom cries
to simple ones, scorners, and fools, which hate knowledge, to turn from their
folly at her reproof, and withal promises to pour out her spirit upon them,
and make known her words unto them; now if these men were deaf and could not
hear, it were a vain thing for wisdom to cry and utter her voice; If they
were so simple, such fools, that could not understand what Wisdom spoke,
without some other power, then the question was not proper to be demanded of
them, how long they would love simplicity, delight in scorning, and hate
knowledge, for they must of necessity love simplicity, and hate knowledge,
until God change their hearts: but in the 24 verse. Wisdom begins to threaten
them, because they refused her call, regarded not the stretching out of her
hand, set at naught all her Counsel, and would none of her reproof; that she
would laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes, etc. Now
what ground has Wisdom to be thus offended with these simple ones for
refusing her call, seeing they could not hear it? for not regarding the
stretching out of her hand, they not perceiving it? and for setting at naught
that counsel and reproof of hers, which counseled them being dead and not
able to stir to turn from folly to wisdom, without inabling them so to do.
And whereas some conceive that they are cried upon, and that wisdom is
offended with them in relation towhat they had bestowed on them in Adam; 'its
plain that she cries upon them in relation to the means and ability, which
she afforded them, being simple ones and fallen, and thereupon does she
manifest her indignation because they did hate knowledge, and when wisdom and
folly was before them, did choose or prefer folly before wisdom, they
despised her counsel, loved their own ways and devices, until their
prosperity brought them to ruin and destruction. And besides the consideration
of what they had received before they were fallen, makes wisdoms calling and
crying on them being fallen, nevertheless vain, for it could not effect the
end proposed, their turning from folly, neither did it give her any further
ground of anger, or displeasure, then what she had before this means was used
with them, for this means was no means in respect to their present condition,
therefore it could bring no guilt on them in respect to their present condition.

Again, God calls all men every where to Repent, Act. 17.30. Christ promised
to draw all men to himself, Joh. 12.32. he is the true light that lights
every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.4.9. did God call and men not
able to hear? does Christ enlighten, and men unable to see? did he draw and
yet was it impossible for men to come? And the Objection which is usually made
(that these and such like expressions are meant only of the outward means which
God affords) is to no purpose, for when God persuades, or draws any man to
himself, he does it in a ration all way and whether the reasons, motives, or
arguments are presented to the mind, through the ear, or through the eye, or
through neither of these, the arguments are the same, neither more nor less
powerful, and these dispositions, inclinations and persuasions which men so
much plead for (as the powerful workings of Gods spirit in them) yet thinking
it unreasonable to have a reason demanded of them, are but dreams and
delusions, for God would have no man to step one foot for him but upon
rational grounds, he would have men to do nothing, believe nothing, hope for
nothing but what they see ground and reason to do, believe, and hope for; else
how should they be able to give a reason of the hope that is in them to every
man that shall ask it of them, 1 Pet. 3.15. When Abraham was promised a
numerous seed, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about 100.
years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb, he staggered not at the
promise through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and all
from this rational consideration or conclusion, that what God had promised he
was able to persorme, Romans 4.19, 20, 21. So also when he was commanded to offen
up his Son Isaac, the child of promise, in whom his seed was to be called;
yet he does it readily, from this rational consideration, that God was able to
raise him up even from the dead, from whence also he had received him in a
figure, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. The service of God is a reasonable service, Romans
12.1. and Christ tells the jews that if he had not done amongst them the works
which none other man did, they had not been to blame in not believing in him,
Joh. 15.24. and therefore their condemnation lay in this, that they had seen
and yet hated him and his Father: when Christ blames the unbelief of his
Disciples, Mat. 16.8. he does it by argument and reason, O ye of little faith,
why reason ye amongst your selves because ye have brought no bread, do ye
not understand nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many
Baskets full took ye up? neither the seven of the four thousand, and how many
Baskets ye took up? how is it that ye understand not that I speak not to you
concerning bread? when God would persuade his servants to rest on him for Food
and Raiment, he bids them to consider how God feeds the fowls of the air, and
how he clothes the grass of the field; when we are affrighted with our
adversaries, he sets before us their vanity, and his almighty power, Isa.
51.12, 13. thus I say God does always endeavor to establish men upon sound
and solid arguments to work on their judgments, not on their fancies, and God
speaks not to men in a Language which they do not understand, and so only
makes a noise in their ears, but in a language which is plain, easy, and
very suitable to them, which will manifest it self to their hearts and
consciences, and prevail with them if they do not resist and rebel against it.

If these men which perished in unbelief in the midst of means, were dead and
blind in such sort as men generally conceive they are, how could they then be
said to cloze their eyes lest they should see, who were altogether blind in
respect of the object they did shut their eyes against? or how could they
harden their hearts against the truth, if the truth did not manifest it self
unto, or strive with their hearts? how could their evil and sinful hearts
hate the light, if they did not discover the purity of it? Joh. 3.19, 20. It
were a needles thing for Satan to blind the eyes of natural men, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should shine unto them, if they
had no eyes to see and receive this glorious light of the gospel when it was
declared to them; for if it were impossible for men to receive the light of the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ when it was preached to them, then they were as
blind as the Devil could make them in point of receiving the gospel, and the
Devil needed not to add this second blindness, lest the light of the gospel
should shine unto them. But indeed men are not blind for want of eyes, but for
want of light, and when light or truth is discovered to them, they have
faculties so suitable, fit and apt to receive it, that unless the God of this
World, 2 Cor. 4.4. the love of this Would, and pleasure in unrighteousness, 2
These. 2.12. blind the eyes of their understandings, and possess them with
prejudice, that they will not hear, nor consider, nor show themselves men,
Isa. 46.8. Heb. 13.22. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Act. 7.57. or unless they wilfully
reject and put from them what they apprehend and see, they cannot but submit
and yield obedience to it, and therefore the Word of God, the truth of God, is
full of light and power in it self, where ever it comes, how slightly soever
men esteem of it, and how meanly soever they through their ignorance speak of
it, as to call it a dead letter, and the like, it being none other then the
wisdom of God.

Again, God proceeds in such a way which the Sons of Men that are fallen (even
with Heathens, those that never heard of the gospel) that they may be without
excuse: For Gods doing good to men, giving them Rain from Heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness, is an evident
testimony of his love and goodness, Act. 14.17. and Gods eternal power and
Godhead is clearly seen by the works which he has made, so that all men were
and are without excuse in these respects, Romans 1.20. But if when men had Christ
preached to them, they were unable to believe, then they were not without
excuse under that, which was the greatest means, for God required those which
heard the gospel to believe it, and not giving them faith, they had this
excuse, that they could not believe, and this was such an excuse as would not
admit of an accusation from a God of mercy, much less of such severe
punishment as is to be inflicted on such as have disobeyed the gospel.

Object. All men are without excuse in relation to what God gave them in Adam,

Answ. God does not afford men means now they are fallen, to leave them
without excuse in relation to what he gave them before they were fallen: for
all the means which God uses with them, being fallen, leaves them never the
more excuselesse in that respect, so that the means used to such an end, would
be vain and to no purpose.

Further consider, if the loss of Adams Innocence leave all men without
excuse, that is, bring all under the curse of condemnation in Hell, then there
could be no redemption for any: For to the transgression of what the severity
of his justice is referred, to the obedience of that the goodness of his mercy
must be confined; for both respect one object, his mercy the obedience, his
severity the disobedience thereof, else God would be divided in himself, or
robbed of his Attributes, for should he save some in respect of Christ, and
damn others in respect of Adam, simply, without respect to the denial of
Christ, there could neither be mercy in the one, nor justice in the other, for
both would be void of equity. It is unequal to save for that, the denial
whereof is not the object of condemnation; or to damn for that, the obedience
whereof cannot be, or salvation by it: So that if the loss of the state of
innocence be the cause for which the equity of his justice leaves all without
excuse, and for which its severity executes eternal damnation in Hell, then
there can be no salvation at all for any, because the thing is not, nor can be,
by which salvation should be, to wit, Innocence recalled, and all fallen
equally from it, as all were equally in the loins of the transgressor.
Therefore the lost state of innocence in respect of Adam, can render us neither
excusable nor inexcusable in respect of Christ, for the objects are different.
Adam has his doom on himself and his posterity, to wit, mortallity, the which
the coming of Christ did not, prevent, but it must pass over all, and then
comes in Christ's Redemption, an endless immortallity, which has its own
extrems, Salvation by obedience, condemnation by disobedience; as the other
had, continuance of that state if he forbore the forbidden fruit, Death in the
day that he did eat thereof; So that the clemency of his mercy, and the
severity of his justice, was and is ever versant in the obedience or
disobedience of one and the same thing, therefore every one whose restored
immortality is eternally condemned in Hell, that condemnation is of himself,
and not of Adam.

Concerning the torments of the damned in Hell, many conceive that the pain of
loss which they shall endure, will be greater then the pain of sense; but if
those that perish had not such sufficiency of means afforded them, as that they
might have come to life and happiness, then there can be no pain of loss to any
of them, for that which a man never had, nor never was in possibility to
obtain, he can in no sense be said to lose the consideration of all that glory
the Saints enjoy affords them no ground to check or blame themselves, for
seeing they themselves (by all the means which was afforded) could not attain
unto it, they cannot blame themselves for not being possessed of it, yea,
instead of trouble of conscience and anguish of soul in this respect, they may
have some comfort and ease from this consideration, that their misery was
unavoidable and the others glory not attainable by them.

But it may be objected, that they lost what God gave them in Adam, and this
may be horror of conscience to them.

Answ. No man shall ever perish in Hell for Adams sin, as is already
manifested, but if they should, yet still the case would be alike. for they
were lost before they were born, and they have no more reason to blame
themselves for what Adam did before they were borne, then an Heir has reason
to blame himself because his father spent his inheritance before he was borne.

Now I shall speak somewhat of those Scriptures which are usually urged
against the universallity of Gods love, some of them speaking of Gods hardening
of men, so that they could not believe, others of his withholding that means
from them, without which they could not attain unto faith, and so unto
eternal life. And first I shall begin with those Scriptures which speak of
Gods hardening of men, and amongst them with the 9. chapter of the Romans, from
the 11 verse. to the 23. from whence the great and main Objections are gathered,
the words are these: For this is the word of promise, at this time will I come,
and Sarah shall have a Son, and not only this, but when Rebecka also had
conceived by one, even by our Father Isaac, for the children being not yet
borne, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according
to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said
unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated: what shall we say then, is there unrighteousness
with God? Godforbid: for he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion, so then
it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy, for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth: therefore has he mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. Thou will say then unto me, why
does he yet find fault? for who has resisted his will? Nay, but O man who art
thou that replyest against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter power over the clay, of the
same lump, to make one Vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor. What if
God willing to show his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much
long suffering the Vessels of wrath ficted to destruction, and that he might
make known the riches of his glory on the Vessels of mercy, whom he has
before prepared unto glory?

Now if we say that God would the salvation of all, they tell us that God did
hate the most part before they had done evil, as he did Elau. If we say that
God uses means to soften all men's hearts to bring them to repentance, they say
that as he shows mercy to some in this kind, so he hardens others, and that
merely of his will, he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens: If we say that it is unsuteable to God who is love, 1 Ioh. 4.8. to
the gospel, which brings salvation to all, Tit. 2.11. which is glad tidings of
great joy to all people, Luke 2.10. to all the la mentations, Protestations,
and professions of God in the gospel, they tell us, we must not dispute with
God, and though we cannot make it out, we ought to believe it. They say Paul
himself was at a stand in this thing and could give no other answer, but that
God might do with us as the Potter with the clay, make some of us for Heaven
and others for Hell, and that we ought not to say unto him, what do thou? so
that men from a misunderstanding of this Chapter, do strengthen themselves
against the most plainest and evidentest arguments that are or can be drawn
from what the Scriptures speak, of the nature of God, or of the gospel,
answering all in the words of Paul. [Nay, but O man who art thou that disputest
with God?] Yet we know that it was usual with the Saints in former times to
draw conclusions and arguments from the Attributes of God: so Abraham; shall
not the Judge of all the Earth dee right, Genesis 18.25. But if God be bound to no
law, how can he be unjust? or if Abraham could not have comprehended what had
bin just, and what unjust for God to do, he would not in the presence of God
have so determined as he did. The Author to the Hebrews having spoken of the
promise and Oath of God to bless the Heirs of promise, adds these words, That
by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
have strong consolation, who are fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us, Heb. 6.18. but if we affirm that notwithstanding all the promises
and proffers of God to do good unto men in his revealed will and word, he may
in his secret will intend the contrary, what do we less then affirm that God
may lie? Again the Author to the Hebrews uses this Argument to persuade the
Saints to persevere in well doing. That God was not unrighteous, to forget
their work and labor of love that they showed toward his name, chap. 6.10.
And again he persuades them to be content with such things as they had,
because God had said he would not leave them nor forsake them, chap. 13.5. but
if they had thought that God might have a secret will, which might not agree
with what he reveals, it would not have been sufficient satisfaction for Paul
to tell them that God had said it, unless he could make it also to appear
that he meant and intended what he spoke: we are also to be like our heavenly
Father, and especially in this, that we love the evil, the unjust, our
enemies, those that hate, curse, persecute, and despightfully use us, Matthew.
5.44, 45, 48. Luke 6.35, 36. but if Gods love in bestowing means and mercies on
the wicked, be to harden them, to make them vessels of wrath, on which he may
show his wrath, and make his power known, who amongst our selves would not be
ashamed to show mercy according to such a pattern? to do men good, that we
may have occasion to inflict evil; its like the mercy of those, which when by
torments they have almost deprived a man of life, will give him some Cordial
to revive him, that they may further torment him, but God is righteous, just,
gracious, merciful, sincere, faithful, and all his promises and his proffers
are in truth. And what Paul spoke of the Gentiles, Romans 2.14. I may say of God,
who though he be without law, (he being Lord of all) yet he is a Law to
himself; he wills and does all things suitable to his nature, to his
Attributes, and he may as well cease to be, as to will or do other.

But against this Doctrine some do Object what is written, Exodus 11.12. and
3.22. where God bids Moses to speak unto the Israelites, to borrow every man
of his Neighbor, and every woman of her Neighbor, Jewels of Silver, and
Jewels of Gold; now say they it had been wickedness in them to borrow, with
an intent never to repay, if God had not commanded them, but seeing he
commanded them they did well; for the will, word, or command of God, is
sufficient to prove any thing good and just (though it appear unjust to us)
and therefore we must not dispute it further.

Ans. First, I grant that seeing God does neither will nor command any thing
but what is just, his will, word, or command, is sufficient to prove any thing
to be just: But secondly, seeing God wills and commands nothing but what is
just, and has given us reason and understanding to judge what is just, and
what is unjust, it concerns us to be very careful (as we tender the honor
and glory of God) that we believe no word to be spoken, nor action done by
God, which we our selves see to be unjust: for if we profess to believe God
to be love, just, merciful, sincere, faithful; and yet believe that God made
some men to destroy them without pre-consideration of any evil or wickedness
which they would commit, that he commands men to perform this or that thing,
and then possitively hardens them that they may not do it; and yet punishes
them for not performing of it; that God in his revealed will, professes to
love men, and to desire their good and salvation, and yet in his secret will
intends their destruction: that he should teach his people to borrow (promising
to repay) but intending to deceive and spoil: it is all one as if we should
profess to believe that such a man were very honest, just and good; and yet
withal to say, that he would lie, steal, murder, bear false Witness and
the like; which things are inconsistent in man, as the former are in God, and
he that does indeed believe the one of God cannot possible believe the other:
Now the word which we have translated borrow does properly signify Ask, they
shall ask every Woman of her Neighbor, etc. and so there is no difficulty in
the Words, for the Jews were a long time oppressed by the Egyptians, who had
made them slaves, and served themselves of them; now when the Egyptians were
urgent, and did have to send them away, as a recompense to them, God bids them
to ask Jewels of Silver, Jewels of Gold, and Raiment; and so they should
cloth their children with the spoil of their enemies and oppressors, which was
but equal and just.

But now I shall show what I conceive to be the meaning of the 9. of the
Romans, and for the better understanding of it, I shall desire you to take
notice with me, of the drift and scope of Paul therein. In the 1, 2, and 3.
verses, Paul does solemnly and seriously profess his heaviness and sorrow of
heart for his Brethren and Kinsmen according to the flesh, who (says Paul) are
Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, the glory, the Covenants, the
giving of the Law, the service of God and the promises, whose are the Fathers,
and of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed
for ever, Amen. verse the 4 and 5. then in the beginning of verse 6. Paul
prevents an objection which might be made to this effect; If we who are
Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, the glory, the Covenants, the
giving of the Law, the service of God, and the promises, come short of
righteousness, justification, life and salvation; then the Word of GOD, the
faith of GOD, the promise of God takes not effect; like unto that which is
Written, Chap. 3. 3. what if some did not believe, shall their unbelief make
the faith of God without effect: Make the word and promise of God false) God
forbid, says Paul, verse. 4. yea let God be true, but every man a liar, etc.
Now in this place Paul endeavors to Answer this Objection more at large, from
the latter part of the 6. Verse, to the end of the Chapter, so that the thing
which Paul in this Chapter undertakes to prove, is, that though many, yea the
most of the Jews should perish in their wickedness and unbelief, yet God
would be just, righteous, and true, in all his words and works; and that every
jot and tittle of his word would take effect. And first Paul tells them that
they were mistaken, in that they did conceive themselves the children of God,
because they were Children of the flesh of Abraham, for (says he) all are not
Israel, that are of Israel, neither because they are the seed of Abraham are
they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, they which
are the children of the Flesh, are not the Children of God, but the Children of
the promise are counted for the seed, verse 6.7, and 8. for says Paul, this is
a word of promise, at this time I will come and Sarah shall have a Son, ver. 9.
so that Isaac was a child of promise and so must you or your being children of
the flesh will profit you little; and this is largely and plainly expounded in
the 4. Chapter of the Galatians, verse 21. to the end of the Chapter, Tell me
(says Paul) ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law,
for it is written that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bondwoman, the
other by a freewoman; but he who was of the bondwoman, was after the Flesh,
but he that was of the freewoman was by promise, which things are an allegory,
for these are the two Covenants or Testaments, the one from Mount Sinai, which
gendreth to bondage, which is Hagar; for this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia,
and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children:
but Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all, (that is,
of us believers:) for it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not,
break forth and cry thou that travailest not, for the desolate has many more
children then she which has an husband. Now we brethren ( says Paul to the
Galatians) as Isaac was, are the children of the promise; but as then he that
was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, even
so it is now. Nevertheless what says the Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman
and her Son, for the Son of the bond woman (the children of Abraham
according to the flesh) shall not be heir with the Son of the freewoman,
(such as believe such as walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, Romans 4.12)
so that whereas you Jews rest in the Law, and think therein to have eternal
life; you think the Law will justify you, but the Law condemns you; that is,
the words and writing of Moses, which are here termed the Law: for though
Ishmael were the child of Abraham as well as Isaac, yet you see God would not
suffer him to inherit, but he must be cast out; therefore your being children
of the flesh is not sufficient to make you heirs of that promise which was
made to your father.

Then Paul proceeds to another instance of the like nature in the 10.11, and
12. verses, and not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our Father Isaac; for the children being not yet borne, neither having
done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said unto her, the elder
shall serve the younger: as if he should have said, that which I affirm does
not only appear by what is written of Ismael and Isaac, but by that also
which is written of Esau and Jacob, the children of Rehecca which she conceived
by one, even by our father Isaac: for though Esau were Jacobs brother, the
elder, the greater, and heir according to the flesh, yet God said that he
(that is, his posterity; for Esau never served Jacob in person, but rather on
the contrary Jacob served Esau, and called him Lord, Genesis 33.14.) should serve
(the posterity of) Jacob the younger. Now these words were a prophecy of what
God would do unto the Edomites for their wickedness; and he declares it to
Rebecca before the children were borne, before they had done good or evil,
that from the beginning he might manifest and make appear that his purpose was
not to justify any one of you by works, but by grace; not to justify the
whole lump of you, but to elect and choose out from among you such as should
believe and be obedient, they, and they only being the seed and true heirs,
according to the intent of the promise made to your father Abraham; and
therefore neither your natural birth, nor any legal or outward performance,
will make you accepted of God, or give you inheritance in the promises of life:
for this of Jacob and Esau (like the former of Isaac and Ismael) is an Allegory
of the two Covenants, Esau being Lord by birth, but Jacob by the
fore-appointment of God; so you Jews, and you only, are children and heirs
according to the flesh; but believers (as believers) and they only, both of
Jews and Gentiles, according to the purpose and election of God: then in the
13. verse he proceeds with these words, as it is written, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated, (the following words in Malachi) and laid his mountains
and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness; whereas Edom says
we are impoverished, but will return and build the desolate places, thus says
the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down, and they shall
call them the borders of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has
indignation for ever: as if Paul should have said, What God intended in his
speech to Rebecca, is more clearly manifested by what is written in the
prophecy of Malachi, where you find that though Esau were Ianobs brother,
(that is, the Edomites were brethren to the Israelites) yet God hated Esau,
(that is, the Edomites) and laid their mountains and heritage waste, for the
dragons of the wilderness, and his indignation was set against them for ever
so that it is a vain thing for you Jews to plead for your justification, that
you are the children of Abraham, (unless you walk in his steps;) for the
Edomites could do as much as that, and yet were destroyed for their
wickedness: and that this punishment came upon them for their wickedness,
though this place in Malachi does manifest it, yet I shall produce some other
Scriptures more fully to evidence the same: Ezech. 25.12, 13, 14. Thus says
the Lord, because Edom has dealt against the house of Judah by taking
vengeance, and has greatly offended and revenged himself upon them: Therefore
thus says the Lord, I will also stretch out my hand upon Edom, and will cut
off man and beast from it, and I will make it desolate from Teman, and they of
Dedan shall fall by the sword, and I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the
hand of my people Israel, and they shall do to Edom according to my anger, and
according to my fury, and they shall know my vengeance, says the Lord. Joel
3.19. Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the
children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land. Ames
1.11. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he did pursue his brother
with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually,
and kept his wrath for ever. And in Obadiah the whole chapter speaks of the
wickedness of the Edomites, and Gods anger against them, especially from the
9. verse to the end of the chapter: And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be
dismayed, to the end that every one of the Mount of Esau may be cut off by
slaughter, for thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever. In the day that thou stoodest on the other
side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and
forreiners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem; even thou wast
as one of them. But thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother,
in the day that he became a stranger; neither should thou have rejoiced over
the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither should thou
have spoken proudly in the day of distress, thou should not have entered
into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; neither should thou
have stood in the cross way, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither
should thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of
distress: for the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen; as thou have
done it shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head,
etc. The evil and unkind carriage of the Edomites toward their brethren the
Israelites, is more fully declared in the 20 chapter of Numbers, the 14 15. 16.
17. 18. 19. 20 and 21 verses: And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the
King of Edom saying, Thus says thy brother Israel, thou know all the
travel that has befallen us, how our fathers went down into Egypt, and we
have dwelt in Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians vexed us and our Fathers;
and when we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an Angel, and
has brought us forth out of Egypt: and behold we are in Kadesh, a City in the
uttermost of thy border, let us pass I pray thee through thy country, we will
not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards neither will we drink of
the water of the wells; we will go by the Kings high way, we will not turn to
the right hand or to the left, until we have passed thy borders. And Edom said
unto him, Thou shall not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the
sword. And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way,
and if I and my cattle drink of thy water then I will pay for it: I will only
(without doing any thing else) go through on my feet: And he said, Thou shall
not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a
strong hand; and Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border,
wherefore Israel turned away from him. Here we see how hardly the Edomites
dealt with their brethren in the day of their distress, for which cause the
Lord was displeased with them; and so Paul would have the Jews to understand
that God would be displeased with them, and punish them, and destroy them,
(notwithstanding Abraham was their Father, and notwithstanding any promise he
had made to them) if they were rebellious and disobedient.

Ob. If Paul had thought that the hatred of God toward Esau, or the Edomites,
had been for his, or their wickedness, he would have so expressed himself,
and not have left the matter so obscure.

Ans. The Jews pleaded for their justification, that they were the children of
Abraham; Paul proves that some of the children of Abraham were hated of God;
and to have told them wherefore, had been superfluous, and not pertinent to the
argument in hand.

But if that purpose and election, which Paul labored to establish amongst the
Jews had been this, That God did elect and choose out some of them to life; and
hate, or leave (as some interpret the word hate) the residue to destruction,
without respect to any good or evil in them, (and that that counsel of his
did always take effect) he would not have had such great heaviness, and
continual sorrow of heart for them as verse. 2. for then he should have
sorrowed because the purpose and counsel of God took effect, he could not then
so love them, as cordially to desire their salvation; chap. 10.1. if he had
known that God in his eternal and unalterable counsel had so hated them as to
leave them for destruction. Besides, God reasons with Jacobs posterity Mal. 1.
that he loved them (that is all of them) and yet many, yea the most of them,
perished notwithstanding this love, as in chap. 9. 27. therefore it was no such
love as would save them unless they were thankful and obedient; and seeing it
would not infallibly save all those that were so loved, it was not such a love
of election as some men conceive.

Further consider, God is not willing that any of the lost sons of Adam
should perish, he desires not the death of him that dies; he does not delight
in tormenting his creatures; he is excellent in judgment, and in plenty of
justice he will not afflict, Job 37.23. He does not willingly afflict, nor
grieve the children of men, Lam. 3.33. but if God should hate men with an
eternal and unchangeable hatred before they had done evil, where then were
his unwillingnesse to afflict, his slownesse to wrath, his goodness to all,
and the like?

Then he proceeds in the 14. verse to make an objection; What shall we say
then, or what do we say then, that there is unrighteousness with God? God
forbid says Paul; for we in thus expounding and interpreting the Scriptures
say no more then God himself says to Moses Exodus 33.19. I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion: The Israelites had made them a molten Calfe, and worshipped it, and
sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, that brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, chap. 32.4.8. wherefore the Lord was angry with them,
and willed Moses to let him alone that he might consume them, and he promised
to make of Moses a great Nation: but Moses still entreats for the Israelites,
and in the 32 verse he is so earnest for them, that he desires God to blot him
out of the book which he had written, if so that he would forgive their sins:
but the answer of God is, Whosoever has sinned against me him will I blot out
of my book. chap. 33.13. Moses desires that God would consider that this
Nation was his people; in the 19 verse God tells Moses that he would proclaim
his name before him, which name was I will be gracious to whom I will be
gracious; so that this is Gods name; his power to show mercy to such as seek
him in his own way, and to punish the stiff-necked and rebellious, even of the
Jews as well as others. But if the meaning of Paul were to declare, by Gods
loving Jacob and hating Esau, that God had elected some men to eternal life,
and reprobated others to eternal death, without relation either to good or
evil in them, and that this objection arises from thence, Is there
unrighteousness with God? then I would feign know what satisfaction Paul gives
in his answer, God forbid; for he says, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, etc. The objection is, whether God be not unrighteous in so doing? The
answer is, No; for he says he will so do. It was as well proved before, in
showing that God did it, as it was after, in showing that he said he would do
it.

In the 16. verse, he sums up what he had spoken, in this conclusion, so then
it is not of him that wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy; (that is) though Moses did, and I do desire your salvation, and though
you desire and seek salvation in your own way, yet that will not effect it,
for for it is not of him that wills, and though you labor never so much to
establish your own righteousness that will not do, for it is not of him that
runs, but it is of him that is merciful, even of God; and therefore you
must seek after the righteousness of God which is by faith: then Paul
proceeds further to manifest and demonstrate the truth of what he had spoken,
for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this same purpose have I raised
thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth, Verse 17. In these words we may consider,
first, the end propounded; Gods showing of his power, and the declaring of his
Name throughout all the Earth; then, the way and means by which he brought
this to pass, he raised up Pharaoh, God would manifest his power and name to
all the world, that there was none like unto him in all the earth, so great and
so mighty a God, that he would destroy all such as did despise and harden
their hearts against him, though he might bear long with them, therefore God
raised up Pharaoh a wicked man, one that he knew would harden his heart against
him, Exodus 3.19 and brings plague after plague upon him, and then at last when
no means would prevail with him, he cuts him off, and this he did that all
men should take notice of his power and fear his great name, and not despise
and harden their hearts against his word, least he destroy them in like manner,
Exodus 15.26. and seeing God would have this thing taken notice of throughout
all the Earth; Paul concludes that he would have the Jews take notice of it
as well as others, that if they hardened their hearts against him, they also
should be destroyed, though they were the natural seed of Abraham; but if God
did necessitate Pharaoh by an inevitable power or providence to do what he
did, then he would declare himself to all the world by such a name as this,
that he was a God that did harden the hearts of mente do evil, and then
punish them for so doing, but this is very unsuitable to what God professes of
himself.

Then in the 18. verse, Paul draws this conclusion, therefore has he mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens; (that is)
therefore it is manifest by what has been said that those that fear him and
seek him in his own way as he should be sought, shall find mercy: but those
that follow their own ways, and resist him, shall be hardened and perish, be
they Jews or Gentiles. (As concerning the manner of Gods hardening I shall
declare that in another place.)

Then he makes another Objection, verse. 19. Thou will then, or therefore say
unto me, why does he yet find fault, for who has resistea his will? (that is)
let it be granted, that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and that
whom he will he hardens, why does he yet complain of us, for he has made
his Covenant with us, and his promises belong to us, we being Abraham's seed,
and he has given us Carcumcision, and other Ordinances to be observed by us,
and therefore in resting herein for life, we do not resist his will, this Paul
answers in the 20, 21. verses, etc. Nay, but O man who art thou that reply
against God? as if Paul should have said, do thou demand of me, who it is
that does resist the will of God, do but consider who thou art that do make
the question, and thou have answered thy self; thou that do labor to
establish thine own righteousness and do rest in the Law, when the law it
self condemns thee, thou do resist the will of God, for does or shall the
formed say to the forming, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter
power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel to honor and another
to dishonor, yet you will not allow me to do with you as the Potter with the
Clay, to destroy such of you as go about to establish your own
righteousness, and oppose the righteousness that I have ordained, and therein
you strive with, and resist your Maker, though it be a sinful and a woeful
thing for you so to do, Isa. 45.9. and this is plainly illustrated in Ier.
18.1. etc. to the eleventh verse. unto which place the Apostle has reference,
The word which came to Jeremy from the Lord, saying, arise and go down to the
Potters house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words: then I went down
to the Potters House, and behold he wrought a work on the Wheels, and the
Vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hands of the Potter, so he made
it again another Vessel as seemed good to the Potter to make it: Then the word
of the Lord came unto me, saying, O House of Israel cannot I do with you as
this Potter, says the Lord? behold, as the clay is in the Potters hand, so are
ye in mine hand O House of Israel: at what instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them; and at what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom to build
and to plant it, if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then
will I repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit it.

In which words we may see that God pleads for no other Power or Prerogative
over the House of Israel, then the Potter does exercise over the clay; That
when a Vessel is marred in his hand, he makes it again another Vessel, as
seems good unto him: So when God speaks concerning a Nation, or concerning a
Kingdom, to build and to plant it, if it do evil in his sight, he may repent
him of the good wherewith he said he would benefit them: So that if the House
of Israel seek not after his righteousness, but labor to establish their
own, then he may destroy them notwithstanding all the promises he has made
unto them, For he is not so bound by any promise that he has made, but he is
at liberty to punish those that rebel and do wickedly, as on the contrary
his threatening to inflict judgments on a people, hinders him not from showing
mercy to the penitent, as yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed,
where though no condition be expressed, yet this condition was employed it they
do not repent: and whosoever pleads against this upon what pretense soever,
pleads against the will and counsel of God, for what if God vvilling (says
the Apostle) to show his wrath and make his power known, endured with much
long suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted or made up to destruction, and that
he might make known the riches of his glory on the Vessels of mercy which he
had before prepared unto glory, even us whom he has called, not of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles, verse. 22, 23, 24. That is, if God will
manifest his power and wrath on such as do not believe, be they Jews or
Gentiles, who are fitted for destruction by their wickedness, in abusing all
the goodness and patience of God toward them, and the riches of his mercy on
such as believe, who art thou that thou should resist the will of God.

But whereas it is conceived by some, that God does make some men of purpose to
damn and to destroy them and so hardens them that they may be fitted for him
to show his wrath toward them, and all merely of his will, without
consideration of any evil in them; as this is very contrary to God and the
gospel, as is elsewhere manifested so it cannot be the meaning of this place;
for when the question is made to Paul, why does, he yet complain, for who has
resisted his will: if he mean such a will as this, that God does make or raise
up some men, whom merely of his will he hardens, and others whom merely of
his will he softens; then Paul does not answer to the question he himself
propounds, for his answer proves nothing but what is granted in the Objection,
yea, it is the ground of the Objection, for the Objection is, why does God
complain, the ground of it is, seeing he does whatever he will, he hardens
and softens whom he pleases: Paul answers that God may do with men what he
will, as the potter with the clay; but though he may, and does do what he will,
yet the objection remains still, why does he then complain of what is done:
for as the pot does not say to the potter, why have thou made me thus? so the
potter does not complain of the pot which he has made according to his will,
saying, why art thou thus made? for then the pottter must be angry with, and
complain of himself that made it so: but the reason why God was angry with them
was because they sought righteousness as it were by the works of the Law, and
not by faith, and that is given also as the reason why they did not attain to
the Law of righteousness, as is evident in the 31, and 32. verses of this
Chapter, but Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not
obtained to the Law of righteousness: wherefore (not because they were not
elected) but because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works
of the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling stone, etc.

Now let us take the advice of the Apostle Peter in his 2. Epistle, 3.
Chapter, and 15 Verse, and account the long-suffering of God salvation, even as
our beloved brother Paul also in all his Epistles (says he) has Written unto
you according to the Wisdom given unto him; and though some things in Paul's
Epistles (as in particularin this Chapt.) be difficult and hard to be
understood, yet let us be careful that we do not make the patience or
forbearance of God destruction to any man, for be is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance, as it is in the 9 verse
of the forementioned Chapter.

Ioh. 12.39.40. therefore could they not believe, because Esaias said again
he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their heart and be converted and I should
heal them; hence it is inferred that as God affords some men means sufficient
to beget faith in them, so he blinds the eyes, and hardens the hearts of others
that they cannot believe.

I Answer, first where it is said they could not believe, and that God blinded
their eyes and hardened their hearts, that they should not believe, neither of
these expressions implies any natural inability or want of power in them to
believe; only it declares that what God fore saw, and by his Prophet foretold,
could not but be fulfilled: For could, would, and should, are signs of one
and the same mood; and where it is read that they should not, etc. it may be
as truly and more properly be read, that they would not. And therefore we may
observe, that these very persons are exhorted to believe, in the 36 verse, and
in the 37 verse, Christ complains that though he had done so many miracles
before them yet they believed not on him; but if God had hardened their hearts
that they could not believe, Christ would not have admired at their unbelief,
and there were no emphasis in Christ's doing so many miracles before them, for
if their condition were such that though many miracles were done before them,
they could not believe, then one miracle had bin as proportionable a means to
work faith in them as many; and where Christ did one miracle before them, if
he had done a thousand, and withal so blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts, that they could not believe, their unbelief had bin no more strange,
nor no more to be complained of, then if he had done nothing. And for the
meaning of the place I conceive it to be none other then this that God
foreseeing and by his Prophet foretelling the unbelief and blindness of the
Jews notwithstanding all the means which God had afforded them, it could not
be but the Scripture and word of God must be fulfilled, as was formerly
expressed, and in that sense they could not believe, as Judas could not, but
betray his master, and as the soldiers could not but part the garments of
Christ, cast lots for his Vesture, and pierce his hands and his feet, and the
like.

Obj. But it is said they could not believe because God had blinded their eyes,
etc.

Answ. God does not possitively blind the eyes, nor harden the hearts of any:
God does not incline nor dispose any man's heart to hardness, as James speaks
in the like case, let no man say when he is tempted to evil, that he is
tempted of God, James 1.13. so let no man say when he is hardened in evil, that
he is hardened of God, for God in so doing should be contrary to himself;
and it is proper to the Devil to blind the eyes, and harden the hearts of men
against the truth, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.4. that by manifesting the
truth they so commended themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of
God, that if their gospel were hid, it was hid to those that perish, in whom
the God of this World has blinded the eyes of them that believe not; lest the
light of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Image of God should
shine unto them; so it is God that by his ministers discovers the truth, and
the Devil which hides it from the sons of men. But if it should be granted that
God did blind their eyes, and harden their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and be converted; yet this
would prove an ability in them to see and understand before God had blinded
them; for he could not be said to blind their eyes that they should not see, if
they were so blind before that they could not see. But the meaning of this
place will appear plainly, if we consider Matthew. 13.15. where the same
Prophecy is related and said by Christ to be fullfilled, in that the Jews
themselves had clozed their eyes, lest at any time they should see with their
eyes, and understand with their hearts, etc. and Paul repeating the same
Prophecy, makes the same application of it, that his master did before him,
that they did verify the saying of the Prophet, in that they had clozed their
eyes, lest they should see with their eyes, etc. Acts 28.27. so then if it be
granted, that where it is said in Joh. 12.40. that he has blinded their eyes,
etc. that by he, God is to be understood, yet it must be in such a sense as
they may still be said to cloze and blind their own eyes; as Matthew records
the words of Christ, and it must be in such a sense as is suitable to God and
the gospel: The question then is, how God is said to blind their eyes, and
harden their hearts, and how they are said, to blind their own eyes? which I
conceive to be in this sense; God blinds their eyes and hardens their hearts
accidentally; the gospel which was intended of God for life, becomes a
stumbling to them, their table a snare, and that which should have been for
their good, a trap, so that they fall and are broken, and perish. But they
harden their own hearts possitively, directly, willingly, and wilfully; so
that this makes nothing to prove men's inability to believe the gospel when it
is declared to them, but only shows that the gospel which naturally leads men
to repentance, to thankfulness, and fruitfulness to God, does accidentally
through men's wilfulness and stubbornnes produce a contrary effect; and so
whereas if they did bring forth fruit answerable to the means, they should
receive a blessing from God, they bringing forth thorns are rejected nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6, 7 8.

Again, Mark 4.11, 12. and he said unto them, unto you it is given to know
the mystery of the Kingdom of God, but unto them which are without, all these
things are done in parables, that seeing they might see and not perceive, and
hearing they might hear, and not understand, lest at any time they should be
converted and their sins be for given them; in which words thus rendered two
things are employed: First; that the end of Christ in speaking to them in
Parables, was to prevent or hinder them from being converted and so from having
their sins forgiven: Now what can be more contrary to God then this, in all
his protestations and professions, or to the gospel of his grace to the Sons
of Men. The second thing employed is, that if Christ had spoken the things of
God plainly, and not in Parables; it was possible (if not probable) that they
had seen, understood, been converted, and so have had their sins forgiven
them; now this would prove an ability in men to see, understand, and be
converted; when the things of God are declared plainly to them, which doctrine
those that urge this Scripture (to prove that God speaks to some men that they
may not be converted) will by no means allow; though indeed it be a foolish
thing to conceive that God did speak to those men in parables, lest they should
see and understand, which were so blind that they could not see nor understand,
though he had spoken never so plainly; but the words may be thus read or
rendered, to them which are without, all these things are done in parables, that
seeing may see and cannot perceive, and hearing may hear and cannot (that is,
will not) understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their
sins should be forgiven them: and this manner of speaking is often times
used amongst us; for instance, when a Master calls upon his Servant, and his
Servant neglects to answer him, or come to him, the Master expresses himself
by way of reproof in this manner; Cannot you hear? cannot you answer? cannot
you come when you are called? implying that he is able, and ought to come, and
therefore is worthy of reproof in that he demeanes himself like one that is
unable, that cannot come: so we say of him that neglects some opportunity of
doing himself good, if he cannot make use of an opportunity when he has it,
it is no matter though he miss what he desires:

Now when we say if he cannot, our meaning is, if he may or can, and do not, or
will not; so these words [that seeing, may see, and cannot perceive, and
hearing may hear and cannot understand, least at any time they should be
converted and their sins should be forgiven them,] are spoken by way of reproof
of the Jews, and are given as the reason of Christ's speaking to them in
Parrables, and not as his end in so speaking. For the things by which they
might have been converted and their sins forgiven them, were spoken to them
plainly: but seeing they might see and did not, and might hear and did not:
therefore Christ would not discover those further miseries of the Kingdom
which were proper and peculiar to them which had already believed in him. And
that this is the meaning of the place, appears more plainly, if you consider
Mat. 13.11, 12.13. where the same History being recorded, the reason is given
by Christ to his Apostles, why he thus spoke to the unbelieving Jews in
Parrables, because they had not improved the light already discovered to them,
[for whosoever has to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance,
but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he has verse.
12. And again verse. 13. (not because seeing they might not see, but) because
seeing they did not see nor understand, (that is) they closed their eyes and
would not see, as it is expressed verse. 15. so that this does not prove any
inability in men to believe the gospel when it was preached to them, but
rather the contrary, seeing they were blamed for not believing, and counted
unworthy to partake of further light, who were so perverse and obstinate
against the light they had.

Again, 1 Samuel 2.25. the latter part of the verse, notwithstanding they
harkened not to the voice of their Father, because (or for) the Lord would or
was willing to slay them: Here it is conceived that Gods desire of their
destruction was the cause of their not harkening unto the voice of their
Father, but this is contrary to what God professes, Ezekiel. 33.11. and the
18.32. that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, in the death of
him that dies but that he turn from his sins and live: now if the
repentance of a sinner be more pleasing to God, and more willed and desired of
him then his death, then Gods desire or will to slay a sinner, cannot be the
cause of his not repenting: but this word for or because is spoken only by way
of demonstration of the truth of what preceeds, like unto that which is spoken
of Mary in the gospel, that much was forgiven her for she loved much, Luke
7.47. Not that her love was the cause or reason that her sins were pardoned,
but her love did demonstrate that she apprehended the pardon of many sins, for
to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little; so in this place, they
harkened not to the voice of their Father, because, or for the Lord would or
was willing to slay them, (this is) the desire, willingness and resolution of
God to destroy them, verse. 34. notwithstanding their Father had reproved and
councelled them, does evidently demonstrate that they did not hearken unto
their fathers voice, for if they had harkened and turned from their wickedness;
they should have lived, they should not have been destroyed according to
Ezekiel 33.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses.

Again, it is objected from certain places in Exodus, viz. I will harden
Pharaoh, chap. 7.3. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, verse. 4. And the
Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh that he hearkened not unto them, chap. 9.12.
From those and the like places men do conclude that God does positively harden
the hearts of some, so that they cannot believe and obey the truth, for (say
they) God was so far from enabling Pharaoh to do what he required of him,
that (on the contrary) he hardened his heart that he might not do it.

For answer whereunto, consider (that as God tempts no man to sin, so much
less does he harden any man in sin. Again, where it is said, I will harden
Pharaohs heart chap. 7.3. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, verse. 4. It
may as truly and more properly be read, And I shall hearden Pharachs heart. But
he will not hearken unto you, for shall and will (in this place) are only
signs of the Future Tence, serving to express somewhat to come. For God did
not exercise any coercive power upon Pharaoh, that kept him from hearkening to
his word, or from letting the people go; but only did declare what effect the
means which God intended to use with Pharaoh would take upon him, even to
harden his heart, though the means used did properly and naturally tend to
soften it; and so God might be said to harden Pharaohs heart, because he did
that for (or before) him, whereby he knew Pharaoh would take occasion to harden
his own heart, as appears in this, that when God sent Moses to Pharaoh to
require him to let the people go, God tells Moses that he was sure that
Pharaoh would not let them go, but by a mighty hand, God knew that instead of
obeying his command he would be hardened by it, and yet bids Moses to go and
do the Message.

Object. How can this agree with that love and goodness in God which has bin
pleaded for: for if God do that which he knows will indirectly or by accident
make us worse and harden us, he might with as much love and goodness directly
do it.

Answ. The case is far different, for if God had positively or directly
hardened Pharaohs heart, then so far Pharaoh had been without fault, because
God did it, and he could not help it, and for God to have hardened him in this
sense, and then to punish him for his hardness, was inconsistent with the
justice and goodness of God.

But if God do that which is just and good (which properly and naturally leads
men to do the like) is his goodness ever the less, or should he forbear to
do good, because he sees that men will abuse his goodness, then God must not
act like God, when men will not act like men, but must go out of his way, and
do things unlike himself, or cease to do what is suitable and agreeable to his
excellent nature, to comply with their wickedness and stubbornness and so
instead of converting evil men, and making them like himself, he himself would
become like to them.

But let us a little further consider what is here done to Pharaoh; Pharaoh
does oppress, afflict and grieve the people of God, and their cry and their
groaning (by reason of their bondage) came up unto God, and God had a respect
unto them, and resolves to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and
to bring them into a good and large Land, flowing with Milk and Honey,
according to his Covenant and promise. Now God sends Moses to Pharaoh, to
desire him to let the Hebrews go three days journey into the wilderness to
worship; yet God knew that he should harden Pharaohs heart thereby, or that
Pharaoh would harden his heart thereupon, which is all one, should God have
suffered his people to remain in slavery and sorrow under their Taskmasters
and not have sent to tell Pharaoh of it, because he knew he would not hearken,
but be hardened.

Again, when Moses had delivered his message to Pharaoh, and received that
answer from him, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, and let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go: should God now have
lest Pharaoh, and not by his miracles have manifested himself to be the Lord,
because he knew Pharaoh would be hardened, and not set his heart to consider
it; or when the judgment did soften Pharaohs heart, and he desires a removal
of it, promising to let Israel go, should God refuse to show mercy to him on
his repentance, knowing that he would be hardened upon the receipt of it;
should God cease to be, or do good, because Pharaoh would abuse his
goodness, and thereby take occasion or liberty to do evil, then God could
not manifest to the sons of men the riches of his goodness and mercy, his
readiness to pardon, etc. Moreover, if we take notice of the history we shall
find by diverse passages that Pharaoh was free in what he did, and that God did
not harden him in any evil (otherwise then has been declared) nor hinder him
from any good: For when Moses speaks to Pharaoh of destroying the Frogs from
him and his houses, he declares this to be the end and reason thereof, That
Pharaoh might know that there was none like to the Lord their God, chap. 8.10.
yet in the 15 verse we find a contrary effect, together with the ground and
rise of it: the effect was, that Pharaoh hardened his heart, and harkened not
unto them, as the Lord had said, or foretold; the rise and ground of it was, he
saw there was respite, the judgment was over, and he in stead of turning the
grace and goodness of God into thankfulness and obedience, turns it into
deceitfulness and stubbornness.

Again, when Moses promises Pharaoh to entreat the Lord that the swarms of
flies might depart from him, his servants, and from his people: He charges
Pharaoh that he should not deal deceitfully any more, in not letting the
people go to sacrifice unto the Lord, verse. 29. but if Pharaoh had been so
hardened by the Lord, that he could not hearken and let the people go, he had
not dealt deceitfully, but on the contrary, the deceit had been in God
(according to this doctrine) in commanding Pharaoh upon a great penalty to let
the people go, and yet to harden his heart that he could not let them go: but
we may find verse. 32. that Pharaoh hardened his heart at that time also,
neither would he let the people go.

Again, when the thundering and hail ceased, Pharaoh sinned yet more, and
hardened his heart, and would not let the people go: Why? he saw the judgment
was past, and in stead of being thankful thereupon he is more stubborn, chap.
9. 34, 35. and yet chap. 10.1. God is said to have hardened Pharaohs heart in
that particular; whereby it is further evident that God is said to harden him,
in that sense only which is already manifested. God is said to raise up
Pharaoh of purpose to show his power in him, and that his name might be
declared throughout all the earth chap. 9. 16. and to harden him, that he might
show his signs before him, chap. 10. 1. therefore seeing God declares his end
in hardening Pharaoh, he ownes the act.

Aus. Let us a little consider the places for the first, chap 9.16. if we read
what goes before, and what follows, we may see that God did not raise up
Pharaoh to show his power, or to declare his name in his destruction, as
Pharaoh was a man, but as he was a wicked proud, stubborn, stiff-necked, and
rebellious man: for verse. the 14. he says, For I will at this time send all my
plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, to what
end, to harden him? no, but that he might know that there was none like God in
all the earth. And in the 17. verse, he says, As yet exaltest thou thy self
against my people, and wilt not let them go: but if God had hardened him in
that sense, which some men conceive; it could not then be said to Pharaoh, that
he exalted himself against God, but that God had exalted Pharaoh against
himself. But the meaning of it I conceive to be this. God foreseeing that
Pharaoh would be a stubborn and rebellious man, one that would exalt himself
against him, after many miracles and judgments, and much means to humble him,
raised him up of purpose the being a man for the purpose) to show his power,
and declare his name in his destruction, that others might take notice thereof,
and not rebel against God as Pharaoh did, lest they were plagued and punished
as he was. And accordingly the Priests and Diviners of the Philistims, Sam.
6.6. when the judgment of God was upon the people for retaining the Arc,
exhorted them to send it away in these words; Why do you harden your hearts,
as the Egiptians, and Pharaoh hardened their hearts, when he had wrought
wonderfully amongst them; did they not let the people go, and they departed?
whereby we perceive that they better understood the meaning of God in his
dealing with Pharaoh, and made better use of it to the people then most in our
days do: whereas if Pharaohs hardness had been wrought in him by God, his
destruction for the hardness of his heart had been very unfit for God,
thereby to manifest his power and name to all the world; unless he would have
them to take knowledge of him to be a God that made men finne, and then
punished them for it: for that Chapter 10.1. it agrees with the former place,
and as I conceive is thus to be understood: God willing to declare to Phoraoh
and to all the World (by his signs and miracles) that he was a great and
mighty God, and that there was no resisting of him; and that he would punish
such as did abuse his grace, and turn it into wantonness, and stubbornness;
did take occasion upon his foreknowledge of Pharaohs wickedness and
deceitfullnesse to manifest the same in him: for in the 9 chap. 27, 28. verses,
we find Pharaohs repentance for refusing to let the people go; and he said
unto them, I have sinned this time, the Lord is righteous, and I and my people
are wicked; entreat the Lord, (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
Thunderings and Hail; and I will let the people go, and ye shall stay
nolonger: Now this repentance of Pharaohs, was cordial (though afterward he
dealt deceitfully and hardened his heart) and God who is rich in mercy, ready
to pardon and forgive upon repentance and submission, did cause the Thundering
and Hail to cease; now God may be said from one consideration, to remove the
Judgment from Pharooh and his people to save them, and yet from another
consideration he may be said to remove the same judgment, to the end he may
destroy them; for when God speaks of intending the good and salvation of such
men as perish in the means and mercies he bestows on them, he declares that
end which the means does properly and naturally lead unto; but when he speaks
of intending the punishment, evil, or ruin of men, in the means and mercies
he bestows on them, then he speaks in reference to their neglecting,
refusing, or abusing thereof.

Now this latter is not his proper and immediate end, considering what the
person is when he bestows these mercies and means on him: but it is his end in
reference to what the person will be, or do, upon the receite of the mercies
and means, being grounded upon his foreknowledge of their wickedness and
perverseness, and somewhat in the like sense Christ speaks when he says he came
not to bring peace but the sword; and so Simeon says of Christ that he was
set for the fall of many in Israel.

But I shall now speak somewhat of those Scriptures which are urged to prove,
that God in the publication of the gospel, withheld that means from some men,
without which they could not believe: and first I shall begin with that which
is written Joh. 6.37. all the Father gives me shall come to me, etc. hence it
is inferred, that God looking upon the lump of lost men chose out some of
them, and gave them to Christ, leaving the rest merely of his will, without
consideration of their embracing or rejecting the gospel; and those thus given
he by a special and allmighty power causes to come, which power being not
exercised toward the rest of the Sons of men, they cannot come to Christ.

First, consider that this word shall in this place, does not signify any
power or compulsion exercised by God, to cause these men to come to him, but is
merely a sign of the Future Tense, and may as well be read, will come to me.

Secondly, I deny that God does put any such difference between the sons of men
in unbelief, (but of this in another place.)

Thirdly, the scope of the place carries it another way, for in the 26 verse
Christ reproves those persons, for that their end in seeking of him was low,
base and sinister. In the 27 verse. he exhorts them first negatively, not to
labor for the meat which perishes; then affirmatively, but for that meat
which endures to everlasting life, which says he, the Son of man shall give
unto you, you unbelievers which seek me for the loaves, verse. 26. which did
see, and yet did not believe, verse. 36 which did murmr at Christ, verse. 41.
unto you will I give that meat which does endure to eternal life, for to that
end am I sent and sealed of the Father: and this meat or bread was his Flesh,
which he was to give for the life of the World, verse. 51. In the 28 verse. the
Jews demand of him what they should do to work the works of God, that so they
might be partakers of that meat, which he was sealed of the Father to give
unto them? Christ tells them that they were to believe on him whom God had sent,
verse 29 they pretend a willingness to believe, if they saw any ground or
foundation for their faith; and therefore they say unto him verse. 30. what sign
show thou, that we may see and believe what do thouwork? Moses manifested
himself to be of God, for he gave our Fathers bread from Heaven, verse. 31.
but what do thou? Christ tells them in the 32. 33. verse. that Mosis did not
give them that bread from heaven, but says he, my Father does give you the
true bread from heaven, for the bread of God is he which comes down from
heaven, and gives lise unto the world. The Jews then desire to have that bread
given them evermore, verse. 34. Christ tells them that he was the bread of life,
and if they did come to him they should never hunger; and if they did believe
on him they should never thirst: but says Christ, whereas ye pretend that if
ye did see, ye would believe, you also have seen and believed not, verse. 35,
36. Then Christ proceeds further, verse. 37. and tells them that all that the
Father gives him, (that is, to give eternal life unto which the Jews
desired, ver. 34.) will come to him, and him that comes he will in no 'wise
cast out: for he came not down from heaven to do his own will, but his
Fathers; and this is his Fathers will, that of all that he had given him, he
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, and that
every one that see'ch the Son, and believes on him, should have everlasting
life, verse. 40. but seeing ye have seen and believe not, the bread of life
which you desire, belongs not to you; you are not of those which the Father
has given, or commended to me to that end: I have no commission from the
Father, to bestow life upon you but only to such as come unto me, as believe on
me: and this I conceive to be the meaning of this place, all that the Father
gives me, will come to me.

Here is one Objection needful to be answered, to take off a seeming
contradiction which some may apprehend from what has bin said (viz.) that in
opening of the 27 verse. I say that Christ was appointed of the Father, to give
eternal life to those which believe not; and in opening the 37 verse. I say,
Christ was appointed of the Father to give life only to those which should
believe.

To which I Answer, that God gives all men eternal life in Christ, 1 John
5.12. or he gives Christ a sufficient means to bring all men to life; Christ
by his death has purchased life for every man and he declares this in the
gospel to the Sons of men, now those that will not believe it, receive it nor
live to it, in the day of grace and mercy, (which is all that God requires) ut
is not his will that they should partake of it, at the last day, the day of
Judgment.

Again, Joh. 6.43, 44. murmr not among your selves, for no man can come to
me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: whence it is inferred,
that the reason why those murmuring Jews did not come to Christ, was, because
they could not, that means being wanting which caused others to come; For the
opening of this Scripture, consider that this word draw, has an equivocall
acceptance, some times we are said to draw, when we use means to remove a
thing though it be not moved by the means; some times we are said not to have
drawn, notwithstanding the means, when the means so used does not take
effect; as thus; we say I have drawn such a man, but he will not come, and
yet of the same person, we say we cannot draw him; in like manner we say, I
have persuaded such a man, and yet we say of the same man (when our
persuasions take not effect) that I cannot persuade him, so that he is
persuaded, and yet he is not persuaded, he is drawn, and yet he is not
drawn; therefore we must consider how the drawing of the Father is to be
understood in this place, whether thus, none can come to me, except the Father
use means to draw him; or thus, none can come to me, except the means used by
the father prevail with him. Now both these are true, but the first is not to
be understood in this place; for the Argument of the place, is, that those that
are so drawn by the Father, as the place intends, do all come. Now all that
the Father does use means to dravv, do not come, for some dravv back, Heb.
10.39. some resist and oppose, Act. 18.6. Act. 7.51. and God having raised up
Christ, sent him to bless the Iows in turning every one of them from their
Iniquities, though few were turned, Act. 3.26. and God leaves the very Heathen
without excuse in respect of means, Romans 1.20. Act. 14.17. therefore it must
be understood in this place, according to the latter acceptance, none can
come to me, except the means used by the Father prevail with them: and this
appears more plainly, if you consider the 45 verse. Every man therefore that
has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me; plainly showing, that no
man is drawn according to the intent of the spirit of God, in this place; but
such a one as has heard and learned of the Father, and that every one so drawn
does come.

For God the Father declares, that there is peace, reconciliation, remission of
sins, and eternal life in his Son for all men, and thereupon invites and
persuades them to come to the son to believe, to hear, to obey, to follow the
Son in whom this fulness is, that so they may be partakers of it; and if
they do not believe in him, they shall die in their sins. Now if men believe
GOD, that there is such safety and security, such fulness of blessedness in
his Son then do they immediately cloze with him, follow and observe him in
all things; and this I conceive to be the meaning of this place, none can come
to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him; as if Christ had said,
murmr not concerning my Father and mother, for except the word, testimony,
and witness of God prevail with you, you will not, you cannot come unto me?

Again, Ioh. 6.68. and he said, therefore say I unto you, no man can come unto
me, except it be given him of the Father: This verse has reference to what
Christ spoke in the 44 verse. (no man can come to me, except the Father which
has sent me draw him) and is but a repeating of the same thing in other words,
so that the former interpretation serves for this place also, no man can come
to me, except it were given him (that is) unless the means used by the Father
to that end prevail with him, unless it take effect in him; and the reason
why Christ spoke these words was to show that he was not ignorant of the
hypocrifie of those who professing themselves his Disciples did not (he does
not say could not) believe, neither was he ignorant who would betray him,
neither how they would neglect and frustrate the means which God afforded them:
now a thing may be said to be given, in respect of the giver, and yet not in
respect of the receiver, (to wit) the thing given, not received by him to whom
it is given, and so not given in respect of the end, for the end of giving it
to possess another of something which he has not; which end not being
obtained, the thing is said not to be done not to be given; as when we are
demanded whether we have given such a man such a thing, we answer (when the
thing is refused) no he will not receive it, and so it is not given in the
effect, though we did as much (in respect of the act done by us) as if it had
been received; and there are other Scriptures like this, which must receive the
same Answer, Deuteronomy. 29.4. yet the Lord has not given you a heart to perceive,
and eyes to see unto this day, (that is) they had not a heart to perceive, eyes
to see, and ears to hear, notwithstanding all the means which God used with
them to that end: for Moses in the 2, 3.4, 5. and 6. verses, reasons thus with
them, ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of
Egypt, to Pharaoh and to all his servants, and unto all his Land; the great
temptations which thine eyes have seen, and signs, and those great miracles:
having lead you forty years in the Wilderness, your clothes waxed not old upon
you, neither did your shoes wax old upon your feet; he preserved you in
strength and health, without the ordinary mea^es of bread, or wine, or strong
drink, and all this was done to the end that ye might know that he was the
Lord your God, as is expressed in the latter end of the 6 verse. Now the speech
of Moses to the unbelieving Jews, is to this effect, God has not bin wanting
to you, to give or work in you a heart whereby to know him to be the Lord your
God, and so to love and fear him accordingly, yet all this great, rich, and
abundant means, which God has afforded you, has not effected that end for
which it was intended, and therefore are you worthy of blame, seeing a heart is
not given you to perceive unto this day, ver. 4. butwheras it is said, the Lord
has not given you a heart to perceive, etc. if the defect in them should be
considered in relation to God the giver, then first the Jews were not to be
blamed for not having an heart, seeing it was not given them (unless they
themselves could have procured it some other way) for God requires no more of
men, then he has given.

Object. God gave them an heart in Adam, therefore he might blame them for not
having a heart.

Answer. Then the blame would lie upon them in relation to (or by reason of)
what God had given, but here they are blamed from this reason, that God had not
given it, yet God has not given you an heart, etc. Now no blame can be
fastened on them, for not having a heart, from such a reason that God had not
given it to them (there being no other way to obtain it) though it had been
given them in Adam. Again, if this 4. verse. should be taken as a declaration
of what God had not done for them in respect of himself; as the former verses
are of what he had done, then it takes away all the life and virtue of the
Argument of Moses in the place, for he endeavors to set forth the goodness
of God toward the Jews, in the great means which he had afforded them, to
cause them to know him to be the Lord their God; but the 4. verse, according
to this latter acceptance he makes all nothing, yea worse then nothing; for
then Moses speaks after this manner, God has done much for you, but he has
not given you that without which all that he has done can do you no good,
without which all his mercies and means, will but aggravate and inercase your
woe and misery: and this would be no apt argument to persuade the people to
enter into further Covenant with the Lord, to which purpose he calls upon
them, verse. 12. seeing that whilst they were in Covenant with him, the great
things which he did before them, and the great mercies which he bestowed on
them, were but shadows without the substance, empty shells, outward means
without spirit and life to make it fruitful in them or beneficial to them;
yea they were not only empty of good (if we consider them in every respect)
but the end of them was full of bitterness and death. And besides if the words
should be so taken, then God could not be said to do all those things, for
(and before) them that they might know him to be the Lord their God, as it is
verse 6. for God never propounds means insufficient to effect the end for
which he propounds it, therefore it must needs be taken according to the first
interpretation, and in the same sense must those words be taken, 2 Timothy 2.25.
In meeknes instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure shall
give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth (that is) if
peradventure the means which God uses may prevail with them to repent, and to
acknowledge the Truth.

Again, Phil. 2.13. For it is God that works in you both to will and to do
of his good pleasure, whence it is inferred that it pleases God to work in
some men to will and to do, and not in others, and that men cannot will nor do
more or less but according as God works in them: But this interpretation is
not suitable to the scope of the place; for he exhorts them to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling. verse. the 24. urging this reason, it is God
which, works in you both to will and to do but according to this explication
he might rather have exhorted them to sit still, for it is God that does all,
it is he which works in you both to will and to do, but the meaning of the
place is this, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God
which (of his goodness and mercy) works in you both to will and to do, as if
he should have said, he is not wanting to you; he enableth, works and
disposes you, and therefore be encouraged, and be very careful that you are
not wanting to your selves in working out your own salvation with fear and
trembling, 1 Cor. 1.26. For ye see your calling Brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many Noble are called, but God
has chosen the foolish things, etc.

For the better understanding of these words, let us a little consider the
scope of the place, Paul declares that he was sont to preach the Gospel, verse.
17. that the gospel had a different acceptance among men, some did esteem it
foolishness, and others the wisdom and power of God, verse. 18. and those that
did esteem lightly of it, were such as had much of the wisdom and
understanding of this world the disputers of this world, wise men after the
flesh, verse. 19, 20.26. And the reason was, because God in saving men by the
Gospel, went in such a way that he did destroy, bring to nothing, and make
foolish their wisdom, verse. 19, 20. For the gospel told them, ( that Jesus the
Son of Joseph a Carpenter) was the Son of God that by his death he had
purchased remission of sins, and being now alive, whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life; and if they would be his
Disciples, they must deny themselves, forsake all, and follow him, they must
have the same mind in them toward others, that he had toward them, who though
he was rich, yet for their sakes he became poor, that they through his poverty
might be made rich, so should they be full of bowels of mercy, visiting the
fatherless and Widows in their affliction, doing good to all, giving to
every man that asks, loving their enemies as themselves, returning good for
evil, blessing for cursing, not resisting evil, but overcomming evil with
good; not to lift up themselves above their Brethren, not to mind high things,
but to condescend to mean things, to men of Iow estate, esteeming others better
then themselves, carrying themselves toward the meanest and poorest, both in
word and deed as to their Brethren and Fellow Servants striving more to
minister unto others then to be ministered unto, or served by others, not being
solicitous what to eat or what to drink, and wherewith to be clothed, but to
cast all their care on God who cares for them, and knows they want these
things; and having Food and Raiment therewith to be content to look upon all
they have, and all that they are as Christ's, who has bought them, and to
employ all in his service, using all to his glory and honor, promoting
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, though with the loss of all they have and are,
counting all things but dross and dung, that the love of Christ may be
manifested, and the will of Christ performed and in doing these things though
men did despise them) God would honor them, though men did hate them he would
love them and though they did forsake and lose all here, they should find and
enjoy all hereafter to all eternity, even a Kingdom, a Crown of life with
unspeakable riches and glory; But their wisdom taught them to love the World,
to live unto it, to walk by sense, embracing things present, and despising
things that could not be seen, felt nor tasted, judging all things according to
outward appearance, esteeming it a vain thing to lose or forsake the life
present, the life in possession, for a life which does not appear, heaping up
riches, and trusting in them, striving to partake of the pomp and greatness
of this World, to be admired, served and worshipped of men, to Lord it over
their Brethren, to look on them at a distance, to sort themselves with men like
themselves, to love and feast their friends and rich neighbors, doing good to
those that do good to them, to crush their enemies, to meddle no more with
truth or religion then will stand with the pomp, greatness, and credit of
this word; not to be singular, but to do as the most, and those of most
esteem do; to withold their hands from giving, lest they should want
themselves; to prefer the lust of the flesh and pride of life, before doing
good and showing mercy: Now though the Gospel were the wisdom and power of
God, yet the wise men, the rich men, and mighty men did esteem it foolishness
and madness: for (says the Apostle) when God had manifested his wisdom
evidently by the works of Creation, which things did appear to the wise men
of the World, so that therein, they might plainly see the eternal power and
Godhead; and yet by this they did not so know God, as to worship him as God,
neither were thankful: then it pleased God to save men by preaching, and
declaring things which do not appear, which the World accounts foolishness;
and that this is so (says the Apostle) you may see by the men that embrace the
Gospel, for you see your calling (brethren) how that not many wise, not many
mighty, not many noble, are called: now if God had chosen the rich, mighty, and
wise things of the World, then many rich, mighty, and noble men would have
embraced the truth, such things being suitable to them: but on the contrary,
God has chosen the foolish things of the World, not the foolish men of the
World (that comes by accident,) to confound the wise; and God has chosen the
weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty; and base
things of the World, and things that are despised, has God chosen; and things
that are not, to bring to naught things that are: and this is the reason that
so few wise men after the flesh, so few mighty, so few noble, do yield
obedience to the Gospel: And this I conceive to be the meaning of the place.

Again, 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. A natural man, that is, one that has
received the spirit of this world, verse. 11, 12. and judges all things
according thereunto; one that is altogether carnal, and walks according to
men, according to the men of this world, chap. 3.3. embracing things present,
that are seen, felt, and tasted, such a one receives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, that is, there is an enmity
between the spirit of this world which dwells in him, and the spirit which is
of God, they are contrary one to the other; what one esteems wisdom the other
accounts folly; the spirit which is of God persuades us that the things we see
are vain, and therefore that we should not look on them, not behold them,
not labor for them, not desire to be richly possessed of them, not to trust in
them, but despise them, to forsake them, and to seek those things which are
above, the things not seen, verse. 9. which are freely given to us of God,
verse. 12. and to part with all here, to be possessed of those things hereafter.
The Spirit which is of God tells us that to strive for riches, honor, and
esteem in this world, to set our affections on things here below, to bless
our selves, or to measure our happiness according to our greatness in the
things of this life, is vain and foolish: the spirit of the world persuades us
to cleave to the world to seek after the things thereof, persuading us that it
is a vain thing to neglect and forsake things present, which we see, to seek
and embrace things which do not appear; so that the natural man cannot know
(that is) cannot approve of the things of the Spirit of God, for they are to be
judged and discerned only by faith, by that spirit which he has not received,
which dwells not in him, which is contrary to him: not but that a natural man
may reject and cast off the spirit of this World, and so receive the things of
the Spirit of God; for we are all natural until we receive the things of the
Spirit of God; but he does not receive them, he cannot know them, that is,
whilst he is natural, whilst he retains, hearkens unto and follows the
dictates and suggestions of the spirit of this world. The intent of the Apostle
in this place is only to show how contrary, how incompatible the Spirit of God
and the spirit of the World are, how they cannot lodge under one roof, they
are like God and Mammon, he that loves the one must hate the other, he that
cleaves to the one must despise the other, and this I conceive is all that is
intended in this place.

Thus have I briefly declared what I conceive to be the meaning of these hard
places of Scripture.

To All Men,
IT was Paul's petition for the Ephesians, that they might comprehend the large
dimensions of the Love of GOD; and so it should be our earnest petition and
endeavor to know and to make known the same. When John describes the Divine
Nature to be Love, he declares this as the most eminent manifestation thereof,
the giving his Son to death, that we might live through him; therefore it is
of excellent use and concernment, that the sons of men be rooted and grounded
in the fullness of the glory of this truth, of the full, free, universal, and
individual Love of God toward them in Christ, for that will fill their hearts
with love to God. The apprehension of his love begets love in us; we love him,
because he loved us first: and the reason why so few men love God, is because
so few men know him to be Love; and those that have some affection and love to
God, if they saw more of his love would love him more, and be more established
in his love; they would not be so tossed too and fro with every wind of
temptation, for they might quench all the fiery darts of Satan (the grand
enemy of their peace and comfort) with this consideration, God is Love. Love
affords us an excellent argument to prevail with our hearts, to trust God in
every strait, and to cloze with him in every promise: what can he deny us that
spared not his Son, but gave him to death for us? The apprehension of this
love will fill us with joy and contentment in all conditions; it will make us
to do and suffer with delight: Love makes us one with God, it quickneth and
enlarges us adding fullness and perfection to all our services, making us
fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord: but where there is little love, there is
little life in what is done, for love is the soul, love is the substance of
Religion; Knowledge puffes up, Love builds up, knowledge makes a man seem to
be, but love makes a man to be indeed; for he that is full of Love, is full of
God, for God is Love, he is the fountain and Father of Love; love will teach
us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live righteously and
holily in this present world; for love will do nothing unpleasing to the thing
it loves.

Therefore seeing this truth is so excellent, how should we labor to preserve
it, in its fulness, beauty, and glory; it is the ground and foundation of all
our hopes; it is our life, all our springs are in it, and all our expectation
from it, it is the truth of God and the God of truth, for God is love. Now
considering what excellent effects this truth would produce, were it known,
and embraced among the sons of Men; and withal considering, what strange, dark
and dismal doctrines are preached and published by those, which profess
themselves Ministers of the gospel, and grace of God in Christ, yea by the most
zealous of them; as, that God did from eternity decree the ruin, and damnation
of the most part of men, without respect to any evil, which he knew they would
commit: or (as the more moderate) that he has left the most part of men, being
fallen in irrecoverable condition. That God calls upon men to do that which
they are unable to perform, and yet damns them in hell fire for not
performance. That God calls, invites, and persuades men by his ministers, to
believe that they may have life, and yet has no life for them, nor intention
that they should live; that the end of God in sending means, and bestowing
mercies on the most part of the Sons of men, is only to harden them, to make
them vessels of wrath, to fit them for destruction. These things I say caused
me to publish these few lines of the love of God to all: for 'its impossible
that men should ever be established in the love of God, whiles their minds and
consciences are bewitched with such strange conceits of him. The glad tidings
of the Love, and grace of God in Christ, is plain and easy to be apprehended
by the meanest capacity, and if it were delivered with plainness and
simplicity it would manifest it self to every man's conscience with power and
efficacy. But the teachers of the people cause them to err, they lead them in
dark and sad ways, they possess them with false and wicked Principles, and
thereby keep them in bondage, terrifying, and comforting them, according to
the visions of their own heart. They have brought up another gospel, I may say
other gospels, (though indeed they be no gospels, but only dreams and
delusions) whereby they deceive the people, leaving them in darkness, filling
the World with disputes. They instead of revealing the gospel, have hid it from
the eyes of men: for no men are more resolvedly ignorant thereof then those
which would be thought the most known men. They are more peremptory in their
conclusions, then seven men that can render a reason for what they say, yea
they despise and trample on reason, as low, carnal, and not to be exercised
in divine things; they speak in a dialect that none can understand, but such
as are like unto them, (as some of them will affirm) as though God would have
men's affections run without or before their judgment to believe, or do that
which they cannot give a reason of. Those that deny the universal love of God,
are the men that thrust out the gospel, and bring in the Law; that throw down
Christ, and set up themselves, that ground their comfort more in their own
humiliation then in Christ's; more in what they do, then in what Christ has
done; more in their own grace, then in the grace of God; they bound and limit
the love and death of Christ to some few persons only, and therefore they must
find out something to distinguish them from others, which may serve as a ground
of their faith, that Christ dyed for them and not for others. Hence it is that
they lay the ground and foundation of their peace and comfort in legal
terrors, preparations, marks, signs, and qualifications: In humiliations they
have bend below others, and therefore think they have ground to exalt
themselves above others: But whiles the ground and foundation of their comfort
is in themselves, it must needs be uncertain, and unstable, as they themselves
are: when their spirits are composed, and they find themselves well affected,
they conclude they have faith, and are in the love and favor of God: It is but
a little, and they are in another temper, otherwise disposed, and then they
cast away all peace and comfort, and will by no means entertain any thoughts of
the love and grace of God to such sinful wretches as they are: What is this,
but to put their preparations, qualifications, and dispositions, in the place
of Christ, and so to live and die as those appear, or are withdrawn: hence it
is that so many poor souls are distracted for want of the apprehension of the
love and grace of God toward them in Christ, that some of them are continually
tosled up and down, one day lifted up to heaven, and another day cast down to
hell, in their own apprehensions: others continually cast of comfort all their
days being so terrified with horror, and amazement of spirit, that they are
unserviceable to God and man, of which many destroy themselves, and others
hardly escape: whereof we have woeful and continual experience; many sweet and
excellent spirits have been possessed with those dangerous doctrines, which
are destructive to the manifestation of the love of God unto them; it is time
for men now to awake out of sleep and to abandon these horrid opinions and not
to suffer themselves to be deluded, and led into such palpable and absurd
errors; the absurdity of them being so manifest, that he that runs may read it,
a child may discover it, for to limit the love and death of Christ to some few
persons only, and to persuade men to peace from that doctrine, is to build
without a foundation, to show unto them broken Cisternes that will hold no
water: so that it is a marvel, that all that fear God, holding that opinion,
are not in the like distempers and distractions that others are, seeing they
are taught to deny that doctrine, which is the ground of true peace and
comfort, the universal love and grace of God in Christ toward mankind. I have
demanded of some, that deny the love of God in giving Christ for all, how they
know Christ dyed for them: they Answer, because God has persuaded their hearts
to believe, which in effect is, they believe, because they believe; but true
faith clozeth immediately with God in his word, God has spoken, and therefore
I believe, is the voice of Faith; and not I believe and therefore God has
spoken, we must not make a groundless faith, the ground of our faith for then
we shall multiply fancies instead of faith. God is love, this love is
manifested to all the Sons of men, in giving Christ, that they all might live
through him; GOD would have all men to confide in, and cast themselves upon,
this his love and goodness, and it shall go well with them: The foundation is
firm, the bed is large, if we ground our peace here, our peace will be firm
and stable, like Mount Sion, which shall never be moved, like GOD himself.

But those that teach that Christ dyed only for a few, take away the true
gospel, (and ground of faith, and introduce a false gospel, which affords men
no ground to believe; and hence it is, that they have raised another error to
maintain the former, that men by all the means which was afforded in common
where the gospel was preached) could not believe. And indeed were their
doctrine true, that Christ dyed only for some; I should agree with them: (For
it would of necessity follow) that no man could believe, seeing God in the
dispensation of the gospel, spoke to all men in general, but to no man in
particular or by name, yet they say that they believe and that their faith is
fixed on the word of GOD, if so, then there is a rational ground for their
faith in the Word of GOD, or there is not, if there be, then it is as well
every man's ground, as any man's, and as possible for every man to believe, as
any man if there be not, then they do not believe, for God himself cannot make
a man believe without ground; and the things whereon they ground their peace
and comfort, and wherein they glory and rejoice, (as that God persuaded and
overpowred their hearts to believe such a promise, made this or that Scripture
theirs; spoke to them in it, gave them abundance of comfort from it, at such a
time, in such a place, in such a manner, after they had been so long in a
despairing and distracted condition in bondage under the Law) are vain.

For now though that Scripture or promise be made theirs, (as they conceive)
and they do believe it (as they say) and comfort themselves in it, that God
loves them, and that they shall certainly live, yet can they give no ground or
reason (from their principles) why that Scripture or Promise belongs to them;
much less that it should more belong to them then to others, only they say,
that God persuaded their hearts: but if he persuaded them, he persuaded their
understandings and judgments by some evident and rational demonstration or
conclusion from the Scripture, or promise so believed, and if not, then the
things they speak of are but pleasing fancies, and golden dreams.

Again from this Doctrine of limiting the love of God to a few, the love of
the most religious men of our times is also limited to a few, to love those
that love them, to do good to those that do good to them, to salute their
Brethren only, whereas Christ tells them plainly, that there is nothing
singular in it, they do no more then others, then sinners, then Publicans,
whereas if God indeed were the Pattern of their love, their love would be
universal like the love of God; love is a debt due to all men, and we shall
never be freed from that debt in this World, Romans 13.8. It appears by the
words of Christ, Luke 10.30. That every man we see in misery or in need of our
help and relief is our Neighbor, and we must love our Neighbor as our
selves in deed and in truth, without dissimulation; so that we ought to love
all men, the evil and unthankful our enemies those that hate, curse and
persecute us, and nothing can beget such a Spirit in us, but the Spirit of this
Doctrine, of the free and universal love of God to us, when we were enemies,
sinful lost creatures, evil and unthankful. As God by the discovery of his
love and goodness to us, did turn us from evil to good, so should we
endeavor to overcome the evil of men by good, to prevail with them by love,
for love is very powerful; whereas men's disposing and rejecting such as are
not so good as they would have them, or such as suit not with them in judgment
and opinion, makes them to be despised and hated, yea many men despise Religion
it self. Seeing these things do appear in those which profess themselves to
be most religious, though indeed Religigion teaches no such thing, but the
contrary; as the Scriptures plainly manifest; the substance of Religion is
almost lost, and there is little else then the show or name of it remaining:
(unless Religion be a rigid, A practice not suitable to the Gospel of grace
and love, but to policy and sensuality, not coming from above, but from
beneath, whether it tends, and is therefore to be shund and abhord of all men.
blind and preposterous zeal in seeking dominion over the faith of our brethren
and fellow servants, and by humane and positive laws inhumanely, (Rev. 13.15,
16, 17.) to compel their judgments and consciences to conformity to our
dictates and determinations in matters of the worship of God.) We have much
hearing much praying, much talking amongst men, but little love, whereas all
the means that God uses with us, is to manifest his love to us, that so we may
love him, and one another. To do good, and to show mercy, are services well
pleasing to God, better then all burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, 1 Samuel 15.22.
hearing, praying and discoursing is no further beneficial, then it tends to
edification in love; yea it is abomination if love be wanting. Pure Religion,
and undefiled before God and the father, is this, To visit the fatherless,
and the Widows in their affliction, and to keep our selves unspotted in the
world; and who so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion, from him, how dwells the love of God
in him, all his Religion is vain, and to no purpose.

If any Object, that this doctrine of Gods rich and abundant grace to all,
tends to looseness.

I Answer, (as formerly) that the grace of God which brings salvation to all
men appearing, teaches us to deny all ungodlines, and worldly lusts, and to
live righteously and godlily in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12.] But if any
abuse this grace of God, and turn that into wantonness, which naturally leads
to holiness, the Judgment of God is just against those that so do: now I
desire you to consider, what is here written in love, and that the love of God
may be shed abroad in our hearts, that we may dwell in love, walk in love, and
do whatever we do in love; shall be the prayer and endeavor of him who
while he lives never, cease to remain.

The Servant of all men in Love. L. S.

FJNJS.

