PROPOSITION'S From the Right Honorable the COMMISSIONERS OF THE KINGDOM OF
SCOTLAND, TO The Kings most Excellent Majesty.

IN The Name of themselves, and all the COMMONS of that NATION; CONCERNING His
Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity; as also, touching the weakening of
His Majesty's power, and Authority Royal.

With the proceedings of the Commons of England thereupon.

London, Printed by I. C. for G. Horton, MDCXLII.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY The humble Proposals of the Commissioners
of Your Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's humble and faithful Subjects, considering that the mutual
relation betwixt your Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland and England, is such that
they must either stand or fall together, and the disturbance of the one, must
needs disquiet and distemper the Peace of the other, as has, been often
acknowledged by them both and especially in the late treaty, which is ratified
in Parliament, and confirmed by the public Faith of the Estates of your
ancient and native Kingdom of Scotland, so that they are bound to maintain the
peace and liberties of one another, being highly concerned therein, as the
assured means of the safety and preservation of their own, and finding our
selves warranted and obliged, by all means to labor to keep a right
understanding betwixt your Majesty, and your people: to confirm that brotherly
affection begun betwixt the two Nations: to advance their Unity by all such
ways as may tend to the glory of God, and peace of the Church and State of
both kingdoms; and likewise to proffer our service for the removing all
Jealousies, and mistakings which may arise betwixt your Majesty and this
Kingdom, and our best endeavors for the better establishment of the affairs
and quiet of the same.

That both your Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland and England, may be united in
the enjoying of their liberties in peace under your Majesty's scepter, which is
the most assured foundation of your Majesty's honor and greatness, and of the
security of your Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity. We have taken the boldness
to show to your Majesty, viz.

I. That we are heartily sorry and grieved to behold these distractions which
increase daily betwixt your Majesty and your people, and which we conceive are
entertained by the wicked plots and practices of Papists and their Adherents,
whose aim in all these troubles has been not only to prevent all further
Reformation, but also to subvert the purity and truth of Religion, within all
your Majesty's Kingdoms.

For which end, their constant endeavors have been to stir up divisions
betwixt your Majesty and your people, by their questioning the Authority of
Parliament, and the lawful liberties of the subjects, and really weakening your
Majesty's power, and Authority Royal, upon pretense of extending the same,
whereof by Gods providence being disappointed in your Majesty's Kingdom of
Scotland, they have now converted their mischievous Councels, Conspiracies, and
Attempts, to produce these distempers in your Majesty's Kingdom of England and
Ireland,

II. And therefore according to our duty to your Majesty, to testify our
Brotherly affection to this Kingdom, and acquit our selves of the trust imposed
upon Us, we do make offer of our humble Endeavors for composing of these
differences, and to that purpose do beseech your Majesty in these extremities,
to have recourse to the sound and faithful advise of your great Council, and
to repose thereupon as the only assured and happy means to establish the
prosperity and quiet of this Kingdom, and in the depth of your Royal Wisdom,
to consider and prevent these apprehensions of Fear, which may possess the
hearts of your Majesty's subjects in your other Kingdoms, if they shall
conceive the Authority of Parliaments and the Rights and Liberties of the
subjects, to be here called in question.

III. And we are confident, if your Majesty shall be graciously pleased to take
in good part, and give ear to these our faithful and humble desires, that the
success of your Majesty's affairs, howsoever now perplexed, shall be happy to
your Majesty, and Joyful to all your people, over whom that your May long and
prosperous Reign, is the constant and fervent prayer of Us your Majesty's
faithful subjects, and servants.

These Proposals were agreed upon, and assented to, by the Representative
Council of Scotland, in the Name of themselves, and all the Commoners of that
Nation.

The Answer of the Commoners of England, to the Proposals and Desires of the
Commissioners of Scotland, presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
THE House of Commons are very sensible, and do tenderly and affectionately
consider, that this your dutiful and faithful advise, is a large testimony of
your fidelity to the King, affection to this State, and of Wisdom, for
honor, security, and peace of his Majesty, and both Kingdoms, and not only
very acceptable to this house but likewise of great advantage to both Nations.

They clearly perceive, you rightly understand the causes of our distempers,
and your careful endeavors to comply with them in the quieting and removing
of the same: That the Brotherly communion lately confirmed by both Parliaments
of England and Scotland, bind them both to maintain the peace and liberties of
one another, being highly concerned equally therein, as the assured means of
the safety and preservation of both, and being so united, the disturbance of
the one must needs disquiet and distemper the peace of the other, as has been
acknowledged by them both.

They are likewise sensible that those ways which you in your wisedoms have
advised his Majesty to take, are the only means to settle peace and unity in
this Kingdom, which are:

I. To endeavor to procure a right understanding between his Majesty and his
people, by which his Majesty may truly understand the real causes of these
disturbances, and who are the Authors thereof, who are his faithful and loyal
subjects, who are his faithful and dutiful Councillors, and who not: by this
means shall the brotherly affection begun betwixt the two Nations be confirmed
by all such means, as may tend to the glory of God, and peace of the Church
and state of both Kingdoms, will their unity be advanced, and all mistakes and
Jealousies which may arise betwixt his Majesty and this Kingdom be removed, and
the establishment of the affairs and quiet of the same, settled in such a manner
as may be the perpetual peace and tranquillity of the same, the liberties and
privileges of his Majesty's subjects freely enjoyed under his Royal scepter,
which is the most assured Foundation of his Majesty's Honor, and Greatness,
of the security of His Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity.

II. The removal and prevention of all such plots and practices which they
conceive are enterained by the Papists and their Adherents, whose aim in all
these troubles has been not only to prevent all further Reformation, but also
to subvert the purity and truth of Religion within all His Majesty's Kingdoms,
For which end, their constant endeavors have been to stir up division betwixt
His Majesty and His People, by their questioning the Authority of Parliaments,
and the lawful liberties of the subjects, and really weakening His Majesty's
power and Authority Royal, upon pretense of defending the same, which
mischievous Councels, Conspiracies, and Attempts, has produced these
distempers in His Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Ireland.

III. That His Majesty would be pleased to have recourse only to the sound and
faithful advise of His Parliament, and to depend thereupon as the assured and
happy means to establish the prosperity and quiet of this Kingdom, and in His
Royal wisdom to consider and prevent these apprehensions of fear which may
possess the hearts of His Majesty's subjects in His Majesty's other Kingdoms,
if they shall conceive the Authority of Parliaments, and the Rights and
liberties of the subjects, etc

These your faithful and loyal propositions is the greatest demonstrations of
your affections, faithfully united and devoted to the security of His Majesty,
and your hearey wishes and desires of the peace and prosperity, as well of His
Majesty's Kingdom of England. as Scotland and Ireland: these Propositions have
been the only endeavors and intentions of His Majesty's High Court of
Parliament, to effect and make manifest to all men: And in any other means
whatsoever that shall by you be conceived necessary to the composing and
settling of these present distractions, they declare themselves desirous to have
the same communicated unto them, and they shall be right Joyful and thankful
therefore, and will willingly and cheerfully join with you in the same.

IT was Ordered by the Honorable House of Commons, that this Answer should be
communicated to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland.


