THE DEMANDS AND PROPOSALS OF The Parliament of Scotland to be presented to the
Parliament of England, by the Lord Lee, for removing the King near London, a
personal treaty, and the disbanding the Lord Fairfax his army.

Votes of the Parliament of Scotland that the Parliament of England have broken
the Covenant and treaties in seven particulars, and the answer given to the
English Commissioners

Die Mer. 19 April. 1648.

THese papers were read and appointed to be Printed by the Original Copies.

Imprimatur Dilbert Mabbot.

London Printed, by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at the Royall-exchange in
Corne-hill. 1648.

THE DEMANDS AND PROPOSALS OF The Parliament of Scotland, to be presented to
the Parliament of England, by the Lord Lee, for removing the King near London,
etc.
SIR,
THE Parliament of Scotland have been upon an answer to the desires of the
Clergy, which I believe you have seen long ere this, but although they would
have first stated the question, yet carried on the negative, and the answers
resolved on, was not hele satisfactory to the Ministry. Some days there are
great hopes of an agreement, and other days the distance is so far, as scarce
any man shall know how near they are to have an Army: many English men are at
Edinburgh, and they do daily increase. Another great ship came to Leeth Rode
on Friday night last; what she is, is not yet known, but a flying Report of the
Prince being in her, but no certainty. Some Irish Rebels are come into some of
the Scots Islands, and the Marq. of Argyles Regiment are directed, with some
others, to march toward them. This is all, I earnestly request a
correspondency weekly, and where I shall direct my Letter unto you, that I may
take the occasion to subscribe my self.

Your obliged servant, R. S.
Barwick 12 April, 1648.
The Copy of a Letter from Edinburgh, touching several Propositions to be sent
to the Parliament of England.
Noble Sir,
YOurs I received, and by way of requital take what has occurred since my
last. The difference between the State and the Clergy is as great as ever; they
will by no means consent to the raising of an Army, till the King establish the
Presbytery: yet notwithstanding I hear for certain, that an Army is raising,
and men listing in diverse parts of this Kingdom; it is supposed 'twill be
speedily effected; and because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of
this Kingdom do not concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be
disbanded, and the Earl of Calender is to be General of their new Model;
insomuch, that the Cavees and English Fugitives grow very high, treating ruin
and destruction to the Parliament and their Adherents.

Our Commissioners have not had audience, nor answer to any one of the papers
they have delivered to the Parliament, but are promised it this week. We hear
that it is ^o^ed by this Parliament, that our parliament have broken the
Covenant and Treaties with them in seven particulars. Its likewise reported,
that the Lord Lee is to go speedily to England with propositions from this
Parliament; the one is, about settling Religion according to the Covenant, a
second for removing the King to one of his Houses, and a personal treaty with
him: the third for disbanding the Army, with others, which I hope to send the
certainty of by the next, I have underneath, written you the names of the
Committee of danger, with some that are added.

Edinburgh 10. Apr. 1648. Your most affectionate friend to serve you. Duke
Hambleton. Mar. Argile. Ld. Treasurer. Ld. Lannerick. E. Calender. E.
Ladderdale. added E. Uxborough. E. Traquire. Buroughs Archibald Sidserfe. Sr.
Peter Wedderborne. Patrick Lesly. John Sh^rt. George Porterfeild. William
Gloudoving. added George Bell. James Pady. Barons Innerpeffer. Lee. Hunbey.
Wariston. Arneston. Collington. added Innis. Garthland for Edenborough. Dundee.
Aberdeen. Sterling. Glasgow. Kirk-Gudbright. Lithgow. Munrosse.


SIR,
SInce my writing by this Post, I received a Letter just now from Edinburgh,
whereby I perceive it was concluded yesterday, that an Army should be forthwith
levied though it be kept very close. There is a Lord called Lee, as I hear
appointed Commissioner for England, with some Propositions touching Religion, a
personal Treaty with his Majesty, and disbanding of the Army: This is all that
is material, I am, Sir,

Your assured loving friend, R. G.
Barwick 12 April, 1648. Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament
of Scotland have given an answer to our Commissioners papers, but it is said to
be very unsatisfactory, and that they refer the substance of all to their own
Commissioners which are coming into England to treat with the Parliament.



Worthy Sir,
FOr affairs in these parts, we hear another Mac-Donald, commonly called
Kolkittoh, and a Kinsman of the former, is risen in Arms in the Marq. of
Argyles Country, which has caused sundry Forces that lay in the Southern parts
of Scotland, to march Northward to the suppression of him, A^l the Officers in
the standing Army of Scotland, save Lieut-Gen. Middleton, have petitioned the
Parliament not to engage in a war against England, unless the Church do concur
with them. Some Demands or Proposals from the Parliament of Scotland, to the
Parliament of England will shortly be sent By which we may guess, a good deal
of time will be spent, before our Brethren resolve one way or other,

The Kirk and State here, are still at a distance, one day there is some
likelihood of an agreement between them, another while there is no hope at
all: to say truth, affairs in Scotland lie lose, things are done, and not done:
the Scots expect, that the division and distempers in England will increase,
and prepare the way for their coming into England: they love to go upon some
grounds, and thereupon they build their hopes, being still at liberty to
declare and join with whatsoever interest and party shall be found most
advantageous, and suitable to their ends, If, in some short time, the Cloud in
Wales blow over, and the Parliament make examples in punishing Poyer, and
others, that are there in Rebellion, it will be a great discouragement, and
happily, may put a period to the designs of the Malignant parties in both
Kingdoms, the Scots have agreed to raise an Army, the Lord Lee is to be sent to
the Parliament of England, with Proposals and Demands: In the mean time, the
English flock thither apace, and the common soldiers have 4. d. a day. All
will be naught.

Barwick 12. April, 1648.
FINIS.

