A DECLARATION Of the Parliament of SCOTLAND, CONCERNING The Government of that
Kingdom, and the deposing of His MAJESTY from executing any Power, until He
has signed the Propositions concerning RELIGION and the COVENANT.

Whereunto is annexed, His Majesty's Desires to the Parliament of England: And
the Determination of both Housss thereupon.

JANVARY. 5. 1647.

Printed for general satisfaction of the Subjects of England.

NEVVES FROM THE NORTH
BY Letters from Scotland it is advertised, that the Parliament of that
Kingdom sits very close, and has many Conferences and Debates about the
Disposal of the Kings Person, the major-part desiring, that his Majesty may be
settled in Honor and Dignity, etc.

But now they have with one unanimous consent voted, and declared, viz.

That it is not lawful for the Kingdom of Scotland to assist the King, for
the recovery of the Government of the Kingdom of England, He not granting the
Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, and giving satisfaction to
both Kingdoms, according to their engagement by the Covenant, etc.

They have further declared, that the kingdom of Scotland shall be governed,
as it has been these five last years, all means being used that the King may
take the Covenant, etc.

And further, that the King shall not execute any power in the Kingdom of
Scotland, until such time, that he has granted the Propositions concerning
Religion and the Covenant, and given a satisfactory answer to both Kingdoms in
the rest of the Propositions, etc.

It is also further declared, that if his Majesty refuse to pass the
propositions, he shall be disposed of according to the Covenant and treaty, etc.

Resolved upon by the Representative Body of the Kingdom of Scotland.

By Letters from Newcastle it is further communicated unto us, that since the
arrival of these tidings from Edenborough, the King is much discontented, and
does earnestly desire a personal treaty with the Parliament of England; as will
manifestly appear by these ensuing lines.

His Majesty having a desire to bring a speedy period to the miseries and
distractions of this sanguishing kingdom, has sent another Message to the
Parliament, viz That He desires to come to London, or any of his houses the
abouts upon the public Faith and security of his two houses of Parliament,
etc. that he shall be there with honor, freedom and safety, where by his
personal presence, He may not only raise a mutual confidence betwixt him and
his people, but also have those doubts cleared, and those difficulties
explained to him, without which he cannot (but with the aforesaid mischievous
inconveniences) give a particular answer to the Propositions.

And with which he doubts not but so to manifest his real intentions for the
settling of Religion, the just privileges of Parliament, with the freedom and
property of the subject, that it shall not be in the power of wicked and
malicious men to hinder the establishing of that firm peace which all honest
men desire.

Assuring them, that as he will make no other Demands, but such as he believes
confidently to be just, and much conducing to the tranquillity of the people: So
he will be most willing to condescend to them in whatsoever shall be really for
their good and happiness. Not doubting likewise but you will also have a due
rega d to maintain the just Power of the Crown, according to your many
Protestations and Professions. For certainly except King and People have
reciprocal care each of other, neither can be happy.

Which Message, the honorable house of Commons have spent some time upon, and
have had some Conference with the Lords about the same, which debates have
produced thus much; that his Majesty may come to Holmsby house in Northampton
shire, there to remain, with respect and honor to the safety and preservation
of his Majesty's person, in the preservation and defense of the Kingdoms,
according to the Covenant, with such attendance as both Houses shall think fit.

One thing I cannot omit, which will render great satisfaction to the Subjects
of England, viz.

His Excellency General Lesll has given Order to all the Colonels both of
Horse and Foot, under his Command, that they forthwith have their Regiments in
readiness, and prepare themselves for a march. The Works at Barwick and
Carlisle are demolishing and throwing down.

And therefore, for the satisfaction of the Kingdom of England, the Scots
Commissioners has sent to the Parliament, intimating, that they are now upon
their returning home to Scotland, desiring to know, if they had any further
service to command them.

Which Message the house received with much alacrity, and ordered that that
thanks should be given them, etcs

O what a terror is this to the enemies of Great Britain, to behold the
gallant concurrence, and happy uniting of the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, who are resolved to assist each other, against any Foreign or
Domestique Enemy, that shall endeavor to disturb the peace and tranquillity of
these united Kingdoms.

From Ireland it is communicated unto us,

First, that the exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, be in Dublin,
Droheda, and all the Kingdom of Ireland, as free and public, as now in Paris,
and other places beyond the Seas.

Secondly, that the Council of State, called the Council Table be of members
true and faithful to his Majesty, and such of which there may be no fear or
suspicion of going to the Parliaments Party.

Thirdly, that Dublin, Droheda, and all other Garrisons within the Protestants
quarters be garrisoned for the King by the Confederate Catholics, to keep
the same for the use of his Majesty, and defense of the kingdom.

Fourthly, that the Confederate Council shall take an Oath to keep all
Garrisons for the use of the King and his Successors, and defense of the
Kingdom.

Fifthly, that the Counselors, Generals, Officers and Soldiers shall swear
to fight against the Parliament both by Sea and Land, and that they will never
come to any agreement with the Parliament, or any of the Kings enemies, to the
prejudice of his Majesty, or that Kingdom.

Lastly, that according to the Oaths of Association, they will to the utmost
of their power defend the Fundamental Laws of that Kingdom, the Kings Rights,
and the lives and fortunes of the Subjects.

The Parliament have this week declared, that they will maintain a defensive
war for the reducing of that Kingdom, and have ordered that the Lord Lisle
Lieutenant General of the Kingdom of Ireland for the Parliament of England,
shall be forthwith dispatched overwith an Army, for the redeeming of that
distressed Kingdom from the tyrannical oppression from the blood-thirsty
Rebels.

FINIS.

