A LETTER From the Parliament of SCOTLAND To the Parliament of ENGLAND WITH
Several Demands therein, in relation to the King and both Kingdoms. ALSO, The
Copy of the Oath taken by all the Members of the Parliament in Scotland, and
some Orders made since their sitting.

March. 16 London, Printed for B.D. and are to be sold near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1648. 1647*

THE DEMANDS OF The Parliament of Scotland to the Parliament of England, sent
in a Letter from the Parliament of Scotland to the House of Commons in England.
Right Honorable,
AS the Parliament of this Kingdom does acknowledge the zeal and endeavors of
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the good progress already made
toward Reformation of Religion and Uniformity of Church Government: Go is it
expected, that when they shall seriously consider the brotherly affection, and
great sufferings of this Kingdom, who from a peaceable condition which we
formerly enjoyed, did engage our selves in a dangerous and bloody war with
England against their enemies, when their affairs were in the hardest and
lowest condition, upon a mutual League and Covenant, to settle Religion and
Church government, according to the Word of God, the practice of the best
Reformed Churches, and as might draw the nee^est Uniformity betwixt the two
Kingdoms, which was acknowledged to be the chief grounds of craving Aid and
Assistance from this Kingdom the Honorable Houses will now, after so mature
deliberation, add their Authority and Civil Sanction without further delay, to
what the pious and learned Assembly of Divines, upon mature deliberation, have
advised to be most agreeable to the Word of God, and perfect what remains to be
done in the Work, according to the Covenant; which I am commanded by the
Parliament of this Kingdom to demand, and do accordingly in their Names demand
of the Honorable Houses of Parliament of England: The performance whereof will
be most acceptable to this Kirk and Kingdom, as a special recompense of the
labors and blood which has been shed (...) assisting you to promote the Cause
of God, and will be a mean to procure Gods blessing upon the proceedings and
undertakings of both Kingdoms: And the Parliament of this Kingdom is persuaded,
That the piety and wisdom of the Honorable Houses, will never admit any
toleration of any Sects or Schisms, contrary to our Solemn and Sacred Covenant.

The next desire of the Parliament of this Kingdom (and which of all things
next to truth is most desirable) is, That all lawful means be used, for
attaining a just and well-grounded peace, that there may be an end of the great
distractions, and unnatural war of all the three kingdoms.

This kingdom lies under the burden of great and vast expense, in raising
add entertaining Armies, and has with the loss of the lives of many precious
men, set their own houses of fire to quench the flame of yours, and almost
destroye^ their own Nation to preserve yours.

And seeing by the seasonable assistance, afforded by this ^^^^^m to you, and
by the late successes wherewith God (...) your Armies, you are in a great
measure freed of (...) trouble, and are in a far better capacity to pay the
money to our Armies, then you were at any time since the beginging of these
wars.

I am likewise commanded by the Parliament of this kingdom, to demand, and
accordingly do in their name demand of both Houses of Parliament, to make
payment before the sums of money duly owing by them to this King come, that so
this Kingdom may thereby relieved of the great burdens and pressures of our
debts contracted in this Cause, and be enabled and encouraged for joint
carrying on of the war, till the Church of God be settled in purity and peade.

And it is further craved from the Justice of the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, that they will take into their serious consideration, the great
losses sustained by this kingdom at Sea, through the not attendance of their
ships upon our Coasts, according to the Treaty, and make reparation thereof;
and of the losses which Scotland has sustained by the Irish Invasion, which
the Kingdom of England is bound to suppress by the large Treaty.

In all which, the Desires of the Parliament of this Kingdom are no other, then
that Religion and Church Government may be settled according to our Covenant,
That a well-grounded peaceimay be endeavored betwixt the King and his
Subjects, That payment be made of the sums due to this Kingdom and our Armies
by Treaty: and that (against the malice of our open Enemies, and secret plots
of such as for their own ends, are laboring to sow sedition betwixt Brethren,
tied by so many relations) mutual Amity and Union between the Kingdoms, may be
strengthened and perpetuated to al Posterity. We rest,

Your most affectionate friends, Crawford and Lindsey.


For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster.
A Letter to a private Gentleman.
SIR,
WHen the Parliament of Scotland met together, after some questions about
Elections were over, they took the usual Oath appointed to be taken by the
Members of Parliament, and made an Order of secrecy, to prevent the divulging
of their Debates, before the House should perfect the same, and hold them fit
for public view; and one thing which is much wondered at, is, that the
Instructions of the English Commissioners were in print at Edinburgh, before
the Comissioners themselves came thither. The Commissioners since the sitting
of the Parliament have had several meetings with the Committee appointed to
receive their papers, and receive the transaction of business from them, who
are to make report thereof to the House; but what the issue will be, as yet
cannot be known. The Lord London, and other of the Commissioners which were in
England, are in great esteem, and his Lordship is made Lord Presidenu.

SIR, I am your humble servant, J. M.

An Oath taken by the Parliament in Scotland.
FOrasmuch, as the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom and the purity of
Religion, ought to be sought after by all good Christians and loyal Subjects,
and ought to be maintained and furthered by them, against all such, as shall
by any means endeavor to shake or subvert the same.

Therefore we under-scribers, and every one of us, do in the presence of
Almighty God promise and vow, that in this present Parliament, we shall
faithfully and freely speak answer and express our selves upon all and every
thing which shall be propounded, so far as we think in our conscience may
conduce to the glory of God, the good and peace of the Kirk, and State of this
Kingdom, and employ our best endeavors to promote the same, and shall in no
way advise, voice, nor consent to any thing to our best knowledge, we think not
most expedient and conduceable thereunto. As also that we shall endeavor to
preserve and defend His Majesty's Royal Person, the power and privileges of
Parliament, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subject, and by all good ways
and means oppose and endeavor to bring to exact trial all such, as either by
plots or conspiracies have done, or shall do any thing to the prejudice of the
purity of Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and peace of the Kingdom. And further,
that we shall in all just and honorable ways endeavor to preserve union and
peace betwixt the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland, and neither
for hope, fear, nor other respect shall relinquish this vow and promise.

FINIS.

