A DECLARATION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, To all his Majesty's good
Subjects of this KINGDOM.

Concerning their Resolutions for RELIGION, KING and KINGDOMS, In pursuance of
the Ends of the COVENANT.

CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of
arms

Imprinted at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, and reprinted at London for J. Huntscot
1648.

A DECLARATION OF THE Parliament of SCOTLAND, To all his Majesty's good
Subjects of this Kingdom, concerning their resolutions for Religion, King, and
Kingdoms, in pursuance of the ends of the COVENANT.
WE the Estates of Parliament now conveened, in the first Session of
this-second Trienniall Parliament, finding the strong endeavors and attempts
of disaffected persons and Enemies of Truth, to blast and obstruct our Labors
in the performance of our duties, in order to all our Relations, by traducing
and calumniating our proceedings; Are therefore obliged to undeceive the abused
People, to vindicate our selves from all unjust Aspersions, and to clear and
evidence to this Kingdom our constancy and firmness to the Cause of God, which
we find now in as great (if not greater) Danger then it ever was in since the
beginning of all their late Troubles.

Upon the growing divisions and debates betwixt his Majesty and his Two Houses
of the Parliament of England, This Kingdom did for the space of near two
years, by reiterated Petitions and Messages offer their Services and
endeavors, for composing and removing these Discentions and Differences. But
their desires therein, through the Counsels and Practices of their common
Enemies were still made ineffectuall and disappointed, until at length many
thousands of either side were fallen by the fury and rage of a cruel and
unnatural Sword, and the Flourishing Kingdom of England turned into a field
of blood. And while they were thus with their own hands, tearing out their own
Bowels, and massacring themselves, The Houses of Parliament then in a very low
Condition invited this Kingdom to their Assistance, who finding their Petitions
and addresses to his Majesty, for a more Natural and amicable decision of
differences, then by the Sword, rejected; and justly apprehending to have the
dregs of that bitter Cup, which overflowed in England pour out upon their own
heads, if those Councels and advices, which gave first Life and motion to these
Discentions, should still be prevalent; Did engage in a Solemn League and
Covenant for Reformation and defense of Religion, the Honor and Happinesss of
the King, and peace and safety of the three Kingdoms; In pursuance thereof,
this Kingdom joined in Arms with their Brethren in England, and for diverse
years through many hazards and wants, did prosecute these ends, until by the
Blessing of God upon their joint endeavors, their common Enemies were subdued,
and most of them brought to such condign punishment as the respective
Parliaments thought fit. Thereafter, our Army returned home upon assurance from
the two Houses, that the Treaties and Covenant should be inviolably kept. But
by the contrary, We find that there is not any Article of the Solemn League
and Covenant, which has not been Sinfully and Dangerously violated before God,
Angels and Men, by the prevalent party of Sectaries, and their adherents; Nay,
the Covenant it self like to be destroyed, or at least forgot and laid aside.
For where we expected that according to the first Article of the Treaty betwixt
the Kingdoms, in Anno, 1643. It should have been taken by both Kingdoms, and
that the not Takers thereof are by the joint Declaration of both declared
public Enemies to Religion and Country, and are to be punished as professed
Adversaries and Malignants. We now find by the prevalent Party of Sectaries
and their adherents; It is not only laid aside in the new Propositions lately
sent to his Majesty to the I Will of Wight, and no execution of public Orders for
taking it through the Country, but also many persons of eminent and public
Trusts in the Army and elsewhere, have never taken it, neither are urged
thereunto. Instead of Reformation and defense of Religion, That Reformation
which by the Covenant ought to be endeavored, is resisted and hindered,
Heresy and Schism Tolerated, under which most horrid Blasphemies are
sheltered and protected, if not openly professed and allowed. In stead of
maintaining the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the Houses have been
highly disobeyed, and threatened; Those who by the Covenant ought to be brought
to condign trial and punishment for hindering the Reformation of Religion,
dividing the King from his People, or any of the Kingdoms from another, or
making any Faction or Party amongst the people, contrary to the League and
Covenant, have been protected and assisted, and those persecuted who by the
Covenant ought to be defended. In stead of a firm union and peace betwixt the
Kingdoms, a breach has been endeavored. And whereas both Kingdoms by the
Solemn League and Covenant are obliged to preserve his Majesty's Person and
Authority, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties
of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our
Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts nor intentions to diminish his Majesty's
just power and greatness. And the Kingdom of Scotland, having also upon his
Majesty's going from Newcastle, declared against all injury, harm, prejudice,
or violence to be done to his Royal Person: Yet by a sudden surprizall his
Majesty was violently seized on, and carried from his house at Holdenby against
his own will, and the declared Resolution of both Kingdoms by a party of the
Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and by that Army thereafter
carried about from place to place at their pleasure, kept and environed with
strong guards within their Quarters until he was forced for safety of his life
to fly from Hampton Court, as he himself declared in his Message from thence:
And by the power and prevalency of that Army and their adherents he is kept a
close Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, and Votes past, declaring it high Treason
to make any further applications to him, or to receive any Messages or Letters
from him; Yea, even to that extremity are they already gone against him, that
it is declared they will repose no further trust in him. Like as not only such
as had Warrants for acc^sse to him, from the Parliament of this Kingdom are
debarred thereof, notwithstanding of the engagement of the Houses 27 January,
1647. to the contrary, but the Earl of Landerdale a public Minister of this
Kingdom, contrary to the Law of Nations, was violently removed from Woburn,
where his Majesty then was, and not suffered to have access to him; and
though reparation therein was desired by the Committee of Estates, yet none was
given: And when the said Commissioners desired to know whether the Votes
against all Applications to the King did extend to His Majesty's Subjects of
Scotland, to debar such as are Warranted by the Parliament of this Kingdom, or
their Committees from free access to, or intercourse with His Majesty; or that
he should be hindered from, and so made incapable of any Act of Government in
relation to the affairs of Scotland, no Answer at all was returned thereto,
until the Commissioners from both Houses now residing here, did in March last
give to us a large Declaration from them, acclaiming the sole power of the
disposing of the Person of the King in England. We do not conceive it fit at
this time to insist upon any violation made of the large Treaty concerning the
remainder of the money due upon the brotherly assistance, nor of the Treaty for
the Army in Ireland, whose service there was due in Anno 1643. by a subscrivit
Account 312000. l. sterling (though we can never part from the interest of that
Army till they be justly satisfied for their long and faithful services) For
as money neither was the cause nor motive to any of our undertakings nor
resolutions, whatever has been falsely suggested by our Enemies, so we shall
not value it to much as now to mention it amongst the causes and grounds of our
proceedings at this time.

By the large Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms of Scotland and England, it is
provided, That if any Armies be leavied in any of the Kingdoms, and the
neighbor Kingdom thereby harmed or wronged, that then the Estates, of the
Country by which it is done shall be obliged to pursue, take, and punish the
offenders with all rigor. The Kingdom of Scotland has diverse times desired
the performance of this Article, and in particular the Parliament of Scotland
upon the 16. of January 1647. To which the Houses in their Letter of the 27. of
January engaged themselves to the Parliament of Scotland, That the English
Garrisons being delivered up, and the Scottish Army marched out of England, They
should take that desire into speedy consideration. Upon the 16. of July, 1647.
the Scottish Commissioners desired performance hereof. But through the
prevalencie and power of the Sectaries, no reparation, satisfaction nor answer
was given.

And although by the eighth Article of the Treaty, 1643. It is agreed that no
Cessations, Pacifications, nor agreement for peace whatsoever shall be made by
either Kingdom, or the Armies of either Kingdom without mutual advice and
consent of both Kingdoms, which engagement the Houses of Parliament also
repeated in their Letter of the 17, of January 1648. to observe that Article
after the removal of our Army out of England; yet contrary thereunto the Army
of Sectaries and their adherents framed Proposalls destructive to the Ends of
the Covenant, which were presented to his Majesty without the advice or consent
of the Kingdom of Scotland: And thereafter, by their power and prevalency, the
Houses of Parliament have laid aside the Propositions agreed on by both
Kingdoms, and have contrary to the Treaty, presented Propositions and Bills to
his Majesty; against which the Commissioners of this Kingdom by order, and
according to their instructions, did protest, as being destructive to Religion,
the Crown and union of the Kingdoms.

These dangers so eminently threatening Religion, and Government call upon us,
as Christians, as Subjects, as Scotchmen, to a duty to God, our King and
Country, and to our oppressed and heavily afflicted Brethren in England who
are faithful and constant to the cause of God. We have therefore resolved in
the first place to endeavor and assay all brotherly and amiable means of
repairing and making up such differences or breaches, as may otherwise
necessitat this Kingdom to engage in a War: And therefore, we do intend to send
to the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, These following
necessary, and just desires for Religion, His Majesty, and good and peace of
these Kingdoms.

1 That an effectual course be taken by the Houses for enjoining the Covenant
to be taken by all the subjects of the Crown of England conform to the first
Article of the Treaty, and conform to the Declaration of both Kingdoms in anno
1643. By which all who would not take the Covenant were declared to be public
enemies to Religion and the country, and that they are to be censured and
punished as professed adversaries and malignants: And that Reformation of, and
Uniformity in Religion be settled according to the Covenant. That as the Houses
of Parliament have agreed to the Directory of Worship, so they would take a
real course for the practicing thereof by all the subjects in England and
Ireland, that the confession of Faith transmitted from the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster to the Houses be approven; and that Presbyteriall government
with the subordination of the lower Assemblies to the higer be settled and fully
established in England and Ireland, and that any effectual course be taken for
suppressing and exterpating all Heresies and Schisms, particularly
Socinianism, Arminianism, Arrianism, Anabaptism, Antinomionism, Erastianism,
Familism, Brownism and Independencie; and for perfecting what is yet further to
be done for extirpating Popery and Prelacy, and suppressing the practice of the
Service Book, commonly called the Book of English Common Prayer.

2 That conform to the former desires of this Kingdom, the Kings Majesty may
come with honor, freedom and safety to seem of His houses in or near London,
that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms may make their applicacations to Him for
obtaining His Royal assent to such desires as shall be by them presented to
Him, for establishing Religion, as is above expressed and settling a well grounded
peace.

3 And to the end, that all Members of both Houses who have been faithful to
this Cause, may freely and safely return and attend their charges, the City of
London may enjoy its liberty and privileges which it had before the late
encroachment of the Army, the Parliament may sit and voice with freedom and
safety, both Kingdoms without interruption or disturbance may make their
applications to His Majesty, and the settling of Religion and Peace may be no
longer hind red and obstructed, that the present Army of Sectaries under the
Command of Thomas Lord Eairfax of Cameron, be disbanded, and none employed but
such as have or shall take the Covenant, and are well affected to Religion and
Government, excepting from the said disbanding the garrisons necessary to be
kept up by the Parliament of England, for the safety of that Kingdom, which are
desired to be commanded by such as have or shall take the Covenant, and are
well affected to Religion and Government as aforesaid.

We will not doubt, but the Honorable Houses will seriously weigh and
consider how necessary and just these our demands are, to which we will expect
a satisfactory answer; But if through the influence and power of the Army of
Sectaries that now invirons them, these our desires be slighted and rejected;
Yet, we resolve by Gods assistance in all our proceedings never to break on our
part the unio^ betwixt the kingdoms, nor to encroach upon the national rights
of the subjects of England, or entrench upon their just liberties, much less
is it our intention at all to make any National engagement against the
Parliament and Kingdom of England. But for them whose freedom Privileges and
happiness shall be ever as Dear to Us as our own. And if we shall be
necessitate to any undertakings in War. We do resolve that as the engagements
of this Kingdom have been constantly hitherto, for settling Truth and Peace
under his Majesty's Government, So they shall still be for the obtaining the
same ends. And we will be careful that in the managing and carrying on of so
pious and dutiful a work. That we shall not enter into Association and
Conjunction of Force with those, who shall refuse to swear and subscribe the
Solemn League and Covenant, nor use such means or instruments as may
discourage or disoblige the Presbyterians in England, who continue firm to the
Solemn League and Covenant: And that we will be so far from Joining or
Associating our selves with the Popish, Prelaticall or Malignant party, if they
shall again rise in Arms; either to oppose or obstruct all or any of the ends
of the Covenant; That on the contrary we will oppose and endeavor to suppress
them, as Enemies to the Cause and Covenant on the one hand, as well as
Sectaries on the other. And we further declare, That we will give trust in our
Armies, and Committees to none but such as are of known Integrity, Abilities
and Faithfulness to this Cause and Covenant, and against whom there is no just
cause of Exception. And as we shall endeavor the Rescuing of his Majesty from
those who violently carried him away from Holdenby, and by whose power he is
still detained close prisoner; That he may come with Honor, Freedom and Safety
to some or his Houses, in or near to London, where both Kingdoms may make their
applications to him, for settling Religion, and a well grounded Peace: So we
resolve not to put in his Majesty's Hands or any others whatsoever, any such
power, whereby the foresaid ends of the Covenant, or any one of them may be
obstructed or opposed, Religion or Presbyterian Government endangered. But on
the contrary, before any agreement or condition to be made with his Majesty,
having found his late Concessions and Offers concerning Religion not
satisfactory. That he give assurance by his Solemn Oath under His hand and
Seal. That he shall for Himself, and his Successors give His Royal assent,
and Agree to such Act or Acts of Parliament, and Bills as shall be presented to
Him by His Parliaments of both or either Kingdoms respective, for enjoying the
League and Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyteriall Government, Directory
of Worship and Confession of Faith in all his Majesty's Dominions. And that his
Majesty shall never make any opposition to any of those, nor endeavor any
change thereof. And further to show and evidence the candor and reality of our
intentions, we are willing to subjoyne to the grounds of our undertakings and
Oath, whereof both in the framing thereof, and otherways we are willing the
Church shall have their due interest as formally in the like cases.

And albeit we are resolved not to engage in any War before the necessity and
lawfulness thereof be cleared: so as all who are well affected may be
satisfied therewith. And that reparation to such breaches an injuries as are or
shall be condescended to shall be demanded in such a just and fit way as shall
be found most lawful and expedient. Yet we cannot be answerable to the great
trust laid upon us, if seeing so imminent and great Dangers to all that is
dearest to us; We did not make use of our Authority and Power for the common
safety of this Kindome; And therefore we have resolved to put this Kingdom
presently into a posture of Defense, as it was An. 1643

And now as many of the dangers, with the grounds and resolutions in pursuance
of our duties, are hereby made known to this Kindom; so we are assured, that
all, and every one, who have any zeal to Religion, love to Monarchical
Government, sense of the sufferings and imprisonment of their King, affection
to their oppressed Brethren in England, or desire to preserve the Privileges
of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject will cheerfully in such an exigent
(while the eyes of al Christendom are on us) rouse up themselves and contribute
their best endeavors, as they shall be required by us, in pursuance of all the
ends of the Covenant, as well for Religion as for his Majesty's Person, and
Government, and Privileges of Parliament; in doing whereof we shall witness
to the world, that we have not swerved from these our first principles
contained in our National Covenant, and in our Solemn League and Covenant,
whereby we did solemnly swear and promise before God and his Angels, To endevor
in our several places and callings, the Reformation of, and Uniformity in
Religion and Church Government in all his Majesty's Dominions, according to the
Word of God, and example of the best Reformed Churches; and not only to the
utmost of our Power, with our means and lives to stand to the defense of our
dread Sovereign, his Person and Authority, in the Preservation of the true
Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms: But also in every cause which may
concern his Majesty's honor to concur according to the Laws of this Kingdom,
and duty of good Subjects: And also hereby give a singular proof of the good
intentions of all that maintain Presbyteriall Government, that they are not
enemies to Monarchy as they are falsely by their enemies branded. And in
particular this Kingdom of Scotland will now make it evident as they often
declared, that their quietness, stability, and happiness does depend upon the
safety of the Kings Majesty's person, and maintenance of his greatness and
Royal Authority, who is Gods Vice gerent set over us for maintenance of
Religion, and ministration of Justice: Having so many bands and ties of Duty
and subjection to his Majesty, and his Government, who is our Native King from
a longer Series and descent of his Royal Progenitors then can be paralleld in
Europe. That we resolve closely, and constantly to adhere thereunto, as also to
all the Ends of the Covenant.

Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist.

FINIS.

