LETTERS FROM The Committee of Estates at Newcastle, AND THE COMMISSIONERS OF
The Kingdom of SCOTLAND residing at London to both Houses of Parliament.
Together with Two PAPERS Delivered in to His MAJESTY by the Committee of
Estates.

As also diverse LETTERS past between the Committee of Estates, and the
Committee of Parliament at York, and Col: General Poyntz.

Published by Special Command.

LONDON. Printed for Laurence Chapman, June 17. 1646.

15 June, 1646.
A Letter to the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore, To be communicated
to to both Houses of Parliament, from the Commissioners of the Parliament of
SCOTLAND.
Right Honorable,
WE have frequently, and of a long time represented to the Honorable Houses
our earnest desires of a happy and speedy Peace, of which we are so studious,
that we cannot cease from expressing the same Desires at all Opportunities; and
the rather at this time, because of the sad stroke lately fallen upon our
Brethren in Ireland, whose former and present sufferings under which they
groan, do of themselves call so loud, that we do not doubt the Houses from
their wisdom, care, and commiseration, will timely and effectually apply
themselves to the composing of all differences, and the speedy settling of a
happy Peace in this Island, whereby they may be enabled to send further aid and
succor unto that Kingdom for prosecuting of the War there, and reducing the
Rebels to obedience; and for the same ends speedily to send provisions to the
Scottish army there, who for many Months have received no entertainment,
notwithstanding of their faithfulness and great sufferings in that public
service.

Another occasion now ministered unto us, is, from the pressing and unsupplyed
necessities of our Army in the North of this Kingdom, who are extremely
straightened in their quarters and provisions: For remedy whereof, the Lord
General and Committee of Estates with the Army, did write to the Committee at
York, and to Colonel General Poyntz, who in their Answers have declared no
unwillingnesse, but that they are not enabled by any power from the Parliament
to afford them the desired assistance and satisfaction toward the enlargement
of their Quarters, or bettering of their provisions, as will more fully appear
by the Letters themselves herewith presented, We do therefore again earnestly
desire the Honorable Houses will be pleased to give order to the Committee at
York for the convenient quartering of the Scottish Army, and for accommodating
them with necessary provisions, that the burdens of the Country occasioned to
our great grief, by the failing of the due and orderly course of providing for
that Army, may be eased: To which end, We do also renew our former desire for
sending them from hence a considerable sum of Money toward the discharging of
their quarters. We must further make known, that as the Committee at York, and
General Colonel Poyntz in their Letters of the fourth of this instant June, Do
fairly and ingenuously give testimony to the faithful and careful Endeavors
of the Committee of Estates for preventing misunderstandings, and for
preserving Peace and Amity between the Kingdoms, of which they were pleased in
these Letters to give for instance the Orders of the Committee of Estates, for
preventing the future entertainment of such as shall give occasion of offense,
and for disbanding the Regiment of General Major Vandrusk; which, as the
Messenger sent hither does assure us, is already put in execution, and none of
them are suffered to be received in other Regiments. And as that Honorable
Committee in their Paper of the Eighth of this instant presented to the King
(which we do herewith communicate) and in their own Letters to the Honorable
Houses now sent, have expressed their firm resolution, not to suffer themselves
to be divided from their Brethren of England, with whom they are United by the
Solemn League and Covenant, But to preserve the happy Union, and to observe the
whole Articles of the Covenant and Treaties between the Kingdoms; So upon the
most particular and assured knowledge which we have of their faithful, real,
and unanimous Endeavors, We dare confidently say, That if both Houses had been
witnesses to their most privy Consultations, as before, so especially since
His Majesty did unexpectedly come amongst them, It had been in stead of many
Demonstrations, to remove Jealousies between the Nations, and to breed a more
full confidence of their Sincerity and Integrity toward this Nation. We
therefore joining and cooperating with them for the same good ends, Do with
all earnestness desire the expediting of the Propositions intended to be sent
to His Majesty; That by the blessing of God upon the joint Desires, Councels,
and Endeavors of both Kingdoms, Religion and Peace, with all possible speed may
be settled, all Distempers and Differences healed, all Armies in both Kingdoms
disbanded, the Country eased, the distressed Brethren in Ireland relieved, and
a firm Peace and Union in this Country continued to the Generations following,
then which nothing can be more earnestly desired, or endeavored by

Your Lordships humble Servants,
Worcesterhouse, June 15. 1646. Signed A. Iohnston. Hugh Kennedy. Lauderdail.
Charles Erskine. To: Barclay.

We do also again earnestly desire, That the Honorable Houses will send a
Committee to join with the Committee of Estates, who may be witnesses of all
their proceedings, and co operate with them for the good of the public service
here.



Right Honorable,
NOt only our consciences bear witness to our selves, but our actions are a
real and public testimony to all men who have marked our ways since our
coming into this Kingdom, how earnest our desires, and how constant our
endeavors have been to preserve the Union of the two Kingdoms, as a principal
mean of happiness of both; and for this end, what our affection and care has
been to observe and perform the whole Articles of the Covenant and Treaties
betwixt the Kingdoms: Yet (thus much we may truly say) at no time since the
beginning of our engagement in this Cause, have we with more sincerity and
faithfulness endeavored to improve our opportunities for the Public, then we
have done of late since His Majesty's unexpected coming into our Army, by our
carnest and uncessant dealing with Him, to send such Messages to His
Parliament, as might give them full satisfaction, and be a sure ground of Peace
to His Kingdoms, and of Happiness to Himself: And although we have not as yet
prevailed so far against such prrinciples, as by education, length of time, and
the Councels and Company of such as have been formerly about Him, have been
deeply noted in His mind, as to obtain the utmost of our desires; yet have we
not lost our labor, nor are we diffident, but that in a short time He may be
moved to give satisfaction to His people, which when it comes, will be a
matter of rejoicing to all that loves the settling of Religion and Peace. And
we do earnestly entreat, and confidently expect, That the Houses of Parliament
will in their Wisdom, and from their love of Peace, be pleased, with the
concurrence of the Commissioners from the Parliament of Scotland, speedily to
send such Propositions and Demands to be granted by His Majesty, as are
necessary for curing the present Distempers, the settling of Religion and Peace,
the safety of His Majesty's Person and Authority, and the confirming and
conserving the Union of the Kingdoms: Which being sent, we will upon His
Majesty's answer, clearly and distinctly know how to proceed in this intended
Pacification, And to satisfy the desires of the Parliament, and our own, in
Disbanding our Forces, delivering up the Garrisons possessed by us, and
retiring home, after all our Sufferings, with the same cheerfulness and
affection that we had when we came into this Kingdom; And we resolve shortly to
send some from us to give your Lordships further Informations of our
proceedings here, that by mutual and joint advice, such things as may serve for
the Peace and good of both Kingdoms, may be brought to a speedy and happy
close, which is the earnest desire of

Newcastle, June 10. 1646. Your Lorships humble Servants, Loudoun. Leven.
Argyl. Calander. Crawford and Lindsay. Dunfermlinge. Lothian, Lanerick. A:
Hepburne. D: Home, T: Shaw. To: Freidland. Will: Glendoning.

For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England at Westminster.
A Paper delivered in to His Majesty by the Committee of Estates of the
Kingdom of Scotland at Newcastle, concerning the Prince.
WE do humbly represent to your Majesty, That we conceive it will much
contribute for the good of your service, and the better procuring a right
understanding and well grounded peace, if your Majesty were pleased to give
Order, that the Prince his Highness go not beyond Sea, but that he may stay
within this Kingdom, so as he may reside therein with honor and safety, for
preventing the dangers which may be to his Person and Religion, and the
jelousies and inconveniences which may ensue upon his Highness going out of
the Kingdom in this jointure of time and affairs.

Newcastle, 2 June 1646. Loudoun J. P. D. Com.

Another Paper delivered in by the Committee of Estates to His Majesty.
WHereas upon consideration of the present condition of affairs and sense of
our duty, we did in all humility and faithfulness advise and beseech your
Majesty that you would he pleased to send such a message to the houses of
Parliament, and Commissioners of Scotland, as might be a ground of settling
Religion and Peace, according to the solemn League and Covenant. It is still
our earnest desire, that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to send such
a Message for the further satisfaction of your Parliaments, and preventing of
imminent dangers which may ensue upon the delay thereof; Which, if your Majesty
shall not (out of your wisdom and compassion of the sad condition of your
Kingdoms) be pleased to grant, We will be constrained presently to take such a
course, as that by mutual advice and resolutions of both Kingdoms, they may
be saved from a breach, and the dangerous sequels prevented which may follow.

Signed by all the Committee and General Officers of the Army.
Newcastle, the 8 June 1646.
May it please your Honors,
WE find by your Lordships Letters of the first of June, you are not pleased
to give us any hopes of the removing of your Forces out of the County, which we
have been often suitors for; inregard of the disability of the County to bear
the charge of both Armies, and cannot forbear to renew the same suit still.
Your Honors are still pleased to desire our assistance in the quartering of,
and provision for your Army here; to which my Lords, we must deal ingeneously,
as we had no power in that particular heretofore, so at present, neither in
that, nor any other public employment, by reason that the Ordinance by which
we Acted expired the last of May, and we having yet received no intimation from
the Parliament of their pleasure for the continuance of it. We have often times
applied our selves to the house for their speedy course for the provision of
your Army in some equal way, and do expect a return daily, till then
(especially in the condition we now are) we hope your Lordships will not expect
any further Answer from us herein, and that your Lordships will rest satisfied
in the reality of our desires and cares to do the utmost in our power that may
speak our Constancy to our Covenant, and our zeal to prevent mistakes, that
might any way weaken the happy mutual unity between the two Nations. And truly
my Lords we cannot but with many Honorable respects take notice of your
Lordships care therein, and of that Honorable instance your Lordships have
given, in your Order for disbanding of Colonel Vandruks Regiment; in execution
whereof we conceave your Lordships will do your selves and the cause much
right; so soon my Lords as we shall obtain any return from the Parliament,
we shall readily give your Lordships a further account. In the mean time shall
desire to be accounted as we are

York the 4. June, 1646. Your Honors most humble Servants John Boutcher Wic.
Rich. Darley. George Trotter. To. Barnick. Geo. Mawald. Tho. St. Nicholas. Io.
Farrer. I. Wichlethwit. R^kie Mere. Dary Wentworth. Will. Goodraw.


For the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates for the Kingdom of Scotland.
Noble Gentlemen,
WE do perceave by your Letters of the 4th instant, that the Ordinance of
Parliament, by which you acted in all public employments expired the last of
May, So that you are not furnished with authority to afford us any assistance
in the quartering of, and providing for our Army, which we shall forbear
therefore to press any further; Not doubting, but when you are better enabled
and your power enlarged, you will coninue your public care and affection to
do every thing that may be for the good of the army, and preserving the
mutual Amity and Union of the two Kingdoms, which we shall study to confirm
by all the ways and means that are in our power; having also seriously
recommended the same to General Lieutenant Leslie (whom we desired to repair
to us about the executing of that Order for disbanding General Major
Vandruskes Regiment) that he would likewise take special care to prevent all
mistakes that might beget any misunderstanding betwixt us. So we remain.

Newcastle, June 10. 1646. Yours, etc. Signed For the Committee of Parliament
at York. Leven, Lowdoun, Callender, Argyll, Crawfurd-Lindsay Dunfermling,
Lanerick, Lothian A Hepburne D. Home, Fryland. Tho. Ker. W. Glendoning.

Right Honorable,
I Received your Lordships of the first of June instant, and as I perceave your
Lordships do suspend your resolutions concerning the more northerly quartering
of your Army till you have a return from the Committee of both Kingdoms, so I
hope your Lordships will not expect any thing further from me in a business of
so great concernment to this poor Country till I shall likewise hear the
pleasure of those above, whose commands and directions your Lordships will
apprehend I am engaged to observe. My Lords, I should highly injure your
Lordships, and my self also, if upon all occasions I should not acknowledge
your Lordships great care and prudent circumspection to carry on the publik
affairs, wherein both Nations have a reciprocal interest, So as the happy
union may be preserved, and the great ends which are mutually driven at in the
National League, may be best achieved, And I hope your Lordships will not
believe, in any complaints, I have represented, I had the least intention to
reflect on your Lordships particulars, and truly My Lords, I do with many
humble thanks acknowledge it a great favor to my self, and a convincing
evidence to the world of (what wisemen were always satisfied in) your
Lordships desires to prevent occasions of distaste, That upon my last, your
Lordships have given Order for the disbanding of General Major Vandruskes
Regiment; and for the preventing the future entertainment of such as give
occasion of offense: The effecting of both which will be certainly of very good
consequence, and of very honorable interpretation. For my particular, I shall
ever deem it my honor and happiness in any civil relation, to be
isntrumental to the public good, so none shall be more ready to manifest,
what a large share thereof he does account is lapt in being esteemed, as he is

My Lords Your Lordships humble Servant. Signed Sednham Pointz.
York the 4. of June 1646.
For the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates for the Kingdom of Scotland.
SIR,
WE received yours of the fourth instant, showing that you could not satisfy
the desires of our former Letter, nor afford us any assistance toward the
enlargement of our quarters, until their pleasures were known, whose
directions you were to observe: And seeing you are not furnished with Authority
in that behalf, we shall not further press it, until you be otherwise
enabled; Not doubting but you will manifest the continuance of that friendship,
whereof we have always had the experience. In the mean time, we cannot but be
very sensible of your expressions and acknowledgement of our care and
faithfulness in our public employments, and shall endeavor so to behave our
selves in pursuing the ends of our Covenant, that all our ways and actions may
speak our constancy and zeal to preserve the happy Union and Amity of both
Kingdoms, and to prevent every thing to the utmost of our power, that may tend
to the infringement of that Union. In assurance whereof, we rest

Newcastle, the 10. of June, 1646. Yours, etc. Leven, Loudoun, Callender,
Argile, Crawfurd-Lindesay, Dunfermling, Lanrick, Lothian A. Hepburn, D. Home,
Frieland, Thomas Ker, Will. Glendoning.

For Colonel General Poyntz.
FINIS.

