A VINDICATION OF CONFORMITY TO THE LITURGY Of the Church of ENGLAND. In a
Letter, Written to a Person of Quality, wherein satisfaction is given to
certain Queries suggested by a Nonconformist.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley And are to be sold by Richard Lambert, 1668.

Imprimatur,

Joh. Garthwait, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Richardo
Archiepis. Eboracensi, a Sacris Domesticis.
Datum, Episcopo-Thorpae, Feb. 19. 1668.
Queries of a Nonconformist.
WHether our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, as he is God and Man, he not the
sole, Supreme Legislator to his Church and People in things concerning the
Worship of God; insomuch, that what ever external exhibition of the Worship of
God, as to the whole, or such part of it as was not in use in the Prophets, our
Saviors, the Apostles days, not for above three hundred years after our Lords
Ascension, neither is any where in the sacred Scriptures appointed by our Lord
and Masiers command, or example to be used in Public, and is so far from
having his Royal Stamp upon it, that as to some parts of it, it is plainly
insufficient (considered as a means) to effect that which it is appointed for?
whether such a Public Worship of God, with 'its Liturgy, and Rubric, ought
at all to be used in the Churches of Christ in these days of Reformation, or
Restoration of Conformity?

2. Whether the enjoyments of such a Public Worship, ut supra, with that
strictness, that unless that Worship be used, there must not be any other
Worship of God be used, be it never so Scripturall, and Orthodox? whether this
be not a making this Worship an Essential part of Gods Worship, and an adding
to Gods Word, so solemnly forbidden in Deuteronomie, and Revelation?

3. Whether if I assent, and consent to the use of that Worship, Liturgy, and
Rubric? Whether I do not so far set up an other Power in co-ordination to my
Lawgiver, and Judge, who is both God and Man? Yea, Whether I do not set up
another Power above Him, if I do as that Power enjoynes, rather omit, or
curtall that I know for certain my Lord and Master enjoynes, than leave one
word un-read of that manner of Worship a Foreign Power enjoynes? Whether thus
doing, is not such a pleasing of Man, as declares I am no true servant of Jesus
Christ?

4. Whether it be not a transgression of my Commission given me by my Lord and
Masters own mouth, in Mat. 28. ult. and penult? whether it be not in some sense
a bidding him keep his Gifts, and Spirit he has promised, keep them to
himself, I am furnished with a manner of Worship which I can carry on, without
his, or his Spirits help, or any extraordinary gift?

Whether by Assenting, and Consenting, ut supra, I do not incurr the curse
threatened against Adding, or detracting from the Word of God, and from the word
of that Prophet spoken of by Moses, and Paul?

Whether by Assenting, and Consenting, ut supra, I do not recidivate from
being a faithful Witness and Asserter of my Lord and Master his sole
Supremacy, ut supra? And whether I do not hereby render my self plainly
without excuse, when he, at that great day, shall say, Who required the
Exhibition of such a worship at thy hands?

Good Madam,
I Intended, before this time, to have performed my promise to your Ladyship,
in sending you a word or two concerning that Paper, which a Divine presented to
your Mother. I told you at Horn -- by Castle, that much having been written by
Learned Men of our Church concerning this Argument, (which it is supposed any
Minister in this Nation, that desires cordially to employ his Talent* in his
native Country to Gods glory, and his Country-mens advantage, will not neglect
to peruse) the best course would be for a Person unsatisfied, after the Reading
of such Writings, ( Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, Archbishop Whitgifts
Reply to the Admonition, Masons Sermon of Conformity, Bishop Sandersons
Preface, etc.) to debate matters calmely with some Divine of a contrary
persuasion, especially with some Learned Bishop, who by verbal conference may
possibly give the dissenting person that satisfaction, which by Reading he
cannot yet procure: If (till opportunity offer it self of better assistance)
any weak endeavors of mine might contribute any thing to the settlement of
this Gentleman, I should be very ready to communicate unto him the ground of my
own submission to the Church Government now established among us, and to hear
him produce the Reasons of his dissatisfaction: If he shall be able by any
convincing Arguments to prove, that our Church enjoyneth any thing contrary to
the will of the Supreme Legislator, I hope that nothing that I enjoy at this
time in it, shall be an impediment unto me of embracing his convictions, and
bearing a part of that Cross, which many of his persuasion would have the world
think, that they take upon them for the cause of Christ.

It Is possible the Gentleman may have more to allege in discourse, than he has
expressed by writing; otherwise I much marvel, why he should think himself
warranted to suspend his exercise of such gifts as God has given him, and the
pursuit of that high Calling, unto which I suppose him Legally advanced, by
reason of the present settlement of our Church.

For first, (in reference to his first Querie) We all readily acknowledge our
Lord Christ the Supreme, and sole Lawgiver to his Church in all the
substantialls of his worship and service: But yet we deny that it does hence
follow, that no circumstances of serving God are left to the Judgment of the
present Church. The holy Scriptures are a sufficient rule of Faith, and
manners; and we abhor that distinction of the Papists, of the Word of God,
into Traditionall and Written. We cheerfully believe all things necessary for
us to believe, and do, to be contained in those holy Books of the Old and New
Testament, as appears by the sixth Article of our Church: And yet when God was
pleased to afford us the succor of supernatural Revelation, in the grand
Mysteries of our salvation, We do not believe that he forbad us the sober use
of Reason; the giving a greater light was not intended for the extinction of
the lesser, but to offer unto us the help of Divine assistance, in things that
natural reason is altogether blind in; the eye of humane reason is dim in
discerning natural and Moral things; altogether blind in Divine. We give
therefore no license at all unto reason, to contradict the revealed will of God
in his Word. The sacred authority therefore of supernatural truth being
advanced to that pitch of unquestionable dignity, that where it speaks clearly,
there no exceptions of Men, or Angels are permitted to interpose, and control
what is there spoken; what should hinder a single Person as far as his liberty
is not restrained by his Superiors? much less a National Church publicly to
manage the worship of God, after those Methods, which reason, assisted by
Divine light shall judge most advantageous for the edification of Christian
Assemblies? Does not our Savior ask the Jews, Why, even of themselves, they
did not judge what was right? Luke 12.57. And does not St. Paul send us to the
School of nature, to learn, what hair best becomes the Masculine Sex? 1 Cor.
11.14. What then, though there be neither express precept, or example for that
Liturgy, which is now imposed upon the Ministers of the Church of England, in
the Writings of the Apostles, or Prophets? Must we presently judge our
conformity unto it unwarrantable, though no sound Reason can be confronted unto
it, either in the Bulk, or in the Parcels? What Argument can Reason produce,
why the people of God being assembled together, the Priest should not compose
their thoughts to lowly reverence, and penitential devotion by some of those
pertinent Sentences of Scriptures, wherewith our Liturgy begins? What reason
can be urged, why an humble Confession immediately following, a comfortable
Absolution should not be pronounced by them, to whom the power of the Keys is
committed, and whose very Orders were given them, with those words of our
Savior, Receive thou the holy Ghost; Whose sins thou remittest? etc. Can well
enlightened reason plead any just cause why a competent portion of the Psalms
should not follow? and then Lessons out of the Old and New Testaments, with
Hymns between, either out of the Scriptures, or conformable unto them? The
rehearsal of the Creed standing, one would think could offend no man, that
sees every Article founded on Divine authority if he be resolved to stand to
his Faith. And the Antiphones, or Responses of the people, if they have not
sufficient grounds from the Hymns of Moses, and the Answer of Miriam, in the
15th. of Exodus and the Song of Deborah and Barak Judge. 5. Nor the singing of
the people by course, Ezra 3.11. yet are as ancient as Greg. Nazianzen To be
sure, if the Liturgy of Saint James, St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom should be
granted to be spurious. Nay, Pliny, in that famous Letter of his to Trajan,
says, That the Christians did, Carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem:
that is, Sing an Hymn to Christ, as a God, by course. This could not be long
after St. John's time, for he lived (as St. Hierom writes) to the Reign of
Trajan. St. Basil the great lived in the fourth Century, about the 70th. year;
and he mentions a Method of devotion, consisting of alternate Versicles, as
appears by his 63. Epistle to the Church of Neocaesarea; The people (says he)
with us, rises betimes, after night, to the house of Prayer, and making
Confession to God with pains, and tribulations, and distress of tears; at
length, rising from Prayers, fall to Singing of Psalms; (...); that is, And
now being divided into two parts, they Sing by course, answering one another,
thereby both corroborating the meditation of the Divine Oracles, and
administering to themselves attention, and indistracted vigilance of heart.

And that this was no private Institution of his own Church, appears from what
he presently subjoynes in the same Epistle, If for this cause (says he) ye
forsake us, ye will, together with us, forsake the Egyptians, ye will forsake
the inhabitants of both the Libia's, the Thebans, Palestines, Arabians,
Phaenicians, Syrians, and those that live upon the River Euphrates, and in a
word all, amongst whom watching, and supplications, and common Psalmody are in
request. If it be urged, that none of these things were in use before three
hundred years after our Lords Ascension, the contrary appears from the
forementioned Epistle of Pliny; and moreover, it may be replied, that some of
them were in use more than three times 300. years before his birth; for the 92.
Psalm is a set form appointed for the Sabbath day, as it appears by the
Title; and how well our Savior, that had the Spirit without measure, approved
those Forms, to which the Synagogue was accustomed, may appear, by his use of
them in his Agony, and Passion. For he was pleased to express himself twice in
the words of two Psalms, as is evident, by comparing the 22. Ps. ver. 1. with
the 27. of St. Mat. ver. 46. and the 31. Psalm, ver. 5. with St. Luke 23. ver.
46. so that our late Annotator on the Psalms has duly hence inferred, That no
Tongue of Men, or Angels, can invent a greater height of Encomium, to set out
the honor of any Writing, or give us more reason to lay up in our minds the
words of the Martyr Hippolitus, That in the days of Anti-Chrict, (...): that
is, Liturgy shall he extinguished, Psalmody shall cease, Reading of the
Scriptures shall not be heard. In which three, as the public Service of God,
was by the Ancients thought to consist; so the destroying of all, and each of
them, must needs be a branch, if not the whole body of Anti-Christianisme, a
direct contradiction to Christ, who by his prescription, or practice of each of
these, impressed a sacred Character on each. See Dr. Hammonds Preface on the
Psalms.

By this it appears how remote from Truth that speech of the Querist is, That
our Liturgy is so far from having our Lords Royal Stamp upon it, that is is
plainly insufficient, (considered as a means) to effect that for which it is
appointed. For the designs of the Liturgy are to carry on the worship of God,
by prescribing set Forms of Praises, Thanksgivings, and Celebration of the
Sacraments, etc. in such a decent method of devotion, as may become the solemn
Worship of that great God, to whom no service is to be presented, but that
which is reasonable: The representative body of the Church of England, has
thought this Liturgy now enjoined, suitable to these ends; if any particular
member think otherwise, Reasons should be alleged, not bold assertions
Dictator-like concluded.

What the Querist means, when he asks Wether such a Public Worship of God,
with 'its Liturgy, and Rubric, ought at all to be used in the Churches of
Christ in these days of Reformation, or Restoration of Conformity, I can
scarce understand. The Liturgy is the same, in effect, that it was at the
first Reformation, that happily was brought to pass by the pious endeavors of
our Ancestors, in King Henry the 8th. King Edward the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth's
days; If any thing contrary to Gods Word, and disagreeable to the Judgment of
the Church Universal be delivered, and enjoined to be assented, and consented
unto in the Bulk of this Liturgy, it is not, I confess, fitting for days of
Reformation, for it will carry 'its deformation manifestly in those imposed
corruptions. But because no particular instances are alleged, wherein the
unsoundness of the Liturgy does appear, I believe this to be nothing, but a
rash surmise, void of all firm foundation, to pitch a foot on. The Book has
been sifted, and searched over, and over; and when the Classical Brethren in
Queen Elizabeth's time, that were not so mad as to cast off all set Forms,
opposed themselves against that Form, that was Legally in force, that is, for
substance, the Form that is now Enacted amongst our selves, they were quickly
convinced, that the fault was rather in their own intemperate heat, than in
any errors retained in the Service Book. They complained (four Classes of
them) to the Lord Burleigh, ('it is possible, that Assent, and Consent were too
hard meat for their squeasie Stomachs:) That Lord enquired, Whether they would
have all Liturgy taken away? They said, No. He required them to make a better,
that might take place, upon the removal of what was settled. The first Classis
framed one, complying with the Genevah Form. This the second disliked, and
altered in 600. particulars. That again had the hard fortune to be quarreled by
the third Classis: And what the third resolved on, by the fourth: And (as a
Learned man says) The dissenting of those Brethren, as the division of Tongues
at Babel, was a fair means for keeping that Tower then, from advanceing any
higher. Vide, Vindication of the Liturgy, page 3.4.

What the Gentleman means, by days of Restoring Conformity, I can but
adventure to divine, I remember that there was a Clause in the beginning of the
Scotch Covenant (illegally imposed by men in usurped power, and taken, rashly
by the ignorant, because they thought it lawful; and cowardly by the fearful,
that loved their integrity less than their temporal concerns) wherein the
Covenanter engages, To endeavor the Reformation of the Church of England, and
Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches. Perhaps the Querist
has some Church in his eye, unto which we cannot be conformable, whilst our
Liturgy shall stand in force; had he named that Church, we might have
enquired, whether our Church has not as good Reason, to be exemplary to it, as
to tread after it. They that have traveled in this enquiry, will tell us, That
they judge the Church of England to be the Eldest Daughter in all the
boundaries of the Reformation, and as Orthodox for Doctrine, and sober for
Discipline, as any Church, since the first Ages. Mr. Durel, who was Minister
above eight years in a Protestant Church of France, will assure this Querist,
That in France, and Genevah, set Forms are enjoined. That a Tigurine Minister
was questioned at Genevah for officiating in the Germane Church there, and not
rehearsing (as it is appointed) the Creed, after the Morning Service. The same
Person aforementioned, now Minister of the French Church at the Savoy, relates a
passage of a Letter sent to him, by the Learned and eloquent Mounsier Martell;
the words in English are these, I wonder to hear, that some are found in
England, that are altogether averse from any set Forms of Liturgy, to be
observed generally one, and the same in all the Kingdom; among us, it is no
where permitted, to reject the use of the Liturgy, which was made by Calvin,
etc. indeed for Calvin's Liturgy, we leave it to those that like it. But his
reasons for a Liturgy are so binding, that I know not what can be alleged
more convincing. These are his words in our Tongue, which he Wrote in a Latin
Epistle to the Protector of England in King Edward the sixth his days: As
touching the Form of Prayers, and Ceremonies of the Church, I approve very
much, that it be Set; and that it be not lawful for the Ministers to recede
from it in their Function, as well to help the simplicity, and unskilfulness of
some, as that the Uniformity of all the several Congregations may appear: And
finally that the desultory, and capricious lightness of such as affect
Novelties, may be encountered, and stopped.

2. The Gentleman's second Querie is, Whether the Injunction of that Worship, to
the exclusion of all else, unless that be used, be not to make it an essential
part of Gods Worship, and an adding to Gods Word, forbidden in Deuteronomy, and
the Revelation?

To Preach God Word, and dispense his Sacraments; to make Prayers,
Supplications, and give thanks for all men, are Essential parts of Gods
Worship. But to perform these duties, after such a manner, at such Forms of
words, and with such Vestments, are but circumstantialls, left in the power of
the Church, by that general rule of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.10. Let all things be
done decently, and in order. I would feign see this, or any other person,
pretending the pleas here alleged, undertake the performance of the Service of
God in such a Scripturall manner, that might secure him, against as strong
exceptions, nay far stronger, than are here made against the Public Liturgy
by this Querist.

I suppose he would come into the Assembly clad with some garment or other. For
(though Saul Prophesied naked; and the Adamites think it their perfection to
appear at their Meetings unapparrelled, yet) few are so Fanatic as to think
those examples obliging others to a conformity. He cannot approve a Surplice,
perhaps; May not another plead as much against a Gown, or Cloak, or Cassock:
If a white Surplice be no where commanded, neither is a black Gown; If not to
kneel at the Communion, neither to sit, or stand, is a precept in the sacred
Text. If the established Orders of the Church are not to be received, because
they are no where commanded by express injunction of Scriptures; the
Nonconformists to the Church must permit us, to be such to themselves, until
they can act upon the warranty of that Word, which they say gives no allowance
to us.

But let us hear how the Service of God must be carried on when the
Congregation is met; Although the Common Prayers may not be used, perhaps
because a Form; perhaps because commanded; yet I suppose the Querist would
pray after his own fashion. If the Service be a Form, such will be his to
those that are to join with him: And if it be urged, that by the contrivance
of his Form, his gifts are exercised: May I not reply, that these are the
gifts of the Church in the Prayers authorized by our Governors. The Church
forbids no man the employment of his Talents. At their Ordination, all
Ministers are very powerfuly exhorted thereunto. But we have a clear Text,
That the Spirits of the Prophets, ought to be subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14.32. That we ought to obey them that have the rule over us, Heb. 13.17. That
all things ought to be done decently, and in order, and common sense teaches
us, that where there is no subjection, there can be no order. It Is certain
also, that the Canon of the Scriptures is sealed, that no man can pretend to
such special Revelations, that what he shall utter, must conclude the Church
as powerfully as if the Prophets, or Apostles spoke. The best gifts in men, not
exempted from carnal infirmities, may be abused. One may be zealous, and want
knowledge; another may be competently knowing, and want humility. Ambition, and
Covetousness, and Pride, and Rebellion have stained the gifts of many, in our
late remembrance, that might otherwise have done (though not so much service to
the Church as themselves supposed) yet less mischief than through their
mis-imployment she has sustained. By reason of these defects, what has our
Church suffered? whilst one was for a Classis; Another for a gathered
Congregation; A third against Paedobaptisme; A fourth against Monarchy, and yet
all (would we credit them) for Christ. When these had Preached their several
Sentiments, they concluded their Harangues with Prayers agreeable to their
respective judgments; and the Auditors that heard them must either with their
Amen to such wild devotions, seal contradictions, or stand upon their guard, to
pick and choose, where to join issue with those incoherent ejaculations, which
(in defiance of all Authority of the ancient Church) must be obtruded upon the
world, as the Dictates of the holy Ghost.

But it is alleged, That to enjoin a set Form, so as not to suffer any parts
of Gods worship to be carried on without it, though never so Scripturall, seems
to make an addition to Gods Word, forbidden in Deuteronomy. and the Rev. nothing less.
For here it is to be noted, that some things are absolutely good, as, the Love
of God, and our Neighbor, the believing of the Articles of the Christian
Faith, praying to, and praising of God, etc. And then, some things are
absolutely sinful, and wicked; as, all the violations of the Moral Law, and
the discredit of any thing commended to our belief, under pain of damnation.
But then, some things are of an indifferent, and middle nature, neither of
themselves obliging us to the use, or refusal of them; but are left unto us,
under our Christian Liberty, to be either forborne, or employed, as our selves
shall think fitting, under no restrictions, till our Superiors limit us, but
that of the Apostle, Whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God;
And let us follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one way edify another, 1 Cor. 10.31. Romans 14.19. of this kind are the words,
wherein we present our supplications to God, the time when, (the Lords day
excepted,) and the place where, the Garments, in which we Pray unto him: Which
circumstances when the Church determines, she is far from intending to make
any addition to the sacred Oracles of Gods Word, or from straightening that
liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free. For first, The Church of England
has no such opinion (as some of the Romanists have of the Orders of some of
their Saints) touching any constitutions that she makes concerning the
regulating of Gods Worship; she places no necessity in them: Indeed she
judges, that when such Laws are made, they ought to be obeyed upon the
obligation of the fifth Commandment: But that obligation springs not from the
immediate Law giver, but from the Ordinance of him, that has commanded us to
submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake. For even after
her determination, the Church supposes the indifferency that was before, still
to continue, in respect of the things themselves; only in respect of use, and
so far, as concerns us, we are under restraint; but yet not so, that the
violation of such Laws, when it falls to be committed upon some sudden
emergency, is esteemed a sin like the breach of Gods Laws, so long, as it is
without wantonness, scandal, and contempt.

2. The Church conceives her self not so bound to keep any Rites, or
Ceremonies established, but that upon due motives, she may alter them as she
pleases, prescribing to no other Church, what they should do, but permitting
unto them, in this behalf, the liberty that her self takes. If upon this
ground, it should be inferred, Why are such Ceremonies of which the Church
declares her judgment to be, that in themselves they are indifferent, pressed
so indispensably, that he that will not assent, and consent to the use of them,
must not be suffered to use another manner of Worship, which he conceives more
Scripturall? We answer, That it appertains not to private men to judge what
Public Worship is most Scripturall, but to the Governors of the Church; and
they think, that the Liturgy established is as Scripturall a Worship, as any
that can be contested against it: If the Scriptures had appointed, with what
words, and after what express Form, the whole Service of the Church should
have been managed, that method would have obliged all Christians; but such a
Form is no where extant in all the Book of God. Indeed there is a general
Rule, That all things should be done decently, and in Order: And a clear
Injunction, that we should obey those that are over us in the Lord, to whom it
belongs to judge what in the public Assemblyes is decent, and orderly.

It may be this Querist would have every Minister of God in the Public
Service of the Church, proceed according to the measure of his Talents, which
he supposes may be husbanded to the edification of souls, far more
advantagiously, than the prescript Forms can be, which being known, and
always the same, are apt to beget, or at least nourish in us formality,
oscitancy, and dullness in those addresses, that should be active, and vigorous,
full of affection, and holy zeal. I know such things have bin pleaded, but
experience has taught us, that neither set Forms do necessarily beget those
evil effects; nor do the arbitrary conceptions of such Divines, as have
thought fitting to renounce compliance with the rule enjoined them, provide
against them. We have no desire to reproach men; but if we had, might we not
tell them, that the new methods of devision which entered, upon the late
banishment of the Liturgy, were so far from spiritualizing the people, that
pertook of them, that if Pride, Contention, Schism, Rebellious contumacy
against Governors, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil; Oppression and
Covetousness, are works of the flesh, a more carnal generation of professors
cannot be produced, I say, not since the Reformation, but scarce since
Christianity, than those that have (upon pretense of Carnality, and Formality)
deserted the Communion of the Church of England.

3. I hope upon consideration of what has already been said, the Querist may
easily perceive, that, by his Assent and Consent to the Liturgy, etc. he will
not fall under the guilt of setting up a power in co-ordination to our great
Lawgiver, who is God and Man; much less need he fear, that hereby he shall
advance a power above Christ. For the Church of England pretends to no
infallible authority over men's Consciences, she is far from checking any thing
expressly commanded by the Spirit of Christ, in the Writings of the
Evangelists, and Apostles, only by the help of that light, which she thence
receives, she endeavors to direct and assist all the children, within her
Communion, in the most ready course of performing the duties there required;
and herein she recommendeth her proceedings to the judgment of every man's
Conscience, and has received no censure from any Church since the Reformation:
Nay, so far is she from incurring the censures of the rest of her Sisters, that
they rather emulate her Beauty. We are assured, that the Reformed Churches
which follow the Confession of Ausburgh, have the very same, both Government,
and Worship in every particular that we have: Nay, they go far beyond us in
many things of the same kind, which our Church has thought fit to lay aside;
and yet, by a National Assembly of the Reformed Churches of France, held at
Charenton, Anno 1631. are quitted from the charge, either of Idolatry, or
Superstition in their public worship. See Durel, page 4. so that, if the
Querist, by his former expression, where he mentions, the restoring of
conformity, would tax our Church with Nonconformity to the rest of the
Reformation, because she reteineth a Liturgy, with a Rubric; he is strangely
mistaken, and knows not the Methods of their public worship. For as the most
of them have a subordination of Pastors, and admit not a parity in the
Government of their Churches; so have they (as the cited Author attesteth) all
of them set Forms of Prayer, not one excepted; he instanceth in the Imperial
Towns, and other Free States, as Strasburgh, Vlm, Ausburgh, Norenburgh,
Hamburg, Lubeck, and in all the Territories of the Sovereign Princes of
Germany, Saxony, Brandenburg, Lawenburg, Brunswick, Baden, Ouspatch,
Mecklenburg, etc. so that the Church of England, by abolishing Liturgy, would
be so far from restoring conformity with the best Reformed Churches, that she
would be rather Schismatic, by walking in a path by her self alone.

4. But the Querist would know, Whether to submit to the Form enjoined, be not
a transgression of his Commission given him, Mat. 28. ult. and penult. The
Commission there given, was immediately proper to the Apostles, who were to be
Christ's Witnesses of what they had heard, and seen, by Preaching repentance,
and remission of sins, in his Name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem,
Luke 24.47, 48. so far, as it extends to all inferior orders of the
Ministry, they may well think themselves concerned to fulfill so solemn a
charge; the words are, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them,
etc. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, etc.
I cannot imagine how the Liturgy of the English Church checketh this
Commission; it no where prohibits the teaching of Christ's Precepts: and if any
in the Communion of our National Church shall presume to teach any thing
contrary unto them, I hope the care of our Spiritual Governors is so great,
that he would no longer be permitted to proceed in sowing such tares, than he
should be convicted guilty of so foul a crime; neither do the dutiful Sons of
the Church of England, bid Christ (as the Querist pretends) keep his gifts and
spirit which he has promised, to himself. Nay rather, when they observe the
spirit of wisdom and counsel, so to have assisted the Compilers of the
Liturgy, that the exactest searchers into it, and disputers against it, have
bin able (after all their heats) rather passionately to revile it, than solidly
to confute it; they own Christ's gracious succor in the illumination, and
direction of those that framed it, and see that general promise verified in
the reformation of the particular National Church, in the very. Text alleged
by the Querist, Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the world. And
therefore the Querist may be secure, that his Assenting and Consenting, will
never endanger him to incurr the curse denounced against such as shall add, or
detract from the Word of God. For our Church does not impose her Liturgy as
immediately inspired, but contrived through the assistance of the Spirit indeed
but by men, using the means of study; and careful enquiry after the truth, not
challenging Prophetical, or Apostolical infallibility. Whereupon it will
follow, that the complyer with this method of Worship, can in no reason be
charged with reeidivation from asserting Christ's supremacy; for the Liturgy
controles no Law of Christ, nor challenges any submission to the diminution of
his authority; but directs us to make all our addresses to God the Father in
his name, and glorifieth him as the Father, in the unity of the blessed Spirit,
common to them both, teaching us, to ascribe honor, praise, obedience, and
adoration to the three Persons in the unity of the same essence, for ever and
ever. He that distrusteth the settlement of so well an ordered Church, may
rather be afraid to incurr the curse wished by the Apostle, upon the disturbers
of the peace of the Galatians, I would they were even cut off that trouble you.
Let a man search the Liturgy, and examine every parcel of it, I am confident
that he shall find no part of it contrary to sound reason, the sacred Text, or
the usage and custom of the ancient Church: and then I think St. Augustines
words may be worth the Querists consideration, Contra rationem nemo sobrius,
contra Scripturasnemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit, de
Trin. 4.6. no sober man will contradict reason, no Christian the Scriptures, no
peaceable person the custom of the Church.

Good Madam, whether I have said enough to satisfy the Contriver of the
Queries, I know not; but I am confident, that I have said more than was
requisite to satisfy your Ladyship, for you are better Principled in the
Religion established amongst us, than to be shaken by such Proposals, as the
Querist's Paper has offered to your consideration.

Indeed, it seems strange to me, that Persons (otherwise not void of common
sense) should so bungle in disputes of this nature, as, without any
considerable force of Argument, to oppose, not only the practice of our own
Church, and all others of the Reformation, but to slight the precedent of the
Catholic Church, throughout the East, and West, for a long time before, even
impudence it self dare charge them with Superstition, or Idolatry; except God
in his just judgment has given them up unto a spirit of delusion: For it is
very possible, that they, who upon secular designs, disturbed the settlement
of our Church, whose prudent, and pious constitutions, their own subscriptions
had sometimes justified, should deservedly be punished, either with so much
blindness, as not to see what formerly they discerned; or with so much hardness
of heart, as to refuse to comply with, what they can, with no solidity of
reason, disapprove and censure. The piety and charity of your Ladyship make you
zealous to win others to the same persuasion, which, upon, not only the
authority of our Church, but the conviction of your own discerning Judgment,
you have embraced. I heartily wish, that these, or any other endeavors of mine
might contribute somewhat to the gaining of any dissenters to the bosom of that
affectionate Mother, whom they have so deeply, by their Apostasy, disquieted,
and grieved.

It Is not, in my judgment, an Act of comprehension, that will effect this
great work, that will but disparage the Wisdom and gravity of our pious
Mother, and farther confirm such wanton Children (as resolve never to be
confuted) in their obstinate, though groundless oppositions. It must be some
Act of the incomprehensible goodness, and power of God, who is able both to
illuminate the eyes of the blind, and discover unto them the path of Truth, and
to order the Footsteps of the pervers and guide them into the way of Peace.

Your Christian charity will incline you to implore Almighty God for such a
mercy for them, and I shall cheerfully join with you in the same request. To
this I shall, at this time, add but one more (for a blessing upon your
Ladyships Person, and Family) and without giving you any further trouble of
Reading what has (long since) exceeded the measures of a Letter, rest,

Good Madam, Your Ladyships humble servant in Christ, P. S.
Feb. 25. 1667/8.

