THE LAST Proceedings OF THE PARLIAMENT in SCOTLAND, Against the MARQUESS of
ARGYLE.

TOGETHER, With the SPEECH and DEFENSE of the said Marquess, In Vindication of
himself from the Aspersions of his having a hand in the DEATHS Of His late
MAJESTY, James Duke Hamilton, Marquess Huntley, Marquess of Montross.


And of his Dealing with the ENGLISH after WORCESTER Fight.

London, Printed by T. M. for T. J. 1661.

AT THE Parliament House in Edinburgh, March 13. 1661.
The Parliament being all Convened,
THe Marquess of Argyle, being Accused with High Treason, at the Instance of
Sir J. Fletcher, His Majesty's Advocate, for his Interest was brought to the
Bar; his Lordship desired to speak but a few words before Reading the
Indictment, assuring to speak Nothing in the Cause it self. Whereupon his
Lordship was Removed a little; and after some small Debate, the House Resolved,
that the Indictment should be first Read: Then his Lordship desired that a bill
(which he had caused his Advocates give in to the Lords of the Articles;
desiring a Precognition; with many Reasons, urging the Necessity of it; to
which he had Received no Answer) might be Read before the Indictment; which
being likewise Refused, the Indictment was Immediately Read; after Reading
thereof, The Marquess being put off his first Thoughts, made this Extemporarie
Discourse following.

May it Please your Grace, etc.
MY Lord Chancellor, Before I speak any thing, I shall Humble Protest my words
may not be Wrested, but that I may have Charity to be Believed; and I shall
(with Gods assistance) speak Truth from a Heart. I shall (my Lord) Resume
Mephibosheths answer to David, after a great Rebellion, and himself evil
Reported of. Says he, * 2 Samuel 19. 30.
Yea let him take all, since my Lord the King is come again in peace to his own
House. So say I, since it has pleased God Almighty, Graciously to Return his
SACRED MAJESTY, to the Royal Exercise of his Government over these Nations (to
which he has indoubted Right) and most Unjustly, and Violently, thrust
therefrom, by the late Tyrannizing Usurpers.

It is (my Lord) exceeding matter of Joy to us all, that, that Iron Yoke of
Usurpation (under which we have these many years, sadly Groaned) is now broke:
and with such Freedom, this High, and Honorable Court of Parliament are
meeting together, under the Refreshing Warm Beams of his MAJESTY'S ROYAL
GOVERNMENT, so much longed for, by our almost starved Expectations; and I do
earnestly wish his ROYAL Presence upon his Throne amongst us; but since at this
time, that great happiness cannot be probably expected; I am glad, that his
Majesty's Prudency has singled out such a Qualified, and Worthy Person as my
Lord Commissioners Grace, to Represent himself: whose Unspotted Loyalty to his
Majesty, we can all Witness.

I cannot (my Lords) but acknowledge, that there are two Grand Mercies, which
comfortably attend my present condition. One is the High Thoughts I deservedly
Entertain, of that Transcendent, and Princely Clemency, wherewith his SACRED
MAJESTY is so admirably Delighted, abundantly Evindenced by many Noted and
Singular Testimonies, in all the Steps of his Majesty's Carriage; as those most
Gracious Letters, Declarations, and that Free, and most Ample Act of
Indempnitie, etc. Granted to all his Majesty's Subjects, to Eradicate any
Time^ous Jealousy of his Majesty's Gracious Pardon; which might happily arise,
by serous Reflectings, convincing them Forcibly of their own Miscarriages, in
these most unhapy times of Distraction,

The Effects (my Lords) of which Princely Deportment, I am confidently hopeful,
his Majesty has already Experimentally, and shall futurely find, prove an
effectual cement, to conciliate the most Antimonarchich, and Disaffected
Persons (excepting some) those Barbarous Phanaticks) in all his Majesty's
Dominions) most willingly to the Subjection of his MAJESTY'S ROYAL SCEPTER; and
with a perfect Hatred Psalm. 139. 22.
Abominate all Disloyal Practices in themselves, or others in all times coming.

The second is, my Lords, when I consider, that my Judges are not such as we
had of late (strangers) but my own Country men; both which jointly together
with the Royal Sense, and Solid Convictions I had of my Innocence, of these
Calumnies most Unjustly charged upon me) Encourages my hopes rather, to expect
such dealing, as will most Sympathize with that Clement Humor, (to which his
SACRED MAJESTY has such a Natural Propensitie) and such equal Administrate
Justice, (void of all byassing prejudices) as will be most suitable for such a
High, and Honorable Meeting.

I shall therefore (my Lord) desire to use Paul's answer for himself, being
accused of his Countrymen, (I desire not to be mistaken) having a learned
Orator ( Tertullius) accusing him, as I have my Lord Advocate: Paul's was
Heresy, mine of another nature; but I must say with him, Acts 24. 14, 15, 16.
That the things they all laid against me, cannot be proved. But this I
confess, in the way allowed, by Solemn Oaths, and Covenants, I have served
God, my King, and my Country, (as he said) which they themselves allow.

Therefore I shall (my Lord) Remember (not with Repining, but for Information)
my hard usage, never having had any hearing, nor allowance of Pen, Ink, or
Paper, until I received this Summons; which was (in Effect) a load, above a
burden; Enemies (both Scots and English) out of malice, Calumniating me for all
the same things, excepting what relates to his Majesty's most Royal Father of
ever Glorious Memory.

Therefore, (My Lord,) I beg Charity and Patient hearing, not doubting, but the
Wisdom and Goodness of the Parliament will be so favorable, and not as the
inconsiderate multitude (as a learned able man writes) says he Sir Walt.
Rauleighs Preface to the Hist. of the World.
As we see in experience, that Dogs they always bark at those they know not:
And that it is their nature to accompany one another in those Clamours; So it
is with the inconsiderate multitude, who wanting that virtue which we call
Honesty in all men, and that special gift of God, which we call Charity in
Christian Men; Condemn without Hearing, and wound without Offense given; led
thereunto by uncertain report only, which his Majesty King James only
acknowledges to be the Father of Lies. I shall not desire to be in the least
mistaken by any that hear me: But sure I am, it is pertinently applicable to my
Case.

I entreat likewise your Lordships seriously to consider the words of another
Notable Man, Speed in his History.
who says ( d) As the Tongues of Parasites are ill Balances to weigh the
virtues of Princes, and great Men; so neither ought theirs nor other Men's
Blemishes be looked upon, as they are drawn with the deformed Pencill of Envy,
or Canker, which do always attend Eminency, whether in Place or Virtue. I
shall not (My Lord) be so presumptuous, as to Arrogate any thing to my self in
this, only I want not the two Companions; for I am but a weak Man, Subject to
many Failings and Infirmities, whereof I do not purge my self; for as we must
all confess to God Almighty, Psalm. 130. v. 3.
if he should mark Iniquities, who can stand? Neither shall I say, that there
cannot an hole be discovered (as the Proverb is) in my Coat: and it cannot but
be so with any, specially such as have labored in such times and businesses;
but I bless the Lord, that in these things which has been, and are here cast
upon me, I am able to make the falsehood, and misconstructions of them palpably
appear.

My Lord, (before I mention any thing in particular) I must show this
Honorable Meeting of Parliament, and all that hear me (who doubtless have
various Apprehensions of my being present in this condition,) that I am here
rather upon the account of Misfortune than Injury, wherein I desire to explain
the differences, as Plato and Aristotle do very well, Calling Injuries, such
things as are done purposely, and with a wicked mind; And misfortunes, such
things as are done with a good mind, though the events prove bad; yet, we could
not foresee them.

So (My Lord,) I shall take God to Record (who must judge me one day,) upon my
Conscience, that what I did, flowed not from any Injurious Pinciples to any,
though I acknowledge, the events were not still successful, which was my
misfortune indeed: But it has been my lot often, in these times, (wherein I,
and many others, were inevitably involved by the malicious tongues of my
Calumniating Enemies, to be misconstrued for the worst; yea, even in many which
the Lord was pleased to make successful: For the truth of this, I may (I
hope) safely appeal to many in this Honorable House, who can abundantly
witness my Faithful, and Loyal Endeavors for both My King, and Native
Country, whereof I should be very sparing to be a Herald my self, were not the
contrary so impudently affirmed.

There are five main Calumnies, that I desire (My Lord) to satisfy all that
hear me a little in, to the end, that the rest of less moment, may be likewise
(in its own due time) heard afterward, abstracting more from personal prejudice.

The first Calumny is, My Lord, concerning that Horrid and Unparaleld Murder of
his late ROYAL MAJESTY, of Eternal blessed Memory: I do here publicly
declare, That I neither desire, nor deserve the least Countenance, or Favor,
if I was either accessory to it, or on the Council, or Knowledge of it: which
to make clearly appear, is under Oath in the Parliament Books 1649. (whereof I
was the first Startour my self) to the intent, we might both Vindicate our
selves, and Endeavor a Discovery, if any amongst us had any accession to that
Horrid and Villainous Crime; As also in my latter Will, which I made; going to
England, in Anno 1655. or 1656. fearing what possibly might hereafter be
obtruded by any upon me or my family upon that account, I set it down, to clear
me to posterity, that I was altogether free of that detestable and execrable
Crime, or of any prejudice at his Majesty, in either Person or Government. I
left this with a very worthy Gentleman, (I believe) well known to your
Lordships all, and never saw it since; So your Lordships may be pleased (if ye
will) to call for it, and try the truth; Whatsoever other thing may be in it, I
hope (My Lord) this Opportunity is a mercy to me, to have that Vile Calumny
(among many others) against me to be cleared.

And (My Lord) to make this particular yet more evident, I did still, and do
positively assert, That I never saw that monstrous Usurper, Oliver Cromwell in
the face, nor never had the least Correspondence with him, or any of that
Sectarian Army, until the Commands of the Committee of Estates sent me with
some other Noble Men, and Gentlemen, to the Borders, in Anno, 1648. to stop his
march into Scotland, after those who returned from Preston fight.

Neither, after he left the Borders in the Year 1648. did I ever Correspond
with him, or any of that Sectarian Army; So unsatisfied was I with their way,
after the wicked and sinistrous courses he and they were upon, afforded evident
Presumptions for us to apprehend, That he, and they, intended prejudice to his
Royal Majesty: only one Letter I received from Sir Arthur Haslerig; to which
I returned Answer, That he might have spared his pains in writing to me: For I
blessed the Lord, who had taught me, by his Word, To Fear God, and Honor the
King, and not to meddle with them that were gi^en to Change. Though Sir Arthur
be now dead, yet he acknowledged to several in the Tower, that my Letter he
still had: and when I was there, I often desired he might be posed, and
examined upon it; which I can presently instruct.

And during (my Lord) my being in England, neither at London, nor Newcastle, in
Anno 1647. there was not any thing so much as mentioned, concerning his late
Majesty's person: All that ever I heard of it, was in public Parliament 1647.
The Commissioners papers at London, and Committee-Books at Newcastle, will
clear this fully.

The second Calumny is, Anent the inhumane murder of Duke James Hamilton.

My Lord, its well known, my great respect to that truly Noble, and Worthy
person; whereof (upon all occasions) I gave ample testimonies, and can yet
convince any of his Friends with the Reality of it; and evidenced my true
Sorrow, for the wicked cruelty committed on him. But indeed, I cannot deny, I
refused to Complement Cromwell on his behalf; he having (my Lord) been
immediately Proceeding so Instrumental, and so very Active in that most Horrid,
and Lamentable Murder of his late SACRED MAJESTY. And if I had done otherwise,
undoubtedly, it had been a more Black Article in that Lybil now Read, then any
that is in it.

The third Calumny is, that which breeds a great part of these groundless
Clamours, (though it be not in the Indictment) i^ my Lord Marquess of Huntly
his death, wherein (I may truly say) I was earnest to preserve him, as possible
I could, which is very well known to many in this Honorable House. And my not
prevailing, may sufficiently evidence, I had not so great a stroke, nor power
in the Parliament, as is Lybelled.

And my Lord, for his Estate, I had nothing in that, but for my own absolute
necessary Releif: and was even most willing to part with any Interest I had
therein; getting his friends (who professed Zeal, for the standing of the
Family) engaged for warrandise to me, for any proportion that should happen to
fall for my satisfaction. And to Evidence that I was no means to harm the
Family, I stood with my Right, betwixt all Fines, and Forfeitures of lands,
and accounted for any thing I did receive: and to manifest yet further, that
the burden of that Family, was not from any Extrinsick cause to themselves; I
have under the old Marquesses own hand, and his Son George Lord Gordoun, (who
was a very worthy young Nobleman) the just Inventory of their debts, amounting
to about one Million of Mark Scots, in Anno 1640. It would I fear, (my Lord,
consume too much of the Parliaments precious time) to hear many other
circumstances to make this particular more clear: which I shall at this time
forbear.

The fourth Calumny is, The Death of the Marquess of Montrose.

There are many in this House (my Lord) who know very well, I refused to meddle
either in the matter, or manner of it; and so far were we from having any
particular quarrels at one another, that in Anno 1645. he and I was fully
agreed upon Articles, and Conditions, contained in a Treaty past betwixt us;
and it was neither his fault, nor mine, that business did not end at that time;
which (its known to all) proved very Obnoxious to the Kingdom thereafter.

The fifth Calumny is, concerning my dealing with the English after Worceter
fight: its well known (my Lord) to many, that my self, and the Gentlemen of
Argyle-shire (my Kinsmen, Vassalls, and Tennants) Endeavored Cordially, to
engage all their Neighbors about them, on all hands against the English, which
they did not prevail in; but was most unhappily made known to the English
Commanders, for the time, (which they caused immediately to publish (as a very
notable discory) in their News Books) which occasioned two sad Disadvantages
to us; for they not only crushed our attempts in the infantry, but also
determined the severer Resolutions against us; whereby two strong Regiments of
Foot ( Overtons and Reads) and very near the number of one of Horse, (under the
Command of one Blackmore) were sent to Argyle-shire, and when Dean came there,
it pleased God to visit me with a great distemper of sickness, as Dr.
Cunningham, and many others who were with me can witness.

What (my Lord) I was pressed unto, when I was violently in their hands, may be
instructed by the paper it self, written by Deanes man's own hand, yet extant to
show, which I did absolutely refuse, upon all the hazard of the uttermost of
their malice; as also what I was necessitated to do, is likewise ready to be
shown, whereby I was still detained their Prisoner upon demand.

I shall (my Lord) add one Reason more to clear this, besides many other
weighty public Reasons and Considerations (which I shall forbear to mention at
this time, it being more natural to bring them by way of defenses afterward)
my own interest, and of all Noblemen, and Superiors in Scotland; it may be
rationally presumed, that I had been a very senseless fool, if ever I had been
for promoting such and such Authority, or interest over me, as levelled all,
and was so totally destructive to all that differenced my self, and other
Noblemen, from their own Vassals (which many says they were too earnest in)
yea, it being likewise so absurdly derogatory to all true Nobility, and my
Ancestors and I (as is said in that Lybell) have had so many titles of Honor,
Dignity, and Eminent Places of Trust conferred upon us, by his Majesty's Royal
Predecessors and Himself, all for our constant Loyalty and adherence to the
Crown, at all Occasions, (as the Records and Histories of this ancient Kingdom
holds forth, besides the narrative of all our grants) and asserting the just
Privileges thereof against Opposers.

I did (my Lord) ever (even when the Englishs were at the intolerable height
of Usurpation) declare my abhorrence to a Commonwealth Government, which was
well known to them all. I was not indeed (my Lord very dissatified, when there
were Rumors current, of Cromwells being made a King (as some here can witness.)
for I told them, it was the most probable way for his Majesty's advantage;
therefore the less it were opposed; and the more it were encouraged, it would
tend to Cromwells, and their deformed Commonwealths Governments ruin; and
promote his Majesty's just interest the more.

My Lord, I shall not much blame my Lord Advocate for doing his Endeavor, (it
being in Essential part of his function to accuse) but I must say, that its
very hard measure, that so able a man has near as many months, in taking
pains to promp as many Enemies as his persuasions could possibly invite, to
bend upon the highest notes of their malice, and laying out search by them for,
and collecting all the Bad Reports, or rather (to give them their genuine term)
I may call them a confused mass of the Common Classis of the Country; thereby
to devise misconstructions of all the public actings of both Parliaments or
Committees, during the late Troubles, and with strange and remote Inferences,
and to adduce all those to the channel of my particular Actings, as many I say
(my Lord) months, as I have days to Answer them, (being an exceeding
disadvantage.) But (my Lord) that's not all, I am likewise extremely gauled,
that he labors in that Libell all along, to draw an obscure vail of perpetual
Oblivion over all my Good Services, and specially my Faithful, and Royal
Endeavors, in Restoring his Sacred Majesty to the Crown of his this most
Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, and the exercise of his Majesty's Royal
Authority therein; with my cordial Endeavors for his Majesty's Restitution to
the rest of his Dominions also, which his Majesty both knows, and has been
pleased often to acknowledge it to have been Good Service: and yea, many
present in this Honorable House knows, that I extended both my Zeal and
Affection to the uttermost of my power, for his Majesty's Service in that
particular: which I willingly acknowledge nothing (my Lord) but my Duty,
whereunto I was Tied, both by Natural, Civil, and Christian Bonds to my
Sovereign; and especially such a Deserving KING, of whom I may now (as I have
often) Affirm, That he is a King, in whom the Lord has taken such pleasure, as
to possess his Majesty with so many Superlative Degrees of Excellency, that
any of his Princely perfections may be a Characteristick Distinction sufficient
to Exalt his Majesty's Fame, both in our Age, and to the subsequent Posterity,
above all the Monarchs in the World.

So (My Lord) we may consequently discover a high Demonstration of the Lords
singular Kindness, and special providentiall Care for us his Majesty's
Subjects, in preserving such a Rich Blessing as his SACRED MAJESTY; (in whom
the happiness of these Nations is wrapped up) under the safe wings of his
Divine Protection, I may say, even when the extravagant malice of men would
have swallowed him up.

After his Lordship had ended this discourse (being heard very attentively by
all without any interruption) my Lords Advocate says to my Lord Chancellor
thus, My Lord Chancellor, but what can the Marquess of Argyle say to the
opposition at Striveling in Anno, 1648? The Marquess replied, that he found my
Lord Advocate endeavored to bring him to debate the particulars, which he
hoped should be cleared at a more convenient time, and waved it, answering
nothing to the thing it self, but insisted thus:

(My Lord Chancellor) I have Informative only hinted at the main things, which
I am often charged with, my memory cannot fully reach all, neither will time
permit to Circumstantiate these particulars, which I have only touched in the
general; nor is my purpose at present, to fall on the debate of that Libell,
not having, as yet unfolded the process. By reason those Advocates your
Lordships was pleased to allow me, have not yet all embraced, and the excuses
of my ordinary Advocates (in whom I had confidence) being admitted as
relievant: And this Gentleman that has been pleased (in obedience to your
Lordships commands) to come here with me, not being much acquainted with
matters of this weight, and not having embraced till within these two or three
days, so that they are strangers altogether to my case. I shall therefore (my
Lord) humbly desire, that a competent time may be allowed me, that I may
prepare my defenses, and I shall (God willing) abundantly clear every
particular in the Libell.

And also (my Lord) I humbly desire, that those other Advocates, who were
ordained by your Lordships to assist me; after the Honorable Lords of the
Articles rejected their excuses, they may be now Ordained by your Lordships, to
consult and appear for me.

The Marquess his Advocates entered a Protestation, that what should happen to
escape them in pleading (either by Word or Write) for the Life, Honor and
Estate of the said Noble Marquess their Client, might not thereafter be
obtruded to them as Treasonable; whereupon they took Instruments.

The Marquess assured my Lord Chancellor, that he knew not of any such
protestation to be presented, and that it flowed simply of themselves, and not
of him. Whereupon my Lord Chancellor desired the Marquess and his Advocates,
to remove till the House should consider of both; my Lord Marquesses desire,
and the Advocates Protestation.

The Marquess and his Advocates being removed, The House (after some small
debates) Resolved, as to my Lord Marquesses desire, his Lordship should have
till the 26 of March to give in his Defenses in Write, and ordained Mr. Andrew
Ker to be one of his Advocates.

As to the Advocates Protestation, The House Resolved, That they could not be
allowed to speak any Treason, either by Word or Write, but upon their peril:
only allowed them, in the general, as much as ever in such cases was indulged
to any.

The Marquess and his Advocates being called in, my Lord Chancellor intimates
the foresaid Resolutions of the House, both in reference to my Lord Marquesses
desires, and to the Advocates, in relation to their Protestation.

When my Lord Chancellor had done, the Marquess spoke as follows:

My Lord Chancellor, There is one thing that had almost escaped me, anent that
Opposition at Striveling 1648. that my Lord Advocate was speaking of, that it
may not stick with any of this Honorable Meeting, I shall ingenuously declare,
that after the Defeat at Preston, I was desired to come, and meet with the
Committee of Estates (meaning those who were not in the then Engagement) I came
with some of my Friends to Striveling, fearing no harm, nor suspecting nothing;
I was invaded by Sir George Monro, where several of my Friends were killed, and
my self hardly Escaped; which is all that can be said I acted in Arms, which
many here knows to be most true.

My Lord, not that I am any ways Diffident, but I shall in due time clear
every particular in that Libell: yet I am not a little troubled, That some, who
have heard the Calumnies therein, may let them have such an Impression (being
asserted with such confidence) as to conceive a possibility, if not a
probability of their being true. I shall therefore humbly desire so much
Charity from this Honorable Meeting, that there may be no hard thoughts
entertained by any, till I be fully heard.

The Marquess thereafter, with joint Concurrence of his Advocates, humbly
desired, That his Bill, containing many pungent Reasons for a precognition of
his Business, given in to the Honorable Lords of the Articles, may be
considered in plain Parliament.

To which my Lord Chancellor Replied, That it had been formerly refused at the
Articles, and that it would not be granted.

FINIS.

