A DECLARATION Of the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND. FOR RERIGION, CROWN, and COVENANT,

AND Their Resolution to adhere thereunto, and to preserve and maintain their
ancient Government, by a mixed Monarchy of KING, LORDS, and COMMONS, and their
further proceedings thereupon, in relation to their young King, and the
Parliament of ENGLAND.

ALSO, A Declaration to the Citizens of London, concerning twenty thousand
Horse and Foot to be raised for the Prince, under the command of General
Hatzfield, with the advice and Proposals thereupon.

AND The King of Denmark's sending forth a new Fleet to fall upon the English
Ships.

Imprinted at London, for R. Williamson, 1649.

THE DECLARATION Of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND FOR Religion, Crown, and Covenant;
and their Resolution touching the Parliament of England; their preparations to
fight for Charles the second, and 8000 Horse and 12000 Foot raising in Holland.
SIR,
THe Parliament of Scotland begins to display the banner of great Politicians,
and have taken an Oath of Secrecy not to impart or disclose the results of
their debates til all things come to maturity and ripeness: all their
consultations tends to the purging of the Army, adhering to their Covenant, and
maintaining their Government by a mixed Monarchy of King, Lords, and Commons;
and in order thereunto, the major part have entered into protest, and declared,
in the name of all the Commons of that Kingdom, That they will (to the utmost
of their power) endeavor the preservation of the peace and tranquillity
thereof, against all opposition or power whatsoever, and that they will
likewise endeavor the true establishing of a firm and unspotted Monarchy
(which can hardly be) according to the ancient Laws Liberties and Custom of
that Kingdom, and does further remonstrate exceeding high language against the
Parliament of England, in reference to the late Kings execution, and their
present transactions between Parliament and Army: But their young Kings Answer
seeming unsatisfactory to the desires of the Commissioners of the Kirk, causes
them rather to pray for his Conversion; then advise his Conformity.

However, the vulgar sort of people seem to rescent his condescensions, and
say, that unless their plants receive moisture from the sap of the Cedar, the
bark and pith of the poor Shrub will fade and decay.

Hence it is, that tyrannical Oppressors have received an allarum throughout
all Ages, with the desperate Careers of a distressed multitude, who no sooner
enter by storm, but they make their enemies (though never so great) drink the
dregs of their cup of fury, and not only so, but leaves them and their Issue,
odious to all posterity.

But its hoped that those who keep their Trophies of Victoria by love, will
challenge a high applause of Christianity and Soldiery, and attempt desperate
adventures for the bringing of their oppressors to a speedy ruin;
notwithstanding all their foreign machavilianism, to a new involving; It being
apparent that their present actings beyond the Seas, tends to the universal
destruction of the well-affected party throughout the three Nations; the which,
that it may appear more visible to your stately Fabric and renowned
Metropolis, I shall here represent unto the Ornaments and Inhabitants thereof,
a perfect Demonstration and Declaration of the proceedings of the King of Scots
and his Adherents, in reference to an engagement against them; to the end they
may receive a timely allarum, for a ananimous association, with those renowned
Trustees, who have so deerly purchased their liberties; the sum and abstract
whereof I shall here insert as follows, viz.

The King of Scots has sent several Embassies to foreign Princes and
Potentates; to wit, the most high and mighty Imperialist, the Emperor of
Germany, Philip King of Spain, Lewis King of France, and the most pious and
virtuous Princess the Queen of Swethland, earnestly imploring timely aid and
assistance for his restoration; and we hear that great preparations are
(there) making suitable to his Desires, and that upon the Confines of High
Germany several Regiments of Horse and Foot are raising, which are to be
distinctly divided into four Brigades, each Brigade to consist of 4000 Horse,
and 6000 Foot, to be commanded by General Hatzfield, who has Commission
proffered from the King of Scots, for the leading and conducting of them
according as his titular Majesty and his Council shall determine of. ( This
General Hatzfield has a point of great policy if he can raise something out of
nothing; for although there be so many designed, yet there are not a quarter so
many (as yet) levied.

We hear that the King of Denmark has sent an additionall Fleet to the Zund,
to intercept and fall upon the English ships at their return from the East
Country; and for certain it is, that both the Scots and others have them in a
universal hatred.

Berwick 30 June, 1649.
Right Honored,
THe Marq. of Ormond with 13000 Horse and Foot is sat down before the City of
Dublin, with a resolution to storm, if not suddenly surrendered upon summons;
but renowned Col. Jones has taken a resolution to fight it out to the last
man, and has already made a gallant attempt and inroad upon his Outquartes
with 2000 Horse and Foot; and after a sharp conflict Col. Jones made an
honorable retreat into the City with the loss of 7 or 8, besides some sew
wounded; but the Lord Inchiquins Brigade of horse being gallantly mounted, took
upon them great resolution, and embraced the pursuit within a quarter of a mile
of the Gates, where we had a second engagement, which continued very dubious
for the space of half an hour, till at last a considerable party of the Seamen
came in to our assistance, who by their lining of the hedges, did so gall the
Enemy, that they were forced to retreat, leaving above 30 men dead upon the
place; in which fight we took Captain Smith, Cornet Johnson, and about ten more
prisoners, with the loss of five men.

Since which time, they have made another attempt upon our Out-guards, and upon
the near approoch of their forlorn hope consisting of about 60 horse, 30 of
ours answered their charge, and shot Lieut. Col. Dungans horse under him, took
him prisoner, and Major Dungan his brother was mortally wounded, our men
brought off 7 of their horse, and (blessed be God) but one man wounded, none
slain.

They are encamped within a mile and a half of the City, where they expect the
coming up of the Earl of Clanrickard, Lord Taff, and the Lord Dillon, with
their forces, for a sudden conjunction; and then to make a sharp storm.

Their Tents are pitched on this side Fingles, their horse and foot lie all in
our sight; Col. Jones is laboring hard to fortify against them, has given
Orders for the pulling down all the Outhouses that may advantage their design,
and has set forth Proclamation for all the Irish Papists, and other
disaffected Citizens, to depart the City within 12 hours after the publishing
thereof; by whose unwearied pains and vigilance, we are in some reasonable
possibility of the more safety thereby, and have hard duty to attend the Line
daily, but great will, vigor and eadinesse is in all men to perform the
service: We have about 7000 foot (with the Inhabitants) fighting men, and about
500 horse to face the enemy: Our provisions consume very fast, and every thing
is excessive dear, having now neither fish nor flesh to come to our Markets,
the enemy being possessed of that which should relieve us; and are in a
prosperous condition at present, and like to do what they please if our friends
in England do not relieve us suddenly, and mocey to pay them and those that are
already here, and more provisions for them all, for Wheat is here at 5. li. 10.
s. the quarter, Rye at 4. li. 10. s. the quarter, little to sell, and little
money to buy it, our Men of War are come from Bewmorris, and diverse ships from
Chester, and no men nor money, it is impossible (in man's judgment) for us to
hold out till aid comes from England.

We have lost the good Town of Kildare, but it cost the enemy very deer; for
after three or four desperate assaults made by them on the breaches, made by
their Canon, having lost many of their men they sent for a parley, and
observing the undauted resolution of Lies Col. Huteson and Cap. Dixon, who
commanded the men there, and mo- of the men under them, although many of their
men would not fighst at all, and are since gone to the enemy, that they gave
our men quartet in two days to carry away what they had, where was great store
of corr and meal, Ballesoman is besieged, and it must be lost because we cannot
come to relieve them.

We hear that Owen Oneal with his forces is joined with them of Kilkenny
against us, but we have no certainty thereof. We are in a very sad condition,
all our provisions being almost all spent, yet I hope the Lord will defend this
place, and that every one that puts his trust in him shall be delivered, to
whose blessed protection I commend you, and rest ever,

Your indeared, and most affectionate friend, SAMUEL COTTON.
Dublin 24 June, 1649.
The Propositions of General Owen Oneal, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of the
Confederate Catholics in Ulster.
To the most honorable and potent the Parliament of England.
IMprimis, That all Laws, Statutes, Penalties, made, past, or concluded against
the Roman Catholics, its Ministers or professors, their liberties and
exercises of the said Religion, since the 21 year of H. 8 to be reclaimed and
perpetually to be taken off, and to extend to that party and their successors
for ever.

2 That the said Genesis Oneal desires that an Act of Oblivion be passed to extend
to all and every of his party, for all things done since the beginning of the
year 1641. 3 They desire that General Oneal be provided for a competent command
in the army, befitting his place worth or quality. 4 That on both sides, all
jealousies, hate and aversion be laid aside, unity, love and amity be renewed
and proclaimed between both parties. 5 That the Army belonging to General
Oneal and his party, be provided for in all points as the rest of the Army
shall be.

Letters further from Berwick say, That the Scots begin to unite and that the
major part are for an agreement with their King; but (say some) their chief
object (at present) is upon Dublin, and that if General Ormond becomes master
thereof, they intend a conjunction, and so to march into England with a very
considerable Body, and the young King in the head of them. But these vapors
are supposed to arise only from a Scottish Mist, which with one strong
Southernly English Gale, become quite expelled and dissolved.

Imprimatur,

T. J.

FINIS.

