A LETTER FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, To HIS most Sacred Majesty. August
1. 1681.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, Anno 1681.

A LETTER from the Parliament of SCOTLAND, to His most Sacred Majesty.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty.
THe manifold sad experiences of the fatal mischiefs and calamities which
attend Rebellions, must needs in due proportion, dispose all your Majesty's
Subjects to higher measures of Loyalty; more particularly us in this Your
ancient Kingdom, being sensible, as we have a more special interest in your
Majesty's Sacred Person and Family; so must we inevitably share the more
deeply in all the inconveniences which may disturb or subvert your Royal
Government. And therefore, as by our Allegiance, we own it to be out duty to be
obedient and loyal to your Majesty and Your lawful Heirs and Successors; so
your Majesty's extraordinar^ kindness, to such as have continued in their
duty, and your wonderful clemency by your repeated Inde^pnities to such as have
fallen from it, cannot but kindle in us strong and ardent desires to serve Your
Majesty, with all the courage and alacrity, of which we are capables, and to
let Your other Kingdoms, and all the world see, that we esteem our Lives and
Fortunes to be best employed, in maintaining of the just Rights and
Prerogatives of your Majesty's Crown and Monarchy, the native succession
whereof cannot be invaded, without utter subversion of the fundamental Laws of
this your Majesty's ancient Kingdom. And this our Loyalty we esteem our alone
security, to avoid these confusions and slavery, which distracted and ruined us
in the last Age, and seems to threaten us so apparently in this.

SIR, Though some rebellious and deluded People, have disturbed your Majesty's
Government there, yet their Principles are so extravagant, and so few Persons
of any Note or Quality, are engaged with them; that we may justly hope, their
Crimes cannot be imputed to this Kingdom, whose Representatives in this Your
Majesty's Parliament, will no less for their Vindication as to what is past,
then for their own Security for the time coming, cheerfully provide suitable and
sufficient Remedies; All of us being very sensible, that these distractions and
disorders would in the issue tend to the dissolution not only of Your
Majesty's Government in the Church and State, as the same is by Law
established, but even of all Humane Society.

It is a great satisfaction to us, to find Your Majesty so concerned for the
PROTESTANT Religion, not only in Your Gracious Letter to us, but in the whole
Conduct of Your Royal Government. And we shall with all Christian care, and
duty endeavor to confirm it, so as it may become a solid and pious support, to
Your Royal Family, and Monarchy, and a sure fence in this disturbed and
divided Church, against all Usurpations and Disorders of Popery, and
Phanaticism, that for the future, the pretense of its insecuritie may not be
made (as formerly) an Engyne for carrying on disloyal designs and practices.

We offer our most humble and hearty thanks to Your most Sacred Majesty, for
calling us together at this time, to consult jointly the Interests of Yout
Majesty's Government, and of Your Subjects in this Your Ancient Kingdom, which
we trust shall never be divided. And therefore, as the Prerogatives and just
Rights of the Monarchy, are absolutely necessar, for the defense of our
Properties and Liberties, so in pursuance of our own Interest, and for further
clearing of our Duty and Allegiance by positive Laws; we shall not fail to
declare our humble and hearty acknowledgements of the just Rights and
Perogatives of Your Imperial Crown in its Just, Native, and Lineal course of
Descent; And to secure the just Rights, and Liberties of Your Subjects, so as
may fully demonstrat our unalterable Resolutions, never to depart from our
Duty to Your Royal Family, and Your lawful Heirs and Successors, to whom we
are tied by so many sacred Obligations.

We do also with all humble Gratitude, acknowledge the Grace, and Honor, done
to this Kingdom, in naming Your Royal Brother to be Your Majesty's High
Commissioner in this present Parliament. And indeed the beholding a SON of our
Ancient Monarchs, under whom we and our Ancestors, have been so long and so
happily governed in this Character, Does vigorously awaken in us, the
remembrance of our Native Kindness and Obligations, as his just Temper and
steddie equality in all our Concerns cannot but extinguish in us all fears and
jealousies of severitie, or partiality; His Interest being unseparable from
Your Majesty's: And he being well acquainted with all Our Concerns, and so
affectionat to, and careful of them, Your Majesty may justly expect from a
Parliament, under the conduct of such a Commissioner, all that can be judged
necessar for the honor and support of Your Royal Government, and Authority,
and for securing the just Rights and Liberties of Your Subjects, and that with
all the Loyalty, Readiness, and Sincerity, which can be expressed by Us:

Signed in Name and by Order of the Parliament, By Your Majesty's most Humble,
most Faithful, and most obedient Subject and Servant. ATHOLE J. P. D. Par.


