A DECLARATION OF THE Convention of Estates in Scotland, concerning their
ARMY: With their reasons for continuance thereof until March next; And in
what manner the Officers and Soldiers shall be paid. Dated at Edinburgh
October 15, 1647.

Together with An Exhortation of the General Assembly of the Kirk of SCOTLAND,
unto the Scots Merchants and other their Country People scattered in Poland,
Swedland, Denmark and Hungary.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tylar, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. And reprinted at London for ROBERT BOSTOCK. MDCXLVII.

At Edinburgh October. 15, 1647.
THe Committee of Estates being frequently met, to take into consideration the
disbanding of the Army presently within the Kingdom, according to a former Act
of the Committee of the eleventh of Sephember last; and considering the dangers
at this time imminent to Religion, His Majesty's Person and Authority, the
Union betwixt the Kingdoms, and Peace of this Kingdom, which were fully
represented to them in the Remonstrance of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly, in the Letters from their Commissioners at London and in the
informations sent hither from several places of the Kingdom: And having at
length debated thereupon* do find it necessary, in regard thereof, that the
Army be kept up till the meeting of Parliament in March next to come come: And
do therefore remit and refer the consideration of the disbanding the Army till
that meeting. And in the mean time, that the burden of the entertainment of the
Army do not appear greater then really it is, The Committee of Estates have
thought fit to make known to all His Majesty's good Subjects, That this day the
Lord General, the Lieutenant General, and General Majors, to testify the
willingness of the Army to ease the Kingdom as much as can be; Have for
themselves, in the n^me of the whole Officers and Soldiers under their
command, and contained in the establishment of the Army, freely quit and
discharged to the Kingdom the proportion of their Pay underwritten, from the
tenth of October instant, to the tenth day of March next to come, viz. the Foot
soldier quits daily twelve pennies Scots, the Trooper two shillings Scots, the
Dragooners proportionally; and the Officers above a Lieutenant quits the third
part of their Pay; Which offer the Committee has accepted, and with that
deduction ordains the Army be entertained from the said tenth of October, till
the said tenth day of March next, according to the rule of Maintenance, the
accounts whereof is to come in to the General Commissary as formerly: And the
retention of the Annual rents to be proportionable to the Maintenance: And
whereas by the foresaid Act of the eleventh of September, the Shires were
ordained to advance presently new three Months Maintenance; The Committee in
regard of the course taken by this Act, discharges the advance of the said
three months Maintenance, and all execution to pass for payment thereof. And
ordains their presents to be Printed, and published at the Market Crosses of
the several Burrows of the Kingdom, and to be sent to the Committees of War of
the Shires, that none pretend ignorance thereof.

Arch. Primerose.

Unto the Scots Merchants and others our Country People scattered in Poleland,
Swedland, Denmark, and Hungary; The General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland
wishes grace, mercy and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord JESUS
CHRIST.
ALthough this Kirk of Scotland; whiles spoiled of her Liberties under the
Prelatical tyranny, had much difficulty and wrestling to preserve the true
Reformed Religion from being quite extinguished among our selves; yet since the
mighty and outstretched arm of the Lord our God has brought us out of that
Egypt, and has restored to us well-constituted and free national Synods, It
has been our desire and endeavor to set forward the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the purity of his Ordinances, not only thorowout this Nation, but
in other parts also, so far as God gave us a call and opportunity, and opened a
way unto us. And among other things of this nature, we have more particularly
taken into our serious thoughts the sad and lamentable condition of many
thousands of you our Countrymen, who are scattered abroad as sheep having no
Shepherd, and are through the want of the means of knowledge, grace and
salvation, exposed to the greatest spiritual dangers, whether through
ignorance, or through manifold tenta^ions to errors and false Religions, or
through the occasions and snares of sin.

We have therefore thought it incumbent to us to put you in mind of the one
thing necessary, while you are so careful and troubled about the things of the
world. And although we do not disallow your going abroad to follow any lawful
calling or way of livelihood, yet seeing it cannot profit a man although he
should gain the whole world and lose his own soul, and seeing you have
traveled so far, and taken so much pains to get uncertain riches, which cannot
deliver in the day of the wrath of the Lord, and which men know not who shall
inherit: We do from our affection to the salvation of your immortal souls, most
earnestly beseech and warn you to cry after knowledge, and lift up your voice
for understanding, seeking her as silver, and searching for her as for hid
treasures, and so play the wise Merchants in purchasing the Pearl of price, and
in laying up a sure foun^ation for the time to come, by acquainting your souls
with Jesus Christ, and by faith taking hold of him, whose free grace is now
offered and held out to sinners, excluding none among all the kinreds of the
earth who will come unto him. God forbid that you should let slip the time and
offers of grace, or neglect any warning of this kind sent to you in the Name
of the Lord. We shall hope better things of you, and that knowing the
acceptable time and the day of salvation will not always last, but the Lord
Jesus is to be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel, you will
the rather bestir your selves timely and with all diligence to seek the Lord
while he may be found, to endeavor that you may have among you the ordinary
means of grace and salvation, to pray that God would give you Pastors
according to his heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding, to
consult also and agree among your selves, with consent of your Superiors under
whom you live (whose favor and good will we trust will not be wanting to you
in so good and necessary a work) for setting up the Worship of God and
Ecclesiastical Discipline among you according to the Form established and
received in this your mother Kirk, and for a way of settled maintenance to
Pastors and Teachers: Which if you do, our Commissioners appointed to meet
from time to time in the interval betwixt this and the next national Assembly,
will be ready (upon your desire made known to them) to provide some able and
godly Ministers for you, as likewise to communicate to you our Directory for
the public Worship of God, and our form of Ecclesiastical Government and
Discipline; together with the Confession of Faith and Catechism.

And in the mean time, we exhort you that (...) neglect not the worship of God
in secret and in your families, and that ye continue steadfast in the profession
of that Faith in which ye were baptized, and by a godly, righteous and sober
conversation adorn the Gospel; and withal, that distance of the place make you
not the less sensible of your Countries sufferings, both in respect of the
just judgments of God for the sins of the Land, and in respect of the malice
of enemies for the common Cause and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, of which
happy Conjunction, notwithstanding we do not repent us, but by the grace of
God shall continue faithful and steadfast therein.

This Letter we have thought fit to be printed and published, that it may be
with the greater ease and convenience conveyed to the many several places of
your habitation or traffic. Consider what we have said, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all, Amen.

EDINBURGH, Augusti 31. 1647. Subscribed in the name of the General Assembly of
the Kirk of Scotland. M. Robert Douglasse Moderator.

FINIS.

