THE DECLARATION OF THE ESTATES OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, Containing the
Claim of Right, and the Offer of the CROWN to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY: Together with the Grievances Represented by the Estates; and Their
Majesty's Oath at Their Acceptance of the CROWN.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Parliament,
Anno DOM. 1689.

The Declaration of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, containing the
Claim of Right, and the Offer of the CROWN to their Majesty's King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, the Eleventh day of April, 1689.
WHereas King James the Seventh, being a professed Papist, did Assume the Regal
Power, and Acted as King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law, whereby
the King, at His Access to the Government, is obliged to Swear, to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and to Rule the People according to the Laudable Laws; and
did by the Advice of Wicked and Evil Counselors, Invade the Fundamental
Constitution of this Kingdom, and Altered it from a Legal Limited Monarchy, to
an Arbitrary Despotick Power; And in a public Proclamation, asserted an
Absolute Power, to cass, anull and dissable all the Laws, particularly
Arraigning the Laws, establishing the Protestant Religion, and did Exerce that
Power, to the Subversion of the Protestant Religon, and to the Violation of the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

By Erecting Public Schools, and Societies of the Jesuits; and not only
allowing Mass to be publicly said, but also Inverting Protestant Chapels and
Churches to public Mass-Houses, contrary to the Express Laws against Saying
and Hearing of Mass.

By allowing Popish-Books to be Printed, and dispersed by a Gift to a Popish
Printer; Designing him Printer to His Majesty's Household, College and Chapel,
contrary to the Laws.

By taking the Children of Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, sending and
keeping them abroad, to be bred Papists, making great Fonds and Dotations to
Popish Schools and Colleges abroad; bestowing Pensions upon Priests, and
perverting Protestants from their Religion, by offers of Places, Preferments
and Pensions.

By dis-arming Protestants, while at the same time he Employed Papists in the
Places of greatest Trust, Civil and Military; Such as Chancellor, Secretaries,
Privy Counselors, and Lords of Session, thrusting out Protestants, to make
Room for Papists, and entrusting the Forts and Magazins of the Kingdom in their
hands.

By Imposing Oaths contrary to Law.

By giving Gifts and Grants for exacting Money, without Consent of Parliament,
or Convention of Estates.

By Levying, or keeping on Foot a standing Army in time of Peace, without
Consent of Parliament, which Army did exact Locality, free and dry Quarters.

By Employing the Officers of the Army, as Judges through the Kingdom, and
Imposing them where there were Heretable Offices and Jurisdictions, by whom
many of the Leidges were put to death summarly, without Legal Trial, Jury or
Record.

By Imposing Exorbitant Fines, to the Value of the Parties Estates, Exacting
Extravagant Bale; and disposing Fines and Forefaultures before any Process or
Conviction.

By Imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and delaying to put them
to Trial.

By causing Pursue and Forefault several Persons upon stretches of old and
obsolete Laws, upon frivolous and weak Pretenses, upon Lame and Defective
Probations; as particularly the late Earl of Argyl, to the Scandal and Reproach
of the Justice of the Nation.

By Subverting the Right of the Royal Burghs, the third Estate of Parliament,
Imposing upon them not only Magistrates, but also the whole Town-Council, and
Clerks, contrary to their Liberties, and Express Charters without the Pretense
either of Sentence, Surrender, or Consent; So that the Commissioners to
Parliaments being chosen by the Magistrates and Council, the King might in
effect alse well nominat that entire Estate of Parliament; and many of the
said Magistrates put in by him, were avowed Papists, and the Burghs were forced
to pay Money for the Letters, Imposing these Illegal Magistrates and Councils
upon them.

By sending Letters to the Chief Court of Justice, not only ordaining the
Judges to stop and desist sine die to determine Causes; but also Ordering and
Commanding them how to proceed, in Cases depending before them, contrary to the
Express Laws; and by changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts ad vitam aut
culpam, and giving them Commissions ad beneplacitum, to dispose them to
Compliance with Arbitrary Courses, and turning them out of their Offices, when
they did not Comply.

By granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, contrary to Law.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws, Statutes and
Freedoms of this Realm.

Therefore the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Find and Declare, that King
James the Seventh being a Professed Papist did Assume the Regal Power, and Acted
as King, without ever taking the Oath, required by Law, and has by the Advice
of Evil and Wicked Counselors, Invaded the Fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal Limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary
Despotick Power, and has Exercised the same, to the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and the Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, Inverting all the Ends of Government, whereby he has Forefaulted the
Right to the Crown, and the Throne is become Vacant.

And whereas His Royal Highness, William then Prince of Orange, now King of
England, whom it has pleased Almighty GOD to make the Glorious instrument of
delivering these Kingdoms from Popery, and Arbitrary Power, Did, by the Advice
of Several Lords and Gentlemen of this Nation, at London for the time, call the
Estates of this Kingdom to meet the Fourteenth of March last, In Order to such
an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not be again
in Danger of being Subverted; And the said Estates being now Assembled, in a
Full and Free Representative of this Nation, Taking to their most serious
Consideration, the best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, Do, in the
first Place, as their Ancestors in the like Cases have usually done, for the
Vindicating and Asserting their Ancient Rights, and Liberties, Declare,

That by the Law of this Kingdom, no Papist can be King or Queen of this Realm,
nor bear any Office whatsoever therein; nor can any Protestant Successor
exercise the Regal Power, until He or She Swear the Coronation Oath.

That all Proclamations asserting an Absolute Power, to Cass, Annull, and
Disable Laws, the Erecting Schools and Colleges for Jesuits, the Inverting
Protestant Chapels and Churches to Public Mass-houses, and the allowing Mass
to be said, are contrary to Law.

That the Allowing Popish Books to be Printed and Dispersed, is contrary to Law.

That the taking the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, sending and
keeping them abroad to be bred Papists, the making Fonds and Dotations to
Popish Schools and Colleges, the bestowing Pensions on Priests, and the
perverting Protestants from their Religion, by offers of Places, Preferments,
and Pensions, are contrary to Law.

That the Disarming of Protestants, and Employing Papists in the Places of
greatest Trust, both Civil and Military, the thrusting out Protestants, to make
room for Papists, and the intrusting Papists with the Forts and Magazines of
the Kingdom, are contrary to Law.

That the Imposing Oaths without Authority of Parliament, is contrary to Law.

That the giving Gifts or Grants, for raising of Money, without the consent of
Parliament, or Convention of Estates, is contrary to Law.

That the employing the Officers of the Army as Judges through the Kingdom, or
Imposing them where there were Heretable Offices and Jurisdictions, and the
putting the Leidges to death summarly, and without Legal Trial, Jury, or
Record, are contrary to Law.

That the Imposing of extraordinary Fines, the exacting of exorbitant Bale, and
the disposing of Fines, and Forfaultures before Sentence, are contrary to Law.

That the Imprisoning Persons, without expressing the Reason thereof, and
delaying to put them to Trial, is contrary to Law.

That the causing Pursue and Forefault Persons, upon stretches of old and
obsolete Laws, upon frivolous and weak pretenses, upon lame and defective
Probation, as particularly the late Earl of Argile, are contrary to Law.

That the Nominating and Imposing the Magistrates, Councils, and Clerks, upon
Burghs, contrary to their Liberties and express Charters, is contrary to Law.

That the sending Letters to the Courts of Justice, Ordaining the Judges to
stop or desist from Determining Causes, or Ordaining them how to proceed in
Causes depending before them, and the changing the nature of the Judges Gifts
ad vitam aut culpam, into Commissions durante beneplacito, are contrary to Law.

That the granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, is contrary to Law.

That the forcing the Leidges to Depone against themselves in Capital Crimes,
however the punishment be restricted, is contrary to Law.

That the using Torture without Evidence in ordinary Crimes, is contrary to Law.

That the sending of an Army in an Hostile manner, upon any part of the
Kingdom, in a peaceable time, and exacting of Locality, and any manner of free
Quarter, is contrary to Law.

That the Charging of the Leidges with Law-borrows at the King's instance, and
the Imposing of Bonds without the Authority of Parliament, and the Suspending
Advocats from their Employments, for not Compearing when such Bonds were
offered, were contrary to Law.

That the putting of Garrisons in private Men's Houses in time of Peace, without
their consent, or the Authority of Parliament, is contrary to Law.

That the Opinions of the Lords of Session in the two Cases following, were
contrary to Law, viz. 10. That the concealing the demand of a Supply for a
Forefaulted Person, although not given, is Treason. 20. That Persons refusing
to discover what are their private Thoughts and Judgments, in relation to points
of Treason, or other men's Actions, are guilty of Treason.

That the Fyning Husbands for their Wives withdrawing from the Church, was
contrary to Law.

That Prelacy and the Superiority of any Office in the Church, above
Presbyters, is and has been a great and insupportable grievance and trouble to
this Nation, and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People,
ever since the Reformation (they having Reformed from Popery by Presbyters) and
therefore ought to be abolished.

That it is the Right and Privilege of the Subjects, to Protest for Remeed of
Law to the King and Parliament, against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of
Session, providing the same do not stop Execution of these Sentences.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and that all
Imprisonments and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are contrary to Law.

That for Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthening, and
Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be frequently called, and allowed
to sit, and the freedom of Speech and Debate secured to the Members.

And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all and sundry the Premises, as
their undoubted Right and Liberties, and that no Declarations, Doings, or
Proceedings, to the prejudice of the People, in any of the said Premises,
ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter, in Consequence or Example, but that
all Forefaulturs, Fines, loss of Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Pursuits,
Persecutions, Tortures, and rigorous Executions be considered, and the Parties
Lesed be Redressed.

To which Demand of their Rights, and Redressing of their Grievances, they are
particularly encouraged by his Majesty, the King of England His Declaration for
the Kingdom of Scotland, of the day of October last, as being the only means
for obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, that His said Majesty, the King of
England, will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by Him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
Asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties.

The said Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Do Resolve that WILLIAM and MARY,
King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, Be, and be Declared King and
Queen of Scotland, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, to Them the said King and Queen, during Their Lives, and the longest
Liver of Them, and that the Sole and Full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only
in, and Exercised by Him the said King, in the Names of the said King and
Queen, during their Joint Lives, and after their Decease, the said Crown and
Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom, to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said
Queen, which failing, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of her
Body, which also failling, to the Heirs of the Body of the said WILLIAM King of
England.

And they do Pray the said King and Queen of England to accept the same
accordingly.

And that the Oath hereafter mentioned, be Taken by all Protestants, of whom
the Oath of Allegiance, and any other Oaths and Declarations might be required
by Law, in stead of them, and that the said Oath of Allegiance, and other Oaths
and Declarations may be Abrogated.

The OATH.
I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear True
Allegiance to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me GOD.

And the Estates Do Ordain, That this Declaration be Engrossed in Parchment,
and Recorded in the Register Books of Parliament.

Follows the Grievances Represented by the Estates of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND,
to the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, to be Redressed in PARLIAMENT.
THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Do Represent, That the Committee of
Parliament, Called the Articles, is a great Grievance to the Nation, and that
there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are freely Chosen by
the Estates, to prepare Motions and Overtures that are first made in the House.

That the first Act of Parliament 1669. Is inconsistent with the Establishment
of the Church Government, now desired, and ought to be Abrogated.

That Forefaulturs in prejudice of Vassals, Creditors and Heirs of Entail, are
a great Grievance.

That the obliging the Liedges to Depone upon Crimes against Delinquents,
otherwise than when they are Adduced in special Processes, as Witnesses, is a
great Grievance.

That Assizes of Error are a Grievance, and that Juries be considered by
Parliament.

That the eighteenth Act of Parliament 1681. Declaring a Cumulative
Jurisdiction, is a Grievance.

That the Commissariot Courts, as they are now Constitute, are a Grievance.

That the Twenty seventh Act of Parliament 1663. Giving to the King Power to
Impose Custom at pleasure, upon Foreign Import and Trade, is a Grievance, and
prejudicial to the Trade of the Nation.

That the not taking an Effectual Course to Repress the Depredations and
Robberies by the Highland Clans, is a Grievance.

That the Banishment by the Council of the greatest part of the Advocat from
Edinburgh, without a Process, was a Grievance.

That the most of the Laws Enacted in the Parliament Anno 1685. are Impious and
Intolerable Grievances.

That the Marriage of a King or Queen of this Realm to a Papist, is Dangerous
to the Protestant Religion, and ought to be provided against.

That the Levying, or Keeping on Foot a Standing Army in time of peace, without
Consent of Parliament, is a Grievance.

That all Grievances relating to the Manner and Measure of the Leidges, their
Representation in Parliament be Considered and Redressed in the first
Parliament.

That the Grievances of the Burrows be Considered and Redressed in the first
Parliament.

The OATH taken by the King and Queen at Their Acceptance of the Crown of
Scotland.
WE WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of Scotland, Faithfully Promise and Swear
by this Our Solemn OATH, in presence of the Eternal GOD, That during the whole
Course of Our Life, We will Serve the same Eternal GOD, to the utmost of Our
Power, according as He has Required in His most Holy Word, Revealed and
Contained in the Old and New Testaments; and according to the same Word, shall
Maintain the True Religion of Christ Jesus, the Preaching of His Holy Word, and
the due and right Ministration of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached
within the Realm of Scotland; and shall Abolish and Gainstand all False
Religion, contrary to the same; and shall Rule the People committed to Our
Charge, according to the Will and Command of GOD, Revealed in His aforesaid
Word, and according to the Love-able Laws and Constitutions, Received in this
Realm, no ways Repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal GOD, And shall
procure to the uttermost of Our Power, to the Kirk of GOD, and whole Christian
People, true and perfect Peace, in all time coming, That We shall preserve and
keep Inviolated the Rights and Rents, with all just Privileges of the Crown of
Scotland; Neither shall We Transfer nor Alienat the same; That We shall Forbid
and Repress, in all Estates and Degrees, Reife, Oppression, and all kind of
Wrong; And We shall Command and Procure, That Justice and Equity in all
Judgments, be kept to all persons without Exception, as the Lord and Father
of all Mercies shall be merciful to Us: And We shall be Careful to Root out all
Heretics and Enemies to the true Worship of GOD, that shall be Convict by the
True Kirk of GOD, of the foresaids Crimes, out of Our Lands and Empire of
Scotland: And We Faithfully Affirm the Things above-written by Our Solemn Oath.
Signed by Us at Whitehall, the Eleventh Day of May, One thousand six hundred
fourscore and nine years.

WILLIAM R. MARY R.

At Edinburgh, the 21 of June 1689.
HIs Majesty's Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliament, Do Ordain the
Declaration of the Estates of this Kingdom, Containing the Claim of Right, and
the Offer of the Crown to Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; With
the Grievances Represented by the Estates; And the Oath Taken and Signed by the
King and Queen, at Their Acceptance of the Crown, to be Printed. Extracted out
of the Records of Parliament, by ALL. GIBSON, Cls

FINIS.

