ACT OF THE CONVENTION OF ESTATES: Holden at Edinburgh the fifteenth of August
1643. for the Loan and Taxt.
FOrsameikle as the Kings Majesty and Estates of this Realm, in the late
Parliament, taking to their consideration the Rebellion in Ireland, and danger
upon that occasion threatened against the Protestant Religion, Did thereupon,
and out of their affection to the Kingdom of England, make offer to the said
Kingdom of a supply of ten thousand men from this Kingdom, for suppressing of
that Rebellion, To be entertained by the Parliament of England, according to
the Capitulation made thereanent by the Commissioners sent from the Parliament
of this Kingdom, With instructions sent from the Lords of Privy Council
thereof; And accordingly the said supply being put over upon the great charges
of this Kingdom, such have been the great necessities and wants of that Army,
as well Officers as Soldiers, not only through default of their ordinary pay,
but also of victual in the sparest measure, and all other necessaries, That
the Lords of Privy Council, unto whom the care of that army was entrusted by
the Parliament, and who did accordingly undertake for the same, Have been put
to great trouble and charges, both by engaging themselves, and with them also
the Commissioners for the peace and common burdens, As also by their joint
invitation of the well-affected subjects of this kingdom to contribute sums of
money for entertainment of that Army, and payment of the arreares thereof,
which they are obliged to pay with the ordinary annual rent; And howsoever
considerable sums have been by their painful endeavors received,
Notwithstanding, such have been the pressing miseries of that Army, in regard
of the unhappy distractions in England, disabling the Parliament thereof,
according to their obligement to entertain them, as they have expressed in their
several Declarations sent to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council; And
such have been the difficulties occurring to the said Lords of Privy
Council, Commissioners of peace, and common burdens, touching the farther
entertainment of that Army, which they found unpossible for them any longer to
undergo, as they were moved from their affection to His Majesty's service, and
sense of the distress of their brethren, For this and other the like extreme
exigencie, nearly importing the good of this Kingdom, to call this Convention
of Estates, by whose authority they might more warrantably proceed in matters
of so great importance: And the said Estates having accordingly taken to their
consideration the condition of the said Army, and the whole course and
procedure concerning the same, as is before expressed:

Therefore, and for diverse other considerations moving the said Estates, they
have thought fit, stature and ordained, Like as by their presents they statute
and ordain, The sum of twelve hundred thousand marks Scots money, together
with the sum of one hundred thousand marks money foresaid, as allowance for
charges of ingathering of the same, to Collectors, Clerks, and others necessary
members, and for allowance of exemptions for mortifications, and the Lord
Chancellor and fifteen ordinary Lords of the Session, persons exeemed, as is
after specified, To be uplifted by way of Loan, out of the several Sherifdomes
and burrowes of this Kingdom, in manner, as is after divided: viz. The said
Burrowes one sixth part of the principal sum, extending to 200000. marks, and
the several Sherifdomes of this Kingdom to pay the remanent of the said
sums, conform to a particular roll made and set down thereanent, and
subscribed in presence of the said Estates by the Lord Chancellor, to remain
in Record in the books of Convention and Collection; Which whole sums of money
to be lent, as said is, as well to Burgh as landward, shall be delivered to the
Collectors, and others having power from the said Estates, betwixt the date
hereof, and the second day of February next to come 1644. years.

And because the sums of money presently to be lent, are not to be ingathered
aff the shires, as taxations have been, or by the divisions of Temporalities
and Spiritualities, But rather is thought fit that the same may be uplifted out
of the lands, teinds, and others, as they lie locally in every Sherifdome
promiscuously, conform to the said roll subscribed as said is.

Therefore it is thought necessary that several Sub-collectors be appointed
through the whole Kingdom, in ilk shire or shires one or more; Which
Sub-collector or Collectors, so to be appointed, shall be charged with the
whole sums of moneys to be lent by the shire or shires where he or they shall
be Collector.

And to the effect the said Sub-collectors may have letters of relief against
the several persons to be contained and set down in the Rolls after mentioned:

Therefore the said Estates have nominate the persons following: viz. For the
Sherifdome of Orkney, Thomas Buchanan of Sound, Sheriff of Orkney, and Patrick
Smith of Braco, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest of
the shire to choose their own Conveeners) James Baikie of Tankernes, Adam
Ballinden of Stanehouse, James Mudie of Melsetter, Patrick Balfour of Fearey,
Edward Sinclar of Gyre.

For the Sherifdomes of Innernes and Cromertie, sir John Mackenzie of Tarbet,
master Alexander Mackenzie of Kilcowie, Conveeners for the first meeting (and
thereafter the rest of the shire to choose their own Conveeners) Walter Innes
of Innerbraiky, Coline Mackenzie of Kincraig, (...) Monro of Obstail, Alexander
Dumbar of Bennetsfield, Robert Innes of Roskeene, Hugh Fraser of Belladrum,
John Grant of Lurgie, John Ma^cleud of Dunevegan, Neil Macneil of Baro, sir
James Fraser of Bray, (...) Rosse of Pitcanie, Walter Rosse of Kindrosse,
Thomas Rosse of Priesthill.

For the Sherifdome of Caitnes, sir James Sinclar of Murtil, David Sinclar of
Dun, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest of the Shire to
make choice of their own Conveeners) James Sutherland of Forse, David Cogle of
that Ilk, John Sinclar of Scrabster, James Sinclar of Brymnes, John Innes of
Stuister.

For the Sherifdome of Sutherland, sir Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, Robert
Murray of Pulrossie, Conveeners for the first meeting and thereafter the rest
of the shire to make choice of their own Conveeners Robert Gray of Creich,
Walter Murray of Pitgourdie, Alexander Gordoun of Carrell, Hugh Mackye of
Skowrie, Robert Gray of Boltoun.

For the Sherifdome of Nairn, George Campbel brother to the Lord of Caddel,
William Dollace of Contra, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the
rest of the shire to make choice of their own Conveeners) Hugh Rosse of
Kilraok, Alexander Broddie of Lethin, John Grant of Moynes, William Rosse of
Clava, Thomas Dumbar Tutor of Grange, Patrik Paplay of Broomhill.

For the Sherifdome of Elgin, sir Robert Gordoun of that Ilk, sir Robert Innes
of that Ilk, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the rest of the
shire to make choice of their own Conveeners) sir Alexander Sutherland of
Duffus, master John Hay Provost of Elgin, Alexander Dumbar of Westfield, Ninian
Dumbar of Grangehill, James Grant of Frewchie, John Cuming of Racowcas.

For the Sherifdome of Aberdeen, the Lards of Drum and Phillorth to be
Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter those of the Shire to choose
their own Conveeners) Robert Farquhareson of Innercald, John Irwing of Beltie,
Alexander Straquhane of Glenkendie, sir William Forbes of Craigievar, Mr
William Davidson of Cairnie, sir Gilbert Meinzies of Pitfodells, Thomas Erskin
of Pittoddrie, Mr Robert Farquhare of Munie, Mr Robert Gordoun of Pitlurg (...)
Gordoun of Cokclarochie, John Owdnie of that like, James Hay of Muryfauld,
Robert Irwing of Fedret, William Keith of Clakriach.

For the Sherifdome of Bamffe, Alexander Ogilvie of Kempcarne, Thomas
Abercrombie of Skeith, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter those of
the Shire to choose their own Conveeners) James Stewart of Ordeins, Walter
Grant of Mellers, Alexander Ogilvie of Knok, James Barcley of Kinminnettie,
Alexander Lesly of Auchindoun, John Grant younger of Ballindalloch.

For the Sherifdome of Kincardin, sir Alexander Falconer younger fiar of
Hackerton, sir Alexander Cairnegie of Pittaro, Conveeners for the first meeting
(and thereafter those of the Shires to make choice of their own Conveeners, sir
Robert Grahame of Morphie, sir Gilbert Ramsay; of Balmain, Robert Keith of
Whiterigs, Sheriff depute of Kincardin, Patrik Falconer of Newton, John
Barcley of Johnstone, John Falconer fiar of Newton.

For the Sherifedome of Forfar, Robert Arbuthnet of Findowry, sir Alexander
Carnegie of Ballnamoon, Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter the
rest of the Shire to make choice of their own Conveeners) John Lord Loure,
Peter Young of Seaton, William Ruthven of Gairn, Mr James Durhame of Pitcairo,
James Vicount of Dudop, William Durhame elder of Grange, Mr William Durham of
Omaquhie (...) Maxwell of Telin, James Lord Couper James Crichton of Ruthven,
sir William Blair of Bagillo (...) Lion of Brigton, Henry Mauld of Melgume,
Thomas Fothrengham of Dununne.

For the Sherifdome of Perth, The Lairds of Inshbraikie, and Inshture,
Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to make choice amongst
themselves.) Thomas Blair of Baltheyok, six Thomas Ruthven of Frieland, John
Oliphant of Bachilton, Peter Hay of Leyis, sir Patrick Ogilvie of Inshmartin,
sir Robert Campbell of Glenorquhie, Alexander Menzies of Comrie, Patrick Ratra
of Cuaighall, Gilbert Campbell of Keithik, John Blar of Ardblair, Mr Patrick
Murray fiar of Ochtertyre, James Drumond of Milnab, sir John Hadden of
Glenegies, William Sterling elder of Auchyle.

For the Sherifdome of Fyfe, and Kinros, the Lairds of Scotscraig, and Danemiln
to be Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter to make choice among
themselves) sir James Halket fiar of Pitfirrane, William Monteeth of Randeford,
John Henderson of Fordell, Robert Dempster of Balbougie, sir George Hamiltoun
of Blaikburn, sir John VVeymis of Boegy, Mr Robert Ayton of Inshedairnie, sir
Andrew Skeen of Halyeardis, sir James Arnot of Fairnie, sir John Aiton of that
ilk, James Macgill of Rankelour elder, George Hay fiar of Nachtoun, sir Thomas
Myreton of Cambo, Mr James Ried of Pitlethie, William Forbes younger of Rires,
sir William Douglas of Kirknes, and David Balfour of Ballo.

For the Sherifdome of Sterling, (...) Murray of Polmaes, John Rollok of
Bannokburn, Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter the rest of the
shire to make choice of their own Conveeners, sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnok,
William Livingstone of Wastquarter, William Rosse of (...) John Sterling of
Harbertshire, sir James Livingston of Bancloth, (...) Stirling of Glorat, (...)
Kinked of Archinreach, (...) Hamiltoun of Baldoure, William Blair of Fenik,
John Lennox of Cairneshogle, Mr William Cunningham of Balindalloch, Mr Robert
Naper of Kilcrewch, James Stirling of Balwill, Alexander Cunningham of Baquhane.

For the Sherifdome of Clakmannan, sir Charles Erskin of Bandeth, sir Robert
Bruce of Clakmannan, and sir Alexander Shaw of Sauchie, Conveeners for the
first meeting, and thereafter to make choice amongst themselves, Master Robert
Bruce of Kennet, James Hadden of Myreton, William Graham of Hilton, William
Reid of Craigheid.

For the Sherifdome of Edinburgh, sir Archibald Johnston of Wariston, and the
Lord of Libberton, to be Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to
choose among themselves, sir Patrick Hamiltoun of little Preston, sir William
Scot of Clerkington, David Macullo of Guidtries, Mr John Inglis of
Nether-Cramond, Mr David Andersoun of Hill, Mr John Cant of Pentland, Mark
Kersse of Cokpen, Mr Samuel Johnston of Scheans.

For the Sherifdome of Linlithgow, The Lairds of Daundas and Balbachlaw,
Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to make choice among
themselves, William Drummond of Riccarton, sir Walter Murray of Livingstoun,
George Dundas of Dudingstoun, sir Robert Drummond of Medop, Master George
Dundas of Manner, Master James Hamiltoun of West-port, Samuel Drummond of
Carlowrie.

For the Sherifdome of Hadingtoun, sir Patrick Hepburne of Wachtoun, and sir
Adam Hepburn of Humbie, Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to
choose among themselves, Mr (...) Hepburne of Smeitoun, Patrick Inglis of
Elvingston, Mr James Sydserffe of Ruchlaw, John Hepburn of Craig, Mr Alexander
Hay of Bara, William Cairnes of Pilmoore, George VVood of Neumilnes.

For the Sherifdome of Berwik, The Lairds of Aitoun and Blaikader, Conveeners,
for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves, George
Auchirlek of Cumledge, Alexander Home of Restoun, Alexander Home of
Rollandstone, James Home of Castell-law, Mr Alexander Home of Saint Leonards,
Mr George Home of Kymergem, William Home of Linthill.

For the Sherifdome of Roxburgh, The Lairds of Stobbs and Cavers, Conveeners
for the first meeting, and thereafter to make choice amongst themselves, sir
Walter Riddell of that ilk, Master George Douglas of Bonne-Jedbrugh, John Ker
of Lochtour, Robert Pringle of Stichel, John Scot of Gorranberrie, Walter Scot
of Gaudielands, Mr Gilbert Ellot of Craigend, James Pringle of Buckholme, John
Scot of Heidshaw, John Rutherfoord of Capehope, Robert Land-lands of that ilk,
Walter Riddell portioner of Bewly, Andrew Bell of Mow, Andrew Key of Sinles.

For the Sherifdome of Selkirk, The Lairds of Harden and Whitsleid Conveeners
for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves, James
Pringle of Torwoodlie James Pringle of Whitebank, Neill Scot of Gallascheills
William Scot of New-wark, Robert Scot of Hartwoodmyres, Robert Scot of Bowhill,
Francis Scot of Synton.

For the Sherifdome of Peibles, sir Alexander Murray of Blakbarronie, sir David
Murray of Stonehope, Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to make
choice among themselves, sir Michael Naesmith of Posso, Mr James Lawson of
Cairnmure, Robert Hunter of Polmood, Andrew Hay of Hayston, William Govan of
Cardrona.

For the Sherifdome of Lanerk, The Lairds of Belstane, and Dalserff, Conveeners
for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves, sir James
Hamiltoun, of Fingletoun, Edward Hamiltoun of Sillertonhill, Gavin Hamiltoun of
Raploch, William Baillie of Carphin, Robert Hamiltoun of Aikinheid. (...)
Crafurd of Kibbers, Andrew Hamiltoun portioner of Overtoun, sir William Baillie
of Laminton, sir William Carmichell fiar of that ilk, George Weir of Blaikwood,
John Bannatine of Corhous James Hamiltoun of Halcraig, James Winraham of
Wolstoun, Mr John Carmichell Commisser of Lanerk, James Hamiltoun of
Sandieholme, James Hamiltoun of Boigs.

For the Sherifdome of Air, The Lairds of Rowallan, and the Lord of Corsby,
Conveeners for the first meeting, and thereafter to choose amongst themselves,
Hew Campbell of Cesnoke, James Chalmer of Gad-girth, sir William Cochrane of
Coudoun, Allan Cathcart younger of Cairnehill, Robert Ferquhar of Gilmicroft,
Neill Montgomrie of Langshaw, Robert Montgomrie of Hissillheid, John Crafurd of
Crafurdland, David Kennedie elder of Kirkmichell, Thomas Boyd of Pankill,
Gabriell Proterfield of Hapland, John Cunningham of Bordland, Henry Kelso of
(...) John Mac-Alexander of Corsclayes, John Macclevin of Grim-met, Mr Adam
Cunningham of Priviks.

For the Sherifdome of Wigtoun and stewartry of Kirkudbright, The Lord of
Garthland, and the young Sheriff of Galloway, Conveeners for the first
meeting, and thereafter to make choice among themselves, sir Patrick Makgie of
Large, John Makgie of Balmagie, William Grierson of Bargaltoun, Alexander
Gordoun, of Erlestoun, James Rosse of Banneill, John Makculloth of Mertoun,
John Fullerton of Carletoun, Robert Makcullo of Drummorell, George Glendonning
of Mochrumi William Gordoun of Crachlaw Uchtry Mackdowgall of French, Patrick
Agnew of Sewchram, Richard Mure of Cassincarry, Thomas Makclellan of Colin,
Patrick Agnew of Barneweil, John Stewart of Shambelly, William Glendonning
Provest of Kirkudbright, James Lafreis.

For the Sherifdome of Dumfreis, The Lord of Lag and (...) Conveeners for the
first meeting, and thereafter to make choice among themselves, Mr George
Douglas of Pymurie, Thomas Ferguson of Caitloch, John Creichtoun of Crafoord
John, James Douglas of Mortoun, William Maxwell of Steilstoun, John Grierson of
Chapel, Hugh Charters of Glencorse, Alexander Ferguson of I Will, James Douglas
of Mousewall, Robert Charters of Dowchra, James Johnstoun of Corheid, Andrew
Johnstoun of Locherby, Matthew Wilson of Greenhill, Francis Scot of Carteitoun,
John Kennedie of Halklaithes, Archbald Douglas of Dronock.

For the Sherifdome of Renfrew, the Lord of Grenok, and (...) Conveeners for
the first meeeting (and thereafter to meet and choose amongst themselves) fir
Ludowick Hostoun of that ilk, John Birsbane of Bishoptoun, Alexander
Porterfield of that ilk, (...) Pook elder of that ilk, (...) Caldwall of that
ilk, John Maxwell of Southbarre, James Orr of Langfillie.

For the Sheriffdome of Dumbartan, the Lord of Fulwood, Conveener for the
first meeting (and thereafter to choose amongst themselves) Walter Makaula of
Ardincaple, John Naper of Kilmahew, Robert Hall of Fulbarre, Robert Cochran of
Bellarmik, (...) Carshore of that ilk, John Colquhoune of Kilmadymne, Hugh
Craford of Claverhill, John Dennestoun of Dalquharrie.

For the Sheriffdome of Argyle, the Lairds of Glenurquhie, and Auchinbrek,
Conveeners for the first meeting (and thereafter to choose amongst themselves)
James Campbell of Arkinelies, Archbald Campbell of Kilmure, sir Lachlane
Makclene of Dowart, Archbald Campbell of Dunstaffnik, Sheriff depute of
Argyle, George Campbell. (...) Hector Makneil

For the Sherifdome of Bute, the Lord of Skelmorlie, Conveener for the first
meeting, sir James Stuart of Kirktowne, Ninian Stuart of Kilcatton, Ninian
Stuart elder of Ashcock, Hector Bannatyne of Kaynes, John Stuart of Alismore,
Neil Makneil of Kilmore, John Campbell sometime Provest of Rothsay.

Who shall conveene with the whole Heritours, Life-renters, Taksmen, Titulars,
proper Wadsetters, Pensioners, Conjunctfiers, Lady tercers, and others, within
ilk one of their said Sherifdomes, respective, Or at least with so many of the
said persons as shall be conveened for the time, upon the first Tuesday of
October next, as the first day of their meeting appointed for the whole shires
of the Kingdom: And to the effect the same may be known to the whole lieges;

It is ordained that the Conveener or Conveeners of the shires before named,
shall cause intimate the said meeting at the Market cross of the head Burgh of
the shire with all convenient diligence, and at every Parish Kirk thereof,
immediately after Divine Service, upon any Sunday preceding the 22. day of
September next, and to meet ilk shire at the places following: viz. The
Sheriffdome of Orkney at the town of Kirkwall, the Sheriffdome of Caitnes at
the town of Thursay, the Sheriffdome of Sutherland at the town of Dornoch, the
Sheriffdomes of Innernes and Cromertie at the Burgh of Innernes, the
Sheriffdome of Narn at the Burgh of Narn, the Sheriffdome of Elgin at the Burgh
of Elgin, the Sheriffdome of Bamf at the Burgh at the Burgh of Bamf, the
Sheriffdome lam den day dome of Aberdene at the Burgh of Aberdene, the
Sheriffdome of Kincairdine at the town of Stanehyve, the Sheriffdome of Forfar
at the Burgh of Forfar, the Sheriffdome of Perth at the Burgh of Perth, the
Sheriffdomes of Fife and Kinros at the Burgh of Cowper, the Sheriffdome of
Clakmannan at the town of Clakmannan, the Sheriffdome of Sterling at the Burgh
of Sterling, the Sheriffdome of Renfrew at the the Burgh of Renfrew, the
Sheriffdome of Dumbartan at the Burgh of Dumbartan, the Sheriffdome of Argyle
at the Burgh of Innerara, the Sheriffdome of Bute at the Burgh of Rothesay, the
Sheriffdome of Lanerk at the Burgh of Lanerk, the Sheriffdome of Air at the
Burgh of Air, the Sherifdome of Wigtoun and Stewartrie of Kircudbright at the
Burgh of Wigtoun, the Sheriffdome of Dumfreis at the Burgh of Dumfreis, the
Sheriffdome of Roxburgh at the Burgh of Jedburgh, the Sheriffdome of Selkirk at
the Burgh of Selkirk, the Sheriffdome of Peibles at the Burgh of Peibles, the
Sheriffdome of Berwick at the Town of Duns, the Sheriffdome of Haddington at
the Burgh of Haddington, the Sheriffedome of Edinburgh at the Burgh of
Edinburgh, the Sheriffdome of Linlithgow at the Burgh of Linlithgow. And there
the said Conveeners, or any of them, with such other Commissioners as shall be
conveened for the time, shall cause call by name and surname, the Heritours,
Live-renters, Titulars, Taksmen of teinds, proper Wadsetters, Pensioners, Lady
tercers, and others within the said Sheriffdomes, who bruike any benefit to
landward, whereby any profit or commodity arises, And by consent of them, or
most part of them conveened for the time, shall make choice of a select number
of persons, to be joined with the foresaids Commissioners, chosen by the
Convention, to the number of eight persons, in the foresaids shires where there
are sixteen chosen by the Convention, and to the number of three persons in the
rest of the shires, being judicious, conscientious and understanding men, who
shall (as well these nominate as those to be elected) give their solemn oaths
judicially at their first meeting, in presence of the said Conveener or
Conveeners, who are hereby authorized to take their oaths, to do uprightly
and impartially, according to their best knowledge and information in the
particulars following.

With power to the said Commissioners, or most part of them conveened for the
time, to make choice of a Clerk for writing and forming of the rolls after
specified, and doing every other thing incumbent to the charge after following.

Which Commissioners so nominate and elected, shall use all lawful means,
according to the time, and if need be, shall direct out summons at their own
instances against any person or persons within the said shire, to compeere
before them, and give them information upon oath or otherwise, with
certification of a pecuniall sum, not exceeding forty pounds toties
quoties, in case of contempt and refusal.

And with power to the said Commissioners, to use all other legal way to
inform themselves of the just and true worth of every person or persons their
present years rent of this cropped and year 1643. to landward, as well of lands
and teinds, as of any other thing whereby yearly profit and commodity arises.

And that the worth of every person of persons, their lands, teinds, and other
commodities, where gressums and enteresse have been paid, be valued and set
down, not only as they pay to the Heritors, Life-renters, and others their
masters, but as the same are worth, and may pay presently, without respect of
gressums or enteress, and to divide the said rolls in particular Parishes, by
making a roll for every several Parish within the said shire; Which roll shall
contain every particular persons name, surname, and designation, with their
said years rent, and commodity within the said Parish, whether in victual,
money, or other commodities.

And the said victual and commodities to be converted into money by the said
Commissioners, upon their former oaths, according as in every Parish the
prices of several spaces of victual and commodities shall rule for the time,
deducing aff the said rents and commodities, what is paid forth thereof to
Ministers, Schoolmasters, Superiors, Taksmen, Life-renters, Colleges, and
Hospitals, which deductions aff the said Life-renters, Taksmen, and
Superiors, shall be charged upon the said Life-renters, Taksmen, and
Superiors, by Articles apart, together with any other rent, if any they have
within the said Parish.

As also because it is necessary to be known what the said deductions of
Ministers and Schoolmasters stipends, and exemptions extends to, It is
appointed and ordained, that at the end of every one of the said rolls,
Articles shall be set down thereof: viz. one for the said deductions of
Ministers and Schoolmasters stipends, and another for the said exemptions of
every Parish.

It is likewise appointed, that in the setting down of the said rolls, this
years constant land rent shall be distinguished from the other casual rent,
whereby yearly profit and commodity arises.

And for performing and perfecting of the said rolls, the said Commissioners
and others foresaids, shall appoint their several diets of meeting, betwixt the
first Tuesday of October next to come, and the fifteenth day of November
thereafter, which is appointed to be the last day peremptorily for perfecting
and delivering of the said rols.

And which rolls so perfected and concluded, shall be subscribed by the said
persons nominate and to be elected as said is, or most part thereof conveened
for the time, and which particular rols of every particular person of every
Parish, shall be kept in retentis within the said shire in some trusty person
or persons hands, not to be made public, nor shown except to the Collector of
the said Parish, who must make use thereof, in uplifting of the sums due to be
paid by the said Parish, unless upon occasion of question betwixt party and
party, or betwixt the said Collector and party.

And after perfecting of the which rolls the said Commissioners shall draw up
aff the said particular rolls of Parishes a general roll containing as many
several Articles, as there are several Parishes, or parcels of Parishes (if
any be divided within several Shires) which Articles shall be set down in
manner following: viz. A. B. for himself and remanent Heritours, life-renters,
and others within the Parish of D. for their proper rent of the said Parish,
extending to the sum of (...) (victual and others commodities being converted
into money) their part of the said Loan extends to (...) and so forth
throughout the rest of the whole Parishes.

In the which roll there must be set down in camalo the deductions of
Ministers and Schoolmasters stipends (if any be) in an Article. Item in
another Article mortified and exeemed rents, if any be.

And siclike in setting down of the said Article for the whole Parish, it must
be distinguished what thereof is constant land rent, and what is casual rent.

Which general rolls, containing only an Article for every Parish within ilk
Shire, being so set down and subscribed by the Commissioners, or most part
thereof conveened for the time, and containing the said Articles of
deductions, and exemptions, and distinctions, in manner foresaid, shall be
delivered by the said Commissioners, or their Clerk, to the Sub-collectors of
the said Shire appointed, or to be appointed for that effect, betwixt and the
said 15. day of November next to come, and by the said Sub-collector, to the
Clerk of the said collection, that the same may be a ground and warrant for
raising of Letters thereupon against the said Collectors of several Parishes,
or persons nominate in the said general rolls for every Parish.

And if any of the said Commissioners hereby nominate and to be elected for
setting down of the said roll, shall refuse to accept, or be negligent in doing
their faithful diligence therein, It is herefore statute and ordained, that
letters shall be direct to messengers of arms to command and charge every one
of the foresaids persons to accept the said Commission within 24. hours after
they be charged, and to do their exact diligence therein until the final
close thereof, and to deliver the said rolls subscribed by them betwixt and
the said 15. day of November next to come, under the pain of rebellion, etc,
And if they failie, to denounce and escheat, etc.

And incase the said stent rolls shall not be set down, perfected, subscribed,
and delivered betwixt and the said 15. day of November next to come. In that
case letters shall be direct against the said Commissioners nominate and to be
elected, to pay the whole sums of money to be lent by the said shire, which
Commissioners are ordained hereby to be the first payers thereof, in case they
shall refuse or failie to set down, perfect, and deliver the said rolls
betwixt and the said 15. day of November next to come, under the pain of
rebellion, etc. and if they failie, to denounce and escheat, etc.

And it is hereby declared, that in the case foresaid of their neglect, as said
is, and of their first payment of the sum to be lent by the said shire, In that
case, and after payment thereof made by them, they shall have letters of relief
against the whole Heritours, Life-renters, and others of the said Sheriffdome,
conform to the roll when it shall be made up and subscribed by them, or most
part o them, as said is.

It is hereby also declared, that it shall be lawful and leisome to every
person or persons, (excepting the Commissioners nominate, and to be elected as
said is) interest in the sums to be lent by the said shire, who cannot
conveniently come to the said meetings, to send their Procuratours authorized
by them in writ, who shall have such like power in doing every thing as they
might do themselves, if they were personally present.

It is hereby likewise declared, that incase any of the Heritours,
Life-renters, Titulers, Taksmen of teinds, proper Wad-setters or others within
the said shire, shall not conveene at the day and days appointed, or to be
appointed for that effect, it shall be leisome to the said persons hereby
nominate, or most part of them convened for the time, to make and set down the
said rolls, perfect, subscribe and deliver the same, in manner aforesaid.

And that the sums of money so to be lent by the said shires, may be
uplifted and inbrought, It is Statute and Ordained, that letters shall be
directed for charging the whole sub-collectours within ilk shire or shires, to
make payment of the whole sums of money, due to be paid by the said shires,
whereof they are or shall be appointed Sub-collectours, conform to the said
roll, subscribed by the said Lord Chancellor in presence of the said
Convention, at the said Term of Candlemas next, under the pain of rebellion,
etc.

And for the said Sub-collectours their relief aff the shires, It is statute
and ordained that letters shall be directed, charging the several Collectours
of every Parochin within the said shire or shires, or persons nominate in the
said particular rolls for payment to the said Sub-collectour, or his deputies,
of the sums contained in the said rolls, and that within twenty days next
after they be charged, if they be within this Kingdom: And if they be without
the same, by open Proclamation at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Piere and
shore of Leith, upon threescore days warning under the pain of rebellion,
etc. And if they failie, to denounce and escheit, and to poynd and distrenie,
etc

And for relief of the said Collectour of every several parochine or persons
nominate in the said particular rolls, It is hereby statute and ordained, that
letters shall be directed for payment making to them of the sums contained in
the said particular rolls against every particular person or persons contained
in the said rolls, within eight days aster they be charged, if they be within
this Kingdom: And if they be without the same, by open Proclamation at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, Peire and Shore of Leith, upon 60. days warning
under the pain of rebellion, etc. With power to poynd and distreinie their
readiest goods and geire that shall be found upon the ground of any of their
said lands, who shall not timously pay, whether the said goods pertain to
these liable in the said loan or not, which goods being so poynded, it shall
not be necessary to carry them to the Market Cross of the head Burgh of the
shire, but only to use the ordinary way of poynding and apprising upon the
ground of the said lands, together with the sum of twenty marks for ilk
hundrerh marks failie.

And for inbringing of the Burrowes part of the said loan, Ordains letters to
be direct, charging the Provest and Bailies of ilk Burgh, to make payment of
their part thereof (conform to one roll to be subscribed by the Clerk of the
Burrowes, or conform to the old roll.) To the said Collectour general his
Deputes and Officers in his name having his power to receive the same at the
said Term above specified, and if they failie, to denounce and eschew it, etc.

And for their relief, that letters be derect, charging the Provest, Bailies
and Council within each burgh to conveen and elect certain persons to stent
their neighbors, and the said election being made to charge the persons
elected to accept the charge upon them, in setting down the said stent upon the
said neighbors, and to conveene and set the same, and to make a stent roll
thereupon as effeires, within twenty four homes next after the charge, under
the pain of rebellion: And if they failie, to denounce and escheit, etc.

And sicklike, the said stent roll being made and set down as said is, to charge
the Burgesses, Indwellers, and Inhabitants within each Burgh, to make payment
of their part of the said loan to the said Provest and Balies, Conform to the
said roll to be given out thereupon, within three days next after the charge
under the pain of rebellion; and if they failie to denounce and escheit, etc.
And if needs be that the said Provest and Bailies poynd and distrenie as they
shall think expedient.

It is always provided, that no person whatsoever be stented within Burgh, for
any lands or possessions which he has to landwart.

It is hereby likewise declared, that the charges to be given for payment of
the said loan, may be execute as well against these that are without the
Country, as these that are within the Country before the said term of
payment, but that the execution of denunciation and poynding shall not be
execute until the said term of payment be bygone, and the several days of
the charges respective forsaids be also bypast.

And in respect that the foresaids whole sums of money so to be lent, be the
said shires, and burrowes, Is for relief of the great sums of money already
taken on as said is, and to be advanced for supply of the said army in Ireland,
which should be repayed by the Parliament of England out of the first end of
the arrears due to that army.

Therefore the said estates have not only ratified and approven the foresaid
act of Council, with concourse of the said Commissioners, for conserving the
peace and Commissioners of the common burdens, but also have of new Statute,
and Ordained, like as they be their presents Statute and ordain that as well
these who have already advanced momoney or victual, or who have engaged
themselves for payment of the prices of victual, money, and other provision by
warrant of the said Lords of Council alone, Or by warrant of them jointly
with the said Commissioners of peace and common burdens, but also the whole
foresaids sums (whereof the said former advancements are apart) are hereby
ordaind to be repayed out of the first and readiest of the said arrears,
conform to the tenor, and upon the conditions mentioned in the said Act of
Council, with concurse foresaid.

And in case the same shall not be repayed by the Parliament of England betwixt
and the said second day of February next to come, It is hereby statute and
ordained, like as the said Estates by their presents statutes and ordaines,
that the whole foresaids persons, who have by warrant foresaid advanced money,
victual, or other provision, to the said Army, preceding the date hereof,
conform to the particular count thereof registrate in the books of Convention
of the date hereof, shall be repayed ilk man of his several sums, together
with the interest thereof, conform to the tenor of the foresaid Acts, and
that out of the first and readiest of the sums of money to be uplifted by
virtue of this present act, and that by the Collector, Sub-collector, and
others having warrant and power to receive the same, betwixt and the last day
or February next to come.

So that it shall not be leisome to the said Collectors or others, to dispose
upon any of the said moneys so to be lent, without the consent of those who
have lent the said money or victual, until they be first satisfied.

And incase the said Parliament of England shall happen not to pay and deliver
the said bygone arreares, at least so much thereof as shall repay the said
sums so to be lent, as said is, betwixt and the first day of June next to come,
in the year of God 1644. years.

And seeing it is agreed and condescended unto, that the burden be equally
according to every man's estate, In that case it is declared, that when the
whole valuations of the whole Kingdom shall be known in manner and conform to
the rolls above specified:

Therefore it is appointed and ordained, that a survey shall be made of the
whole foresaids rolls, and compared one with another, to the effect it may be
seen and known if any Shire or Shires have paid more out of the hundred marks
(victual and others commodities being turned into money) then other shires
have, and being so found, that some may be appointed before this present
Convention dissolve, or by the next Parliament, or by Committees from either of
them, to see what is the just proportion, which according to their foresaids
rents, would fall upon every Shire, that these who have paid more then their
just proportion, may have repayment aff the Shires, who have paid less, to be
collected and inbrought by such persons as this present Convention, the Estates
of Parliament, or Committees from either, shall appoint.

And because the foresaids whole sums of money, as well to burgh as land ward,
extends to a great sum of money, and will be a considerable burden upon this
Kingdom, and that the same is wholly paid out of the land rents, trade, burrow
lands, and other land rent and yearly commodity, without consideration or
laying any burden upon money upon bank or annual rent: Therefore it is
statute and ordained, like as the said estates, statutes, and ordains that
every debtour of money upon annual rent, as well to burgh as landward, shall
have retention at the said term of Candlemas next, of six of each hundredth
marks or pounds wherein he is liable of annual rent to his creditours at the
said term, Providing that the remanent of the said annual rent, out of the
which the said debitour shall crave retention, shall be thankfully paid at the
least within three months after the said term of payment of the annual rent,
otherwise no retention to be allowed.

And siclike, it is hereby declared, that this present act, nor no clause
therein, shall be any ground of suspension to any debitour for retention of the
said principal sums addebted by him, and by-runne annual rents, but that
every creditour may suit, crave and charge, for the same, after the day of
payment thereof.

And it is hereby declared, that if any person or persons within or without
burgh, shall upon their oath declare to their Magistrates within burgh, and
Commissioners of the shires without burgh, that they pay annual rent to
strangers dwelling without this Kingdom, of whom they cannot have retention
foresaid, in that case, the said Magistrates within burgh, and Commissioners
without burgh, shall defaulk proportionally to the said person or persons,
such a part of their loan as they shall find agreeable to equity and reason.

And siclike, in respect that the foresaids sums of money so to be lent, are
in hope of payment thereof, from the Parliament of England.

It is hereby declared, that the whole creditours within this Kingdom, as well
to burgh and landward, who shall grant retention to their debitours, in manner
foresaid. shall have their proportional repayment with the rest of the
Country, and that either from his debitours, if it please the creditour to
trust him therewith, or otherwise to take assignation from the debitour upon
the Parliament of England, as a part of the same, due to the debitour for his
relief.

AND because the enemies to Religion and Peace of this Kingdom, are daily
making divisions, and waiting all occasions, whereby they may draw to factions,
make insurrections, and stir up others to the disobedience of the laws, and
common resolution for the good of Religion, his Majesty's honor and safety,
and the weal of this Kingdom.

Therefore, and for the reasons contained in the act of the said estates, made
anent the leavie of some horse and foot, for preveening of any such divisions,
distractions, insurrections, factions and disobedience to the said common
tesolutions.

The said Estates have voluntarily granted, statute and ordained, like as they
by their presents voluntarily grants, statutes, and ordains, A taxt of 120000.
l. Scots money, to be uplifted for the entertainment of the said men, horse
and foot to be levied, as said is, in manner, and for the use contained in the
said Act. Which sum of 120000. l. money foresaid, shall be paid to the said
general Collector, his Deputes and Officers, and others having power and
warrant from him, at the said term of Candlemas next: viz. one sixth part
thereof, extending to the sum of 20000. l. by the Burrowes of this Kingdom,
and the remanent thereof, extending to 100000. l. by the several Shires of
this Kingdom, conform to a particular roll thereof, subscribed by the said
Lord Chancellor in presence of the said Convention of Estates.

FOR inbringing and ingathering whereof, the same manner of way shall be
followed, and the same kind of letters direct, the like diligence used and
received, as for the foresaids sums of money hereby lent for the supply of
the Army in Ireland, conform to the preceding tenor of this present Act.

And it is statute and ordained, that no suspension shall be granted to any
persons whatsoever, without consignation of the sums charged for in the Clerk
of the said collection his hand, unless the reasons thereof can be instantly
verified or made notour at the passing of the said Bill, either in presentia in
the time of Session, or by four or five of the Lords of Session in time of
vacance, To the which suspensions the said Lords of Session shall be only
Judges, in such form and manner as they are, and have been in matters of
Taxation.

It is hereby statute and ordained, that the general Collector shall take
sufficient and responsal caution from every Sub-collector to do his exact
diligence in every thing committed to his charge, as well in bringing in of
money, as in in all other diligence, conform to the bands to be made by them
and their Cautioners thereanent.

It is likewise statute and ordained, that the Collectors of every Parish shall
either be a sufficient and responsall man himself, or otherwise shall give
sufficient caution for his intromission and diligence, The which diligence to
be done as well by the said Sub-collectors, as by the said Collectors of
Parishes respective, is hereby understood to be all ordinary execution of
horning registrate in due time, and poynding, until they be stopped by
deforcement, are to be received for diligence alannerly.

Like as it is hereby statute and ordained, that the said Collector general
shall receive the said diligence of registrate hornings in due time, and
executions of deforcement from the said Sub-collectors and Collectors
respective, providing the same be delivered to the said collectour general,
before the fifteenth day of March next to come, otherwise no diligence to be
received, but they to be liable for payment in solidum.

It is likewise ordained, that the Subcollectours of every Parochine, shall not
be obliged to carry the money received by them farther then their own Parish,
and at farthest, to the head Burgh of the shire, and the Sub-collectour shall
be obliged to receive the same, and make payment thereof to the general
collectour, as is above specified.

And because these who takes pains in the said collection, well the said
Sub-collectours, Collectors of Parishes, Clerks in the shires, Clerk of the
said collection, and others to be employed in the said service, will deserve to
have certain fees and allowance granted to them.

It is therefore statute and ordained, that ane roll be made thereof, either by
the said estates, or by some to be appointed from them, which rolls being so
made and set down, the same shall be registered in the books of convention, and
extracts given forth thereof, to the effect every man may know his own due.

It is hereby declated, that no exemption shall be granted to any person or
persons whatsoever, except only the lands, rents, annual rents, and others
duties mortified to Colleges, Schools, Hospitalls, and for upholding of
Kirks, and Bridges, and the Lord Chancellor, and fifteen ordiner Lords of
Session allannerly.

It is always declared, that this present manner of ingathering of the said
loan and taxation shall no ways prejudge any person whatsoever in succeeding
taxations, but that every man's right and claim, and all the prejudice that may
arise anent the famine or manner thereof, whereby any man may instruct enorm
lesion, and that he was unequally stented, is hereby specially reserved hinc
inde.

FINIS.

