HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms A Letter sent from the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND to
the several PRESBYTERIES within the Kingdom.
Right Reverend,
THe many scandals that are thrown on our Actions by the favorers of
Sectaries, and haters of the Person of our KING and Monarchical Government,
invite Us to this extraordinary address to you; Conjuring you, as you will
answer to the great GOD whose Servants you are, not to suffer your selves to be
possessed with unjust and undeserved prejudices against Us and Our proceedings,
who have since our late meeting in Parliament preferred no earthly thing to our
Duties to Religion, and the promoting of all the ends of our Covenant, and have
constantly used all real endeavors to have carried on those Duties to the
satisfaction of the most tender consciences; and especially by Our great
compliances with the many desires from the Commissioners of the general
Assembly: We have proceeded to greater discoveries of Our Resolutions, in the
ways and means of managing this present Service then possible in prudence We
ought to have done, having so near and active Enemies to oppose Us: Neither
can it be with any Truth or Justice in any sort alleged, that We have in the
least measure wronged, or violated the true Privileges and Liberties of the
Church, or any ways taken upon Us the determination or decision of any matters
of Faith or Church Discipline, though We be unjustly charged with taking an
Antecedent judgment in matters of Religion; under pretense whereof great
encroachments are made on our unquestioned Rights. For what can be more Civil
then to determine what Civil Duties We ought to pay to our King, or what
Civil Power he ought to be possessed of? And if we meet with obstructions and
opposition in carrying on those Duties, are not We the only Judges thereunto?
Is there any other Authority in this Kingdom, but that of King and Parliament,
and what flows from them that can pretend any authoritative power in the
choice of the Instruments and Managers of Our public Resolutions. It is a
subject for the dispute of Church Judicatories, whether his Majesty has a
negative voice in Parliament or not? These certainly cannot be pretended to by
any Kirk-man, without a great usurpation over the Civil Magistrate, whereof We
are confident the Church of Scotland, nor any Judicatory thereof will never be
guilty, nor fall into the Episcopal disease of meddling with Civil affairs:
And if any have already in these particulars exceeded their bounds, We expect
the ensuing general Assembly will censure it accordingly, and prevent the
vilifying and contemning the Authority of Parliament by any of the Ministry,
either in, or out of their Pulpits, or who shall offer to stir up the Subjects
of this Kingdom to disobey, or deny to give Civil obedience to their Laws;
it being expressly prohibited by the 2. and 5. Acts of Ja. 6. his 8. Parliament,
in Anno 1584. That none of his Majesty's Subjects, under pain of Treason,
impugn the authority of Parliament. And therefore seeing the cause is the same
for which this Kingdom has done and suffered so much, and that We are resolved
to proceed for the preservation and defense of Religion, before all other
worldly interests whatsoever; and to carry on sincerely, really, and constantly
the Covenant, and all the ends of it, as you will find by our Declaration
herewith sent to you: We do confidently expect, that as the Ministers of this
Kingdom have hitherto been most active and exemplary in furthering the former
Expeditions, so now you will continue in the same zeal, to stir up the people
by your Preaching and Prayers, and all other ways in your calling, to a
cheerful obedience to Our Orders, and engaging in this business; and that
you will not give so great advantage to the Enemies of Presbyteriall
Government, and bring so great a scandal on this Church, as to oppose the
Authority of Parliament, or obstruct their proeeedings in their necessary
Duties for the good of Religion, the Honor and happiness of the King and his
Royal Posterity, and the true peace of his Dominions.

Signed by Order of Parliament. Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist.
Edinburgh, 11 May 1648.

