THE DESIRES Of the States of SCOTLAND To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND:
CONCERNING, His Majesty's advancing from Newcastle toward the City of London,
with their deserting of the Garrisons of Newcastle and Tinmouth, and Major Gen:
Skippon to take possession of them.

Likewise the proceedings of the Parliaments Commissioners at Newcastle, And
his Majesty's Propositions to the Scots Lords, about his departure from thence.

Printed for E, A, January 28!

A TRVE RELATION OF The Proceedings of the Parliaments Commissioners at
Newcastle.
THE great Argument which holds the Kingdom in Disputation and Suspense, is,
the disposal of his Majesty's person (great Britains Sovereign) a thing
(indeed) of great concernment; yet all must be referred to the most wise and
serious consideration of the great Councels of both Kingdoms; whose gallant
concurrence, and mutual amity, will (no doubt) in a short time, settle and
establish the Subjects of both Nations, in a most firm and glorious peace.

For no Coals of Wrath can be kindled within the hearts of the English and
Scottish Commissioners (although many great Ones have endeavored to stir up
the Embers) but go on with alacrity, for the discharging of that great trust,
committed to their charge, by the Estates of both Kingdoms.

For upon the two and twentieth day of this instant month of January, the
Parliaments Commissioners arrived safe at Newcastle, being entertained with
much joy and triumph, and the Scottish Commissioners have expressed themselves
gallantly unto them, showing their great forwardness, to comply with them, and
expedite the business, for which they came about, being resolved, not to
adhere (in the least) to any particular that shall prove prejudicial to either
Kingdoms; and therefore, do freely assent and concur with them, that his
Majesty shall come to Holmby house, or any other place that the Parliament of
England shall make choice of, and there continue until he shall subscribe unto
the Propositions.

And it is likewise declared from the Parliament of Scotland, that they desire
there may be a Committee of both Kingdoms constantly to attend his Majesty, to
use their utmost endeavors for persuading of his Maj. to pass the
Propositions, and to advance the union betwixt both Kingdoms. Further
intimating their desires, that those who shall be employed on the business of
State from that Kingdom may have due access unto his Majesty, after their
resigning of Him up to the Parliament of England; desiring also, Brotherly
assistance against all foes domestic or foreign, and particularly, against
those barbarous Rebels now in their Kingdom.

The Scottish Forces are (almost) upon a martch with their bag and baggage,
some of their Carriages being drawn out of Newcastle, and their great Ordnance
dismounted and ready to be shipped for Scotland.

The Earl of Stamford is appointed to see all things fairly carried, and the
articles faithfully maintained, upon the Scots delivery of the Northern
Garrisons.

Major General Skippon is to place a sufficient strength in the Garrisons of
Newcastle and Tinmouth, and to remain Governor.

The King is expected Southwards daily, and diverse of the Scottish Nobility and
Gentry (is thought will accompany him.

But his Majesty is somewhat perplexed about the resigning up of Newcastle,
propounding to the Nobility of Scotland, as follows:

IT is a received opinion by many, that engagements, acts or promises of a
restrained person, are neither valid nor obligatory; How true or false this is,
I will not dispute; but I am sure, if I am not free, I am not fit to answer your
or any Propositions: Wherefore you should first resolve me in what state I
stand (as in relation to freedom) before I can give you any other answer (the
reason of this my question, the Governor can best resolve you) But if you
object the loss of time and urgency of it; certainly in one respect it presses
none so much as my self, which makes me also think it necessary, that I be not
to seek what to do when this Garrison shall be surrendered up, to demand of you,
in case I go into Scotland, if I shall be there with honor, freedom, and
safety, or how? Being ready to give you a farther and more particular answer,
how soon you shall have resolved these two Queres. The Scots Commissioners
Answer te his Majesty's Quaeres Ian. 14.

1. To the first, in what state you stand, as in relation to freedom, the
Parliaments of both your Kingdoms have given such orders and directions as they
have thought fittest for the good and safety of your Majesty and the Kingdoms,
to the General and Governor.

2. To your Majesty's second Quaere, of your going into Scotland, we shall
humbly desire, that we may not be now put to give any Answer; but if your
Majesty shall either deny or delay your assent to the Propositions, we are in
that case to represent to your Majesty the Resolutions of the Parliament of
England.

His Majesty's Reply.

I know very well, that the Genesis and Governor have received orders concerning
me; but the question is, into what state those Orders put me in (as relating to
freedom) To which you have either power to answer, or not; if you have, then
answer me: otherwise send to those who can: And so to my second quere. The
great Politician Doctor Hudson were brought to the Parliament house, and called
in before the Commons, who examined him whether he had been with the King
(since his escape at Newcastle* which he confessed, And it was further demanded
of him, whether he wrote to Major General Laughorn, and whether it were not to
persuade him to decline the Parliament, which he also acknowledged: The house
proceeded further in examination of him, which was too long to be inserted in
this sheet, but when that was done, they came to this result, that he was
charged with treason, and it was ordered that the said Mr. Hudson shall be
sent forth with to the Tower of London, there to remain close prisoner, and
that none shall speak with him but in the presence of his Keeper.

Letters were presented to the House of Commons coming from beyond Sea, which
tell of strange stories, how true we know not, but the relation comes from a
good hand.

One is a letter from Poland, speaking plainly that the great Assembly or
Parliament of that Kingdom have put their King under restraint for raising of
forces without their consent.

That they told him freely in open Parliament, he had forfeited his Crown, and
that all his subjects are thereby discharged of their Allegiance, and are not
to be further subject to his commands, That they have commanded the Kings Seal
not to be any longer used and raised a Guard of twelve hundred to attend the
King, and keep the Kingdom in Peace.

One cause of the difference between the King of Poland and his subjects, is
said to be, his endeavor to continue a war contrary to the advice of the
States and Council of that Kingdom, and against the mind of the Lord Marshall.

We shall now conclude with what we have last from the North from whence is our
greatest expectation of News as affairs stand. The money is gone from York,
Northalerton is 22 miles beyond, where the first hundred thousand pound is
paid, Our Commissioners are come to Newcastle, and fair congratulations
between the Commissioners of Scotland and them, and some Conference.

They also apply themselves to his Majesty, who seems to be hardly persuaded
to come to Holmby house: what will follow, few days will evidence: but our
Commissioners being newly come thither, it could now produce little, except
what is before.

FINIS.

