CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION Against all Meetings of Quakers, Anabaptists, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits, Heralds, Pursevants and Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs, In that part specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as
by several Laws and Acts of Our Parliament, especially by the one hundred and
thirty one of the Eight Parliament of King James the Sixth. Our Grandfather of
blessed memory (and renewed and ratified by Us, with advice of Our Estates of
Parliament, presently conveened) It is statuted and ordained, That none of Our
Subjects, of whatsoever quality, state or function, Conveen or Assemble
themselves, for holding Councils, Conventions or Assemblies (except in the
ordinary judgments) without Our Warrant, or express License, had and obtained
thereto, under the pain made against such as unlawfully convocate Our Lieges:
And that notwithstanding thereof, there be diverse persons under the name of
Quakers, Anabaptists, and Fifth-monarchy-men, avowed Enemies to Our lawful
Authority and Government, whoupon specious and religious pretenses, at unlawful
times and places, keep frequent Meetings and Conventicles together: And We, and
Our Estates of Parliament, considering what has been the cruel Tenets, and
bloody Practices of such in former times, and what Insurrections and Murders
have been committed by them in Our Kingdom of England, within these few days,
and of what bad consequence their Meetings may prove at this time. Our will is
herefore, and We charge you and straightly commands: That incontinent their Our
Letters seen, ye pass, and in Our Name and Authority, inhibit and discharge
all Meetings and Conventions of the persons foresaid, upon whatsoever color or
pretext the same may be, under the pains contained in Our Acts of Parliament,
made against unlawful Convocations of Our Lieges: And for the better preventing
of such unlawful Meetings, and of any prejudice may ensue thereby, We do hereby
command all Magistrates of Our Burghs, Sheriffs, Constables, Justices of the
Peace and other Our public Ministers, To make exact search from time to time,
in all places where any such Meeting has been, shall, or may be suspected; and
to apprehend every such person, who shall keep, or frequent these Meetings, and
to commit them to the next Prison, therein to remain till further order be
taken with them, by such as shall have Our Authority for that effect; and
ordains you to make publication hereof at the Market Cross of Our Royal
Buroughs, where-through none pretend ignorance thereof, As ye will answer to
Us thereupon: The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our
full power, by their Our Letters, etc.

Given at Edinburgh the 22. day of January, 1661. and of Our Reign the Twelfth
Year. A. PRIMEROSE, Cls. Reg.


