NEW PROPOSITJONS From the Parliament of SCOTLAND, CONCERNING The Kings
Majesty, and their Resolution to re-instate Him in His Royal Throne, and to use
their utmost endeavor for the rescuing of His Person out of the hands of those
who carried Him from Holdenby against His will, and the Resolution of both
Kingdoms.

Likewise their further Proposals, touching the Kings Majesty, and His
Successors, and the detaining his Royal Person contrary to promise.

REsolved, and agreed upon, that these Propositions and Proposalls, be
forthwith sent to the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for R. G. MDCXLVIII.

A Letter from Scotland, certifying how the Lord Lee is sent with a message to
the Parliament, and of the late passages in those parts.
SIR,
I Received yours of the 15. instant, and have dispensed with my other
occasions which at this time are very urgent; to fulfill your request, and give
you a certain relation of all the proceedings in these parts.

This last Week, the Earl of Argi^e and diverse others ^issenting Scots Lords,
and Gentlemen, with the Gen: dissented to the raising of Forces against
England, and Petitioned the Parliament that there might be no engagement with
their Brethren of Engl^nd, but that they would edeavour to compose all
differences, that Unity and Peace might once again triumph in both Kingdoms.
Which petition was seconded by diverse well affected persons in the County of
Fiffe, who have likewise drawn up a petition to the very same effect.

The Clergy generally stick to their old principles, and labor to persuade the
people to seek after peace, laying before them the miseries and inconveniences,
that War brings to a State or Kingdom, and the rich blessings and benefits
that attend on peace; whose doctrine has so wrought in peoples hearts,, that
diverse have entered into an agreement to petition the Parliament, that they
might not be forced to fight against their consciences, nor further engage,
unless it be on better terms, then as yet they conceive. Yet (notwithstanding
these dissentions) there is a very considerable A^my raising, (under the
command of the E. of Calendar, which I conceive you have heard off formerly)
under the pretense of pu^ting the kingdom into a posture of defense, and they
list men dayl^ in all p^^ts; and within th^se 8. days there came above 100
English Soldiers to this City, who are already entered into pay, and joined
with the rest, who are in all some 2000. and most of them Cav^liers, and such
as have formerly engaged against the parliament: Yet for all this, th^re is
great hopes there will be an agreement between both Kingdoms, and these men
disapointed of their purpose, for the L. Lee is appointed to go with a Message
(to London, from the Parl. of Scotland) to the Parl, of England, and present
several propositions for a personal treaty; and to that end, they desire; 1.
That his Majesty should be brought to London, or Holdenby, or some other of
his Majesty's Palaces, which the Honses shall think most fit, where his
Maj^stie may remain in honor and safety. 2. That the Presbyterian government
may be settled in full uniforformity to that of Scotland, or according to
Covenant. 3. The disbanding the A^my of Sectaries, as they call them. 4. That
the War of Ireland may be effectually prosecuted.


Now before these propositions were agreed upon, there passed several Votes on
which Votes it is conceived, these propositions were propounded. 1. That the
Parliament is not free. 2. That Bills were sent to his Majesty without their
consent. 3. That the King is a Prisoner, contrary to promise. 4. And that
Religion is not settled according to the Covenant.


But diverse ^ds, with the G^n^ and many of the Officers of the Army are against
these Vo^es, and Petitioned against their raisi^^ of Forces in this kind.

Sir T^o^ Glemham, and Sir Will: Fleming, expect daily to be dispa^ched for
France, and the Ships that came with them are prepar^^ for their voyage; the
Mariners are very jocond and merry, and report that they hope they shall have
a speedy passage over, and ere long to return again, and to b^ing his
Highness, Prince Charles with them. T^^ English Commission^rs delivered their
Message A^ril 12 to the Parl. demanding Cap. Wogan, and some other delinquents
there, that endeavored to see both Kingdoms on fire by another War, and
they received this answer.

That for the delivery of Cap. VVogan, Glemham, and others, They say it is not
contracted in the Treaties and Pac^ficat^on; only to deliver such as shall
endeavor to incense the King of the Scots against the kingdom of Engl. for
that they conceive them not incendiaries between the Kingdoms, but rather
between the King and Engl. And to that of the am^ty between the kingdom^, they
answer, that they do on their parts desire it, and will labor to continue it.
Also, they do approve the m^tter of their Commissioners Declaration, and they
conceive that the parliaments answer is not satisfactory, etc. The English
Commissioners seemed not to be well pleased with this answer, but daily solicit
the parl. that they would be pleased to consider further of it, that they might
receive a more plausible answer to their demand.

In the Marquess of Argiles Country there is likewise great Forces raised
under the command of one Mac. Donald, commonly called Kolkir^oth, a kinsman of
the former and has gathered unto him a great number of discontented persons,
and malignants, which is a very great obstruction to the Design here on foot,
and does much re^ard our proceedings.

The Clergy stand firmly to their Protestation, and utterly detest against
sending of an Army into England, or engaging themselves in a new war with their
covenanted brethren, and do f^eely acquit themselves of the innocent blood,
which by that means may be split, and desire of God that i^ may light upon the
heads, and be laid to the charge, and requires only at the hands of those, that
seek to promote the differences, and make the breach betwixt the two Kingdoms
wider, which is already too to large.

The former propositions are delivered to the Lord Lee, and the Parliament have
given him his Instructions, and limited the time of his stay in England, which
must not be very long, he having not many days allowed him for his journey.

Captain Wogan (so far forth as I can learn) is not in this City, but it is
commonly reported, is gone toward the Borders of England. There are diverse
horse and foot quartered betwixt this City and Barwick, who are provided for
their March, if occasion serve, at an hours warning. It is here confidently
reported, that Sir William Flemming, and Sir Thomas Glemham, do earnestly
solicit the Parliament, that they would be pleased to permit his Highness
Prince Charles to come into th^s Kingdom, and that they would be pleased to
appoint the place where he shall reside and keep his Court, and some there
are, which are forward in swearing that the Parliament has consented to their
desires, and appointed Ships for the better security of his Highness Person:
And not long since I heard an English Gentleman speak it, that we should ere
long see more of the Royal Blood in the City, and that we should see
Edenborough famous.

The English Cav^es here, are very busy in inst^g^ting and stirring the
people, and setting their hearts against the Parliament of England, and are so
confident that things will suite according to their desires, that they daily
drink healths here to the confusion of the Parl. and their Independent Army.

The Scots still go on in their preparations, they have a Declaration ready to
come for the the soldiers that come from England are still received, but
maintained at private men's charge, which cannot hold long, the Ministers still
courageously oppose, but prevail not, but do acquit themselves of the guilt of
blood that shall be shedd much endeavor is used to gain them; the principal
Synod in Fife and Sterlings, Petition for the Parl. hearkening to the Kirk,
for good of Kirk and Commonwealth, are sl^ghted, and the other party carries
on all with a strong hand Wogans Troop is become a double Troop; Munroes men
in Ireland have offered themselves to serve the Parl. had thanks, and 14.
days pay; The Paper set out by the Ministers in Glocestershire, in approbation
of the Testimony of the London Ministers in relation to the Covenant is
reprinted at Edinburgh; its thought they will shortly adjourn to June, and in
the interim prepare their Armies in the Counties: the Commissions of the Kirk
put up a large Petition to the Parl. wherein they do most earnestly desire the
Lords, not to preceede, so as to give any encouragement unto the Prelaticall,
or Malignant party in England, nor be any grief to the Presbyterian party, nor
to restore the King until he has resolved, and assured the settlement of
Presbytery, the taking of the Covenant, etc. they desire that such reparation
be sought from the Parl. of England, as may be most probable in reason to
attain the same in a peaceable way.

In answer to this Petion, the 24 Lords, and Committee for that purpose, give
in, as the sense of the thre^ Estates of Parliament. First, That the necessity
and lawfulness of a War shall be cleared before any engagement, so as all well
affected may be satisfied with the necessity, and ends thereof. Secondly, So
that the union between the Kingdoms shall be kept firm without discouragement
of the Presbyterian party in England. Thirdly, That they will be so far from
associating with the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant party that if they
shall be rising in arms to obstruct the ends of the Covenant, that they will
endeavor the subpression of them, as enemies to the Covenant, as well as
Sectaries. 4. That in regard his Maj. late concessions concerning religion are
not satisfactorie, the chief end of the undertakings of this nation having been
for Religion, and as we shall endeavor the rescuing of his Majesty out of
their hands, who carried him from Holdenby against his will, and the resolution
of both Kingdoms and do still detain him cl^se prisoner, that he may with
honor and safety be where both Kingdoms may make application to him for
settling Religion, and a well grounded peace. So we resolve not to put in his
Majesty's hands, or any other, such power whereby the ends of the Covenant may
be obstructed; but before any Engagement his Majesty to give assurance under
hand and seal, that he shall for himself and successors agree to such Acts and
Bills as shall be presented by both, or either Kingdom respectively, for
injoyning the Covenant, Presbyterian Government, Directory worship; etc. in all
his Majesty's Dominions, and that his majesty shall never oppose or endeavor
the change thereof. 5. That none shall be employed in Arms or Committees, but
such as are of known integrity and without any just Excepsion. Lastly, that an
Oath shall be framed, wherein the Church shall have its Interest, as in the
like case has been. This being promised, they conceive it sit the Kingdom be
put in the posture of defenceas it was in 1643 and that a discret man be sent
with Propositions to the Parliament of England, with a limited time for his
return, and their answer. The Propositions that are to be brought, are with
confidence said to be these. 1. That his Majesty come to one of His Houses,
there to be in honor and safety. 2. That the present army in England be
disbanded, unless those who will take the Covenant. 3 That Presbytery be
settled And lastly That the Covenant be taken by all upon a penalty. In a
months time they expect to have their army ready; the large Declaration to be
sent, will be ready within two days. Sir, thus have I for the present, given
you a true account of all our proceedings in these parts, which I am bound to
perform, being

Your obliged servant F. Robins.
Edinburgh April. 22. 1648. SIR,
Sad news from Norwich.
SInce my last to you, here has bappened a great accident, and many persons
lost their lives, occasioned by the Malignant party; for the Mayor being sent
for to attend the Parliament for somewhat done: the disaffected to Parliament
opposed his coming up the affected endeavored to further it, this grew into a
quarrel, which put the disaffected upon repair to the County Magazine, being
within the City to arm^ themselves; they so handled the matter, that the
Magazine blew up, which besides the house in which it was, diverse others
were spoiled, and much hurt done to Churches; one hundred persons were killed
and mortally vvounded, the residue persisted, until three Troope^ of C^l.
F^eet^^oods horse came in, who quietted them.

There was this day Order given to the Citizens of London, to look to their
Arme^, and be ready to be upon their Guard, when they shall have notice.



Imprim^tur

G. M.

EINIS.

