W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the Scottish unicorn on one side and the English lion
on the other
ACT For publishing His Majesty's most gracious Letter.
HIS Majesty's high Commissioner, and Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
having received from His Majesty, the gracious Letter subjoyned, with the Order
therein contained; Appointing the same to be Published, for the Satisfaction of
all His Majesty's good Subjects, do hereby Ordain the same to be published
accordingly: And do therefore grant Warrant, and Ordain His Majesty's Heralds,
Macers of Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, to pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and there make due Publication of the said Letter
with sound of Trumpet, and all other Solemnities. And Further, Ordains the same
to be Printed, and His Majesty's Solicitor to transmit Copies thereof, and of
this Act, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the
Stewartries, their Deputs or Clerks, who are hereby* required to cause publish
the same at the Head burghs of their respective J^^isdictions, after the Manner
and Form of public Proclamations, as they will be answerable.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Follows the Tenor of His Majesty's Letter.
crown surmounting the French fleur-de-lis flanked by the Scottish thistle on
one side and the Tudor rose on the other
His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS LETTER: Directed to His Grace JAMES Duke of
Queensberry, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Privy Council of SCOTLAND.
WILLIAM R.
RIght Trusty and Entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right ^rusty and
Right well Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins
and Counselors, Right Trusty and well Beloved Counselors, and Trusty and well
Beloved Counselors, We Greet you well.
We heartily wish that the last Meeting of Parliament had proceeded, so as that
the Kingdom might have been made Partakers of these Advantages for which Our
Commissioner was so fully Instructed: If it had been possible for Us to have
agreed to the Resolve offered to Assert the Right of the African-Companies
Colony in America, though that Method had appeared to Us more unnecessary, yet We
had from the beginning readily done it, at the earnest Desire of Our Ministers,
and for Our Peoples Satisfaction, all other Considerations set apart. But now
that Things are much changed, (wherein We are truly Sorry for the Nations
Loss) And We being most willing to Grant what may be needful for the Releif and
Ease of the Kingdom, and the Advancement of its Welfare in all its Concerns: We
have thought fit to Declare this Our good Mind to be made Known to all Our
loving Subjects. And for the Companies Concerns, We Assure you, that We will be
so ready to concur with Our Parliament, in every thing that can be reasonably
expected of Us, for Aiding and Supporting their Interests, and Repairing their
Losses, that Our good Subjects shall have just Grounds to be sensible of our
hearty Inclinations to advance the Wealth and Prosperity of that our Ancient
Kingdom. And as for Captain Pinkerton and the other Prisoners in Spain, We have
already, and We hope Essectually Interposed for their Liberation. In the next
place, As We did fully Instruct our Commissioner, So We are still Resolved, to
pass all such Laws as shall be offered for the better Establishing the true
Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian Government of the Church, which you
at present Enjoy; For the more effectual preventing the Growth of Popery justly
feared, for the Repressing of Vice and Immorality, for the Preserving and
Securing the Liberty of Men's Persons, for the Encouraging and Advancement of
Trade and Manufacturies, and generally, to give Our Assent to such other Laws
as shall be brought in for further clearing and securing Men's civil Rights and
Properties, promoting the Administration of Justice, and settling the Peace and
Quiet of the Kingdom, demanding nothing on Our part, save what shall be
necessary to Maintain that Our ancient Kingdom in so happy a Settlement against
Our and Their Enemies. And this Declaration, We are confident will be
satisfying to all good Men, who will certainly be careful both of their own
Preservation, and of the Interest and Honor of the Government, and not to
suffer themselves to be Misted, nor to give any Advantage to Enemies and ill
designing Persons, ready to catch hold of every Opportunity, as their Practices
do too manifestly witness.

Our necessary Absence has occasioned the late Adjournments, but as soon as
God shall bring Us back, We are firmly Resolved Our Parliament shall Meet,
where We do again Assure all Our good Subjects, nothing shall be Wanting on Our
part, that may contribute to their Welfare and Happiness. And this Our
Resolution and Declaration, We Allow you to Publish for the Satisfaction of all
concerned. So We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Loo, the 26th day of July 1700. And of Our Reign the
12th year. By His Majesty's Command, TO. PRINGLE.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.


