A particular RELATION ABOUT PASSAGES OF THE Treaty at Breda.

Concerning The Concessions of the Declared King of Scots,to the Desires of
that Kingdom, touching the Militia, the Covenant, and of a Declaration to
satisfy that Kingdom.

WITH A Message sent from the PRINCE, To the PRINCE of ORANGE, and his advice
to his Brother in Law, about certain PASSAGES in the TREATY, and of his going
into SWEDEN.

TOGETHER, With some OBJECTIONS and DOUBTS made by the PRESBYTERIAN Party of
SCOTLAND, in which they desire further satisfaction. May.25.

LONDON, Printed for J.C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, and in the Old-Bayley, 1650.

A particular Relation concerning the Treaty at Breda, etc.
SIR.
ACcording to your request in your last, I shall comunicate unto you such
intelligence as is with us: An express came hither the last night from the
Committee of Estates at EDINBURGH, the contents whereof is rumoured to be some
farther instructions to the SCOTS Commissioners reciding here which
instructions by directions forthwith were to be urged by them in the Treaty, if
it were not broken of before these Letters came to their hands, and if nothing
effectual could be agreed on whthin a time lymitted in the said Instructions,
then the report goes that the Commissioners are remanded home; what will be the
issue of these things time (the discoverer of truth) will produce, but of this
you may be fully assured that as in all other Treaties so especially in this
has appeared great intricasie, and although particular conclusions have been
kept in obscurity, that yet many generals tendered, are openly spoken of,
which as I have gathered consist of these heads following viz.

1 That some Lords about the Declared King of SCOTS would take advantage by
this Treaty to gain a power by the sword, and while the Presbytery are seeking
for an agreement, the Cavalliere party would get into the field who want not
malice but for the present want readiness and strength, and whilst the Scots
are Treating for an Accommodation, the Common Enemy should destroy them by a
thundering war.

2 This appears in the not recalling of MONTROSSES Commission, but to the
contrary letters are sent to the said Montrosse, to prosecute his Commission,
notwithstanding the Treaty on foot, etc.

3 It has been alleged by the Scots Commissioners, that they find their King
backward to satisfy and grant the desires of that Nation, by which, at the
first, say they, we have little assurance that this treaty will take effect;
but that after much time spent, nothing will be yielded to which will answer
their just desires.

4 They have considered what their condition is like to be, when the Treaty is
over; for should the other party get head during the Treaty, and then the same
should be broken off, all men would say, that the Covenanters of Scotland, were
out witted, and if that by an Agreement betwixt them and their King, new
troubles should arise amongst themselves, the world would judge them more
miserable then they are already, and so by hopes of bettering their condition,
should make it much worse then it was before.

5. These and such like doubts have been put on in behalf of the Scots, in
regard many persons which have chiefly their Kings ear, are known not to
promote or forward any Treaty or other business of importance in behalf of
their King, but on purpose and with intent to deceive, for which cause a
Minister of theirs told their King, that unless he would remove from about him
some of those Lords that were with him, they could expect little good from him.

Having thus far with as much plainness and certainty as I can given you what I
hear concerning the one side, I shall not leave you altogether unsatisfied, as
touching the other: Their King, says our Intelligence, condescends.

1. That they shall have the ordering and dispose of the Militia of that
Kingdom five years, and after the expiration of the said Term, he would have
it come into his own hands, and that an Act shall pass accordingly.

2. That an Act shall pass, that all his Subjects shall take the Covenant, but
would be free from that Engagement himself.

3. He condescendes, that when he finds a convenient time, he will come into
Scotland in person, upon security, that he shall not be sold, delivered up, etc.

The frame of affairs standing on this manner: such as drive forward the Royal
interest, look very sad, and express no little discontent, and would rather
plunge their young King into the like extremity with themselves, then by
putting himself upon another, they should be left without hopes of remedy of
being restored in condition or honor, which being likewise the way, the young
Gentleman is chiefly inclined, fills his brains with dubious thoughts,
sometimes apprehending it to be his best course to sit still, and let others
act what they can for themselves, and another which carries it fair with the
Commissioners of Scotland, with whom the Prince of Orange advises him to
agree, and tells him, that were the case his own, he would go into Scotland,
and (for fear of being a burden to him) says, that if he had a hundred lives,
he would adventure them all upon that way, which together with other Arguments,
has moved him to send the Lord Lauderdale to the Prince of ORANGE with a
Message, signifying that he intends shortly to be with him, and inform him
surther in all things concerning the Treaty. In the mean time a Declaration is
drawing up, with as much plausibleness as may be, showing how far the KING has
condescended to their desires, yet will it be a difficult task to give
satisfaction, for many of the Scots stick not to say that some things like a
fly in a Box of Ointment, will be an abhorring in the nostrils of most of the
Presbyterian Clergy, who cannot but be jealous what good is like to be effected
by this means, and may justly doubt, that under the gilded pretenses of such
as are known enemies: there ever lies something both poisonous and formidable;
however it is spoken with great confidence, and by such as are supposed privy
to the secret negotiations, that there is an agreement, the manner is like to
be known in Scotland as soon as here, for that dispatches are hastened
thither, and by such time as they arrive there, their Parliament, say some of
that party, will be sitting: the Commissioners themselves it is thought will go
shortly after: Their declared King is going into Sweden.

As for England, whilst they remain united, its dreadful to its enemies, who
have little hopes to effect any malicious design against it, so long as the
sweet harmony of peace and concord, remains there: therefore it is the duty
of every one that esteem their own good, and the peace and welfare of the
Nation, to endeavor the continuance of this happy knot, seeing that nothing
but the loosening thereof can hinder us from tranquillity at home, or give
advantage to our Enemies abroad. Much more might be spoken of this nature; but
I intend not to exceed the bounds of a Letter, and shall conclude with this
word of advice to my Countrymen, That they behave themselves wisely in their
several stations, the only way to enjoy and continue that blessing of peace,
which is the hearty prayer of, Sir,

Your humble Servant T. S.

FINIS.

