A True and Exact RELATION Of the taking of COLCHESTER, Sent in a LETTER From
an Officer of the ARMY, (who was present during the siege in that service,) to
a Member of the House of Commons.

With a List of the Ordnance, Arms, and of 3076. private soldiers there
taken: Also a List of the names of most of the Officers of note, and an account
of the Cause of giving no Quarter to Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lyle.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White for John Partrige. 1648.

SIR,
AFter a long and tedious Siege, (in as wet a season as has been known) an
enemy of a desperate and high resolution, have at last brought themselves to a
low and miserable condition, and some of them being made examples of Justice,
the best of the Conditions of the rest, is Imprisonment; it was their wilful
obstinacy, and hautinesse of spirit, that lost them the opportunity when they
might have had honorable Terms.

Three times were the Enemy in Colchester invited to a Treaty by the Lord
General, twice had conditions sent in, but scorn and reproach was the return,
and the Trumpeter the last time (as appears by writing under the hands of the
Lord Goring, Capell, and Lucas) threatened to be hanged if he came any more upon
such a message: Though this night have provoked, and taken off all inclinations
of mercy toward them, yet endeavors were not wanting on our parts to undeceive
many of the poor, deceived and deluded soldiers, from whom their Officers
concealed all overtures of a Parley, or Conditions. Arrows were shot several
times into the Town, to let the soldiers know the Conditions offered, and that
yet they might have Passes to go to their several homes, and above 300
soldiers came from the Enemy upon that account, and received their Passes
accordingly.

When Captain Storm without, and Captain Hunger within, were both prepared to
join Forces together to break through their stone walls, then the Enemy was not
so high before, but they were as low now, and sent (as soon a our Canon had made
a breach in the wall) for a Parley, and prevailed with the Committee their
prisoners, to intercede for it, and likewise the Townsmen to mediate on the
behalf of the Town, but they had slipped their time: Our soldiers were
exasperated with the loss of the blood of their fellow soldiers, (many being
slain with chewed and poisoned bullets;) yet his Excellency, that all might
not suffer alike, sent in these Conditions following, viz. That all private
soldiers, and Officers, under Captains, shall have Passes to go to their
several homes, engaging themselves not to bear Arms hereafter against the
Parliament; and all Captains, and superior Officers, and Gentlemen, to submit
to Mercy. And understanding these Overtures, (as the former had been) were
concealed from the private soldiers, we conveyed conditions in writing to them
by annexing them to the Tail of a Paper Kite, which the wind blew into the
Town, (a truer story then the Cities Colchester Bull,) which falling among the
soldiers, a horseman endeavoring to get it from the foot to carry it to the
Generals, occasioned a muterlie, the foot crying out, They would know what
those written Papers meant that were annexed to it, which being read unto them,
and perceiving good Conditions intended to them, made such an impression upon
their spirits, that they told their Officers, Either instantly make Terms or
else they would desert them, or deliver them up to the mercy of our souldierss

Immediately after the Lord Goring, etc. sent out for a Parley upon Terms of
mercy, and Quarter offered, for the surrender of the Town, and accordingly sent
forth their Commissioners, whose chief time was spent in explaining the meaning
to submit to Mercy, which being explained by our Commissioners, (and admitted
of by theirs,) that it was meant thereby, That it was in the Generals power to
save any of those who did so submit to Mercy, or to put them to the sword: The
Articles being signed upon Monday August 28. 1648. The Town was Surrendered,
and the three Generals, all Officers, and Gentlemen render themselves at Mercy,
and the private soldiers and inferior Officers upon quarter. The same day
examples of Justice was done upon Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lyle, the
former was conceived (and too true) to be the cause of the ruin of this place,
his interest in the Town drawing the Army thither. He was the head of all those
that did rise in this County, and so brought the odium of the country upon
him, and at last grew harsh to the Towns people, (a thing contrary to his
wonted disposition) when they complained for want of bread, not regarding what
misery he brought upon that place where he was born; besides, It was affirmed
unto him by four persons at his death, That he put two men to the sword with
his own hands in cold blood, long after quarter granted,

The other, (as was informed) was a great cause of burning of the houses about
the Town, and a person bent to much mischief.

This is the first example of Justice that ever was showed in this kind (since
the first and second war) by the Parliaments party, though it be according to
the rules of war (in submitting to Mercy;) the example hereof was given by the
Kings party in the West, when 14 country men, that among others submitted to
Mercy, were all hanged up together.

For those Officers and soldiers who were employed by the Parliament, and
deserted their truth, they are to be tried by a Council of War, and some of
them to be made examples for their Treachery.

Colonel Far was the third man assigned to suffer with these two, but being
concealed he could not then be found, though since he is taken, whom the
Country cries out much upon, because he drew many an innocent man of the
Trained band under the pretense to muster, not knowing they should engage in
matter of blood, he never discovering unto them what his intentions were of
engaging them in a War against the Parliament.

The fourth man that was brought to the place of Execution with the other two
that suffered, was Sir Bernard Gascoyne an Jtalian, who after he had declared
himself a Papist, and preparing for death, was reprieved. The cause of his
being one designed for example, was, his extroardinary forwardness in
appearing in person in Kent with the Lord Goring, in putting that County into a
posture of Arms, in persisting in that way here in Essex, and being a man of
great action during the siege; and besides, that it might be an example for
strangers and forraigners how they presume in an other Nation, to take that
boldness and confidence, as to cast themselves out of their protection by
engaging in unwarantable actions: The carriage of this person, as a soldier
was fair toward our party, and so mercy obtained for him.

I or the L Goring whom the people cry so out upon for justice against him and
the like against the L. Capell, and the L. Loughborow, the Genesis and Counsel of
War in a special manner, left them to the mercy of the Par. that the
expectation of the people may be satisfied, in the Parl. doing justice upon
some, (a thing they have long looked for) all the rest who have likewise
submitted to mercy, are likewise left to the mercy of the Parliament, if they
think fit to proceed against them in a way of justice. These men had not come
to this sharp account, but that God had hardened their hearts, which were full
of bitterness of spirit, against this handful of men, that did besiege them,
hoping (according to Sir Anthony, St. Legers Letter to one of the Captains in
Colchester) to extirpate and destroy all those that were honest Christians,
under the notion of Independents, etc.

The Town has suffered as well as the men, being ruined in its buildings,
Provisions, People, and Trade; what fair streets are here of stately houses
now laid in ashes? How eminent are their graneries of Corn, (which before the
enemies came, exceeded all parts of England) And their Cellers and storehouses
of Wine and fruit, where there was plenty before, are empty now; they who had
houses to live in, now live desolate for want of habitation, and those who had
formerly their tables furnished with variety of dishes (besides their usual
dainties of Oysters and Ringo Roots) have for a long time fed upon Horses,
Dogs, and Cats, Starch, Bran, and Grains, and that with much greediness, and
many starved to death by hunger.

The chief Minister of this place, Mr. Harmar, that not long before stirred up
the people against the Army, branding them with the names of Heretics, and
Schismatics, and the people of the Town who affronted and abused our
soldiers when they quartered there, now both Ministers and people have longed
for their deliverance by the hands of those whom they so much despised before.

What place in the Kingdom like this drove such a Trade with London in all the
former Wars, but since they Traded with Cavaliers, and admitted them so
freely into their Town, what place has been more debarred thereof? Let this
be a warning to London how they embrace those whom God fights against, and how
they hereafter cast off those whom God ownes.

If it be asked why the L. Goring etc. held out so long? it is answered, (as
some of their party have confessed) that they did it to the end, the Parliament
might be cudgelled with a Reformado party, and that the General and those
Forces with him might be here so engaged, as not to be able to resist the Kings
friends from risiing in a body, in any part of the Kingdom.

And if it be wondered why we lay so long before that place, I can only offer
this as my own observation, that we were too few to storm the place, they
being between five and six thousand when we sat down before it and we but
1500. foot of the Army, besides part of two Regiments of the Essex
Trained-bands, our strength was better in horse, and besides, it was held a
thing advisable (since we had an enemy) rather to tempt him to stay at such a
distance (as this is) from London, then to follow them, and be far off, and so
unable to help the Parlia. if they stood in need, and besides, the soldiers
being kept in continual action, in making of works, and approaches, would keep
them more in health, and make them better soldiers, and our Army now at
present is stronger then when we at first sat down before this place.

The like Line, Regular works, Fortifications, and Approaches, have not been
made in any part of the Kingdom since the first wars began.

There were taken in Town 26. pieces of Ordnance, great and small, about five
thousand Arms, (many of them broken) three thousand sixty and seven private
soldiers, and of Officers above three hundred. I am not prepared to give you a
particular of the several persons, only of some of the remarkable of them, viz.

The Earl of Norwich. Lord Capell. Sir Charles Lucas. The Lord Louborough. Col.
Sir William Compton. Sir George Lyle. Col. Sir Bernard Gascoign. Sir Abraham
Skipman. Colonel William Maxey. Colonel Sir Hugh Orelie. Colonel Far.
Colonel Ayloff. Colonel Bard. Colonel Hamond. Colonel Till. Colonel Heath.
Colonel Tewk. Colonel Chester. Colonel Gilburt. Colonel Culpepper. Sir Henry
Appleton, Sir Richard Mauleverer. Sir Lodowick Dyer. Colonel Sayer. Colonel
Slingsbie. Colonel Sir Charles Hastings. Colonel Lancaster. And diverse other
Knights and Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, and Majors. Gentlemen of quality,
and Reformado Officers, 183. Colonel Cook. Col. Sir William Campion. Lieutenant
Col. Hatcher. Major Sturt, and others of quality slain in the fight the first
day, and during the Siege.
T. S.

FINIS.

