A LETTER CONCERNING CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION: Written to a Friend some years
since. And now proposed to the Consideration of the gathered Churches in LONDON.

Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNAME.



LONDON: Printed by Francis Neile. 1650.

A Letter written to a Friend touching CONFESSION.
SIR,
THe conference that I had with you about Confession and Absolution, has
occasioned my further thoughts and meditations thereon; which being fresh in
memory, I have committed to Paper with intent you should see them, that so you
may consider. And if upon serious thought you find them disagreeing with holy
Scriptures, then I pray you show me how, and impart for my help what you
undoubtedly understand in this point. And if you meet with any phrases that you
like not, pass them over as not materially appertaining to the matter in hand.
So I would deal with you, and so I desire you to do with me. And in the next
place I desire, that you may not be minded like those that slightly and easily
let pass every thing that pleases not their palate, and fleshly mind, as
this of Confession may not. For it may be truly said, the flesh is at enmity
with Confession, for that it lays it open, and shameth it. Yea Confession
makes the soul stand trembling in a confused condition before men and Angels.
And it may truly be said of real and penitential Confession, that by it some
men's sins go to judgment beforehand. 1 Timothy 5.24.
And being this is a truth, that all must come to judgment, and every secret
must be made manifest, let the Christians account it the unspeakable kindness,
and love of our good God, that has ordained so easy a judgment for his
elect, 1 Cor. 6.2.
as to send his Ambassadors who shall judge the world, his Ministers aforehand
to take their Confessions, and in case they have committed some heinous fins,
to lay upon them a penance of watching, fasting, prayer, alms, or hard labor,
etc. so punishing their bodies in this life, that they might not perish with
the world in the life to come. This is a great mercy, and not common to all; 1
Cor. 11.32.
and besides our loving Lord is loath to lay his own hand upon us, as he says,
he does not willingly afflict, nor grieve the children of men. If we would
chastise our selves, we should not be chastised of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.31.
Now what should let, that we accept not of this great mercy, and be willing to
be judged by Gods Ambassadors. And let not any one think this needless for
such persons as are eminent for knowledge. Deuteronomy. 17. Mal. 1.7.
Some are ignorant, say they, and that may occasion them to go to the Priests
for Law and Judgment. The Priests lips are to keep knowledge, and the people to
seek Law at their mouth; but some have more understanding than their Teachers,
what need such go? I answer, he is a proud man that will not submit to Gods
way. Psalm. 119.99.
Our Savior, Lord of heaven and earth, has showed us an example of another
fashion. Matthew. 3.14,15.
John said to our Lord, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to
me? Observe our Lords answer. Suffer it to be, says he, for it behooves us to
fulfill all righteousness. So likewise under the Law it is not to be doubted,
but there was many a Jew without the help of a Priest discern his own leprosy,
and also pronounce himself unclean, yea and separate himself according to Law.
Yet this was not approveable, without the Priests had done it; and when that
Leper was cured, he was not so esteemed till he was so pronounced by the
Priest, and a sacrifice offered, as when our Lord himself had cleansed the
Leper, Matthew. 8.4. yet to fulfill all righteousness, he commanded the said
leper to go to the Priest, and offer a gift, which Moses had commanded for a
testimony. So that if there be men of such knowledge that understand all
mysteries, if they have lived loose lives, committed heinous and great sins,
and yet think to be pardoned, and justified without the help of Gods Ministers,
their way is not Gods way, neither can they produce any holy man in former ages
that has trodden such a path.

But let us consider further, what reasons may induce us to submit to this
Ordinance.

1.
First, for the Antiquity of it we find some footsteps thereof under the Law,
yea before the Law, though more darkly, for God himself required a confession
of Adam, Eve, and Cain, and accordingly proceeds against them. And for the
punishment of Adam and Eve, whereunto they were sentenced, namely, that in the
sweat of his brows he should eat his bread, and she bring forth in sorrow, it
may well be called a penance imposed upon them for saving their souls. 1 Timothy
2.15.
For as he by labor, so she by sorrow in childbearing should be saved, if
they continue in the faith. The like example in another place we have of God
himself. Aaron and his sister Miriam having murmured against Moses, about
taking an Ethiopian to wife; God was so displeased with their murmuring, that
he smote Miriam with leprosy, which did occasion Aaron, as for himself, so for
his sister to confess their fault to Moses: and Moses having prayed to God for
her, the Lord healed her; but what though she were healed, yet for her penance
or punishment, let her be separated seven days, says God, that so she might
be ashamed. For if her father had spit in her face, should she not be ashamed?
this was done by Gods own appointment. But under the Law we may see the
footsteps thereof more manifest; though not so perspicuous as under the Gospel,
where truths appear as it were with open face.

In the time of the Law we find it manifest, Levit. 5.5. Numb 5.6.
that God commanded all such men and women as having sinned should come to the
Priests, and make confession thereof before atonement could be made; and it is
explained by Ainsworth in his Annotations upon them verses, that no atonement
was ever made without confession. Yea though a man or woman did all other
things that the Law did require, yet without confession there was no atonement
made. And he that in confession did most aggravate his sin, was accounted the
best man. Hence we may see, that as the Ministers under the Gospel are, so the
Priests under the Law were after penitential confessions Ministers of
reconciliation, but yet in a darker manner, and not so glorious. For it is
written of them under the Gospel. 2 Cor. 3.10. and 3.6.8,9. 4 7.
For even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason
of the glory that excels. Their Ministry was of the letter, ours of the
Spirit. As it is written, He has made us able ministers of the New Testament,
not of the letter, but of the Spirit: And again, has given unto us the
ministry of reconciliation. Such treasure have we in earthen vessels.

Now for the time of the New Testament, observe that our Lord Christ, not only
as he was God, but also as he was man; did officiate this Ministry. He forgave
sins, and reconciled men to God. For he says unto the sick of the Palsy, Son
be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. At which the Scribes murmuring,
our Lord replies; Whether is it easier to say thy sins be forgiven thee, or to
say, Arise and walk, but that you might know the Son of man has power on earth
to forgive sins. What could the Lord have said more plainly, he spoke of very
purpose as he said, that they might know what power he had, not only as he was
God, for that was not doubted of, whether God could forgive sins, but also as
he was man, and on earth. Wherefore when the multitude heard and saw what was
done, they glorified God who had given such power unto men. This power as he
was man, he purchased by his death upon the Cross. As it is written, For the
suffering of death, he is crowned with glory and honor. And again, Him has
God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel and
forgiveness of sins. And in another place, He has obtained a more excellent
Ministry. Observe the words, He has obtained, not as he was God, that could
not be, but as he was man, he obtained a more excellent Ministry. So that now
we may see the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, committed to a Man of our own
flesh; compassed about with infirmities even as our selves. The Son of man has
power on earth to forgive sins. This is that Elihu, Job. 33.6. His words to
mankind are: Behold I am according to thy wish in Gods stead; I also am formed
out of the clay, Behold my terror shall not make thee afraid. Job 9.33,34.
For Job had wished for such a dayes-man to stand be twixt him and God, because
if God should speak, His terror would be upon him. As it was with Israel at
the delivering of the Law when they heard God speaking unto them out of the
mount, so terrible was it, that they desired they might not hear the voice of
God again, lest they dyed: but desired that God would deliver his Law to them
by Moses; which desire God approves, and then said, that he would send them a
Prophet, raise him from among their brethren like unto Moses, who indeed is
Gods substitute. This is that great Prophet into whose mouth he said he would
put his word, and surely require it of every one. Deuteronomy. 18.
And now our loving Lord condescending to man's request, has in sending his Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh fulfilled his good word. This is the man
Christ Jesus, whom the Father has sent with authority to forgive sins; Matthew.
16.
which authority he first promised to Peter, saying, I will give thee the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven: and what ever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. Which promise after he was risen from the dead, he performed not only
to St. Peter, but also to the other Apostles, and that in a most solemn
manner, Ioh. 20.
when he said to them again the second time, Peace be unto you, he then said,
As my Father has sent me, so send I you. And when he had said this, he
breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye
remit, they are remitted; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.
Was ever any power upon earth put over from one to another in greater
plainness then this; As the Father, says our Lord, sent me to remit, and
retain sins, so send I you. What is done, is done from God the Father by my
commission, and the holy Ghost in you. To which end I now breathing upon you
give, saying, Receive ye the holy Ghost, Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted to them: and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

And let none seriously imagine as some boldly affirm, that all this is done
only by Preaching and Baptism, and that is all which is here meant. It is
most true, that sins committed before Baptism, are sacramentally forgiven by
the washing of water in Baptism; but sins cannot properly be said to be
retained in or by Baptism. And besides the Apostles had authority before our
Lords passion, both to preach and baptize without this solemn investment,
which commission was enlarged after his resurrection. The first Commission
being to Israel only, but the second enlargement to all the world. Matthew.
10.5. 28.18,20.
All power is given me in heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore into all
Nations, teaching and baptizing. Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world.

So that I do here conclude, that our Lord Jesus did not only give unto his
Disciples authority to absolve by Baptism such sins as were committed before,
but also in a most solemn manner has given them authority to remit unto the
penitent sins committed after Baptism, which mercy the learned call the second
Table, or board after shipwreck. The which who ever contemns, must utterly
perish. For as at Sea when a ship splits, some laying hold upon boards are
saved from drowning; so in the Church, such as by deadly sins have made their
Baptism of none effect, are likely to perish, unless they hold upon the plank
or board, namely, penitential Confession, and priestly Absolution. And truly
that man does not argue rationally, that questions their authority in the
latter more then in the former, why a man repenting of particular sins
committed after Baptism, may not by the Priest be absolved as well as he was
by a general repentance of all sins committed before Baptism. May we not say,
Thou fool, is it not as easy to forgive a few sins to a man truly penitent,
though committed after Baptism, as to forgive a multitude, suppose to an aged
man (as in the Apostles days many such there were that came to be baptized)
committed before baptism, for it is believed that the sins committed all his
life time whereby the Minister in the name of the blessed Trinity, washed away
in baptism; may not the same Minister by the same Authority viz. in the name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, forgive sins committed after baptism?

Obj.
But they object that sins are loosed or retained by the word preached.

Ans.
The Prophets of old preached. Men and women by good counsel and advise may
occasion the conversion of some: if such, therefore have they Keys of binding
and loosing, there is no excellency nor speciality in that gift which our Lord
is said to bestow upon Peter, I will give thee the Keys, etc.

What shall we say to these things, shall we think that the Apostles of our
Lord did not so understand their Master, and therefore did not so do, and
practice? Certainly that they did so understand him, their own practice with
the general tradition of the Catholic Church, East and West, Greek and Latin
down, till this present presumptuous age does testify. For till this last
century, it was scarce ever questioned, or in any disrespect. 2 Cor. 2.6.
See Saint Paul sending an absolution by the hands of Titus and Luke, for the
incestuous person who before had been before excommunicated. See the Apostle
demonstrating his Authority received from Christ. V. 10.
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment. For your sakes I forgave it in
the person of Christ, or in Christ stead or name he forgave him. What can be
more plain than this example in the first Epistle of binding, here of loosing,
there of punishing, here of pardoning, there of retaining sins, here of
remitting them. Moreover, as our Lord forgave the sins of the man sick of the
Palsy, Mat. 9. So says Saint James, If any man be sick, let him send for the
Priests of the Church: For I have seen it so translated, which translation by
moderate learned men, is said to be the truest, and most consonant to the
honor of God and Holy Scriptures. For if an original word about holy things,
should bear in English two significations, the one common and profane, the
other more sacred, shall not the servants of God render it in the most sacred?
As under the name of an Elder in those times were contained Priests,
Magistrates and old men, to which of these do we think Saint James sends us for
the recovery of bodily health by ghostly means, that we should confess our
sins unto them, and they pray over us, and in Christ's name anoint us with oil?
Surely not to Magistrates nor old men, but Priests, except we will apply this
to our Churchwardens or late made lay elders, which experience shows, are as
little concerned in this as either Magistrates, or old men.

Therefore let us read it as the Church has always done, and common reason
and experience shows, if necessity constraines that the word must be rendered
either Priests, Magistrates, old men, Churchwardens or lay elders, for so the
learned affirm it may be Englished of all. The word Priests, is most proper and
consonant, both to the matter to which it relates, and also to Gods Honor.
Therefore if any be sick, let him send, says Saint James, for the Priests of
the Church. For them it is most proper to pray for the sick to have confession
made to them, and for them in Christ's name to remit sins, and to anoint the
sick with oil in the name of the Lord. Besides, the late English Church, which
ever stood at so great a distance from the Roman, did allow of the title or
word Priest. And if she could have had but some handsome colorable ground of
an utter rejection of confession and absolution, she would not for the
advantage it gave to the Roman cause have inserted it several times in her
Liturgy, using the very same form as the Romanists do at the visitation of the
sick, viz: By that authority which our Lord Jesus Christ has committed unto
me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. Amen. And besides but for some reasons best known to themselves, they
would have established Confession, Penance, and Absolution, in another manner
then at that time they did. The words at the beginning of the Commination
before Lent are these.

Brethren, in the Primitive Church there was a godly discipline, that at the
beginning of Lent such persons as were notorious sinners were put to open
penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day
of our-Lord; and that others admonished by their example, might be more afraid
to offend. Instead whereof (until the said discipline may be restored again)
which is much to be wished, (mark that) it is thought good that these
Scriptures should be read, etc. By this we may see, as in a glass, what
opinion the Church of England had of these things. And God forbid we should be
such enemies to our own souls, as spitefully to cast off that which is
consonant, and not against old or new Testament, that which our Lord for our
special benefit did constitute, his Apostles officiate, the Churches
universally till this present age practice, with a full approbation of the
English Church, scarce ever any contradicting; I mean private Confessions and
Absolutions for the quieting of consciences.

It is true, that private sins being publicly confessed did occasion scandal
to some, which was by the Church in that Age forbidden. Socrat. l. 5. c. 19.
which place with some others of like nature, some persons for the hatred they
generally bear to all Confession, make a ground of writing and disputing
against it: but such are not sensible of the evils that ensue upon the omission
of Confession, for by this the ordinary means both of the forgiveness and
purgation of sins is rejected, and how salvation may be had in a Church which
has so done is very doubtful. This donation of our Lord to his Apostle was a
great mercy, an high prerogative to the Apostles, as ever was given to the sons
of men. To what men on earth, Angels or Archangels in heaven did he ever say,
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; what ye bind on earth shall be bound
in heaven; what ye lose on earth shall be loosed in heaven: yet to his
Apostles, and their successors was this grace given.

Wherefore I pray such as tender their souls safety, seriously to think and
consider on what the wisdom of God has appointed for men's sins, namely, 2
Courts, one in Heaven, and another on earth. Of that in Heaven, our Lord is the
only judge, for the Father has committed all judgment to the Son. But that
on earth our Lord has delegated and put over to his Ministers or Priests,
given the Keys to them, and has promised that what sins they bind on earth
shall be bound in Heaven, and what they loose on earth shall be loosed in
Heaven: he seems to give them the precedence, and promise to confirm in Heaven,
what they do on earth. Then what art thou, O man, that dare deny or presume
to contradict the blessed trinity. The Father authorizeth the Son, and the Son
authorizeth his Apostles, and their successors, to forgive sins; to which end
they had the Holy Ghost given them, and therefore what they do, is done in the
name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and will thou venture to go time after
time to the blessed Sacrament, and at last to death, and so to judgment,
without a penitential preparative by confession, presuming of a pardon from God
the Father without his substitute, because thou did believe and fancy such a
thing. Do thou think that he will be pleased with thy presumption. Thou will
not except of a pardon from his Ministers, but wilt have it from himself. Oh
the soul is precious, and the redemption thereof cease for ever. Tremble
when thou think of going thy own way, at the best thou do but venture, and
to walk with God at adventure, is a dangerous path.

Remember that saying of our Lord. The Father hears you if you ask according
to his will: and whereas the Scriptures say that sins of Infidels after
conversion are washed away in Baptism, had it been pleasing to God, and
according to his will, for the Gentiles to pray for pardon without a Baptism?
The like may be said of penitential confession. Let therefore the humble
conscientious Christian address himself to God in Gods own way, namely, by
those who are appointed Shepherds to watch over the souls of men.

Quest.
But some quaerie, Are no sins forgiven in heaven, but such as are confessed to
a Priest on earth.

Ans.
I answer: our loving Lord lays no impossibilities upon us, for to relate all
and every one of our sins and failings which as our hairs are numberless;
Psalm. 19.12.
For who can understand his errors? but when they come to our knowledge, we
are bound to confess them. For so was Israel under the Law, which is as a
Schoolmaster leading unto Christ. For as then upon confession, contrition and
restitution, atonement was made by the blood of beasts, in like manner do the
Christians Priests by virtue of the blood of Christ, warranted from our Lord,
absolve the truly penitent. And this is the ancient beaten path, the good old
way, which whosoever faithfully treads, finds rest unto his soul. But besides
these, there are other forcible inducements moving honest hearts, tender of
their souls good, not to slight Confession.

1. Confession much represseth pride, for as much as it occasioneth shame and
blushing, which breeds humility.

2. As it is a cause of humility, so is it also of charity, moving pity
toward the penitent, considering that our selves have been tempted also. A
motive it will be that we bear the burdens of such penitents.

3. Confession weakens the very power and dominion of sin, for sin having its
seat, strength and residence in the flesh, so long as the flesh is lusty and
frolic, sin is so too; but Confession ashameth, astonisheth, and casts down
the flesh, by which sin loses strength, and does not so easily carry captive.

4. It is a means to make the soul to be at enmity with sin, and even to cause
it to loath, detest, and abhor that which does daily bring it to such shame,
and in the end if amendment be not, to utter destruction.

5. It is a strong means to reduce a sinner to a good life, for what man whose
conscience is not totally seared, and in a reprobate sense will come often to
Confession with one and the same sin but that such a one must needs be somewhat
reformed.

6. It helps the Priest much both in his private exhortations, and rebukes; and
also in his public preachings: for by confession he comes to know the disease
of his sheep, and what remedies to administer.

7. As it helps the Minister in applying the word of God seasonably to the
sinner, so does it how to put up petitions for the penitent; For as the Priests
under the Law carried the names of the twelve Tribes before the Lord, and
Ezekiah spread the letter before God in the Temple; so does the faithful
Pastor those Souls committed to his charge. And the confessions of penitents do
both inform the Pastors understanding how to pray, and stir up his fervor in
prayer for the penitent.

8. It is an excellent means, to set in this world many crooked things
straight, which through the Pastors wisdom may be done; many suites in law,
Scandals and offenses stopped or hindered. Yea how many are there, that by this
means might be kept from making themselves away.

9. It is a special means, not only to obtain pardon by Gods messenger in a
ministerial way, but also peace to the conscience. For true penitential
confession, does pierce the very heavens, and so move God, that he says to
penitent Ephraim, being ashamed and confounded because of his sin, Jer. 31.19.
My bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him says the Lord.

10. True and real confession, prepares and makes a man ready for death. For
the penitential sinner does so manifest and lay open his sin with hearty
sorrow, shame and blushing for the same, that the soul is thereby arreigned,
yea judged and acquitted. Of such a one says God, Job. 33.27,28. He looked
upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right,
and it profited me not. If any make that manner of confession which God
requires, mark the answer of God, ver. 28. He will deliver his soul from going
down into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

These things considered, if there were no Tract of Confession in the old
Testament, no Institution of Christ in the new, no practice of the Apostles or
succeeding Ages to be found: if God should so please that the Church of this
present Age for the much profit that comes to the souls of men by confession,
should think fit to lay this so necessary and profitable a burden upon her
members, what man without manifest sin and wrong to his own soul, but would
yield obedience? By what Scripture can any man show did the Apostles do away
circumcision, but only by a conference one with another in that holy counsel
at Jerusalem, Act 15.
by which they perceived the unprofitablenesse thereof: And after St. Peter had
showed how the holy Ghost was given to men uncircumcised, in the very same
miraculous manner as it was to the circumcision in the beginning, Act 11.15.
and that want of circumcision did not hinder the holy Ghost from descending
upon men, then forthwith they concluded that the Gentiles should not be
circumcised, and so sent their Decrees to all the Churches; never mentioning
any Scripture, only the unprofitablenesse of circumcision, which St. Paul
mentions in several places, as, 1 Cor. 7.19.
Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God. Again, Gal 6.15.
Circumcision avails not, nor uncircumcision, but faith that works by love.
Gal. 5.6. Again, Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails not, but a new
creature. Upon this very ground did the holy Apostles do away circumcision,
which did not give the proud and self willed of that Age satisfaction, but was
an occasion of their stumbling, and falling into Sects as those of the
concision, Ebionites, and others. And therefore most offensive to God, and
dangerous to the soul, is the sin of disobedience to things commanded and
enjoined, although the grounds thereof be not so clear, and manifest as we
would have them to be. If a disputable controversy did arise in Israel, the
men were to ascend from Council to Council, till they came to the great
Sanhedrim in Jerusalem, whereof the high Priest was chief, and who ever did not
submit his understanding to what the said high Council determined, was to be
put to death, that all Israel might hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. This was God Law, Deuteronomy. 17. And certainly that counsel of the
Apostles, Act. 15. did not give satisfaction to all Christians then in being.
The proud and presumptuous would not submit. Their not conceiving how such and
such things could be done, would not serve their turn, they must submit God
approves not of such proud self-willed ones. The sin of disobedience is great,
and if it be so for things not so manifestly plain to be understood, as the
doing away of circumcision by the Apostles, not only without but seemingly
against Scriptures, for circumcision was not of Moses, but before him of the
Patriarks; what may be thought of disobedience to a thing so manifest as this
of Confession is, as appears by the Tract thereof before Christ, the
Institution of it by Christ, and that in so great a solemnity; the manifest
practice of the Apostles, and all succeeding Churches down to this age, and
that upon such godly and wholesome grounds, as no pious soul can gainsay. If all
this be not ground and reason sufficient for our generation to move and bind
them to obedience, God knows then what will become of them; but as others by
disobedience fell from the Church, and as we may say even perished in the
gainsaying of Core, so it is to be feared that even these will fall into diverse
Sects, and never return to take hold of the paths of life.

And let none say, they cannot believe that any men on earth can forgive sins
in their own name and authority. It is true, none can: but God through our Lord
Jesus Christ having given them this authority, let us not question the wisdom
of God, but believe. 2 King 5.12.
When the Prophet bid Naaman the Syrian for the cure of his leprosy to go and
wash in Jordan, he was angry at the Prophet, and said, I thought he would have
come, and prayed, and put his hand over the place, and will he not? but bids me
go and wash seven times in Jordan. Thus Naaman in his conceit contemned the
wisdom of God; and if he had so persevered, he had not been cured of his
leprosy. God Almighty grant us heavenly wisdom, humble minds, and grace, not
to contend, and contest against his Church, especially in things evident,
because to worldly wisdom they seem but foolishness. Let us remember that
saying, The wisdom of God is foolishness with men, he takes the wise in
their own craftiness. Our Lord preserve us from all proud and by-pachs, and
every evil way. Which is the earnest prayer of

Your Friend, T. S.

FINIS.

