THE DECLARATION OF THE CITIZENS OF EDENBOROVGH, CONCERNING, The maintaining of
a War for the KING, against the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

WITH The Grounds and Reasons of their present Rising, in Relation to the
proceedings of Duke Hamilton, and his Forces, and their imprisoning of three
great Lords, who acted contrary to the Desires of the Kirk and Kingdom.

LIKEWISE, The proceedings of the Northern Army, under the Command of Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, and the victorious success of Major Genesis Lambert against
them.

AS ALSO, The taking of APPLEBY Castle in Westmerland, by Col Harrison and
Major Sanderson, and the Articles of Agreement thereupon.

SEnt by a Messenger from Major Genesis Lamber^ to the Right H^^ou^able, the
Committee of Lo^ds and Commons at Derby house, upon Thurs^ay night last, being
the 22. of this instant June. 1648. June 24.

LONDON. Printed for ^. C. 1648.

A true Relation of the proceedings in the North, betwixt Major General
Lambert, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, by one that was with Major Gen Lambert at
Perith in Cumberland, and the taking of Appleby Castle.
SIr Marmaduke Langdale about June 15. came into the Borders of Yorkshire,
about 6. miles off on this side Bows, but Major Genesis Lambert drawing near to
him, he retreated back 12. miles, Major Genesis Lambert followed him, and he drew
back in policy to a bridge between Bows and Cattrick to engage the enemy,
which they perceiving, pursued at a distance, but only some small skermish
between their Scouts, where he met with Col. Harrison, who Commanded the horse
that went out of the South, who being joined together, faced about toward the
Enemy, and so soon as the Enemy perseived it he fled back so fast as he could,
Major Genesis LAMBERT still pursuing him till he came to Carlisle, where he drew up
his Army before the Town, June the 13. hoping to engage the enemy, but they
were utterly unwilling to engage, not so much as aparty of Horse to Skirmish,
only some few Horse that lay under the walls, under the Command of our
Musketers but durst not come forth or make any saly forth out of the Town, He
lay there one night but finding the Country so bare, and impoverished by
Langdale, and his Army he could not have provision for his men, and so
retreated to perith where he stayed till the Lancashire forces being 2000
besides the party that was before Appleby Castle, which was surrendered to
Colonel Harrison) last Saturday being the 17. of June at 12 a Clock, came up
to him, which Surrender was upon condition to march where they would, leaving
their Arms and all behind them; but they were resolved to go home and be
quiet. And so soon as they were joined, it is conceived they would march for
Carlisle, either to engage them to fight, or to besiege the town. And certain it
is, that the enemy were forced to set a guard of horse upon their foot at a
Bridges, to keep their foot from running away, they being most of them Array
men. And they are much straightened for provision; for a penny loaf is sold for
three pence in Carlisle, as is certified by good hands.

Major General Lambert has a very gallant Army, and is in number betwixt
eight or nine Thousand able fighting men, which in short time will give a good
account of their faithful Service.

A Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland against Duke Hamilton, and their
intentions not to rise in a posture of War against the Parliament of England.
SJR,
IT is certified from Scotland, by a messenger sent thither by Major Genesis
Lambert to bring him certain Inteligence of the State of things there, who came
to him on Friday night last being June 16. at Perith, That the 2. Regiments of
Foot that mutinied in Edinburgh, and were marching to Arg^le, who has a verry
strong party; but Hamilton hearing is, sent a party of Horse after them, and
overtooke them at a pssaage where they were to go over a water, and brought
them back again, and shot one man in the head of the Companies for example to
the rest, and brought them back to Edinburgh whereupon the City of Edinburgh
rose, declared themselves absolutely they would have no War against the
Parliament of England, except the just grounds cleared, and did clap up 3. of
the Malignant Lords of Hamiltons party, their names are not yet known to the
Relator: General Lashley is made Governor of Edinburgh Castle by Edenburg
men, and the Kirk, for the Kirk of Scotland, and Argiles party: And Hamilton
lists men, but before they come to a Randevouz, they run to Argile, that at
their Randevouz, the appearance is very small, so that it is not to be
questioned, but in a short time the whole Kingdom will be reduced to a firm
comply once with the Parliament of England, and in my next I shall give you a
more full account of the proceedings in that Kingdom, with the names of those
Lords imprisoned by the City of Edinburgh. So desiring to be excused for the
bejefnesse of my writing, which is by occasion of the Messengers have, I remain

From my Quarters at Perith June the 17. 1648. Your humble devoted Servant T. S.

By an express from Scotland, to the Committee of Lords and Commons at Darby
house, upon Thursday night last being the 22. of this instant June, it was
certified, that two of Duke Hamiltons Regiments are revolted from him, and have
declared for the Marquess of Argile, and his party, being resolved to dissent
their Articles of engagement, against the levying of a War, in opposition to
the proceedings of the Parllaments of both Kingdoms. They have also secured the
city and castle for the Marquis of Argile which was formerly under the power
and Command of Duke Hamilton, and his party, and are resolved to adventure
lives and fortunes, both against the Hamiltonians, and all others, that shall
endeavor to disturb the peace and amity of either Kingdoms.

FJNJS.

