Errata.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, the first line in the second page, for ut, read
but. Of the Book p. 1. line, 17. for offered, r. of or to, p 9. l. 9. r.
Objection, the word, p. 12. l. 9. for so, see, l. 10. for Meldad r. Medad, p.
16.16. for godly r. God by, p. 18 l 34. for special r. spiritual, p. 19 l. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. read thus: Know, no godly man can be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ, for no man in the state of grace and salvation, as every godly man
is, can be guilty of the body and blood of Christ; yet they hold that Gods
people seeing Christ crucified by wicked men at the Sacrament, are guilty of
the body and blood of Christ. p. 21. l. 3. r. had laid: amongst them were, p.
22 l. 12. for sinned r. side, l. 19. for the r. their, p. 24. l. r. for the r.
their, p. 25 l 29. for the r. their, p. 30. l. 4. for or r. our, p. 31. l. 10.
for wages r. ways, p. 34. l. 13. for disciples r. discipline, p. 35. l. 37.
dele of, p. 37. l. 24. for inferring r. enforcing, l 25. for praising r.
practicing, p. 38. l. 9. for performing r. preferring, p. 39. l. 25 for
Idolaters r. Idolatrous, p. 41. l. 4. dele or, p. 42. l. 40. for perform r.
profess, p. 43. l. 1. for forth r. foot, p. 44. l. 2 for these r. the, p 45.
l. 12. for prophaners r. profane ones, p. 48. l. 2. for sanctify r.
sanctified, l. 15. for bones r. bands, p. 52. l. 15. for the r. their. In the
Postscript, p. 1. l. 12. for their r. the, l. 26. r. advantage at.

A DECLARATION OF The Lords of His Majesty's Privie-Councell in SCOTLAND; AND
Commissioners for conserving the Articles of the Treaty: For the Information of
His MAJESTY'S good Subjects of this Kingdom.

Together with a Treacherous and damnable PLOT Of the Irish, English, and
Scottish Papists, begun to be discovered by the unexpected apprehending of the
Earl of Antrim coming from York, partly by Letters which were found in the said
Earls pockets, and partly by the Depositions of a Servant of his, who was
hanged at Carrick-Fergus.

26. Iunii: 1643.
Imprimatur

HEN: WALLEY.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty;
and now Reprinted at London for Edward Husbands, 27 Junii, 1643.

A Declaration of the Lords of His Majesty's Privie-Councell in Scotland.
THe Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councell, and the
Commissioners for conserving of the Peace, according to the great trust reposed
on them by His Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, whereof they are to make
account to God and His Majesty the next ensuing Parliament, Taking to their
deepest and most serious consideration the best ways of preserving the peace
of this Kingdom, That all His Majesty's good and dutiful Subjects may enjoy
their Religion, Liberties, and Laws, which GOD in a singular and wonderful
providence in the time of His Majesty's Reign has vouchsafed them, And of the
peace betwixt the two Kingdoms so unanimously and happily established in the
late Treaty of peace, and in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, Have faithfully
endeavored by all good means to reduce IRELAND to His Majesty's obedience,
which through the unnatural, barbarous, and Antichristian cruelty of Papists,
is from a peaceable Kingdom turned into a stage of unexampled and unexpressible
miseries, to be looked upon as an horrid and dangerous example by this Kingdom,
And by their earnest supplications to His Majesty, and their Declarations to
the Parliament of England, but especially by their earnest desires for
establishing Unity of Religion, and Uniformity of Kirk-government, and for
disbanding all Papists in Arms within their Dominions, and by the humble offer
of their meditation to remove the unhappy differences, and quench the fire of a
wasting War, begun betwixt His Majesty and His Subjects of England, wherein
His Majesty's sacred Person is exposed to so great danger, and so many
thousands of His Subjects have already perished: But finding to their great
grief the success no way answerable to their endeavors and expectation, and
the trouble of the neighboring Kingdoms, and the dangers of this Kingdom daily
arising to a greater height, then they by their care, counsel, and diligence,
were able to remeid or obviate, they did resolve for this and other causes,
which exercise and heavily press the Kingdom at this time, to call a
convention of the Estates, as the only mean (His Majesty not thinking fit to
hearken unto their motion of calling a Parliament) which might by common
counsel, consent and resolution, take the best course for representing yet
more sensibly these manifold evils and dangers, and for overcoming by greater
wisdom the difficulties which were above their power.

In the mean while (which they cannot but attribute to the merciful and
marveilous Providence of GOD, and which is a confirmation to them of their
resolution in calling a convention, and lays the greater necessity upon the
Estates, to meet the more willingly and frequently) a treacherous and damnable
Plot of the Irish, English, and Scottish Papists, is begun to be discovered, by
the unexpected apprehending of the Earl of Antrim coming from York, where he
had kept his meetings and correspondence by Letters, with certain Popish
Lords his confederates, and amongst others, with the Earl of Nithisdail and
Vicount of Aboyne, Their devilish designs and devices are come to light, and
brought to our knowledge, partly by Letters from Ireland, showing the
deposition and confession of a servant of the Earl of Antrims, and partly by
Letters which were found in the Earl his own pockets, all sent to them from
Ireland: His servant who was hanged at Carricke-Fergus the (...) day of May,
deponed (as the Letters bear) before and at the time of his death, that the
design was to reconcile the English and Irish in Ireland, that they by their
joint power, having expelled the Scots, the Irish Forces there might be sent
against the Parliament of England, to deal with some fit instrument there, by
all their strength to surprise the Isles and the High-Lands, and to depopulate
and waste so much of this Kingdom as their power could extend unto, being
assured of the like dealing in the North, by the Papists and their assistance
there, And to have a Magazine at Carlisle for twenty thousand men, to fall in
with an hostility upon the south parts of this Kingdom. The Letters sent from
Nithisdail and Aboyne, all written and subscribed by their hands to the Earl of
Antrim, and found with him, although in some things covertly written, do carry
thus much expressly, that for furtherance of the design and point resolved on,
there was assistance assured from the Isles, and from the North, and south of
Scotland, that Ammunition and Arms, without which they think their service
useless, were appointed to be sent to the North, and other parts of this
Kingdom, And that Popish Officers were commanded, and had undertaken to go into
Scotland; of which we are informed, some are already gone to the North, for
stopping, and disappointing so far as may be for the present (till the same
divine providence make a more full discovery) the attempts and devices of this
unnatural and bloody confederacy and conjuration. As the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council have given order that Nithisdail and Aboyne be cited,
and criminally pursued of high Treason, and have made the same as a matter of
public and most high importance known to his Majesty, and to the Parliament
of England; so they and the Commissioners of Peace also, for acquitting
themselves in their trust, and for the safety of the Kingdom, do make the same
publicly known to al his Majesty's good subjects, that being forewarned of
their danger, they may be upon their guards, and prepared against foreign
invasion and intestine plots and insurrection: And especially, that the Noble
men, Commissioners of Shires, and Burrows, perceiving greater and more apparent
necessity of the approaching convention then they could have wished or
expected, May at the day formerly appointed, meet in such celerity, and with
such public affection and disposition of heart, as the present condition of
affairs does require, and call for at their hands, and as beseems the lovers
of their Religion, King, and Country, which are in so great danger, from
papists, Atheists, and other degenerated country men, who are no less enraged
against this Kingdom, even since the late Reformation of this Kirk, then were
their predecessors at the first reformation of Religion, when their
negotiating was so restless, and their attempts so many, and malicious against
the work of God in this Land: nor is it to be past without observation, that
while His Majesty is making a public Declaration of his intentions to defend
and maintain the Religion, Rights and Liberties of this Kingdom, according to
the laws, civil and ecclesiastic, The Papists are conspiring, plotting, and
practicing against the Religion, Rights, and Liberties established, and against
the lives of His Majesty's good Subjects; whereby they do really manifest to
the world what the Kings Majesty against His Declarations, and His Subjects
against their confidence grounded thereupon, may look for from their malice
and power, if they shall continue in Arms, and (which God forbid) if they
shall prevail in the end. And whereas the Lords of Council are informed, that
the late Act of Council for publishing his Majesty's Declaration is mistaken by
sundry, as a Declaration of their own judgment, concerning the proceedings of
another Kingdom; For preventing of this mistake, They think fit to remember
and declare according to the act of Council in January last, showing that their
Lordships giving warrant to print any paper coming from His Majesty, or
Parliament of England, did not import their approbation of the contents
thereof: That they did on the first of June, both remember the famine, and
express their intention in this publication to be far from taking on them to
judge of the proceedings of the Parliament of another Kingdom; but only to
thank his Majesty for His gracious expressions toward the preservation of the
Rights and Liberties of this Kingdom: And ordaines this to be printed and
published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Burghs within this
Kingdom, for the information of his Majesty's Subjects within the same.

FINIS.
At Edinburgh the ninth day of June, 1643.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council and Commissioners for conserving the
Articles of the Treaty, Ordaines this following Declaration to be printed and
published at the market Cross of Edinburgh, and other Burghes of this
Kingdom, for the information of all Hi^ Majesty's good Subjects within the
same.

Arch. Primerose. Cler. S. Cons. and Commis.


