CR

(...) QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT of Council, For burning the Solemn League and Covenant, and several other
Traitorous Libels.
At Halyrudhouse, The fourteenth day of January, 1682.
FOrasmuch, As albeit by the seventh Act of the first Session of His Majesty's
first Parliament, and the second Act of the second Session of that same
Parliament; that Oath and Combination commonly called The Solemn League and
Covenant, is condemned as Treasonable, and the taking and renewing thereof by
any of the Subjects, is declared to be High Treason: Yet in the Year 1666, and
since, several desperate and incorrigible Traitors, have taken upon them to
Renew and Swear the said Covenant, and to emit and publish several treasonable
and scandalous Libels, founded thereupon, as particularly these treasonable
Declarations published at Rutherglen and Sanquhair, the Libel called Cargil's
Covenant, and the late Declaration published at Lanerk upon the twelfth of this
Instant, Entitled, The Act and Apologetick Declaration of the true
Presbyterians of the Church of Scotland. His Royal Highness, His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and Lords of H^s Majesty's Privy Council, to evidence the great
abhorrence they have of these treasonable Libels, Do Ordain, that upon
Wednesday next, being a Market day the said treasonable Libels, viz. The
Solemn League and Covenant, The Rutherglen and Sanquhair Declarations, The
Libel called Cargil' s Covenant, and the late treasonable Declaration at
Lanerk, be publicly burnt at the Cross of Edinburgh, by the hand of the common
Hangman. And Ordains the Provost, Bailiffs, and Council of Edinburgh, to be
present, and to see the same solemnly done the said day, betwixt Eleven and
Twelve hours in the Forenoon, and to report an account of their Obedience to
the Council, the next Council day thereafter. And that these Presents be
Printed and Published. Extracted by me,

WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. Anno DOM. 1682.


