A Breife EPISTLE to the Learned Manasseh Ben Israel. In Answer to his,
Dedicated to the PARLIAMENT.

September. 6.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.

Printed at London, 1650.

TO MY ANCIENT FRIEND William Lenthall Esquier, Mr of the Rolls.
SIR,
I Can, to none more justly, dedicate this little work of mine of a few days
production, which ayms at the conversion of the Jews, than to you who now hold
the place of Mr of the Rolls, which was the Inn or Hospital of the converted
Jews; and therefore it is fit you should take notice of the beginning, of
their conversion: And I am assured you fear not the too sudden conversion of
them, but do much desire at; and by this little Treatise there is abundant
caution given, that the converted should not be burdensome to the State, and
after your perusal of this small piece, which you approved as a fair attempt
toward their conversion, saying, there was no hurt in it, but wishing it had
been done more seriously. To which I make this reply, That Manaslehs treatise
being so slight, deserved no better. And this may chance do more to their
conversion than the many serious labors of very good and judicious Authors
have done. As all the care and endeavor of a skillful paynter, who desired to
express the foame of a beast, could not attain unto it to satisfy himself,
yet by an angry dash of his pencill or sponge, thereby saw a rare expression of
it: So may this careless dosh of my pen do somewhat, which if it may please
you and good men, and bring down their haughtiness, I have my aim.

Your humble servant E.S. Middlesex.

To my dear brother Manasseh Ben Israel the Hebrew Philosopher.
SIR, I kindly take (...) Dedication of your Book, as one who am a Member of
that House you so much honor, and your acknowledgement that we of that House
do highly favor your Nation; and seeing you would yet have us love you more
and more, I will tell you what is the true bond of Love and the greattest
obligation, even true Religion, wherein because you yet fall short, I cannot
yet love you so much as I would, but I do abundantly pity you, that you yet
live in darkness and the shadow of death, and will not entertain that light
which your Adonai and ours has sent into the world. But what yet we have done
of any glorious action, I cannot yet acknowledge, it may be I may find it
hereafter. And certainly it will be a very glorious action, if we can convert
your Nation of the Jews to the fullness of true belief.

And indeed I believe we are the likelyest Nation under Heaven to do it. For
we hate Idolatry as much as you. Nor do we worship any graven or painted
Images. I wish both ye and many of us were as free from inward Idolatry and did
not worship our own conceits and vain Imaginations. But we have some that are
free from that also, and are free from Covetousness which is Idolatry, I wish
your Nation were so also. But I would not have our nation put that hard precept
of Christianity upon you, that upon your conversion your goods should be
confiscated, that precept, to sell all and give to the poor, is ill
administered by the Idolatrous Roman Congregation.

Secondly, we worship that one God which you do, whether you call him Elohim
or Adonai; but we say, that Adonai belongs to us more than you, for you shall
find in the Psalms, that Elohim said to Adonai, which we declare thus; The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy footstool: you cannot say but this is spoken of the Messiah, and the filius
Davidis, and hence we collect two persons in the Trinity, which one God,
Trinity in Unity, we worship, and upon this very day, which we call Trinity
Sunday, the Sunday after the coming of the Holy Ghost. And we write de tribus
Elohim which we can prove out of the old testament. Thirdly we acknowledge
with you the old testament to be the word of God, and receive no other Canon of
it than you do, herein we both disagree with the Romanist And we acknowledge
that God by your Nation has preserved the Canon of the old testament, and we
pray you may understand it as well as we.

Fourthly, we keep a sabbath as well as you, only we say that Adonat, being
Lord of the Sabbath, changed the day; some other things there are wherein we
agree; and clearly in the whole decalogue, saving that alteration of the
sabbath.

Now Sir, I will show you wherein you differ from your self, or fall short of
the truth, and that your hopes built upon Montezint's relation are very
fallible, and nothing so Divine or reasonable as our faith.

Your relation of Montezini is a double here^^ first of him from the Cazic
Francis, and that was also from his forefathers; then from Montezini to your
self. That from the Cazic Francis, with that caution, that Montezini should
not ask him any questions, least he should make him to lie. [ p. 10.] A very
doubtful business, whether Montezini did not ask him too many questions, or
whether the Cazic being so apt to do is, did not lie; but this upon the result
must be the fullfilling of the prophesies, and induce our Parliament men to
kill the Kings of the earth, that Messiah may reign, and all the world may be
under his government.

There are some of us apt enough to believe, that Christ shall reign a
thousand years, and that they shall destroy all Monarchy. They have done
prettily well for three kingdoms already in one man, but that your brethren
the Scots call upon his sonn^^ and so will endeavor to spoil all the work,
but let them not follow their forefathers, your countreyman Judas Iscariot.
They have done pretty well already, in so barbarously hanging his best friend,
that even our men rail upon them, and so will do still until they have
purchased or conquered their Sanhedrim. Have at them; Cromwell has once
conquered them already, for which they have given him thanks, and so may they
do again.

But Sir, ye both well agree in pulling down the Pope; but will you pull down
the Antichrist? The Papists say, he must be of the tribe of Dan, will you pull
down your brother? Ye loved Music, your brethren the Scots hate all but the
bagpipes, or one of Robert VVi^edomes Psalms. But Brethren of Israel, be
advised, they will have a King of their aun nation, have a care they prove not
mongrells; they say they are Christians, not altogether Jews, England is their
land of Canaan; yet they are as well dispersed over all the world as ye: even
to a proverb in the German tongue. (Scotten Rotte^and base gelt goes all the
world over.)

But ye must join with some of us for a thousand years reign; their Nappier
speaks much against it, and very rationally. Well, then join with those
Millenarians now or never. What though it has been condemned for an Heresy?
Origin was a good Scholar, and a good Hebrician. You have also many of the
ancients, and many of our Synod men on that part. But they will have the Son
of Mary to reign He is not for your new Messiah. Well then piece up as well as
ye can, and find some medium.

For me, and those of the true reformed Religion (though we have great hopes of
your conversion) yet we must say, that by these opinions of yours, you will
cause the prophecy to be fulfilled, that the Messiah shall come again as a
thief in the night For while ye look for a glorious temporal King he will
come out of the clouds with the sound of the trumpet to judgment. Take heed of
the Valley of Jehosophat! But then indeed shall the true sons of Abraham
reign with him the thousand years of eternity. Take heed least through such
wicked expectations ye and they think not the end of the world so near as
it is, and through your want of faith and charity, ye cause not the dates to
he shortened, and that the world continue not the six thousand years, before
the long day of eternity comes, and ye be shut out into utter darkness.

Connder therefore the Doctrine of John Baptist, and repent betimes, (ye have
Moses and the Prophets,) and look well to the Star, (...) Virgins Son, and
the Branch, and see well whether he be not come already, and Flias in Saint
John Baptist. Has he not destroyed all the Idols Temples and Oracles? Has
not he rent the veil of the Temple, and broken the pertition wall between Jew
and Gentiles? Is not Shilo come, where is your King of Judah? Was not Herod an
Idumaean? Has not he prepared a a heavenly kingdom for you, if you will
believe in him? Brethren, be not so stupid to look for an earthly kingdom. Is
not the heavenly far better? Ye believe a judgment day and a resurrection;
The Saduces (I hope) have no sect amongst you now, then ( see also p. 83. cap.
^7) harken to your contrymen, Paul and Peter, they will interpret the old
testament better than you do. Who sent Montezini to preach to you? Be not
deluded with vain expectations, you and he say the time of your deliverance is
concealed, and your people are concealed until that day, and believe me; or
your own Prophets and Nation, ye will still be so, until ye come into utter
darkness, if ye repent not, and know ye have crucified the Lord Jesus. For
examine your selves in what is revealed: have not all of you a bloody issue
about your bodies, (See the book of the blessed Jewe of Morrocco) and do not
the Italians say, they smell a Jew before they discern him with their eyes?
Did not your forefathers say, His blood be upon us and our children? Was not
his prophecy fulfilled in the destruction of your Temple, and the dispersion
of the relics of your nation? What plainer signs would you have? What
plainer prophesies? O brethren, be not wilfully blind.

My consent ye shall have, that you and your people shall live in England, and
have meeting places to worship Adonai, but no place for sacrifices, for that
were to deny Christ, as your own Countryman, Paul has told you. And ye shall
be allowed to expound the Old Testament, and Christians shall be admitted to
hear you, and you shall admit them to teach you. And indeed, we have yet some
that are very skillful in the Eastern tongues. You may do well to give them
good Pensions, to teach your nation, and they are so poor they had need of
it. But let me entreat you, not to endeavor to destroy Kings, until Christ
come. You will hardly destroy the Popish Kings, and if ye destroy the
Protestant, ye will cause the Papists to prevail.

I had thought to have showed you, the slenderness of your proofs and
expectations of your Earthly Monarch and Messiah; but but I had rather you
would consider the full proofs of our belief, and the reasonableness of the
grounds thereof, to the help of your people herein. I wish reverend Doctor
Hammond would put his little book of the reasonableness of Christian religion
into Latin.

I like well your intention, that you will continue the history of your
countryman Josephus. see. P. 44.45. etc chap. 16.

I had thought here to have made an end of my discourse with you, seeing your
writing so vain and frivolous, but truly my bowels yearne after your
conversion, and I must say, we Christians do a great deal more honor your
Nation than you your selves. For we worship that countryman of yours, that
son of of David, and of Mary, the Son of the most high God, perfect God,
and perfect man, whom you and we crucified, though the eternal act of his
crucifixion was done by your forefathers alone. We reverence all your
progenitors, and prophets. We reverence our fathers in Christ of your nation,
the holy Disciples and Apostles, who by their preaching overthrew all the vain
Gods of the gentiles, and suffered Martyrdom for the belief and expectation
of your forefathers; they indeed raised up seed to your father Abraham, and we
are the sonns of his faith, which we have now held forth almost as long as
the law was held forth. We yet hold forth the eternal law of God, the Ten
Commandments, though the law of ceremonies be abrogated, by that one
sacrifice of him upon the cross, who was a Priest after the order of
Melchisedek. And what priests have you of the order of Aaron? You must go
look for them, you know not where; amongst the Indians. Montezini may be your
guide, to bring you to the Cave of Montezint in Don Quixot. But Brother, though
I could say enough farther upon this point out of the old testament and the
Psalms, yet I will leave that to ours who are more learned in the Eastern
tongues.

And now come again to that which is most proper for my part. The
preparations for your admission into England, to which, if the Parliament shall
think fit, I shall give my directions and cautions.

1. First, I doubt whether we may admit you to circumcise in our land. For
should we do it, we should deny Christ to be come. And ye need not always
do it; for it was not done for forty years in the wilderness, and omitted
for long times in your captivity; and truly you do but crucify Christ again
by it, in denying him to be the Messiah, and so do your brethren the Turks.

Well then; will you forbear that, if you should live amongst us? We will but
desire you to forbear it till Messiah come to have an earthly kingdom, some
of you say, that is to be very shortly.

2. In lieu of this, we will neither force you, nor any of your children to be
christened, we hold that an abomination; but if any of you will repent and
believe, we will christen them; but if anyfall back, we must punish them:
and we must tell you, the Rolls in Chancery lane is the Hospital of the
converted Jews, and we will make more colleges for such converts, if there
be need.

3. He that dies a christian shall enjoy his whole estate, and he that dies a
Jew shall leave but a third part to his posterity, one third to the state of
this land, and one third to the maintenance of converted Jews.

4. There shall be a view at their entrance taken of their names and
circumcisions that have been heretofore, and a Record kept constantly, that
the circumcised may be entered, which if they neglect, they shall suffer death
and confiscation.

5. Every year a search shall be made, whether any male child be circumcised,
and if done in England, or the Dominions thereof, a consiscation of half the
parents estate shall ensue. If any lew undertake to circumcise a christian, he
shall suffer the pains of death and confiscation, in what Nation soever he
does it.

6. They may come of both sexes to christian prayers and sermons unconverted,
so they behave themselves reverently and decently. And once in the year, viz.
on Good Friday or the day of Crucifixion, they shall be compelled to come, and
then the names both of men, women and children to be taken, and recorded. As
also the names of the converts.

7. They may well pay double custom, both they and the Postnati borne in
England, until they be converted, and then to pay only single custom.

8. They shall keep no Fraternityes or Guilds, but by special license, but
they may dwell and trade in any part of England. No corporations to be allowed
but to those of the converted Jews; and all in general shall maintain their
own poor.

9. None of either sex shall marry with any Christian, nor shall any christian
marry with them, until they be converted.

10. If they shall endeavor to raise up any of their own nation to be their
King, those that are guilty thereof shall suffer death and confiscation.

11. If they join with the Anabaptist or Leveller to raise a Captain
General, such as John of Leyden or Knipperdoling, they shall suffer death and
consiscation.

12. They shall be subject to all other laws of the land. To these laws the
Parliament may add or diminish as they please, in relation to the government of
the Jews.

And now brother Manasseb, to give you one touch more for a farewell; you know
how long the world has lasted hitherto; some say two thousand years before the
law, two thousand years under the law, and 1650 since the law, this is the
year of Iubilee, look for the sabbath day of eternity, it may be the world
shall not last six thousand years. There are five thousand six hundred and
fifty passing, and there is no room for Messiah his one thousand years reign
upon earth. Will you hear a story I have lately heard, and I hope to make out
the record better than you do that of Montezinies.

It is thus; one of your great Rabbis upon his deathbed, in the
Low-countreyes, not many years since, called his people to him, and said, We
have long, expected our Messiah, and he do not come in the year 1650. or 51.
Embrace the Christians Messiah, for he must needs have been the man. And at
his throne no doubt all Protestant Kings will cast down their Crowns. Look
upon some of the psalms, I will direct you to a few viz. 65. v. 2.5.7.8.13.
Psa. 66. V. 1.2.3.6. Psa. 67. All the Psalm Psa. 68. For this days morning
prayer v. 1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also
that hate him fly before him. 2.3.4.5.6.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. Thou art gone
up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received gifts for men: yea,
even for thine enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them.
19.20.21.22.23.27. There is (...) little Benjamin their ruler, and the Princes
of Juda their council: the Princes of Zabulon, and the Princes of Napthali.
Observe that your first King was a Benjamite, and observe how many of your
tribes shall return. 28.29.30.31.32.33.34. Ascribe ye the power to God over
Israel his worship and strength is in the clouds. Why will ye then have it a
temporal reign upon earth.

See the eightieth Psalm. v. 14. Turn thee again thou God of Hosts, look
down from heavan, behold and visit this vine, v. 15. and the place of the
vineyard, that thy right hand has planted: and the branch that thou made so
strong for thy self. v. 17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand
and upon the Son of man whom thou made so strong for thine own self.

Your Rabbis say, there are two Messiahs, that of ours you call Ben Joseph,
But you expect Messiah Ben David. Was not ours Ben David? Look upon the
Pedegrees in Matthew and Luke, in the latter you shall find Mary's Pedigree,
who was the right heir after her espoused Joseph was dead.

Behold, a Virgin did conceiv and bear a Son; This was the Branch, and the
Man of Gods right hand, and he was called Wonderful and Emanuel. And often
called in his life time by propheticke spirits whom he cured, the the Son of
David, nay the Devils themselves confessed he was the Son of David, and
quarrelled with him, because he came to torment them before their time.

It was a wonderful production. The Spirit of God overshadowed this Virgin,
etc. Why should not that make her fruitful, as it did the Abyss in the first
of Genesis, v. 2 Terra erat inanis et vacua, et tenebrae erant super faciem
abyssi, and Spiritus domini ferebatur super aquas: There have you the third
person in the Trinity. Et dixit Deus, fiat Lux, and facta est Lux. And as upon
this incubation Light was made, so upon this obumbration, our faviour Christ,
the true and everlasting Light, was brought forth by the holy Ghost in the
shape of man. What would you have more? See Sylou scintillane, 97. page

To see the humblest maid with light dyvine,
in poorest dress so brightly shine,
In darkest womb to hide the light,
till that his star did show this sight.
All this and more we wondering see
disclosed by faith and and hope in thee.
All this and more were but to see
our God take flesh and borne of thee.
The shepherds weet harmless lives!
(on whose holy leisure,
waits innocence and pleasure)
Whose leaders to those pastures and
clear Springs,
were Patriarchs, Saints and Kings.
How happened it that in the dead of night,
you only saw true light.
While Palestine was fast a sleep and lay
without one thought of day?
Was it because those first and blessed swains
were pilgrims, on those plains
When they received the promise, for which now
it was there first shown to you.
Perhaps some harmless cares for the next day
did in their bosoms play,
As where to lead their sheep, what silent nooke
what Springs or shades to look.
But that was all; and now with gladsom care,
they for the town prepare.
They leave their flock, and in a busy talk
all toward Bethlem walk,
To see their souls great Shepherd who was come
to bring all straglers home.
Where now they find him out, and taught before,
that lamb of God to' adore.
That lamb whose days great Kings and Prophets wished
and longed to see, but missed.
The first light they beheld was bright and gay,
and turned their night to day.
But to this later light they saw in him,
their day was dark and dim.
Sanctae and individuae Trinitati Gloria,
Gloria Deo in excelsis, in terra Pax, etc.
Praenobili Domino Edvardo Spencero Militi, (...).
Ornatissime vir,
SPem nostram de Gentis Judaicae conversione, faeliciter expergefecisti: quam
licet semper spectavimus ut certam, nunquam tamen ut propinquam: non ut opus
hujus, sed alicujus venturi saeculi. Cum enim consideramus quot procellae,
turbines, ac tempestatesubique gentium, orbem Christianum mir e perturbant!
quantilla autem spes sit remedij, aut alicujus vicinae pacis! quam omnia in
praecipiti nutant! and in Catholicam ruinam cedunt! Quis Christianae fidei
Atlas, aut spei Hercules tanto oneri pares praebere poterit humeros? Cum
naufragio periisse visa est Charitas, quis e perituris secundam tabulam
admovebit Iudaeis jam clim perditis? Cum nobis non convenit inter nos, quis
nostrae communionis participem dedet suam animam? Sed esto! Spes, non est nisi
fit de arduis. Hebraee ausculta: Vir doctus, and nobilis: (...): Genere, and
Genio honorandus, rem illam arduam aggreditur! Quidui per divinum auxilium and
auspicium opus hoc possibile redderetur? Heu! nimium faciles Hebraeos, se
gentium idolis and superstitionibus olim praebuisse, testantur omnes ad unum
prophetae Israelitae. In Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum qualis, quanta, and
qua^ obstinata durities? Adeone mutuari d^um alienum ab Ethnicis, in
promptuest? Deum autem vestrum communicare Ethnicis adeo molestum est? Qualis
est haec justitia? Crudeles Judaei, aut vobis aut peregrinis! Deum non vultis
vestrum esse, quia noster esse dignatus est. Si haec non sit ratio Iudiaicae
insaniae, Istanecesse erit. Quod suae non divinae satis factioni inhiarunt.
Miserias prius quaese, quam peccata quae Deum premunt removeri semper placuit.
Idcirco Beatum Iesum Bar-Mariae qui suo primo adventu Deo satisfecit potius
quam Iudaeo; A Iudaeo aspernatur. Qui peccata prius studuit tollere quam
miserias nullo modo his Messiah esse poterit. Sed eligunt in peccatis simul and
miserijs per multa annorum saecula inter varias gentes comminui, potius quam
hanc methodum amplecti.

Sed age, Illustrissime Domine, hunc foelicem conatum prosequere, occasionemque
sapiens ut arripuisti, sic faxit Deus sinem operis prospere consequaris. Ita
precatur, Domine,

Humilimus tuus in Christo Jesu Servus and Jesu Christi conservus N. B.

Lectori.
LEctor, sisve Judaeus, vel ex nobili Gentium stirpe, non in malam partem
acceptum erit spero. Si levi manu tangam quod scopus est hujus pusilli operis.
Quod (praeter ablationem scandali ex eo quod nonnulli fail credent afctionem
nostram esse eximiam and nimis magnam ad introducendam incredulam Iudae^rum
Nationem, quandoquidem maximo desiderio prosequimur illorum conversionem.)
altiorem habet finem and metam, continuationem scilicet industriae Doctorum
nostratium, hominum, in linguis orientalibus peritorum: Et animum addere
industriae eorum, ad operandum, verbo scriptoque ejusdem Nationis conversionem.
Quandoquidem nec recte loqui eam orationem possimus Adveniat Regnum tuum, ni
maximopere studeamus Israelis restaurationem, ut ita simus unicum ovile sub
unico pastore Salvatore nostro Jesu Christo, qui intranubes veniet
circumvallatus and circumseptus totis caelestium cohortibus ad judicium, and ad
separationem Caprorum ab Ovibus. Tunc certe nos, qui credentes sumus, maximo
maerore affecti erimus, si videbimus totam istam gentem quae super terram
manebit, per nimiam expectationem and desiderium Monarchiae terrestris
caelestem illam amittere. Per longum abhinc tempus in usum venit in diem
Crucifixionis preces sundere pro eorum conversione. Nunc etiam optime actum
esset si jejunium appositum opus continuaremus anniversari um, and preces
funderemus. Quod faxit Deus. Ita precatur pusillus Author.

To the Reader.
REader, whether you be Jew or Gentile, I think it will not be taken amiss
that I give you a little touch of the intent of this little piece, Which
besides the taking off the scandal of our too great desire of entertayning the
unbeleeving Nation of the Jews, and yet our earnest wishes of their
conversion, has also another aim, to continue the industry of our learned men
in the Eastern Tongues, and to encourage some of them to take more pains in
endeavoring that Nations Conversion by word and writing, seeing we cannot say
that Prayer, Thy kingdom come, unless we endeavor the restoring of Israel,
that we may be one flock under one Shepherd our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, who shall come to Judgment in the clouds attended with the whole host
of Heaven, to separate the Goaets from the Sheep, and we who are believers
should be loath to see that whole Nation, who are left upon earth at that day,
by their expectation of an earthly Monarch should loose the heavenly. Therefore
we have used to pray for their conversion upon the day of Crucifixion, and
therefore may well fast and pray upon that day anniversarily, which that we
may all still continue is the hearty desire of the small Author

E. S.

Fratri suo spectatissimo Menasseh Ben Israel Hebraeo Philosopho. S.
DEdicationem libelli tui aequi bonique consulo Iose, pars nonnulla ejusdem
(quem tanto honor prosequeris) Confessus: nec minori studio, amplector gratam
tuam recognitionem, istius favoris, quo Nos ejusdem Consessus (vti dicis)
vestram Gentem dignamur. Et quoniam vult Dominatio tua, nos indies vobis magis
magisque amorem nostrum impertire: dicam tibi quid sit verissimum amoris
vinculum, et maximum ligamentum; verus scilicet, in vera Religione consensus,
et unio. Qua in re quoniam nondum Nobis satis aut Christo fecistis, tantu^
amorem vobis impertire, Mihi necdum licet, quantum alias facile liberet,
intimisque medullis cupio. Sed totis visceribus genti vestrae misereor,
quatenus adhuc in tenebris, et umbra mortis miserrime circumvagamini: nec
vultis persuaderi, Lucem illam quam Adonai tam vester, quam noster, misit in
Mundum; amplecti. Sed honorem cujusquam gloriosae actionis, seu splendidi
facinoris nondum admitto, nec agnosco; amodo fortassis tale aliquid patrare, et
arrogare Nobis licebit. Et certe gloriosissimus erit ille conatus, si nostra
opera gens vestra Iudaica conversa fuerit, et adscita in communionem, ac
plenitudinem verae fidei.

Et sane nullus dubito, quin Nostra Gens ex omnibus quae in toto Orb Terrarum
degunt Nationibus, huic operi sit maxim par, et idonea. Pari enim vobiscum
idololatriam odio prosequimur; nec quemquam venerari patimur sculptile, aut
pictas imagines; Utinam tam vos, quam multi e nobisaeque immunes essemus ab
Idololatria interna; nec coleremus nostras proprias Phantasias et vanas
Imaginationes. Sunt tamem nostri aliquot, immunes ab illis etiam malis: ficut
et ab avaritia, quae est Idololatria vestrae (ni fallor) Gentis. Sed ipse nolim
durum, istud Christianitatis praeceptum de omnium bonerum, venditione, and in
pauperes erogatione; per Nostram Gentem vobis immitti; male nimirum
Idololatrica ista Romana Congregatio vos in conversione vestra omnium bonorum
dispendio mulctavit.

Secundo eundem quem vos Deum Religiose colimus ac veneramur, utrum sit apud
vos Elohim, aut Adonai; nos autem dicimus, Deum Adonai magis proprie ad nos,
quam ad vos, pertinere: Invenietis enim in libro Psalmorum (...) quod nos
interpretamur, dixit Iebova domino meo sede ad dextram meam: donec disposuero
inimicos tuos in scabellum pedum tuorum; neque potestis negare, Messiam illum
filium Davidis hic nominari; et inde colligimus duas Trinitatis Personas; quem
Trin-Vnum Deum nos etiam hodie veneramur; Hodie (inquam) Dominica est Sanctae
Trinitatis; Dominica proxime immediata a Pentecoste, seu Dominica Adventus S.S.
Spiritus. Et nos de Tribus Elohim tractatulos edimus, quos probare possumus, ex
veteris Testamenti libris. Tertio pariter vobiscum agnoscimus, et confitemur
vetus illud Testamentum, esse verbum Dei; nec alium ejusdem admittimus Canonem,
quam qui vester est: et Utrique, Romanae Sectae hac in re contrariamur.
Agnoscimus etiam Deum, per vestrum populum, praeservasse illum veteris
Testamenti Canonem: et enixe rogamus Deum, ut vos illud probe intelligatis,
sicuti nos.

Quarto Sabbatum ita colimus vt vos, hoc tantum dicimus, quod Adonai qui
Dominus est Sabbath, five Sabbathi, mutavit diem. Sunt etiam alia quaedam de
quibus inter nos convenit: et plane de toto Decalogo praeterquam de alteratione
Sabbathi

Nunc autem videre liceat ista, in quibus parum tibi stas, aut veritati, nec
tibi tecum, aut cum veritate convenit; unde spes posita supra relationem
Antonii Montezini vana apparebit, nec adeo divina, aut rationi consentanea, ut
nostra, quam respuitis, Fides.

Vestra Montezini relatio duplex est fama. Prima ipsius Montezini a Francisco
Cazico tibi delata; altera a propatribus Francisco tradita. Ista Francisci
narratio ea lege facta; modo Antonius non esset molestus, aut nimium illum
rogaret, ne illum induceret, ut falsa diceret p. 10. Rem totam reddidit dubiam;
fortasse Montezinus illum nimium rogavit; et tum fortasse Cazicus (huic rei
satis aptus) mentiobatur. Sed inde concludendum est, Prophetias impletum iri,
et Patribus nostri Parliamenti persuadere ^^^aris, Reges Terrae interimere:
utpote Messiah regnaret, et totus orbis suo subijceretur Sceptro.

Sunt e nobis nonnulli satis facile credituri Christi Regnum Terrestre per
mill Annos duraturum, and ipsos in ruinam (...) positos; cui rei ut satagunt,
ita pro Tribus Regnis in uno Capite, nimium peregerunt. At fratres e gente
Scotorum vestri hoc opus Conantur praetervertere; compellant enim filium Regis
ablate: ni (quod male timeo) vestigia majorum suorum premant, et vestratis,
Judae. Iscarictae. Quod iamdudum percommode fecerunt, ita
inhumanitersuspendendo, huic amicessimum: ut etiam nostri his convitiantur, eo
nomine; et convitiabuntur, usque dum mercede conduxerint, aut Bello devicerint
Scotorum Synedrium. Been caveant! Crumwellus semel iam, illos perdomuit; cujus
causa gratis illi habuerunt, et iterum habere possunt.

Sed Domine, Judaeis convenit cum Scotis, de deturbando Papa. Atquid fiet de
Antichristo? Papistae illum de tribu Dan futurum asserunt. Number vim illaturi
estis fratri vestro? Vos melodiae et harmoniae amatores habiti estis: Sco^i
autem fratres vestri omnem concentum odio habent, praeter illum quem reddit
tibia utricularis, aut aliquis e Psalmis Roberti Wisdomi. Sed fratres
Israelitae! sapite, et circumspicite; Scoti Regem Scotum habebunt, cavete ne
sint hybridae! hise Christianos prositentur, non prorsus Iudaeos Anglia est
istoru^ Terra Canaan, sive promissionis: tamen aeque ac vos supra totum Mundum
been dispersi sunt, ut est in proverbio. Scotten rotten et Nummus adulterinus
ubique Gentium sunt.

Vobis igitur incumbet, nonnullis nostratium adhaerere Regni mill annorum
causa: Napierus, Scotiae in hoc regnum multa et probabilia invehitur, nunc ergo
aut nunquam porrigite dextras Chiliastis, sive Millenariis; sit licet haeresis
olim damnata; Origenes doctus erat, et linguae vestrae peritissimus, multi
etiam ex Antiquis hisce partibus stetere; multi item e nostra Synodo ijsdem iam
stant. Attamen Regem istius Millenarij Regni, habebunt omnes Iesum Bar Mariae;
novum Messiam neutiquam admittent. Esto; resarcite mutuo vestras licet divisas
sententitias, ut convenire placebit; aut medium exquirite.

Quantum mea interest, et illorum qui sunt de Ecclesiis vere reformatis (licet
spem fovemu vestrae conversionis et resipiscentiaes cogimur vobis pronuntiare,
Per hasce vestras perversas opiniones Prophetiam implendam praestabitis,
Messiam ita reversurum, and venturum, vt fur necte. Dum enim hujus saeculi
Regem splendidum speratis, Ipse descendet de nubibus, cum voce tubae ad
judicium. Contremiscite, et cavete a valle Jehoshaphat! tunc certe very Abrahae
filii ipsi conregnabunt, per mill annos aeternitatis. Circumspicite ne propter
istiusmodi impias expectationes, cum vos tum illi cogitetis finem Mundi non ita
vicinum ut est: et per vestram infidelitatem, et Charitatis indigentiam,
faciatis, ut decurtati sint dies illi, ne Mundus continuetur per Annos 6000,
ante adventum gloriosae diei eternitatis; et sic vos excludamini in tenebras
exteriores.

Considerate igitur doctrinam Johannis Baptistae, et impigre paenitentiam
agite; Habetis Mosen, and Prophetas, consulite Stellam, Virginis Filium, et
Ramum, et videte, number hic qui venturus erat, iam venerit necne? Et Eliiah
etiam, in Ioanne Baptista? Nonne ruinam invexit Idolorum Templis, et silentium
Oraculis? Nonne velum Templi ab ipso fissum est, in duas parts, a summo ad
imum? Nonne solvit medium naceriae parietem, inter Iudaeos et Gentes? Nondum
venit Shilo? Ubi est Rex Iudae? Fuitne Herodes Idumeus? Nonne Salvator noster
etiam vobis Caeleste Regnum paravit, si modo in cum crederetis? Fratres, nolite
stultescere, nec de Terrestri Regno diutius somniari! Nonne Caelum praestat?
Uos fidem adhibetis, diei Iudicii et Resurrectioni; Saduceorum Secta, inter vos
(uti spero) locumamplius non habet, Auscultate igitur vestratibus' Paulo, et
Petro, melius Mosen et Prophetas interpretantibus quam cuiquam e vobis.

Quis misit Mentezinum, vobis praedicatorem? Nolite ( Andabatarum more) errare
vanis expectationibus: Et vos et ille confitemini, tempus illud vestrae
restitutionis latere, imo et populum latere, donec iste dies venerit. Et creed
mihi uterque latebit, donec veneritis in tenebras exteriores: and si non mihi,
saltem credit genti vestrae, and Prophetis vestris) nisi resipiscatis et
agnoscatis vosmet crucifixores domini Jesus Christi. Scrutamini enim vos ipsos
in his quae manifesta sunt: Habetis vos ad unum omnes in corporibus vestris
fluxu^ sanguinis, an non? Nonne dicunt Itali se prius Judaeum, naribus sentire
quam oculis? Majores vestri protulerunt haec verba, sanguis ejus super nos et
super filios nostros? Nonne impleta fuit isthaec Prophetia in ruina vestri
Templi, et dispersionibus reliquiarum vestrae gentis? Quae signa manifestiora,
quas clariores Prophetias quaeritis? Oh fratres, nolite Caecutire de industria.

Libenter Concederem vobis (quod ad me attinet) inter nos et commorandi et
adorandi loca; sed non sacrificandi! hoc enim esset negare Adonai, Christum
nostrum: sicut docuit vestras Paulus. Ut and licebit vobis, vetus Testamentum
interpretari, imo and ^hristianis vos audire; dummodo vos mutuo nostris
auscultabitis: Nec desunt nobis viri in Linguis Orientatalibus valde docti, et
eorum nonnulli adeo egeni and indigentes ut (quod and vos deceret) vestram
gentem operis mercedem pensuram, docerent eas.

Sed quaeso vos, nolite ante adventum Messiae Regum ruinam conari; conatus enim
perdifficilis erit in Reges Papistas, sin autem molire hoc placet contra Reges
Protestantium no^ vobis, sed Papistis, non Hierusolymis, sed Romae, triumpha^
parabitis.

Cogitavi imbecillitatem vobis, vestrorum argumentorum proposuisse, necnon
vanitatem vestrae spei, and expectationis Monarchae Terrastris, and Messiae.
Sed malim vos promptos, attentioni probationis nostrae fidei and ejusdem
demonstrationibus habere, and in auxilium populi vestri hac in re, optarem,
reve. rendum nostrum D. Hammondum libellum suum de justitia sive equitate
Christianae Religionis, latino sermon donaret.

Intentionem tuam de continuatione Historae vestratis Josephi, valde probo.
vide p. 44, 45 etc. c. 16.

Hic autem meis finem imposuisse mihimet proposui, tuorum abunde satur
scriptorum tricis, and nugis. Sed revera adeo amore vestri, and conversionis
vestrae cupidus sum; ut prorsus dicam, nos Christianos majori honor gentem
vestram, quam vosipsi prosequimur. Nos enim colimus vestratem, filium Davidis
and Mariae filium Altissimi, vere Deum vere hominem: quem and nos and vos
crucifixum reddidimus per peccata; tametsi actus hujus crucifixionis externus,
propatribus vestris solis ascribitur. Veneramur omnes Prophetas progenitores
vestros, veneramur item Patres nostros in Christo, de gente vestra, Sanctos
scilicet Descipulos, and Apostolos, cujus doctrina, omnes dij fictitij
Ethnicorum eversi sunt: and quorum Martyrio, quod passi sunt, pro fide, and
expectatione Patrum, semen Patri vestro Abrahamo exertum est. Nos enim filij
consurreximus Abrahami fidei, quam fidem nobis, and mundo, nunc praetulimus,
tamdiu, quamdiu ante nos, lex Mosaica a vobis praelata fuit. Et adhuc
praeferimus legem illam Dei aeternam, scilicet Decalogum, et si lex
caeremoniarum per sacrificium illum vnum, ejus qui Sacerdos erat secundum
ordinem Melchisedeci, abrogata sit. Quos autem habetis vos Sacerdotes ordinis
Aaronici? Quaerendi sunt vobis apud Indeos, aut ubi gentium nescitis! Sit
Antonius vester deductor in antrum Montezini, apud D. Quixotum. Sed mi frater;
etsi plura satis super hac re ex veteri Testamento, and libro Psalmorum possim
dicere, tamen haec doctioribus nostris qui Linguas Orientales callent,
relinquenda censeo.

Ac nunc redeo, ad parts quae mea proprie intersunt, praeparationes (scilicet)
ad vestri admissionem in Angliam. Quibus (si ita Parliamento visum fuerit)
cautiones, and Regulas dabo.

Primum hic haereo: utrum venia circumcisioni vestrae inter nos concedenda sit,
necne? si daremus enim hanc vobis, nos ipsi negaremus Christum venisse. Neque
vobis necessario illa semper incumbit; per quadraginta annos in eremo omissa
fuit: ut and per longa temporum spatia in captivitatibus vestris. Et sane vos,
nihil aliud agitis, nisi Christum iterum recrucifigere dum negatis ipsum
Messiam esse. Quod item faciunt fratres vestri Turcae.

Quaero igitur number differetis circum cisiones vestras donec inter nos
commorabitis? Hoc tantum petimus, hujus intermissionem, donec adveniat Messiah
cum terrestri suo regno; quod brevi futurum nonnulli evobis audacter dicitis.

Instar hujus hanc vobis indulgeri placet immunitatem, fine vi aut pana, vos et
liberi vestri, ut Baptismo carere possitis. Cujus carentiam vobis fraudi esse
prorsus abominamur. Si qui autem e vobis paenitentiam agetis, et credetis (i)
fidem nostram amplexi fueritis, honor et beneficio Baptismi, dignemini. Siqui
autem per Apostasiam, se subduxerint, graviter plectendi sunto.

Hoc autem vobis innotuisse placebit, Tabularium Archivum vulgo the Rolls in
angiporto Cancellariae Hospitium olim Iudaeorum conversorum fuisse. Et pluribus
conversis amodo plura Collegia si necesse sit instruemus

Minores Iudaei Christiani defuncti haeredes in ass erunt, seu plenam ejus rem
possidebunt, Qui Judaeus tantum (hac est) non conversus, moritur, tertiam
tantum partem rei suae posteris relinquet: alteram reipublicae: postremam
denique in alimonium supradictorum Collegiorum.

Ad introitum vestrum per examen lustrari placet, and in catalogum digerere
nomina circumcisorum antehac, and Album servari vbi denuo circumcidendorum
nomina scribantur. Quod siqui neglexerint and morte and confiscatione
mulctabuntur.

Singulis quoque annis Jnquisitionem fieri placet, de liberis maribus,
circumcisi sint necne? si ita! number res peracta fuerit in Anglia, aut locis quae
sunt Anglicanae ditionis? and inde pars altera totius rei parentis infiscum eat.

Siquis Judaeus praesumeret circumcidere Christianum, ubicunque gentium factum
fuerit scelus hoc, paenas mortis and confiscationis luito.

Vtriusque sexus Judaei etiam nondum conversi ad conciones Christianorum,
venire si placet, possint, modo illic honest and been se gesserint. Semel
autemin anno jubeantur, imo cogantur convenire, viz. Die Passionis dominicae
quando nomina virorum, faeminarum and liberorum scribentur in Album, vt and
nomina conversorum.

Duplex vectigal been solvere possint, and hi et in Anglia postnati ante
conversionem, scilicet post autem simplex soluturi Fratrics, nullas and
Sodali^ia nulla habebunt sine speciali permissu and licentia, and habitare and
commercia tractare quibuslibet Angliae locis licebit.

Corpora quod ajunt Communia nullis nisi conversis Judaeis concedenda sint and
omnes in communi proprios alant pauperes.

Nullus Iudaeus ducet Christianam, nullus Chrisflianus Judaea^ ante
conversionem, nec vicissim, nubert.

Si molientur quenquam e suagente in regem sibi constituere, mortis and
confiscationis poenas luant quicunque hujus criminis rei sunt.

Si foedera ferient cum Annabaptistis aut Aequifaratoribus Imperatorem, aut
(...) constituere similem Joanni Lugdunensi, aut qualis crat Knipperdolling,
mortis and confiscationis paenas subeunto.

Omnibus caeteris teriae legibus se subdant, ijs item legibus quas placebit
Parlamento addere, aut quibus detrahere, pro eorum placitis in ordine ad
Judaeorum temperationem.

Nunc autem frater Manasse, priu quam tibi valedicam, hoc unum addere liceat,
Probe nosti aetatem Mundi usque adhuc. Quidam computant duo millia annorum ante
legem latam: duo millia sub lege, and mill sexcentos quinqu aginta a Christo
nato. Hic annus est Iubilaeus Sabathum nunc expecta aeternitatis Fieri potest
mundum per sex millia annorum non ducraturum esse A mundi Creatione anni 5410.
secundu^ aeram tuam praetericrunt. Quis locus igitur, milleannis terrestri
Messiae regno? Libetaudire narrationem nuperrime receptam e meliore, uti spero,
origin, quam illa tua Montezint? haec est.

Quidam vestras Rabbimus jam moribundus suos sibi advocatos (inter Belgas non
multis abhinc annis) sic alloquitur. Valde diu expectavimus nostrum Messiam;
and si non venerit ante annos 1650. aut 51. peractos, amplecti vobis suadeo
Christianorum Messiam necesse est ut ipse sit (...). Et ante ejus Thronum,
procul dubio, omnes Protestantium Reges Coronas suas mittere aut abjicere
parati erunt. Consule, si placet, aliquot Psalmos, quorum nonnullos tibi
indigitabo, viz. Psalm. 65. v. 2. 5. 7. 8. 13. Psalm. 66. v. 1, 2, 3, 6. Psalm.
67. per totum Psalm. 68. Hujus diei matutinis lectionibus proportionatum, v. 1.
Fxurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici ejus, and fugiant qui oderunt eum, a
facie ejus, etc. 2.3.4 5.6.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. Ascendisti in altum,
cepisti captivitatem, accepisti dona in hominibus; etenim non credentes,
inhabitare Dominum Deum, etc. ver. 19 20.21.22.23.27. Ibi Benjamin parvus, and
dominatur little; Principes Jehudae, and caetus eorum: Principes Zebulunis,
Principes Naphthali. Attend ut primus Rex suit e Tribu Benjamin; Attend item
quot Tribus revertentur. v. 28.29.30.31.32.33.34. Tribuite robur Deo, cujus
excellentia est super Israelem, and cujus robur in superioribus nubibus. Quid
amplius aniliter desipitis circa ejus in terris temporale regnum. Consule Psalm.
80. v. 14. Deus exercituum, revertere jam, intuere e caelis, and respice, ac
visita vitem hanc. ver. 15. Et surculum quem plantaverat dextra tua; idque
propter filium quem fortificasti tibi. ver. 18. Adsit manus tua viro dextrae
tuae, filio hominis quem fortificasti tibi.

Dicunt Rabbini duos esse, qui Messiae nomen subeunt; alterum Christianum, quem
vocant Ben Joseph; alterum quem ipsi expectant Messiam, Ben David. Nonne noster
fuit etiam Ben David? Consule Genealogias secundum Matthaeum, and Lucam;
posteriori enim invenies Mariae parentelam, quae post Josephum conjugem,
proxima erat haeres.

Ecce virgo concepit, and peperit filium! Hic erat ille Ramus and vir dextra
Dei; cui nomen erat Admirabilis, and Immanuel. Saepius etiam a spiritibus
propheticis quos sanavit nominatus filius Davidis dum vixit in terris. Imo ipsi
Daemones hunc confitentur filium Davidis, and querebantur illum venisse ante
tempus in little cruciatum.

Mira plane erat illa productio. Spiritus Dei obumbravit hanc virginem, etc.
Quidni autem redderet illam sic gravidam, ut etiam reddidit abyssum primo
Geneseos, ver. 2. Terra erat inanis and vacua, and ^enebrae erant super faciem
abyssi, and spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas. Ecce tibi tertia S.S.
Trinitatis persona. Et dixit Deus, fiat lux, and facta est lux. Et quomodo ex
hac incubatione lux producebatur, eodem modo ex hac etiam obumbratione,
Salvator noster Christus vera and aeterna lux concipiebatur de Sipirt^ Sancto
in forma hominis. Qui^ amplius moramini aut desideratis?

Sanctae and individuae Trinitati Gloria.
Gloria Deo in excelsis, and in Terra Pax, etc.
Errata.
Page 1. l. 1 for your r. the, p. 8. l. 7. for look r look. p. 9. l. 10 for
pertition r. patition p. 13. l. 4. for eternal r external. p. 19. l. 17. for
and he. r. and if he. p. 20. l. 14. dele a. p. 23. l. 1. dele See Sylex etc.
and add l. 12.

FINIS.

