SOME PAPERS OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF SCOTLAND, Given in lately to the Houses of
PARLIAMENT, Concerning the PROPOSITIONS OF Peace.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling at the sign of the Kings Head in
Paul's Churchyard. April 11. 1646.

To the Reader.
Judicious and good Reader,
THe drawing up of Propositions for Peace to be sent unto the King, for a long
time has taken up the thoughts and pains of those who sit at the stern and
helm of affairs. The delay of sending the Propositions, of late has busied the
phancies and tongues of most men, who do make it at this time the ordinary
Theme of their discourses, which every one frames right or wrong as he is
carried by interest, but chiefly and mainly as he is lead by information,
reasoning to and fro, he lays the cause of the thus delaying to send
Propositions to His Majesty, upon those whom he thinks and gives out to be the
let.

Now, seeing the great mistake of many well-minded men in this Point, who
taking things at the second hand, without being able to dive to the bottom and
ground of affairs, shut at rovers and do not attain the mark; For the better
information of all those who love Truth; and that faithful men with constancy
to the Principles whereunto we are all sworn by our solemn Covenant, and tied
to by diverse Treaties, Agreements, and Results, after so many debates,
conferences, and mature deliberation, be no more thus misunderstod, as they are
by some, namely by those who are so much concerned to know the truth; and
consequently to reject the sinistrous reports, raised and spread abroad against
honesty, integrity, with constant faithfulness to the glory of God and good of
his People: I having clearly understood from very good intelligence the cause
in hand, do set it down here truly and simply as it is revera, without any
disguisement by stating the question otherwise then it is indeed, or by
coloring it with affected words; which I here present unto thee, judicious
Reader, heartily for thy satisfaction; with the Copy of three Papers given into
the Houses of Parliament by the Commissioners of Scotland, which the last day
fell into my hands; I pray thee to take in good part this weak expression for
the public good from him who constantly prays for the welfare of Jerusalem,
and wishes thee to live in it happily and prosperously,

Adieu.
The state of the Question concerning the Propositions of Peace.
THe Commissioners of Scotland have for nine Months, ever since the twentieth
of June last, pressed the sending of the former Propositions agreed upon
between the Kingdoms, presented to the King at Oxford, and whereof the most
material were afterward debated upon at Vxbridge.

The Houses of Parliament upon the sixth of August last, in answer to the
Scottish Commissioners declare, That Propositions shall be sent speedily, but
that they intend to make some alterations.

After nine Months the Houses deliver to the Scots Commissioners upon the last
of February some new Propositions.

The Commissioners of Scotland upon the 16. of Marchs deliver in their Answer
to these Propositions, wherein they observe, that all the omissions, additions,
or alteration made in the former Propositions, are in those things which
concern the joint interest and union of the Kingdoms.

Upon the 26. of March the Houses appoint a Committee to debate with the
Scottish Commissioners concerning the differences, which are chiefly these:

1 Concerning Religion; The Houses make a general Proposition, desiring the
King to assent to what they have, or shall agree upon concerning Reformation of
Religion, and concerning Uniformity in Religion, as the two Kingdoms shall
agree.

The Commissioners desire to know the particulars, that after so long
consultation of the Divines of both Kingdoms, they may with knowledge and
assurance consent to that Proposition; it was answered, the Houses had not
resolved what particulars to send: And the Commissioners of Scotland deny to
consent till they be acquainted with the Particulars, and take them into
consideration.

2 Concerning the Militia, The Commissioners desire the former Proposition
agreed upon between the Kingdoms, and debated at Vxbridge to be sent,
especially because it does nearly unite the Kingdoms.

The Houses in their new Propositions will have the Militia of the Kingdoms
settled severally, each Kingdom by it self apart.

The Commissioners desire such a conjunction at least, as both may upon
occasion join together for suppressing insurrections, and opposing foreign
invasions.

The Houses will have the Militia settled in themselves from time to time
without any limitation, and not only the King, but his Posterity and the Crown
excluded in time coming.

The Commissioners conceive it necessary, that for the security of the
Kingdoms the Militia should be so settled as the King may have no power to make
these Kingdoms twice miserable, but that this being a case extraordinary, it
should only be for a time; and as upon the one part, they think it most
dangerous, that the Militia should after expiration of that time be settled in
the King alone, so they hold it very unsafe, That the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom should be altered, and the Crown for ever excluded from all interest
and right whatsoever; but after expiration of such a time as shall be agreed
upon, the ordering of the Militia may be by King and Parliament, according to
the many Declarations of both Kingdoms, See Collection of Remonst. page 207,
208. 728, 729, 730. etc.
and particularly of the Houses of Parliament, who affirm it to be by the
constitution and fundamental Laws of the Kingdom in King and Parliament
together, and only in cases extraordinary, when the King fails in his Duty,
the Parliament alone to provide for the security of the Kingdom.

3 Concerning Ireland; The Houses allege, that the trans-actions between the
Kingdoms made at Edinburgh, 28. November 1643. are no Treaty.

The Commissioners make it appear that it is a Treaty, for that the English
Commissioners had power to Treat, agree, and conclude; Articles are drawn up
and agreed unto, which the Houses ratify and confirm in their Votes of the
ninth of March, and eleaventh of April, 1643. In the same Votcs calling it a
Treaty: And Scotland performs their part of the Treaty, makes their Army stay
and advance to them a hundredth thousand pounds sterling, at the desire of
England, who then because of their low condition were not able to send them any
releife; and now the Houses make question to perform their part of the Treaty
to Scotland.

Lastly, The difference is concerning four Propositions formerly agreed upon
between the Kingdoms, and omitted by the Houses in their new Propositions.
They are:

1. The Proposition that Peace and War shall not be made without consent of
both Kingdoms. 2. For education of the Kings Children by consent of both
Kingdoms 3. For disbanding the Armies by consent of both Kingdoms. 4. For an
Act of oblivion by consent of both.

The Commissioners desire, that either the Propositions concerning Religion,
the Militia, and Ireland, be sent alone as was done at Vxbridge, or if more be
sent, That these Propositions which concern the joint interest of both
Kingdoms may also be sent when others of less moment are sent.

When the Committee of both Houses, and the Commissioners had debated upon all
these differences, the Commissioners expected that both should have joined
their endeavors to find out expedients for removing these differences, and so
come to a speedy agreement. But the Committee of both Houses, Declared they had
no power to consent to the alteration of the least circumstance, though they
were convinced in reason; whereupon the Commissioners gave in a Paper, desiring
the Houses to enlarge the power of the Committee.

Some Papers of the Commissioners of Scotland, given in lately to the Houses of
PARLIAMENT: Concerning the Propositions of Peace.
OUr earnest desires to have Religion settled in this Kingdom according to the
Covenant, and to have both Kingdoms delivered from their present troubles and
pressures, and established in a firm and happy peace, that we our selves and
our Army might return to our own Native Country with comfort and contentment;
moved us these nine Months past often and earnestly to press, That the
Propositions formerly agreed upon by the two Kingdoms might be sent to his
Majesty, and the Answer of the Honorable Houses seven months sithence;
showing their resolution to send Propositions to his Majesty for such a Peace,
has moved us extremely to long for them. Upon the 28. of February we received
some of the Propositions, which your Lordships desire to be sent, and in answer
to our Paper of the second of this instant March, expressing our desire to know
whether these were all the Propositions desired to be sent, or if we were to
expect any other. It was returned upon the fourth of March, that these were
all, except such as concern Delinquents, and the City, which were speedily to
be delivered unto us.

In the Propositions which we have received we cannot but observe, That the
most material additions, omissions, and alterations as they are expressed in
the Paper wherein the difference consists, betwixt these and the Propositions
formerly agreed upon, do trench upon the joint interest of both Kingdoms, and
tend to the leusing of the Bonds, and weakening of the sinews of our happy
Union: which were not only notable Pledges and Evidences of reciprocal
kindness for the time, to the discouragement of the common Enemy, but were
also powerful means for conserving and perpetuating our common Peace, and
Brotherly Amity for all Generations to come, to the dispairing of all our
Enemies, ever to prevail by their plots or attempts against these so nearly
and firmly united Kingdoms. This could not but be a matter of resentment and
unspeakeable grief unto us, and to the Kingdom of Scotland, had we not
grounds of assurance of the intention of both Houses to the contrary; both from
the inviolable League and Covenant, wherein we have all sworn, to endeavor
that thesc Kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
posterity, and from their Letter of the 13. of November, 1645. to the
Parliament of Scotland, expressing their desire of a nearer union, and
conjunction between the Kingdoms: We come therefore to the particular
consideration of the Propositions. We do first of all desire, That the
Preface, Title, and conclusion of the Propositions may be the same as formerly,
or to that sense.

In the first Article we desire these words [the Parliament of that Kingdome]
to be added after these words [convention of Estates in Scotland] and we do
agree to the first, second, third, and fourth Propositions.

To the fifth and sixth Propositions, We desire to see what the Houses have
already agreed upon concerning Religion, and then we shall give in our Answer
about these Propositions.

To the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Propositions we do agree, the clause set
down in the 11. Article of the former Propositions, and omitted in these,
concerning the ratifying the Acts of the Convention of Estates and Parliament
of Scotland, being added to the 12. Proposition.

The Treaty at Edinburgh the 28. of Nov. 1643. which was comprehended in the
former Proposition agreed upon between the Kingdoms, is excluded by these
words in this new 13. Proposition [And whereunto they are obliged by the
afaresaid Treaties] for the Kingdoms were not obliged by any of the former
Treaties to make a subsequent Treaty, and therefore we desire the said Treaty
of the 28. of Nov. 1643. together with the Ordinances of the 9. of March, and
the 11. of April, ratifying the same, may be expressed in the Proposition, for
which we offer the Reasons following:

The Commissioners of the Parliament of England received particular
instructions from the two Houses to treat with the Kingdom of Scotland,
concerning the maintenance of the Scottish Army in Ireland, and ordering
thereof in such manner as might best conduce to the prosecution of that War
according to the ends expressed in the Covenant. And by their instructions
communicated to the Convention of Estates of Scotland, according to the
direction of the Houses, they are expressly authorized to settle upon some
course with the Kingdom of Scotland, to manage the War by the joint advice of
the Committees of both Kingdoms, and to prevent the evils and mischiefs that
else might fall out for want of the same.

According to these instructions seven Articles are mutually agreed upon at
Edinburgh the 28. of November. 1643. by a Committee of both Kingdoms, after
advising with the Agents and Officers sent from the Scottish Army, and serious
debates, and mature deliberation upon the whole matter between the Committees
of both Kingdoms, as is acknowledged in the preface of the Treaty.

In the fourth Article of that Treaty two things are agreed on: 1. That he who
does or shall command in chief over the Scottish Army, by joint consent of both
Kingdoms, shall also command the rest of the British Forces in Ireland. 2. For
the managing of that War, and prosecuting the ends expressed in the Covenant,
that the same be done by joint advice with the Committees of both Kingdoms.

These Articles being agreed upon were transmitted to the Houses of Parliament,
and six of them ratified and approved in the Votes of both Houses of the ninth
of March, and eleaventh of April.

In the Votes of the ninth of March, the fourth Article concerning the Command
in chief, and the managing of the War, with the joint advice of both
Kingdoms, is verbatim ratified by the Houses, and was presented at Vxbridge to
be confirmed by the King.

The Commissioners of Scotland having received instructions from the Estates of
Parliament for the perfecting of this Treaty, and the two Houses having
referred the same to the consideration of the Committee of both Kingdoms, After
a free debate, and full deliberation the third and fourth Articles of the
Treaty at Edinburgh were agreed upon and perfected by them, and reported to
both Houses, who ratified and approved the same in their votes of the 11th of
April.

Concerning the command in chief, these words were agreed upon, That the Earl
of Leven Lord General of the Scottish forces in Ireland being now by the votes
of both houses agreed to be commander in chief over all the forces, as well
British as Scotts, according to the fourth Article of the result of the
Committee of both kingdoms passed both houses, be desired with all convenient
speed by the advice of the said Committees, to nominate and appoint a Commander
in chief under his Excellency over the said forces to reside with them upon
the place.

Concerning the managing of the war, it is agreed upon in these words, That
Committees be nominated and appointed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms of
such numbers and qualities as shall be by them agreed on, to be sent with all
convenient speed to reside with the said forces, and enabled with full and
ample instructions by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, for regulating of the
said forces, and the better carrying on of that war. And both these Articles
were delivered in at the Treaty at Uxbridge, and desired to be confirmed.

That according to these Articles, Committees are now in Ireland from both
Kingdoms for mannaging of the war.

That these Articles of the 28 of November. 1643. are likewise ratified in the
Parliament of Scotland, and registered as a Treaty.

That the houses of Parliament in their votes of the 9 of March do in
approbation of the sixth Article acknowledge it to be a Treaty.

That the votes of the 9 of March by direction of the houses were delivered
unto us, as their consent to the Articles of the said Treaty of the 28 of
November, and the houses in their Letter of the 25 of May did acquaint the
Parliament of Scotland that they had ratified and confirmed the several
Treaties made and agreed between their Commissioners, and the Convention of
Estates of Scotland: And that it was their desire the same might be done by the
Parliament of Scotland, which they did accordingly.

That these Articles were agreed upon between the Kingdoms when the
Parliaments Army in Munster revolted from them, and when the Scottish Army in
Vlster, had sent agents to the Convention of Estates of Scotland to declare,
that by reason of their extreme wants and sufferings occasioned by the want of
their pay and necessary maintenance, due by the Parliament of England, they
were resolved to leave that Kingdom, whereby it would have been wholly lost to
the Parliament of England, if the Kingdom of Scotland had not interposed, and
by taxing great sums of money upon the Kingdom of Scotland, and levying
provisions, had raised considerable supplies, and sent them over for the
present subsistence of the Scottish Army, until the Parliament of England
should be able to send them further supplies; which both Houses do acknowledge
in their said Letter of the 25 of May to the Parliament of Scotland, and do
return their hearty thanks to the Kingdom of Scotland, for their care of that
Army, and the great charge they have been at for their relief with provisions
and money for their necessary subsistence.

Those Articles being treated upon by Committees of both Kingdoms, both in
Scotland and England, being ratified by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and
by both acknowledged to be a Treaty; presented with the Propositions of peace,
and debated at Vxbridge, and having as much if not more of the formalities of a
Treaty then the first Treaty concerning the sending of the Scottish Army into
Ireland: we desire this Treaty may be inserted with the other Treaties in this
Proposition, it being most reasonable the Treaty made and conditions agreed on
for the continuance of that starved Army in Ireland, should be of as great
force and as well observed, as the Treaty made for sending them over into
Ireland.

As to the former part of the 14 Proposition, we desire it may stand as
formerly, for the reasons above expressed: And as to the later part now added,
we desire that all the Articles concerning the settling of Religion in this
Kingdom may be extended to Ireland, according to the Covenant.

The 15 Proposition concerning Delinquents we have not received.

To the 16 and 17 Propositions we do agree.

In the 18 Proposition, we find so material differences from that which was
formerly agreed upon concerning the Militia, as may be matter of long debate
what may be most conducible to the security of both Kingdoms, and so retard
the sending of the Propositions and loose the present opportunity of obtaining
his Majesty's consent before he be engaged in some other design which may be a
ruin to himself, and a matter of new trouble to these Kingdoms.

We desire it may be considered, that the former Propositions, according to the
interest of both Kingdoms, did settle a power in Commissioners of both
Kingdoms for resisting all foraigne invasions, and for suppressing of all
forces raised within either of the said Kingdoms, to the disturbance of their
peace; By which there was no place left either to arbitrary power, or to any
mistake or jealousy that could be raised or fomented between the Kingdoms; or
to any project of Incendiaries, to divide the King from any of his Kingdoms,
or one Kingdom from another. And we see no reason why that which at the
framing of these Propositions, was esteemed as a great service and a firm
foundation of unity and mutual confidence betwixt the Kingdoms, should now be
altered, the reasons for preventing thereof being as strong as ever. And this
new Proposition contains nothing that may prevent those so great and obvious
inconveniences, but seems rather to argue a diffidence and jealousy to the
weakening of that mutual confidence which was laid by the former Propositions.

Further, this new Proposition does not provide how the Militia shall be
ordered and disposed in the Intervals of Parliament, although in another case
by the 21 Proposition concerning the nomination of the Deputy or chief
Governor of Ireland the Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, and other
Officers and ministers of England and Ireland, it is provided that in the
Intervals of Parliament they shall be nominated by a Committee of Parliament.
And if it be intended that in like manner the Militia be ordered in the
intervals of Parliament by a Committee of Parliament, there is no objection can
be made against the former Proposition, for settling the Militia in
Commissioners, which will not be as full against settling thereof in a
Committee, for by the former Propositions the Commissioners were alterable from
time to time by the Houses, and to receive and observe their directions and
instructions.

We conceive also, as the honorable Houses upon consideration of the manifold
troubles and distractions in these times, have wisely and necessarily resolved
for the safety and security of these Kingdoms, so to settle the Militia, as the
King although he were willing be not able by involving them again into a bloody
war, to make them twice miserable wherein we are ready most heartily to
concur: So do we think, it is not their intention, to divest the King his
posterity and Crown for all time coming, of all power, right, and interest in
the matter of Militia, so as although they be never so willing to follow the advice of their Parliaments, yet they shall for ever be incapable, and in no
time coming be admitted to join with the Parliaments, for ressisting their
enemies, and protecting their Subjects; the apprehension whereof, may prolong
the Kings answer and hinder his consent, and (as may easily be collected from
the debates at Vxbridg) may be interpreted to be a fundamental alteration of
the Government, contrary to the resolutions and declarations of both Kingdoms,
and not so agreeable to the Covenant; may be made use of by our adversaries,
for such an occasion of quarrelling, as they never had before, may be made a
mean to bring the common cause and our carriage into contempt, and used by our
enemies as a motive for provoking foreigne Princes and States to engage in a
war against us; both parts were provided for in the former Proposition upon the
one part the exercise and execution of the Militia was not to be in the power
of the King, yet upon the other part were the Commissioners in whose hands it
was to be trusted, to have their Commission from King and Parliament, and it
was condescended upon at Vxbridge, that the time should be limited to seven
years, and after expiration of that term to be settled and exercised in such
manner as his Majesty and the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respective should
think fit, but by this new Proposition the whole power is to be settled in the
two houses of Parliament, and the Crown altogether excluded from all interest
in the Militia for ever, which therefore requires a new consideration.

There is another thing which we profess does very much affect us, that whereas
in the large Treaty of Peace, a Commission for preservation of the peace then
settled between the kingdoms was judged most necessary, and was mutually agreed
upon, and accordingly in pursuance thereof, Commissioners were appointed by the
Parliament of Scotland, to whom the Houses of Parliament upon several occasions
made their addresses to good purpose, and whereas in the former Propositions,
several Articles were set down with mutual consent for conserving the peace,
firmly and inviolably for all time to come, yet in this new Proposition
although the danger be no less, and the necessity no less urgent, there is
not so much as mention made of any mean to be used or course to be taken for
conserving the peace between the Kingdoms, and betwixt the King and either of
them, but all passed in silence; All which necessary considerations we offer to
the wisdom of the honorable Houses, that they may continue in their
resolution to send the former Propositions as they were proposed at Vxbridge,
which will be free of debate, are more likely to be obtained of the Kings
Majesty, and will serve more for the peace and good correspondence of the
Kindomes, especially that the conservation of peace for the future may be
provided for.

To the 19. and 20. Propositions we do agree.

To the 21. Proposition we do agree with this addition.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland concerning the nomination of the Lords
of the Privy Council, Lords of Session, and Exchequer Officers of State and
Justice General, in such manner as the Estates in Parliament shall think fit.

The Proposition concerning the education, marriage, and choosing of the Tutors
and Governors of the Kings children by consent of both Kingdoms, is omitted
in these new Propositions.

The Proposition concerning the making of peace or war with foreigne Princes
and States, with advice and consent of both Kingdoms, is also omitted in these
Propositions.

The Proposition concerning the disbanding the Armies by consent of both
Kingdoms is likewise omitted.

The Proposition for passing an act of oblivion in the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms is omitted.

We desire that the Proposition concerning the City of London, as also the
Propositions concerning Delinquents, may be speedily delivered unto us that
they may be dispatched with the rest.

Upon the whole matter, If the houses of Parliament shall think fit for the
present, to send only the three Propositions, concerning Religion, the Militia,
and Ireland, as they were proposed at Vxbridge we do agree. But if they think
fit that more Propositions be sent at this time, we do desire that all the
Propositions which concern the joint interest of both Kingdoms, and are
omitted in the new Propositions, may be sent likewise, although we are of the
judgment that every particular, and circumstance of the Propositions, is not
of so great importance to these Kingdoms as peace and war should depend
thereupon.

Having thus freely in such brotherly manner as the matter of peace does
require expressed our sense of the Propositions delivered unto us; if there be
any mistake on our part, or if there be any point wherein the honorable Houses
are not satisfied, we are most willing and ready to give and receive all
brotherly satisfaction, by conference or otherwise in such manner as shall be
judgeed most behovefull and expeditious, and to give testimony of our true and
earnest desires, and readiness to concur with the honorable Houses in all
such things as upon a friendly debate, shall be found conduceable for
procuring, settling and propagating such a peace, as we all desire for our
common happiness.

March, 16. 1646.

It is not unknown to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, how long a time we
have waited here in patience and silence for the settling of Church Government
according to the Covenant, and we our selves know (for which we have many
witnesses, at home in the Church of Scotland) how zealous we have been of the
honor of the Parliament in this matter; what has been our care and industry
to persuade and assure, that although hope deferred might make the hearts of
many to faint, yet when the desire should come, it would be a tree of life; And
that we were not to judge of the model of Church Government in the Church of
England, and of uniformity with the Church of Scotland, by some praevious and
particular Ordinances of Parliament which were but parts of the building, but
were to expect the last Ordinance, which would supply the defects of the
former, and by rearing up the whole house in proportion and beauty, would in
the end give to every judicious eye and zealous heart a full satisfaction. We
do also with thankfulness acknowledge and remember the zeal of the
honorable Houses, in removing the Book of Common Prayer, in abolishing
Episcopal government, and in other parts of of Reformation, and that in the
time of their greatest troubles and dangers, which makes their work the more
acceptable to God and all good men; Yet are we at this time necessitated by our
Covenant, our common interest, and public trust, to make remonstrance of two
things most material and of greatest consequence: One is, that through the
long delay of the settling of the true Government of the Church, Heresies and
Sects are so multiplied, and Schism has so much prevailed, that if there be
not in time a powerful remedy provided, this Church after so many miseries of a
bloody and long lasting War, will be in worse case then the former was, from
which it was taken for a great happiness to be delivered; And (...) Church of
Scotland, after their many sufferings in this Kingdom and at home, in greater
danger then it was in from the Prelates here, whose usurpation was the
beginning of all our calamities and vexation.

The Honorable Houses may be pleased to call to mind, that in the large
Treaty of the date March 10. 1641; the Commissioners of Scotland, from the
sense of the troubles of that Church, arising from the Prelates of the Church
of England, did by many Arguments press Unity in Religion, and Uniformity of
Church Government, in the three Kingdoms, Unto which from the King and
Parliament jointly, a comfortable and hopeful answer was returned for obtaining
their desire. Thereafter in the year 1642, the General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland, seconded and assisted by the Lords of Secret Council, Did upon the
same grounds renew the same desire, And received from the Parliament of
England, not only a Profession of their great contentment in the motion
proposed, with many thanks, But also a large approbation of the motives upon
which it was urged, which were; The more strict Union of both Kingdoms; More
safe, easy, and comfortable Government of his Majesty, And both to himself and
people more free communion in all holy exercise and duties of Worship; More
constant security of Religion against the bloody practices of Papists and
deceitful Errors of other Sectaries; More profitable use of the Ministry, in
drawing them from unpleasant and unprofitable Controversies, to the pressing of
Mortification, and to Treatises of true Piety and Practical Divinity; The
making of way to the relief and deliverance of the poor afflicted Churches
abroad, etc. All which are expressed in their Declaration and Resolution, in
answer to the Declaration of the General Assembly, Together with a sad
Complaint, that the miserable Estate of this Church and Kingdom, was not able
to endure any longer delay, And a desire that some godly and learned Divines
might be sent from the Church of Scotland, whereby the so-much-desired Unity
and Uniformity might be obtained. In the end, the mutual and joint desires of
both Kingdoms were concluded, and crowned with a Solemn League and Covenant,
now translated in other Tongues, and known thorowout all Christendom; which was
taken, as for other good ends, so for endeavoring the nearest Conjunction and
Uniformity in Religion and Church Government, and the extirpation of Heresy
and Schism. All which considered, we may be bold to say without Preface or
Apology (which about the like purpose the Houses of Parliament in that their
Declaration judged unnecessary) that it would be the sin and shame of the
Church of England, And the sorrow of all the Reformed Churches, particularly of
the Church of Scotland, if after so many preparations, and so Solemn League and
Covenant is entered into, for endeavoring the nearest Conjunction and
Uniformity in Religion and Church-Goverhment, and the extirpation of Heresy
and Schism; Not only all sorts of Blasphemies, Heresies and Sects which are
now multiplied, and Liberty of conscience which is pleaded for, should have
place; But Unity and Uniformity in Religion, which is so much preached and
written against, should be slighted, and the Covenant it self wrested and
perverted to speak that which it never intended, and which did not enter into
any man's mind in the beginning, Such a violence as the holy Scripture it self
has suffered from perverse and heretical spirits; And this Church after so
long a time further from Uniformity amongst themselves and with other Reformed
Churches, then they were at first when it was judged so necessary. Against
these so dangerous and destructive evils, we earnestly desire the Honorable
Houses to provide effectual remedy, And we pray God so to bless their
endeavors, that the ruin of Religion in both Kingdoms, with the horrid
consequences thereof, which is the work of Satan and his instruments, contrary
to the Work of God and his Servants, may while there is yet hope, be wisely and
speedily prevented.

The other material Point which we desire to offer, is concerning the late
Ordinance of Parliament, 14 March 1645, with the Directions, Aug. 19. 1645;
which in discharge of their duty to God, in pursuance of the Covenant, and in
thankfulness to God for his mercies, They have after long consultation
resolved upon; And wherein there be diverse evidences of the Piety and Wisdom
of the Honorable Houses, For which not only the Church of England, but the
Church of Scotland, and all the Reformed Churches, have cause to bless the
Lord; Yet it being acknowledged, that there may be need of Supplements and
Additions, and happily also of alterations in some things, And it being supposed
that the advice of the Assembly of Divines, wherein we have been assistant, is
had thereunto, And we being entrusted by the Church of Scotland, in matters
that concern them so nearly upon their common Interest: We have taken the
freedom to present our thoughts concerning some particulars contained in the
Ordinance.

First, concerning the Subordination of the Assemblies of the Church to the
Parliament: We make no question but the Parliament is superior to all the
Assemblies of the Church in Place, Dignity, Honor, and earthly power; That
Civil powers are the Vicegerents of God on earth, And that Ministers are only
Servants and Ambassadors; And that the Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae,
and may by his authority compel the Ministers and Assemblies of the Church, to
perform the duties which Christ requires of them: Like as the Ministers are
bound to render a reason and account of their proceedings to the Civil Powers
with all humility and reverence. We do only desire, that without diminution
of, or derogation unto the right and just power of the Parliament or Civil
Magistrate, the expression of Subordination may be altered; Because it may
suppose (contrary to the meaning of the Parliament) that the relation of one
Church-assembly to another, and of the Assemblies to the Parliament, and of
appeals of one to another, are of the same kind and in the same line, as if
the Civil power were not only about matters of the Church and Religion, But
were formally Ecclesiastical, and to be exercised Ecclesiastically; Because
some may interpret it to be such an Headship and Supremacy in the Church, as
sometimes was in the Pope, and has been retained in substance in this Kingdom,
As the fountain of the High Commission, and foundation of other corruptions,
contrary to the judgment of all such as have sought after further Reformation;
And because it is against the Doctrine and Profession of the Reformed Churches,
which next unto the Word of God which is the Rule, are proposed in the Covenant
as the example of Reformation.

Secondly, We desire the Provincial Commissioners for judging of Scandals, may
be taken to further consideration, there being no warrant nor pretense for such
a mixture in Church Government from Jesus Christ, Who has appointed his own
Spiritual Officers, to whom he has committed the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, And to whom the Reformed Churches conceive the judging of offenses, and
the qualification of Communicants, does as properly and incommunicably belong,
as the public Preaching of the Word and Administration of the Sacraments. Nor
can it be supposed, that some few Civil men, having no calling from God, can be
more able to judge of matters of this nature, then the Assemblies of the Church
separated for the work of the Gospel, of which this is no small part. The same
Churches, and particularly the Church of Scotland, which all this time have
been in expectation of great purity and perfection of Reformation in the Church
of England, may have their own jealousies and fears, that in the nature of the
thing, this may be the laying of a new foundation of an High Commission or
Episcopacy, upon which the superstructure afterward, although contrary to the
present public intentions, may be easy, And for a new partition wall to
divide betwixt them and the Church of England, and to make a present Schism and
Separation for renting the bowels of this Church.

Thirdly, Concerning the meeting of the National Assembly, we acknowledge that
the Supreme Magistrate, who is Guardian of both Tables and a Nurce-Father of
the Church, may call a National Assembly, when in his wisdom he shall judge it
necessary; and the Church is with all respect and humility to obey his call,
for the good of Religion, or the Peace of the Kingdoms, when by Religion
disturbed; But it is withal to be acknowledged that this power of the
Magistrate is accumulative or positive, but is not a privative or destructive
power: We therefore move, That the liberty which the Church has from Christ be
not restrained in cases of such extraordinary necessity, as Religion in all
places has been and may be subject unto, the safety of the Church being here
the Supreme Law, and the honorable Houses of Parliament, having their
liberties enlarged, will be willing to enlarge the liberties of Christ and his
Servants. And we desire, that as they have in their wisdom appointed certain
times for the meeting of the inferior Assemblies of the Church, they may also
be pleased to appoint fixed times for the meeting of the National Assembly;
otherwise what shall become of the mal-administration of Provincial Synods, and
of appeals from them to the National Assembly? May not Provincial Synods within
a short time run into contrary opinions and practices, and presume upon a
Provincial Independency to hold them without control? The Christian Churches
in all ages have used this as an ordinary and necessary mean for the Uniform
settling and preserving of Religion and Piety, for censuring and purging out of
heresies and errors, and removing of scandals, schism, tyranny, profaneness,
and such evils as by Divine Providence and prediction must be, and would bring
certain destruction and desolation upon Churches, if by this powerful remedy
they were not cured or prevented.

There be diverse other particulars in the Directions and Ordinance of
Parliament, as the giving of the Sacrament to some persons against the
conscience of the Ministry and Eldership, concerning public Repentance, and
such like, which by conference or otherwise as shall seem good to the wisdom of
the honorable Houses, we would willingly and humbly offer to be examined, and
with small alteration may give great satisfaction, being confident, that our
liberty in what we have expressed, will be taken in good part; Since it is done
by us in pursuance of the ends of the Covenant, wherein as the Parliament and
Church of England are bound to endeavor the preservation of the Government and
Discipline of the Church of Scotland, So are we bound to endeavor the
Reformation of the Discipline and Government in the Church of England and
Ireland according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches; And since we have not for the present, and we hope shall never have
for the future, whatsoever our adversity or prosperity may be, any other
intentions or desires, then we had and proposed in the beginning, when we so
solemnly entered in Covenant.

March 26. 1646.

The honorable Houses having after nine months deliberation framed and upon
the last of February delivered unto us some of the Propositions of Peace; Upon
the 16th of March we returned our Answer, in the close whereof we expressed our
earnest desires and readiness to give and receive all brotherly satisfaction
concerning any differences, and to concur with the Houses in all such things
as upon a friendly debate should be found conduceable for procuring and settling
a happy Peace. Upon consideration whereof, the Houses appointed a Committee to
meet with us upon the 27th of March: but when we expected that upon debate
their Lordships should have concurred with us in finding out expedients for
removing of all differences and reporting of the result to both Houses that we
might come to a speedy agreement, they declared unto us that they had only
power to argue with us, and were so strictly bound up by the Votes of the
Houses punctually to adhere to every Proposition, that they had no power to
consider of the alteration of the least circumstance, though only as
preparatory and in order to the further consideration of the Houses. When we
have seriously thought upon this way of proceeding, the Propositions being the
demands of both Kingdoms to be sent in the name of both as the best means for
settling a well-grounded Peace, and in regard of the joint interest which both
Nations have in the matter and end of the Propositions, and according to the
Treaty made between the Kingdoms, both ought to have their judgment and advice
in agreeing unto, and framing of the Propositions; we cannot but insist upon
our former desire, That the honorable Houses may be pleased to authorize their
Committee to confer with us about the best way and means for removing of our
differences, to propose expedients, and hear what shall be offered by us, and
report the results to the Houses, that so we may come to a speedy agreement,
which (if we shall meet with the like inclinations, as we shall bring with us,
being resolved as in other things so especially in the matter of the Militia
for the full security of this Kingdom as of our own, to give all possible
satisfaction so far as may consist with our Covenant and public Declarations)
we hope may be by Gods assistance in a very short time effectuated. Whereas
otherwise if we shall spend time in drawing up all our differences with the
reasons thereof, to present in writing to the Houses, receive their answers,
and give in replies in like manner, it must needs prove the loss of a great
deal of precious time, may in this conjuncture of affairs be of very dangerous
consequence to both Kingdoms, and will retard the sending of the Propositions,
the dispatch whereof for many reasons, would not be longer delayed, especially
since we have so often declared to the King, that they are speedily to be sent,
and the granting of them will be an effectual means for giving satisfaction to
both Kingdoms. This we have judged necessary for us to offer as the most
expeditious way for attaining those ends, and that we might clear our selves
before God and the world, that we have neglected no mean in our power, which
may procure a speedy Peace, desiring much rather to come to a speedy agreement
by a friendly conference, then with loss of time to reckon up our differences
in writing, although (if the posture of affairs would have admitted of delay)
we should have accounted it our advantage first to have presented to the Houses
in writing the reasons for the difference of our judgment in the Points
controverted.

Concerning the Proposition for Religion; When we were ready to have debated
with the honorable Committee upon the particulars communicated unto us by
direction of the Houses upon that Proposition, their Lordships did acquaint us
that they knew not whether it was the intention of the Houses to send to the
King the Ordinances past both Houses, or to send any other particulars, and
that the Houses themselves were to be consulted herein. And therefore that the
Proposition concerning Religion (the settling whereof should be and is the
chiefest of the desires of both Kingdoms, and for which principally they entered
in solemn League and Covenant) may with as distinct knowledge and as full
assurance of the particulars as is possible, be in Name of both Kingdoms
demanded of the King, and with knowledge granted by His Majesty. And that
according to the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, Truth and Peace may be
established upon a sure foundation for the present and future Generations; our
earnest desire is, that a Committee may be appointed with whom we may join for
considering such Articles of Reformation, and Uniformity of Church Government,
as are already agreed upon by both Houses, that having joint consent, they may
be fit matter for the Proposition of Religion to be sent to the Kings Majesty,
with such other matters of Church government, as we conceive may be concluded
in a day or two, they being long since offered to the Houses, and wherein there
can be little difficulty, and the one and the other may be formed up in a
Method for a Model of Uniformity in Church Government.

Without this agreement in particulars of Church Government, as well as in the
Directory of Worship and Confession of Faith, we are not answerable to our
Covenant; our engagements and all our labors and sufferings are in vain; the
very long consultations of the Divines of both Kingdoms are fruitless; the
great expectation not only of the Church of England, but of all the Reformed
Churches, is frustrated; we shall not know what to answer to the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, which will not be satisfied, nor secured in their Religion
with Generals; nor can we find any ground to satisfy our own reason for
sending a general Proposition of Religion to the King. And therefore we still
desire the honorable Houses in their wisdom to expede us of this difficulty,
That the Propositions may be with all speed brought to a comfortable and
harmonious conclusion.

April 6. 1646.
FINIS.

