ACT Against Tumults and Disorders in Colleges and Universities.
At Edinburgh, the Twenty sixth day of December 1693 years.
THe Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council, Ordains the Act of Privy Council
of the Date the ninth day of March last, against Tumults and other Disorders of
Students in Colleges, whereof the Tenor follows: At Edinburgh, the ninth day
of March, one thousand six hundred and ninety three years. The Lords of Their
Majesty's Privy Council taking to their Consideration the Tumults and Disorders
which frequently fall out amongst, and are committed by the Students within the
several Colleges and Universities within this Kingdom, and having considered
the Report of a Committee of their own Number, appointed in this matter. The
said Lords for preventing of any Tumults or other Disorders in any of the
said Colleges and Universities for the future, Do hereby Authorize and
Empower the several Principals, Regents and Masters of the said Colleges
respective, in case it shall happen hereafter any of the Students of any of the
Colleges abovementioned, to commit, or be guilty of any Tumults, or other
enormous Disorders, against the quiet and good Government of the said
Colleges; to impose and exact Fines from such as they shall find guilty, not
exceeding the respective Rates and Proportions after-mentioned, viz. For a
Nobleman, or his eldest Son, an hundred and fifty Pounds Scots, for Noblemens
younger Sons, or Barons, themselves, or their eldest Sons, an hundred Pounds,
for the younger Sons of Barons or Gentlemen, and for the Sons of Burgesses
fifty Pounds; and for the Sons of Crafts-men or Yeamen fifty Merks Scots, and
that by and attour the Reparation of Damnages: And the said Lords do hereby
require and Command the Magistrates of the respective Burghs, where the said
Colleges are kept, to interpose their Authority to the Sentence of the said
Masters, and to give them their Assistance in executing the same, by
Imprisonment, if need be^; and allows and appoints the Sums that shall be
exacted for Fines, in manner, and for the Causes abovementioned, to be applied
for the use of the several Bibliothecks of the said Colleges. And the said
Lords having reviewed an Act of Council, of the date the first day of February,
one thousand six hundred and seventy two years, prohibiting one College to
receive any Scholar from another College: They do restrict the same to such
Scholars only as have been removed for Misdemeanors, or have fled from
Discipline.

To be Printed and Published at the Mercat-Crosses of Edinburgh, New and Old
Aberdenes, Saint Andrews and Glasgow, and likewise to be publicly Read before
the Students, in the Common Schools, or Publick-Halls of all the Universities
and Colleges within this Kingdom, and printed Copies thereof to be affixed
upon the Doors of the said Universities and Colleges. Extracted by me

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printers to Their
Most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


