NEW ARTICLES FOR PEACE, Delivered by the Kings Majesty to the Commissioners on
Satturday last at the Treating-House in Newport, And the Commissioners Answer.
With his Majesty's Demands touching His coming to LONDON with Honor, Freedom
and Safety, And the passing of an Act of Oblivion to all his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects in all parts of his Realms and Dominions. Whereunto is annexed the
Declaration and Resosolution of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Communality of the
towa of Newcastle in relation to the Kings Majesty and the proceedings of the
Treaty.

Examined by the Original Copies, and Published by authority for General
satisfaction of all his Majesty's loyal Subjects.

crude woodcut of king in castle THE TREATING HOUSE:
THE I WILL OF WAIT



October. 18. LONDON, Printed for I. Jones, 1648.

Several Articles of Agreement for peace, presented by the Kings Majesty, to
the Commissioners upon Satturday last, and the Commissioners Answer thereunto.
Honored SIR,
I Have sent you here enclosed the full and exact proceedings Between His
Majesty and the Commissioners, being in order as follows viz. The King
condescended to the Proposition for public debts on Thursday last, and on
Friday granted the Proposition sor recalling all Honors conferred on any
person by him since 1642 as the Parliament desired.

Yesterday he told the Parliaments Commissioners, that the days allotted for
the Treaty drew toward an end, and therefore he thought it time to present his
paper of desires, which were.

1 That he might come to London with honor, freedom; and safety.

2 That he might have recompense for the years his Revenue has been kept from
him.

3 That there may be an Act of Oblivion, That so the Souldierp under the
Command of the Lord Fait fax may not be justified in what they have (but as
illegal) their astions requiring an Act of Oblivion for Conquering him and his
Cavaliers. Some of the Commissioners were willing to receive these Propsitions
from him, but the major part must needs dissent, because contraty to their
Instructions, having other Propositions to present unto him, especially that
concerning Delinquents, for whom an act of Oblivion could not be granted. The
Parl. Commissioners therefore presented their paper about Delinquents to the
King to which the King desired time till Monday to give Answer; The three
remaining.

^^ Concerning the Court of Wa^ds. 2 Offices and places of Trust. And 3 London
his Majesty will soon yield to.

Thus having sent you the chief heads of the Kings last Papers I remain,

From Newport 16. of October. 1648. Your affectionate Friend R. S.

Humbly shows,
That we cannot but deeply resent, what has been presented to you by the
well-afected in the Southern parts, as concerning this present Treaty: That if
after all the Epexriences of the misch^fes which has happened to us from
former T^eaties, of all Gods wonderful ownings of you, both formerly, and of
late in midst of so many oppositions from all hands, and of all his gracious
appearings, against the King and his party you go on to Treat before full and
exemplaty Justice be done upon the great Incendiaries of the Kingdom, the
fomenters of, and actors in the first and second War, and the late bringing in
of the Sco^s, we can expect nothing as the Issue thereof but the sudden
dissolution of the Parl: and Army, the destruction of all the wel^ ^ff^cted the
involvi^g of this Nation in more blood then ever.

May it therefore please you in this Iuncture of time to he^rken to your
Petitioners, who have constanly adhered to you, and before you conclude this
treaty, to execute Impartial and speedy justice (though upon the greatest
offenders) wherein you cannot want assistance from God, and from man, to
strengthen you in ^o^r endeavors to settle this Kingdom in Peace and
rightecusnes.

The Scots Proceedings examined and onswered.
There is a natuarll discord between tyranny and freedom, slavish popery and
Christian liberty; Acubrese renders the reason thus, because Christ the King of
Kings by his righteousness, has made his people free, therefore the Kings of
the earth, by tyrany injustice or popish interest, cannot make themselves.

And do the Laws of God, man and nature justify the people in opposing,
fighting against and imprisoning of Kinds who act contrary to their Oaths, and
the trust imposed on them by the people? And do not the same laws as much
justify them in opposiug the power of Par. when they betray their trust, in
pleading the interest, and justifying the cause of such tytannous P^inces join
with them to levy war against the poor people, whose trustees they are only,
and by whose Votes and election they sit in parliament, to preserve, and nof to
destroy them, to condemn, and not justify their enemies, who have brunke with
the blood of Saints, and have confessed themselves guilty of the blood of three
hundred thousand souls, that have perished by war in the 3 Kingdoms

The Parl. gave great encouragement by their letter the 3 of Aug. last, to the
Ministers of the General Assembly of the Kingdom of Scot. to oppose the Parl.
of Scot. then siting a^ Edenb. who had made breach of their solemn league and
Covenant and their many agreements and Acts of Parl. passed in both kingdoms,
in posessing of Barw. and Carlisle, and for your further satisfaction take the
words of the letter,

And being assured these impious, and unwarantable actions (of the Parl. of
Scot.) cannot be done with the approbation, and consent of the well affected
people of the kingdom of Scot. and that they understood there were very few
amongst these who were in this engagement against them, that first engaged with
them in the Covenant and cause, but such as have been professed enemies unto
the kingdom of Scotland (which were the Parl.) however they were content to
pretend thereunto, that they may the better deceive the people of this kingdom.

That they were unwilling to impute such evils to the nation ingenerall but to
those present that own, and appear in them, whom they were confident, God in
his due time would judge whatsoever they may suffer in the mean while.

Therefore they now send unto them that it may appear they will not by any
provocation, be induced to withdraw themselves from those in Scotland, who
retain their former principles, and still own their cause, (though against the
Pa^l. of Scot.) wherein they have with blessing from heaven, bin so long
solemnly United. vide P. 4. and 5. of that letter.

Upon this score and that encouragment, the minor dart of the people of Scot.
raise an Army to oppose the Parl. of that Nation, and the Army raised by the
supreme authority thereof, and put themselves under the Command of the E. of
Argile, to fight with kill and slay them.

And did not L. G. Cr^mwel, in pursuance of the Commands of the Parl. of Eng.
join with those handful of people in Scot. to oppose the Parl. of Scot. and
the army raised by that authori^y, and did not the eff^^t ther^ of produce an
absolute dissolution of that Parliament and Committee of Estates?

By this time, the Reader may expect the authors Inference upon the whole,
which he once thought to have waved, and therefore resolved only to toss the
Ball amongst the multitude, that so each judgment might cach at it, but because
my fellow Commoners may not be ignorant herein, I have set down a few
undeniable conclusions upon the whole.

1. We se that the K. may err, notwithstanding the maxim, in the law ( Lex non
potest errari) by laying illegal taxes Monopolies, and Impositions upon the
people Introducing Popery, and Levying war against them etc.

2. That in committing such errors, he falsifies the trust which the people of
the land repose in him, and then his Commands being unlawful, and destructive,
it is lawful for the people to disobey them, and on the contrary, it is no
less then sin, and the forsiuire of all the Liberties, Freedoms and
Birthrights of the people to give obedience thereunto.

3. That it is lawful and of necessity for the people to Leavy war against
their King, and all that adhere to him for defense of themselves, and
preservation of their birth rights and freedoms, having once broken the ^rust
reposed in him, and put them out of his protection by levying war against them,
ruling them as a tyrant at his pleasure oe not as a Kiug by the law of the
Nation. 4. That it is lawful for the peoples Trustees in Parl. to declare to
the nation the miscarriages of such a tyranous prince, and to state the matters
of fact therein, by way of charge against ^^m. 5. That it is a breach of trust
in the peoples Trustees and a great dishonor for the E^glish Nation to charge
the King with such high crimes, and neither to prove them against him, nor to
clear him of them. 6. It is a great breach of the trust, and the National
League and Covenant, not to bring delinquents to condign punishment there
being no person exempt by the same. From the second part of the assertion
plainly appears. That a Parl. by breach of Covtnant, Treaties, and Acts of
Parl. voting and acting against the Covenant, and siding with, and pleading the
interest of the enemies thereof, and of that Nation, for which they are
Trustees may err. 2. That by breach thereof they have forfeited their Trusts
to the people, for whom they seve, and by whom they were elected. 3. That it is
lawful for the people of that Nation to Levy war against them for the
maintenance of there Lives and Freedoms, which that Parl. endeavors to give to
their enemies and make them and their posterity slaves for ever to them.

FINIS

