SOME PAPERS Given in by the COMMISSIONERS of the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, To
the Honorable HOUSES of the Parliament of ENGLAND. In Answer to their VOTES of
the 24. of September. 1646. CONCERNING The disposing of His MAJESTY'S PERSON.

EDINBURGH: Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer t^ the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1646.

20. October. 1646. From the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland.
Right Honorable,
We do herewith present to the Honorable Houses two Papers, in answer to
their Votes of the 24, of September, wherein we have contributed our best
endeavors to come to a speedy agreement in the great affairs now in agitation,
and to preserve and continue a firm correspondence between the Kingdoms: And
we cannot but promise to our selves, that we shall meet with the same
affections in the Honorable Houses; That all differences being determined, and
all just desires satisfied, these Kingdoms may still remain in a sweet
concord and brotherly conjunction, then which nothing can be more acceptable to

Your Lordships most humble servants, Loudoun. Louderdaill. A. Johnston.
Charles Erskine. Hugh Kennedy. To. Barclay.

Worcester House, the 20. of October. 1646.
For the right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore.
HAving received the Votes of both Houses, dated the 24. of September,
concerning the disposing of the Kings Person as both Houses of Parliament shall
think fit. Although we judge (as in charity we ought) that it is nor the
meaning and intention of the Honorable Houses, to claim or assume to
themselves the whole and sole power to dispose of his Majesty's Person, which
is known to be a matter, as of high, so of common and equal concernment to
both Kingdoms: Yet lest by our silence the right and interest of the Kingdom of
Scotland should be prejudiced, and lest that sense of those Votes, which many
have apprehended and expressed, should minister occasion of misunderstanding
and difference between the Kingdoms, according to the desires and hopes of our
common enemies, We have judged it necessary, with that freedom, candor, and
plainness which becomes Brethren, to represent our thoughts concerning this
great business to both Houses.

We do acknowledge, that as Positively the Houses of Parliament have as much
power in disposing of the Kings Person as any one Parliament has or can have,
to dispose of a King who has more free Kingdoms then one; So Negatively none
ought or may dispose of His Majesty's Person, without, or against their
consent. The like we suppose, will be mutually acknowledged in reference to the
Parliament of Scotland, It being a fundamental Right and Liberty of either
Kingdom, That none can justly (without their own consent) impede or restrain
the Person of their King from coming amongst them, and doing the duties of a
King unto them: And in both these Senses we acquiesce in the Vote of the
Honorable Houses.

But if the Vote should be meant or made use of as restrictive to the
Parliament of England, and exclusive o^ the Parliament of Scotland; Or, as if
the two Houses were to dispose of the Person of the King, by their single an^
sole authority, without the consent and concurrence o^ the Kingdom of Scotland;
We trust this sense is as far from the thoughts of both Houses, as it is from
justice and equity: the Parliament of Scotland having as much interest in the
Person of the King of Scotland, as the Parliament of England has of the Person
of the King of England; and the Person being but one, both Kingdoms must needs
share equally in that joint interest. Neither has the Parliament of England
any more power to dispose of the person of this King of Scotland being in
England, then the Parliament of Scotland has to dispose of the person of this
King of England if he were in Scotland: And as the Parliament of England might
justly conceive their inrest and power to be greatly prejudiced, if the
Parliament of Scotland should claim the sole power to dispose of His Majesty's
person being in Scotland (and consequently if they shall so think fit to
restrain his Person from coming to his Houses of Parliament when the necessary
affairs of this Kingdom require his presence) So we cannot but in justice
expect to be dealt with by the Honorable Houses, as they would have us in like
cases to deal with them.

Although what we have now expressed might be sufficient, as to our sense of
the Vote; Yet it shall not be superfluous but very expedient, that we further
clear our selves and our real intentions, in that which we first offered in
our Paper of the 11. of August, Concerning a joint consultation and resolution
of both Kingdoms, what is next to be done in reference to the King, Which
motion we now resume to be still insisted upon: For the question is not,
whether the Houses of Parliament, or the Scots Army shall dispose of the person
of the King in England. Our Army claims no power to dispose of his Majesty's
Person. And as they could not refuse to receive him when he came amongst them;
So they are ready to obey and submit to the joint resolutions of both Kingdoms
concerning his Majesty. Neither is the question, which of the two Kingdoms
shall trust the other with the present residence of the Kings Person, till he
be disposed of by the consent and agreement of both. Let it be far from both
Kingdoms, that the former mutual confidence, should now turn to a mutual
diffidence: And let not a blessing from heaven be expected upon either of the
Nations, which continued not faithful to the other, according to the Covenant;
Our confidence in the Wisdom, Justice, Loyalty, and Faithfulness of the
Honorable Houses is such, that whenever the King shall be willing to return
unto them, and they willing to receive him, we shall not make the least
impediment, but give our cheerful consent. Least of all is the question
concerning any Privilege or Power of the Parliament of England, or any Law,
Liberty, or practice of this Kingdom, to dispose of their King. It is not our
meaning to controvert what in that kind they may do, or at any time have done
according to their Laws (which are best known to themselves) for their good and
safety, without the least shadow of any dependencie upon another Kingdom. But
withal we desire it may be remembered, that this is to be transferred equally
to the power and privilege of the Parliament of Scotland. We do not meddle
with any of the single or proper Rights, Privileges, or Laws of this Nation,
more then we would have our Brethren to meddle with ours. It is one thing what
the Parliament of England might have done in another Cause or War, before
their engagement by the Covenant and Treaties with the Kingdom of Scotland: It
is another thing what ought to be done after such conditions and ties imposed
by neither Kingdom upon the other, but by both jointly upon themselves, and as
mutual Obligations, both to God, and each to other: Although we might also go
further back than to the Covenant and Treaties, and plead the common and equal
interest of the Kingdoms, in their common Head and Sovereign, ever since they
were so united; as may sufficiently appear, even by some instances in his
Majesty's time who now reigns over us. It may be remembered (as to the interest
of Scotland) that when his Majesty was first invited and desired to come into
that Kingdom to be Crowned, It was represented by the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council in England, that the great affairs of this Kingdom could hardly
dispense with his Majesty's going to Scotland: And therefore that either he
might receive his Crown of Scotland by a Vicegerent there, or that it might be
sent hither unto him. Like as, this present Parliament when the King went last
into Scotland, to settle the Peace of that Kingdom, did earnestly desire and
press, that He might not go, but that he might stay here for the urgent
affairs of this Kingdom. But both in the one case and in the other, the
interest of the Kingdom of Scotland was preserved: And as it was most
necessary, that His Majesty should go into that Kingdom for reciving that
Crown, so His Majesty found it expedient to go thither for the settling of
Peace. It may also be remembered (as to the interest of England) that the
English Nobility both at the Berks Anno 1639, and at York 1640 (whose letters
to that purpose are yet extant and to be seen) And this Parliament Anno 1641
did claim an interest to see and know our demands proposed to the King, that
neither His Majesty nor themselves might be hereby prejudiced.

But the present question needs not go so far upon a back trade: whatsoever
the joint interest of the Kingdoms was formerly, it is without controversy now
much more conjoined. And unless we lay aside the Covenant, Treaties,
Declaration of both Kingdoms, and three years conjunction in this war,
Neither the one Kingdom nor the other, must now look back what they might have
done singly before such a strict Union; but look forward, what is fittest to be
done by both jointly for the common good of both, and for the ends of the
Covenant, which both are obliged jointly to prosecute and promote. So that the
true and proper question in this conjuncture of affairs, is, whether both
Kingdoms have not a joint and common interest, in disposing of the King of
both, for the good of both, and that His Majesty's Person ought not to be
disposed of by either Kingdom singly. Much might be said for this joint way,
and against a divided way, from the nature of all associations, and the common
rules of equity observed between persons, societies, or nations, which have a
joint interest in the same Person, Parent, Master, Servant, Or in the same
thing inheritance, lands, house, stock, or the like. In which cases, one of the
parties associated may not without the consent of the other, dispose of that
which is common, especially if it be a common Person, and least of all if it be
a Person of chiefest eminency or concernment: For although a common thing may
be divided, and to each party his proper share assigned, yet one individual
Person does not admit of a partition, and so requires the greater Union and
conjunction of Councels in the disposal of it. And as reasons may be drawn
from the nature of all associations; so especially from the nature of ours in
the solemn League and Covenant, the Title, Narrative Articles and conclusion of
it, do along link together the interest of the Kingdoms, in this common cause
so much concerning the glory of God, their own safety, Union and Peace, and the
honor and happiness of the King and his posterity; which ends of the
Covenant, both Parliaments as well as other Subjects of both Kingdoms, have
obliged themselves jointly and mutually to promote, according to their power,
and to continue zealously and constantly therein all the days of their lives,
against all opposition; And to assist and defend all those that enter into this
League and Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and never suffer
themselves to be divided directly or indirectly from this blessed Union and
conjunction. So that the ends of the Covenant (upon which the disposal of the
King must needs have a strong influence) are not to be prosecuted by the two
Kingdoms, as by two distinct bodies acting singly, but they were united by
solemn Covenant made to Almighty God, and by League each to other, as one
entire body to prosecute this cause; which was the expression used by the
Honorable Houses in their Declaration of the 5 of August 1645, to the Lords
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries. In which
Declaration this notable instance was given, which deserves also to be
remembered, That by the Covenant both Houses of Parliament, and many thousands
of other His Majesty's Subjects of England and Ireland, stand bound as well as
we, to hinder the setting up of the Church government by Bishops in the
Kingdom of Scotland, And that we as well as they stand bound to endeavor the
extirpation thereof in England and Ireland. And as by the Covenant, the
Kingdoms are fast linked together in the whole prosecution of this cause; so
particularly both are obliged to endeavor mutually to preserve and defend the
Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms, That the world may bear witness
with our consciences of our loyalty, And that we have no thoughts or intentions
to diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness.

From the Treaty the same thing does further appear, it being thereby manifest,
that as our Army was to be leavied for the common good of both Kingdoms, in
the pursuance of the ends expressed in the Covenant, And not as Auxiliaries for
the single good of this Kingdom; So they are not tied to be subject to the
resolutions and directions of either Kingdom singly, but of both jointly. Also
by the 8th. article, no Cessation, Pacification nor Agreement for Peace,
whatsoever is to be made by either Kingdom, without the mutual advice and
consent of both. So that if the disposal of the Kings Person, mentioned in the
Vote of both Houses, be intended for the good, Peace, and security of both
Kingdoms, then it should not be done without the mutual advice and consent of
both; But, if intended for the Peace and security of this Kingdom within it
self singly, this were to settle the Peace of the one Kingdom, not only
without the counsel and consent, but before the settlement of the other, and
so the more inconsistent with the plain scope of that Article. Moreover by the
9th. Article of the same Treaty, all matter of difference arising between the
Subjects of the two Nations, are to be resolved and determined by the mutual
advice and consent of both, which has ever been the usual way in such cases:
Neither know we any other way for healing of differences between two free
Nations, which are as Brethren and equalities, and neither of them subordinat
to the other. If therefore any difference should arise (which God forbid)
between the two Parliaments or any others of the Subjects of the two Nations,
concerning the disposing of His Majesty's Person, then the question cannot be
otherwise resolved and determined, but by the mutual advcie and consent of
both. How much better is it (according to the 6th. Article of the Covenant) to
consult how to prevent all differences which are like to arise between us or
our posterities?

The honorable Houses in their wisdom did think fit that in the managing of
this War there should be a conjunction of the Councels of both Kingdoms in
reference to the English as well as to the Scottish forces. How much more may we
expect a conjunction of Councels in disposing of His Majesty's Person, wherein
the one Kingdom is as much interested as the other.

If more need to be said in this business, we hope it is not forgotten, how
the Declarations of both Houses and their Commissioners sent into Scotland, to
desire their assistance and engagement in this War, did invite, solicit and
persuade that Nation upon principles of common interest, And in regard the one
Kingdom cannot enjoy a firm and durable peace, while the other is in war:
We were also put in mind of the affection and duty which becomes brethren.
And as we did upon these and the like considerations, espouse our brethrens
quarrel; So it cannot be offensive that we desire from them an improvement of
the very same principles: And that the same measure of the Conjunction of
interests be given to us, which was got from us. God forbid, that ways of
separating the interests of the Kingdoms should now be studied, as much as ways
of Uniting them were before endeavored. We cannot but expect beter things from
our Brethren, then in their posterity to desert us, who did engage and join
with them in their greatest affliction; Or to think of securing their own Peace
without us, while the troubles of our Kingdom continue.

Wherefore, we cannot choose but obtest by the common good of both Kingdoms;
by the conjunction and parity of interests; by the love of Brethren; by
Declaration of both Houses; by former presidents; by the Treaty between the
Kingdoms; by the solemn League and Covenant: yea, by the very law of Nations
and rules of common equity, that there may be a conjunction of the Counsels
and resolutions of both Kingdoms, in disposing of that royal Person who is
King of both, and that all lawful and possible means (of which is one and a
chief one) may be used, which may preserve His Majesty's Person, honor, and
happiness according to the Covenant; Monarchical government according to the
fundamental laws of both Kingdoms: Together with a firm and happy Union
between the Kingdoms.

These principles we desire still to go upon, And therefore if the vote of both
Houses communicated unto us, be understood as a material demand of his
Majesty's Person to be delivered unto them, to be disposed of as they shall
think fit: This as it does not necessarily follow from the words of the vote
nor does agree with that sense of the vote, which in charity we are most
willing to entertain, so there are just and great reasons against it. We
acknowledge that we are not to presume the worst, but the best concerning the
intentions of the honorable Houses toward the King. But we do not doubt it
will be mutually acknowledged that for preventing of differences afterward it
is most fit and necessary, that there be a clear and distinct understanding
between the two Kingdoms, in a business of this nature and consequence. And
that it is not to be expected from private persons (though under jurisdiction)
much less from another Kingdom, that they should pass from their interest or
just security, because they have to do with such, as they judge to be honest
and faithful. To speak therefore to the nature of the thing in it self, if
the Scotch army should deliver up His Majesty's Person without his own
consent, and that upon the vote communicated unto us, which (although it may
suffer a benign interpretation and be understood of the disposing of the Kings
Person favorably and honorably, yet) as the words stand, is comprehensive and
capacious of more then is fit to be expressed: This Act of the Army were not
agreeable to their Oath of Allegiance (obliging them to defend his Majesty's
person from all harms and prejudices) nor to the Solemn League and Covenant,
which was not intended to weaken, but to strengthen our Allegiance, and to wipe
off the calumny and aspersion of Rebellion: For which end, before our
engagement in this War, it was mutually covenanted between the Kingdoms, to
preserve the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation of the
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms; Thereby holding forth to the world,
that the preservation and defense of Religion and Liberties, may well consist,
and was intended to consist with the preservation of his Majesty's Person and
Authority, whom therefore our Army cannot deliver, to be disposed of by any
others at pleasure. This delivery were also inconsistent with that joint,
equal, and common interest of both Kingdoms in the disposal of his Majesty's
Person, which we have before asserted; And, were upon the matter a passing from
the right and interest of the Kingdom of Scotland in that business. It were
also contrary to his Majesty's power of residence in any of his Kingdoms, and
to the free exercising of the duties of his place and acts of personal
Government, such as the hearing and redressing of the grievances of his
Subjects in Parliament, and his concurring to the making of Laws. Neither could
it stand with the Commissions given to the Committee of Estates and general
Officers of our Army, or with their military Oath, to deliver up their Ki^
without his own consent, and without warrant from the Parliament of Scotland,
to be disposed of by another Nation: Even as it were not to be expected, that
the Army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, if they were in Scotland for
our assistance there in the like cause, and under the like engagement, in a
recesse of the Parliament of England, and without their warrant, would upon the
like demand deliver up the King (having cast himself in their hands) to be
disposed of by the Parliament of Scotland. Finally, if it be contrary to the
Law and common practice of Nations, to deliver up the meanest subject fled to
them, though it be for the greatest crimes: (for which cause the Parliament of
England in the 4. of King James, as likewise in the large Treaty, refused a
general Act of remanding between the two Kingdoms, unless they should be
united into one) how much more would the world abroad condemn our Army for a
base and dishonorable act, if they should deliver up their Head and Sovereign
(having cast himself into their hands) to be disposed of at the arbitrament of
another Nation.

And now we hope it will not be tedious, that we further enlarge our selves
upon this great subject, by adding satisfactory Answers to such Objections as
have been, or may be made against our desires and principles in this business.

Object. 1. That the Scottish Army is an Auxiliary Army of England, and under
their pay, and therefore ought to deliver up the King, to be disposed of by
both Houses as they shall think fit.

Answ. It is sufficiently known, that the Scottish Army came not into this
Kingdom in the nature of Auxiliaries. For when it was desired by the
Parliament of England, that the Kingdom of Scotland should send an Auxiliary
Army into this Kingdom, to be subject to the directions and resolutions of both
Houses, it was absolutely refused, as may appear by the several Papers about
that purpose yet extant. The Kingdom of Scotland did foresee and consider how
prejudicial it was to forsake their own Peace, and what infinite troubles,
losses, and unavoidable danger their engagement with the Parliament of England
against so powerful and prevailing an Enemy, would bring upon the Kingdom of
Scotland: And as they regarded not the large offers nor the threats of the
other side for all their prosperity; so there was no offer of pay or other
worldly advantage whatsoever from the Houses of Parliament, which could have
induced them to undertake so hazardous and desperate a War. It was the good of
Religion, King and Kingdoms, they set before their eyes, in order to which
end, they accounted nothing too deer unto them: And having resolved to engage
in this Cause for assistance of their Brethren therein, they did not stand upon
conditions, but without respect to the season of the year, the great strength
of the Enemy, and other discouragements, They did in a short time leavy an Army
at their own charge: And because of the many burdens then lying upon this
Kingdom, were content for the present to accept of a sum toward the Monthly
entertainment of that Army, amounting to little more then half pay, and to
supersede all further recompense till the War should be at an end. And seeing
the Kingdom of Scotland was to quit their own Peace, and equally with England
to undergo the hazard of the War, it was found reasonable, that the prosecution
thereof, and the making of the conditions of Peace after the War, should be
with joint advice and consent of both Kingdoms. And according to these grounds
a Covenant was agreed upon for the Reformation of Religion, and for
preservation of the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and of the Kings Person and
Authority: together with a Treaty, wherein it is declared, that the Scottish
Army shall be commanded by a General appointed by the Estates of Scotland, and
shall be subject to such resolutions and directions, as are and shall be
mutually agreed upon and concluded between the Kingdoms, or their Committees in
that behalf appointed for pursuance of the ends of the Covenant: of which, one
is to defend and preserve his Majesty's Person.

Object. 2. That the King is in England, and therefore to be disposed of by
both Houses of Parliament, and cannot be disposed of by the Scottish Army: And
though the Kingdom of Scotland may pretend to an interest and power in the
disposing of the King, yet they can have no exercise of that power in England:
And albeit the Scottish Army, according to the Treaty between the Kingdoms be
only subject to such resolutions as are mutually agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, or their Committees appointed in that behalf, yet this is only to
be understood in ordering and regulating of the Scottish Forces for prosecuting
the war, and the Treaty extends no further.

Answ. Although His Majesty's riding one days journey might wholly subvert the
grounds of this Objection; Yet we shall not insist upon this Answer, because we
conceive it touches not the true state of the question. It has been already
cleared what is not, and what is the state of the question, which being
remembered, we do assert, That the King coming voluntarily to the Scottish
Army, they cannot in duty deliver him against his will to the Houses of
Parliament without consent of the Kingdom of Scotland: For the being in
England takes not away the relation between the King and His Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland, nor ought it to impede the performance of the mutual
duties founded upon that relation: For Allegiance has no limitation of place,
being grounded upon the Law of Nature, as well as the law Municipall, and so is
rather universal then local. The difference of place takes not away the
relation and mutual duties between parents and children, And it is not the
place but the relation which gives interest to the disposing of the Person of
the King. As his being in England takes not away the relation between him and
his Subjects of Scotland, so it does not infringe the mutual obligations and
solemn engagements between the Kingdoms, for joint counsels in prosecution of
the War and settling of the peace: The Kings coming to the Scottish Army, being
an emergency of our joint War, and the right disposal of his Person, the only
mean (for the present) of our joint security and peace. Neither can the Kings
being in England, prejudice any right or privilege of either Kingdom. It is
the Fundamental right and privilege of the Parliament of Scotland, and the
liberty of that Kingdom (as we acknowledge it to be the right and privilege
of the Kingdom of England) that the person of their King ought not to be
disposed of, but with their advice and consent. The place of the Kings
residence (as was answered to us, when in the large Treaty it was desired His
Majesty might sometimes reside in Scotland) is at his own election, in either
of the Kingdoms as the exigence of affairs shall require and he shall think
fit, Or else must be determined by the mutual advice and consent of both
Kingdoms. From all which grounds it is apparent, that the Kingdom where he
resides for the time, may do no Act which may hinder His Majesty to perform
the office and duty of a King, to the Kingdom from which he is absent in
Person, Nor impede him to repair to that Kingdom, when the affairs thereof
shall necessarily require it. Otherwise, if the Kingdom where His Majesty
resides has the sole interest and right to dispose of his Person, the Estates
of the Parliament of Scotland, might upon former occasions and may now, in case
the King and Prince shall repair to Scotland, lawfully detain them there, and
make it the place of the ordinary residence of them and their posterity without
the consent of the Kindome of England. Which we acknowledge could not be done
without a manifest prejudice and injury to this Kingdom. Wherefore we cannot
but conclude that wheresoever the King be, in Scotland or England, he being the
King of both, ought to be disposed of for the good and with the consent of both
Kingdoms. And if it be considered that the Scottish Army was invited and
called into this Kingdom by both Houses in a Treaty for prosecuting the ends of
a solemn League and Covenant, whereof one is to preserve and defend his
Majesty's Person, there can remain no doubt concerning the exercise of that
right and interest in this Kingdom: And therefore it seems very strange, that
when upon invitation they are come into England, as for other ends, So to
defend His Majesty's Person, their being in England should be made use of, as
an argament why they should deliver up the Person of their King to be disposed
of, as both Houses shall think fit. Whereas it is alleged, that the Treaty
extends no further then to the ordering and regulating of the Scottish Forces
in relation to the war: Although this be really answered from the nature of
the thing, the Kings coming to the Scottish Army being an emergency of the
war, and so the delivering of his Person comes under the regulation and
direction of both Kingdoms or their Committees, as an Act of the Scottish Army;
Yet that all doubt may be removed, we further add, that it is clear from the
third Article of the Treaty, that the Scottish Army is to receive the
Directions of both Kingdoms or of their Committees, in all things which may
concern the pursuance of the ends of the Covenant and Treaty, whether in
relation to Peace or War. In the 8th Article of the Treaty, no Cessation,
Pacification, or agreement for Peace whatsoever, is to be made by either
kingdom, or the Army of either kingdom, without the advice and consent of both
kingdoms. And in the 9th Article, all differences arising between the Subjects
of the two Nations are to be resolved and determined by the mutual advice and
consent of both kingdoms.

Object. 3. That the Scottish Army did carry away the King from the Leaguer
before Newark when there was a Committee of both Houses there, without seeking
their consent, and that they have since disposed of him without consent of the
Houses of Parliament, whereas by the Treaty they ought to do nothing without a
joint resolution of both Kingdoms or their Committees.

Answ. No sooner did the King come into the Scottish Army, but the very same
day the Committee of Estates of Scotland, residing with that army, did acquaint
the Commissioners of both Houses therewith: and not satisfying themselves with
this, the day following they wrote a Letter to the Committee of Scotland
residing at Edinburgh, and another to the Committee of both kingdoms here
(which was communicated to both Houses) desiring the advice of this kingdom,
as in a matter of common interest, and declaring they would obey the joint
resolutions of both kingdoms: Yet no answer or advice was returned unto them,
either from the Houses or their Commissioners. But immediately after the
surrender of Newark, they received information that five thousand Horse and
Dragoones from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army were upon their march toward them
Northward (which the Honorable House of Peers was pleased to give order to
stop) there being no Enemy in those parts to be opposed: Upon consideration
whereof, the Quarters wherein they had stayed during the siege of Newark, being
extremely exhausted, and the Service for which they came thither being
performed, for preventing mistakes or new troubles between the Kingdoms, They
removed into Yorkshire, and the King as he came unto them of his own accord,
did voluntarily march along with them. Upon several occasions afterward, They
and we did earnestly desire the Honorable Houses to send a Committee, to join
and cooperate with the Committee of Estates there upon the place, in all
things according to the Treaty: But no Answer was returned. And from time to
time the Houses were acquainted with the proceedings in that Army; which, were
according to the Covenant, and the known resolutions of both Kingdoms, to
debar all such of both or either Kingdoms as had been in Arms against the
Parliament, from coming into their Quarters, or to the Court, or to the Kings
Person, according to the desire of the House of Peers. And whereas it is
affirmed, That by the Treaty the Scottish Army ought to do nothing without a
joint resolution of both Kingdoms or their Committees, There is no such Clause
in the Treaty, but they are to be subject to such resolutions as are and shall
be agreed upon, and concluded mutually between the Kingdoms and their
Committees, as by Ordinance of Parliament, the Army under the command of the
Earl of Essex, or of Sir Thomas Fairfax, was to receive and observe the
Directions of the Committee of both Kingdoms sitting at Westminster; But in
case no new Directions were sent unto them, they were left to former Orders (if
any were) or otherwise to their own judgment and discretion. There was never
any such resolution agreed upon between the Kingdoms or their Committees, as
that the Scottish Army should not receive the King if he came unto them, but it
is an agreement between the Kingdoms (in the Covenant) that they should
preserve and defend his Majesty's Person; And (in the Declarations of both
Kingdoms) to rescue him from the common Enemy: So that the Scottish Army
having often desired to know the direction and advice of the Houses of
Parliament, concerning the King, and no new Directions being signified unto
them; According to the Treaty, they were to observe the Directions and
Resolutions formerly agreed upon between the Kingdoms. And as the Scottish
Army do and will ever acknowledge, that they claim no power to dispose of the
Kings Person, but are subject to, and shall be ready to follow whatsoever both
Kingdoms shall agree upon, as best for the King and Kingdoms: so their keeping
and preserving his Majesty's Person (as they would do to any person of his
eminency and relation in an Army or Garrison Town) without the least thought of
hindering his voluntary return to his Parliament, cannot be reputed or called a
disposing of his Person.

Object. 4. If any Peer of England go to the Scottish Army and desire their
Protection, can he not be disposed of without the consent of the Committee of
Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland residing with that Army?

Answ. There is a wide and manifest difference betwixt the relation the
Scottish Army has to any Subject of England, and the relation they have to
their King: which are sufficiently distinguished in the third and fourth
Articles of the Covenant: for by the one they are mutually obliged to preserve
and defend his Majesty's Person, and by the other they are mutually obliged to
endeavor, that all Incendiaries and dividers betwixt the King and his People,
or betwixt the Kingdoms, be brought to trial and condign punishment before
the supreme Judicatories of the Kingdoms respectively, and the Kingdom of
Scotland has equal right and interest with the Kingdom of England in the
disposal of the Person of the King, which they cannot pretend unto concerning
the Person of any Subject of England.

Object. 5. That seeing it is alleged by us, that the disposing of the Kings
Person comes in place of a Peace, then the receiving of the King into the
Scottish Army without consent of the Houses, is aequivalent to the making of a
Peace, without consent of the Kingdom of England, contrary to the eight
Article of the Treaty.

Answ. It has been sufficiently answered before, that the Scottish Army
neither has nor will take upon them to dispose of the King. He came unto them
without Capitulation or Treaty, his residence with them is voluntary and free,
and they do nothing which may hinder him to come to his Houses of Parliament.
But if the kingdom of Scotland should consent to the desire of the Houses,
that they may have the sole disposal of the Person of the King, It being that
which comes in the place of the Peace and security of both kingdoms, they will
really quite the right and interest they have by the eight Article of the
Treaty, concerning the making of a Peace; for which soever of the kingdoms is
acknowledged to have the sole disposal of the King, may without the other make
Peace with him, when, how, and in what terms they please.

Object. 6. That England is a free Nation, and in former times it was in the
power of the Parliament of England to dispose of their Kings, And if one
Kingdom pretend to a joint right of disposing of the King, while he is in the
other, it is to entrench upon the former liberty of that Kingdom. That the
Kingdom of Scotland have no reason to distrust the Houses of Parliament, who
when the King shall be in their power, will not dispose of him otherwise then
may consist with their duty, according to the Covenant and Treaty between the
Kingdoms.

Answ. We will not dispute what power the Houses of Parliament formerly had to
dispose of the person of their King; but whatsoever power or right they have,
the like is due to the Parliament of Scotland, and so the Person of the King
being common to both and indivisible, cannot be disposed of, but by consent of
both kindomes. It were another question indeed, if it were as in former times,
if we had different Kings, if there were not an Union of the kingdoms under one
head and Monarch, if there were neither Covenant nor Treaty between the
kingdoms; But since all these are, and that the peace and security of both
kingdoms, is so much concerned in the disposal of the King; not any one of
them without the other, can justly pretend to the sole judgment and right, to
determine what is best and most expedient for the safety and security of both.
Nor can it in reason be made an argument that the one kingdom distrusts the
other, because the one will not renounce and resign all right and interest
they have in the person of the King, and matter of their own security and
peace, to the judgment and determination of the other; otherwise, according to
this Argument, where there is any trust, there should be no contract between
person and person, nor Treaty between Nations; Or if there be any Treaty or
agreement, the performance or not performance of it is to be left to
arbitrament. But we cannot see that this does argue any diffidence or distrust
more then when private persons lending money to the Public, desire security,
and will not depend upon pleasure; And therefore, though it is not to be
questioned, but the Houses of Parliament would dispose of the Person of the
King, so as might consist with their duty, in performing the Covenant and
Treaty; Yet, this can be no Argument why the Scottish Army should neglect their
duty, or the Kingdom of Scotland quite the Interest and Right they have in the
Person of the King.

Object. 7. That the King is in the possession of the Scottish Army, and
though a joint advice and consent of both Kingdoms be urged for his disposal;
Yet if the Houses of Parliament agree not to what Scotland shall desire, the
King does still remain in the power of the Scots Army, and so the Parliament
of England has no consent.

Answ. If this Argument were turned over, the strength or weakness of it may
the more easily appear: Suppose the King were here at Westminster, it may be
upon the same grounds urged, that the Kingdom of Scotland would have no consent
in his disposal; And so much the more that the Houses claim the sole Interest
and judgment to dispose upon the Kings Person, which we desire may be done
jointly, as may be best for the security and safety of both Kingdoms. And we
see no reason, why it may not now be determined when he is in the Scottish Army
(who are entrusted by both, and subject to the resolution of both Kingdoms) as
well as hereafter, since he came thither of his own accord, and his residence
there is voluntary. And if his Majesty shall think fit to repair hither to his
Houses of Parliament, they shall do no act which may either hinder or dissuade
him, but cannot constrain him, or deliver him to the Houses to be disposed of
as they shall think fit.

It may now abundantly appear from the grounds and considerations before
expressed, that the Scottish army may not deliver up his Majesty's Person, to
be disposed of by the one Kingdom, without the consent of the other; Upon
supposition whereof, we shall in the next place (without presuming to prescribe
ways, or impose conditions) express our selves concerning some expedients,
which in reference to his Majesty, deserve to be looked upon, considered of,
and compared together; where we shall only premise this much, That whatever
way shall be taken, if the right end be looked at, his Majesty's person ought
to be so disposed of, as may serve most for the safety and happiness of the
King himself, and for the common Peace and security of the Kingdoms, United
in this Cause by the solemn League and Covenant; and, as may best agree with
their duty, Covenant and Treaties.

These ends being before our eyes, although it be most eligible, and best of
all, that his Majesty should without further delay, forthwith give satisfaction
in the Propositions of Peace (which has been with all instancy pressed, not
only by us, but by all the judicatories of the Kingdom of Scotland) and so
return fully reconciled to His Houses of Parliament; Yet since (to our
unspeakable grief) this has not been as yet obtained: We do propose that His
Majesty's coming to London, or to some of his houses near London, with safety,
freedom and honor (which is desired by himself, that he may be heard, And
that upon the clearing of his doubts, he may knowingly give a satisfactorie
answer to the Propositions) is much better then the other ways, which may be
expected in case this His Majesty's desire be not agreed unto. As for His
Majesty's going to Ireland, or other-where beyond Sea, It could not be the way
to a present peace now so much desired; but would certainly prognosticate new
troubles. Lastly, his Majesty's coming hither, or near this place, is a more
probable and hopeful way to preserve the Union of the Kingdoms, because the
enemy being still in arms in Scotland, and expecting supplies from Ireland,
and the kingdom disabled by their great sufferings to entertain an army for
suppressing the Malignant party, It were much more easy to raise new Forces
there to the disturbance of the peace of this kingdom, then it could be here,
where (by the blessing of God) all the Forces and Garrisons of the enemy are
subdued, and where it will not be so difficult to hinder Delinquents from
access to his Majesty. The dangers and inconveniences of any of these other
ways, do so much preponderate, and the present condition of affairs does so
much differ from that time, when both Houses with our concurrence did disagree
from his Majesty's desire of coming to London (at which time he had both
Garrisons and field Forces unreduced) that it may be conceived not only safe,
but (as things stand) most convenient, to agree to His Majesty's coming to
London or near it, upon such conditions and assurances from him, as shall be by
joint resolution found necessary for preventing the access of delinque^ts to
His Majesty, or an intestine commotion, or foreign invasion, to the
disturbance of the peace of either Kingdom. We trust it might accelerate a
happy peace, bring the present differences to an end, and be no grief of heart
afterward, if upon such terms and conditions, both Houses should be pleased
to revive and renew such an invitation and assurance upon their part, as was
contained in their Answer to His Majesty's Message of the 11. of September. 1642.
where, after mention made of their chief grievance, it was added: All this
notwithstanding, as we never gave your Majesty any just cause of withdrawing
your self from your great Council, So it has ever been and shall ever be far
from us to give any impediment to your return, or to neglect any proper means
of curing the distempers of the Kingdom, and closing the dangerous breaches
betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament, according to the great trust which
lies upon us. And if your Majesty shall now be pleased to come back to your
Parliament without your Forces, we shall be ready to secure your Royal Person,
Crown, and dignity with our lives and fortunes; Your presence in this great
Council, being the only means of any Treaty betwixt your Majesty and them
with hope of success. Diverse such passages there are in the Declarations of
both Houses, which we shall not need to mention.

But if the Houses of Parliament shall not agree to his Majesty's desire of
coming hither with safety, freedom, and honor: We offered to be considered
in the next place; whether it be not expedient, that once again Commissioners
be sent to his Majesty in name of both Kingdoms, with power to hear his
desires, and to endeavor the satisfaction of doubts and scruples; with
intimation also, That if his Majesty shall not give satisfaction in the
Propositions, both Kingdoms will without any more such applications, consult
and jointly resolve upon other ways of their safety and security. And upon the
other part, that if His Majesty will be now at last graciously pleased, to
satisfy the desires of both Kingdoms, His Majesty's Throne, with his just
power and greatness, shall be established, as well as the peace and security of
his Subjects.

All which we do propound in a brotherly freedom, not being peremtorily
wedded or addicted to any expedient that we have offered; but, if the
honorable Houses in their wisdom, shall be pleased to think of any other
expedient, which shall be for the good, safety, and honor of the King and
Kingdoms, We shall be most willing and ready to agree unto it, when it shall
be made known unto us, not doubting but that in the faithful and conscionable
use of all good and possible means, which may prevent differences between the
Kingdoms, there will be at last a sweet and brotherly agreement in such a
conclusion, as shall be good in Gods eyes, and wherein both Kingdoms shall
find greatest comfort and happiness.

By command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland. Jo. Cheislie.

SEVERAL SPEECHES, Spoken by the Right HONORABLE The Earl of LOUDOUN, Lord
high Chancellor of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND: AT A Conference with a Committee
of the Honorable Houses in the Painted Chamber, October 1646.

Proverbs 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver.

EDINBURGH: Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1646.

Good Reader,
I Understand that the right Honorable the Lord Chancellor of Scotland had
not right done him by the printed Copy of his Speech to the Kings Majesty at
New Castle, concerning the Propositions of Peace, there being in that Copy
Errors and Omissions, and both material; which has moved me to resolve, as to
print the former according to the true Copy, so for preventing the like
mistakes and mis-representations, first to procure to my self, and now to
communicate to the public view, the true transcrips of these last three
Speeches: In which thou shall find the merit of an excellent subject to speak
for it self, for thou have here a most solid, judicious, candid, and plain
debate, concerning the best and most hopeful means of attaining a speedy and
happy Peace, which may put a period to the lasting miseries of these three
Kingdoms: Read and consider, and beware thou do not receive with the left hand
what is reached forth with the right; This Noble Lord has dealt freely and
faithfully both with King and Parliament; and, as Truth and plain dealing did
appear in his Speeches, so what he spoke is here faithfully imparted; and thou
may be confident, that in this it holds true, (...)

Thine to serve thee for the Public good, G. A.

20. October. 1646. From the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland.
HAving received the Votes of both Houses of the 24. of September, declaring
that whatsoever conference, consultation or debate shall be with the
Commissioners of Scotland, concerning the disposal of the Person of the King,
it shall not be understood to be any capitulation, in relation to the retarding
of the march of the Scottish Army out of this Kingdom, or of any Treaty between
the Kingdoms concerning the same. And being desired to give an answer hereunto,
before we entered upon the conference; As we did then, so we do now again
declare, That our conference, consultation, or debate with the Honorable
Houses, concerning the disposal of the Person of the King, shall not retard or
be any hinderance to the march of the Scottish Army out of this Kingdom, or to
any Treaty concerning the same. And that it may be manifest how sensible we are
of the unnecessary burthe^s continued in this Kingdom by keeping Armies on foot
after the War is at end; And that it may fully and clearly appear, how really
it is desired by the Scottish Army, that without delay they may march out of
this Kingdom, with the same affection and cheerfulnes that they came in for the
assistance of their Brethren; And to the end all jealousies, mistakes, or
misunderstandings of our intentions may be removed, we do further declare, That
we are willing and ready to meet with such as the honorable Houses shall
appoint, and within 24. hours to agree concerning the time and place of the
payment of the 200000. pounds, and the security to be given for the other; And
to appoint a day wherein our Forces shall march out of the Town and Castle of
New Castle, out of Tinmouth Castle, Hartl^pool, Stockton, Thirlwall, and all
other places within this Kingdom (Berwick and Carlisle being disposed of,
according to the respective Treaties between the Kingdoms) and likewise for
marching of our Army out of this Kingdom: Which, in regard the Winter does fast
approach, and for other important reasons, we earnestly desire may be with all
possible expedition; And for this end, that the money may be speedily sent unto
them; for the sooner they shall receive it, the more acceptable it will be, and
give the greater satisfaction, and the impoverished and exhausted Country will
be the sooner eased. And since the cause of their stay and continuance in this
Kingdom, is not upon their part, and that for these six months past they have
received no pay, whereby they are exceedingly straightened in their quarters, and
the Northern parts where they remain, greatly overburthened: We do earnestly
entreat, that in the mean time (with the 5000. l. at Nottingham already
accounted unto them) some competent proportion of money may be sent unto the
Army for their necessary entertainment; Or otherwise, they will be forced to
enlarge their quarters for the ease of the Country. In all which we are the
more desirous to come to a close, that within few days some of our number must
repair to the Scottish Army, and from thence to the Parliament of Scotland
(which is to sit the second of November. next) to give an account of our
proceedings. And therefore we do earnestly entreat the speedy answer of the
honorable Houses.

By Command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland. Jo. Chislie.
20. October. 1646.
24. October. 1646. From the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland.
Right Honorable,
IT is very well known to the honorable Houses, that the Scottish Army
receiving no pay for these six months past, has been forced to take free
quarter from the Country people; whereby the Northern Counties have been
extremely exhausted and impoverished, and the necessities of that Army in a
great measure unsupplied, we had rest disatisfied that these things had been
already represented to both Houses of Parliament, and that the inconveniences
which might fo^low thereupon, were sufficiently understood; But being
advertised by several Letters of the growing necessities of the Army, and the
insupportable burden of those parts where they do quarter: for ou^ further
exoneration and preventing the great dangers that may ensue; we have judged it
necessary to acquaint the honorable Houses, that it is rumored abroad in the
Northern parts, that the Country people have a design to surprise and injure
our Forces, as they lie dispersed in their several quarters. It were a matter
of no great difficulty for the Scottish Army, in a forcible manner to prevent
or suppress any such insurrection; But they have resolved to prefer the
public good, and a happy correspondence between the Kingdoms, to their own
safety: In pursuance whereof, they have written Letters to the Committee of
Yorkshire and other Counties, earnestly desiring their concurrence to prevent
such inconveniences, as may endanger the Peace and Union betwixt the Kingdoms:
And have given direction to the general Officers of the Army, to confer with
the Gentlemen of the Country, and to use their utmost endeavors, to remove
all Jealousies and Mistakes; And particularly to acquaint them how earnestly
desirous they are, and have been for above these two months past, to remove
out of this Kingdom, and return to their native Country. Upon which
considerations, it is our renewed earnest request to the honorable Houses,
that the first 200000. l. may be speedily raised and sent to the Army, and the
security for the other agreed upon, that they may forthwith march out of this
Kingdom; Or otherwise, that in the mean time, some course may be taken for
supplying that army, and easing of the Country until the money be raised,
whereby the great danger that is like to arise, to the disturbance of the peace
betwixt the Kingdoms, may be prevented. For if the Scottish Army shall be
forced to enlarge their quarters Southward; and in the mean time Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Army (as we are informed) do enlarge their quarters. Northward, into
those harrased and exhausted Counties; it is easy to foresee, that these
Kingdoms may unhappily be again embroyled into new and greater troubles then
they have yet seen, And what great advantage will be given to Foreign Nations,
to make use of our divided interests, to the ruin of both? All which out of
the conscience of our duty, and sincere affection to the peace and happiness of
these Kingdoms, we have thought our selves bound timeously to make known: And
against all jealousies and mis apprehensions, to give perfect and full
assurance, that whatsoever reports or suggestions there may be to the contrary,
no persuasion, terror, plot, nor combination, shall ever be able directly or
indirectly, to divide or withdraw the Kingdom of Scotland from a firm
conjunction with this Kingdom; But as they have done hitherto, so for the
future shall continue in pursuance of the ends of our solemn League and
Covenant, against all opposition whether foreign or intestine, and to promote
and settle the Peace of both Kingdoms: Being very confident that the
Honorable Houses in their wisdom will seriously apply themselves to the
effectual means, for preventing the dangers and evils represented; for
hastening the return of our Army and satisfying all our just desires, for
settling the Peace of these Kingdoms, which, with constant zeal and fervent
affection, shall ever be faithfully endeavored by.

Your Lordships most humble Servants, Lowdoun. Lauderdaill. A. Johnston Charles
Erskine. Hugh Kennedy. R. Barclay.

Worcester House the 24. October. 1646.
For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore.
29. October, 1646. From the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland.
Right Honorable,
UPon the eleventh of August we did declare how desirous the Kingdom of
Scotland was of the easing of the burdens and pressures of this Nation, and
their willingness forthwith to surrender the Garrisons, and recall their Army
out of this Kingdom, reasonable satisfaction being given for their pains and
charges. And after the honorable Houses had resolved upon the ways and means
for their satisfaction, we were pressed by them to come to a speedy agreement
concerning the particular time of the removal of our Army out of this Kingdom;
which was insisted upon with so much earnestness, as at the Conference in
September last, it was required, that we should declare, That our consultation
about the disposing of the King, should be no hinderance to the marching of our
Army out of this Kingdom, or to any Treaty concerning the same: To which, we
did not only willingly assent, but have since declared, That we were ready
within four and twenty hours to agree concerning the time and place of the
payment of the first 200000 l. and the security to be given for the other; and
to appoint a day for the delivery of the Garrisons, and marching of our Army out
of this Kingdom. For above these six months past, no money has been sent to
our Army, nor has any course been taken for their maintenance during that
time, but they have been forced to quarter upon the Northern Counties, of whose
sufferings we have been so sensible, That there was no mean could occur to us,
which might afford them relief, but we have from time to time represented the
same to the honorable Houses: And we may from certain knowledge and with
confidence say, That for above these two months past, the Northern Counties
have been no more desirous to be eased of their pressures, then the Scottish
Army has been to remove out of this Kingdom, and return to their native
Country. All which notwithstanding, we do perceive that our malicious enemies
will never give over to calumniate even our best actions, and most faithful
endeavors, and for their own base ends, to foment and increase jealousies and
differences between the Kingdoms, as may appear by a printed declaration here
enclosed, which we find to be so full of wicked spite, bitter invectives, and
^etestable lies against the Scottish Army, and so directly aiming to stir up a
dis-affection in the people against that Nation and Army; as we could not but
present it to the view of the honorable Houses, earnestly desiring them
seriously to consider, how they would construct of it, if Diurnals and
Pamphlets of this kind were daily licensed in the kingdom of Scotland, to be
printed against the English Nation or Army, and no course taken for their
vindication, but rather all Papers which may clear their proceedings, denied to
be licensed, or stopped and suppressed. We did long since in our Paper of the
eleventh of August, express our confidence, that the honorable Houses in
their wisdom and justice would take some course to prevent such vile abuses for
the future; and have ever since been expecting to hear of their resolutions for
a speedy redress. But having perceived that the patience of the Houses has
animated the Authors of such Pamphlets, to return to their former boldness; we
are necessitated to renew our former desires, being still confident, that if
the honorable Houses could spare but a little time from their greater affairs,
upon the perusal and consideration of a few of the Diurnalls and Pamplets that
are almost daily published to the World, their wisdom and affection would never
bear with so many base calumnies and reproachful aspersions, as are therein
cast upon their Brethren of Scotland, with whom they are tied by so many bonds
and mutual obligations. We shall not further insist upon this business,
expecting upon what is already represented, to receive speedy satisfaction; not
doubting also, but that the honorable Houses will in their wisdom and
civility, give order that the speeches of the Lord Chancellor of Scotland,
lately seized on at the Press, (and which were by him discharged to be
published till the conference was reported to the Houses) shall be returned
unto us. And to end a happy correspondence with love and amity may be
inviolably preserved between the Kingdoms, we do again earnestly desire, That
all inconveniences by approaching of Armies may be prevented; that some course
be taken for the present maintenance of the Scottish Army, and ease of the
Northern parts; Or, which we much rather desire, that the 200000. l. may be
forthwith provided and sent to that Army; and without further delay, that a day
may be agreed on for the delivery of the Garrisons, and marching of our Army
out of this Kingdom, that after all these troubles and heavy pressures of both
Kingdoms, they may at last enjoy the fruits of their labors, A happy Peace,
which is the earnest desire of

Your Lordships most humble Servants, Lowdoun. Lauderdail. Charles Erskine.
Hugh Kennedy. Rob. Barclay.

Worcester House the 29. of October. 1646.
For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore.
The Lord Chancellor of Scotland his first Speech: At a Conference in the
Painted Chamber with a Commit of both Houses, October. 1. 1646.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe end of this Conference is to advise what is fit to be done for the Peace
and Security of the Kingdoms in relation to the King, and how to dispose of
his Majesty's Person, which is a matter very ticklish, and of most high
concernment; and they who would build very high, must dig very low for a firm
foundation: And therefore I shall make bold to desire, That what ever we
resolve upon concerning the Kings Majesty, it may be done by joint advice and
consent of both Kingdoms, and that the Unity between the Kingdoms may be
inviolably preserved, as that wherein (next to Gods protection) the chief
strength of both lies, which would be laid as a ground of our future debates.
And because the purpose we are to speak of is very grave and serious, I shall
speak of it with that sincerity, as I wish my words were written with the beams
of the Sun, and registered to posterity, that all the world might see the candor
and integrity of our proceedings toward the King and our Brethren of England.
And (as I had occasion once to express in this place) so do I now say, That no
man has conscience nor honor who will not remember our solemn League and
Covenant, as the strongest bond under heaven between God and man, between man
and man, and between Nation and Nation, in which our Unity is founded upon
Verity in a threefold relation; to God, to the King, and amongst our selves.
The first is the greatest, and ascends as high as heaven: for Religion, which
has its name a religando, unites us to God himself: and so long as he is in
League with us, we need not fear who be against us. Let us therefore hold fast
our Unity in Religion, and beware of Toleration of all Religions, which is the
ready way to have none; for there is nothing more divine in God then Unity,
and nothing more Diabolical in the Devil then Division, who therefore is
known to the vulgar by his cloven foot to be the spirit of Division.

The next ground and relation of our Unity, is with the King, to whom we are
bound (in the strictest bonds of loyal Subjection) by our Allegiance and
Covenant, as to one Head and Monarch: and therefore the faithful endeavors of
both Kingdoms should (without wearying) be constantly contributed, That we may
be united to him by a happy and just Peace: For if one of the Kingdoms shall
cast off the King, and the other have a King; if the one shall make Peace with
the King, and the other not make Peace, but be still at variance with him, it
is to be feared, that no humane wit not policy will be able to keep the two
Kingdoms long without a rupture; And if it please God so to incline the Kings
heart, and direct the wisdom of the Parliaments, as that the King and we
could make a happy agreement, no power or policy can be able to divide us;
for, Qui convenient uni terrio, convenient interse.

The third ground and relation of our Unity, is the conjunction of the two
Kingdoms which has been acknowledged to be so necessary and useful to both,
That they have often declared, they would stand and fall, and (like Hippocrates
twins) live and dye together. And therefore, as we regard our solemn Covenant
with God Almighty, and tender the standing and safety of the Kingdoms, let us
(with one heart and mind) join our Counsels and Actions, That whatsoever we
resolve upon for our common Peace and Security in relation to the King, and of
each Kingdom to other, that it be done in zeal to Religion, in loyalty to the
King, and with unanimity amongst our selves. Numerus Binar^us infamis est quia
primus ausus est d^sce^ere ab^u^tate.
And as the Pythagoreans did note the number of Two with the mark of infamy, as
being the first number that durst part from Unity; so, which soever of the
Kingdoms shall first violate the Unity which is bound up in our Covenant, may
apply it to themselves: but if we shall adhere to that Unity which is builded
upon the firm foundation of Verity, in our relations to Religion, the King, and
amongst our selves, it will be a threefold cord which is not easily broken;
and our Unity, I hope, shall be turned into an Identity, both Kingdoms may be
perfectly one.

Having thus in the first place laid a ground for Unity of Counsels and
Resolutions, I shall in the next place humbly desire and protest, That
whatever may be our Propositions or Debates concerning the King, it be not
mis-construed, as if one of the Kingdoms were imposing conditions upon the
other, or that we aye absolutely wedded to any one desire more then to another;
but that (all several ways being amicably debated and rightly pondered,) That
which may serve most for the safety, security and happiness of the King and
both Kingdoms, may be gravely resolved upon. And now I come to the Question it
self, concerning the disposing of His Majesty's Person; first Negatively, and
then Positively. Negatively, the Q^stion is not of the power and authority of
the Houses of Parliament in disposing of any person, or judging of any case
which is of single concernment to England: Nor is the Question how the Kings
Person may be disposed of de facto by any one of the Kingdoms; neither is the
Question properly de jure and posse, but de esse, and been esse: And as it is
neither good Logic nor good Divinity to argue (...) p^sse ad esse; so sure I
am, in this case it is far worse policy for either Kingdom to dispute what
they may do in the height of their power, when both are consulting what is
fittest to be done for the Peace and Security of both. And the relation of both
Kingdoms to his Majesty, and of each Kingdom to other being rightly
considered, as he is King to both, as both are Subjects to him, as both are
engaged in the same Cause, and have been in the same War, and are laboring
under the same Danger, are seeking the same Remedies, and should have the same
Security; we do hold, that the disposing of the Kings Person does not properly
belong to any one of the Kingdoms, but jointly to both. And after Scotland
has suffered the heat of the day and winters cold, have forsaken their own
peace for love of their Brethren, have set their own house on fire to quench
theirs: After so much expense of their blood in all the three Kingdoms, after
we have gone along with you in all the hardship of this War, and (without
vanity be it spoken) have been so useful in this Cause: And that the King has
cast himself into the hands of the Scottish Army, and that by the blessing of
God upon the joint endeavor of both Kingdoms we are come to the harbor of a
peace; We cannot expect, that the honorable H^uses will think it agreeable
with conscience or honor, or with the justice of the Houses, that the Person
of the King should be disposed of by them as they shall think fit, or by any
one of the kingdoms alone; but that what ever shall be resolved in this, may be
done by joint advice of both, as may serve most for the peace, security, and
happiness of both Kingdoms.

The Lord Chancellor of Scotland his second Speech: At a Conference in the
Painted Chamber, with a Committee of both Houses, October. 6. 1646.
AT our last meeting in this Conference, your Lordships did assert the Vote of
the Houses, That the Person of the King should he disposed on as the two Houses
shall think fit; And we did hold, that the King, who is the Head and Monarch of
both Kingdoms, ought not to be disposed of by any one of the Kingdoms, but by
joint advice of both, as might serve most for the peace, happiness, and
security of his Majesty and both Kingdoms, which we fortified with several
arguments from the interests and relations which both Kingdoms have equally to
the King, and from the Covenant and Treaty between the Kingdoms, as the best
way ^o preserve our Unity. But since your Lordships do adhere to the Vote of
the Houses, as that which you cannot part from, We do humbly desire, that your
Lordships may be pleased (in time convenient, at the close of this Conference)
to report the difference of our judgment to the honorable Houses, who upon
better reasons both may, and (we hope) will take their Vote into further
consideration: And so with reservation of our judgment, that the disposing of
his Majesty's Person does belong to both; and not to any one of the Kingdoms,
especially in such a juncture of affairs, as both Kingdoms stand engaged in
this cause; I shall descend particularly how the Kings Person should be
disposed of to the best advantage of both Kingdoms, and for attaining such a
happy peace as all good men should desire. But lest we should walk in the dark
upon obscurity of ambiguous words, I shall desire that the word of disposing of
the Kings Person may be rightly understood, and the true sense of it may be
clearly known: For, Dolus versatur in universalibus. For, To dispose of the
Kings Person, as both Houses, or both Kingdoms shall think fit, may in some
sense be to depose, or worse: But berause the word [Dispose] may admit a more
benign interpretation, as when men commit their estates and children, or that
which is dearest to them to be disposed of, (which is but to be advised) by
these who have nearest relation to them, and in whom they repose most trust: I
shall speak of the disposing of his Majesty's Royal person in that sense
(which I hope) is also the sense of the Houses. Nor do I know any other way
how his Majesty's Person can be disposed of, but that he be put either under
restraint, or be at freedom with honor and safety. As for the way of
restraint, I look upon it as it looks upon us, as a remedy more dangerous then
the disease, and as a mean to draw the war of forain Kings upon us (especially
the Prince being in other Kingdoms) rather then to quiet our troubles at home.
And therefore supposing that none of the Kingdoms will take any way concerning
his Majesty's Person, but such as may consist with duty and honor, and which
may lessen, and not increase our troubles, I shall lay aside the way of
restraint, and speak of the way which may be with freedom, honor and safety,
which can be no other, but that his Majesty shall go into Scotland, or come to
his Parliament here, or some of his houses neer-abouts.

His going into Scotland is full of dangers and inconveniences to both
Kingdoms: The Amalckites are not yet driven out of that Land. The bloody
barbarous Irish, banded with a wicked crew of Malignants, possess the
Mountains and highlands, which are the strong holds, and never conquered parts
of that Kingdom. They have not laid down Arms, but keep in a body together,
and they are so near Ireland, as the Forces of the Rebels there may in two or
three hours space come over and join with them: and (Scotland) not being able
to keep and entertain Armies long, the King being there may raise such Forces
in Scotland, as may make way quickly into England. And therefore his Majesty's
going into Scotland (before our peace be settled) being of most dangerous
consequence to both Kingdoms, I shall humbly offer to your Lordships
consideration his Majesty's coming to London, or some of his houses
here-abouts, as the most probable way to procure a speedy and happy agreement,
which is also his Majesty's own desire in his answer to the Propositions. And
although no persuasion of ours could prevail to procure a more satisfactory
answer for the time, then what is returned to the Houses of Parliament, yet (I
assure your Lordships) that the Committee of Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland, and the Noblemen, who were at Newcastle, did faithfully contribute
their best endeavors, that his Majesty might have given his assent to the
Propositions: And, as we did then deliver our minds with that plainness and
freedom which was fit for faithful and loyal Subjects, with no less regard
to this Kingdom then our own Nation; so are we now (with the same candor and
tenderness of affection) willing and ready to concur with the honorable
Houses in every thing which may promote the great work of Reformation, and
settle Religion according to the Covenant with a well grounded peace. And for
these ends, we desire, that his Majesty's answer may be improved to the best
advantage of the public.

For albeit the King has not given a present assent to the Propositions, yet
he has not in his answer refused them; but does promise, That he will
cheerfully grant and give his assent unto all such Bills (at the desire of the
two Houses) and reasonable demands for Scotland, which shall be really for the
good and peace of his people. To which end he desires and proposes, That he
may come to London (or any of his houses thereabouts) upon security, That he
shall be there with honor, freedom and safety, as the best expedient to
procure a happy agreement between his Majesty and his Parliament, which we
desire may be weighed in the balance of righterous judgment, as a business of
the greatest consequence which can fall within humane consideration, and
wherein the glory of God is most concerned of any business under heaven. For
upon a blessed agreement between the King and his Parliament, Religion and
Righteousness, Truth and Peace, which are the compend and height of all
happiness, will be established to the eternal fame and glory of great
Britain, and the great comfort of all the Protestant Churches: And upon our
disagreement, all the calamities of a bloody and unnatural war, will be
continued, and nothing heard nor seen in Church nor State but confusion. God
has brought both Kingdoms through the surges and waves of a boisterous tempest,
into the harbor of a peace, and has scattered most part of our Enemies, and
now our work is how to come ashore, and establish a right peace. I hope, it is
as far from our desires and intentions, as it is against our Covenant and
Professions, to change fundamental government. We have need to take heed, that
we run not from one extreme into another; Dum stulti vitant vitia, in contraria
current: Therefore our study would be how to cure the wound which our sins and
the evil counsels of others have made between the King and his Parliament, to
make up the breach, and not make it wider.

It has been universally acknowledged, That the Kings removal from his
Parliament, is the immediate and chief cause of all the war, mischief, and
calamities of the kingdoms: Then his Majesty's presence in joining with his
Parliament must be the best, if not the only remedy to remove our troubles,
for it is a maxim no less true then common, that Contraries have contrary
consequents. Contrariorum contraria sunt consequentia^


The King desires to come to his Parliament, not only to have his doubts
cleared, and have these difficulties explained which hinder his consent to the
Propositions as they now stand: But likewise that his coming may raise a
mutual confidence beween him and his Parliament: If the last were done, the
first would soon be performed, and all those mountains of difficulties would
easily be removed, and become valleys.

Your Commissioners had no power to give any reasons, no not so much as tell
what is the meaning of any of your demands, nor hearken to any desire of the
Kings; And certainly some things might be justly moved by his Majesty, which
are necessary for the Crown and a well grounded Peace, as, That he may have
his Revenues, That he may return with honor and safety to his Crown and
government; And if the King were with his Parliament, where he might both give
and receive satisfaction, he might with reason be convinced, to assent to what
he now conceives to be unreasonable.

The making of a peace, is so great and glorious a work, and so acceptable to
all good men, and to the whole people, that it would (after so great trouble)
be like rain to the new mownegrasse, or like a resurrection from the dead, and
is a work worthy of a Kings presence: And the King may without arrogance
desire that glory to himself, the more to reingratiate him to his people, and
not devolve that honor wholly to anyother, wherein he himself ought to be the
prime Actor. And therefore the Kings presence with his Parliament is the most
probable way to attain to a speedy and blessed peace, which certainly will be
the more durable if it be with the good liking of both sides.

I know there is one common objection (and I know not another) wherewith many
are possessed and prejudiced against the Kings coming to his Parliament, That his
presence may breed division, and that he may thereafter withdraw and continue
our troubles. Unity and Concord (I confess) is that by which Kingdoms and
Commonwealths do flourish, and there is nothing more dangerous then
division, Concordia enim res parvae creseunt, discordia vero miximae
dilabuntur. But is there any greater or more dangerous division, then to have
the Head divided from the Body? to have the King divided from his Parliament,
the representative body of the kingdom, whereof he is the Head? Has not this
division divided brother against brother, the father against the son, and the
son against the father, and Country against Country? This division is the
cause of all our other divisions; Take this away and all our other divisions
are at an end. Ablata causa tollitur effectus. The King does (with all
earnestness) desire to be joined with you, and stands more in need of
reconciliation, and I hope will (according to his profession) endeavor it
rather then division; And (I trust) the wisdom of the honorable Hou^s is such
as they will do so too, and rather be reconciled to the King, then di^ide
amongst our selves. And that argument not to admit of the Kings coming ^o his
Parliament, because his presence may breed division, is an argument to debar
him perpetually from his Parliament. And now the case is altered from what
(...) was, when it was thought unfit, that the King should come to his
Parliament, (...) then he had forces in the fields, garrisons, and strong holds
to return to: Now he has none of these against you, And his desire of coming
to his Parliament, cannot be but with resolution (...) agree and stay with you,
for if he were once with you, where can he go from you? And if they were
esteemed enemies to the Parliament and the Peace of the kingdoms, who advised
the King to withdraw from his Parliament, what estimation will the world have
of them, who will not suffer him to return to his Parliament, when he offers
to cast himself in your arms? Nor can there be a more real testimony of our
respect and affection to England, then that we desire he may be with you, and
be advised by you neither can you have any greater honor, then that (after you
have dissipated your Enemies) his Majesty is willing to return to you: And if
so kind an offer shall be refused, and the King driven to despair, it is to be
feared, these kingdoms will be involved in greater difficulties then ever, and
we shall be driven out of the harbor and entrance of a peace, into the tempest
of new and bloody wars.

For although Scotland be most willing and desirous that the King should return
to his Parliament with honor, safety, and freedom, and that he may remain
where his personal presence may serve most for the security and happiness of
his people; yet if any such course shall be taken, or any demand made for
rendering (...) his Person, which cannot stand with his honor and safety, or
which cannot consist with our duty, allegiance and Covenant, not with the
honor of that Army, to whom (in time of his extreme danger) he had his
recourse for safety; it cannot be expected that we can be capable of so base an
Act. And if (to shun this, and avoid occasion of quarrelling between the
kingdoms) he shall go to Scotland, and resent his expulsion out of England,
and crave the assistance of that kingdom for recovery of his right to this
Crown; He may in a short time raise such Forces in Scotland and Ireland, as
with the assistance of Foraine Princes, these kingdoms may be made a field of
blood, and the youngest amongst us not live to see the end of these unnatural
wars. But if the present opportunity be wisely managed, and that we maintain
the just privileges of Parliament and liberty of the Subject in both
kingdoms, with that wisdom and discretion, as that may be given to God which
is Gods, and to Caesar what is Caesar's, if we fear God and the King, and do
not meddle with them who are given to change, That same divine providence and
wisdom which has brought us through many difficulties, will also teach us how
to establish these kingdoms in peace, and the Kings Throne in righteousness,
That the great blessing of a constant and friendly conjunction of the two
kingdoms (now united by allegiance and loyal subjection to one Sovereign and
Head) may be firmly observed and continued to all posterity.

The Land Chancellor of Scotland his last Speech, At a Conference in the
Painted Chamb^^ with a Committee of both Houses, October 10. 1646.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis day I hope will bring our Conference to some results to be reported (...)
the Houses, and therefore I shall frame my Discourse and Arguments with that
succinctnesse as may bring us soonest to a close.

At our first meeting, the subject of our debate was, Whether the Right and
Power of disposing the Person of the King is solely in the two Houses as the^
shall think fit, or in the two Kingdoms; and at our last meeting, we had so^
arguing (...) the same question, but your Lordships did ^ill assert the (...)
of the Houses, and we say (in respect of the interest and relations which both
Kingdoms have equally to the King, especially in the present juncture of
affairs, when both Kingdoms are entered in the same League and Covenant, have
jeoparded their lives in the same War, are laboring under the same danger, are
seeking the same remedies, and stand in need of the same Peace and security;
and both Kingdoms are bound by our Covenant to preserve Unity, and are obliged
by Treaty that none of us shall make any peace, cessation or agreement
whatsoever, without mutual advice and consent of both) That the Person of the
King cannot be disposed of without the joint advice and consent of both
Kingdoms. But as we do acknowledge that England has parity of interest with
Scotland, so do we still offer that they shall have parity of power in
disposing of the King: and we do affirm, That the Person of the King, who is
the King of Scotland as well as of England, and is Head and Monarch of both
Kingdoms, cannot be disposed of by any one of the Kingdoms alone: but what
ever is to be done concerning the disposing of his Majesty's Person, ought to
be done by joint advice and common consent of both, as may serve most for the
Peace, security, and happiness of the King and Kingdoms, which we did prove
by several Arguments: To which there was nothing answered in effect but, That
the King being within England, his person was to be disposed of as the two
Houses shall think fit, and that the King being with the Scottish Army, and
they being paid by the Parliament of England, he is in effect in the power of
the Houses, and ought to be at their disposing, in the same way as if he had
come in the Army of Sir Thomas Fairfax, or any other of the Parliaments Armies.
To which we shall not need to make any reply other then we have made already,
That the Kings present residence in England, nor no locality, can take away the
reality of our relations formerly mentioned by us, far less can it take away
the engagements and stipulations between the Kingdoms, and though the
Scottish Army be paid by the Parliament of England, yet they are the Army of
Scotland, raised for pursuance of the ends of the Covenant, and are to be
ordered and directed by the Parliaments or Committees of both Kingdoms: And
therefore they cannot with conscience, duty, nor honor, deliver the Person of
the King without his own consent, to be disposed of as the two Houses shall
think fit: but we have declared and do still declare, That we are content
that the Person of the King be disposed of (the word Disposed being taken in a
right sense) as may serve most for the Peace, safety, security, honor and
happiness of the King and both Kingdoms: and did offer to your Lordships
consideration his Majesty's coming to or near London, as the most probable
means to procure a speedy and well-grounded Peace. And seeing your Lordships
have done us the honor to meet with us in this free and brotherly Conference,
we do expect that you will concur and assent to this Proposition, or
propound a better expedient for the good of both Kingdoms.

But if the honorable Houses will not admit of this Proposition, our next
desire is (that it may appear, no lawful and possible means are left
unassayed which may procure a happy agreement betwixt the King and his
Parliaments, and for our further exoneration) That Commissioners may yet once
more be sent ^om both Kingdoms to his Majesty, to show the meaning of our
Propositions ^d to assert them, and to hear the Kings doubts and difficulties,
and desires, who ^ay further intimate, that (if his Majesty shall not give a
satisfactory answer to the Propositions) then both Kingdoms will without making
any such further application to him, take such course as they shall judge
fittest for the peace and security of the Kingdoms.

And as at the opening of this Conference I did begin with an humble, lawful,
and laudable desire for unity in relation to Religion, the King, and amongst
our selves, so shall I close in the same dialect; for the first of Religion, if
we do remember our vows to God to perform them, and shall endeavor really,
constantly, and sincerely, the Reformation of Religion, and uniformity
according to our Covenant, we may certainly expect that God will crown this
great work, wherein he has honored us to be actors, with his blessing; but
if in place of uniformity, which we are obliged to endeavor, there shall be a
toleration of all Sects and sorts of Religion, and if we neglect to build the
house of God, and become insolent upon our successes; although we could mount
up with Eagles wings, and build our nests as high as the stars, and had an
army who for valor and strength could march to Constantinople, God shall lay
our glory low in the dust, and suffer the work to fall in our hands, like the
confusion of Babell: And what ever has been moved by us concerning the King,
we desire it may be rightly constructed, as proceeding from such as have not
wavered from their first principles; for when the King was in the height of his
power, we did not, and (I hope) never shall flatter him; and when the enemy was
in the height of their pride and strength, Scotland did fear no colors: and
now when the King is at his lowest ebb, and has cast himself into our Army
for safety, we hope your Lordships will pardon us from our sense of honor and
duty to be very tender of the person and posterity of the King, to whom we have
so many near relations, and not like the worse of us: that we cannot so far
forget our allegiance and duty, as not to have an antipathy against the change
of Monarchical government, in which we have lived through the descent of so
many Kings, and under which both kingdoms have been governed so many ages, and
flourished in all happiness. And now my last word shall be for constant Unity
between the kingdoms, which as it has been the chief means to promote the
great work wherein both kingdoms are so deeply engaged, so there is nothing can
make us so formidable to our enemies, nor so much aiding one to another, as the
cherishing and continuing thereof; and I dare say that no man would divide the
one from the other, but such as desire to fish in troubled waters, and are
real enemies to both. God has blessed the joint endeavors of both Nations,
both are in one ship, and are come through a very great storm, and now when we
are come in the harbor, it would be great shame to both to split upon the
rocks of division (and devorate bove deficere in cauda) and your Lordships may
be confident that Scotland, who have esteemed no hazard too great, for
settling of Religion and love to their Brethren, will stick so fast and firmly
to you, (so long as you hold the principles of your Covenant) as no fear nor
favor will ever be able to divide them from you, and we do expect that
reciprocal amity which may perpetuate our Unity.

The Lord Chancellor of Scotland his Speech, to the Kings Majesty at NEWCASTLE.
YOur Majesty was pleased on Monday last, to call the Lords of your privy
Counsel of Scotland, and the Committee to acquaint them with the Propositions,
and told, That before the delivery of your answer, you would make the same
known to them. The time assigned for the stay of the Commissioners is so short,
and the consequence of your Majesty's answer is of so great importance, either
for the preservation or ruin of your Crown and Kingdoms, as we could not be
answerable to God, nor to that trust reposed in us, unless we represent to
your Majesty how necessary it is (as the condition of affairs now stand, and
in so great an extremity) that your Majesty should assent to the Propositions,
and that the danger and loss of your refusal will be remediles, and bring on
sudden ruin and destruction.

I shall begin first with the last, which is the danger; and shall next speak a
word of the remedy. The differences between your Majesty and your Parliament
(which no man knows better then your Majesty's self) are grown to such a
height, that after many bloody battles, there is no cure but a present peace,
otherwise nothing can be expected but certain destruction. The Parliament is
possessed of your Navy, and of all the Forts, Garrisons, and strong holds of the
Kingdom: They have the Excise, Assessements, and Sequestrations at their
disposal, and have authority to raise all the men and money in the Kingdom,
and (after many victories and great successes) they have a strong Army on foot,
and are now in such a posture for strength and power, as they are in a capacity
to do what they will both in Church and State: And some are so afraid, others
so unwilling to submit themselves to your Majesty's government, as they desire
not you, nor any of your race longer to reign over them. Yet the people are so
wearied of the wars, and great burdens they groan under, are so desireous of
peace, and loath to have Monarchical government (under which they have lived so
long in peace and plenty) changed, that such as are unwearied of your Majesteis
government, dare not attempt to cast it totally off, till once they send
Propositions of Peace to your Majesty, lest the people (without whose
concurrence they are not able to carry on their design) should fall from them.
And therefore all the people being desirous, that (after so great wars and
troubles) they may have a perfect security from oppression and arbitrary power,
The Houses of Parliament have resolved upon the Propositions, which are tendered
to your Majesty, as that without which the Kingdom and your people cannot be
in safety; and most part of the people think, that there cannot be a firm
peace upon any other terms.

Your Majesty's friends, and the Commissioners from Scotland (after all the
wrestling they could) were forced to consent to the sending of those
Propositions, or to be hated as the hinderers of peace, and to send no
Propositions at all. And now, Sir, if your Majesty (which God forbid) shall
refuse to assent to the Propositions, you will lose all your friends, lose the
City and all the Country, and all England will join against you as one man,
and (when all hope of reconciliation is past) it is to be feared, they will
process and depose you, and set up another government, they will charge us to
deliver your Majesty to them, and to render the Northren Garrisons, and to
remove our Army out of England; and upon your Majesty's refusing the
Propositions, both Kingdoms will be constrained (for their mutual safety) to
agree and settle Religion and Peace without you, which (to our unspeakable
grief) will ruin your Majesty and your Posterity. And if your Majesty reject
our faithful ^dvice (who desire nothing on earth more, then the establishment
of your Majesty's Throne) and lose England by your wilfulness, your Majesty
will not be permitted to come and ruin Scotland.

Sir, we have laid our hands upon our hearts, we have asked council and
direction from God, and have had our most serious thoughts about the remedy,
but can find no other (as affairs stand for the present) to save your Crown
and Kingdoms, then your Majesty's assenting to the Propositions. We dare not
say, but they are higher in some things (if it were in our power and option to
remedy it) then we do approve of: But when we see no other means for curing
the destempers of the Kingdoms, and closing the breaches between your Majesty
and your Parliaments, our most humble and faithful advice is, That your
Majesty would be graciously pleased to assent to them, as the only best way to
procure a speedy and happy peace; because your Majesty shall thereby have many
great advantages: You will be received again in your Parliament, with the
applause and acclamations of your people: by your Royal presence your friends
will be strengthened, your enemies (who fear nothing so much as the granting
of the Propositions) will be be weakened: Your Majesty will have a fit
opportunity to offer such propositions, as you shall in your wisdom judge fit
for the Crown and Kingdom. All Armies will be disbanded, and your people,
finding the sweet fruits of your peaceable government, your Majesty will gain
their hearts and affections, which will be your strength and glory, and will
recover all that your Majesty has lost in this time of tempest and trouble.
And if it please God so to incline your Royal heart to this advice of your
humble and faithful servants, who (next to the honor of God) esteem nothing
more precious then the safety of your Person and Crown, Our actions shall
quickly make it appear to all the world, That we esteem no hazard too great
for your Majesty's safety, and that we are willing to sacrifice our lives and
fotunes for establishing of your Throne. And now, Sir, we prostrate our selves
at your Majesty's feet, and in the lowest posture of humility do beg, That
your Majesty may (in end) grant the suit of your most humble Servants and
faithful subjects, who have no private aims, but only the glory of God, and
safety of your Majesty's Person, Posterity, and Crown before our eyes. And the
granting of our desires will revive our fainting spirits: refresh our sad
hearts, which are overwhelmed, and like to break with sorrow, and will turn the
prayers and tears of the many thousands of your people, in praises to God, and
make them embrace your Majesty with acclamations of joy.

FINIS.

