SOME PAPERS Given in by the COMMISSIONERS of the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, To
the Honorable HOUSES of the Parliament of ENGLAND: In Answer to their VOTES of
the 24. of September 1646. CONCERNING The disposing of His MAJESTY'S PERSON.

EDINBURGH: Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.

HAving received the Votes of both Houses, dated the 24 of September,
concerning the disposing of the Kings Person as both Houses of Parliament shall
think fit. Although we judge (as in charity we ought) that it is not the
meaning and intention of the Honorable Houses, to claim or assume to
themselves the whole and sole power to dispose of his Majesty's Person, which
is known to be a matter, as of high, so of common and equal concernment to
both Kingdoms: Yet lest by our silence the right and interest of the Kingdom of
Scotland should be prejudiced; and lest that sense of those Votes, which many
have apprehended and expressed, should minister occasion of misunderstanding
and difference between the Kingdoms, according to the desires and hopes of our
common enemies; We have judged it necessary, with that freedom, candor, and
plainness which becomes Brethren, to represent our thoughts concerning this
great business, to both Houses.

We do acknowledge, that as Positively the Houses of Parliament have as much
power in disposing of the Kings Person as any one Parliament has or can have,
to dispose of a King who has more free Kingdoms then one; So Negatively none
ought or may dispose of his Majesty's Person, without, or against their
consent. The like we suppose, will be mutually acknowledged in reference to the
Parliament of Scotland, It being a fundamental Right and Liberty of either
Kingdom, That none can justly (without their own consent) impede or restrain
the Person of their King from coming amongst them, and doing the duties of a
King unto them: And in both these Senses we acquiesce in the Vote of the
Honorable Houses.

But if the Vote should be meant or made use of as restrictive to the
Parliament of England, and exclusive of the Parliament of Scotland; Or, as if
the two Houses were to dispose of the Person of the King, by their single and
sole authority, without the consent and concurrence of the Kingdom of Scotland;
We trust this sense is as far from the thoughts of both Houses, as it is from
justice and equity: the Parliament of Scotland having as much interest in the
Person of the King of Scotland, as the Parliament of England has in the Person
of the King of England; and the Person being but one, both Kingdoms must needs
share equally in that joint interest. Neither has the Parliament of England
any more power to dispose of the person of this King of Scotland being in
England, then the Parliament of Scotland has to dispose of the Person of this
King of England if he were in Scotland: And as the Parliament of England might
justly conceive their interest and power to be greatly prejudiced, if the
Parliament of Scotland should claim the sole power to dispose of His Majesty's
Person being in Scotland (and consequently if they shall so think fit to
restrain his Person from coming to his Houses of Parliament when the necessary
affairs of this Kingdom require his presence) So we cannot but in justice
expect to be dealt with by the Honorable Houses, as they would have us in like
cases to deal with them.

Although what we have now expressed might be sufficient, as to our sense of
the Vote; Yet it shall not be superfluous but very expedient, that we further
clear our selves and our real intentions, in that which we first offered in
our Paper of the 11. of August, Concerning a joint consultation and resolution
of both Kingdoms, what is next to be done in reference to the King. Which
motion we now resume to be still insisted upon: For the question is not,
whether the Houses of Parliament, or the Scots Army shall dispose of the person
of the King in England. Our Army claims no power to dispose of his Majesty's
Person. And as they could not refuse to receive him when he came amongst them;
So they are ready to obey and submit to the joint resolutions of both Kingdoms
concerning his Majesty. Neither is the question, which of the two Kingdoms
shall trust the other with the present residence of the Kings Person, till he
be disposed of by the consent and agreement of both. Let it be far from both
Kingdoms, that the former mutual confidence, should now turn to a mutual
diffidence: And let not a blessing from heaven be expected upon either of the
Nations, which continues not faithful to the other, according to the
Covenant; Our confidence in the Wisdom, Justice, Loyalty, and Faithfulness of
the Honorable Houses is such, that whenever the King shall be willing to
return unto them, and they willing to receive him, we shall not make the least
impediment, but give our cheerful consent. Least of all is the question
concerning any Privilege or Power of the Parliament of England, or any Law,
Liberty, or practice of this Kingdom, to dispose of their King. It is not our
meaning to controvert what in that kind they may do, or at any time have done
according to their Laws (which are best known to themselves) for their good and
safety, without the least shadow of any dependencie upon another Kingdom. But
withal we desire it may be remembered, that this is to be transferred equally
to the power and privilege of the Parliament of Scotland. We do not meddle
with any of the single or proper Rights, Privileges, or Laws of this Nation,
more then we would have our Brethren to meddle with ours. It is one thing what
the Parliament of England might have done in another Cause or War, before
their engagements by the Covenant and Treaties with the Kingdom of Scotland: It
is another thing what ought to be done after such conditions and ties imposed
by neither Kingdom upon the other, but by both jointly upon themselves, and as
mutual Obligations, both to God, and each to other: Although we might also go
further back than to the Covenant and Treaties, and plead the common and equal
interest of the Kingdoms, in their common Head and Sovereign, ever since they
were so united, as may sufficiently appear, even by some instances in his
Majesty's time who now reigns over us. It may be remembered (as to the interest
of Scotland) that when his Majesty was first invited and desired to come into
that Kingdom to be Crowned, It was represented by the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council in England, that the great affairs of this Kingdom could hardly
dispense with his Majesty's going to Scotland: And therefore that either he
might receive his Crown of Scotland by a Vicegerent there, or that it might be
sent hither unto him. Likeas, this present Parliament when the King went last
into Scotland, to settle the Peace of that Kingdom, did earnestly desire and
press, that He might not go, but that he might stay here for the urgent
affairs of this Kingdom. But both in the one case and in the other, the
interest of the Kingdom of Scotland was preserved: And as it was most
necessary, that His Majesty should go into that Kingdom for receiving that
Crown, so His Majesty found it expedient to go thither for the settling of
Peace. It may also be remembered (as to the interest of England) that the
English Nobility both at the Birks Anno 1639, and at York 1640 (whose letters
to that purpose are yet extant and to be seen) And this Parliament Anno 1641
did claim an interest to see and know our demands proposed to the King, that
neither His Majesty nor themselves might be hereby prejudiced.

But the present question needs not go so far upon a back trade:
Whatsoever the joint interest of the Kingdoms was formerly, it is without
controversy now much more conjoined. And unless we lay aside the Covenant,
Treaties, Declaration of both Kingdoms, and three years conjunction in this
war, Neither the one Kingdom nor the other, must now look back what they
might have done singly before such a strict Union; but look forward, what is
fittest to be done by both jointly for the common good of both, and for the
ends of the Covenant, which both are obliged jointly to prosecute and promote.
So that the true and proper question in this conjuncture of affairs, is,
whether both Kingdoms have not a joint and common interest, in disposing of the
King of both, for the good of both, and that His Majesty's Person ought not to
be disposed of by either Kingdom singly. Much might be said for this joint
way, and against a divided way, from the nature of all associations, and the
common rules of equity observed between persons, societies, or nations, which
have a joint interest in the same Person, Parent, Master, Servant, Or in the
same thing, inheritance, lands, house, stock, or the like. In which cases, one
of the parties associated, may not without the consent of the other, dispose of
that which is common, especially if it be a common Person, and least of all if
it be a Person of chiefest eminency or concernment: For although a common thing
may be divided, and to each party his proper share assigned, yet one
individual Person does not admit of a partition, and so requires the greater
Union and conjunction of Councels in the disposal of it. And as reasons may be
drawn from the nature of all associations; so especially from the nature of
ours in the solemn League and Covenant, the Title, Narrative, Articles and
conclusion of it, do all along link together the interest of the Kingdoms, in
this common cause so much concerning the glory of God, their own safety Union
and Peace, and the honor and happiness of the King and his posterity; which
ends of the Covenant, both Parliaments as well as other Subjects of both
Kingdoms, have obliged themselves jointly and mutually to promote, according
to their power, and to continue zealously and constantly therein all the days
of their lives, against all opposition; And to assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and never suffer themselves to be divided directly or indirectly from this
blessed Union and conjunction. So that the ends of the Covenant (upon which the
disposal of the King must needs have a strong influence) are not to be
prosecuted by the two Kingdoms, as by two distinct bodies acting singly, but
they were united by solemn Covenant made to Almighty God and by League each to
other, as one entire body to prosecute this cause; Which was the expression
used by the honorable Houses in their Declaration of the 5 of August 1645, to
the Lords States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries. In which
Declaration this notable instance was given, which deserves also to be
remembered, That by the Covenant both Houses of Parliament and many thousands of
other His Majesty's Subjects of England and Ireland, stand bound as well as we,
to hinder the setting up of the Church government by Bishops in the Kingdom of
Scotland, And that we as well as they stand bound to endeavor the extirpation
thereof in England and Ireland. And as by the Covenant, the Kingdoms are fast
linked together in the whole prosecution of this cause; so particularly both
are obliged to endeavor mutually to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
liberties of the Kingdoms, That the world may bear witness with our
consciences of our loyalty, And that we have no thoughts or intentions to
diminish His Majesty's just power and greatness.

From the Treaty the same thing does further appear, it being thereby
manifest, that as our Army was to be leavied for the common good of both
Kingdoms in the pursuance of the ends expressed in the Covenant, And not as,
Auxiliaries for the single good of this Kingdom; So they are not tied to be
subject to the resolutions, and directions of either Kingdom singly, but of
both jointly. Also by the 8th. article, no Cessation, Pacification nor
Agreement for Peace whatsoever, is to be made by either Kingdom, without the
mutual advice and consent of both. So that if the disposal of the Kings
Person mentioned in the vote of both Houses, be intended for the good, Peace,
and security of both Kingdoms, then it should not be done without the mutual
advice and consent of both; But, if intended for the Peace and security of this
Kingdom within it self singly, this were to settle the Peace of the one
Kingdom, not only without the council and consent, but before the setlement
of the other, and so the more inconsistent with the plain scope of that
Article. Moreover by the 9th. Article of the same Treaty, all matters of
difference arising between the Subjects of the two Nations, are to be resolved
and determined by the mutual advice and consent of both, which has ever been
the usual way in such cases: Neither know we any other way for healing of
differences between two free Nations, which are as Brethren and equals, and
neither of them subordinate to the other. If therefore any difference should
arise (which God forbid) between the two Parliaments or any others of the
Subjects of the two Nations, concerning the disposing of His Majesty's Person,
then the question cannot be otherwise resolved and determined, but by the
mutual advice and consent of both. How much better is it (according to the
6fh. Article of the Covenant) to consult how to prevent all differences which
are like to arise between us or our posterities?

The honorable Houses in their wisdom did think fir that in the managing of
this war, there should be a conjunction of the Counsels of both Kingdoms
reference to the English as well as to the Scottish forces. How much more may we
expect a conjunction of Counsels in disposing of His Majesty's Person, wherein
the one Kingdom is as much interested, as the other.

If more need to be said in this bussinesse, we hope it is not forgotten, how
the Declarations of both Houses and their Commissioners sent into Scotland, to
desire their assistance and engagement in this War, did invite, solicit and
persuade that Nation upon principles of common interest, And in regard the one
Kingdom cannot enjoy a firm and durable peace, while the other is in war:
We were also put in mind of the affection and duty which becomes brethren.
And as we did upon these and the like considerations, espouse our brethrens
quarrel; So it cannot be offensive that we desire from them an improvement of
the very same principles: And that the same measure of the Conjunction of
interests be given to us, which was got from us. God forbid, that ways of
separating the interests of the Kingdoms should now be studied, as much as
ways of Uniting them were before endeavored. We cannot but expect better
things from our Brethren, then in their prosperity to desert us, who did engage
and Join with them in their greatest affliction; Or to think of securing their
own Peace without us, while the troubles of our Kingdom continue.

Wherefore, we cannot choose but obtest by the common good of both Kingdoms;
by the conjunction and parity of interests; by the love of Brethren; by
Declarations of both Houses; by former presidents; by the Treaty between the
Kingdoms; by the solemn League and Covenant: yea, by the very law of Nations
and rules of common equity, that there may be a conjunction of the Counsels
and resolutions of both Kingdoms, in disposing of that royal Person who is
King of both, and that all lawful and possible means (of which this is one and
a chief one) may be used, which may preserve His Majesty's Person, honor, and
happiness according to the Covenant; Monarchical government according to the
fundamental laws of both Kingdoms: Together with a firm and happy Union
between the Kingdoms.

These principles we desire still to go upon, And therefore if the vote of
both Houses communicated unto us, be understood as a material demand of His
Majesty's Person to be delivered unto them, to be disposed of as they shall
think fit: This as it does not necessarily follow from the words of the vote
nor does agree with that sense of the vote, which in charity we are most
willing to entertain, so there are just and great reasons against it. We
acknowledge that we are not to presume the worst, but the best concerning the
intentions of the honorable Houses toward the King. But we do not doubt it
will be mutually acknowledged that for preventing of differences afterward, it
is most fit and necessary, that there be a clear and distinct understanding
between the two Kingdoms, in a business of this nature and consequence. And
that it is not to be expected from private persons (though under jurisdiction)
much less from another Kingdom, that they should pass from their interest or
just security, because they have to do with such, as they judge to be honest
and faithful. To speak therefore to the nature of the thing in it self, if the
Scots Army should deliver up His Majesty's Person without his own consent, and
that upon the vote communicated unto us, which (although it may suffer a
benign interpretation and be understood of the disposing of the Kings Person
favorably and honorably, yet) as the words stand, is comprehensive and
capacious of more then is fit to be expressed: This Act of the Army were not
agreeable to their Oath of Allegiance (obliging them to defend his Majesty's
person from all harms and prejudices) nor to the Solemn League and Covenant,
which was not intended to weaken, but to strengthen our Allegiance, and to
wipe off the calumny and aspersion of Rebellion: For which end, before our
engagement in this War, it was mutually covenanted between the Kingdoms, to
preserve the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation of the
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms; Thereby holding forth to the world,
that the preservation and defense of Religion and Liberties, may well consist
and was intended to consist with the preservation of his Majesty's Person and
Authority, whom therefore our Army cannot deliver, to be disposed of by any
others, at pleasure. This delivery were also inconsistent that joint, equal,
and common interest of both Kingdoms in the disposal of his Majesty's Person,
which we have before asserted; And, were upon the matter a passing from the
right and interest of the Kingdom of Scotland int that business. It were also
contrary to his Majesty's power of residence in any of his Kingdoms, and to the
free exercising of the duties of his place and acts of personal government,
such as the hearing and redressing of the grievances of his Subjects in
Parliament, and his concurring to the making of Laws. Neither could it stand
with the Commissions given to the Committee of Estates and general Officers of
our Army, or with their Military Oath, to deliver up their King without his own
consent, and without warrant from the Parliament of Scotland, to be disposed of
by another Nation: Even as it were not to be expected, that the Army under the
command of Sir Thomas Fairfax if they were in Scotland for our assistance
there, in the like cause, and under the like engagements, in a recesse of the
Parliament of England, and without their warrant, would upon the like demand
deliver up the King (having cast himself in their hands) to be disposed of by
the Parliament of Scotland. Finally, if it be contrary to the Law and common
practice of Nations, to deliver up the meanest Subject fled to them, though it
be for the greatest crimes (for which cause the Parliament of England in the 4.
of King James, as likewise in the large Treaty, refused a general Act of
remanding between the two Kingdoms, unless they should be united into one) how
much more would the world abroad condemn our Army for a base and dishonorable
act, if they should deliver up their Head and Sovereign (having cast himself
into their hands) to be disposed of at the arbitrament of another Nation.

And now we hope it will not be teadious, that we further enlarge our selves,
upon this great subject, by adding satisfactory Answers to such Objections, as
have been, or may be made against our desires and Principles in this business.

Object. 1. That the Scottish Army is an Auxiliarie Army of England, and
under their pay, and therefore ought to deliver up the King, to be disposed of
by both Houses as they shall think fit.

Answ. It is sufficiently known, that the Scottish Army came not into this
Kingdom in the nature of Auxiliaries: For when it was desired by the Parliament
of England that the Kingdom of Scotland should send an Auxiliarie Army into
this Kingdom, to be subject to the directions and resolutions of both Houses,
It was absolutely refused, as may appear by the several Papers about that
purpose yet extant. The Kingdom of Scotland did foresee and consider, how
prejudicial it was to forsake their own Peace, and what infinite troubles,
losses, and unavoidable danger their engagement with the Parliament of England
against so powerful and prevailing an Enemy, would bring upon the Kingdom of
Scotland: And as they regarded not the large offers, nor the threats of the
other side for all their prosperity; so there was no offer of pay or other
worldly advantage whatsoever from the Houses of Parliament, which could have
induced them to undertake so hazardous and desperate a War. It was the good of
Religion, King, and Kingdoms, they set before their eyes, in order to which
end, they accounted nothing too dear unto them: And having resolved to engage
in this Cause for assistance of their Brethren therein, they did not stand upon
conditions, But without respect to the season of the year, the great strength
of the Enemy, and other discouragements; They did in a short time leavy an Army
at their own charge: And because of the many burdens then lying upon this
Kingdom, were content for the present to accept of a sum toward the Monthly
entertainment of that Army, amounting to little more then half pay, and to
supersede all further recommence, till the War should be at an end. And seeing
the Kingdom of Scotland was to quite their own Peace, and equally with England
to undergo the hazard of the War, it was found reasonable, that the prosecution
thereof, and the making of the conditions of Peace after the War, should be
with joint advice and consent of both Kingdoms. And according to these grounds,
a Covenant was agreed upon for the Reformation of Religion, and for
preservation of the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and of the Kings Person and
Authority: together with a Treaty, wherein it is declared that the Scottish
Army shall be commanded by a General appointed by the Estates of Scotland, and
shall be subject to such resolutions and directions, as are and shall be
mutually agreed upon and concluded between the Kingdoms, or their Committees in
that behalf appointed for pursuance of the ends of the Covenant: of which, one
is to defend and preserve his Majesty's Person.

Object. 2. That the King is in England, and therefore to be disposed of by
both Houses of Parliament, and cannot be disposed of by the Scottish Army: And
though the Kingdom of Scotland may pretend to an interest and power in the
disposing of the King, yet they can have no exercise of that power in England:
And albeit the Scottish Army, according to the Treaty between the Kingdoms be
only subject to such resolutions, as are mutually agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, or their Committees appointed in that behalf, yet this is only to be
understood in ordering and regulating of the Scottish Forces for prosecuting
the war, and the Treaty extends no further.

Answ. Although His Majesty's riding one days journey, might wholly subvert
the grounds of this objection; Yet we shall not insist upon this answer,
because we conceive it touches not the true state of the question. It has
been already cleared what is not, and what is the state of the question, which
being remembered we do assert, that the King coming voluntarily to the
Scottish Army, they cannot in duty deliver him against his will to the Houses
of Parliament without consent of the Kingdom of Scotland: For the being in
England takes not away the relation between the King and His Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland, nor ought it to impede the performance of the mutual
duties founded upon that relation: For alledgeance has no limitation of place
being grounded upon the Law of Nature as well as the law Municipall, and so is
rather universal then local. The difference of plate takes not away the
relation and mutual duties between parents and children, And it is not the
place but the relation which gives interest to the disposing of the Person of
the King. As his being in England takes not away the relation between him and
his Subjects of Scotland, so it does not infringe the mutual obligations and
solemn engagements between the Kingdoms, for joint counsels in prosecution of
the War and settling of the peace: The Kings coming to the Scottish Army, being
an emergency of our joint war, and the right disposal of his Person, the
only mean (for the present) of our joint security and peace. Neither can the
Kings being in England, prejudge any right or privilege of either Kingdom. It
is the fundamental right and privilege of the Parliament of Scotland, and the
liberty of that Kingdom (as we acknowledge it to be the right and privilege
of the Kingdom of England) that the person of their King ought not to be
disposed of, but with their advice and consent. The place of the Kings
residence (as was answered to us, when in the large Treaty it was desired His
Majesty might sometimes reside in Scotland) is at his own election, in either
of the Kingdoms as the exigence of affairs shall require and he shall think
fit, Or else must be determined by the mutual advice and consent of both
Kingdoms. From all which grounds it is apparent, that the Kingdom where he
resides for the time, may do no Act which may hinder His Majesty to perform
the office and duty of a King, to the Kingdom, from which he is absent in
Person, Nor impede him to repair to that Kingdom, when the affairs thereof
shall necessarily require it. Otherwise, if the Kingdom where His Majesty
resides has the sole interest and right to dispose of His Person, the Estates
of the Parliament of Scotland might upon former occasions and may now, in case
the King and Prince shall repair to Scotland, lawfully detain them there, and
make it the place of the ordinary residence of them and their posterity,
without the consent of the Kingdom of England: Which we acknowledge could not
be done without a manifest prejudice and injury to this Kingdom. Wherefore we
cannot but conclude that wheresoever the King be, in Scotland or England, he
being the King of both, ought to be disposed of for the good and with the
consent of both Kingdoms. And if it be considered that the Scottish Army was
invited and called into this Kingdom by both Houses in a Treaty for
prosecuting the ends of a solemn League and Covenant, whereof one is to
preserve and defend His Majesty's Person, there can remain no doubt concerning
the exercise of that right and interest in this Kingdom: And therefore it
seems very strange, that when upon invitation they are come into England, as
for other ends, So to defend His Majesty's Person, their being in England
should be made use of, as an argument why they should deliver up the Person of
their King to be disposed of, as both Houses shall think fit. Whereas it is
alleged, that the Treaty extends no further then to the ordering and
regulating of the Scottish Forces in relation to the war: Although this be
really answered from the nature of the thing, the Kings coming to the Scottish
Army being an emergency of the war, and so the delivering of His Person comes
under the regulation and direction of both Kingdoms or their Committees, as an
Act of the Scottish Army; Yet that all doubt may be removed, we further add,
that it is clear from the third Article of the Treaty, that the Scottish Army
is to receive the Directions of both Kingdoms or of their Committees, in all
things which may concern the pursuance of the ends of the Covenant and Treaty,
whether in relation to Peace or War. In the 8th Article of the Treaty, no
Cessation, Pacification, or agreement for Peace whatsoever, is to be made by
either Kingdom, or the Army of either Kingdom, without the advice and consent
of both Kingdoms. And in the 9th Article, all differences arising between the
Subjects of the two Nations are to be resolved and determined by the mutual
advice and consent of both Kingdoms.

Object. 3. That the Scottish Army did carry away the King from the Leaguer
before Newark when there was a Committee of both Houses there, without seeking
their consent; and that they have since disposed of him without consent of the
Houses of Parliament, whereas by the Treaty they ought to do nothing without a
joint resolution of both Kingdoms or their Committees.

Answ. No sooner did the King come into the Scottish Army, but the very same
day the Committee of Estates of Scotland, residing with that Army, did acquaint
the Commissioners of both Houses therewith: And not satisfying themselves with
this, the day following they wrote a Letter to the Committee of Scotland
residing at Edinburgh, and another to the Committee of both Kingdoms here
(which was communicated to both Houses) desiring the advice of this Kingdom,
as in a matter of common interest, and declaring they would obey the joint
resolutions of both Kingdoms: Yet no answer or advice was returned unto them,
either from the Houses or their Commissioners. But immediately after the
surrender of Newark, they received information that five thousand Horse and
Dragoons from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army were upon their March toward them
Northward (which the honorable House of Peers was pleased to give order to
stop) there being no Enemy in those parts to be opposed: Upon consideration
whereof, the Quarters wherein they had stayed during the siege of Newark, being
extremely exhausted, and the Service for which they came thither being
performed, for preventing mistakes or new troubles between the Kingdoms, They,
removed into Tork shire, and the King as he came unto them of his own accord,
did voluntarily March along with them. Upon several occasions afterward, They
and we did earnestly desire the honorable Houses to send a Committee, to join
and cooperate with the Committee of Estates there upon the place, in all
things according to the Treaty: But no answer was returned. And from time to
time the Houses were acquainted with the proceedings in that Army; which, were
according to the Covenant, and the known resolutions of both Kingdoms, to
debar all such of both or either Kingdoms as had been in Arms against the
Parliament, from coming into their Quarters, or to the Court, or to the Kings
Person, according to the desire of the House of Peers. And whereas it is
affirmed, That by the Treaty the Scottish Army ought to do nothing without a
joint resolution of both Kingdoms or their Committees, There is no such Clause
in the Treaty, but they are to be subject to such resolutions as are and shall
be agreed upon, and concluded mutually between the Kingdoms or their
Committees, as by Ordinance of Parliament, the Army under the command of the
Earl of Essex, or of Sir Thomas Fairfax, was to receive and observe the
Directions of the Committee of both Kingdoms sitting at Westminster; But in
case no new Directions were sent unto them, they were left to former Orders (if
any were) or otherwise to their own judgment and discrection. There was never
any such resolution agreed upon between the Kingdoms or their Committees, as
that the Scottish Army should not receive the King if he came unto them, but it
is an agreement between the Kingdoms (in the Covenant) that they should
preserve and defend his Majesty's person; And (in the Declarations of both
Kingdoms) to rescue him from the common Enemy: So that the Scottish Army
having often desired to know the direction and advice of the Houses of
Parliament, concerning the King, and no new Directions being signified unto
them; According to the Treaty they were to observe the Directions and
Resolutions formerly agreed upon between the Kingdoms. And as the Scottish Army
do and will ever acknowledge that they claim no power to dispose of the Kings
Person, but are subject to, and shall be ready to follow low whatsoever both
Kingdoms shall agree upon, as best for the King and Kingdoms: so their keeping
and p^eserving his Majesty's Person (as they would do to any person of his
eminency and relation in an Army or Garrison Town) without the least thought of
hindering his voluntary return to his Parliament, cannot be reputed or called a
disposing of his person.

Object. 4. If any Peer of England go to the Scottish Army and desire their
Protection, can he not be disposed of without the consent of the Committee of
Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland residing with that Army?

Answ. There is a wide and manifest difference betwixt the relation the
Scottish Army has to any Subject of England, and the relation they have to
their King: which are sufficiently distinguished in the third and fourth
Articles of the Covenant: for by the one they are mutually obliged to preserve
and defend his Majesty's Person, and by the other they are mutually obliged to
endeavor, that all Incendiaries and dividers betwixt the King and his people,
or betwixt the Kingdoms, be brought to trial and condign punishment before
the supreme Judicatories of the Kingdoms respectively, And the Kingdom of
Scotland has equal right and interest with the Kingdom of England in the
disposal of the Person of the King, which they cannot pretend unto concerning
the Person of any Subject of England.

Object. 5. That seeing it is alleged by us, that the disposing of the Kings
Person comes in place of a Peace, then the receiving of the King into the
Scottish Army without consent of the Houses, is aequivalent to the making of a
Peace, without consent of the Kingdom of England, contrary to the eighth
Article of the Treaty.

Answ. It has been sufficiently answered before, that the Scottish Army
neither has nor will take upon them to dispose of the King. He came unto them
without Capitulation or Treaty, his residence with them is voluntary and free,
and they do nothing which may hinder him to come to his Houses of Parliament.
But if the kingdom of Scotland should consent to the desire of the Houses, that
they may have the sole disposal of the Person of the King, It being that which
comes in the place of the Peace and security of both kingdoms, They will really
quite the right and interest they have by the eighth Article of the Treaty,
concerning the making of a Peace; for which soever of the kingdoms is
acknowledged to have the sole disposal of the King, may without the other make
Peace with him, when, how, and in what terms they please.

Object. 6. That England is a free Nation, and in former times it was in the
power of the Parliament of England to dispose of their Kings, And if one
Kingdom pretend to a joint right of disposing of the King, while he is in the
other, it is to entrench upon the former liberty of that Kingdom. That the
Kingdom of Scotland have no reason to distrust the Houses of Parliament, who
when the King shall be in their power, will not dispose of him otherwise then
may consist with their duty, according to the Covenant and Treaty between the
Kingdoms.

Answ. We will not dispute what power the Houses of Parliament formerly had to
dispose of the Person of their King; but whatsoever power or right they have,
the like is due to the Parliament of Scotland, And so the Person of the King
being common to both and indivisible, cannot be disposed of, but by consent of
both kingdoms. It were another question indeed if it were as in former times,
if we had different Kings, if there were not an Union of the kingdoms under one
head and Monarch, if there were neither Covenant nor Treaty between the
kingdoms; But since all these are, and that the peace and security of both
kingdoms, is so much concerned in the disposal of the King; not any one of
them without the other, can justly pretend to the sole judgment and right, to
determine what is best and most expedient for the safety and security of both.
Nor can it in reason be made an argument that the one Kingdom distrusts the
other, because the one will not renounce and resign all right and interest
they have in the person of the King, and matter of their own security and
peace, to the judgment and determination of the other; otherwise, according to
this Argument, where there is any trust, there should be no contract between
person and person, nor Treaty between Nations; Or if there be any Treaty or
agreement, the performance or not performance of it, is to be left to
arbitrament. But we cannot see that this does argue any diffidence or distrust
trust more then when private persons lending money to the Public, desire
security, and will not depend upon pleasure. And therefore, though it is not to
be questioned, but the houses of Parliament would dispose of the Person of the
King so as might consist with their duty, in performing the Covenant and
Treaty; Yet, this can be no argument why the Scottish Army should neglect
their duty, or the kingdom of Scotland quite the interest and right they have
in the person of the King.

Object. 7. That the King is in the possession of the Scottish Army, and
though a joint advice and consent of both Kingdoms be urged for his disposal,
Yet if the Houses of Parliament agree not to what Scotland shall desire, the
King does still remain in the power of the Scotts Army, and so the Parliament
of England has no consent.

Answ. If this argument were turned over, the strength or weakness of it may
the more easily appear: Suppose the King were here at Westminster, it may be
upon the same grounds urged, that the kingdom of Scotland would have no consent
in his disposal, And so much the more that the Houses claim the sole interest
and judgment to dispose upon the Kings Person, which we desire may be done
jointly, as may be best for the security and safety of both kingdoms. And we
see no reason, why it may not now be determined when he is in the Scottish
Army (who are entrusted by both, and subject to the resolution of both
kingdoms) as well as hereafter, since he came thither of his own accord, and
his residence there is voluntary. And if his Majesty shall think fit to repair
hither to his Houses of Parliament, they shall do no act which may either
hinder or dissuade him, but cannot constrain him, or deliver him to the Houses
to be disposed of as they shall think fit.

It may now abundantly appear from the grounds and considerations before
expressed, that the Scottish Army may not deliver up his Majesty's Person, to
be disposed of by the one Kingdom, without the consent of the other; Upon
supposition whereof, we shall in the next place (without presuming to prescribe
ways, or impose conditions) express our selves concerning some expedients,
which in reference to his Majesty, deserve to be looked upon, considered of,
and compared together; where we shall only premise this much, That whatever
way shall be taken, if the right end be looked at, his Majesty's Person ought
to be so disposed of, as may serve most for the safety and happiness of the
King himself, and for the common Peace and security of the Kingdoms, United in
this Cause by the solemn League and Covenant; And, as may best agree with their
duty, Covenant, and Treaties.

These ends being before our eyes, although it be most eligible and best of
all, that His Majesty should without further delay, forthwith give
satisfaction in the Propositions of Peace (which has been with all instancy
pressed, not only by us, but by all the judicatories of the Kingdom of
Scotland) and so return fully reconciled to His Houses of Parliament; Yet,
since (to our unspeakable grief) this this has not been as yet obtained; We
do propose that His Majesty's coming to London, or to some of his houses near
London, with safety, freedom and honor (which is desired by himself, that he
may be heard, And that upon the clearing of his doubts, he may knowingly give a
satisfactory answer to the Propositions) is much better then the other ways
which may be expected in case this His Majesty's desire be not agreed unto. As
for His Majesty's going to Ireland or other-where beyond Sea, It could not be
the way to a present peace now so much desired; but would certainly
prognosticate new troubles. Lastly, His Majesty's coming hither, or near this
place, is a more probable and hopeful way to preserve the Union of the
Kingdoms, because the Enemy being still in Arms in Scotland and expecting
supplies from Ireland, and the Kingdom disabled by their great sufferings to
intertaine an Army for suppressing the malignant party, It were much more easy
to raise new Forces there to the disturbance of the peace of this Kingdom;
then it could be here, where (by the blessing of God) all the Forces and
Garrisons of the Enemy are subdued, and where it will not be so difficult to
hinder delinquents from access to His Majesty. The dangers and inconveniences
of any of these other ways, do so much preponderate, and the present condition
of affairs does so much differ from that time, when both Houses with our
concurrence did disagree from His Majesty's desire of coming to London (at
which time he had both Garrisons and field Forces unreduced) that it may be
conceived not only safe, but (as things stand) most convenient, to agree to His
Majesty's coming to London or near it, upon such conditions and assurances from
him, as shall be by joint resolution found necessary for preventing the access
of delinquents to His Majesty, or any intestine commotion, or foreign
invasion, to the disturbance of the peace of either Kingdom. We trust it might
accelerate a happy peace, bring the present differences to an end, and be no
grief of heart afterward, if upon such terms and conditions, both Houses
should be pleased to revive and renew such an invitation and assurance upon
their part, as was contained in their answer to His Majesty's Message of the
11. of September. 1642. where, after mention made of their chief grievance; it
was added. All this notwithstanding, as we never gave your Majesty any just
cause of withdrawing your self from your great Council, So it has ever been
and shall ever be far from us to give any impediment to your return, or to
neglect any proper means of curing the distempers of the Kingdom, and closing
the dangerous breaches betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament, according to
the great trust which lies upon us. And if your Majesty shall now be pleased
to come back to your Parliament without your Forces, we shall be ready to
secure your royal Person, Crown, and dignity with out lives and fortunes; Your
presence in this great Council, being the only means of any Treaty betwixt
your Majesty and them with hope of success. Diverse such passages there are in
the Declarations of both Houses which we shall not need to mention.

But if the Houses of Parliament shall not agree to His Majesty's desire of
coming hither with safety, freedom, and honor; We offer to be considered in
the next place; whether it be not expedient, that once again Commissioners be
sent to His Majesty in name of both Kingdoms, with power to hear his desires,
and to endeavor the satisfaction of doubts and scruples; with intimation also,
That if His Majesty shall not give satisfaction in the Propositions, both
Kingdoms will without any more such applications, consult and jointly resolve
upon other ways of their safety and security. And upon the other part, that if
His Majesty will be now at last graciously pleased, to satisfy the desires of
both Kingdoms, His Majesty's Throne with his just power and greatness, shall
be established, as well as the peace and security of his Subjects.

All which we do propound in a brotherly freedom, not being peremtorily
wedded or addicted to any expedient that we have offered; but, if the
honorable Houses in their wisdom, shall be pleased to think of any other
expedient, which shall be for the good, safety, and honor of the King and
Kingdoms, We shall be most willing and ready to agree unto it, when it shall
be made known unto us, not doubting but that in the faithful and conscionable
use of all good and possible means, which may prevent differences between the
Kingdoms, there will be at last a sweet and brotherly agreement in such a
conclusion, as shall be good in Gods eyes, and wherein both Kingdoms shall
find greatest comfort and happiness.

By command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland. Jo. Cheislie.

FINIS.

