PROCLAMATION For Apprehending Captains Gavine Hamilton, Kenneth Mackenie and
Kenneth Urquhart.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch as it is informed, that Captain Gavine Hamilton, Son to Gavine
Hamilton of Hill, Captain Kenneth Mackenie, and Captain Kenneth Vrquhart, were
principal Instigators, Actors or Ringleaders of the Tumult that happened within
our City of Edinburgh, on the Twentieth of June last, which proceeded to the
unheard of Outrages of burning and breaking up of Tolboth-doors, setting free
the Prisoners specially Hugh Paterson and James Watson, accused before our
Privy Council for scandalous and seditious Pamphlets, with other Criminals, and
the deforcing of the Magistrates and Town-Guards, with the effusion of Blood.
Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have Ordained and
hereby Ordain, that all Our Liedges be Certified by open Proclamation, of the
said persons their accession to the said insolent Tumult and Rabble; and in
respect of their absenting and absconding from Justice, do farther require all
Magistrates and Officers of Our Forces and others, to use their outmost
endeavors, to apprehend the foresaids persons, and all Our other good Subjects
to be assisting to them therein, that they may be brought to condign
Punishment: As also, that all Our good Subjects give notice to the next
Magistrates, Justices of Peace, Officers of Our Forces and Constables, where
they have seen the said persons, or any of them, since the said Twentieth day
of June last to the effect they may be apprehended and brought to due Trial.
Likeas, We with Advice foresaid, do hereby Promise and Assure the Sum of Twelve
Hundred Pounds Scots Money, to any person or persons who shall apprehend any or
each of the persons abovenamed, and deliver him to any of Our Officers Civil
or Military, to be by them secured to the end foresaid; And We with Advice
foresaid, Discharge any of Our Subjects, to Shelter, Harbor, or any ways
Assist or Supply the said persons, or any of them, upon their highest peril.
OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
remanent Mercat-Crosses of the several Head-Burghs of the haill Shires and
Stewarties within this Our ancient Kingdom, and thereat, in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premises, that none
pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Twenty Fifth day of July, and of Our
Reign the Twelfth year 1700. Per actum Dominorum secreti Consilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. sti. Consilii.

God save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dous. 1700.


