A REMONSTRANCE AND RESOLVTION OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.

Showing the Lawfulness of the second coming into England to take up Arms
against all those that shall oppose the PARLIAMENT.

Published with the advice of the Council of SCOTLAND.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed first in Scotland by Robert Bryson, and now Reprinted at LONDON for
G. T. 1642.

THE LAVVFVLNESSE OF our expedition into England Manifested.
AS from the beginning till this time, we have at^empted nothing presumptuously
in this great work of Reforma^ion, but have ^roceeded upon good grounds, and
have been l^d forward by the good hand of God, so now, from our own persuasions
are we ready to answer every one that asks us a Reason of this our present
Expedition, which is one of the greatest and most notable parts of this
wonderful work of God beseeching all to lift up their m^nds above their own
particulars* and without prejudice or partiality to lay to heart the
considerations following.

I. As all men know and confess, what is the great force of necessity and how
it does justify actions otherways unwarrantable: So can it not be denied, but
we must either seek our peace in England at this time, or lie unde three
heavy burdens which we are not able to bear. First, we must maintain Armies
on the Borders, and all pl^ces nearest to hazard, for the defense and
preservation of our Country, which by our laying down of Arms, and
disbanding of our Forces should be quickly overrun by hostile Invasion, and
the incursions of our enemies. Second^y, we shall want all Trade by Sea, which
would not only deprive the Kingdom of many necessaries, but utterly undo our
Burroughes, Merchants, Mariners, and many others who live by Fishing, and by
commodities exported, and imported, and whose particul^r callings are utterly
made void, by want of commerce with other Nations and Sea-trade. Thirdly, the
Subjects through the whole Kingdom shall want administration of justice; and
although this time past, the m^rvellous power and providence of God has kept
the Kingdom in order and quietness, without ordinary Judicatories sitting,
yet cannot this be expected for afterward, but all shall turn to confusion.
Any one of the three, much more all of them put together, threaten us with most
certain ruin, unless we speedily use the ten edy of this Expedition. And this
we say not from fear, but from feeling; for we have already felt to our
unspeakable prejudice, what it is to maintain Armies, what to want tr^ffique,
what to want administration of Justice. And if the beginning of those evils be
so heavy, what shall the the growth and long continuance of them prove unto
us; so miserable a being all men would judge to be worse than no being.

II. If we consider the nature and quality of this Expedition, it is defensive,
and so the more justifi^able. For proof hereof, let it be remembered: 1. The
Kings Majesty misled by the crafty and cruel Faction of our Adversaries,
began this years War, not we. When Articles of pacification had been the
other year agreed upon, Arms laid down, Forces and Castles rendered, an
Assembly kept and concluded, with the presence and consent of His Majesty's
High Commissioner, the promised ratif^cation thereof in Parliament (contrary to
the foresaid Articles) was denied into us. And when we would have informed His
Majesty by our Commissioners, of the Reasons and manner of our proceedings,
they got not so much as presence or Audience. Thererafter His Majesty being
content to hear them; before that they came to Court, or were heard, War was
concluded against us at the Councell-Table of England, and a Commission given
to the Earl of Northumberland for that effect: The Parliament of Ireland and
England were also convocat for granting of Subsidies unto this War against
us, as it n^t^^ur^: plots have been hatched and military preparations made
against us; many invasions by Sea, which have spoiled us of our Ships and
Goods; Men, Women, and Children killed in Edinburgh by His Majesty's Forces in
the Castle: Our enemies therefore the authors and beginners of the War, and
we defenders only. 2. We intend not the hurt of others, but our own pe^ce and
preservation, neither are we to offer any injury or violence: And therefore
have furnished our selves according to our power with all necessaries, not to
fight at all, except we be forced to it in our own defense, as our Declaration
bears. 3. We shall retire and lay down our Arms, as soon as we shall get a
sure peace and shall be satisfied in our just demands. Upon which ground, even
some of those who would seem the greatest Royalists, hold the Wars of the
Protestants in France, against the King and the Faction of the Guisians to have
been lawful defensive Wars, because they were ever ready to disband and
quiet themselves when they got assurance of peace, and liberty of Religion. Now
this present Expedition being in the nature of it defensive; hence it
appears, that it is not contrary, but consonant to our former Protestations,
Informations, and Remonstrances: In all which, there is not one word against
defensive War in this cause; but strong reasons for it* all which militat for
this Expedition. Our first Information sent to England this year, though it
accurseth all offensive or invasive War; yet shows plainly, that if we be
either invaded by Sea or Land, we must do as a man that fights himself out
of prison. If a private man when his house is blocked up, so that he can have
no liberty of commerce and traffic to supply himself and his Family, being
also in a cotinuall hazard of his life, not knowing when he shall be assaulted
by his enemies, who lie in wait against him; may in this case most lawfully
step forth with the Forces which he can m^ke, and fight himself free. Of how
much more worth is the whole Nation* and how shall one and the same way of
Defense and liberation be allowed to a private man, and disallowed to a Nation?

III. Thirdly, we are called to this Expedition by that same Divine Providence
and Vocation, which has guided us hitherto in this great b^sinesse. We see the
expedience of it, for the glory of God, for the good of the Church* for
advancing the Gospel, for our own peace, after seeking of God, and beging light
and direction from Heaven, our hearts are inclined to it; God has given us
zeal and courage to prosecute it, ability and opportunity for under-taking it,
Instruments sitted for it, unanimous resolution upon it, scruples removed out
of minds where they were harbored, encouragements to atchieve it from many
passages of Divine Providence; and namely from the proceedings of the last
Parliament of England, their grievances and desires being so homogenecall and a
kin to ours, we have labored in great long-suffering by Supplications,
Informations, Commissions, and all other means possible to avoid this
Expedi^ion: It was not premediate nor affected by us (God knows) but our
enemies have necessitate and redacted us unto it and that of purpose to sow the
seed of National quarrel, yet as God hitherto has turned all their plots
against themselves, and to effects quite contrary to those that they intended;
so are we hopeful, that our going into England, so mucwished and desired by
our Adversaries, for producing a National quarrel, shall so far disappoint
them of their aims, that it shall link the two Nations together, in straiter
and stronger bonds both of civil and christian love, than never before.

And that we may see yet further evidences of a calling from God to this
voyage, we may observe the order of the Lords steps and proceedings in this
work of Reformation. For, beginning at the gross Popery of the Service Book
and Book of Canons, he has followed the back trade of our defection, till he
has reformed the very first and smallest Novations* which entered in their
Church. But so it is that this back trade leads yet farther to the Prelacie
in England, the fountain whence all those Babyl^nish streams issued unto us:
The Lord therefore is still on the back trade, and we following him therein,
cannot yet be at a stay. Yea, we trust that he shall so follow forth this
trade, as to chase home the Beast, and the false Prophet to Rome, and from Rome
out of the World. Besides, this third consideration resulteth from the former
two; for if this Expedition be necessary, and if it be defensive, then it
follows inevitably, that we are called unto it, for our necessary defense is
warranted, yea commanded by the Law of God and Nature, and we are obliged to it
in our Covenant.

IV. Fourthly, the lawfulness of this Expedition appears, if we consider the
party against whom; which is not the Kingdom of England, but the Canterburian
faction of Papists, Atheists, Arminians, Prelates the misleaders of the Kings
Majesty and the common enemies o^ both Kingdoms. We persuade our selves, that
our Brethren and neighbors in England, will never be so evil advised, as to
make themselves a party against us, by the defense and patrociny of our enemies
among them as sometime the Benjamites made themselves a party against the
Israelites by def^nding the Gibeathites in their wicked cause, Judges 20. We
pray God to give them the wisdom of the wise woman in Abel, who when Ioab
ca^e near to her City with an Army, found out a way which both kept Ioab
from being an enemy to the City* and the Ci^ie from being an enemy to him, 2 Samuel 21. As touching the provisi^n and furnit^re of o^r Army in England* it
shall be such as i^ used a^^ng friends, not among enemies. The rule of humanity
and grati^^de will teach them to furnish us with necessaries, when as beside
the procu^ing of our own peace, we do good offices to them, They detest (we
know) the churlishness of Nabal, who refused victuals to David and his men,
who had done them good and no evil, 1 Samuel 20. And the inhumanity of the men
of Succoth and Penuel, who denied bread to Gideons Army, when he was pursuing
the common enemies of all Israel, Judge. 8. But let the English do of their
benevolence what humanity and discretion will teach them; for our own part, out
Declaration shows, that we seek not victuals for naught but for money, or
security: And if this should be refused (which we shall never expect) it were
as damnable as the barbarous cruelty of Edom and Moab, who refused to let
Israel pass through their Country, or to give them bread or water in any
case, Numb. 20. Judge. 11. and this offense the Lord accounted so inexpiable,
that for it he accursed the Edomites and Moabites, from entering into the
Congregation of the Lord, unto the tenth generation, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4.

V. The fifth consideration concerns the end for which this voyage is
under-taken. We have attested the searcher of hearts; it is not to execute any
disloyal act against the Kings Majesty* it is not to put forth a cruel or
vindictive hand against our Adversaries in England, whom we desire only to be
judged and censured by their own Honorable and high Court of Parliament: it is
not to enrich our selves with the wealth of England, nor to do any harm
thereto. But by the contrary we shall gladly bestow our pains and our means to
do them all the good we can, which they might justly look for at our hands,
for the help which they made us at our Reformation, in freeing us from the
French, a bond of peace and love betwixt them and us to all Generations. Our
Conscience, and God who is greater than our Conscience bears us record, that
we aim altogether at the glory of God, peace of both Nations, and honor of
the King, in suppressing and punishing in a legal way of those who are the
troublers or Israel, the firebrarnds of hell, the Korahs, and Balaams, the
Doegs, the Rabshakahs, the Hamans, the Tobiahs, and Sandballats of our time,
which done, we are satisfied. Neither have we begun a Military expedition to
England, as a mean for compassing those our pious ends; till all other means
which we could think upon have failed us, and this alone is left to us as
ultimum and unicum remedium, the last and only remedy.

VI. Sixthly, if the Lord shall bless us in our Expedition, and our intentions
shall not be crossed by our own sins, and miscariage, or by the opposition of
the English, the fruit shall be sweet, and the effects comfortable to both
Nations, to the Posterity, and to the reformed Kirks abroad: Scotland shall be
reformed as at the beginning, the Reformation of England long prayed and pleaded
for by the Godly there; shall be according to their wishes and desires,
perfected in doctrine, worship* and Discipline; Papists, Prelates, and all the
members of the Antichristian Hierarchy, with their Idolatry* Superstition* and
humane inventions sall pack them hence; the names of Sects, and Separatists
shall no more be mentioned, and the Lord shall be one* and his Name one
throughout the whole Island, which shall be glory to God, honor to the King,
joy to the Kingdoms, comfort to the Posterity, example to other Christian
Kirks, and confusion to the incorrigible enemies.

FJNJS.

