Very sad and BLOODY NEVVES FROM IRELAND, Of the loss of BUNRATTY in MUNSTER,
and ROSCOMON in CONNAUGHT.

Where the Rebels put to the Sword, Sir Charles Coot his brother, L. Colonel
Mac-Adams, and many gallant Englishmen, and the particulas thereof.

AS ALSO, Letters from the Officers of the Scottish Army, and their desires to
the Committee of both Kingdoms.

These are Examined, and printed and published according to ORDER of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON Printed by Jane Coe. 1646.

THE Copy of a Letter from the Officers of the Scottish Army, in IRELAND, to
the Committee of both Kingdoms.
Our most noble Lords,
WIth the last Gentlemen sent from this Army, your Lordships were made a
quainted with the miserable condition we have ever been in since our coming
to Ireland, yet hitherto we have seen noappearance of ways taken for our
supply, which your Lordships may conceive is no small discouragement to this
Armyd that God having put the affayre of England in such a good posture, that
without hurting or hindering the p^osecution of you Wars at home, we might have
been furnished with at least as much sustenance as your Lordships would have
allowed Captives. Our misery is so great, if necessity did not comp^ll us, we
are ashamed to show that under such a mighty Estate so many gentlemen
notwithstanding o^ our Treaty, which encouraged our over coming to this
desolate Land, should starve for l^cke of Bread diverse times, has made us go
abroad to haz^rd the buying of it with our blood, but our enemies were so well
acquainted with the shortness of our entertainment, that a little ways
flying, put them without out reach, so that the very same necessity of
provision made us return without effectuating any thing according to your
Lordships expectations or our desires. Our Officers these sixteen Months have
had nothing either from England or Scotland, Our Soldiers have had but an
English pound and an half of mea'e a day, which is so unreasonable
maintenance, as the effects of the last conflict we had, did testify after
we had above three hours dispute with shot for the Victory, yet when our
bodies joined, we sensibly found the weakness of men, our patience is now
almost expired, our misery any longer unsupportable. That if present supply be
not sent us, we must ruin, and your Lordships hazard the losing of a Kingdom,
If your Lordships have no intention for keeping us longer in your service,
according to the custom of Armies, we desire our accounts may be cleared, and
we for our by-runne service contented, And we shall in every thing show our
selves loyal Subjects, true Patriots, and

Your Lordships most humble servants. Subscribed by the Officers of the
Scottish Army in Ireland.
From Belfest dd. the 24. July, 1646 For the Committee of both Kingdoms as
London.

A Letter from DVBLJN, of the sad News from JRELAND, of the Rebels Bloody
actions in taking Bunratty and Rascomount.
SIR,
We have very sad New's come hither both out of Munster and also out of
Conought, the perticulers whereof I thought fit to acquaint you with; which in
brief is thus, (I know you are fully satisfied of the good success that Sir
Charles Coote had in Conought the first of June, against Preston, therefore I
shall not say any thing of that now, but acquaint you with the il success we
have had since.) General Preston having rallied his men, and gathered a great
Body, in Connought, vowing revenge for that great loss he then had had by Sir
Charles Coot which indeed was a very great defeat which was given to the Rebels
at that time; Preston with most desperate Rebels of the Irish Papists, came
against the Lord Raughnelaghs House in Connought, called Roscomon; which siege
was made very strong, and in which place was Sir Charles Cootes his brother,
and many other very gallant men, who held it out so long as they could by
force, the enemy losing many men; but being overpowered Preston has taken the
place, and all the men at mercy, and the cruel bloody Rebels put many of them
(some say all or most part of them) to the Sword, in a most cruel and
barbarous manner, Sir Charles Cootes his brother is slain (for ought we can
hear) and diverse gallant men besides: They have taken all the Arms and
Ammunition, which is very sad and grievous to the protestants in those parts,
and should be to you in England; for our destruction does make way for yours.

And as for the Rebels in Munster, they get much upon ^s, because no relief
has been sent to them: We hoped that when the Lord Toomount delivered up those
Garrisons, he brought in t^^ the power of the King and Parliament, that we
had gained much upon ^he Rebels, and the Rebels themselves were so sensible of
it, that they raised what power they could under the command of General
Musgrave; and immediately besiged Bunratti in Toomount in the County of Clare,
in Munster, where they have lain these 3 Months, where that gallant active
godly Gentleman, Sir Arthur Lostus has used all the means he could for their
relief, and left his Lieutenant Colonel Mac-Adams to keep it whilst himself
came in person to get relief, the enemy being many times beaten off with
loss, and yet no relief could be procured in all these three Months, yet
they still held out to the uttermost, hoping to hear of relief, but still
none came, nor indeed no hopes of any, though Sir Arthur Loftus had there as
gallant a Regiment as any is in Ireland, and had there been but relief sent,
the very noise of it would have raised the Rebels: They stormed several times
and were repulsed, and several good successes we had in beating them off, but
still no relief came: And now we have the sad experience of the delay thereof:
for General Musgrave and the Rebels have taken Bonratti, with all the Ordnance,
Arms and Ammunition, slain Lieutenant Colonel Mac-Adams, and diverse others,
and so very much strengthened themselves in that part of Munster: And if so be
that relief come not speedily to this languishing Kingdom, we shall be in
danger to lose more.

The Rebels grow strong, and are cruel and very barbarous where they conquer,
we had hopes that such relief would have been sent hither from England before
this, as would have put us in a better posture: but we hope you will not let us
perish for want of help, by the Wars that has been in England you may
conceive part of the present miseries of this Kingdom; but the rage of the
inhumane and bloody Rebels here, are more grievous and horrible; God grant that
some course may be taken for relief and help in time, lest we perish for want
of help: and become a prey to the fury of these bloody Villains, who seek
our utter destruction, and in the mean time we desire your prayers for the
Protestants of this poor Kingdom, and amongst them for

Your obedient Servant R. S.
Dublin the 20. July, 1646.
FJNJS.

