(...) and Order of Council, for Sequestrating the Rents of such as are in
Rebellion against Their Majesty's.
At Edinburgh, the 3d day of January, 1690.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council Considering, That by the Laws and
Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom, and particularly by the 2d. Act, 12. Parl:
K: Ja. 2. It is expressly Provided and Declared, That where any person or
persons are suspected or scandelled of Treason, that they be taken and remain
in Firmance, and their Goods under sure Borrows, until they suffer an Assize,
and be Tried, whether they be guilty or not; And that the persons afternamed,
viz. John Earl of Melfort, Sir Archibald Kennedy of Cullean, Colonel (...)
Cannon, John late Viscount of D^ndee, (...) Earl of Dumfermling, (...) Earl of
Buchan, (...) Viscount of Frendraught, (...) Lord Dunkell, Mr. Colin Mckenzie
Uncle to the Earl of Seaforth, Sir John Drummond of Machany, Sir William
Wallace of Cragie, Sir James Hamilton of Eliston, (...) of Archarach, (...)
Crawfurd younger of Ardmillan and (...) Crawfurd his Brother, Mr. David Graham
Brother to the late Viscount of (...) Dundee, (...) Robertson of Strouan, (...)
Stuart of Ladywell, (...) Ogilvy of Clova, James Edmiston of Newtoun of Down,
(...) Grant of Balindalloch, Sir Ewen Cameron of Lochel, (...) Camero^ his
eldest Son, Sir Donald Mcdonald of Slait, (...) Mcnauchton of Dundorow, Major
(...) Middleton, Ensign (...) Winster, Captain (...) Charters, Captain John
Ramsay, Son to the late Bishop of Ross, Major William Grahame of Boquhaple,
Captain Patrick Blair, lately Captain in the Earl of Dunmores Regiment of
Dragoons, (...) Cleiland of Foskin, Halyburton of Pitcur, (...) Grant of
Glenmoristoun, (...) Frazer of Foyer, (...) Blair of Glessclune, Archibald
Mcdonald of Largie, (...) Mcdonald his Brother, Alexander Mcallister of Loup,
(...) Mcilvernock of Oib, Donald Mcneil of Galochellie, Hector Mcneil his
Cousin German, John Mcnauchton uncle to the Lord of Mcnauchton, (...)
Mcnauchton his two Sons, Stuart of Appein, John Stuart of Ardsheil, Stuarts his
Brethren, Alexander Stuart of Innernahyle, James Stuart of Fasnacloich, John
Stuart Fiar thereof, Alexander Mcdonald alias Mcean of Glencoe, Mcdonalds his
two Sons, Mcdonald of Auchatrichaten, Sir John Mcclean, Lord of Mcclean,
Hector Mcclean of Lochbuy, (...) Mcclean of Kingarloch, (...) Mcclean of
Kinlochhalin, Mr. Alexander Mcclean, late Commissar of Argyle, (...) Mcclean of
Coll, (...) Mcclean of Tarbet, (...) Mccleans three Sons, to Charles Mcclean in
Arros, (...) Mcclean of Ardgour elder, and (...) Mcclean of Ardgour younger,
his Son, (...) Mcclean Grand Child to the said Lord of Ardgour elder, John
Cameron of Glendishorie, (...) Cameron his Brother, (...) Cameron of Callort,
(...) Mcmartin alias Cameron of Latterfindlay, (...) Cameron his eldest Son,
(...) Cameron of Glenivish, (...) Mcquar of Uluva, (...) Mcdonald Captain of
Clanronnald, (...) Mcdonald of Glengarie, Mcdonald of Ochterraw, (...) Mcdonald
of Ferset, (...) Mcdonald of Benbecula, (...) Mcdonald of Keppoch, Major Duncan
Menzies (...) Stuart of Ballachen elder, Alexand^r Stuart his brother,
Farquherson of Inverrey, Mr. Robert Stuart late Minister at Balquhither, Andrew
Clerk Fever in Down, Mcdonald younger of Slate, Robert Stuart Brother to (...)
Stuart of Annat, (...) Grahame of Duntruin, William Livineston of Kilsyth,
Captain James Murray, Lieutennent James Murray, Captain Lieutennent (...)
Crichton, Lieutennent Colonel Donald Mcgreigor, (...) Mcgreigor of Braikley,
(...) Chisholm of Strathglass, (...) Chisholm his Uncle, Patrick Stuart alias
vic Domachie, Mcinteirn Wodsetter in Athole, John Stuart Wodsetter of Salichan,
Dougald Stuart of Ach. (...), Alexander Stuart Wodsetter in Baloch, Dougal
Stuart of Auchicon, Mr. Archibald Mccalman of ^rivain, John Mceanroy, alias
Mccoll, and Ewen his eldest Son, John Mccoll, Portioners of Glasdrum, John Reid
alias Mcnaughton Feuar of Finchocken in Lismore; Have been in actual Rebellion,
and in Arms against Their Majsties Government and Laws, or at least accessory
to, and Art and Part of the Crimes of Treason and Rebellion, and many of them
are yet continuing to perpetrat and carry on their wicked designs against Their
Majesty's Interest, and for disturbing the public Peace of the Kingdom; And it
being requisite and necessary, that these persons, and the Successors of such of
them as are dead, should be disabled from the prosecution of such Rebellious
Practices, by withholding from them their Maills and Duties, Debts, Sums of
Money, and others due to them; Therefore the said Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, Do hereby in their Majesty's Names Require and Command, the Sheriffs
of the whole respective Shires within this Kingdom, and the Stewarts of the
Stewartries of Kirkcudbright and Orkney, and their Deputs or Clerks of Court,
and in case of their absence or neglect, the Town Clerks of the Head Burghs
within the said Shires and Stewartries, immediately upon receipt hereof, to
cause Messengers at Arms, or Sheriff Officers, conjunctly and severally, pass,
and in Their Majesty's Name and Authority, by virtue hereof, Fence, Arrest, and
Sequestrat in the hands of the Vassals, Tennents, Cottars, Feuars, Fermors, or
any other person or persons whatsomever, subject and liable in payment, or
adebted and resting, owing to the forenamed persons, Rebels, or the Successors
of them that are dead, all and sundry the Maills Farms, Kanes, Customs,
Casualities, Profits, Duties, Goods, Gear, and others whatsomever, due,
Adebted, Resting and Owing by them to the forenamed persons, who are, or have
been in actual Rebellion against their Majesty's Authority, and Laws, or
accessory to, or Art and Part of the Crimes above-specified, by Bond, Word,
Writ, Promise, Paction, Condition, or any other manner of way whatsomever, and
that for the year of GOD, 1689. and in time coming, and the Rests of preceding
years; And likewise, all other Debts, Sums of Money, and others whatsomever,
due, adebted, and resting, owing by them, to the forenamed persons any manner
of way whatsomever, wherever or in whose hands soever the same can be
apprehended, to remain under sure Fence and Arrestment, ay and while the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council or Thesaury shall give Order, how the same shall
be disposed of for Their Majesty's use, in manner following, viz. Where there
is Tutus accessus in the hands of the foresaids persons personally, or at their
Dwelling-places, by delivering to every one of them a short copy, subscribed by
the said Messengers, or Sheriff-Officers; and where there is not Tutus
accessus, by Crying of three several Oyesses, open Proclamation and public
Reading thereof at the Mercat-Crosse of the Head-Burgh of the said Shires and
Stewartries where they live, or where their Lands and Estates lies, and
affixing and leaving a just double upon the said Crosses, containing upon the
end thereof, a Copy of the said general Arrestment, Signed by the Messenger:
And also to make strick inquiry after all persons in whose hands the foresaids
Arrestments should be made, and lay on the same accordingly, and with all
convenient Diligence, after so doing, to return to Sir William Lockhart His
Majesty's Solicitor, both the particular Executions made in the foresaids
persons hands personally, or at their Dwelling-places, and the general ones
made at the Mercat-Crosses, as they will be answerable; For doing of all which,
this to the Sheriff Principal, their Deputes, Clerks of Courts, Messengers,
Sheriff Officers, and all others concluded, shall be a sufficient Warrant. And
Ordains their Presents to be Printed, and Published accordingly.

Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, By Order of Privy Council,
Anno Dom. 1690.


