THE ARMINIAN Haltered, Who halting between two Religions, the Protestants
and the Papists, fell headlong into despair.

OR The Wicked life and Tragical Death of John Hobson Bachelor in Divinity,
and late Prebend of ELY.

Being one of the greatest Arminians in this Kingdom, who miserablely hanged
himself, the twelfth of July at Lyn in the County of NORFOLK 1641.

With a coppie of verses which he writ a little before his death.

Also a Postscript to Advertize all true Christians to embrace the truth of the
GOSPEL.

Written By T S.

Printed Anno Domini 1641.

The life and death of John Hobson Bachelor in Divinity who miserablely hanged
himself July the twelfth near Lyn in NORFOLKS.
THe distractions of these times are not unknown to be caused by the
copiousnesse of Sects, Religions I cannot term them, lest I should disalow of
that Axomatike of King James of Blessed memory, for he acknowledged but two
Religions, the good and the bad, and those were the Protestants and the
Papists, the Protestant the true, and the Papists the false, But there are a
company of humerous opinions crept in amongst us, 29. not long since were
divulged to the view of the whole World, but yet some were omitted, as the
Libertines and the Atheists, which are a Sect as well as the rest, although no
Religion, but to define them more punctually, they are neither Sect or Religion
because they acknowledge no God, but I desire not to be prolixious in
circumstance, but will treat of that which most concerns me; There was a proud
Arminian which lately hanged himself by name called John Hobson, once a Student
of the University of Oxford in Trinity College.

A long time was he a perfect Protestant in being ruled by the Real
Scriptures Alphabet, not wresting it to his own ends or purpose, But he
perceiving the times to be altered he would needs exercise the changes, and be
a dancer in the figure, his sole ambition was to make his bad opinion good by
antiquity, but at last his antiquities deceived him.

England growing to a Reformation, he had so far studied in that diabolical
practice, that maugre all piety, he would still persist in his own opinion,
although it were as vain as his own Carriage, which was none of the best, as I
shall instantly declare unto the gentle Reader, which being done, judge the man
by his works.

This man lived in Norfolk nigh unto Lyn, where he had means good store, as
was approved by his Kinfolks and neighbors there about, to the value of two
hundred pounds per annum, besides he was one of the Prebends of Ely, what that
came to it is better known to D. Wren, if without offense I may so term him,
then to my self, Doctor Cozens was always his intimate friend, Nicholls, for
the title of a Gentleman I will not bestow upon him, by the reason in the
Masters Lodge of Trinity College in Cambridg, he did hold argument, that the
Pope of Romes prerogative in ecclesiastical affairs and Civil was more then
our King could claim to his prerogative, D. Cozens at that time was
Vice-chancelor, and at that time did sup with D. Cumber, before named, (a man
not guilty of temporizing faction) he being in company withstood his argument,
which Dr. Cozens perceiving, could do no otherwise for his own safety, but
commit him to safe custody, notwithstanding in a small space he was delivered,
Justice being not prosecuted against him, by whose power, judicious Reader thou
may imagine, I do not fear to say, it was by Doct. Cozens command that arch
Arminian, whose Chapel instead of sound Doctrine, is adorned with Romish
Superstitions, Crosses, Ave Marias, these he more delighted in, then to preach
in the University Church of S. Mary's, but to come to the purpose, this
Nicholls was an intimate friend of this John Hobson, or rather damnable foe,
for since it has apparently proved, he was the blinder of him, and the causer
of his intellectual tenebrosity: This John Hobson was so much by his
allurements brought astray, that at length with persecuting Paul, he was not
fearful to hold the garments of those which should stone godly Stephen, true
hearted, religious, and pious affected Protestants I mean, the Bishop of
Camerbury, he honored as a God upon earth, and accounted his Doctrine to be
as pure as Paul's was after his conversion, which me thinks he should not, Paul
being a pains taking man to convert the Gentiles, and the other such a one who
desired nothing more but to convert the truth. But I conclude in speaking of
him, insomuch as the Tower locks are strong enough to bar him, from corrupting
any more Cathedralls by making them Altarwise. Occasions still obviously have
met me, that as yet I have not writ scarce any thing to my theme, but now I
shall begin to be more seriously intended.

This John Hobson long time was a persecutor of those which were zealously
affected, if bowing would argue a man not to be proud, I might truly affirm
him to be humble, but the Arminian sent lately made a distinction, wherefore I
must upon force hold the negative part, at length this Dotard, (for I can give
him no better Title) the times being altered, he began to perceive his own
perverseness, and being left to him, was persuaded no remission could be
afforded, his offenses were so heinous, that he chose rather to die in
despair with Judas, then at the Cocks crowing, (the sign of the most happy
Reformation, by this wise Parliament) to repent with Peter, wherefore most
miserably contemplating within himself, it was probably affirmed by his Wife
which overheard him, that he not long before his death spoke these words.

Long time against my conscience, have I preached and disputed against my
knowledge, and have withheld them which were of an erroneous opinion like to
my self, and now I perceive the mutabilitie of times is at hand, Articles will
be preferred against me, and then to be hanged shall I be sure for seducing of
the Kings Liege people, to die at the Gallows will be a very great shame unto
me, wherefore I will rather choose to die with Judas, then to be hanged with
Saul's sons, which words being spoken, he went hastily out of his study, and
told his wife he was going to walk, because he intended to preach on Sunday,
notwithstanding she feared the worst, and would not have suffered him, he
smiled at her, and desired her to let him go, she thinking (notwithstanding
his former words) he was going to study, she suffered him.

He feigned as if he had been going to the Garden, but went a contrary way to
his Barn, so soon as he came, as it was conjectured, he plucked out of his
pocket these Verses,

The Verses he writ before his death.
Long have I lived, too long my neighbors say:
Death I do owe a debt, which now I Will pay.
But yet before I die I Will meditate,
Whether for death, I may cause my fate.
My fate said I, rather my faults, for they
Not Pluto's furies, can my poor soul slay,
Was I not cursed, for to believe the times,
Am I not damned for affecting crimes,
Which I am guilty of, yes, yes, I know,
My soul in hell will make a gallant show,
My sin against the holy Ghost it was,
Wherefore I am damned, I am damned alas,
Who can help it, accursed world adieu,
I Am posting hence the Stygian flames to view.
These were the last lines he made.

Before I Am cut down, let my lines be read,
Then shall you know the reason here I fled
For this my death, let no man dare to weep,
But learn by me, in false Sects not to creep.
These Verses he spread abroad under the place where he hanged himself, which
was with his Canonical Girdle.

A Postscript.
O gentle Reader, mark his dismal fall,
Learn to be pious, and on thy God call,
That he may give thee grace, not to affect,
Those which the purest doctrine do reject,
Let Scripture rule thee not each foolish man,
But imitate (I pray) the dying Swan
Which sings before her death, not that you die,
But that you lived true and piously.
FINIS.

