A PROCLAMATION OR ACT BY THE Parliament of Scotland, FOR The Proclaiming of
CHARLES Prince of Wales, King of great Britain, France and Ireland, through
all the Market Places in that Kingdom. Also the Remonstrance of the Navy to
the supreme Power of the Kingdom, the Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England, and to his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R

C R

HONI SOIT OVI MAL Y PENSE



Febr. 12. 1648.
Imprimatur

GILBERT MABBOTT.



Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, and Reprinted at London by John Clowes.

To his Excellency, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX Lord General of the Parliaments
Forces of all England and Wales: And the Honorable Council of the ARMY.
The Humble Petition, and tender, of Captain RICHARD BROOK^, and Diverse Sea
Captains, and others.
Whereas the Blessing is Universal, such ought the gratulation to be, upon
which account, We in the place, as the principal Agent, give God the praise;
and next as the happy Instrument to your Excellency and your Army, for our
present Liberty Redeemed, (not without much Colingtation, and loss of precious
blood) from a long insolent, Arbitrary, and oppressing Tyranny, and since one
of the sweetest flowers in the Chaplet of Liberty (made, as by your late
Remonstrance it appears, the only Garland of your many and wonderful
Victory) and is jus suffragii. We are encouraged to present, as our sense of
our hoped approaching happiness, for our best conceptions and endeavors to
complete, and then conserve it.

And since to your Excellency as Captain General of the forces of all England,
and the Dominions thereof, both Militias are united as well of the Sea as Land,
then which an ampler expedient for public, safety cannot be; It is humbly
desired between Army and Navy a happy correspond may be commenc't and
maintayn'd, by means whereof all jealousies and mis-apprehensions in both, or
either, (Mauger the most close and subtle fomentations of all malignant
Spirits) may be prevented, or soon annulled; And to this end, we shall humbly
propose, that some Agent, or Agents, may be mutually and reciprocally in the
behalf of each, taken and received into each others Debates, Transactions, and
Conclusions; that so upon all occasions, we may by undoubted Intelligence,
crave and have mutual assistance and be empowered unanimously to engage
against the Common Enemy.

And because they but vainly pretend health, who only fortify against the
Evils without, and not expel the peccant humors within; With a better
providence, but confining it to our own Sphere, humbly desire, that the
dangerous practices, and abuses (of longtime, and yet) acted, and suffered, in,
and about the Navy, to the infinte dishonor and prejudice of the whole
Nation; may in this happy Juncture of Reformation, speedily be ^^ken into
Consideration and Redress.

To Englands supreme Power and Judicature. The Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition, and Tender, of Captain Richard Brook, and diverse Sea
Captains, and others.
Right Honorable,
THe Commonality of a Kingdom, though a great body, has a quick sense, Tyranny
and oppressions presently felt, private aims and self ambitions easily
discerned; whence true Patriotts, whose affections square only with their
trusts, redeeming general freedom, and improving public interest, cannot
loose their deserved Plaudit. And we no inconsiderable part of this Kingdoms
Commonallty (our vocation, as to use, reflected on) in our sense of your late
renownfull resolutions overcoming all obstructions and difficulties) to settle
the Nation in a blessed posture of liberty and safety, humbly commensurate with
the blessing: present this acknowledgement of our great thankfulness; And
whereas rumor not able to belie their desperate and implacable malice: loudly
speaks the common enemy, busy in soliciting and inciting foreign Princes
and States to an Invasion, We with much joy resent your vigilance and timely
circumspection for their repulsion and our defense, and more especially in your
present preparation of a numerous and well appointed Fleet; whereunto moved by
common piety and duty of devotion, we became thus bold to obtrude zeal, and in
this glorious cause of restored freedom, against all malignant opposers, make
this hearty dedication of our lives and services.

And because they but vainly pretend perfect health, who only fortify against
the evils without, and not expel the pecan humors within, We with a better
providence, but confining it to our own sphere, humbly desire that the
dangerous practices and abuses (of long time, and yet) acted and suffered in
and about the Navy, to the infinite dishonor and prejudice of the whole
Nation, may in this happy juncture of Reformation speedily be taken into
consideration and redress.

1. And first the improper and dangerous mode and Custom in electing all sorts
of Officers, but more especially of Captains and chief Commanders of Ships and
Pinaces in former times, by Court favor and parasitisme, and under pretense of
estate (and indeed more frequently pretended then real) whence issued much
disservice to the State in general, and no public pay stated (excepting
merely allowance for the table, many subsequent cheates too many here) but
upon further discuss and opportunity (to be enumerated in these latter times,
by corrupt or indirect means, as bribing and insinuating into the Secretaries
Clerks, and the like Ministers of Committees, whence disaffected persons that
would submit to such dishonest contracts accepted, and well-affected that would
not, excluded, have succeeded many defaults in our Seas, and that the last
years so foul defection and perrilous Revolt.

2 That all, or most places and Offices, in, or belonging to the Navy, are by
ancient Custom tenanted, as it were, and to be possessed for life, whereby much
supinenes, neglect, and disservice has, and cannot but accrue, for then a
consciousness of being strictly observed, and if faulty, displast; a more
notable both reign to dissoluteness and spur to duty cannot be.

3 The great want of time, and consequently detriment to service, occasioned by
the present Custom in victualling the Navy, every Ship defaulking six weeks of
the six months, she is bound forth, and not seldom lying, as many more
wind-bound.

4 The most injurious, and no less pernicious ingrosing, committed by the
former Committees and Commissioners of the Navy, of all the employment at Sea,
and impropriating it to their own shipping; for thereby at far greater rates
then otherwise would have been, has the State been long served with Ships
less serviceable, and undoubtedly, the will and power of the owners (to bear
all out reflicted on) unexposeable to any hardship of fight and weather.

5. And lastly, the Exiguity of pay for all sorts of persons engaged in, and
attending on this kind of service, whereby much impoverishment to many
particular Families, and general decay of the Service it self, has followed;
many otherwise able, for want of a competent support, either wholly declining
or deserting it.

And forasmuch as we conceive, it is no less eminently our duties, then our
observations of defaults and grievances, to represent our judgments for their
redresses, we humbly Subjoyne as follows.

To the First.

That the Commanders of Ships and Pinnaces, be from henceforth made choice of,
rather then a vain pretense of estate (Bribery, Parasitisme, or Lordly favor)
by their abilities in Navigation and Sea service, in case they be, as only then
apt, for so great Trust, of Religious life, and honest conversation; whereby
will ensue a greater compliance and love between them and the commanded
Seamen; and more service done in one year, then before this Parliament in one
and twenty.

And in regard also that many enormities have been, and will be probably
continued, without a timely and powerful suppression in the Trinity House, and
all Officers thereto belonging. We humbly move, that a free and uninterrupted
liberty be granted (and a Declaration, if needful, to signify the same to all
manner of persons to come and exhibit their Complaints, and without any long
tiresome attendance (cousin German to injustice) have a day certain given them
for producing their Attestations, And that all such impartially, and without
respect of persons) as shall be found guilty of indirect and fraudulent
practices, as selling of places, extortion of Fees, Bribery, or any other
Misdemeanors, in their respective Offices and Charges, May be with open
disgrace (as a happy caution to them that shall succeed them) forthwith dismissed
of their respective places, and be ordered to make due compensation for the
wrongs and damages which in any kind have been sustained by them.

And that the Committee now constituted, may take order and provide, that no
Secretaries Clarke, or any other Minister whatsoever, officiating in the said
Trinity house, or to the Committee, or Commissions of the Navy, be permitted to
hold or execute any place, or charge, that has in any sort been an abettor to
the said Revolt, or shall be lawfully proved guilty of apparent malignancy.

1. Neither here will it be a muse to request Indemnity be not so far
allowed to any person guilty of the late Revolt, as others by their impunity
may be animated to undertake like treasonable Acts, and of so high a degree of
treason, make an umbrage or protection for all their precedent delinquencies.

And whereas the Grandees of Trinity house, gave so clear a display of their
imbosomed malignancy, and how strongly they were byast with affection to the
said Revolt, by not only delaying, and in a manner refusing their assistance to
their reducement; but by discountenancing that pious and so needful devotion
in others, and traducing them for it.

We humbly move, that a due caution for (non est bis erare in Polemicis) of all
such insincere, and so obviously disaffected persons, and that not any of the
said house, which cannot give an evident, manifest, or testimonial of their
good affection to, and cordial compliance with, the reformed Government, and
present power on foot, be entrusted with any power or jurisdiction whatsoever,
But that it be forthwith wholly transferred on, such as shall too securely
stand on their own integrities and upright dealings, to need protection from
great Personages to that end sued unto; and accordingly admitted into their
fraternity, a course frequently practiced, and but lately, though not
succesfully (as on some Lords which we could instance in) attempted on some
Colonels in the Army, for as we hope they have refused it.

And whereas Charity inciteth us to take care, that the same good use be made
of the Chest-money for which it was intended, we can no longer content our
selves with an implicit faith; but (having more then probable grounds to
suspect the contrary. We desire that for future, what receipts and disbursments
thereof, shall happen weekly be weekly printed, and on some place of the
Exchange and Custom house affixt for the view and satisfaction of all.

To the Second.

That from henceforth all places in and about the Navy, of what nature or
quallity whatsoever, be subjected to a yearly Election; that so fidility and
vigilance in their several charges and duties, may be in a better capacity to
be preferred, to the great encouragement and advancement of the same, and the
contraries, through the fear of an infamous displacing, be prevented, or the
subjects of them for examples sake justly expelled.

That no Commander or other Officer whatsoever, be permitted to enjoy at one
time any more then one place, either in his own name or clandestinely in any
others: by receiving all or any of the portion of the Sallary thereto
belonging; And whosoever shall be truly detected of the same, be forthwith
discharged of his proper place, and otherwise Musted as the nature of the crime
shall deserve. And if the tennor hereof extend to all offices, and places
Military and Civil on the Land, it will we conceive be of excellent use in it
self, and very grateful to the public; but we shall not digress, being so
highly satisfied with the Armies Remonstrance, and Petition of the 11. Sept.
last, that our hope to see all those provisions for the peoples freedom
happiness therein contained; and wherein, we profess our concurrence shortly
brought into act, we totally acquiesce.

To the Third.

That every Captain who is appointed for Command of ships for convoyes, may
have the victualling the shipp he so Commands, having the same proportionable
allowance that the victuallers now, or in consideration of the advance of price
in commodities should have; and that all other ships who are ^^^ly appointed
for guarding of the Coast, may have their provisions provided in Magazines in
the several Ports, or some of them most convenient along the Coast.

And therefore it is desired, the certainty thereof occasioning no small
inconveniency that these duties of guard and convoy be distinguished, and
certain ships be more particularly named, to have the charge of the convoy in
and out of Merchants ships and goods; That so trade may be as highly advanced
by this means with us, as it is by the same with the Hollanders, to our long
impoverishment through default thereof.

To the Fourth.

That no Committee, or Commissioners of the Navy hereafter, be permitted to
ingrosse, or impropriate service (to their own ships, but that the proffers of
others (when as much or more conducing to the public good) according to common
equity and liberty, may be accepted and preferred; and that for future all
Committees of the Navy may be admonished to let the doors stand open to receive
all proffers and Petitions Sans fraud, or other sinister practices.

To the Fifth.

That for the several pay every Captain thus employed for the convoying of
ships, being suffered to victual his own ship as aforesaid, be allowed 10 l.
per mensem for his pay. And that every Captain guarding the Coast have also 10
l. per mensem and some allowance for his table, for the entertainment of
strangers occasioned by counsels, or the like, and that every Master have 6 l.
per mensem, and every chief Mate have 4 l. per mensem, and the other Mates 3 l.
10 s. per mensem, the Gunner Boatswaine, Carpenter, have 4 l. per mensem, and
the Cook be allowed 3 l. per mensem, and no other Officer belonging to the
Gunner, Gun-roome or Boatswaine, except each a Mate be allowed above four Mast
men's pay from the State; but what the Gunner or Boatswaine shall allow out of
their own means.

That the Steward, Quartermaster, Gunners Mate, Boateswain^ Mate, Carpenters
mate, be allowed 40 s. per mensem, fore mast men clear of all charges have 20
s. per mensem which several sums though to some, as to our selves may seem to
large, yet if granted may prevent the multiplicity of cheates formerly
amounting to much more, and induce those Seamen fallen off to return to your
service.

That the Minister and Surgeon have such allowance as the State shall think
fit.

That every Captain with the approbation of the power electing him, may make
choice of all his Officers in the respective ships.

That all Captains or Masters of Merchant men ships being Commanders in chief,
may have to the full value of twenty pounds of his own adventure, and his bill
of Portage, free of custom and excise.

That all Masters mates have 15 l. of their own adventure upon the said account.

That all Chirurgions, Pursers, Gunners, Boatswanes Carpenters and Cooks, have
ten pounds upon the same Account.

That all their mates with Quarter Masters and of their quallitie have eight
pounds upon the same account.

That all fore Mast-men have five pounds upon the same Accounts.

That all such as by sufficient testimony shall make it appear, they are not of
ability either by charge of Children, or loss otherwise, to make good their
abovesaid adventurers accordingly, may be enabled to sell the same at the end
of the voyage to him that will buy it, That thereby men may be encouraged to
fight for defense of Ships and Merchants goods, (this being but in liew of our
Ton Custom free, formerly allowed, and since taken away.

That the names of the several Captains, Masters, Mates, Gunners, Boat-waynes,
Carpenters, Cooks, Quartermasters Ministers, and Surgeon, and four
Mast-men, with all other inferior Seamen be with the names of the several
Ships and Pinnaces they serve in, enrolled, and the Pay established,
respectively paid them in whole, when in service, and half pay in the vacation
thereof provided, they take no other employment, whereby as they shall not be
occasioned through the apprehension of want by fraud to provide in time of
service for maintenance, when out of it: So upon the setting forth of any
summers, or winters Fleet, men in every degree fit for employment, will be
always ready to man them.

And if any in what place soever maimed or dying in this service of the State,
shall leave, or have a wife and Children, or either of them to slenderly
provided for to give them convenient sustenance for their subsistence, aliment
and education, And the State in a blessed imitation of the most flourishing
Commonwealths of old, and the Netherlands at this instant, shall ordain some
certain provision for such maimed persons Relict, or Orphans suitable to their
several respective conditions and exigencies. It will be an act not only well
pleasing to God, and worthy our profession of Religion; but for many
demonstrable reasons of great utility in the main, such donatives being in
effect, but as a scattering before a harvest, or as Saloman has it, a casting
of bread upon the waters repayable in a little time with greater abundance.

And whereas it is, and may be falsty suggested, that all disaffected persons
being excluded. A sufficient number of common Seamen for the service of the
Navy, cannot be raysd or found; We are confident these our humble desires
granted to the satisfaction of all well-affected persons: there shall be no such
necessity to endanger so principal a defense of the Kingdoms peace and safety,
as is the Navy in the trust of such inveterate Enemies to it; but that it may
be supplied (and had; had we our desires on the 5. of July last in our first
Proposalls formerly) with men of known affections and integrity to the State.

In sum since shipping is of greatest concernment to this Nation, one of
whose, if not chief Royalities, has ever been the dominions of the Seas, as
deriving to it wealth and defense, either by letter of mart or Trade, and we
our selves dubble obliged by public interest, as English, and particul^r
vocation, as Seamen, to our utmost abilitles to advance the same, have with as
much brevity as we could, presented to this Honorable Assembly this expedient,
humbly imploring as time and affairs shall admit maturity and seasonablenesse,
freedom of enlargement.

Right Honorable
IT has been heard at least in Parable, That a poors Man by his Wisdom has
preserved a City; Sure I am that it incomb^ every one, of what capacity soever,
to intend Public Safety and the contribution of a Mite, adds to the common
Treasury, So that encouraged, by the integrity of my aim at general good
(which is able to screen all other defects, and render my undertakings benignly
accepted; I humbly present this small body of Observations: Whence as from a
Perspective set to blear eyes, may be upon your maturer and more Judicious
scanning, deduces some more advantageous expediences for constituting and
preserving a Navy to the Nations unspekable good, in securing it, and its
Trade, then has yet been happily explored) and the late Act, touching
Regulating the Officecrss of the Navy, and Customs, has greatly incited me
here, to while in many things concurring therewith, it has Anticipated the
presentment though (as it is well known to many) not the draught of this humble
Petition, and tender, which has past the discuss, and received the approved
vogae of the most expert in my vocation, Seamen, of whom upon Command, I can
give a competent List, for any Service at Sea, the State can, or shall require;
but though all met in the Center yet (selfeishnesse, that bane to the Public,
reigning in most, I found some descriptions in running of their lines to the
Circumference of particular Interest, not being impatient of longer
obstructions by the want of Harmony in Circumstantialls only. I have presumed,
declining the Ostentation of their Subscriptions, to personate a Public part,
and (without injury to them, whilst in a zealous right to our Common Parent,
our Country) in their names made this humble presentment.

Rich: Brook.

That Captain Richard Brook, the presenter hereof, may not be suspected to
overshoot in his Suggestions: We whose Names are Subscribed (in our Mutual
affections to the Common Government, which we conceive the precedent
Animadversions may notably advance; Humbly for our selves, and number of our
friends, and fellow Seamen, address our desires, that they may be forthwith
taken into consideration, thereupon, an exceeding advance of Service to the
State, Whereto we shall faithfully, with our lives and fortunes, ever adhere
against all opposers.

Richard Haddoke, Vice Admiral.
Capt. Richard Fermes. Capt. Henry West. Capt. William Bunducke. Capt. Thomas
Merryott. Capt. George Dakins. Capt. Thomas Spalding. Capt. Richard Ingle.
Capt. Jonas Reeve. Capt. Joseph Jordaine. Capt. William Tadnall. Mr. John
Jussif. Mr. Francis Floyd. Mr. William Darkis. Mr. John Kent. Mr. William
Beale. Mr. William Bunduck. Junior. Mr. John Ewell. Mr. Deubers Sotherne. Mr.
Humphrey Morris. Mr. Thomas Downton. Mr, John Feeld. William Godfrey. Mr.
Jeremiah Trevise. Mr. Robert Hudson. William Simkleere.


GOD save the KING.
At Edinburgh the fifth day of February, 1649.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened in this second Sessions of the
second Triennall Parliament, by virtue of an Act of the Committee of Estates,
who had power and authority from the last Parliament, for conveening the
Parliament, considering; that for as much as the Kings Majesty who lately
reigned, is contrary to the Dissent and Protestation of this Kingdom now
removed by a violent death and that by the Lords blessing there is left unto us
a righieous Heir and lawful Successor, Charles Prince of Scotland, and Wales,
now King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland; We the Estates of Parliament
of the Kingdom of Scotland, do therefore most unanimously and cheerfully in
recognisance and acknowledgment of his just Right, Title, and Succession to the
Crown of these Kingdoms, hereby proclaim and declare to all the World, that the
said Lord and Prince Charles is by the Providence of God, and by the lawful
right of undoubted Succession and dissent, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, whom all the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound humbly and faithfully
to obey, maintain, and defend according to the National Covenant, and the
Solemn League and Covenant, betwixt the Kingdoms, with their lives and goods,
against all deadly, as their only righteous Sovereign Lord and King; and
because his Majesty is bound by the Law of God, and fundamental Laws of this
kingdom, to rule in righteousness and equity, for the honor of God the good
of Religion, and the wealth of his People: It is hereby declared, That before
He be admitted to the Exercise of His Royal Power, He shall give satisfaction
to this kingdom in these things that concern the security of Religion, the
Union betwixt the kingdoms, and the good and peace of this kingdom, according
to the National Covenant, and the solemn League and Covenant; for the which
end, we are resolved with all possible expedition to make our humble and
earnest Addresses unto His Majesty: For the Testification of all which, We the
Parliament of the kingdom of Scotland publish this our acknowledgment of His
just Right; Title, and Succession to the Crown of these kingdoms at the Marcket
Cross of Edinburgh, with all usual Solemnities in the like Cases, and ordain
His Royal Name, Portract and Seal, to be used in the public Writings and
Judicaturies of the kingdom, and in the Mint-house, as was usually done to His
Royal Predecessors, and command this Act to be proclaimed at all the Market
Crosses of the Royal Burghs within this kingdom, and to be printed, that none
may pretend ignorance.

GOD save King CHARLES the second.
FJNJS.

