I^R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Appointing a Rendezvous of the Militia-Regiments in several
Shires, and calling out the Heretors, etc.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of
Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as by the
Thirty second Act of Our First Parliament, We were Graciously pleased, for the
Ease of Our People, to Discharge the ordinary Rendezvouzes of Our established
Militia, during Our Royal Pleasure. And now We having thought fit for the Good
of Our Service, and Security of Our Royal Government, that the Foot-Regiments
of Our Militia of the Town of Edinburgh, Mid, East and West-Lothians, Fife and
Kinross, Perth, Stirling, Mers and Forfar, should be Rendezvouzed, at the
Times, and Places, and under the Commanders after-mentioned: Therefore We with
Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby strictly Require and Command, that all
Persons liable in Outriek of the said Militia-Foot Regiments, in the foresaid
Shires, do peremptorly send out their respective Proportions, as formerly, with
their best Arms, and with Forty Eight Hours Provision, viz. The Regiment of
Our Good Town of Edinburgh, at the Links of Leith, upon Tuesday next, the 25
Instant, at Ten a Clock in the Forenoon, under the Command of the Lord Provost
of Edinburgh, and in his Absence, under the Command of the first Baillie; The
Regiment of Mid-Lothian, at the said Time and Place, under the Command of the
Earl of Lauderdale; The Regiment of East-Lothian, the said Time, at the Burgh
of Haddingtoun, under the Command of Sir James Hay of Linplum; The Regiment
of-West- Lothian, the said Time, at the Burgh of Linlithgow, under the Command
of the Earl of Linlithgow, Our Justice General; The East Regiment of Fife, at
the Town of Levin, the said Day and Time, under the Command of the Earl of
Belcarras; The West-Regiment of that Shire, upon Wednesday thereafter, the 26
Instant, the said Time, at the Burgh of Kirkcaldie, under the Command of the
said Earl of Belcarras; The Regiment of Stirling-shire, at Sauchenfoord, the 25
Instant, at the above-written Hour, under the Command of the Earl of Callendar;
The Regiment of Berwick-shire, the foresaid Time, at the Town of Dunce, under
the Command of the Earl of Hume; The Regiment of Forfar, at the Burgh of
Forfar, the said Day and Time, under the Command of the Earl of Strathmore; The
West Regiment of Perth-shire, at Auchterardor, the foresaid time, under the
Command of Sir John Drummond of Machany, or in his absence, James Grahame of
Urchle; And the East Regiment of that Shire, at the same time, at the Inch of
St. Johnstoun, under the Command of the Marquess of Athole, Lord Privy Seal, or
whom he shall appoint: And Ordains the said Regiments to continue in the
respective places above-written, in a Body, for the space of 48 hours: In which
time they are to receive further Orders from Us, or Our Privy Council. Hereby
strictly Charging and Commanding all Heretors, Liferenters, Leaders, and
others, any manner of way liable in Out-reik of the said Regiments, to give
punctual obedience to this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, under the pains
contained in the Acts of Parliament anent Our Militia: Requiring also the said
persons now nominat by Us, to send in exact Accounts from their said first
Meeting, to Our Chancellor, what Commissionar Officers are wanting in their
respective Regiments, that We may supply the same, as in Our Royal Wisdom We
shall think fit; Hereby likewise Requiring and Commanding all persons, whether
Officers or Soldiers of the said Regiments, to give cheerful obedience to
those entrusted by Us in this Command, and that as they will be answerable at
their highest peril, And appoints and Commands the respective Sheriffs and
their Deputs, to cause prepare Beacons at North-berwick-law, Gairlntoun-hill,
St. Abbs-Head, Coldinghame-Moor, Arthures-Seat, Dininicker-law, Kellie-law,
Largo-law, Easter-Lowmont in Fife, and the Bass; upon which places the
respective Sheriffs are hereby ordered to cause kindle Beacons, how soon they
see any considerable number of Ships appearing on the Coasts of this Kingdom.
And strictly Requires and Commands all Fencible Persons, Our Leidges in the
said bounds, betwixt Sixty and Sixteen, in their best Arms, to repair to the
respective places appointed for the Rendezvous of the said Shires, and that
immediately upon their having notice of the Firing of the said Beacons, or
either of them. And likewise hereby Requiring all Heretors, Liferenters, and
Wodsetters, to be ready with their best Horses and Arms, to attend Our Host,
whenever they shall be requi^^d tereto, and that under the Pains and Pe^alties
contained in the Acts of Parliament anent Absents from Our Host. And to the end
Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may be made public and known, Our Will is,
and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters
^een, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other
places needful, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
Publication of Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises. And recommends to the Most
Reverend the Archbishops, and Right Reverend Bishops, to cause read this Our
Royal Proclamation in all the Pulpits of this Kingdom, upon the first next
Lords Day, in the Forenoon, immediately after Divine Service, that none pretend
Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eighteenth day of September, One
thousand six hundred and eighty eight Years. And of Our Reign the Fourth Year.
Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Prin^^r to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.


