A Search after Knavery, OR, A Visitation of the BAKERS.
Who have we here, the jolly Oven-Rakers?
Oh ho! those worthy Gentlemen, the Bakers.
Through these fair Casements of their Oaken House,
Behold the Fronts of Brass and Lugs of Sowse;
But is this the whole top of their prefermen',
To wear this Ruff of Wood instead of Ermin?
No, their Deserts t'a nobler Perch aspire,
And hope to mount one Ladders Round yo^ higher,
Whilst the last Collar that their Necks shall grace,
Shall be the Honor of a fair Hemp-Lace.
depiction of two people in a pillory surrounded by a crowd

THE fair Effigies of this Honorable Wooden Ruff we here present you,
otherwise scandalously called a Pillory, we assure you, is no uncustomary
Ornament and Exaltation of the Brothers of the Mawkin and Oven-Pole, but a^
Implement in all Respects as fit for the Necks of the Baking Fraternity, as a
Halter for a Thief, or a Cardinals Cap for a Friar; being indeed the only
Collar of SS's for the Livery-Hood of the Modern Society of Month founders.
That this hard Ruff, I say, and this high Holy Day Promotion are their Original
Right and Due, challenged not only by their Diverse and Sundry Deserts and
Merits; but likewise most graciously conferred upon them, as no less than Marks
of Royal Favor; they are indeed the bountiful Legacies bequeathed 'em by no
meaner Hands than good old Harry and old Ned the Third and the First, in the
full and ample Solemnity, by and with the Authority of their Dons in
Parliament, as a necessary Provision in fair Statutes and Records for those
worthy Poor gut-pinchers, the light-handed Gentlemen Bakers.

Weight and Measure would travel through the World, were it not for many a
short-come home they meet from those Gentlemen's nimble Hands: For as much as
White and Yellow Boys are their little Gods, Brass and Lead are their natural
Antipathy and Aversion, insomuch that they can prune ye the Excrescence of an
overgrown Pound as heartily, and with as much Dexterity, as the abl'st
Round-the-Tower Artist of 'em all e're took off the Letchery of a fair George
or a broad Elzabeth. For generally, as well read Men as they are in other
Sciences, in their Geographical Learning they are damnable apt to mistake
Venice for Troy.

Well, upon due Examination, who knows but the High and Mighty Balshazar's Hand
Writing-Vition on the Wall, might be some Conjuring Bakers Hieroglyphical
Magic; and his great [Mene, Tekel,] no more than the Mark of their Bread, viz.
by Interpretation, as the Text says, Thou art weighed in the Balance and found
too Light. Perhaps you will say, That Weight and Measure are the old Standards of
the Nation: And so our old Proverbs are our old Standards too: And how bold
soever they make with the First, I am sure, they are very civil to the Last,
for, They measure our Corn by their Bushel. And let Envy and Malice say what
they can of 'em, I dare so far vouch for their Honesty, that they have no
Knavery but in Grain: But what if they do make a little pinch-Weight, or so?
There Is a great many Human Frailties in this World, for which some particular
Favorites plead the Warrant and License of a Cum Privilegio: For instance, to
Lie and to Steal are very paw Things, yet a Traveller may be a Liar and a
Miller a Thief, by Authority. A Miller, did I say, ay and pray my Masters, let
the Baker put in for the Miller's Cozen German; both Brothers in Grain: And
indeed I think it but Justice that they should take equal Liberty of
Conscience, and the Kneading-Trough have as fair Play as the Toll-dish. Nay,
here is one nearer Affinity still betwixt the Mystery and Occupation of the
Miller and Baker, viz. That both their Trades are but Grinding-Work; one that
Grinds the Corn and the other the Poor. Besides, if they do make a little bold
by the way of short cut, or so forth, e'ne much good may't do 'em. They have
this Justification on their Side, That the Baker only takes the Butlers Fee; a
few Chippings, that is all; bar that the Butler chips it in the Bread, and the
Baker by the way of good Husbandry, is a little beforehand with it, and chips
it in the Dough. Nay, let all the Snarlers in the Town vent their ridiculous
Spite and Outcry against small Weights and shallow Measures, and the rest of
their foolish Gibberish; when we have this unanswerable Vindication of our
Cause: For as it is notoriously known, by a Long Old Custom, Time out of Mind,
That the Baker is obliged to sell Two Measures of his Bran for One, where is the
Fault if he makes himself a little harmless Reprizal, by Selling of One Measure
of his Flower for Two?

In short, to do the Baker Justice, and refute all the Vulgar Errors of Popular
Clamours and Calumny, he sets up and values himself for that extraordinary Man
of Morals, being indeed the True Copy from no meaner an Original than the
quondam famous Pharisees, and seasoned with no less than their illustrious
Leven of never-sleeping Memory.

Nay, my good Masters, let grinning Fools talk what they please, I say again
and again, That the Baker is not only a Man of Morals but of Religion too,
Religion, let me tell you, enough to set up for a Disciple, even one of the
Twelve, as no less than the Rightful and Lineal Successor of the Great and
Memorable Iscariot, that carried the Purse and the Curse; only with this small
Difference between 'em, his Office was to buy in the Bread, and the Baker's,
just such another trusty Steward, is to sell the Bread.

Nay, I can assure you, Religion is not the only Blazon in their Scutcheon;
for, if possible, they have one High Top and top gallant more, Renown and
Glory; for the Bakers boast the Honor of being oftener visited by the Great
Horse and Gold Chain than the whole Twelve Companies. The Lord Mayor's Prancer
moves as orderly, and so naturally to the Baker's Shop, that his Lordship may
e'ne lay the Reins upon his Neck, and trust him to find his own Way thither:
And there the proud Baker, at this Illustrious Visitation very rarely fails of
that infallible Triumph, viz. of doaling out his Favors by whole Baskets-full;
and as no small Feather in his Cap, has the Prayers of the whole Colleges of
Newgate, Woodstreet, Poultry, etc. as a most generous Patron and Benefactor of
those hungry Foundations.

Nay, to illustrate their whole Mass of Glory, perhaps their Ingenuity is not
the least conspicuous of their numerous Virtues and Faculties: For example,
What think you of some Hundreds of Chalk-Whiting, by a genteel Legerdemain,
Shuffled in for Tincturing their Flower. Can any thing be a deeper
Philosophical Preparation, or a more Noble Piece of Art! For what are our poor
mortal Frames but so many Tenements of Clay, and consequently (thanks be to the
kind Baker) what so proper as White-wash and Loomwork, for our inside
Decoration? Besides, is it not highly reasonable, that as Bread and Wine are
the Fundamentals of the whole Creation, so the Vintner and Baker should concert
their Operations; and therefore, as Lime is so famous an Ingredient for Wine
brewing, why not Chalk for Bread-baking?

Nay, here is Twenty other Conveniences more: For, First, if the People are
aggrieved at the smallness of the Bread, what can be a properer Medicine than
Chalk against Heart-burning; and consequently ( Probatum est) what a more
agreeable Bread Compound than Whiting? Next, what is more naturally Costive
than Chalk; and therefore considering how dear Bread is, to make a little Money
to go the farther, what can be honester than for the Baker to cater such
Provant for our Stomachs as will stay longest with us? And, Thirdly, here is a
whole National Benefit, in this ingenious Chalk-bread, of indulging all the
Green sickness-Girls in the Town, without giving them the Trouble of scraping
of Walls for their Breakfast? And by this last Expedient, how many People are
here obliged at once: First, all the Landlords, by securing their Tenements
from the daily Breaches made in their Walls by those fair Hands, for the
aforesaid Green Sickly, Puling Dainties. And, Secondly, here is all the
Batchelors most highly indebted to them for making 'em such pleasant
Doctors-Work in the Administration of the necessary Physic for the Cure of
that Maiden Distemper.

And, as a farther Sample of the Wit and Depths of these Virtuoso's, what
notabler Ingenuity than the late modern Invention of Turnip-Bread? How many
round about Sea-Voyages, up to Bear-Key, and as many Fresh Water down-Tides to
Queen-bithe are here saved by a short Cut of Hai-Gee-Whoe from Hackney, to
borrow the kind Help of a Turnip-Cart, to eke out the shortness of the
Cornsack? a second Meal-Tub-Plot! and worthy the Headpiece of such doughty
Projecters! Besides, when their Noble Exploits and Chivalry shall all in good
Time advance them to their enchanted Castles, the Wooden Ruff-Preferment
abovenamed, nothing so pat for the necessary Furniture of that Cavalcade, for
if the Hegler's Baskets can but supply Rotten Eggs, they have Turnip-Tops of
their own, just ready at Home, for their additional Salutation and
Entertainment: For which Post of Honor, their expected Desert and Reward, we
leave 'em to their due Congratulation, where we heartily desire they may meet
all the best Reception imaginable in full Weight and Measure, and lose nothing
but a little spare Leather they leave behind them.

But, bold, my Bread-Batch Members of the City,
Ere we shake Hands, accept this Farewell Ditty;
How can our Muse, alas, forbear to raise
Her highest Noses to your exalted Praise*
A Theme even your own Crickets must inspire,
And tune that chirping Salamander Quire.
You, whese miraculous Renown ^'examine,
Are Wonders that even live by Fire and Famine.
Dearth makes your Feast, whilst fat and fair you shine
Even in the Reign of Pharohs leanest Kine.
But is it so strange to see you so well thriven?
When watered by that precious Dew of Heaven,
No less than the poor Orphans showring Tear,
That falling Drop that plumps you up so fair!
Nor do you only claim that boasted Wealth,
Your Purses and your Constitutions Health.
Those well-grown Squobs, your Morals and your Manners
Your Consciences are larger than your Panniers.
LONDON: Printed for T. Pinch-gut, in Thieving-Lane. 1693.


