THE DIATPI Proved to be PAPADIATPI.

OR, A VINDICATION of the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, and Protestant
Divines, From misrepresentations

Concerning Ordination, and Laying on of hands.

Together with a brief ANSWER to the Pretenses of Edmond Chillenden, for the
lawfulness of Preaching without ORDINATION.

By Lazarus Seaman.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain
in Paul's churchyard. 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Edward Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandeville, Baron
of Kimbolton.
My Lord,
MAY it please Your HONOR to take this Dedication as an humble and grateful
acknowledgement of those many favors and encouragements which out of YOUR
exuberant Goodness alone, and not for my desert, (which is not) have been
vouchsafed to me: And as a token, that I would be thankful, and duly
respectfull, if I did know how to express either. These are Times, wherein
Truth must learn to go alone, and to stand by her own strength: The methods and
depths of Satan, with the power of darkness, are all improved against Light;
and an arm of flesh will prove a broken re^d to those who trust in it. Yet I
shall ever repute YOUR LORDSHIP among those who have not the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of persons, JAM. 3. 1. and who are
willing [(...)] to contend earnestly for the maintenance of the faith once
given unto the Saints, JUDE. 3. And therefore though I dare not presume, or in
any wise expect to engage You on my part in the debate about Ordination and
Laying on of hands, which is presented in the ensuing Papers; yet upon
experience of YOUR natural love to Godly Ministers upon all occasions, I make
bold to creep under the wing of YOUR Patronage, upon occasion of this
Publication.

That Honors and Dignities are slippery places; These, stormy and blustrous
times; And, that Christ ownes none as being of his side, but those who are
Called, Chosen, and Faithful, REV. 17. 14. YOUR LORDSHIP knows assuredly. And
YOU need not be put in mind by me, that they who do wickedly against the
Covenant (whether God's or Man's) are such as are corrupled by slatteries.
Neither is this without the bounds of YOUR consideration, That (Without
understanding, Covenant-breakers, ROMANS 1. 31.) are joined together, in the sad
Catalogue of those who are given up [(...)] to vile affections, ROMANS 1. 26. and
[(...)] to a reprobate mind, verse. 28. As the words [(...)] sound alike, so
are the things thereby signified of like nature; and serve not only against
Covenant-breakers, but against Non-covenanters, if the sense of [(...)] be well
observed. There Is only one thing which remains for me to be YOUR Remembrancer
in; CHRIST'S promise to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, REV. 2. 10. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Which Grace; to be
faithful unto death, that it may abide with You, and abound; and Glory, to
receive a Crown of life; That YOUR LORDSHIP may attain in Heaven, after
fullness of days on Earth, is and shall be the prayer of

YOUR HONORS humbly devoted in the service of CHRIST our Lord, L. S.

To the READER.
I Know not well how to appear in Print, either with, or without an Apology.
To speak of mine own insufficiency, especially in matters of Controversy,
(which will too much evidence it self) or to plead encumbrance by employments
otherwise; is but to put that Question into the mouths of others against me,
Who required this at your hands? And seeing One has already possessed the
minds or hands of many (as he pretends to prove) with [The Judgment of
Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines concerning Ordination, etc] For me to
add more, may seem superfluous; And to contradict him, if his Evidence be
true, and full, (whereof he seems to be confident) is at the least a rash
adventure. I know not better how to extricate my self, and stand clear with
those who are to judge of all that is hereafter presented, but by this
ingenuous account. It moved me not a little to find in print some sheets
pretending one way, and intending another. To show the Judgment of the
Reformed Churches; this way the Ivie-bush held out: and hereupon an Historical
collection out of their Consessions, or Agenda's, and Books of Discipline,
might be expected; and yet nothing is to be found out of either: And that which
is produced, is only Negative, concerning one or two particulars, to the sense
of the Socinians and Anabaptists, rather then agreeable to the general opinion
of those who are Orthodox. Whereas Testimony was the fairest way to have
proceeded in, that is waved for the most part, and a flourish of Arguments
served in instead of it. I considered, on the one hand, the presumption of
many, intruding into the work of the Ministry, and taking the profit, or
ambitious of the credit of it; and how Some preach others out of the Calling,
to preach themselves into it; and that of late, many Old Errors are revived,
under the name of New-Light, as by some others, so by many inordinate or
unordained Preachers; and People, in stead of blessing God (as they ought to
do) for that Ministry which is famous through all the Reformed Churches, and
to which, as a means under God, Saints in England now living, or dead in this
last Century, owe themselves and all that they are, do notwithstanding withdraw
themselves and separate from it. And on the other hand, that Both the Houses of
Parliament had witnessed against those who Preach unordained; and one of them
about the time of publishing of those Papers which I direct an Answer unto, was
in a way of questioning those who Preached contrary to their Order: And that it
is Ministers duty to strengthen the hands of Magistrates in well-doing, when
they show themselves to be (as they ought to be) Nursing fathers to the good,
and a terror to the evil. And fearing also that the Diatribe was intended in
opposition to those proceedings of the Parliament, or at least, that it might
prove prejudicial thereunto, I was inclined to consider of it; hoping, that as
the sheets were not many, so the Animadversions which I should need to make
upon them, would not be long. And because I had reason to think he looked not
only forward, as if Ordination was not necessary for the future; but backward,
as if it were nothing for the time past; I thought my self, with all other the
Ministers of the Church of England, the more concerned in his Positions. And
however some may be offended, that Papacy and Episcopacie should be both
exploded, and yet, that that Calling in a way of Ordination, which is
successively from both, or one at least, either in deed, or in show, should be
retained still, and not renounced: though in my own particular I am moved at it
no more, then to find Rahab and Thamar among those through whose loins the
natural succession of our blessed Savior is propagated from Adam, yet I have
endeavored in the following Answer, page 49. and 84. to remove that stone of
stumbling, and rock of offense.

But whatever becomes of Calling to the Ministry in the manner used
heretofore; I hope it will appear, that for the time to come it ought to be
(in part at least) by Ordination; and Ordination, by Laying on of hands: and
that this is the Judgment of the Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines. Some
will blame me for having said so much; and others say, they expected more. But
if this may be of any use toward the clear discovery and decision of the
Question under debate, till those who are better able unite their shrength and
bring in their supplies, this labor is not lost.

But how comes it to pass, that those who maintain, That any one sufficiently
gifted may Preach; and he whom the People accept of as a Minister to them, is
thereby made a Minister, raise such a dust about the Calling of others, who
have both their gifts received from God, and the Peoples acceptance to plead,
as well as themselves; and do not rather quiet the People, by instructing of
them, that disputes about the external Calling may be laid aside, when as the
internal Call of God is evident, and a further reformation about the outward
Calling is every day endeavored? My hope was, to have at large examined that
Position also, A man may lawfully preach the Word, who is not called to be a
Minister; which in the close of all, I call a Paradox, meaning a thing
incredible, as it relates to the ordinary practice of many in our times. But
for the present, I have only hin^ed some heads of an Answer to another, who
has written since to the same effect; and desire a little respite for the rest.

Touching the Author of the Tract which I deal with, as he is to me uncertain,
so would I have been to him, if the Press were not now under more restrictions
then it was at the time of his writing; that there might be no occasion of
digression from the matter, to either of our persons.

If any where I have mistaken his sense, fallen short in answering, or used any
expression which proves displeasing, I shall be willing to be rectified. So the
Truth, and those who are studious in things of this nature, may gain any real
advantage, though more by him, and less by me, it shall not, I trust (through
Him that strengthens me) be any grief of spirit to me, whose desire is (with
the Italian Martyr) that Christ may live, though Idie; and that HE may
increase, though all the Ministers of England decrease. For your part, who are
to judge betwixt us both, you are entreated to weigh all things soberly, and
without prejudice.

That GOD, who has promised his Spirit to lead his into all Truth, guide us to
the knowledge and love of Truth. Amen.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

Four Propositions: Whereof three are proved by the Holy Scriptures, and
attested unto by the Reformed Churches, in their Confessions of Faith, and
Books of Discipline; the fourth is a just Consequence from the rest. Very
necessary for all men to consider of in this juncture of time, especially for
those who have sworn to Reform according to the Word of GOD, and the example
of the best Reformed CHVRCHES.
PROPOS. I.
THE Office of Ministers is always necessary in the Church of GOD, as an
ordinary means of His institution to effect the salvation of the Elect.

Let these Scriptures be compared and weighed Jer. 3. 15. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 9. chap. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6. chapter 5. 20. chapter 6. 1. Mat.
28. 19, 20.

The judgment of the Reformed Churches touching this

The latter Confession of HELVETIA, chapter 18.

God has always used his Ministers for the gathering and Deus ad colligendam
vel constituendam sibi ecclesiam, eandemque gubernanda^ ac conservandam, semper
usus est Ministris, ilsque utitur adhuc, and utetur porro quoad ecclesia in
terris fuerit. Ergo Ministrorum origo, institutio and functio vetustissima and
ipsius Dei, non nova aut hominum est ordinatio. -- Proinde spectandi sunt
Ministri, non ut Ministri duntaxat per se, sed sicut Ministri Dei, utpote per
quos Deus salutem hominum operatur. Corpus Conf. par. 1. p. 56.
erecting up of a Church unto himself, and for the governing and preservation
of the same; and always will use them so long as the Church remains on
Earth. Therefore the first beginning, institution, and office of the Ministers,
is a most ancient Ordinance of God himself, not a new device appointed by men.
Ministers are to be considered, not as Ministers by themselves alone, but as
Ministers of God, even such as by whose means God does work the salvation of
Mankind.] Harmony in Engl. printed in 4. Anno 1643. page 233.

The FRENCH Confess.
Seeing that we are not made partakers of Christ, but by Credimus, quoniam non
nisi per Evangelium simus Christi compotes, oportere sacram and inviolabile
(...) ejus authoritate in Ecclesia sancita^ conservari: ac proinde requiri in
ecclesia Pastores, quibus onus docendi Verbi, and administrandi Sacramentorum
incumbat. -- Itaque fanaticos illos omnes detest^^^ur, qui qu^^rum in se est,
sacrum Ministerium, sive praedicationern Verbi, and administrationem
Sacramentorum, abolita cupiunt. Corp. Conf. par. 1. page 107.
the Gospel: We believe that that good Order which by the authority of that
Gospel is confirmed, ought to be kept sacred and inviolable. And that therefore
Pastors are necessarily required in the Church, upon whose shoulders the burden
of teaching the Word, and administering the Sacraments, does lie. -- Therefore
we detest all those fanaticall spirits, who, as much as in them lies, desire
that both this sacred Ministry, or Preaching of the Word, and the
Administration of the Sacraments, were utterly abolished.] Harm. Eng. p. 253.

PROPOS. II.
Besides the internal Call of GOD, and due qualification through the Spirit;
an External mediate Calling by men (in the ordinary state of the Church) is
necessary to put a man into the office of a Minister, and to enable him for the
Work.

Proofs out of Scripture. Jer. 14. 14. chapter 23. 21. 1 Timothy 3. 2. Romans 10. 15.
Heb. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 1. Act. 1. 21, 22.

The FRENCH Confession, Art. 31.
We believe that it is not lawful for any man, upon his Credimu^ nulli fas
esse suapte autoritate invadere Ecclesiae gubernacula, sed legitim^ electione,
quoad ejus fieri potest, and quamdi^ Dominus ejus rel potestatem facit,
praeeunte, adscisci unumquemque oportere. Corpus Conf. par. 1. p. 108.
own authority, to take upon him the government of the Church; but that every
one ought to be admitted thereunto by a lawful Election, so near as may be,
and so long as the Lord gives leave.] Harm. Eng. page 253. and 254.

The Augustane Confession, Art. 14.
Concerning Ecclesiastical Orders they teach, that no man De Ordine
ecclesiastico docent, quod nemo debeat in ecclesia public docere, au^
Sacramenta administrare, nisi rite vocatus. Sicut and Paulus praecipit Tito, ut
in civitatibus Presbyteros constituat. Corp. Conf. par. 1. p. 16.
should publicly in the Church teach, or minister the Sacraments, except he be
rightly Called: according as St. Paul gives commandment to Titus, to Ordain
Elders in every city.] Harm. Eng. p. 258.

The latter Conf. of Helvetia, chap. 18.
Furthermore, no man ought to usurp the honor of the Nemo autem honorem
Ministerii ecclesiastici usurpare sibi, i. e. ad se largitionibus, aut ullis
artibus aut arbitrio proprio rapere debet. -- D^mnamus hic omnes qui fua spo^^^
currunt, cum non sint electi, missi, nec Ordina^^. Corp. Conf. par. 1. page 59.
Ecclesiastical Ministry, that is to say, greedily to pluck it to him by
bribes, or any evil shifts, or of his own accord. We do here therefore condemn
all those which run of their own accord, being neither chosen, sent, nor
Ordained. Harm. Engl. p. 236.

The Conf. of Wirtemberg, Art. 20.
Neither is it unknown, that Christ in his Church has Nec est obscurum quoth.
Christus instituerit in ecclesia sua Ministros, qui adn^ncient Evangelium suum,
and dispensent Sacramenta ejus. Nec permittendum est cuivis, quamvis spirituali
sacerdoti, ut sine legitima vocatione usurpet publicum Ministerium in Ecclesia.
Corp. Conf. par. 2. page 164.
instituted Ministers, who should Preach his Gospel, and Administer the
Sacraments. Neither is it to be permitted to every one, although he be a
spiritual Priest, to usurp a public Ministry in the Church, without a
lawful Calling. Harm. Engl. p. 265.

The ENGLISH Conf.
Further we say, that the Minister ought lawfully, duly, Credimus Ministrum
legitime vocari oportere, and recte atque ordine praefici ecclesiae Dei;
neminem autem ad sacrum Ministetium pro suo arbitrio and libidine posse se
intrudere. Corp. Conf. par. 1. page 116. See also the 23 Art. among the 39. and
Corp. Conf. p. 131.
and orderly to be preferred to that office of the Church of God; and that no
man has power to wrest himself into the Holy Ministry at his own pleasure.
Harm. Eng. p. 255.

PROPOS. III.
In Calling to the Ministry, besides Election, Ordination is to be used, where
it may be had. (Act. 6. 2. chapter 13. 2. chapter 14. 23. Titus 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 22.)
And besides the usual way of Ordaining by Prayer, Fasting, and Imposition of
hands; there is no other spoken of in any Confession of the Reformed Churches.

The Conf. of Helvetia, quo supra.
And those which are chosen, let them be Ordained of the Elders, with public
prayer, and laying on of hands. We do here therefore condemn all those which
run of their own accord -- as before. Harm. Engl. p. 236. See also the former
Conf. of Helv. Har. Eng. p. 242. Corp. Conf. par. 1. page 90.

The SAXON Confession.
We do retain in our Churches also the public rite of Retinemus igitur and in
nostris ecclesiis, publicu^ ritum Ordinationis, quo comendatur Ministeriu^
Evangelii, vere electls, quorum mores and doctrinam prius exploramus. Corp.
Conf. par. 2. page 99.
Ordination, whereby the Ministry of the Gospel is commended to those that are
truly chosen, whose manners and doctrine we do first thoroughly examine. Harm.
Eng. page 225.

The BELGIC Confess. Art. 31.
We believe that the Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons, Credimus Ministros,
Seniores, and Diaconos, debere ad functiones illas suas vocari and promoveri
legitima Ecclesiae electione, adhibita ad eam seril Dei invocatione, atque co
ordine ac modo qui nobi^ Dei verbo praescribitur. Corp. Conf. par. 1. page 179.
ought to be Called to their functions, and by the lawful Election of the
Church to be advanced into those rooms; earnest prayer being made unto God; and
after the Order and manner which is set down unto us in the Word of God. Harm.
Eng. p. 258.] Note here, that besides Prayer, they speak of an Order and manner
set down unto us in the Word of God; which, for Ministers and Deacons, relates
to laying on of hands, or Ordination, if I understand them.

The Confession of BOHEMIA, chapter 9.
But Ministers ought not of their own accord to press D^cent Ministros
Ecclesiae, quibus administratio verbi and sacramentorum demandatur, rite
institutos esse oportere, ex Domini and Apostolorum praescripto. Atque hi
probentur prius, tum demum facta precatione, per man^um impositionem
confirmentur. a Senioribus,
forward in that Calling; but ought according to the example (or commanded
rather, for so 'its in the Latin, ex praescripto) of the Lord, and the
Apostles, to be lawfully appointed and Ordained thereunto -- They teach also,
that above all things they be proved and tried by examination; and so
afterward, Prayer and Fasting being made, they may be confirmed or approved (or
rather, as it should be translated, Let them be confirmed; those words [or
approved] have nothing to answer to them in the Latin) by laying on of hands.]
Harm. Eng. p. 246.

Let the Reader observe, that he who published the Harmony of Confessions in
English, was no friend to Ordination and Imposition of hands: as appears, not
only by his Notes upon every passage where Imposition of hands is mentioned;
but by his Translation here. But that the sense of the Bohemians may be the
better understood, I shall here add the words of the Waldenses out of their
most ancient Confession, the first that ever was extant against Popery.

Ad plenam Presbyteri gradationem, tria esse necessaria Ba^. L^d. Wald. to. 2.
p. 14.
approbamus. Primum, probatio vitae, fidei, donorum, fidelitatis quoque in
exilioribus negotiis creditis. Alterum, orationes cum jejuni^. Postremum,
contributio potestatis, aptis ad hoc verbis, and manuum impositio,
adcorroborationem.

For the Church of SCOTLAND:
In their Second book of Discipline, chapter 2 and 3. The Divines of that Church
speak clearly, fully, and most accurately to all the former propositions. To
the first in the 2. chap. to the second and third in the 3. chap.

Without lawful Calling it was never leasome (i. e. lawful Doct. and Disc. of
the Church of Scotl. p. 81.
) to any person to meddle with any function Ecclesiastical. There are two
sorts of Calling: one extraordinary by God immediately, as was of the Prophets
and Apostles; which in Kirks established and well already reformed has no
place. The other Calling is ordinary; which, besides the Calling of God, and
inward testimony of a good Conscience, is the lawful approbation and outward
judgment of men, according to Gods word, and order established in the Kirk.
This ordinary and outward Calling has two parts, Election and Ordination.
Election is the choosing out of a person or persons, most able, to the office
that vakes, by the judgment of the Eldership, and consent of the Congregation
to which shall be the person or persons appointed. -- Ordination is the
separation and sanctifying of the person appointed to God and his Kirk, after
he be well tried, and found qualified. The Ceremonies of Ordination, are
Fasting, earnest prayer, and Imposition of hands of the Eldership.

Let it be observed here, that Imposition of hands is no otherwise made a
ceremony, then Fasting and earnest prayer.

PROPOS. IV.
The practice of those in these days, who commonly Preach, and receive
maintenance for so doing, refusing or neglecting to be Ordained; is not to be
justified by the Scripture, or by the doctrine of, or approved example in any
of the Reformed Churches; but forbidden in their Books of Discipline, and
condemned by their Divines, as the opinion and practice of Anabaptists,
Libertines, Arminians, and Socinians.

Toward the clearing of this, examine these Quotations following.

Crocius de Eccl. Pont. praejud. Dissert. 6. number. 9. page 139. Synops. puri.
Theol. disp. 42. number. 6. and seq. Joshua Stegman. Photinlanis. disp. 53. qu. 1.
and 2. p. 608. 613. Balthazar Mentzerus, in Exegesi Augustane Conf. ad ar. 14.
page 639. and seq. Fredericus Balduinus lib. 4. cap. 4. de casibus conscientiae,
Casu 1. page ^009. Idem in brevi Instit. Minist. cap. 6. page 40, 41. and cap.
9. page 79. Johannes Ge^^a^dus, L. C. in fol. de Minist. Eccles. cap. 3. sec.
1. number. 54. and a number. 64. ad finem sectionis.

Among the Ecclesiastical Canons ratified in the last Synod of Dort, this is
the Third. Nemini fas esto, quantumvis Doctori, Seniori, vel Diacono,
ministerium Verbi and Sacramentorum exercere, nisi legitime ad ea vocato Contra
siquis fecerit, and aliqu^ties admonitus non abstinuerit, penes Classem
judicium esto, utrum Schismaticus sit declarandus, an alia quadam poena
coercendus.

A brief Answer to the Pretenses of Edmond Chillenden, for the lawfulness of
Preaching without ORDINATION.
CHILLENDEN, Page 5.

ELdad and Medad prophesied in the camp. Moses said, would God that all the
Lords people were Prophets.

Numb. 11. from 26. to 30.

Ans. It is one thing, to Prophecy; another, to Preach, Prophets and Preachers
are not convertible, terms: because there are Preachers, who are no Prophets.
God has set some in the Church; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers. 1 Cor. 12. 28. How shall they be distinguished, if they be the same?
Yet those that can prove themselves to be Prophets, shall have liberty (for me)
to Preach without Ordination, and that not only in the Camp, but elsewhere.

Page 8.] Jehosaphat sent to his Princes to Teach in the Cities of Judah; and
they taught in Judah, and had the book of the Law of the Lord with them, and
went about through all the cities of Judah. 1 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9.

Ans. Remember, none went to any city of their own head, but those whom
Jehosaphat the supreme Magistrate sent. What Jehosaphat sent you, and such as
you are? Here Is no mention of Preaching. If Teaching and Preaching be always
all one; then do our Judges (though not Ordained) Preach at every Assize. In
this sense, that of the Princes teaching, v. 7. is most properly to be
understood. And that in the 9. verse, They taught in Judah, refers to the
Priests and Levites spoken of in the 8. verse. It remains on your part to
prove, that the Princes preached sermon-wise, or in the same manner and kind as
the Priests and Levites did. However, here were none joined with them but the
Princes, 'twas Jeroboam only that made Priests of the lowest of the people:
Whosoever would, he consecrated him. But mark what follows. -- And this thing
became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off and to destroy it
from off the face of the earth. 1 King. 13. 33, 34.

Out of the New Testament, the instances of the Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers
are brought; and with them are joined the examples of Christ, Paul and
Barnabas, page 9.

Ans. The liberty given in the Jewish Synagogues, is no more a president for
Christian Churches then their exercise of power. It would anger you, if any
should say; They whipped and scourged in their synagogues such Teachers as they
did not like: and therefore so should we do now. If none might preach among us
unordained, but upon such terms, and the standing Officers of our
Congregations be the Judges; perhaps you might have occasion to complain with
St. Paul, Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one, Thrice was
I beaten with rods, once was I stoned. 2 Cor. 11. 24, 25.

A certain Jew named Apollos borne at Ale^^^dria; an eloquent man, and mighty
in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus etc. Act. 18. from 24. to the end.

Ans. This (as the former) is but an instance of the liberty given by the
Jews, or taken where as yet there was no Church in being. Take in all the
commendations of the man, and in a like juncture of time others of like
abilities may do the like: And yet this concession will nothing avail to prove
the sense of your Position.

To that (page 12.) of the dispersed Disciples, out of Act. 8. 1, 4. compared
with Act. 11. 9, 20, 24.

I answ. In such a condition of the Church as that was, (these cases being much
alike; no Order established, and Order dissolved) I should not oppose that able
men should teach in love, as they are able, though out of Office. But under
this pretense to plead for like liberty to every one that will assume it, in
all places, and in all conditions of the Church; is as if one should argue
thus: -- When there was no King in Israel, every one did that which was right
in his own eyes: Therefore it is the liberty of the Subject for every one to do
what they please, although they have a King.

Page 15. The next Scripture that offers it self to be looked upon in this
particular of Preaching without Ordination, is in 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every
one has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another as good
stewards of the manifold graces of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the
oracles of God, etc.

Ans. Every one is to use his gift with respect to the gift it self, and to his
place and calling, and no otherwise: private persons, in a private way; and
public officers, publicly. And be a man's gift never so small, yet he must use
it. For these words contain a precept. Not that every man is bound to be a
Preacher, by this Text: but he that is a Preacher by office, is bound to preach
with all his might. Compare this Text with Romans 12. from the beginning of the
3. verse, to the end of the 8. it may help to understand it. But you will never
prove, That both together, or either apart, ^o bind every Christian to preach
publicly, as he conceives himself to be able, though he be no Officer. I say,
to bind: for the Apostle spea^^ ^ot of a liberty which we may use or disuse;
but of a duty which we must perform. The duty of Preaching lies upon none but
upon those that are Called. The ordinary regular way of Calling is by
Ordination.

To all which is produced, page 18. concerning Prophets and Prophesying and
using of gifts, out of 1 Cor. 12 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 14. 3, 39. I answer
summarily --

It Is granted, That all Orders, Officers, or Members of the Church, above
Ministers, may preach as well as they, whether Ordained or Unordained: ^^
Apostles, and Evangelists, and Prophets. For Prophets, such as were under the
New Testament, they are always placed next unto the Apostles, and before
Pastors and Teachers. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Act. 13. 1. yea, before the
Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. 11. In the Primitive times there were many such, yea many
in one Church, or at Antioch and Corinth. Whether these were Ordinary, or
Extraordinary, it is easy to judge by the continuance, or discontinuance of
them in the Church in afte^-ages, and at present. If there be any so gifted by
the Holy Ghost, above Ordained persons, that they are worthy to take place of
them and of Evangelists; let them by all means have the liberty of their
gifts, and their proper denomination: I think Ordinary Ministers should give
them the right hand both of fellowship and place.

As for any kind of Prophets, or prophesying in the public Congregations,
below Ministers, and their Ministry, there is none to be found in any
enumeration of Scripture, either in Romans 1^. 1 Cor. 12. or Ephesians. 4. where we
were most like to find it. And therefore it is still with me resolved, that the
Prophets and Prophesying which we read of in 1 Cor. 14. was extraordinary. He
that believes three kinds of Prophets under the New Test. let him distinguish
them.

But of these things more pa^ticularly and at large, when the Lord gives time
and strength.

One writes for Preaching without Ordination; and might upon the same grounds
have added, without Election. Another for Preaching by him wh^ is not Called to
be a Minister. Ordination is thought to be the weaker part; but Calling is the
thing struck at. Yet I am not much sollicitous about the necessity of the
Calling, that has a strong promise to support it to the and of the World,
(...) I humbly offer my part, in the Answer following.

Some Notes belonging to the Treatise hereafter answered, Omitted by the
Printer.
Add therefore, page ^1. lin. 13. to the margin. -- Budaeus. H. Steph. These.
p. 35. l. 4. These. ling. Grae. Novum usum huic verbo tribuere. p. 38. l. 16.
(...), apud Eustach. These. lin. Gre. tom. 1. 1732. C. and 17^7. E. Carthwr. in
Act. 14. 23. P. 29. l. penult. these words should have been setdown at large.
Quicunque ad docendum idoneus eligitur and vocatur suffragio and voce
Ecclefiae, is verus est verbi Minister; siquidem vocatio and electio legitima
facit Ministrum. Ordinatio vero est illius vocationis declaratio coram coet^
Ecclesiae; sicut non Coronatio facit Regem, sed Electio: Coronatio vero est
sole^nis duntaxat ren^nciatio, and declaratio regis. Aegid. Hun. contra assert.
Arturi. Vocatio proprie and essentialiter consistit in electione. Ames. Cas.
Cons. l. 4. c. 25 sect. 28. Ordinatio seu Consecratio, nihil alind est quam
legitima Electio. Voet. p. 267.

Errata's in the Marg. of the Answer.
Page 3. for essentiaam, read essentiam. p. 5. debeat, r. debet. p. 6. (...) r.
(...). p. 17. l. 29. mancipitur, r. mancipatur. lin. 32. ligere, r. eligere. p.
18. l. penult. saltem, r. solum. p. 10. l. 13 after praeire enim, add debent.
lin. 14. cum, r. cor. l. 25. essensum, r. assensum. p. 34. and dominus, r. ut
Dominus. p. 44. in stead of the words there found in the beginning, read thus:
Omnes illi actus qui pertinent ad vocationem, vel tendunt ad electionem, etc.

In the Answer it self.
Page 9. lin. 1. after et, add pro. l. 9. after that is, add in. p. 9. l. 29
for (...) r. (...). p. 11. l. 3. (...), r. (...). l. ^. (...), r. (...). p. 25.
l. ult. Comitur, r. Committitur. p. 34. l. 13. after (...), blot out often. p.
66. l. 9. porrectione, r. porrectionem. p. 77. l. 1. for to ^abylon, r. of
Babylon.

AN ANSWER TO THE TRACT bearing Title, The judgment of the Reformed Churches,
and Protestant Divines, concerning Ordination, Laying on of bands in Ordination
of Ministers, etc.
The words of the Treatise are here set down, without adding, altering, or
abridgement.
ORdination is taken comm^nly for an act of Ministers or Elders, after
Examination and Election.
The ANSWER.
1. IN the common acception of the word. Ordination includes Examination, and
Imposition of hands; and is not a single act, but a complicate. So as all is to
be taken in, which belongs to the Ordainers for the solemn Solenne est quod
solet fieri.
constituting or setting apart, and making of him to be a Minister who was none
before. Ordinatio Apostolica triplici action constabat: Primus act^s erat
praparatorius, scil. jejunium: Secundus, preces; Tertius, manuum impositio.
Nico. Hunnius, Demonstratione Minist. Lutheran. p. 271.

2. Whether the words Ministers or Elders be to be taken here disjunctively or
exegetically, is uncertain, because they are sometimes taken for the same, and
sometimes for several sorts of Church Officers. That Ministers alone may
Ordain without other Elders, when the Presbytery is not integrated, is a
received opinion; but how Elders who are no Ministers may act in Ordaining, is
disputable.

3. As for Election and Examination, whether you suppose them here as the acts
of Ministers or Elders, or of the people antecedently, I know not, nor what
kind of election you mean; for there are diverse kinds:

1. By way of desire, with submission or reference. 2. By way of acceptance, or
acquiescence. 3. By way of choice, out of many to pitch on one. 4. By way of
creation, which is by choosing to make one what he was not before.
Ordination supposes no Election, on the peoples part, but that which is by way
of desire with submission, and reference. This may precede the act of
Ordaining, but is not simply necessary in all cases. Election by way of
creation is included in Ordination, and is not far from the formal reason of
it. That Ministers and Elders may ordain none, de jure, in any state of the
Church, or in any case but those whom the People Vide Council. Laodic^num, can.
5. The substance and essence of Ordination consists in the appointing of such
for the holy Ministry by persons in office. Ruth. Due right of Presbyteries, p.
186. ^. did.
have first chosen, will not easily be proved. It is not of the substance of
the calling to be chosen by voices of the people. Dr. Fulke on Act. 14. 23.


4. Whereas you speak of Ordination commonly so called, you name neither Church
nor Divine who state it as you do here, and I think you can name none. Be it an
act of Ministers or Elders after Examination and Election, there must be
something added to make it a definition or description. In stead of the quid
rei, you give us only the qu^^d^. If your proofs have no more strength, then
your exp^^ation has clearness and fullness, you may still conceal your ^a^e,
and that will be your best advantage.

In that sense Ordination is not essential to the Calling of Minister.

Ans. 1. This implies there is a Scripture-sense wherein Ordination is
essential to the Calling of a Minister; or else you oppose it in all senses,
and then what needs those words [in that sence]? If there be a sense wherein
you, with the Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines, do grant it, why is
that concealed?

2. If your Thesis had been entirely expressed it would run thus. Ordination as
it is commonly taken for an act of Ministers or Elders after Examination and
Election, is not essential to the calling of a Minister. Put then what is the
meaning of it? That no act of Ministers and Elders about the calling of a
Minister is essential thereunto, or none but Examination and Election? I
suppose it is not your sense, that Examination and Election by Ministers or
Elders is essential to the calling of a Minister, and tha^ these together are
commonly called Ordination. That no act of Ministers or Elders whatsoever is
essential to a Ministers calling, will not be found to be the judgment of the
Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines, and that without limitation and
restriction, which Formadat esse. Materia est part quid ditatis.
yet in your Title you pretend unto.

3. The word essential may prove a blind to some readers, being a term of art
which learned ones agree not about. That form gives being, and yet matter is
part of the quiddity, as also Quod essentia^am rei non constituit, sine eo
essentia rei salva esse potest. Propria adjuncta non constituunt essentirei.
Ergo sine iis essentia rei salva esse potest, and ^x consequenti n^n debent
vocari essentialia Heiz. Nullus Philosophorum in ^oto orb terrar^i dabit tibi
Majorem. Rod. Goclen. ad Pisc^^. Piscator in Thesibus, p. 604.
the distinction of essential into, 1. antecedent, 2. constituent, and 3.
consequent, is common in the Schools: yet in a learned company I have heard it
to be, by one of them, little less then hissed at. One Heizo propounding this
argument against Piscator. -- The essence of a thing may be without that which
does not constitute it, Proper adjuncts do not constitute the essence,
Therefore the essence may be without them, and consequently they are not to be
called essential. Rodolphus Goclenius Professor at Marpurg, answers for Pisc.
No Philosopher in all the world will grant the Major. So as if Ordination were
not constitutive, yet if it did necessarily follow upon that act which does, as
suppose Election by Ministers or Elders with the consent of the Church, it
might be called essential.

What think you of this, Whether Ordination be not at' * Zanc. makes Election
and Ordination parts of Calling So Ames If parts, then essential, or integrall.
least an integrall part of a Ministers calling? and whether some integrall
parts be not essential to an integrall whole? and Ordination such a part of
Calling?

4. In plain words, I suppose this to be your meaning: No man who desires to be
a Minister, needs be Ordained; and if he be, he is not thereby made a Minister.
And this you assert without any distinction of time or state of the Church, or
of Calling, whether it be mediate or immediate, ordinary, extraordinary, or
mixed. You might as well say, Marriage, as an act of Ministers or Magistrates,
after the consent of the parties, is not essential to the calling of man and
wife, none need to be so married, and if they be, they are not thereby made man
and wife. Wise men would soon perceive that your word essential would not be a
sufficient salvo against the danger of such a position; families are likely to
be destroyed by it notwithstanding. He that says no act of Ministers or Elders
is essential to a Ministers call, will say as much with fairer pretense of
Magistrates; and then either nothing is essential, or something to be done by
the people, or something immediately on Gods part: what follows upon this, but
either Erastianisme, that there is no Church Power or Order; Brownisme, that
all power is in the body of the people; or Enthusiasme, that every man is to
act [in sacris] as he is led by inspiration, without respect to polity.

If this be your judgment, yet methinks it sounds not like the judgment of
the Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines. Papists use to impose such a
sense upon them, and they use to disclaim it. Yet I do not wonder that you are
thus bold with them, seeing you begin with First, Second, and Third, etc. which
must be understood either of Scripture or Reason, or both, as if right reason,
and that Spirit which leads into all truth, were fully on your side in this
cause, whereas I fear they are not.

5. As to your position in your own terms, Ordination is not essential to the
calling of a Minister; the Reader (who is to judge betwixt us both) must
observe this mystery. Ordination is taken two ways in the Reformed Churches
among Protestant Divines.

1. First and most frequ^ntly for the rite of imposing hands, which is the last
act whereby a Ministers calling is consummated. This (because they call it a
rite) they do not count essential, that is, alw^yes and in all cases
absolutely necessary (especially as appropriated unto Bishops, distinct from
Presbyters jure divino) but they hold it to be lawful and more or less
necessary in a settled and well-ordered Church.

2. Ordination signifies that act wherein and whereby Church Governors do in
the name and stead of Christ set apart one to be a Minister, and by such
separation make him one, with Prayer, Fasting, and either with or without
Imposition of hands. Here they distinguish of the time and state of the Church;
and though (in my observation) the term [essentiall] be used sparingly, yet
the necessity of this thing in the substance of it, in a mediate calling, and
regular state of the Church, is every where asserted. Nemo ad ordinariam in
Ecclesia functionem admitti debeat nisi legitime vocatus, eoque legitime
electus and ordinatus. Zanch. in 4 praec.


You in all your Exercitation confound those things; and whereas your Position,
as you state it and explain it in the beginning, runs upon this latter sense,
those Authors which you cite speak of the former only. So as if your sense, and
the Reformed Churches be clearly held forth, you and they will be found
opposites.

Nothing to be done by Ministers or Elders at any time, or in any state of the
Church, or in any case which may befall a Minister in his calling, is
essential thereunto. That Is your sense.

Unto the ordinary mediate calling of a Minister in the regular state and
condition of the Church, it is necessary or essential that those who are
already Ministers do try, examine, approve, and actually set apart those who
are to succeed them in the same kind of Calling; and this uses to be by prayer,
fasting, and imposition of hands.

This latter I believe will appear to be the judgment of the Reformed Churches
and their Ministers, at least wise for any thing that you have yet produced
unto the contrary; which what it is, comes now to be considered.

1. Arg. Treat. p. 5.

The word To ordain, Tit. 1. 5. (...), even when it is used concerning
Officers, signifies to fix, settle, establish one who was in office before, as
appears by Psalm. 2. 6. where the Septuagint use the same word Paul does to
Titus, (...).

Ans. In this paragraph you seem to imagine this argument. If Ordination be
essential to the calling of a Minister, then, Titus 1. 5. compared with Act.
14. 23. must prove it to be so, because in those places we read of some who
were made Ministers by Ordination only, and have little else to guide us in
things of this kind but examples. Hereupon you set your self by way of
undermining to make a show that no such proposition can be gathered out of
those Texts, and instead of laying down your grounds directly for your own
position, you give us in an oblique insinuation that the contrary cannot be
proved. And though it might suffice to say that the places instanced in bear
not the whole stresse of the affirmative against your thesis, and if the whole
of your implied assumption was granted, yet the consequence remains unproved;
yea, suppose all were true which is contained in your own express assertion,
that the word To ordain, Tit. 1. 5. signifies to fix, settle, etc. It follows
not, therefore Ordination is not essential: because though it have such a
signification in some places, in Titus it may have another. Yet I shall answer
more particularly,

1. Here is no proof that (...) in Titus 1. 5. must have the same sense and
signification with (...) in Psalm. 2. 6.

2. The Hebrew of the Psalm should rather be consulted with then the
Septuagint, a corrupt translation; Especially because it renders that passively
(contrary to all other Greek (...). Aq. and 5 Ed. (...). Sym. (...). sexta ed.
Translators) as spoken by David or Christ, which should be active as spoken by
God. The word is (...) that is, I have anointed or powered out. ordained,
authorized *. The translation of the Seventy cannot be retained, but force must
be offered unto the Hebrew text in three places, as Rivet and others upon the
Psalm observe Ainsw. on the place.
. (...). Que verba retineri non possunt quin vis flat Ebraico textus tribus in
locis. and (...) ^^sakti, legatur (...) nisakti, in Niphal. and pro (...)
malki, regem meum (...) malko rex ejus. and pro (...) kodeshi sanctu^ men^.
(...) kodsho. Rivetus. Musculus, besides the same observation with Rivet
observes further against the Greek translator, Et adjecit quod in textu non est
(...), i. e. in eo. -- Chaldaus Paraphrastes Ebraicam veritatem retinuit.

3. As for the Hebrew word, it may relate to Gods decree. Yet have I see my
King upon my holy hill of Sion, that is, my eternal decree and purpose. Which
is the more probable because of that which follows in the next verse. I will
declare the decree, etc. In Prove. 8. 23. where we have the phrase used
passively, * I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning or ever the
earth was; it cannot be understood (...)
otherwise then of Christ's eternal generation, or that decree of God whereby
he was assigned to his Incarnation and Offices. In neither way it will agree to
your sense of of fixing, settling, or establishing one who was in office before.

4. There is a vast difference between settling (per (...)) by way of might, and
(per (...)) by way of authority. God might set a King in Sion (especially as
you understand it) by force; but Titus could set Elders from city to city no
otherwise then by the peaceable exercise of spiritual power: And therefore
there is the less likelihood that we should have recourse to the 2. Psalm, to
understand that phrase in Titus. And if you will needs compare them, some
authoritative act must needs be understood in both places; and all power of
making Ministers did not belong unto those in Crete among themselves, but unto
Titus, as one sent unto them to set others over them. For in both places, not
simply fixing, settling and establishing, but such a fixing, etc. as is by
virtue of power and authority so to do, must needs be understood.

But you add,

Now if you understand the Psalm of David in the type, he was a King many years
before he took in the hill and fort of Zion, 2 Samuel 5. 5, 6. Or if you
understand it of the Apostles preaching up Christ, as the Apostles do the
Psalm, Act. 4. 25. etc. Christ received all power at his ascension, and did but
settle his Kingdom by their. Preaching, the Apostles were but witnesses of
Christ's glory, and in being so did (...) (...).

Answ. 1. Its well you put an [if] concerning the Psalm as to be understood of
David in the type, because its noted that almost all the Orthodox Fathers do
understand all things in this Psalm, simply and immediately of Patres
Orthodoxi fero omnes de Christo simpliciter and immediate accipiunt, and
interpretantur quaecunquein hoc Psalmo d^c^ntur. Rivetus in arg. and partitione
Psalm. 1 Samuel 16 13. 2 Samuel 2. 4. c. 5. 1. and 3. 8.
Christ.

2. It may be questioned whether that act of David's taking in the Hill of Zion
be here directly pointed at, because we read of his anointing by Samuel at
Bethlehem, and at Hebron twice, * but never of any anointing at the Hill or
Fort of Sion, and therefore have no ground for the Hebrew phrase here used in
the strict and proper acception of it.

3. How the Apostles understand the Psalm, and this passage of it appears by
those words Act. 4. 27. Against thy holy Child Jesus whom thou have anointed
(...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 3.
both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of Israel were
gathered together. Here (...) in the Greek answers to Nasakti in the Hebrew,
and both together imply, that God had mad Christ Jesus whom the Jews
crucified, both Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36.

4. As for the Apostles, that they may be said (...), to settle his Kingdom by
their preaching, we find no such phrase in Scripture, you do but dream in
^sing of it; and though its true they were witnesses of Christ's glory, yet its
also true they were more the^ witnesses: as you use the word in way of
Diminution, but to (...), settle, and establish Christ upon his Throne either
by preaching, witnessing or other way is no where ascribed unto them.

Thus you proceed.

And however the word (...) may be taken sometimes, yet Titus 1. 5. it cannot
be taken for making him an Elder who was none before. For what is enjoined
there is to be done by Titus only, or by Titus joining with other Ministers.
For the text says, I have left [thee] to ordain. But neither did the
Apostles, much less might other Ministers make a Minister by a sole act of
their own.

Answ. How the word may be taken sometimes is not much material; the ordina^^
acception is chiefly to be looked at. For that must take place in Titus,
unless some reason from the text it self, or from the nature of the things
there spoken of, can be given to the contrary. If all the places in the New
Testament of this kind, where it is used, be enquired into, it will be found to
signify either the making of him an officer who was none before, or to give
him a greater power then he had at first. For instance, Mat. 24. 45. Who is
then a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler ((...)) over
his household to give them meat in due season? Luke 12. 14. Man, who made me
((...)) a Judge or divider over you? Act. 7. 10. Pharaoh made him (speaking of
Joseph) governor over Egypt and all his house, (...).

For the second sense, see Mat. 24. 47. Verily I say to you he shall make him
ruler ((...)) over all his goods. Mat. 25. 21. I will make thee ruler ((...))
over many things. The like in Luke 12. 42. 44. When Deacons were first to be
constituted in the Church of Jerusalem, the Apostle speaks thus unto the
multitude, Look you out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy
Ghost and wisdom, ((...)) whom we may appoint over this business. Act. 6. 3.
To produce like places out of the Septuagint, is as needless as it would be
endless; or out of the first and most ancient of the Greek Vide Council.
Nicenum can. 4 Ancyranum can. 10. and 18. Antiochenum can. 23. Laodicenum c.
11. and 16. Sardicense can. 4. and 6.
Councels. One place out of Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians (which is of
great repute among the learned) may give some light unto the text in hand,
speaking of the Apostles and of their preaching in countries and cities, he
says (...), they made the first fruits of them that believe Bishops and
Deacons, (not by popular election, but by virtue of the spirit of discerning,
(...)) Clemens in epist. ad Corinth p. 54 and 55.
. What they did themselves in this kind, they did also appoint to be done by
Evangelists as they saw occasion.

But you say [however the word may be taken sometime, yet Titus 1. 5. it cannot
be taken for making him an Elder who was none before. And your reason is,
because what is enjoined there is to be done by Titus only, or by Titus joining
with other Ministers.

Ans. Be it granted that Titus only was to ordain, what need then that other
Ministers should join with him? And if other Ministers were to join, yet that
cannot be proved from the signification of the word ((...)) there used.
Something was peculiarly enjoined him, for wherefore else receives he a
commission and commandment from Saint Paul? (...) as I have appointed thee.
That which follows [that the Apostles, much less other Ministers, might not
make a Minister by a sole act of their owne] is a mere petitio principii.

Your [as for example] is no proof. Was Titus a Minister to Crete when he came
thither, or was he not? if he was, show us whose act concurred with Saint
Paul's, and whose authority he took in to settle him there as a Minister to
them.

Thus you go on [as for example, Acts 14. 23. (...) (...), and c. the word
translated they ordained in the plural number, may be referred to the people
as well as to Paul and Barnabas.

Answ. The word (...) in the one place does no more refer to the people then
the other word (...). When the people are spoken of it refers to them, but Paul
and Barnabas only are here distinguished from the people.

To that which follows

[For it is such a word as properly belongs to the people as well as their
Rulers, when they gave their votes, and never to the Rulers without the
people.]

Answ. The truth is it belongs properly either to Rulers or people to gether,
or a part as there is occasion. Your [never to the Rulers without the People]
is too confident an assertion, if so be (de facto) no instance could be given
to the contrary: yet (de jure) no reason is produced why it might not. (...)
(as Suidas has it) signifies both Plebiscitum, a Law made by the people; and
(...) which is the ordinary word used in Demosthenes and in the Attick laws for
(Senatus consultum) a Law made by the Senate. As when the people make a Law,
they are said (...): so may the Rulers in like manner in those Laws which are
made by themselves alone. What think you of this passage in Julius Pollux?
(...) Julius Pollux l. 8. c. 9. 1.
The Thesmothetae do privarely prescribe when judgment is to be given, and
promulge public accusations and suffrages to the people. Whose suffrages were
these, if not the Rulers?

And of that in Demosth. (Phil. 1.) cited by Hen. Steph. whom you quote so
often (...). and of making an Officer (...).

But you say [the custom was among the Graecians in their (...) or lawful
meetings, that the people joined Votes with the Rulers, and the Rulers with the
people, before any act was accounted legal. Yea it may be rather referred to
the people, than to them, for the people sometimes voted alone, but the Ruler
did never.

Answ. For this (I think) you cite Budaeus and Henry Stephen, but at large; go
and consult them once again; you wrong those learned men while you would have
us to believe that they were as ignorant of the Greek story as your self, or
that this is to be found in them which is not. For what you here assert, were
it true of some particular Commonwealth in Greece at some time, yet it is far
from truth concerning all the Grecians generally. The Rulers in Athens often
met apart and voted apart; nothing was, or might be brought into their (...)
but what the Rulers had first consulted and concluded. Sam. Petitus in comment.
ad leges Atticas, l^b. 2. de legibus titulo 1. p. 116.
A Law made by the Senate alone stood good for a year before the people were
consulted with about it. And this was one of Solons Laws, sine Senatus
praejudicio populus nulla de re rogator. Let the people be consulted with in
nothing which the Senate have not predetermined. * There were a sort of Rulers
among them who voted things amongst themselves (...) before the Senate and the
Common Hall. idem p. 123.
See more to the clearing of this in Henri Steph. Tom. 4. p. 429. G. But
imagine all was as you say of the custom among the Graecians in their ((...))
lawful civil meetings, what is that to bind Christians in their Churches?
Paul says we have no such Custom nor the Churches of God. It Is not said, nor
the 1 Cor. 11. 16.
Churches of Greece as meaning civil Assemblies. You must first prove that the
government of the Church is Democraticall, and that every single Congregation
among us is to have the same power which a Common Hall had among them, and that
our manner of proceeding is to be regulated by theirs; before you argue from
the one to the other. But to go on:

[And in this sense (say you) it is to be taken by the Reverend Engl. Pop. cer.
p. 166.
Divine of Scotland; his words are, [But it is objected that Luke says not of
the whole Church, but of Paul and Barnabas, that they made them by voices
Elders in every city. Ans. But how can we imagine that betwixt them two alone
the matter went to suffrages? Election by most voices or the lifting up of the
hand in token of a suffrage, had place only among a multitude assembled
together. Wherefore we say with Junius, that (...) is both a common and
particular action, whereby a man chooses by his own suffrage in particular,
and likewise with others in common, one; so that in one and the same action we
cannot divide those things which are so joined together.]

Ans. The sense you mean, as I suppose, is this. Paul and Barnabas as Rulers,
together with the People who had interest of authority in this business, by
joint suffrage or election made Elders, not Paul and Barnabas alone. This you
call the sense of a reverend Divine of Scotland; in other passages you cite the
same book as speaking the sense of that Church.

1. Though I reverence the Church and the Divine thereof, yet I cannot but
remember Amicus Plato, etc. though Junius be heretaken in, yet all will not
help to prove that (...) does necessarily refer in this place to any other than
to Paul and Barnabas. It suffices against the Papists, that the people are not
excluded by the Word; but how it shall be proved that they are included by
virtue of it, I see not. The note of Grotius upon the place is worth observing.
Sol^^ quid^m (...) sumi de quavis electione et i^m quae ab ^^^ vel pancis fit.

2. And be it granted that Paul and Barnabas made Elders with the consent of
the people, as it is by Grotius himself and Protestants generally, (their
consent is one thing, and by their authority another) that must be granted not
from the meaning of (...), but from analogy of the act of making Ministers with
that of choosing Matthias, Act. 1. or Deacons Act. 6. or from some other ground.

3. Neither need it seem strange that a thing should go to suffrage between
two, if we consider what we read of Barnabas and Paul in the case of John Mark*
Act. 15. 37, 38. and what is the meaning of the word (...), which refers to God
alone, Act. 10. 42.

4. When Junius says that (...) is both a common and particular action, his
meaning cannot be that there must be many of diverse sorts, people as well as
rulers, or else there is no (...). And granting, as he does, that it may
signify a particular action, it cannot be from the word proved that more join
in the action then are said to join. Besides, where two alone do join, there is
actus communis and particularis simul. And as to the Text in ^and, only Paul
and Barnabas are here expressed to be those who gave suffrage. And when two are
said (...), its not necessary to understand twenty or two hundred. Two Consuls
may be said truly (...) both by a common and a particular act, when they join
in any business belonging to them as Consuls, though the whole Senatus
Populusque Romanus do not Vote with them. Those Divines among us Protestants
(as Calvin and Ames Calvin instit. l. 4. c. 3.. 15. Nempe sic Romani historici
non raro loquntur consulem qui comitia habuerit creasse novos magistratus non
aliam ob causam nisi quia suffragia receperit and populum moderatus sit in
eligendo. * Amesius Bellarm. enerv. 10. 2. l. 3. c. 2.. 31. (...) is dicitur
qui prae^st (...) quo sensu tribuitur presbyteri^ primariis vel episcopis
aliqua^do apud Eusebius.
) who answer the Papists that Paul and Barnabas are said to ordain, because
they gave direction and had precedence in this business, do thereby
acknowledge that the action is here expressly ascribed to them alone.

To that which follows, [But if the word [they ordained] be referred to Paul
and Barnabas, and signify to create or make an Officer who was nons before;
yet the power whereby this creation is wrought is not their own only; for (...)
is creare per suffragia, as H. Stephen renders it, which is as much as to say
they did it not only vertually in the power of others, but they did it by
others.]

Ans. The word (...) signifies sometimes simply to choose, with lifting up of
hands or without, so as there be some outward expression of the inward consent
of the mind it suffices; and sometimes by choosing to create. But how will you
prove that it signifies mixtly to create per suffragium proprium and alienum,
or non per proprium sed per alienum, as you here suppose, or that the plural
suffragia has any weight to imply a multitude in the Latin tongue? They who
gave their own suffrage, and by giving it created and made or chos^ Ministers,
they had the power. Thus did Paul and Barnabas, they made Presbyters by
suffrage; that must be understood of their own suffrage: Not they by the
people, but they, that is Paul and Barnabas, for them, that is for the people
to their use and benefit. That the people did it in Paul and Barnabas by
acquiescing in their vote, will not be denied; but that the people did it by
them, as if the power were the peoples, and not the Apostles unless by
delegation from the people, is not yet, nor can be proved from the word as here
used. In the close of this Paragraph, as your reasoning is weak, so your
expressions are confused: if the answer fall short, thank your self. Your
second argument to prove that Ordination is not essential to the calling of a
Minister, begins thus:

2. The end and scope of Ordination is but to solemnize, The second Argument.
inaugurate, or publish the Calling of a Minister. It is to a Minister as
Coronation is to a King, it makes him not a King, but declares him and sets him
forth with glory. These are the very expressions and similitudes of Protestant
writers both Lutherans and Calvinists in this matter. Sicut non coronatio facit
regem, sed electio.] Aegyd. Hun. ad artic. Arturi, contra assert. 6. Ames.
Bellarmini enerv. tom. 2. p. 76. idem. Cas. cons. l. 4. c. 25. sect. 28. Boet.
disp. causa papatus, l. 2. c. 20. p. 264. Majorem differentiam comminisci non
potest inter duo illa (elect. and ordinat.) quam inter constitutionem and
commissionem principis nude spectatam, and inter eandem commissionem
erbitrariis quibusdam symbolis, sceptro, corona, etc. insignitam, id. p. 267.
Your margin, Aegid. Hun. ad artic. Arturi contra assert. 6. declaratio
solennis. Ames. cas. cons. l. 4. c. 25. s. 28. constitutionis testificatio.
Croci Antisoci disp 24. s. 3. missio solennis in possessionem honoris. Jun.
testimonium vocati publicum. T^^nob. de minist. l. 1. c. 25. Consecratio, and
manifestatio, declaratio, promulgatio, significatio coram ecclesia, solennis
testificatio. Voet. desp. causa Papat. l. 2. s. 2. c. 20.

Ans. 1. If there were no other use of Ordination, then there is of Coronation
to a King, it might suffice in some sense to prove it essential to the calling
of a Minister. If coronation among Kings in our time be of like use to them as
anointing was to Kings among the Jews, or as imposition of hands was unto the
Elders and unto Joshua in succession unto Moses. Josh. 27. 18.


2. Coronation is not of the like nature in all times and places, nor in all
men's judgments, who write of Politics. And though for the most part it
suppose some precedent act whereby a King receives title; yet such weight is
laid on this solemnity even among those who inherit by succession, that he who
is a King thinks himself not rightly settled till he has been crowned, and from
the time of crowning the time of reigning uses to be accounted in the Empire.
Althus: polit. c. 19. number. 95.


3. It is not simply right that makes a man to be a King, but the solemn
declaration of that right in a forensick way (which uses to be done by
proclamation) and some acknowledgement of the right demanded, and that is by
coronation. All these in the substance of the things must concur and may be
said to be essential, because though the outward sign be juris positivi, yet
the thing signified is juris naturalis. Apply this to the calling of a
Minister, and see what follows. The consent of those who have power to make him
a Minister who otherwise is none, is substantially necessary. Among those who
have that power, I hope the Ministers and Elders as such, shall be allowed
their share. And that manner of declaring consent, which is approveable by the
fundamental laws of the kingdom of Christ, is also necessary; the one
antecedently, the other consequently. Let Ordination be in as much request
among us for making Ministers, as Coronation is for our Kings, and it shall
suffice: for then, as we have no Kings but such as are crowned, so we shall
have no Ministers but those who are ordained. Remember that you are now
speaking of Ordination as it is an act of Ministers and Elders, wherein they
are to consent for making of a Minister. And if their consent as such, h. e. as
Ministers and Elders, be essential, though the manner of Declaring it were
arbitrary, yet that will suffice to prove Ordination in some sense essential.

4. As for the Protestant writers, when they compare Ordination to Coronation;
though it might suffice to say Comparisons prove nothing, (Theologica symbolica
non est argumentativa) yet I answer further, They thereby understand for the
most part the rite of Ordination, or the act of Imposition of hands as
distinguished from the foregoing consent of the Ministers and Elders; and in
that sense it may be admitted that Ordination is declaratio solennis, aut
constitutionis testificatio, missio solennis in possessionem honoris, and such
like. And this will be no advantage to you, or prejudice to us. You are now to
speak of Ordination as distinguished from Imposition of hands, (for that
follows afterward to be considered) but how the Protestant writers understand
it when they compare it to Coronation, is another thing. To the testimonies
which are cited by you, I shall speak more particularly in the close.

Whereas you say that [these expressions and similitudes are agreeable to
Scripture; for, Act. 13. Paul and Barnabas are said to be separated to the work
by prayer and fasting and laying on of hands, but both of them were Ministers
before, as appears Act. 12. ult.

Ans. This text Act. 13. compared with Act. 12. makes nothing for proving the
former expression and similitudes, but it makes much against the scope of your
argument; because if Paul and Barnabas were Ministers before by a call from God
without election, and yet the Lord would have them to be ordained, it makes
much for the necessity of Ordination where it may be had. The holy Ghost said
Separa^^ me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereto I have called them. [I have
called them] why might not that suffice? but that the Lord would teach us by
this extraordinary act and dispensation Quod si hoc factum fuit in eo qui
immediate fuit vocatus quanto magis id facere decet in vocationibus mediatis.
quae sunt verba D. Chemnitii, par. 3. l. de ecclesia c. 4. p 333. apud. Gerh.
l. com. de min. eccl. c. 3 s. 2
of his Spirit to make more account of Ordination than of Election, or at least
more then you would have us. He says no more but [Separate them for the work]
they understand his meaning to be [Ordain them:] And therefore when they had
fasted and prayed, they (that is the Prophets and Teachers of Antioch) laid
their hands on them. No man therefore in an ordinary way, is to be accounted
separate to the work of the Ministry, until with fasting and prayer he has
hands laid on him. But of this more hereafter.

5. Should I say no more, I think I fall not short of a sufficient answer to
this Argument. Yet because herein you make the fairest show, and seem to have
the Lutherans and Cavlinists all on your side, and make many particular
citations; therefore I shall the rather enlarge my self a little in Nos vero
legitimam vocationem nominamus eam quae* sit collect is suffragiis totius
ecclesiae nullo ordine excluso: ita tamen ut certa persona a doctorib^^s
ec^lesi^ examinata sistatur magistratui and popule, a qu^ public audita
communibus omnium ordinum suffragiis eligitur, vel just is allegat is
rationibu^ rejicitur. Fred. Baldvinus de artic. S^^^lcadicis, dispur. 17. thesi
16. Sequitur secundum Ministrorum requisitum Ordo seu ordinatio, qua person a
legitime electa and vocata per alium ecclesiae praesbyterum coram tota
ecclesia, Apostolico ritu nimirum manuum impositione, aliisque precibus
inauguratur, and hac ceremonia quasi a reliquo caetu separatur, and sancto
ministerio mancipitur. Id. thesi 46. Ecclesia constat tribus ordinibus, Sacro,
Politico, Plebeio, omnes in vocationem alicujus consentire debent si vocatio
est legitima. Ad sacrum ordinem pertinent Ministri ecclesiae, quorum est
examinare doctrinam and mores vocandi, personamque idoneam and ecclesiae utilem
ligere. Idde. cas. cons. l. 4. c. 4. casu 3. of Ordinationhe he speaks thus.
Citra necessitatis casum and si haberi possit nequaquam est omittenda, propter
evitand^ novitatis scandalum. Semper. e. in ecclesia Apostolica usitata fuit,
ubi vocati ad ministerium verbi per (...) presbyterii in officio suo confirmati
sunt. and cap. 6. casu 1. Presbyterii nomine intelliguntur non tantum Ministri
verbi, sedetiam illi qui ab ecclesia ad functiones ecclesiasticas constituendas
sunt deputati, quos Seniores praepositos and consiliarios ecclesia, adeoque
senatum ecclesiasticum appellam^s. Atque his quidem presbyter is primas parts
in electione and vocatione Ministrorum conc^denda^ esse, nemo sanus ut opin^r
negabit. AEgidius Hunnius. Dan. Arculariu^. Jo. Wilke^mannus, etc.
Propositionum com. 2. disp. 22. these 83 and 84. vide plura apud Ba^thas.
M^^^zerum in exegesi Augustian^ confessionis, ad Ar. 4. number. 4, 5, 6, and 8.
Chemnitium ^^ exam. conc. Trid. De s^cra^. ordinis, ad can. 8. Nic. Hunnium
indemons. Min. Lutheran^, per totum.
matter of testimony, and desire that these few things may be observed.

1. The general opinion of the Lutherans about the regular and orderly Calling
of a Minister, is, That the three Orders, Classes, or Estates, (all these words
are used by them) that is, Magistrates, Ministers, and People, by a several
interest of Suffrage, are to concur, together, or apart, to the calling of a
Minister. And herein they make an act of Ministers and Elders, as such, to be
necessary, yea the most necessary, proper and essential thing. And this
supposed as antecedent, they use to say Ordination is the declaration of a
Call, and compare it with Coronation, or the solemnization of Marriage. And
though they hold Ordination to be but a declaration of the Calling, yet they
hold it more or less necessary, and to be the peculiar act of Ministers and
Elders.

Gerhard one of the most eminent among them, to justify the Calling of
Ministers (in ecclesiis quas vocant evangelicis) uses this argument against
Bellarmine. Vocatio mediata legitima juxta divinam institutionem and
Apostolorum praxin fieri debet a tota ecclesia and omnibus tribus illius
ordinibus. Nostrorum vocatio fit a tota ecclesia and omnibus tribus illius or
dinibus. Ergo. A lawful mediate Calling according to Divine institution and
the Apostles practice, must be made by the whole Church and all the three
Orders thereof. The call of our Ministers is made by the whole Church, and all
the three Orders thereof. Therefore it is lawful according to Divine
institution, and Apostolical practice. The minor, says he, is manifest out of
the custom used in our Churches Ad exemplum enim ecclesiae Apostolicae and
primitivae, homines idon^is and necessariis donis a Deo instructi, ab
ordinariis Presbyteris, Magistratu constituente, and Populo suffragante post
legitimam vocation in per impositionem manuum, and preces ordinatium, and hac
ratione cultu^ divino consecrantur Loquimur dejure and ordinarid reguld in
constitionibus nostris ecclesiosticip praescr^p^a. ^^. Gerh. l. com. to. 6.
deminist ecclesiast. c. 3.. 9. p. 157. Nos ordinationis ritum nequaequam
omittendum, sed extra necessitatis casumin constitutione ministerii ecclesia
lici semper adbidendum esse ditimus. Idem quo supra. 12.
. So as in their judgments an act of Ministers and Elders is of divine
institution in the calling of a Minister.

Yet a little more clearly and fully concerning the interest of Ministers about
the calling of a Minister. v. Nic. Hun. in Them. Min. Lutherani, p. 199. multis
ex causis ministris nau sabem susfragiunt, sed primum ac praecip. sussragium
meriti^simeconceditur. 1. Hoc postulat praecep^um Apostolicum, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Tit. 1. 5. 2. Aptitudo cligendi. 3. ipsius offici^ ratio. 4 ratio pro animabus
reddenda. 5. exemplu^ Apostoli, Act. 1. Act 6. 2, 3. 6. piae and orthodoxae
antiquitatis exempl^.
The same Gerhard enquiring to whom the right and power of Calling does belong,
gives this answer. [Whereas in the Church there be three distinct states or
orders, the Ecclesiastical, Political, and Oeconomicall; or Presbytery,
Magistrate, and People, of all which as of so many members the Church
consists; Therefore no state of the Church is simply to be excluded, but
their parts and offices must be left to every one of them in the mediate
calling of Ministers. And 1. (says he) that Bishops and Presbyters (understand
by both names one thing) must be used when the Ministry is to be commended to
any one, is manifest (ex mandato Apostolico) by the Apostolic commandment and
the approved examples of Scripture, Act. 14. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. Coming afterward to speak more particularly (quid
cuivis statui proprie tribuendum sit) what is properly to be given to every
several state; that no confusion may arise, and one state may not take to it
self that which is peculiar to another; after other things premised, he makes
this distribution of their parts:

Presbyterio competit exame^, ordinatio and inauguratio: To the Presbytery
belongs examination, ordination, inauguration. Magistratui Christiano
nominatio, praesentatio, confirmatio: To the Christian Magistrate nomination,
presentation, confirmation. Populo consensus, suffragium, approbatio, vel
etiani pro ratione circumstantiarum postulatio: To the People consent,
suffrage, approving, or as circumstances may require, postulation. Id. loco and
cap. citatis sec. 3. number. 85. p. 93. and number. 86. p. 95. vid. ead. apud cund.
Augustana confession is par. 2. cap. 1.
Now Sir I beseech you recollect your self, and tell whether in the judgment
of the Lutherans, Ministers and Elders, as such, have not an interest in the
calling of a Minister; or why the Peoples act should be essential, and not the
Ministers, by virtue of any ground which they build upon; and where you find in
them Ordination and Imposition of hands so distinguished as they are here by
you.

2. The Calvinists do for the most part agree with the Hanc (viz. electionem
seu designationem Ministri) dicimus non ad solom supremum Magistratum
pertinere, us Gretius and alii judicarunt, nec. etiam ad solam ecclesiam
Excluso magistratu ut alii volunt, imprimis Anabaptistae and Papistae: sed
dicimus ad totam Ecclesiam hanc electionem certo respectu pertinere, ordine
tamen debito observato ut praecant Ecclesiae praefecti adsentiatur populus,
quisque suo ordine. Ant. Wallaeus locis com. part 2. de functionibus
ecclesiasticis edit. priore in 4. p. 907. Pertinet autem electio and designatio
ipsa ad totam Ecclesiam in qua sit: sed divers^ ratione -- Pessime quoque
hallucinantur qui non distinguunt quae sunt Presbyterii, quae aut^m Plebis in
electionibus istis parts; sed quod est illius, istitribuunt, indicentes in
ecclesiam Dei magnam omnino confusionem. Praesbyterorum est, personam quae
idonea ad munus vacuum videri potest, inquirere ex totepopulo, camque
designareoculis and de ea inter sese agere and conferre^raire enim toti
Ecclesiae Presbyteri. -- Cum autem hoc. primum suffragiu^ ad praesbyteros
pertineat non ad universam ecclesiam and populu^, quemodmodu^ tamen quidem
sentiu ut and consentiose disputant. Ratio est. 1. quod presbyteri and pastores
dicuntur (...) ecclesia Heb. 13. 7. undo sua voce su^ que consilio praeire
populo debent. 2. Quod illi ipsi sunt ecclesiae senatus ad quem prima rerum
ecclesiasticarum deliberatio ac cura pertinet, atque etiam referenda est. 3.
Exemplum ipsius primitivae ecclesiae, Apostoli enim ipsi primi de diaconis
eligen dis deliberant. 4. Ex ipsa loquendi ratione qua utitur Scriptura Act. 15
v. 22. 16. v. 4. 1 Cor. 16. v. 3. (...) ex qua phrasi luce clarius intelligatur
a populo and universa ecclesia probari tantum vel improbari quae praesbyteri
and ipsi praepositi ecclesia ere ecclesia esse judicarant atque proposuerant.
5. Exempla posterioris ecclesiae, quae tum canonibus suis sanxit, tum etiam usu
ipso and praxi demonstravit a plebe tantum essensum requiri, ut quae a
presbyterio gesta sunt justa aliqua ratione plebs vel rata haberet vel irrita
faceret. Sed fierit summus Magistratus fidelis in cujus territorio aliquis ad
dignitatem ecclesiasticam est asciscendus, debet cert^ specialis istius
Magistratus consensus praeter eum qui a toto populo praestatur expectari and
accedere. Lamb. Danaeus com. in 1. ad Tim. ad cap. 5. v. 22. p. 348, 349, 352,
353, 354. Vide plura in hunc sensum apud Bucanum, loc. 42. de Ministerio in
respons. ad quaest. 39. and Marcsium in Enchiridio de Minist. potest. and
discip. ecclesiae, p. 117. thesi 39 inter Canones ecclesiasticas Synodi
Dordrac. can 4. Zanch in 4. praec. loc. 4. qu. 2. to. 4. p. 780. and sequ.
Harmo. Synodorum Belgic. cap. 1. art. 4.
Lutherans touching the interest of Magistrates, Ministers and People about the
calling of a Minister; though in manner of expression there be some difference,
yet in the substance of the thing it self there is an harmony. Some speak of
Calling, others of Election, both mean the same thing; and ascribe it not to
the People alone, as you do with the Libertines, Anabaptists, Brownists and the
like, nor to the Magistrate alone as Grotius and the Erastians; but principally
and primarily to the Ministers and Elders, and respectively to the whole Church.

3. None of those writers in particular which you cite either in the body or
margin of that paragraph, page 7. exclude Ministers and Elders from sharing in
the power and act whereby a meet person is made a Minister; but every one of
them has more or less, expressly, for their interest. For the Calvinists (to
give them the first place) I shall speak of them in order as you rank them.
Ames against Bellarmine, tom. 2. p. 76. has nothing at all one way or other,
unless the Edition which I follow deceive me. In that of Oxford, 1624. p. 96.
I find this. Populus in judicando dirigi potest ac ordinary debet a judicio
aliorum pastorum electionem vel praeeunte vel comitante. The people may, and
ordinarily must be directed in judgment by the judgment of other Pastors
either foregoing or accompanying Election. And in his book of Cases of
Conscience, lib. 4. cap. 25. number. 27. Actus varii ad vocationem pertinentes
possunt aliis committi, and ex ordine debent a praecipuis ecclesiae membris vel
praesbyte^is praestari. Cura etiam ut omnia recte fiant pertinet ad
Magistratum. [Divers actions pertaining to the calling of a Minister may be
committed to some, and according to order must be performed by the principal
Members or Presbyters of the Church: the care also that all things be done
rightly, belongs to the Magistrate.] Crocius tells us, the conspiracio of the
people must not be taken for a lawful call. Non conspiratio populi pro
perfect legitima vocatione haberi debet. Anti-Socin. disp. 24.
Of the rite of Ordaining he says, Haec est constitutionis illius testificatio,
quae exemplo Apostolorum docetur licita, neque extra casum necessitatis in
Ministerio constituto temere negligenda.] This is a testification of that
Election, which is taught to be lawful by the Apostles example, and not to be
rashly neglected in a settled Ministry, when there is no case of necessity.]
Out of his words I fram this argument. That which is not only lawful, but so
necessary about the calling of a Minister, that it may not be omitted but only
in case of necessity, is more then a bare solemnization, inauguration, or
publication and little less then essential: but so it is with Ordination in
the judgment of Crotius: therefore Crocius makes against you, not for you.

For Iunius, he is so far from giving nothing but a bare rite about Ordination
to the Presbytery, that he gives all unto it. And though (in several respects
and a diverse kind) he ascribes the power of Ordaining, both to Christ as the
head and Spouse of his Church, and to the Church as the Body and Bride: yet (in
a mediate Calling) both of them in his judgment make over the power unto
Ministers and Elders. Sic totum in solidum Ordinatinnis potestatem Christus
habet, quam cum ecclesia sua communicate; uterque vero pro suo jure, sponsus
inquam, and sponsa, Presbyterio tradit Iure Divino. [So as all the power of
Ordination in full belongs to Christ, which he communicates with his Church; and
both of them, the Bridegroom and the Bride, according to the right of each,
gives it by Divine right unto the Presbytery. Junius anim. in Bellar. con. 5
l. 1. c. 3. ar. 16.
] And whereas in the Presbytery, if it be complete, there be two sorts of
Elders; he distinguishes after this manner, that it may be known what belongs
to each. Actu presbyterium totum (i. e. singuli in corprre presbyterii)
potestatem ordinandi habet, ritu vero soli Presbyteri pascentes verbo, i. e.
Ministri verbi habent ordinandi potestatem Art. 21.
. The power of Ordaining, in the act of it, belongs to the whole Presbytery,
(consisting of Ministers and Elders as distinguished) but in the rite of it it
belongs to the Preachers only.] What can this Act be as thus considered apart
from the Rite, but something substantial to the Calling? the rather because
(in the same chapter Art. 3. profecto id legitimu^ est ut quemadmodum in
ministerio absolute per episcopos; it a in ministerio (...) bujus aut illius
ecclesiae per ipsam ecclesiam ordinetur communi ecclesiae nomine.
) he makes the act of the Ministers and Elders to be that whereby a fit person
is made a Minister; and the act of the Church to be that, whereby he is made a
Minister of this or that particular Church.

As for Voetius, though of all other he seem most to favor your cause, and to
ascribe much to election, and little to Ordination; yet I desire that this may
be seriously weighed out of him: That he professedly and at large maintains
against Iansenius, that the first Reformers had an ordinary outward call, not
only to the work of reforming, but also to the office of being Ministers. Which
cannot possibly be maintained on any other principle but this; That as in some
cases Election alone suffices (for he speaks but of Cases) as all that is
essential to a Calling; so in their case, Ordination alone made them
Ministers, and that way of Calling contained all that was essential thereunto.
See to this purpose, Desp. causa Papatus, lib. ^. sect. 1. a cap. 2. ad ult.
and sec. 2. cap. 1. and seq. usque ad 12.

And whereas he says, Majorem differentiam, etc. None can imagine a greater
difference between these two, Election and Ordination, then between the
Constitution and Commission of a Prince considered nakedly, and the same
commission adorned with some arbitrary symbols, as scepter, crown, etc. It may
be answered, besides all the premises, that Election is that act whereby one is
chosen in futurum Presbyterum, to be made a Minister; and Ordination is that
whereby he who is so chosen is actually made a Minister. And the reason is
clear, Because between Election and Ordination something may intervene to make
the choice null in relation to the end and effect whereunto it is intended, to
wit the making of such a person to be a Minister. The designing of a person to
be made a King, and the act of putting him into the Kingly office, as the
choice of a meet person to be a wife, and that act of marriage whereby she is
made a wife (de praesenti) do very much differ: the last is the most formal
and constitutive. And so it is between Election and Ordination when they are
rightly compared, and specially when Ordination (as in this debate) is taken
for the substantial act of Ministers and Elders distinct from the rite of
Imposing hands.

Hitherto of those Calvinists which you cited. Now for the Lutherans, though
you speak big, yet you name but two, and the one was cited to your hand in the
other, as Hunnius in Turnovius. For the judgment of Turnovius, Paulus
Turnovius de S. ministerio, l. 1. c. 6.
he makes Election to be (vocationis initium tantum) only the beginning of a
call, and that it differs from Calling it self; which he proves by the instance
of those two Act. 1. 23. who were both chosen, and yet but one of them was
called: and by experience, because many are chosen, and yet upon examination
rejected. And relating to the judgment of Danaeus, that the first suffrage
belongs to the Presbytery, though he grants in matter of fact it is sometime
otherwise, yet he says it would be (rectissimum and justissimum) the most right
and just way, that no Patron, Magistrate, Nobleman, or Ruler, should make any
promise to any that they should be taken into this Order of the Ministry,
before he was (satis exploratus) sufficiently tried both for doctrine, ability
to teach, and conversation, by the Presbytery, Consistory, or Superintendent
and Company of Ministers. Quod quoties negligitur, and hic ordo legitimus non
servatur, toties ju^a ecclesiae violantur, atque utinam ipsa in periculum
nunquam praecipitaretur. For Hunnius, I cannot yet meet with that Tract of his
which you cite, but you have his judgment out of other writings.

4. The use of Ordination (take it how you will in the sense of Protestant
writers) is more then to solemnize, inaugurate, or publish the calling of a
Minister. And therefore your [but to solemnize] is a gloss of your own to
corrupt the text of those Authors (and others of like kind) whom you have
quoted.

Why was not that englished, Missio solennis in possessionem honoris, The
solemn mission into the possession of honor? Show us some reason why a right
in the thing should not be essential as well as a right unto it; or some other
Scripture way whereby a Minister is actually made a Minister, and put into the
possession of Ministerial power, besides that of Ordination. Tarnovius in the
book and chap. which you have cited, page 267. assigns a threefold use of it.
[1. The person chosen is by this ceremony separated from the remaining company
of Hearers, and consecrated unto God as a sacrifice. 2. He is hereby commended
to the Church as the Governor thereof. 3. Blessed unto the Ministry, and to
that end Prayer and Fasting use to be joined.] From the first of these arises
this argument. When a man is separated from the common company and condition of
hearers, and consecrated unto God to do him service in the holy function of the
Ministry, then he is formally and essentially made a Minister. But every man
is so separated and consecrated in and by his Ordination; therefore in and by
Ordination he is formally and essentially made a Minister.

Chemnitius among other uses whereunto it serves, sets down this for one, ut
esset quasi publica and solennis ecclesiae coram deo protestatio in electione
and vocatione servatam esse formam and regulam a spiritu sancto praescriptam.
[That it might be as it were a public and solemn protestation of the Church
before God, that the form and rule prescribed by the holy Ghost has been
observed in election and calling.] But how can such a protestation be thereby
made, unless Ministers be taken into the Election and Calling, not only to
direct and guide the Church in choosing, but also to judge and determine of the
validity of their choice; seeing the form and rule prescribed by the holy
Ghost in Scripture examples gives no election or power of calling to the
people, but under an oversight and prostacie. (For as he well observes ad Can.
6, 7, 8.
out of the Apostles pr^ctice Act. 1. about Mathias, and Act. 6. about the
Deacons) Non prorsus se abdicant cura vocationis, and vulgi aut multitudinis
caecae and confusae libidini eam permittunt, sed sunt quasi gubernatores and
moderatores electionis and vocationis. Proponunt enim doctrinam and regulam
quales and quomodo eligere debeant, and electi sistuntur coram Apostolis, ut
illorum judicio electio probetur an recte fiat; illi vero orantes impositione
mannuns electionem approbant. The end of Ordination is therefore (with him) to
approve and validate the Peoples choice, which might otherwise be accounted
null or insufficient. And in this sense may all those particular expressions
which you have cited be understood; that Ordination is a solemn declaration, a
testification of the Ministers constitution, A public testimony of one
called, A consecration, manifestation, declaration, signification, and solemn
testification before the Church. All which declaration, testification, etc. is
to be performed by Ministers and Elders; not only as Witnesses, but as Judges
in the room and stead of God and Christ: and without this, the sufficiency of
all that is done by the people may be suspected and questioned. And if it be
well considered that the mediate, as well as immediate Calling of a Minister
does properly belong to God alone and to Christ as their act; it will plainly
appear, that where such a declaration is wanting (which should be performed by
them who in their office act in the name of God and Christ) that there that
which is most proper to an external and mediate calling from God is wanting.
And if it were granted that Ordination in this sense is but to solemnize etc.
yet it would not follow that it is not essential to the calling of a Minister,
but rather on the contrary that it is: because though it may be admitted that
God calls by the Church in choosing; yet the Peoples proper part is to desire
and accept, or to design the person, but with submission to the Ministers and
Elders, who are to judge, detetmine and declare, yea to give, and set over,
with the Churches consent and approbation, in the room and stead of Christ: so
as when one is to be Ordained, (Commitur illi nomine ac loco Dei ab Ordinatore
cura gregis dominici) The care of the Lords flock is, by him who Ordains,
committed * Nic. Hunnius quo supr. p. 280.
to him that is Ordained, in the name and place of God.

Your third Reason:

Then a man is a Minister when he has a calling to the work from God and man:
But both these he may have without Ordination.

Ans. That a man is a Minister when he has a calling to the work from God and
man, is granted; if you understand this Call not of a providentiall permission
on Gods part, nor of any undue and irregular choice by the people alone; but of
Gods calling with approbation, and man's orderly proceeding to make a Minister
according to the rules of Scripture in that case provided. And that both these,
God and man, may concur in a calling without Ordination in some extraordinary
cases, will not be denied. That which you should prove, is, that Ordination is
essential neither in ecclesia constituta, nor constituenda But let us see what
you prove.

A man is called by God, when he is approved to he of eminent gifts, and has
his heart stirred up by spiritual respects to use those gifts for public
good.

Ans. It seems by this, that Judas had no call of God to be an Apostle, nor the
sons of Ely to be Priests; and that an unregenerate person cannot be a Minister
called of God; nor any regenerate person, though he have sufficiency, unless
he be of eminent gifts. But who must have the judging of this eminency, and of
the spiritual respects wherewith the heart is stirred up to use them for
public good? Is no other judgment to be made use of but a man's own? or have
the People all power to be sole Judges in this case? First prove that Ministers
and Elders are no competent Judges in this kind, and then you shall hear
further. But of Man's calling it follows.

He is called by Man, when the People who are godly, consulting with the Word
of God, and laying aside all carnal respects, choose him and give up
themselves unto him.

Ans. Suppose ungodly people choose a godly man approved to be of eminent
parts; is the choice void, because the choosers are not godly? Who shall be
Judge of the peoples godliness? if themselves alone, then who will be excluded
from being of the number of the godly? Every Minister lawfully called is ae
gift of Christ Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
: therefore people should rather receive Ministers as from his hands, by the
Ordination of other Ministers and Elders, then give Ministers unto Christ, and
unto themselves. If Ministers be sent them and set over them in the Lord, they
may receive them by acceptance, 2 Cor. 8. 5. ^.
and give up themselves unto the Lord, and unto them as his Ministers, although
they do not first and formally choose them themselves. Carnal respects may
sometimes cause godly people to choose one rather then another, and (it may be)
the more unworthy. True Apostles were often despised, when False teachers and
the messengers of Satan were welcomed as Angels of light. And therefore the
calling of a Minister should not be left entirely to peoples election upon
pretense of godliness. You know who made this outery, Numb. 16. 3.
All the Congregation is holy, yea every one of them; to set up themselves in
stead of those who were set over them by the Lord himself. And we cannot but
remember S. Paul's prophecy, which is too much verified in the history of our
times; The time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts they shall heap to themselves 2 Timothy 4. 3.
Teachers, having itching ears.

But where is the proof of your Assertion? What Scripture have you to show that
Peoples choice (their consent is of another nature) is either only essential,
or otherwise essential unto the calling of a Minister in all cases, then
Ordination is? or where are Ministers and Elders interdicted from acting in the
call of others?

Your Minor, That a Minister may have a call both from God and man, without
Ordination, may be thus inverted. A Minister may have a call from God and man
without the Peoples election: for so had the Evangelists, and so may they who
are sent to preach among the Heathens; and they who are first Ordained, and
after sent unto a people and accepted of by them as their Ministers. And
therefore popular election is not essential to the calling of a Minister.

Yet though the Scripture fail, it may be the Protestants against the
Socinians will help you out. Of all others, I fear, those who write against
Socinians (whose cause you patronize in this) will hardly stand by you to the
last; And the Socinians themselves do speak more favorably of Ordination then
you have done. Smalcius against Frantzius speaking in the name of all the rest,
says thus: Non negamus ex ista consuetudine primitivae ecclesiae Apostolicae
consequi, illud etiam jure fieri posse hodie quod olim fiebat; and si ecclesia
semper incorrupta mansisset, non dubitamus quin valde justum fuisset ut modus
iste ordinandi Ministros observaretur, quemadmodum etiam nunc ubi constituta
est respub. Christiana valde decorum esse arbitramur ut id observetur. Sed non
hoc potissimum quaeritur. Hocenim in quaestione est, an hujusmodi constitutio
sit prorsus necessaria ad constituendum verbi Dei ministrum Smalcius in
refutatione Thesium Wol. Frantzii disp 4 page 337. Vide plura apud eund. Hom.
4. in 1. Joh. p. 40.
. You engage your self upon the same point of contest with them, but no where
grant so much as they. To that of Crocius against the Socinians, where he makes
Calling necessary, and not Ordination, this might suffice: He speaks not of
Ordination as distinguished from Imposition of hands, as you here do, but as
convertible therewith; and in Calling does not exclude the Ministers and Elders
from acting, as such, Yet because all that you have here, is a transcript out
of him, (yet but a part) I have the more diligently perused that Author, and
find you very injurious in quoting of him by leaveing out these two material
passages. One concerning Election: Non enim conspiratio populi pro perfect
legitima vocatione haberi debet, ubi non observatur Dei voluntas, sed
temerarius plebis and stultus assensus, quem rudiores and indigni praeproperis
pransationibus fere captant. Wherein he intimates what great abuse is incident
to the choice of the people: for the preventing whereof I conceive no better
remedy then Ordination. The other is concerning Ordination, which though he
makes to be but Constitutionis testisicatio, (speaking of the rite) yet he
says it is not extra casum necessitatis in Ministerio constituto temere
negligenda. In another of his Works he speaks more fully to the same point.
Ordinatio ministrorum per manuum impositionem, non quidem absolute necessaria
(that is against the Papists) non tamen quia apprime utilis, extra necessitatis
casum temere omittenda est. (this later part makes against the Socinians and
your self.) Lud. Crocius syntag. Thcol. l. 4. c. 15. reg. 6.


Jos. Stegman Photinianismo disp. 52. qu. 5. An ritus ordinationis futuro
Ecclesiae ministro sit necessarius?
Jos. Stegman speaking to the same point, expresses himself more exactly. [We
distinguish between the necessity of Vocation and Ordination: Vocationis
necessitatem majorem, Ordinationis minorem dicimus.] Both are necessary
according to his judgment, though not alike necessary. -- And a little after:
Vel ipso respectu manet necessaria quod extra casum necessitatis in Ministerio
constituto negligi non potest. All this he says (de ritu Ordinationis) of the
ceremony used in Ordaining. What he judges of the substantial act of
Ministers and Elders, may be easily understood thereby.

It remains yet on your part to prove, that Ordination is never necessary to a
Calling: your own Witnesses have asserted the contrary; and besides them the
Professors at Leyden, who are as ancient as Ames, Crocius, or Voetius, and as
well worthy to be reckoned among Protestant Divines. They propounding the
question, In Synop. pur. Thcol. inter Coroll. ad disput. 42. An Ministri futuri
Ordinatio in ecclesia semper requiratur? R. Sicut ejus vocationem, sic ejusdem
Ordinationem in ecclesia jam constituta semper requiri, adversus Socinianos
affirmamus. For Rivetus (who is one of them) these are his words by himself, in
the name of Protestants. Cum Cypriano agnoscimus, hibere aut tenere ecclesiam
nullo modo posse, qui ordinatus in occlesia non est. Nec nos alios agnoscimus
Pastores praeter eos qui juxta Apostolorum canonesin Actis and Epistolis,
legitime sunt Ordinati. Si qui sunt qui illud munus usurpant sieve vocatione
Ecclesiae, eos inter vagahundos and circumforaneos rejicimus. Apol. pro vera
pace Eccl.. 96. p. 180.
Whether Ordination be always required? answer affirmatively against the
Socinians, That in a constituted Church it is always required.

Your fourth Reason:

4. Whatsoever substantial act belongs to the making of Quicunque ad docendum
idoneus eligitur, etc.
a Minister, or is solemnized in Ordination, the same is done in Election.

Ans. What you mean by Election here is uncertain, whether an act of choice by
the people alone, (as most of your expressions imply) or an act of the whole
Church consisting of Ministers and Elders as one part, and of the People as of
another: for so it is to be understood in Hunnius, whom here you cite in the
margin; what think you of this in stead of it? Ministers and Elders alone
without People do every substantial act which is done in election. They
examine and approve his abilities, set him apart to the Ministry. The people
receive him as from God by their hands, and he accepts of the Charge whereunto
he is assigned by them; therefore Election is not essential unto the calling
of a Minister. But perhaps the strength of your Proofs may carry it, though
your naked Argument would blush to see it self. Therefore if this might suffice
to the whole, yet I shall say something to the particulars of amplification.

To Election there goes the trial and approbation of a man's abilities.

Ans. So there does to Ordination; and whether Ministers and Elders be not as
able at least for this, as the People, let the people judge. In this respect
therefore Ordination may be as essential as Election. Note.
As for your quotations here to the beginning of this 4. reason, they are the
same which you gave us before, p. 7. for the 8. Reason, and serve only in this
place to swell the margin for a show; and therefore I pass them over and refer
the Reader to the answer of them in that place where they were first alleged.

In Election the Church gives up it self to God to take whom he shall direct
their hearts unto, and in choosing one well Act. 1. 24.
qualified they choose him whom God would have chosen.

Ans. In Ordination Ministers and Elders give up themselves to God to ordain
him whom he shall direct their hearts unto; and in ordaining one well
qualified, they ordain him whom God would have ordained. Where is the
substantial difference that Ordination may not be essential? Yet I pray you
remember that which we read Act. 1. 24. speaks of ^ods choosing, not of the
peoples. And where all the eleven Apostles were choosers, Ministers and Elders
are virtually a part. There were two nominated at that time, both well
qualified, and both referred unto God, and he chose one. If the people had all
power in making Ministers, why did not they apart from the Apostles choose one
alone, when there was but one to be chosen? but to teach us that to the regular
Call of a Minister something is necessary besides a mere election by the people.

In their choice they (h. e. the People) eo ipso separate and set him apart to
the Minister^.

Ans. Those two whom the hundred and twenty presented Act. 1. 23. (...), were
neither of them eo ipso set apart to the Ministry; but after the lot fell upon
Mathias, eo ipso he became an Apostle, and was numbered with the eleven. When
the holy Ghost said, Separate me Paul and Barnabas with fasting and prayer, by
Imposition of hands they were separated, Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. So in Ordination,
when a person well qualified has hands laid on him with fasting and prayer, eo
ipso he is separate and set apart to the Ministry See the testimonies formerly
cited, page 17.
. But where is either precept, example, or grouund of reason for people to set
any man apart by a sole act of their own, and thereby to make him a Minister,
when they may have Ministers and Elders to join with them in choosing, and
after to Ordain?

Him (h. e. the Minister) they take as from Gods appointment and hand, they
offer themselves to God by him.

Ans. This is true, when one is Ordained for them, whom they accept of as made
their Minister by Ordination, and who accepts of them as his cure and charge.
But when people choose one to be a Minister, who neither is Ordained, nor
intends to be, they give him to God so as they are the Priests, and the
Minister the Sacrifice, and God must receive him as a Minister to him from
their appointment and hand. The truth is, a Minister should be called in such a
manner as he may come to the Church from God, and as a gift of Christ, yet so
as it may appear that the Church receives him as such; and therefore as some
testimony of the Churches consent is necessary, so much more an Ordination by
Ministers and Elders: for otherwise well may Ministers be looked upon as given
by the Church unto God, but it cannot be held out that they are given from God
to the Church.

In accepting the choice, the Party chosen undertak^th to be in Gods stead to
them, and in their stead and behalf to God, (for what else is it to be a
Minister?) And all this is done with prayer and mutual agreement. 2 Cor. 5. 20.


Ans. All this is but a consequent of Election and Ordination both; no
substantial act of either, but an effect; The duty of a Minister when he has
a call, toward God and the people to whom he is assigned, not the formal
thing whereby he is made a Minister. That a Minister is an ambassador for
Christ, God beseeches by him, and he in Christ's stead, we learn indeed from 2
Cor. 5. 20. But this makes nothing at all for a call by popular election,
because many were true Ministers (as Prophets and Apostles) in all these
respects, who were never chosen by the Church to that end, but by God alone.
And what is more improper then for a People to choose an Ambassador, and one to
be in Gods stead unto them? As he is to act for them, there is some pretense
for choice, but no necessity; for every High Priest (yea every Priest) was
taken from among men, and Ordained for men in Heb. 5. 1.
things pertaining to God: and yet none of them was properly chosen by men, but
all by God. And as he is to act for God, so its necessary there should be some
act whereby Gods sending of him in his stead may appear. The choice or calling
of Ambassadors belongs not to them to whom they come as Ambassadors, but unto
him from whom and in whose name they are to act. And because God does not now
adays make any extraordinary designations, either by voice from heaven, as at
Christ's Mat. 3. 17.
baptism and transfiguration chapter 17. 5.
, or by prophecy, as in the case of Timothy 1 Timothy 4. 14.
; or by some extraordinary and express signation of his Spirit, as in the case
of Paul and Barnabas Act. 13. 2.
; or by vision, as in the case of Paul at first unto Ananias; or by lot, as in
the case of Matthias: e chapter 9. 15.
there remains the only way of Ordination, whereby we come f chapter 1. 26.
to know who are sent of God, and who are not.

Now as where the Church agrees in an act, God will be present to confirm that
act, Mat. 18. 18, 19. so Prayer is also a separation of one to the Ministry,
Act, 13. 2, 3.

Ans. The word Church is not used in either of those verses which you cite in
Matthew; and in the 17. verse where we find it, it signifies a company endowed
with power of binding and loosing, and consequently the Presbytery, Ministers
and Elders. If they agree to Ordain a Minister, their act is valid by virtue of
this ^ext: And if they ask of God the confirmation or blessing of their act, it
shall be granted them. Agreement must here be understood not only with
reference to the persons among themselves, but with respect unto the right rule
of acting. That people have a power to choose themselves a Minister, and by
that act of theirs to make him one without Ordination, who otherwise is none,
even when there is a way open for his Ordination, (for that must here be
supposed) remains yet for you to prove. That Prayer alone is a separation of
one to the Ministry, is but your bare assertion: and to cite Act. 13. 2, 3.
for the proof of this, is bold presumption, and abuse of Scripture. That
Deacons were separated with prayer and imposition of hands without fasting,
(for there is no mention of that) we read in Act. 6. 6. And that Paul and
Barnabas were separated by prayer, fasting, and imposition of hands, we read
also Act. 13. 2, 3. But what is this to prove separation by Prayer only; and
that also by the people alone, without Ministers and Elders?

Add further. Our translators of the Bible take and render (...) to ordain,
which signifies properly to choose: And where the Scripture speaks expressly of
choosing, they supply the text with the word Ordain.

Ans. Our translators use the word Ordain for the English of several words in
the Greek: as in the Old Testament, for that one English word Idols, there be
many and diverse words Elilim. Gillu. lim* Tera^him. Baal^m. Tsirim. etc.
in the Hebrew. This liberty is necessary, and almost unavoidable in many
places; and the more warrantable, because the Holy Ghost speaking in diverse
places of the same thing, does often vary in the manner of expressing. And this
is to be found not only by comparing those places which are cited out of the
Hebrew in the Greek of the New Testament, but also one place of the Hebrew with
another, as Ainsworth often observes in his Annotations. That (...) often
signifies properly to choose, in some places, is granted; provided that you
acknowledge it may signify sometimes as properly to ordain: for it may
indifferently be applied as well to Magistrates, when by vote or suffrage they
constitute, which is by way of authority to ordain; as to People, when they
elect or choose by way of privilege or of power. Whereas you say the Scripture
speaks expressly of choosing, in Act. 1. 22. and yet the Translators supply the
text with the word ordain; it is a great injury not only to the Translators,
but to the Scripture it self, and to the Holy Ghost who is the author of them.
The 21. and 22. Verses being taken in together to make up one entire sentence,
tell us, (...) One must be made witness with us of Christ's resurrection. Here
the Scripture speaks expressly of making, not of choosing; and of one to be made
not by the people, but by God. Among those who were present, there were not
people only, but those who were greater then Ministers and Elders: and they
appointed ((...)) or presented and nominated two, that God might choose one Non
audent unum aliquem certo nomina re, sed duos in medium producunt and Domin^s
sort declaret utrum ex iis velit succedere. Calv. inst. l. 4. c. 3. s. 13.
. Show whether of these two thou have chosen, ((...)) Here indeed the Scripture
speaks of Gods choosing one, and such a kind of choosing may well be called
ordaining, because it is a constitutive and consummating act whereby the people
are bound to receive one as set over them by God. But in the making of Matthias
an Apostle, the people had no such power (as in this sense) to choose him: if
they had, why were lots used? for then they might have pitched on one without
using such a means of decision.

Hen. Stephan calls the act of choice ((...)) creare magistratum, the making of
an Officer; for it is (as he says) a newfound sense of the word to signify
laying on of hands. And if the Apostle Luke should use it for laying on of
hands, Engl. pop. cer. p. 155, 166. Carth. on Act. 14. 23.
it was never used so before his time by any writer holy or profane: And
unless his purpose was to write that which none should read, it must needs be
that as he wrote, so he meant, Election by voices, (says Cartwright.)

Ans. Henry Stephan says that (...) signifies (a-among other things) creare
magistratum the making of a Magistrate; at cum accusati^o personae, creare. Sic
etiam Act. 14. citing the words of the Text; and adds, At vetus interpres, Quum
constituissent. But then he tells you, Sunt tamen qui ad ritum (...), i. e.
impositionis manum, id referri putent, quum alioqui novum usum huic verbo hic
tribuere minime necesse videntur. Here you discover either negligence or fraud.
The sense of the word which he approves in that Text Act. 14 is creating, or
constituting; others he says understand by it imposition of hands; this he
calls a new use of the word, and says it may seem not necessary, yet he does
not deny but the word may bear that sense: because he knew well what he had
said before, that (...) manum portendo and attollo, manum porrigo; and that in
Imposition of hands there is a lifting up and stretching out of the hands; for
what is (...) but (...), as he also expresses it? The Text speaks of
constituting; and because in constituting Church Officers, imposition of hands
was the rite used in the Apostles times, therefore it should not seem so
strange a thing to hold, that as the act of Paul and Barnabas in choosing
Presbyters, so also the consequent act of imposing hands should be comprehended
under that one word (...), seeing the etymology of the word agrees to the
latter, if the use do not. Certain it is that the Greek Fathers and Councels do
use the word for imposition of hands most frequently, as Bilson instances at
large Of Perp. Government.
; which they would never have done if the nature of the word would Dr. Fulk in
locum says, both election by the Church, and Ordination by imposition of hands
of the Apostles, are comprehended under that one word.
not have borne such a use. And it is as certain that many Greek words are used
in the New Testament in such a sense as they are no where else to be found:
those common words of (...) and (...) are enough to prove it. And if you will
needs have (...) to signify nothing but an act of choice or election by voices
(as you call it) yet Paul and Barnabas were the choosers, and this makes
nothing for popular election, which you would have to be the unum and unicum
necessarium in the Calling of a Minister; and yet you cannot prove by this word
(as there used) that the people chose at all, and much less that they only
were the choosers. Produce if you can but one instance out of any Author,
wherein the word is used in such a sense as you contend for, viz. for some to
choose by other men's voices? Our old English translation, When they had
ordained them Elders by election, does plainly hold out that two distinct acts,
ordaining and electing, yet not two distinct agents, are included under that
one word. Beza upon the place, though he says enough to show that Ordination
from Popish Bishops is not necessary, yet endeavors not to prove that
Imposition of hands is not included under the Greek word. To say that
Imposition of hands is there meant (vi vocis) by the proper signification of
the word, is indeed absurd; but to hold it is included (ex natura rei) from the
nature of the thing, the making of Church Officers, and the example of the
Apostles elsewhere upon like occasions, is no absurdity. As for Cartwright,
though he is a little warmer in many expressions then needed, yet in the close
he is exceeding wary, and says, They speak untruly which accuse us
(Protestants) as if we so commended the Churches election, as we shut out the
Bishops ordination, which we do not only give unto them, but make them also the
chief and directors in the Election; understanding by Bishops only such as are
mentioned in Scripture, and not humane creatures.

All that follows might be spared, but that you have a great mind to let the
world know you sometimes look into a Greek Dictionary: and lest some Readers be
beguiled by your show of Learning; I shall therefore omit nothing, especially
because you earnestly call for observation.

Yea let it further be observed that in Election and Ordination the same word
is used. In Election, Act. 1. 23. Act. 6. 6. (...). In Ordination it is (...),
the same word with the addition of a Preposition ((...)) only.

Ans. That Act. 1. 23. speaks not properly of Election, in your sense, is
already proved. Neither is Election to be understood by the word (...) in Act.
6. 6. In the 5. verse it is said of the whole multitude, they chose Steven etc.
(...). The sixth verse says they set them, viz. those whom they had chosen,
before the Apostles, not over themselves by way of authority, but before them
that they might Ordain them. I wonder at your boldness with the Scripture, and
especially at your abuse of words in the Original language. The truth is,
though the Apostles referred the choice of fit persons to the people, yet as
they took unto themselves to prescribe the qualifications, and the number of
the persons, wherein they make themselves Judges of the election, so they
reserved unto themselves the constitution and ordination of them, and thereby
plainly declare that Election without an Ordination suffices not, no not in the
case of Deacons, and much less of Ministers of the Word. And in this they seem
plainly to have an eye (as in all things that belong to the polity of the
Church) to the commonwealth of Israel, and to Moses his manner of making
officers among the Jews, whereof we read in Deuteronomy. Take (or give) ye wise
men and understanding among your tribes, and I will make them (...) apud Sept.
rulers over you, (chapter 1. 13.) And ye answered me and said, The thing which
thou have spoken is good for us to do (v. 14.) so I took the chief of your
tribes wise men and known, and made them (...).
heads over you. (v. 15.) This gives great light to that in the Acts, if the
phrases be compared. But all this while we have nothing for Election alone,
without Ordination. But something we have for Ordination by your own grant, for
(...) refers to Ordination. You must needs intend this of the phrase in Act. 6.
3. and if there it be so understood, it is the more likely to have the same
sense in Tit. 1. 5. which you denied before. Yet you seem loath to grant that
truth which you dare not deny: and therefore having said that (...) in Act. 1.
23. and Act. 6. 6. is to be understood of Election, and (...) (for that you
mean out of Act. 6. 3.) of Ordination; yet you go about to prove that the
simple and compound word have the same sense and signification, that by this
grammaticisme you may seem to gain something. Thus men who are ready to sink,
use to catch at any thing, or the shadow of a thing. Hitherto we have not found
an Election in any sense without an Ordination, as Act. 6. or something more,
as an extraordinary decision by lots, but it may be we shall anon.

And as the translators of the Bible render both words Appoint; (...) They
appointed, Act. 1. 23. (...) We will appoint, Act. 6. 3. So the preposition
(...) does not alter the sense specifically from the word when it is without
it, no not in the matter of making an Officer; for it is all one, (...), and
(...), as H. Stephen observes. In the New Testament (...) signifies to place
one, and to place one with honor: when the phrase is, (...), He shall set the
sheep on his right hand, Mat. 25. 33. it is an authoritative word, as Romans 3.
31. (...), We establish the Law. And the Septuagint whom Luke is observed to
follow most, use (...) for as much as (...), 1 Chronicles. 9. 22. (...). These did
David and Solomon appoint in their set office.

Ans. This great show of something comes to nothing. For, granting that the
simple and compound word have sometimes (for always they have not) the same
signification, yet it will not follow that they have the same sense in the
Texts alleged, as appears by that which has been said already. The action of
the hundred and twenty in appointing two out of which God was to choose one,
was not of the same nature with Gods appointing one, because neither of the two
were made Apostles by the former act, but one alone by the latter. And that of
the Multitude in setting seven men before the Twelve, was not of like nature
with the Apostles in Ordaining them. Whereas you say in the margin, (...) pro
(...) apud Eustath. you abuse your self and the Reader: because neither the
simple nor the compound in his sense are to be understood as you understand
them here. And H. Stephan (of whose words you pretend not to be ignorant, and
are therefore the more inexcusable) has it thus: At Eustathius ^ult (...) esse
pro simplici (...), intelligens ut opinor (...) prosiste: sed ita sumpto, ut
quum dicitur sistere cursum. Possit tamen aliquis magis etiam proprio verbo
utens, illud (...) Eustathii reddere Appelle *. In the latter of those pages
which you cite out of him, viz. p. 1767. he says that Cicero's phrase,
constituere regem, is (in Greek) (...): And in the former of them (viz. p.
1732.) (...), id est quod Cicero constituere regem dicir. But what of this,
till we know what Cicero means by his constituere? Is there therefore no
difference between the peoples appointing two, and Gods choosing one? or did
the Multitude and the Apostles, both or either, constitute (as Kings use to be
constituted) in the same sense? Then why should the foregoing act of the people
be counted essential in the Calling of Matthias and the Deacons, rather then
the latter act of God alone, or the Twelve? It might suffice you to say, the
act of the multitude in setting seven men before the Apostles was essential,
though the act of the Apostles in setting the same seven over the multitude was
not. But must you needs make the act of God in choosing one of two, to be a
mere accident? Take heed. To make the praeposition (...) a Diminut^ve, is
against all use and reason. That (...) signifies to place one, and to place one
with honor, and is an authoritative word, and as much as (...), may be granted
in some texts, though not in these; but that will not content you, unless the
compound signify less then the simple. In good earnest let us know some
reason why (...) may not signify pr^fic^re (as H. Stephan says it does in
those texts of Matthew and Luke heretofore insisted on) and consequently to
place one in honor, by way of authority, and as much as (...)? Why is the act
of the people under authority a substance, and the act of those who are over
them in the Lord a shadow? I fear it is not so much for the Truths sake, or
for the Peoples good, as for some advantage, that you make so light account of
the Apostles and God himself. I would willingly allow the people all right, but
I dare not say that alone which they do is essential, authoritative, and
establishing, but nothing else. If (...) be an authoritative word in that
phrase, We establish the law, where the Apostle speaks but of a doctrinall
establishment; let us know why, when he speaks of political acts, and applies
the compound to them, that should not also be as authoritative, or at least
authorittaive?

When you say, [the Septuagint whom Luke is observed to follow, use (...) for
as much as (...), as 1 Chronicles. 9. 22. (...), These did David and Solomon appoint
in their set office.] I hope by this time you see the mistake. The words are,
whom David and Samuel the Seer did appoint in their set office. And if you mean
that the peoples act in Act. 1. 23. and Act. 6. 6. was like unto that of David
and Samuel about the porters, you are mistaken. David and Samuel might be said
to set, appoint, or ordain, either as the one was a King, and the other a
Judge, or as they were both Prophets, but neither of these acceptions belong
unto the people. Yet there is something in the close wherein perhaps you may
speed better then you have done hitherto.

But especially consider that electing one is taking up an office for him, Act.
1. 20. 22. and he that is elected is said to be numbered amongst officers, Act.
1. 26. The lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered amongst the Apostles.
Numbered (...) communibus suffragiis seu calculis ad scriptus est, by common
consent or votes he was put into the number or enrolled amongst the Apostles.

Ans. That electing one, is taking up an office for him, I understand not. But
that by Gods election Matthias was made an Apostle, as all the rest by Christ,
is certain. That there were two presented by the people at first, and afterward
Apostolos solus Deus eligit, Ecclesia accipit: Apostoli a Christo solo
Ecclesiae capite, ac non ab hom^nibus, (ut Paulus ad Galat. 1. 11.) eliguutur.
Jun. ecclesiast. lib 3. cap. 1.
one accepted of by common consent in way of obedience to Gods determination, I
verily believe. There was no other suffrage nor second lot, though the word
(...) sound that way: (for to refer the choice by lot to God, and after to vote
whether Gods decision should stand, were to tempt God.) but an acquiescence on
all parts in his as the last resolve. Calvin speaking to this point, A quibus
eligendi sunt Ministri, says, Hujus rei certa regula ex Apostolorum
institutione peti non potest, quae nonnihil habuit a communi reliquorum
vocatione dissimile Calv. inst. l. 4. c. 3.. 13.
. And that the 120. acted here as a general Church visible, not as a single
Congregation, is the rather to be believed, because he that was chosen was to
be an Apostle: and this will make little for the right of Congregations to have
all power in electing of their Officers. Yet this example may be of this use,
to teach us, 1. That the Churches consent or assent is in some cases requisite
unto the call of a Minister. 2. That a Ministers call is not to be left wholly
to the Peoples election; for then what need either of a Lot, as here; or of
Ordination, as in the case of Deacons? And for all that yet appears in the
discussion of this argument, Ordination may be estentiall to the calling of a
Minister.

Your fifth Argument: page 11.

5. Upon whomsoever Ele^tion falls, Ordination does necessarily, and
therefore the Call to the Ministry lies principally in Election; as he that i^
chosen to be a King, must be crowned, therefore his Election gives him the
right to rule. That Ordination necessarily follows Election, appears Act. 6. 3.
where the Apostle bids them look out (i. e. choose, as is explained ver. 5.) and
he would appoint.

Ans. This Argument falls short in the Conclusion, That therefore Ordination is
not essential. And if Ordination do necessarily fall upon whomsoever Election
falls, then is Ordination at least necessary after Election. If it be
necessary, it may not be omitted when it may be had; all that neglect or
despise it are without excuse, especially when the Magistrate injoyns it
agreeably unto the Word. And if it should always follow upon Election, yet you
cannot thence conclude that the Call to the Ministry lies principally in
Election. Marriage is begun by the motion of the man to the woman that he may
have her for his wife; and yet marriage it self lies not principally in that,
nor in their mutual consent, but in their solemn taking one another, and in
the ratification thereof by such as are in authority to allow or disallow of
such desires and purposes. In generation nature begins with the preparation of
the matter, and after that the form is educed or introduced, and yet the
essence or being arises from the union of the form with the matter. That he
who is chosen to be a King, must be crowned, makes still more for the necessity
of Ordination; and if his Election gives him the right to rule, yet his
Coronation only does solemnly declare to the binding of all his Subjects unto
obedience, that his right is acknowledged, and he is actually put into the
exercise of it. Grant that a Minister may not (have jus in re) act as a
Minister in things of Order and Jurisdiction, till he be Ordained, and our
strife will cease. Where you say, that Ordination necessarily follows Election,
appears Act. 6. 3. I fear you mean it backwards, that Election must necessarily
go before Ordination: but then Act. 6. 3. will not prove it, because neither
that one example nor any other hold out a full enumeration for all cases which
belong unto the calling of a Minister In hist. N. Testamenti exempla habemus
constitutionis mi^i^^er^i, and ejusde^ etiam conservationis, sed no^
^estaurationis ejus aut Refor^ationis post generalem apostasium. Omnia igitur
quae pertinent ad plebem fidelem in tali casu, non representantur ibi certis
exemplis. Ames. Bell. Enerv. ^^. 2. c. 2. n. 6.
And if the Apostle reserves (as you grant) [appointing] to himself, it thereby
appears that some act of another nature distinct from Election belongs to the
calling of a Deacon, which is not in the peoples power: for why should the
Apostles reserve that unto themselves which did belong unto the people?

As to your Margin about this Argument, if I should take no notice of it,
either you might think your self neglected, or some Reader be so weak as to
imagine there was strength in the Latin, though the English prove weak: and
therefore I shall take that also into consideration. Out of Ames you tell us,
Omnes illi actus qu^ pertinent ad Electionem, ut nominatio, praesentatio
examinatio, vel ab Electione pendent, ut O dinatio, institutio, vel immissio.
Ames. cas. consc. quo supra.
All those acts which pertain to Calling, either tend to Election, as
Nomination, Presentation, Examination; or depend upon Election, as Ordination,
Institution, or Immission.

Ans. Nomination, Presentation, and Examination, tend equally to Ordination as
to Election, and some kind both of examination and election belongs properly to
the Ordainers, and not unto the People. If Election be taken for the peoples
act, Ordination does not depend upon it absolutely in all cases, as has been
proved already: but suppose it did, what hinders but that those things which
depend upon Election may be as essential unto Calling as Election it self?
What think you of the act of a Minister in accepting of the work and charge
unto which he has been chosen? If that be not essential, a Minister may be
compelled and made a Minister whether he will or no: If you say it is
essential, you grant that something which depends upon Election is essential;
for he cannot properly accept until he have been chosen first. Sometimes there
is Mission, Institution, Ordination, or something of like nature thereunto,
without any Election on their part to whom Ministers are sent; as in the case
of particular Ordination, as Junius distinguishes of it into universal and
particular. When Peter and John were sent unto Samaria, they might preach,
baptize, perform any act of Ministerial order among the Samaritans
respectively to their state and condition: an^ if they had any Election from
the Believers there, it must follow after their lawful calling to the
Ministerial work in that place, which they brought with them from Jerusalem,
and received not in Samaria, and so was not essential to constitute, but
accumulative to corroborate their call. When a Ministry is first set up in any
place to convert those who are yet uncalled, it comes in after this manner
mediately or immediately.

To that of Voetius, though it be more full in his own words then as you
contract it, Relationes in subjecto dicuntur existere posi^o fundamento and
term^no. Sed legitima electio est fundamentum Ministerii, and particularis
Ecclesia ista vel illa terminus. Voet. ubi sup. p. 265. Consecratio est
adjunctum Ministerii, atque adjunctum est po^terius suo subjecto. Id. 18
That relations are said to exist in their subject upon the position of their
foundation and term, and that the lawful election and vote ((...)) of the
Church is the foundation of the Ministry, and this or that particular Church
the term. as also, that Consecration is but the adjunct of Ministry, and the
adjunct is after his subject. Yet you shall do well to prefer reason before
testimony, and to consider that the foundation of Calling, is power and
authority to set one over others in the Lord for the Ministry: and the term
may be indefinite or particular, or both, as the good and state of the Church
does require. Election of the people can be nothing else but a desire that such
a one may be made a Minister, and their Minister in particular; and may either
go before, or follow Ordination, according to the state of the person who is
desired. This desire of theirs is to be subject, as in some respect to the
person himself, so more especially unto them who are to discern, judge and
determine in the room of Christ. The sentence of such competent Judges is the
true foundation of Calling; and the assignation of a particular Company to be
ministered unto (which when they are Saints is to be done with their consent) is
the term. All this is done in Ordination; and in that regard Ordination
rightly stated is not an adjunct of Calling (it might be an adjunct, and yet
inseparable) but the form it self.

That which follows concerns those of Scotland.

And to this agree our Brethren of the Church of Scotland, speaking of
Ordination in general, (though they instance it as Eng. pop. cer. pt. 3. c. 8.
p. 167
to a particular flock) Neither the Patrons presentation, nor the Clergies
nomination, examination, and recommendation, nor the Bishops laying on of hands
and giving of institution, nor all these put together, can make up to a man his
Calling to be a Pastor, without the free election of the flock. [Here it might
be added, Nor the free election of the People without Ordination.] Again. A man
has from his Election power to be a Pastor, so far as concerns jus ad rem; and
Ordination only applies him to the actual exercising of his Pastoral office,
which Ordination ought to be given to him only who is elected, and that
because he is elected.

Ans. Upon what ground you entitle that book so often cited, to the Brethren,
and sometime to the Church of Scotland generally, I know not, unless it be to
de^^de the Reader, or upbraid the Brethren and the Church. Some of them have
been long in England as Commissioners from that Church; and have not been
silent where they had occasion to debate. Besides, their Works speak for them;
as the great pains of Reverend Mr. Rutherford at large to the point in hand
Due right of Presb. from p. 178. to 241.
. Before their arrival here, there was a learned Tract of Patrick Forbes of
Corse, to clear the Call of Ministers in the Reformed Churches, and
particularly in Scotland, against Objections of the Papists. As to these
particular passages here cited, you wrong both the Author, the Reader, and the
Truth it self, by leaving out all those expressions whereby Ministers and
Elders are interessed in Election as distinguished from Ordination; and by
misapplying those words which you have expressed. But whiles (says he) we
plead for the Election of People, we add, 1. Let the Clergy of the adjacent
bounds in their Presbyteriall assembly try and judge who are fit for the
Ministry. 2. Even when it comes to Election, yet (Populus non solus judicat,
sed praeeunte and moderante actionem Presbyterio: the words of Junius) Let the
Elders of the Congregation, together with some of the Clergy concurring with
them, moderate the action, and go before the body of the People. Would to God
that these things were observed by all. I add Amen: for then an act of
Ministers and Elders in judging of the Calling of a particular person, would
always be found in praxi, and without it all choice by People alone would be
counted null and invalid. Whereas you say he speaks of Ordination in general,
and yet instances it as to a particular Flock, the truth is, he speaks there
only of Ordination to a particular flock, and not of Ordination in general
until he come to the next page. It follows (says he) to speak of
Ordination; page 168.
wherein with Calvin, Junius, Gersom, Bucer, and other learned men, we
distinguish between the act of it, and the rite of it. The act of Ordination
standoth in the mission or deputation of a man to an Ecclesiastical function,
with power and authority to perform the same. Now that Ordination, at thus
described, is essential to a Calling, he himself implies by these words, For
how shall they preach except they be sent? speaking of such a sending as he had
before stated. That Ministers should not be obtruded invito populo, against the
peoples will, is the sum of all which he pleads for, and will not be gainsaid
where the people are Saints and Orthodox: but it will not thence follow that
People have a power to make one a Minister, excluso or invito Presbyterio,
without or against, or otherwise then by a Presbytery. Suppose a man had by
Election jus ad rem, power to be a Pastor, yet he is not therefore or thereby a
Pastor actually; and if Ordination be that which gives jus in re, no man is to
act as a Pastor till he be ordained. And if Election do only design a man to be
made a Minister, and Ordination be that act whereby he is so made; I hope it
will be plain, that as the introducing of the form is essential in creating,
rather then preparing the matter or mass which i^ to receive it; so Ordination
will be found to be essential rather then Election, though Election may
precede in time, and Ordination follow after.

6. A Minister may want and be without Ordination in The sixth Argument.
some cases; therefore it is not essential to his Calling. Thus Gregor.
Thaumaturgus was, and others may be in times of persecution.

Ans. Here you fight against your self, if one word be changed. A Minister may
want and be without Election in some cases, therefore it is not essential to
his Calling. This is commonly judged to be the case of our first Reformers, and
may be the case of others in times of extreme persecution. You care not to
wound your self, so as you may strike others. There must be a voice from
heaven, i. e. a true Ministry to bring men out of Babylon Non pot^i^ Ecclesia
restitui, nisi restituto Ministerio, (de forma ecclesiae visibilis loquor) quia
non alia ratione qu^m praedicatione Evangelii vel instaurari ecclesta, vel
instaurata potest conservari. Sadeel de legit. vocatione Min. p. 7. Verum h^c
summo studic attendi debet, quod vocationis Ministrorum verbi divini
necessitas, huc usque adstructa, non ad quod vis tempus, etiam corruptae
ecclesiae, atque turbatae salsa doctrine atque immani persecutione. Nam ubi
ecclesia, aut salsa doctrina turbata, aut persecutione dissipata est, it aut
desint qui sinceros verbi divini M^nistros (...) vocate possint and ^elint: hac
certe rerum necessitate extrema concedit Deus, ut quivis qui volunlotis divine
gnari sunt, verbum Dei praedicent, Sacramenta administrent, collapsam veritatem
restaurent, and quaevi^ munia sacra citra ordinariam vocationem obeant. (...).
p. 222.
(Rev. 18. 4.) but who shall either ordain or elect, when Clergy and Laity (I
use the words only for distinction sake) are equally corrupted. At such a time,
wherever God providentially sets up a standard, his people may flock unto it;
and if they find a burning and a shining light, it suffices that they know it
is not of men, but from heaven, and that they ought to walk in the light of it.

But you add:

This argument Voetius presses larger, and shows (even by confession of
Papists) that one Elected or chosen may without Ordination do all the Offices
of a Minister, as Excommunicate, Absolve: and concludes it is no more to the
essence of a Minister, then bowing of the knee externally is essential to
ptayer to God, or the leading of the Bride and pomp of a wedding day is to
Marriage. Desper. causa Papat. 266, 267.

Ans. 1. Voetius speaks not of Ordination there as an act of Ministers and
Elders distinct from the rite of laying on hands. 2. The Papists distinguish
between the power of Order and Jurisdiction; though they grant Election gives
jurisdiction, yet it is but in some cases; and those things which belong to
Order can be done by none but by Ordained persons, according to their
principles. Neither 3. does Voetius produce any such confession of the Papists
as you here assert he does, that one elected or chosen may without Ordination
do all the offices of a Minister. And the instances which you give of
Excommunication and Absolution (both of which belong to Jurisdiction) show
plainly of what kind of actions the Papists are to be understood; and such are
all those cases which you find cited in him, and many more of like nature which
are more fully insisted on by a Parisian Lawyer to the same purpose Johan Dar^
is de Hierarch. Ecclesiast. p. 10.
. 4. But this is especially to be noted, That Voetius thinks Ordination, or (as
he there expresses himself) Coronation or Investiture may be wanting only
(aliquo in casu) in some case, and instances in the time of persecution, (cum
nec plebe nec presbyteri in unum convenire possunt) when neither the People nor
Elders c^n meet together. Wherein he seems to suppose it is necessary at other
times. The reasons which he gives why it should not be necessary in the case,
concludes as much against the one, as against the other. In time of persecution
Ministers cannot assemble to Ordain, nor People (says he) [I add, to Elect]
and therefore that case which voyds the one, voyds the other also, and more
strongly: A few Ministers may more safely meet privately to Ordain, then many
people to Elect. The case of Greg. Thaumaturgus, if truly stated out of Voetius
(whence you had it, as all the rest of this Paragraph) does much confirm thi^;
For as he was not Ordained, so neither was he Elected in your sense h. e.
chosen by the people; nor so much as present, neither did he consent, but was
compelled: there went nothing to his Call but an act of the Bishop (Deo
consecrans eum qui corpore non aderat) Consecrating him who was not present
bodily, unto God. And if this be all that is essential to a Call, a company of
Ministers and Elders may perform it, as well as one Bishop alone. The same
Gregory (as you may read elsewhere) being called to Cumas to Ordain a Pastor for
Histor. Pontif. Jurisd. Parisiis 1624. l 2. c. 1.
that Church, the People being divided in their Election, he alone chose
Alexander Carbonarim, and dedit civitati Sacerdatem, nihil moratus consensum
aut electionem Populi.

The seventh Argument:

7. The inconveniences will be very great which follow upon this, That
Ordination is essential to the calling of a Minister: For of necessity, for
the maintenance of it, it must be asserted that the Romish Priests, by whom
Ordination comes to us, (And therefore to Beza it was all one to be Ordained by
the Ordinary, and to be Consocrated in Romana Ecclesia, in Ac. 14. 23.) are the
Ministers of Jesus Christ; and the Church of Rome wherein they are, the true
Church and Spouse of Christ: yea, that there is a personal succession of
Ministers (uninterrupted by Heresy, or whatsoever else may nullify a
Ministers Calling) from the Apostles times to this presons, and if there be but
one, who when he Ordained was no Minister ^^ not Ordained, all that were
Ordained by him are no Ministers, if Ordination be essential.

Ans. Is this the best, or the worst of your Wine, that you have kept it for
the last? Whatever you intended, your Arguings (like violent motions) grow
weaker and weaker nearer the end. If you think there is none like this, as David
said of Goliahs sword, I think your cause will utterly perish, as that Giant
did by his own weapon. And though you make a flourish with many words, yet this
in short is the substance of your argument. [If Ordination be essential to the
calling of a Minister, then the Church and Ministry of Rome are true, and
Personal succession uninterrupted is necessary.] 1. I deny the consequence,
and shall exp^ct your proof hereafter, for at present you do not so much as
offer any. And why have we nothing of Voetius here? do you not know that he
maintains the lawfulness of that Call which Luther and other of the first
Reformers had in the Church of Rome (for the substance of the thing) and yet
denies that it follows thence that the Church of Rome is a true Church Lib. 2.
sec. 1. cap. 6. page 97.
. To clear the ground of this denial, I distinguish between the Church and
her external Polity: That which is essential to the Churches Being never
ceases, but that which is essential to her outward Polity may, because
Polity it self is not essential. The Church, for Being, like Christ as God,
never dies; but in her external Order, like Christ as man, she dies and rises
again. If this be no good argument: [Election is essential, therefore it has
been from the beginning of the world, and shall continue to the end, as the
Church and Calling have done and shall do] -- as you know it i^ not; then must
you needs acknowledge your own inconsequence in the former. For every one of
your aggravated inconveniences will fall as heavy on the head of Election, as
you think they do on Ordination, and besides them many more. As 1. That there
must be a true Church before there can be a true Ministry, i. e. the effect
before the cause, and the end attained before the means of attaining are
provided. 2. That the government of the Church is purely and strictly
Democraticall or popular; for if the People without Ministers and Elders are
sole Judges of their own Saintship, and of fitness for the Ministry, and
consequently of soundness of Doctrine and the right way of Worship, what can
be denied them? 3. That a Ministers calling, as a Minister, extends not beyond
the bounds of a single Congregation; or that one Congregation may make a
Minister to serve themselves or any other. 4. That the providence of God has
failed concerning the essentials of Ministers calling, for many generations
every where, because the right of electing Ministers has been denied to
Christian people.

As to the Inconveniences themselves, let them be considered distinctly, and
have the patience to hear what the Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines do
think of them. The first inconvenience is:

1. That the Romish Priests by whom Ordination comes to us are the Ministers of
Jesus Christ. To make this the more odi^ us; you swell it out with a wind^
parenthesis, That to Beza it was all one to be Ordained by the Ordinary, and to
be Consecrated in Romana Ecclesia. in Ac. 14. 23.] Herein you wrong him, and
abuse the Reader; for he speaks not of Ordination in your sense, as
distinguished from Imposition of hands, neither does he account it all one to
be Ordained by the Ordinary, and to be Consecrated in the Roman Church; as if
every one that is Ordained by a Bishop in any of the Reformed Churches, were in
that respect to be looked upon as Consecrated in the Roman Church: (To say
nothing of those who are Ordained by Ordinaries in the Greek Church) And this
is plain by his own words, speaking of the wo^d (...). Quidam (says he) hoc
refer malunt ad manuum impositionem, quae and ipsa fit prorsus necessaria, ut
hoc praetexti^ accepto vocationem nostram irritam esse dicant, quoniam
Ordinarii quos vocant nobis manus non imposuerunt, sive quod non sumus in
Romana ecclesia constituti. And though after he show the invalidity of their
Call, ex ipsis Canonibus quos jactant, out of those Canons which they boast of;
yet he brings not one reason to prove that Imposition of hands is not to be
included in the Original word so much insisted on. And if the word [Elders]
used in that Text, be to be taken synecdochically for Pastors, Deacons, and
Ruling Elders, as he there expounds it; why may it not as well be said that
(...), though it signif^^, choosing, does also include Ordaining? because it
appears by Act. 6. that with choosing, Ordination by Imposition of hands was
also used.] This by the way to your Parenthesis. To the Inconvenience it self I
answer:

1. The Ordination of Rom^sh Priests as Priests is a mere nullity, because the
Priesthood i^ self is so: but their Ordination adonus Presbyterii, to Preach
and administer the Sacraments, is of another nature, and therefore these must
not be confounded together; the rather, because in their manner of Ordaining
they are really distinguished Vide Pontisicale Romanum.
.

2. Though some of our Divines deny a lawful Ministry, and Calling thereunto,
to be in the Roman Hierarchy, as * Beza and Sadeel; (not as making of it to be
simply invalid and null, but extreme sinful) yet they must not be interpreted
too rigorously, unless we mean to set Protestants at variance among themselves
to our own prejudice: And that 1. Because the Lutherans do maintain the
ordinary Call which Luther had in the Church of Rome, as sufficient. And, 2.
not they only, but diverse also of the Calvinists, as Voetius, Forbes, Festus,
Homius, etc. 3. They who say there was somet^ing extraordinary in Luthers
Calling, do place that extraordinarinesse rather in his spirit, gifts,
success, and manner of ministry, than in the Call it self, and therefore make
his Calling mixed.

3. The most judicious and best approved amongst us do hold, That as Baptism,
so Ordination even in Rome is so far forth valid, that upon separation from
them, and joining with us, there needs neither new Baptism nor a new
Ordination.

4. We all agree that a Call from Rome is not necessary at all, against the
Papists, who make the Pope to be the fountain of Order and Jurisdiction.

5. This inconvenience follows not at at all upon the opinion that Ordination
is essential; but upon that mistake only, that the lawful way of Calling is
one only in all cases and conditions of the Church: wherein whesoever engages
either for Election or Ordination, apart, and much more for both together, will
be sure to plunge himself into inextricable labyrinths. I approve our men
(says Reverend Forbes) who sustain our ordinary Vocation in common, but who
plead so for it as a point absolutely requisite for approving our cause, and in
such a case of the Church do place all defense therein: in my judgment they do
wrongly limit the Holy One of Israel, against both the privilege of his power
and his usual manner of dealing in such cases. Forbes Defense of the lawful
Calling, sec. 28. page 60.

To your second inconvenience:

That (then) the Church of Rome is a true Church and Spouse of Christ.

I answer, 1. It follows not; because in a false Church there may be something
true. 2. Many Protestant Divines are not afraid to grant that in some sense it
is a true Church, [So at the whole Church was not extinct in Rome, neither did
the Ministry altogether perish there.] -- ^^a ut sicut non penitus exti^cta
ibi suit Ecclesia, sic neque penitus interitrit ibi Mini^terium Zanch. i^ 4
pr^^.


3. This objection is so fully answered by all our Writers of this subject
against the Papists, that it is not worth the while to transcribe them. Vide
Voetium quo supra.

4. Those who are commonly called Brownists are sufficiently zealous against
Rome; and yet even among them the more moderate part, as Johnson and his
followers, do not only grant that the Society commonly called the Church of
Rome is a true Church, without all fear of inconvenience, but labor at large
to prove it Christian Plea by Fran. Johnson. Printed Anno 1617. hom page 119.
^^ 215.
. The more rigid of them, who deny that which he grants, as Robinson and
Ainsworth, yet acknowledge that in Rome there are some true Ordinances, as
Baptism for instance: And in granting the administration of Baptism with
those of Rome to be valid, and yet denying the Church to be true, they must
needs reject your consequence.

As the Lord has his people in Babylon (says Robinson) his I mean both in
respect of Election and of personal Sanctification: so has he for their sakes
there preserved (notwithstanding all the apostasy and confusion which is found
in it) sundry his holy Truths and Ordinances, amongst which Baptism is one.
Robins. justificat. of Separat. ed. ult. p. 232.

If the question he whether Ordination or Imposition of hands be not another
Ordinance retained in Rome from the beginning; the Reader shall do well to
weigh what follows here out of Mr. Johnson, one of no mean account among the
Brethren of the Separation.

Whereas one that was Minister in the Church of England, was after chosen
Teacher to a Separate Congregation without any new Imposition of hands, he
labors for to justify it after this manner, (in his Ans. to the Letter of H.
A. touching the division among themselves, p. 50. and seq.)

The Anabaptists holding (says he) that Antichrist has utterly destroyed all
Gods ordinances, so as there was not so much as true Baptism retained and had
among them (h. e. in Rome or England) thereupon they began to baptize
themselves again. Whose errors while we confuted, and while some of them
objected that we should no more retain the Baptism then the Ministry there
received: we had just occasion thereupon to consider thereof; and so weighing
with our selves that one main and special reason against Rebaptization is,
because Baptism is an ordinance of God which was had in the Church of Rome
before she fell into apostasy, and has been there continued ever since the
Apostles times (however it be comingled among them with many corruptions and
inventions of their own) we began to consider Whether the like might not be
observed and said concerning Imposition of hands; that it was had from the
Apostles in the Church of Rome before her apostasy, and is there continued to
this day, though mixed with many pollutions and devises of their own.

And entering into a consideration thereof, we observed -- 1. That Imposition of
hands is of God, and not an invention of man; not a post or threshold first
brought by Antichrist into the temple of God, but had therein before Antichrist
sat there. 2. That Baptism and Imposition of hands are joined together among
the principles of the foundation spoken of Heb. 6. 2. which we thought
therefore should in this behalf be well regarded. 3. That Imposition of hands
i^ in the Church of Rome still given to the Office of Ministry, and in the
name of the Lord; as they do also still administer Baptism. 4. That we found
not either precept, example, or ground in the Scripture binding us to the
repetition thereof. 5. That the Priests and Levites in Israel becoming
unclean, when afterward they were cleansed retained still their places of being
Priests and Levites: And that the children of the Priests and Levites
succeeding after them, did minister without a new Anointing, or new Imposition
of hands: yea that in the case of Idolatry, the Levites repenting kept their
first function, and the Priests also, being only debarred from the Altar, but
still remaining Priests, both doing such duties, and enjoying such benefits
thereof as the other Israelites might not, no nor the Levites but in cases of
necessity. Lev. 22. 1, 9. and Ezec. 44. 10, 14. 2 King. 23. 9. with Lev. 21.
and 24, 9. Mat. 12. 4, etc.

Other reasons we considered also on the other hand, which I need not here
mention. But seeing we found that it was even from the Apostles times in the
Church of Rome long before she became apostate, as Baptism was; and that the
repeating of it among us, and not regarding the having of it there, is a means
to strengthen the Anabaptists in their errors, -- We stayed our selves, and
rested in this that the Church did choose.

5. Let it be supposed that some others are of the same opinion, as you know
there are, whose testimonies are elsewhere produced by Dr. Hall: What is the
inconvenience which you so much fear by this concession? That then Separation
from the Church of Rome is unlawful? So Robinson and John Can imagine. But (if
I mistake you not) you your self and many others in these times can tell how to
avoid that, who pretend to acknowledge the Church of England and her Assemblies
to be true Churches, and yet separate your selves from them: and Johnson in his
Plea, p. 118. will help you out, so as the inconvenience is not so great as you
would have us to conceit it.

But you tell us of a third --

That there is a personal succession of Ministers (uninterrupted by Heresy,
or whatsoever else may nullify a Ministers Calling) from the Apostles time to
this present. For if there be but One who when he was Ordained was no Minister,
or not Ordained, all that are Ordained by him are no Ministers, if Ordination
be essential.

To this I answer, 1. It cannot be inferred upon the supposition, unless
Ordination were the only essential way of calling Ministers at all times, and
in all cases, which needs not be much insisted on. 2. Though in fact a
personal succession could not be proved, yet of right and according to precept
it might be necessary; as in the case of Circumcision among the Jews from
Abraham downward among his posterity, during the force of that Law. 3. That
which you suppose, that Heresy and something else (you say not what) may
nullify a Ministers calling; as you do not prove it, so it is not granted
neither by all the Papists Nulla laesionis portio a^^ingit ^um qui ^^
haereticis jam damnatis ordinatur. Decret. par. 1. did. 20 cap. 8.
nor by our Protestant Writers. Suppose the people who choose a Minister be
indeed Heretical, if you say their Calling of him by Election alone is a
nullity, as therein you shall gratify the Papists who in this respect
especially except against our Calling in England, because our first Reformers,
though Ordained persons, were (as they reproach: them) Heretics: so also will
you wound your best friends in the point in hand, the Socinians, 4. More may be
said for personal succession in way of Ordination, to prove it has been, then
you take notice of. See Voetius to that purpose Desp. Causa Pap. l. 2. sect. 1.
cap. 2. page 65.
. And as it was of some use to the Fathers in the Primitive times, so it is no
small comfort to the Churches now. We are sorry for the death of Christian
friends, though we believe their resurrection; and should count it no small
part of our misery, that Succession though now revived in Reformed Churches,
yet was sometime at that pass as to need a raising up again. 5. Succession of
Ministers is the more to be enquired into, because of that promise Mat. 28. 20.
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. As also because either
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, or Pastors and Teachers are always
necessary for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 6. This also is worth
observing, that the chief Instruments of Reformation have been rai^ed out of
the number of Ordained persons in all places. Yet, 7. there is not a like
necessity of the way of Calling, as of the Calling it self; because the
Scripture examples afford, and the state of the Church requires a greater
liberty for the manner of Calling, then for the want of Ministers. And God in
thrusting forth laborers into his harvest by ways of providence, with a
blessing, shows plainly that he is free to give as he please, Cu^ Dei judicio
ita labefactatur Ecclesia, ut jamjam ruitura videatur, corruptis jam p^orsus
ordinariis Ministris and Episcopis; tum solitus est Deus Extra Ordinem never
exc^tare Ministros, qui rutatem Eccl siam erigant, and Ministerium ab
ordinarits neglectum and corruptuminstanrent. Zanch. quo supr^. Vide
Confessionem Gallic^m Artic. 31.
.

8. For matter of succession in the way of Ordination. I see no need of
contending for more then is granted by some of the Separation.

[I deny not but confess (says Robinson Justif. of separation page 322. It.
page 327. ed. ult.
) that the Church of God, and more particularly the Churches of the New
Testament continuing and abiding in that State, faith, and order, wherein they
were set, and established by the Lord in the hands of his Se^vants the Apostles
and Evangelists, were to receive their Ministers constantly by succession after
a sort, namely so far as that all succeeding Ministers were to be Ordained by
Ministers, and not otherwise]

Provided that this be added, when Faith and Order are revived, the same way of
succession ought also to be revived: because this Order is necessary to
preserve that faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

To conclude.

Whatsoever may be said of the calling of our first Reformers, in the case of
immediate separation from Rome, or of others in times of tyranny and
persecution, when there is no place either for an orderly Election, or
Ordination, yet you have not brought so much as one shadow of reason, why
Ordination should not be necessary with us in England, in the way now appointed
by Ordinance of Parliament, should all be granted whereby you pretend to prove,
That Ordination (as commonly taken) is not essential to the calling of a
Minister.

But as to the regular and ordinary lawful Calling of a Minister: if precept
and examples out of Scripture; the general practice of the Church in all ages
from the Primitive downward, with that of the Reformed Churches, ever since the
foundations of the Second-Temple-mysticall have been laid among them; or
arguments drawn out of Scripture and from the judgment of Protestant Divines
conform thereunto, will determine any Question: I shall presume
(notwithstanding all you have insisted on unto the contrary) That

Ordination, h. e. an act of Ministers and Elders as such, whereby they IN THE
NAME OF CHRIST separate and set apart a meet person to the Work and office of a
Minister, is necessary, and more or less essential to his Calling.

For Imposition of hands, though many things unavoydably, as either You, those
Authors which you have cited, or the nature of the thing gave occasion, have
been touched upon about it; yet it follows now more particularly to be
considered.

Yet stay a while.

Upon perusal of the papers, after the Press had made some progress, I take
notice of a double oversight, one in my self, another in you, besides some
errata's of the Printer. In the transcribing of your part, a few things are
unwittingly omitted, which should be in the margin: yet for the things
themselves you shall find an answer. Only one passage which is with you, page
8. in the body of the Tract, I forgot to set down at length; and therefore
(though out of place) I supply it here, which should have been inserted page
29. before the fourth reason.

This (meaning your third) is the reason of Crocius in Anti Soc. di^p. 24. see
3.
defense of the Protestants against the Socinians. Distinguimus inter
necessitatem Vocationis and Ordinationis, (says he) We distinguish between the
necessity of having a Call, and of being Ordained Illa est necessaria ratione
mandati, haec ratione ordinis and cons^itutionis Ecclesiasticae. Illa est
constitutio in officio, quae si legitima est duo habet. 1. Vt a Dco quis
eligatur. 2. Vt per ant^cedentem po^uli consensum eligatur. A Deo eligitur cum
ipse donis exorna^, etc.
. A Calling is necessary by reason of Gods command; Ordination is necessary in
respect of order and Ecclesiastical constitution. The Calling is the
Constitution of one in Office; which (if it be lawful) has two things in it.
1 That one be chosen of God. 2 That he be chosen by the antecedent consent of
the people. One chosen of God when he is adorned with gifts, etc.

To this, besides what I have already said (page 28. lin. 22. and seq.) I shall
now add further.

1. That the Socinians insisting only upon this question, [Whether a
Constitution by way of Ordination be altogether necessary to the making of a
Minister?] are not (as you think) to be opposed; neither are the Reformed
Churches nor Protestant Divines of any other judgment then they: and therefore
what needs Crocius to defend the Protestants against them in this point, or
profess himself Anti-Socinian? unless he will say more for Ordination then
they have done; which cannot well be, but by holding it to be essential.

2. It Is granted, that there is less necessity of Ordination then of Calling;
yea, that Ordination is not always alike necessary, but according to the state
of the Church. And it might be proved, that there is a case wherein it is so
far from being necessary, that it is not lawful: But it will not thence
follow, that in no case it is essential.

3. Those Scriptures which prove the lawfulness of it, will prove more: For we
cannot argue from the bare example of the Apostles -- Thus they did, therefore
we may do the same. Because it follows not in all things. Therefore De Eccl.
Pontis. Praejud. Disser. 6. p. 149.
Crocius (in a later Work) flies to 1 Timothy 5. 22. for his ground and proof: and
there we have a precept.

4. That Order and Ecclesiastical constitution which he speaks of, can be
understood of none other then Apostolical; and those things which the Apostles
wrote about Order, were commandments, 1 Cor. 14. 37.

5. Whereas he says, A Calling is necessary by Gods command; and after seems
to show what he means by Calling; namely, that the person constituted be chosen
by the antecedent consent of the People. You know full well, no command of God
can be found for this way of Calling, but as it is gathered out of examples by
consequence from Act. 1. and the 6 chap. And if those examples imply a command
for the Peoples Election one way, I would hear some solid reasons why the like
command is not to be concluded out of examples for Ordination.

6. Whether the antecedent consent of the People be always necessary, is not
the point at present under debate. But this is his sense: That the power of
choosing is the right of the whole Church, and belong^th not to the People
alone, as we commonly understand the word: And the antecedent consent of
Ministers and Elders, is (I Will be bold to say it) necessary unto a Call. And
that granted, suffices to the matter of Ordination, as it is here considered.

7. To that That one is chosen of God, when he is adorned with gifts. I think
you your self make some scruple of it. When the Ministers of England have
pleaded (among other things) to prove their Calling the gifts which God had
given them: Those of the Separation, in their Writings, are wont to tell them,
Qualification is no Calling. Neither dare I say, Every one that is sit to be a
Minister, is called to be one. And in a mediate Calling, the testimony of
competent Judges concerning Abilities, and the right to exercise them, is most
necessary; and that uses to be, in the orderly way of Gods prescribing in the
Word, by Ordination.

Now (Sir) give me leave to mind you of an oversight in yourself. You told us
in your Title Page, of the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, as a distinct
part from that of Protestant Divines. Why are none of their Confessions cited,
or Books of Discipline? Make they for you, or against you? If they be on your
side, would you spare to tell us? Suppose they were against you, yet you might
not conceal it, while you pretend to hold it out. As for particular men, their
Judgment is not tanti, if it agree not with the Church in general. He that
made the Observations on the Harmony of Confessions in English, will help you
out a little: but the Confessions themselves are not (as it seems) for your
turn. As for the Divines which you have cited; of the Lutherans there are but
two, Hunnius and Tarnovius; and of the Calvinists but three, Ames, Voetius, and
Cortiu^. Though each of them be Reverend, yet they are but of yesterday, either
living, or lately dead; too few to make up a full verdict touching the
Historical part of the point in question. Indeed you have not so much as one
witness to your Thesis of Ordination as it was stated in the beginning. As for
the English Popish Ceremonies, whether one alone composed that Tract, or many
concurred together by their joint endeavors, I know not? I take it for no more
then a single, and in many things for a singular and solitary Testimony.

What think you of Protestant Estates? Is not their Judgment considerable? If
they do not hold Ordination to be essential, why have they ever been so strict
in urging it? You know our Worthies assembled in Parliament are under a Solemn
Vow and Covenant to reform according to the Word of God, and the Example of the
best Reformed Churches; and in pursuance thereof they have declared it, as a
thing manifest by the Word of GOD, Ordinance of Parliament for Ordination pro
tempore.


That no man ought to take upon him the office of a Minister, until he be
lawfully Called, and Ordained thereunto. And that the work of Ordination, that
is to say, An outward solemn setting apart of persons for the Office of the
Ministry in the Church by Preaching Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ.

This they have since attested unto in the same words in other Ordinances of
Theirs, giving power to Ordain unto Classical Presbyteries. And that this
sense of Theirs might be better taken notice of, they have further Ordered as
here follows.

Die Sabbathi, 26 April. 1645.
IT is this day O^dered and Declared by the Lords and (...) in Parliament
^^s^^abled, That no ^erson be permitted to Preach, who is not O^dained a
Minister either in this, or some other Re^o^med Church; except such as
(intending the Ministry) shall be allowed for the ^^yall of their (...), by
those who shall be appointed thereunto by both Houses of Parliament.

It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published; And that it be forthwith
sent to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, with an earnest desire and recommendation from both
Houses, That he take care that this Ordinance may be duly observed in the Army;
and that if any shall transgress this Ordinance, that he make speedy
representation thereof to both Houses, that the Offenders may receive condign
punishment for their contempts. It is further Ordered by the Lords and Commons,
That this Ordinance be forthwith sent to the Lord Mayor and Committee of the
Militia in London; to the Governors, Commanders, and Magistrates of all
Garrisons, Forces, Places of strength, Cities, Towns, ^orts and Ports: And to
the several and respective Committees of the several and respective Counties,
with the like injunction unto them respectively; and that they take care that
this Ordinan^e be duly observed in the places aforesaid respectively, and that
they make speedy representation to both Houses of such as shall offend herein,
that they may receive condign punishment.

Die Jovis, 31. December. 1646. A Declaration of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, Against all such Persons as shall take upon them to Preach or
Expound the Scriptures in any Church or Chapel, or any other public place,
except they be Ordained either here or in some other Reformed Church.
THE Commons assembled in Parliament do Declare, That they do dislike, and will
proceed against all such persons as shall take upon them to Preach, or Expound
the Scriptures in any Church or Chapel, or any other public place (except
they be Ordained either here or in some other Reformed Church, as it is already
prohibited in an Order of both Houses of 26. April, 1645.) And likewise against
all such Ministers or others, as shall publish or maintain by Preaching,
Writing, Printing, or any other way, any thing against or in derogation of the
Church Government which is now established by the authority of both Houses of
Parliament. And also against all and every person or persons, who shall
willingly and purposely interrupt or disturb a Preacher who is in the public
Exercise of his Function: And all Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Mayors,
Bailiffs, and other Head-Officers of Corporations; And all Officers of the Army
are to take notice of this Declaration; and by all lawful ways and means to
prevent offenses of this kind, and to apprehend the offenders, and give notice
hereof unto this House, that thereupon course may be speedily taken for a due
punishment to be inflicted on them.

For the Example of the best Reformed Churches, if thereby you understand (as
some do) those of New England, how ever their Elders speak ^^ part as you have
done, yet by their Practice they make it essential (for why else is it that
they put the power and a^t of Ordaining into the peoples hand, or some of their
deputing when they have no Officers?) and in their Doctrine they hold it
Necessary by Divine Institution *. Church Government and Church Covenant
discussed. page 67.


For those of the separation, these are the words of their Confession, Art. 23.
that every Christian Congregation has power and Commandment to elect and
ordain their own Ministry according to the rules in Gods word prescribed. --
And if there be a commandment for Ordination, as well as for Election, why
should not the former be essential^, as well as (in their account) the latter
is. Whether every congregation have the power is no part of the present
question and therefore as they affirm it. I deny it and pass it by.

Those who are wont to ^e called Non-conformists, in that book of Common Prayer
which they advised Print^d at Lon^on by To. W^^de-gra^e.
they speak of the Election and Ordination of Ministers to the Election they
call in neighbour-Ministers. After that (say they) he is to be ordained by the
laying on of the hands of the Eldership, with these words pronounced by the
Mi^ister thereunto appointed [According to this lawful calling, agreeable to
the word of God, whereby thou art chosen pastor IN THE NAME OF GOD, stand thou
charged with the pastoral charge of this people over which the Holy Ghost has
made thee Overseer, to govern this flock of God, which he has purchased with
his blood.] Among them there are two of great eminency, whose expressions I
shall here add. One, the Reverend Mr. Arthur Hildersam, who (in that letter
which Johnson in his Treatise of the Ministry Page 117.
pretends to answer) makes a right Ordination into the office, a substantial
part of a true Calling to the Ministry. The other Mr. H. Jacob (whose old
books have furnished those who are known among us by the name of Independents,
with their new light and all subtilties whereby they would be thought to
distinguish themselves from Brownists) There are two essential parts of
Calling to the Ministry (these are his words Attestation ch 8. page 299.
) Election and Ordination. And though he make Imposition of hands but a
ceremony, yet he adds Howbeit I suppose Christ's Church offends in omitting of
it, for though it be but a ceremony, yet it is Apostolic. And howsoever in
this place he reputes it but a Ceremony, yet elsewhere Declaration page 39. The
Divine beginning and institution of Christ's true visible or Ministerial
Church. Argum. 7.
he makes it to be of the foundation necessary to salvation ordinarily, and
unchangeable by men.

Whether these latter witnesses be to be reckoned among Protestant Divines,
especially in your account, I shall leave it to you to judge.

But let this suffice at present to the question of Ordination.

Concerning IMPOSITION OF HANDS.
This is your Position -- page 13.

IMposition or laying on of Hands is neither essential to a Ministers Call,
nor to his Ordination.

Ans. Before I speak to the particulars wherein you pretend to the proof of
this, it seems necessary to preface a little concerning the Subject in
general, that the Terms belonging to the Question may be the better understood.

When shall we know what you mean by a Call? and how it shall be discerned what
is essential to it? Or to whom the power of Calling does belong? Whether one
way of Calling be precisely determined? Or what manner of Ordaining is to be
found in Scripture, besides that of Laying on of hands? At your leisure resolve
these Enquiries distinctly, that the Reader may be fully informed.

Till I am convinced of the contrary by your self or some other, I shall
presume that a Call is always necessary, yea a Call from God, mediate or
immediate. That way of Calling mediately is to be followed in succeeding times,
which is warranted by precepts or example^ in the New Testament. In the nature
of the thing it self, Calling for the substance of the act is more necessary,
than this or that manner, or rite of Calling. Election may possibly he either
by silence, as in the discipline of the French Churches it is prescribed, or by
lively voice, or by holding up the hand, or by writing. The Church at Frankford
in Queen Mary's days had a peculiar way of choosing Ministers, in part
blindfold, by a kind of Ballattingbox Lyturgia in Ecclesia Pereg^inorum
Fra^oford^ae. p. 51.
. For Ordination, the Papists have devised many Rites, not only by perverse
applying of the examples of Christ and his Apostles, but also by their own
presumptuous inventions. The Reformed Churches suffice themselves with Prayer,
Fasting, and Laying on of hands. Some few have used manus porrectione, the
giving of the right hand of fellowship in stead of Laying on of hands: but
though there be an instance of the use of that Ceremony in token of approbation
between Paul and Barnabas on the one side, and some of the Apostles at
Jerusalem on the other part, (Gal. 2. 9.) yet that will conclude nothing to the
question of Ordination.

In such things as are indeed (not pretendedly) left unto the Churches liberty,
she may use it as makes most for edifying; and about many Circumstances
belonging to a Ministers Call, there is a liberty supposed, granted, and taken;
and in some things necessary to be determined, not so much by rule or Canon, as
(per prudentiam practice practicam) by the discretion of those who are (pro hic
and nunc) employed in Calling. To this purpose some speak largely enough Quibus
ritibus Doctores ecclesiae sint vocan^i, qua ratione publicum hoc docendi mun^^
e^^ sit delegandum ac imponendum, non est express traditum, sed liber^ari
Ecclesiae relictum. Magdeburgenses, cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4 page 118. lin. 33.
Modus elect^ni^ nullus certus est prascriptus i^ sacris literis. Aretius,
probl. part 3. de Minist. Vocati^ ^ata habenda, dum vocatio Dei manet
conjuncta foris aliqua testificatione ipstu^, quae qui^varia est, desinire non
possumus. Armin.
, and more then I dare assent unto without due caution.

Yet this must be remembered, that God is not sought after the due Order, (1 Chronicles, 15. 13.) when any rite or manner of doing is omitted which is of his
appointing: And it is safer to cleave unto warrantable examples even about
circumstances, then to presume too much of our freedom in devising any thing
which may be called new, or transferring the rite of one thing to another. And
many things which were in themselves, and to the Apostles, free and
indifferent, become by their example more or less necessary to us, especially
when their example is backed by the ^ptnesse or equity of the thing it self,
and either directly commended to us, or enlivened with some insinuation, that
in doing as they did we shall do well. The certainty of lawfulness is always
a sure point for us to center in:

As to the use of Laying on of hands (to say nothing of that which was common
to all Christians to be applied unto them upon several occasions, but of that
which was used by those who were already in office, in putting others into
office also) The Papists urging of it as a Sacrament, as a means of
conveighing the Holy Ghost, as always absolutely necessary and essential: And
those hands to be a Bishops, as an Order or Degree superior to a Presbyte^,
gave occasion to some of the first Reformers in some parts to suspect it, to
judge it indifferent; and to argue from the Apostles liberty in taking of it
up, and translating of it from ^ Jewish use unto a Christian, to their liberty
of using or difusing it as they found expedient, and the state of the Church in
their times and those places where their lot fell, made way.

For my part, when I consider how uniform and accurate the Apostles were in
observing it, and of this rite alone in the matter of Ordination, and that we
have no instance or example of their Ordaining otherwise; How unsafe it is to
vary from their lawful and imitable practice; What advantage the Papists have
to bring in other rites upon pretense of liberty, And what danger might be by
substituting another way of Ordaining then we have sure warrant for; Of what
consequence it is that Ministers should keep up a peculiar interest of acting
in the name and stead of Christ, by something peculiar to themselves; and that
this alone does most clearly hold it out, beside the manifold uses of it which
are expressed by Protestant Divines: Though it be commonly called a rite, and
in that respect is but an adjunct, so as it must needs seem harsh to call it
essential; yet I judge it sinful for any who desire the office of a Minister
to refuse it, and scandalous in any Church wilfully to throw i^ aside. That its
more or less necessary in the judgment of Reformed Churches and their
Divines, cannot but be known to those who are acquainted with their writings.
The peace of the Church may be preserved among those who hold it lawful; and
the dispute whether it be Essential, might be spared.

Yet because though it were not essential, your Proofs may fall short of that
Conclusion, I shall consider of them.

Your first Reason is:

Some have been made Ministers without it, as the Apostles and Matthias, Act.
1.

To which I answer. 1. If your Argument had truth and weight in it, it would
prove, That nothing is essential which is to be performed either by the Church
or her Officers, because the Apostles were made Ministers by the Head alone
without the Body. Paul calls himself an Apostle neither of man nor by man, Gal.
1. 1. and yet he was a Minister, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The like may be said of the
Twelve. And whereas you distinguish between the Apostles and Matthias, as if he
were none, Acts 1. the Text here cited proves the contrary.

2. Its not enough to say, That some were made Ministers without it; unless
you show further, that in being made Ministers they were Ordained, and that
without Laying on of hands.

3. How some have been made Ministers in particular cases, as Matthias alone by
lot, is not to be insisted on; but what is the general rule for all in an
ordinary way.

4. Were it proved that the Apostles have been made Ministers, and Ordained
without the Rite in question; it would be little to the purpose, because there
is neither the same rule nor reason for Them and ordinary Officers.

The second Reason:

When the Apostle bids Titus to Ordain, Tit. 1. 5. he says not a word of
Imposition of hands.

Ans. You should say, Not of Election by the People, and therefore Election is
not essential. But if Tit. 1. 5. be compared with Act. 6. 3. 5. it will
appear he means appointing or constituting by Imposition of hands. There were
among the Cretiant Tit. 1. 11.
many ^^r^ly and vain talkers, specially they of the Circumcision, whose mouths
(says Paul) must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy lucres sake. These might well be the fruits of that
liberty of Preaching without a Call, and the Peoples making to themselves
Ministers by their own choice without Ordination or Imposition of hands, which
you contend for; and Titus, it seems, was left at Crete to Ordain others in
stead of these.

The third:

When the Apostle used it to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 6. it was so used as it was in
giving the Holy Ghost; as appears by comparing that place with Act. 19. 6. And
therefore was no more essential to Timothies being a Minister, then it was to
their Baptism, Act. 19. 6.

Ans. 1. Suppose the Holy Ghost was given by Imposition of hands, both after
Baptism, and in Ordination; as this makes nothing to prove it to be essential
unto either, so it makes nothing against it: but in that such a blessing did
then accompany it, we may be assured that the use of it was of God, and not
from men.

2. There Is no mention of the Holy Ghost, in 2 Timothy 1. 6. but of the gift of
God which was in him (or which he had) by the laying on of Paul's hands, that
may be meant of the power and authority conferred on him, or of the Office it
self; for Offices are called (...) gifts, Ephesians. 4. 8. And Power and Authority is
by many thought to be called (...) grace, Romans 12. 3. If Laying on of hands be
the isntrumental rite of conveighing the gift or grace in this sense, it is
the more necessary.

3. Because the Holy Ghost was given by Laying on of hands after Baptism in
Ordination, and upon other occasions also; therefore you will not easily prove
that Ordination must needs be understood in that place, as you use to argue.

Neither, 4. doth^ Act. 19. 6. or any other place speak of Laying on of hands
in Baptism: and in Heb. 6. 2. Baptisms and Laying on of hands are
distinguished as things of a diverse kind. In all this you seem rather to
answer, than to frame an Argument. To say the Holy Ghost was given by
Imposition of hands then, but not now, and therefore it is not essential, is
no proof (as shall further appear hereafter.)

5. Under the Old Testament Imposition of hands was used in diverse cases. As
first in Blessing, Genesis 48. 14, 20. Secondly, in Consecrating, or setting apart
of a sacrifice unto God, Numb. 8. 12. Thirdly, in Ordaining, or appointing unto
an Office; as when Joshua was appointed to succeed Moses, Moses laid his hands
upon him and gave him a charge. Number. 27. 23. Joshua also is said to be full of
the Spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. He was
full of the Spirit of wisdom, and therefore had hands laid on him, as appears
Number. 27. 18. Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and
lay thy hands upon him. As in the New Testament, the Deacons were first full of
the Holy Ghost and wisdom, Act. 6. 3. and therefore they had hands laid on
them, v. 6. This laying on of hands was (as Ainsworth calls it) Ainsworth on
Numb. 18. 18.
a sign of his Calling and Ordination. And though a greater measure of the
Spirit might be given with the sign, yet that was not the only ground of using
it. We read not of any Law requiring the use of it constantly, save in the case
of consecrating: and yet you show no reason to the contrary, why it may not be
necessary under the Gospel in the setting apart of a meet person to an holy
function, though every other kind of using it be not necessary, whereof we have
example in the New Testament. All Ends of using it do meet together in
Ordination; as Blessing, Consecrating, and Setting apart unto an Office. And
therefore we have the greater reason to continue it still.

To that of the Divines of Scotland:

The Apostles indeed by the Laying on of hands did signify Engl. pop. cer. p.
169.
their giving of the Holy Ghost: but now as the miracle, so the mystery has
ceased.

Ans. 1. It no where appears by any express Scripture, that Laying on of
hands in Ordination was used by the Apostles as a signs, with relation to the
Holy Ghost as the thing signified and given thereby: It Is too much advantage to
the Papists, in making (...) Sacrament, to grant so much.

2. Suppose that the (...) Ghost was given by, with, or after Imposition of
hands in Ordination, and that such miraculous giving do now cease: yet as
Baptism of water continues, though there be no miraculous Baptism of the Holy
Ghost, and is not in that respect to cease, as the Socinians pretend; so may
Imposition of hands continue still in Ordination as a rite of designing a fit
person to an office in the Church, because no reason can be supposed for the
use of it in that kind then, which holds not in other ages of the Church, in
the regular and ordinary state thereof.

[Solemnly to design and point out the person Ordained as a moral sign, was
one of the ends and uses whereunto this rite of Laying on of hands was
appointed by themselves, as Chemnitius shows.]

These last are the words of your own Testimony in the same page.

That which follows of your own, is --

Something extraordinary its likely was in the Apostles Laying on of hands. For
he says, the gift was given (...), by the laying on of my hands, as it was
(...) by prophecy, which was peculiar to extraordinary Officers; but it was
but [with] (...), 1 Timothy 4. 14. They (it seems) had but a bare concurrence, but
the efficiencie was in Paul, as our Brethren of Scotland express it.

To which I answer, 1. All this is but, its likely, and it seems, by which its
likely to prove nothing, and it seems you your self saw as much aforehand.

2. To say there was something extraordinary in the Apostles laying on of
hands, is ambiguous, because it may relate either to the ground, or manner of
doing, or to the effect or accidental consequent thereof. There might be
something extraordinary, but that can be no prejudice to the ordinary use of
this rite, unless they ^ad only some extraordinary ground for their using of
it.

3. In comparing 2 Timothy 1. 6. (...) 4. 14. there is indeed a difference between
((...) and (...) and with; and from thence the Papists and Prelates wo^^ ^^fer,
That the efficiency of Timothy's Presbyteratus was i^ Paul as in a Bishop, and
in the Presbytery by a bare concurrence, and thence infer the necessity of a
Bishop unto Ordination. But this is e^ually vain, as in them to one end, so in
you to another. For that in 2 Timothy 1. 6. you may remember what was said in the
beginning of this answer to your Third. And as you tell us page 17. touching
laying on of hands in 1 Timothy 5. 22. that its not necessary to be understood of
Ordination, because it was used in other cases. So might it be put off here.
But be it granted that Ordination is intended in 2 Timothy 1. yet it will not
follow that Paul ascribes any thing to himself, as excluding the Presbytery.
Junius speaking to this Text, says: [In a common thing, the arguing from
position of one, to the removing or denying of another, is inconsequent. As
after this manner: Paul laid hands on Timothy, therefore the Presbytery did
not. Junius in Bell. Cont. 5. lib. 1. cap. 3 ar. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 18. Ac. 16. 1 a.
] Those words (...) by prophecy, do show the moving cause, and what encouraged
Paul with the Presbytery to lay hands on him, viz. It was prophesied that
Timothy should be an excellent Minister, as Cartwright (upon the place)
interprets it.

That phrase, (...). and the other, (...). do both of them equally imply an
isntrumental efficiencie in Paul, and in the rest of the Presbytery. That the
Preposition [(...)] by, with a genitive case, does usually signify an
isntrumental working, yet not in (...), is amongst Cartwrights Annotations.
(...) with, is sometimes put for (...) by. as Act. 13. 17. chap. 14. 27. and
15. 4. In the 12. v. of that chap. Then all the multi^ude kept silence and gave
audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring See Beza in loca.
what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. In the
Greek it is (...), in this latter place; but in all the rest (...), and yet the
like thing, viz. what God did by them as by instruments, is intended in them
all. The reason why the Apostle uses (...) and not (...) in 1 Timothy 4. 14. may
be because (...) goes immediately before in the same verse in that phrase,
(...), where it has another sense than the next words will bear, if it had
been used there also. How fit it would have been for the words to have run
thus: [(...)] etc. by prophecy, by laying on of hunds, let the learned judge.

5. If the efficiencie was in Paul singularly, and in the Presbytery by a bare
concurrence, as you say it seems; there using of it then, makes nothing at all
for our using of it now, unless we had such concurrence: and then Laying on of
hands in these times is not only non-essentiall, but unlawful. We must wait
with the Seekers for some New Apostles to revive this way of Ordaining: and the
practice of those, who being themselves out of Office are deputed to lay on
hands, is most presumptuous; because there is no instance so much as of their
concurrence, and much less of their acting alone in this kind.

6. Those words [as our Brethren of Scotland express it] seem to relate unto
the former passages; and then they are injurious, because you go about to put a
sense upon them which I think you know they will not own: That the Presbytery
Ordained only by a bare concurrence, and not as (Causa socia) a joint cause, in
way of efficiencie.

I shall now consider their words as you allege them.

Paul's hands were the mean; the laying on of their hands the rite and sign of
his Ordination. And therefore they add (as you say) Its not to be used with
opinion of necessity; Ordination may be done by word alone, without ceremony.
And again. If the use of Imposition of hands in Ordination be accounted and
used as a sacred Rite, and as having a sacred signification, (the use of it not
being necessary) it becomes unlawful by reason of the by gone and present
superstitious use of the same in Popery.

Ans. 1. All this you heap together by substraction as you please: And though
it is true, the first words [Pauls hands were the mean -- ] are to be found in
the place intended, yet your conscience will tell you that the Author used them
to one end, and you unto the contrary. Take them fully, and let a third be
Judge between us. Thus he:

[Because Imposition of hands was used in Ordination, not only by the Apostles
who had power to give extraordinarily the gifts of the Holy Ghost, but likewise
by the Presbytery or Company of Elders; and Timothy did not only receive 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4 14.
that gift which was in him, by the laying on of Paul's hands as the mean, but
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery as the rite and sign of his
Ordination: therefore the Church in after-ages has still kept and used the
same rite in Ordination; which rite shall without leave be yet retained in the
Church.]

2. For my part, I see no ground at all either in the nature of the thing, or
in the Texts, for that distinction of mean and sign. The Professors of Leyden
are not afraid to call Ordination a mean. Ad legitimam Pastorum ordinariorum
vocationem duo potissimum media sunt adhibenda; vocandorum Synop. pur. Theol.
^is^. 42. n. 31.
Electio, and electorum Ordinatio. [Two means are especially to be used for
the lawful Calling of ordinary Pastors: Election of those who are to be
called, and Ordination of those who are elected.] But this is clear out of the
former Testimony; that notwithstanding the difference of the phrases, by the
laying on of Paul's hands, and with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, the latter cannot be so understood as to give unto the Presbytery
(in his judgment) a bare concurrence, because then it could not be a ground of
using the rite either at the Present or in former ages.

3. For those expressions -- Its not to be used with opinion of necessity, and
the rest; they are indeed Proviso's, or rather some excerpta, extracts of those
things which the Author brings in by way of providing: the sum whereof is --
1. Laying on of hands is to continue, if it be not used with opinion of
necessity; Nor 2. as a sacred significant Ceremony. But naked testimony avails
little, especially when it i^ is single or singular. Therefore I answer, 1.
Necessity must be distinguished. Simple necessity with relation to all times
and cases, is asserted by none but Papists. Necessity (secundum quid) in some
respect, either for Orders sake, or to avoid scandal, is acknowledged by those
Protestants who make least account of Laying on of hands. As it must be granted
that all examples either of Christ or his Apostles have not the nature of a
Law; so must it also be maintained that some have: and I think as much may be
said for this in particular, I mean the Apostles practice in Ordination, as for
any other; or as much as for the gesture of sitting in receiving the Sacrament.
At present here is nothing but bare Assertion, and therefore the less need to
dwell upon the particular. 2. If Imposition of hands be a sign, and (as your
Author calls it) a moral sign, it must in some sense be sacred, because the
subject of it, and manner of using, belong unto the first Table; and as a
sign, it is essential to it to be significant. That grace is given by and
with the Ordination of the Ministers, when Cartwright against the Them. on 1 Timothy 4 14.
it is duly given and received, we willingly yield, because the words of the
Scripture bear it. Thus much Cartwright grants unto the Rhemists, in the name
of Protestants.

To your fourth Reason, page 14.

If laying on of hands be essential to a Ministers Call, then are the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches no Ministers: For though they use Laying on
of hands, now, as a thing indifferent; yet they who used it first, had it not
themselves.

I answer. The Consequence is denied. 1. Because Laying on of hands (contrary
to what you say) has continued in most of the Reformed Churches successively
to this day; as in England, Denmark, and many parts of Germany. For England, in
this respect the spite and envy of the Papists has been especially set
against the Ministry of it. And though Tractatu de vocatione Ministrorum.
Champney labors to invalid all which Mason alleges (de Ministerio Anglicano)
to prove succession; yet in his Epistle to George Abbot then Archbishop of
Canterbury, he confesses he heard that the said Archbishop caused some Popish
Priests to be brought before himself and some others in Commission with him,
that they might testify they had seen those Public Acts which Mason urged for
his proof. For Denmark, and also for diverse parts of Germany, I refer you to
Melchior Adamus in the life of Bagenhagius, p. 315.

2. Because there are times wherein neither Election nor Ordination [as
Church-acts] are essential unto a Ministers Calling; as in part has been
cleared already, and will further appear in that which follows.

To your large Quotation out of Beza on Act. 14. 23. in these words:

Some (said he) choose to refer this to Laying on of hands, as Quid^m hoc
^^ferre (...) ad manuu^ impositionem, quae and ipsa si^ pro^sus necessaria; and
hoc praetext^ accepto vocationem nostram irritam esse dicunt: qu^niam Ordinarii
(quos vocan) nobis manus non imposuerunt; sive quod no sumus in Romana ecclesia
ordinati. Resp. and ipsis canonibus qu^s jactant, irritam esse consecrationem
cui non praeirit legitima el^cti^, aut quae fit Excommunicaro. Ostendant autem
ipsi vel unumin tota illo Hierarchia qui legitime sit vocatus, imo qui non sit
centies ipso jure excommunicatus, si ipsi eorum Synodis statur. Not ^^itur cur
ab illis Impositionem manuu^ pe^eremus? aut qu^ sure ipsi nobis eam tribuerent?
Habemus autem nos Dei beneficio certas nostrae vocationis nota^, legitimo ab
ecclesiis nostris and vitae and doctrinae testim nio (per Dei gratiam) ornati,
and ab i^sdem electi, ac demum etian invocate Dei nomine, in no^tro Ministerio
confirmati, cui Dominus (ut spero) ejectis tum suribus tum mercenariis,
benedicet.
if it also were altogether necessary; and under this pretense say Our Calling
is null, because the Ordinaries (as they call them) have not laid hands on us,
or because we are not Consecrated in the Church of Rome. I answer by those
Canons which they boast of, the Consecration is null, where there was not first
a lawful choice, or which was done by one who is excommunicated. Let them show
but one in all their Hierarchy who is lawfully chosen, yea who is not by the
very Law a hundred times Excommnicate, if they will stand to their own Synods.
Why should we therefore desire hands to be laid on us by them? or by what Law
can they do it? But we have by the blessing of God certain marks of our
Calling, being (through the grace of God) adorned with the lawful Testimony of
our Life and Doctrine, from our Churches; and after that, by calling upon the
name of God, confirmed in our Ministry; which God, I hope, will bless, and
cast out both the Thieves and Hirelings.

Ans. These few and brief Notes may suffice for answer. 1. Beza gives no
reason at at all to prove why (...) the word there spoken of, should not be
referred to laying on of hands, or why it should imply some joint act of the
Apostles and of the Churches. But of this enough before. 2. The whole passage
is rather an apology for want of Imposition of hands in some, than to show
that it is needless in all. 3. Its granted, that in such a case as he speaks
of, the first coming out to Babylon, it was not necessary to return back again
to Popish Bishops for Ordination: and to this his reasons are strong; but what
is that to the regular and ordinary way of Calling? 4. It Is worth observing how
he begins: [Some choose to refer this to Laying on of hands.] For indeed they
were not only Papists who urged the necessity of having hands laid on, (and it
seems from this place) but Protestants also were offended with the first
Reformers in France, for want of succession in the way of Ordination. Which
gave occasion to Sadeel to write a special Treatise (De legitima vocatione
Pastorum Ecclesiae Reformatae) against those who professed to differ from the
rest (in hoc tantum capite) in this point only, That Ministers wanted a lawful
Calling, for want of succession from the Apostles to the present times. And
therefore you must not wonder if you cannot persuade all men to be of your
mind, especially when your reasons are far from cogencie: And Beza, from whom
you might expect something, and make a show of much, waves the determining of
that on the place, which was most proper to it. 5. If it be said, he gives
certain marks of Calling, and yet reckons not Imposition of hands for one. As
1. the Testimony; 2. the Election of the Church, (for that is in the Latin,
though you leave it out in the translation) and 3. Confirmation by prayer. I
answer, these suffice when the condition of the Church will not possibly afford
more, yea less then these: The edisication of the Church is so necessary, that
it must be endeavored as Providence makes way; but when there may be Order and
beauty observed, its sinful to neglect the rules and means of procuring and
upholding it. That which is lawful by virtue of necessity, is only so far
lawful, as the necessity is real, and not pretended.

That which follows is in part confused.

And in the same case are the Lutherans, who hold Laying on of hands not to be
essential to their Calling, yea, that it is Popery to hold it so. Bellarmine
(says Tarnovius) would have laying on of hands to be absolutely necessary, as
the substantial part of Ordination.

Yet I answer, 1. In the connection of these words either to those immediately
foregoing, or to the beginning of the Paragraph, you make the Lutherans Thieves
and Hirelings, or exclude them out of the number of the Reformed Churches,
which is extreme uncharitable. 2. Though the Lutherans do not hold Laying on of
hands to be essential, yet they need not fear a nullity in their Calling,
having Imposition by succession, and using it still. The act it self is of
force, though they should err in the grounds of using it. 3. To hold Laying on
of hands to be absolutely necessary in all cases, may well be counted Popery;
if we think those hands must be a Bishops, and that Bishop consecrated by a
power derived from the Sea of Rome, as Papists do: But to hold Laying on of
hands such a rite as ought not to be omitted by those who have authority from
the Word to use it, in designing a meet person to the Ministry, and in the
visible declaration of that designation, is no Popery. 4. In this passage you
deal fraudulently with your credulous Readers, while you pretend to tell them
the Judgment of Protestant Divines, and do purposely conceal it. Tarnovius in
that very place which you point at in your margin, propounding the question (De
impositionis manuum necessitate) Concerning the necessity of Laying on of
hands, supposes a necessity more or less to be granted on both sides between
Papists and Lutherans; and having set down Bellarmines opinion, afterward gives
this for his own and others of that part. Nos eum (speaking of this rite)
necessarium existimamus secundum quid, nimirum quia citra scandalum omitti
hodie non potest, qui tot annos in Ecclesia usitatus fuit, and habet suos usus.
What need you cite Tarnovius only to let us know what Bellarmine says and will
not let us know the judgment of Tarnovius himself; if it were not upon design
to rake up all that may be said against that Rite, and to hury (as much as in
you lies) all that makes for it. 5. As for the opinion of the Papists in
general, and particularly of Bellarmine, they are divided in this point. And
though he labors to prove Manus impositionem ad essentiam De Sac. Ord. lib. 1.
cap. 9.
Sacramenti ordinis pertinere; yet he says, Alii existimant manus impositionem
esse accidentariam. -- ita Dominicus a Soto, and alii quidam. Whether there be
not some difference between (pertinere ad essentiam) to belong unto the
essence, which is Bellarmines expression; and, esse substantiale, as Tarnovius
has it: or, to be a substantial part, as you phrase it, is considerable:
because that belongs unto the essence, without which it cannot be complete or
entire; and that only is a substantial part, without which it cannot be at
all. Among Decret. Greg. lib. 1. tit. 16. ^. 1.
the Decretals of Gregory, this Case is put: An permitti debeat ministrare qui
sine impositione manuum fuerit ad Ordinem Subdiaconatus assumptus. Whether one
taken into the Order of a Subdeacon, without Imposition of hands, should be
permitted to minister. By this it appears, 1. That laying on of hands was
sometime omitted in some Ordinations. 2. That such Ordination Impositio manuum
non requ^r^tur in omnibus Ordinibus ecclesiasticis velut in cocolytho and
subdiacono ordinandis. Can. subdiacon. and can. seq. did. 24.
was not presently thought to be invalid, and [eo ipso] null. Which is further
manifest by the Popes answer to the Case, which is made a Canon in their Law.
In talibus non est aliquid iterandum, sed caute supplendum, quod incaute fuerat
praetermissum. In such cases nothing is to be reiterated, but that must be
warily supplied, which was unwarily pretermitted. Th^s is of great use against
the Papists themselves, who can find a salvo for want of Imposition of hands
among themselves, and yet allow none to the Paotestants. And serves also to
show the vanity of your argument, who from the defect of this one hing, without
any distinction of time or state in the Church, would infer a mere nullity in
the whole. Thus far by occasion of that in Tarnovius.

Touching Chemnitius it follows.

Chemnitius puts the case, Whether his Ministry be Null who has not hands
laid on him? And having repeated their opinion who say its not necessary, so
the Call be lawful; he lays the necessity of it to be in regard of others who
run and are not sent, not in regard of the Calling it self, but that the
Calling may be witnessed which the Minister has; and says, Ord natio non facit
vocationem, Ordination makes not his Calling, but declares it. And further,
Praecipue servatur iste ritus, ut tota Ecclesia communibus and ardentibus
precibus etc. That Imposition of hands is retained chiefly for the Prayers sake
which the whole Church makes, etc. Yea, Fatendum sane nullum extare in
Scripturis mandatum Dei In 1 Timothy 5. 22.
quod h^c ritus Ordinationis sit adhibendus. There is no command of God in
Scripture to Ordain by laying of hands. Loc. com. tom. 3. 137.

The answer. 1. Why did you conceal from the Reader Cer^o and manifest
constat, cum ex Scripturae mandatis, tum exemplis, Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 4 14. 2 Timothy 22. Act. 14. 23. Eos qui jam sunt i^ M^n^sterio, and profitentur sacram
doctrinam, adhibendos esse quando per medi^tam vo^ationem al cui comm^ndandum
est ministerium. Turbulenti and sedui si Anabaptistae minime recte faciunt qui
vocabulo Ecclesiae intell gunt tantum promiscuam multitudinem, excluso
Ministerio and pio Magistratu. Chemnit. par. 8. L. C. de Ecclesia. page 134.
what you found in Chemnitius in favor of Ordination, as an act of Ministers
and Elders, when you were upon that Head? Are not those his words, which you
have here in the margin?

2. Touching the matter it self which you here refer unto, you mis-relate him.
He speaks not of laying on of hands in the ordinary and regular Call of a
Minister, for therein he supposes Imposition of hands should be used; but of a
certain case. Nam interdum hujusmodi casus incidunt, ut quis habeat vocationem,
and impediatur quo minus se conferat ad Nobiliorem Ecclesiam, in qua accipiat
ritum Ordinationis. Question ergo est, An illius ministerium sit evacuatum? His
answer is, Aliqui id affirmant, aliqui negant: Some grant it, some deny it.

3. It suffices me that he grants Imposition of hands to be necessary in any
respect agreeable to the Word. For they who agree in that, will agree in a
warrantable use of this rite; neither the peace nor the communion of the Church
will be disturbed, though it be not held to be essential. 4. Take his own
words fully, (Sed tamen propte^ eos qui currunt, and non missi sunt, vocatio
debet habere publicum Ecclesiae testimonium. Et ritus Ordinationis nihil aliud
est quam talis publica testificatio, qua vocatio illa in conspectu Dei, and
ipsius nomine declaratur esse legitima and divina.) and consider whether th^s
follow not: -- A Ministers call is then declared lawful and divine, and so to
be reputed, when he is Ordained by laying on of hands. And if there be no other
way of such Declaration to be f^und in Scripture, This of Imposition of hands
will be essential to it. 5. Whereas you single out those words only, Ordinatio
non facit vocationem, Ordination makes not his Calling, but declares it: -- The
entire sentence is this: Licet ergo Ordinatio non facit vocationem, si tamen
quis legitime est vocatus, ille ritus est declaratio and confirmatio vocationem
illam quae praecessit esse legitimam. Here are two things which you leave out.
1. That Ordination is a confirmation of that Call, as well as a declaration. 2.
It is not barely a delaration of the Call, but of the Lawfulness; so as the
lawfulness of the Call may justly be questioned, which has not been declared
by Ordination. 6. This rite is not retained chiefly for the Prayers sake (as
you translate his words) but rather for the benefit of such prayers as use to
be made at Ordination. [Et illas preces tali ritu peractas, non esse inanes
testatur Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy, 1. 6.] 7. As I grant those
are his words, Fatendum sane etc. so you cannot deny that these which follow
are his also. Habet tamen ille sua fundamenta in verbo Dei. This rite has its
foundations in hhe Word of God. 8. It Is much that you have alleged out of
Chemnitius; but is there nothing else which is of concernment for the Reader to
know touching this Rite? You know there is more (page 138.) where he gives an
account to what end and use Imposition of hands is retained in the Reformed
Churches. As, 1. Illo publico ritu testamur, hoc opus licet sit mediatum, esse
tamen vere divinum. [By this public rite we testify that this work although
it be mediate, yet it is truly Divine: for it is not ours, but Gods work which
we perform, who calls and Ordains that person by us.] 2. Hac impositione
manuum sistitur Ecclesiae, ut haec quoque admoneatur Deum per hanc personam and
ejus ministerium velle ipsos docere, exhortari, consolari, Sacramenta
administrare, peccata vel absolvere vel ligare. [By this impo^ition of hands
the Minister is presented to the Church, that they also may be admonished that
God by him and his ministry will teach, exhort, and comfort them, administer
the Sacraments unto them, and loose or bind their sins.] But the people must
hear nothing of this kind from Protestant Divines, lest they soon perceive that
those Ministers who make them believe that power of Ordination belongs unto the
people, do deceive; and that there is something belonging to the Call of a
Minister, which from the nature of the thing it self cannot belong to the
People, or to any of their deputing to this act, but to such as are already
Ministers, by them to be performed toward the people in the name of God and
Christ alone. Authoritas coram Ecclesia tribuitur ei, cuimanus sunt impositae.
[Authority is conferred on him publicly before the Church, on whom hands are
laid. Thus Chemnitius. But this was not for your turn; neither does it serve
ad captandum populum, to hear of authority conferred on Ministers, especially
by Imposition of hands. Thus far of Chemnitius.

To that of Danaeus in 1 Timothy 5. 22.

Laying on of hands is not necessary, so there be but Prayer made to confirm
the Party elected, and the whole Church join in prayer with him, that the
Spirit of God would strengthen him. And he gives amongst other reasons, as that
Prayer is all, this for one. Qui hanc ceremoniam praecise urgent, incidunt in
vanas quaestiones and ineptas. The urging of it breeds vain and foolish
questions about Ministers Callings.

I answer, 1. I question whether ever you consulted with the Author himself,
and did not rather transcribe a little out of that which you found cited in
Tarnovius. If you did, it further appears how partial and unfaithful you are
in setting down the Judgment of Protestant Divines; For he makes an act of the
Presbyters not only to be necessary, but necessary in the first place before
the assent of the people be asked, in calling of a Minister; and gives five
strong reasons for it, to which I refer the studious Reader in the Book it
self, page 352, 253, 254.] 2. Whereas you say, Laying on of hands is not
necessary, Danaeus his own words (page 360) are, Non usque adeo certe
necessaria est. And so they are also in Tarnovius, so as you cannot pretend
that he deceived you in this. By that manner of expression he grants some
necessity, though not absolute; and does not simply say as (...), Laying on of
hands is not necessary. 3. That reason, that Prayer is all, is obtruded on him
(if I mistake not) and not to be found in any of his expressions. 4. What he
says of the precise urging of the Ceremony, is to be understood of the urging
of it upon Popish grounds. The foolish questions which he means, are those in a
Popish Canon de triplici manuum impositione, una Ordinatoria, altera
Confirmatoria, tertia Curatoria, and such like. 5. It Is granted that he says
expressly, that Laying on of hands is not essentialis pars, and ritus legitimae
vocationis; and that it is in rerum indifferentium numero, and retineri and
omitti potest pro more regionis in qua electus ordinatur. This last is more
then you have yet acknowledged: And if it be to be retained pro more regionis
according to the custom of the Country, it must continue in use among us, for
ought that you have said or can say to prove it Non-essentiall.

Now thus it follows --

And with them agrees the Church of Scotland. The Engl. pop. cer. page 168, 169.
Church has full liberty to use any other decent rite, or to use no rite at
all beside a public declaration; the Church is not not tied to use any rite at
all by the Word of God, in the giving of Ordination.

Ans. What Is the matter that you cite this book so often? Are you in love with
English Popish Ceremonies? or do you take that Book for an Oracle? Or do you
think the Church of Scotland will abide by every expression to be found
therein? Or is there no other way to know the sense of the Church of Scotland,
but by that Book? Are you of the same judgment with that Church, or any of
those Protestant Divines whom you have cited, so much as in this one head of
Ordination, and the rite of it? I fear nothing less. The Church of Scotland
is at an agreement within it self, and with such eminent Divines abroad as
Chemnitius and Danaeus; but you and they differ (if I be not misinformed) more
then a little. But, 2. to the thing it self. Liberty of devising new rites in
Ordination is neither s^fe to be granted by way of doctrine, nor to be used in
practice, especially in those Churches which have suffered much under pretense
and by the abuse of such liberty, and who in other things are strict urgers of
examples as binding, and that in matter of Rite. 3. Those Scriptures which tie
the Church to Ordination, tie her also to the Rite which we are speaking of: Or
tell us where you find a Scripture for the one, and not for the other?

That which follows, whether intended as a fifth reason, or as an excursion
only, I know not: though it be confused, yet it sufficiently discovers what you
aim at, viz. To make those who were Ordained by Bishops no Ministers, under
pretense that they were Ordained by them as a Superior Order unto Presbyters,
and so you slide into another Question: Whether the Person ordaining or
imposing hands be of the essence of the Call.] I shall lay down all your own
words entire, and then answer. Thus you, page 16.

Yea, suppose it essential; and then, whereas it has been held against the
Brownists, that the Ministry in the Church of England is not null, though the
Bishops laid on their hands, who should not have had a finger in it, (because
an extrinsecall Circumstance failing, or being corrupted, a thing ceases not to
be) yet if it be made Essential, what shall be said? Seeing both in the
Bishops intention in ordaining, and in the profession of the Party ordained,
hands were laid on him, not as a Presbyter formally, but as one of a superior
Order to Elders; and for such an Order there is no Divine institution. As
therefore that Baptism must be repeated, which was administered by a person not
lawfully called to the ministration of it, if the Person ministering be
essential to Baptism; so must that person be Ordained again, who had hands
laid on by a Bishop, as a Bishop, if Laying on of hands be essential to the
Ministry. Whatsoever wants its Essentials, is not, though it seems to be.

Ans. Let the Questions be propounded distinctly, which are here involved, and
then it will be easier for any one to judge.

1. What will follow concerning the Ministry in the Church of England, if
Laying on of hands be essential?

I answer. That the Ministers of England who have Hands laid on them, have that
which is essential to their Calling. Who can imagine otherwise upon the
supposition?

2. But seeing Ministers in England were Ordained by Bishops as a superior
Order to Elders, and no such Order is of Gods appointing, nor ought to be; is
not their Calling null in that respect?

Ans. No, i^ is not. 1. Because neither Church nor State did ever declare
Bishops to be a superior Order, though some of them (for they were but some)
made such a claim. The State has often declared against it, not only by books
approved by them, as in the days of Henry the 8. but by several acts of
Parliament in King Edwards time, and since.

2. Because Bishops only and alone were never authorized to lay on hands,
excluding other Pr^sbyters, but together with them.

3. Bishops were Elders first, before they came to be Bishops; and of Elders
were made Bishops in way of accumulation, not in way of privation. Their error,
that they thought themselves a superior Order above Presbyters, could not make
them no Presbyters.

4. All Ordinations are counted valid which are performed in a settled Church,
with the consent of Magistrate, Ministers and People; whether the Ordainers be
Bishop, Superintendent, or a Presbytery. This principle is maintained both by
the Lutherans and Calvinists, as you use to distinguish, For the Lutherans, I
refer you to Hen. Ekhardus [in opusculo de Ordine Ecclesiastico, page 5^. and
to Nicolaus Hunnius [Demonst. Min. Lutherani, page 294.] For others, Zanchy
says, (quo supra.) Nihil refert sive ab omnibus praesentibus Ministris, sive
ab uno omnium nomine imponantur manus. It matters not whether hands be laid on
by all the Ministers who are present, or by one in the name of the rest. So he.
And I think it might be added, nor how many be present; the Quorum is but of
prudentiall determination. Pareus speaks more largely. Comment. ad Romans 10. 15.
The lawful Calling of the Church is that, which is instituted in every Church
by public authority, for Orders sake unto edification. Neque enim uniformis
est omnium ubique quoad circumstantias externas, sed libertati Ecclesiae
relicta.

5. To speak my own judgment. When sin cleaves to the manner of Calling,
through the general error or corruption of all sorts who are concerned in it,
though such a Calling cannot be said to be legitima, or legi proxima, but is
displeasing to God, and null in some sense, (as unworthy receiving of the
Sacrament is counted no receiving, 1 Cor. 11. 20.) and sinful fasting, no
fasting, Zach. 7. 5.) yet it is not otherwise to be invalidated here below,
than by doctrinall censure and repentance, and not (as we use to phrase it) by
reiteration.

2. As to your third question, What shall be said to the Brownists? By the way,
let us know what you are; whether to satisfy you and them be not one thing?
And let them first agree amongst, and answer for themselves. Ainsworth, the
more rigid, thinks the People have power to Ordain. Johnson denies it, and
maintains the validity of Baptism and Ordination not in England only, but in
Rome. Whether all, I know not, but sure I am many of those in New England fall
in with Ainsworth in this fundamental of the Brownists. Those amongst us here
at home, who say they are not Brownists, and like not to be called
Independents, are not all one man's children in this point. What a case are they
in with the Anabaptists, who will not call in or repair unto the Elders of
other Churches to Ordain for them, and can have no Eldership within themselves
but by popular Election; if Ordination be essential, and the persons Ordaining
in Scripture be found to be only Elders, or more then Elders, and there be
nothing almost or in comparison but examples in things of this kind?

3. For your close: Whatsoever wants its essentials, is not, though it seems to
be. I answer, There Is difference between essentia partis, and compositi; and in
a totum integrale, a member may be wanting, and yet all being not be destroyed.
He that loses an arm or a leg, does not thereby lose his life, unless it be
by accident. As Election relates to the People, and Ordination to the Elders,
they subsist apart: Each of them have their fair claims for priority. In
several cases both may carry it, and the presence of the one supply the
absence of the other. That Ordination which is pretended by the body of the
People, or such Members out of office as they depute, seems to be and is not:
But that which is performed by Preaching Presbyters, is an Ordinance of God,
and you have yet proved nothing to the contrary.

Next you make show of answering an Objection.

1 Timothy 5. 22. Laying on of hands is put for the whole matter of appointing
Ministers, Ergo it is essential.

Ans. Before I consider of your answer, I have something to say in general,
and particularly to this for the general. 1. If you have a mind in good
earnest to answer such things as may be produced for the affirmative of that
Thesis which you deny, why say you nothing to that of Calvin, whereof I suppose
you are not ignorant? Licet nullum extet certum praeceptum de manuum
impositione, quia tamen fuisse in perpetuousu apostolis videmus illa tam
accurata little observatio praecepti vice nobis esse debet. Calv. inst. lib. 4.
cap. 3. sec. 16.
Although (says he) there is no certain precept extant concerning Imposition
of hands, yet because we see it was in perpetual use by the Apostles, that
their so accurate an observation must be in stead of a precept to us.

2. Imposition of hands was of such account with him, and many other the most
eminent among Protestant Divines, that I believe you think they said too much
in favor of it, and cannot but conceive they saw some reason for so saying,
and therefore it would not be below you to vouchsafe them an answer. Non
invitus patior vocari Sacramentum. So Calvin Calv. lib. 4. cap. 14. sec. 20.
cap. 19. sec. 39.
. In another place: Superest impositio manuum, quam ut in veris legitimisque
ordinationibus Sacramentum esse concedo, ita nego locum habere in hac fabula.
Martin Bucer enquiring after that Ordination which the Holy Ghost in his
Scriptures teaches to be lawful, says. Ea vero est -- solennis per verbum
Domini and preces Ecclesiae, and manuum impositionem, institutio, atque
imitatio Videndum igitur quam Sp. Sanctus in scripturis suis doceat legitimam^
esse Ministroru^ ordinationem. Ea vero est eorum qui agnosci possint and
debeant ad Ecclesiae ministeria esse rite vo^a^i atque probati, ad eadem
ministeria ^ legitim^ Ordinatore solennis per verbum Domini and preces
Ecclesiae, and Manuum impositionem institutio, ^tque i^^ia^i^ M. Bucer inter
scripta Anglicana. De Ordinatione legitima Ministrerum Ecclesi^ revocanda. p.
238.
. In his judgment therefore, where there is no laying on of hands; there is no
lawful Ordination; and this way of Ordaining is the Scripture-way, and the way
which the Holy Ghost teaches.

Now particularly to that place in 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man.
This argument may be drawn from them* Laying on of hands is established for
continuance, because only the sudden laying on is forbidden, and whatsoever is
commanded about Ordination is essential to it. But this you take no notice of;
only you devise a Reason which I know not who will own, and think perhaps to
be applauded for your answer.

Take it for granted (say you) that [Laying on of hands is put for the whole
matter of appointing Ministers] (for this must be supplied hither out of the
Objection) though it will not easily be proved, because the Scripture shows it
has been used in other cases then in appointing Officers; yet it follows not
that it is the principal or essential thing in Ordination. As for example,
Prayer is put for the whole worship of God, yet it is not the principal part
of worship; for sometimes keeping the Sabbath is put for all the Worship; as
Isa. 56. 4. Again, as when the Scripture by the same figure puts lifting up of
hands for Election (as it does Act. 14. 23) it binds not to that in all
Elections, nor places it the essence of a choice in that: so neither does the
Scripture place the chief part or essence of Ordination in laying on of hands,
though it put it for that work.

Ans. 1. Though laying on of hands was used at other times, as well as at
Ordination; yet there is no reason why we should imagine that in this Text it
refers to any other thing because the Chapter speaks for the most part of
things belonging to Elders. 2. Be it granted that laying on of hands was used
in other cases besides that of appointing Officers: yet the use of it in
ordaining Elders is one thing, if it be not the only thing here intended. 3.
This argument will surely hold. Laying on of hands is put for appointing
Ministers therefore in appointing Ministers its lawful to lay on hands. As
this: Prayer and keeping the Sabbath are put for Worship, therefore they belong
to Worship. And if because they be put for Worship, they are therefore parts of
Worship; then Imposition of hands is part of Ordination, because its put for
Ordination. If a part, then either essential or integrall; so as at least no
Ordination is complete and entire without it. 3. Lifting up of hands is not put
for Election, in Act. 14. 23. as you understand Election; and if you will needs
have Election understood there, it will follow that Paul and Barnabas did both
elect and ordain; and while you grasp in all for the People, you will leave
them nothing. 4. If lifting up of hands by the people, were as directly
intended and as often expressed as laying on of hands by Apostles and Elders
is, your zeal for the People would make you think it necessary. To what
purpose should laying of hands be so often mentioned, if the Holy Ghost
intended it should be merely arbitrary, whether it be used or no? 5. Consider
what Antonius Walaeus has said, propounding the question, Whether Imposition
of hands be necessary. Video in omnibus Confessionibus Nostrarum Ecclesia^um;
praet^r unam a^t alte am, eam requiri and Sane cum Apostoli semper eam
usurparint, in^o Apostolus praeceptum dat Timotheo. 1. Tim. 5 22 Ne ^ito
^^iquam manus Imponito, nos omittendam non judicamus: quia in negativo illo
mandato, etiam affirmativu^ continetur: ubi cu^ pro tota electione Pastoris
sumatur per Synecdochen, certe pro ritu aut part essentiati habenda est,
alioquin pro toto sumi non possit, aut saltem proadjuncto proprio and omnibus
vocationibus communi. Ant. Wall. l. de Funct. Eccl.
[I perceive (says he) that it is required in all the Confessions of our
Churches except one or two. And surely, seeing the Apostles always used it,
yea the Apostle gives Timothy a commandment, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly
on no man: we judge it is not to be omitted; because in that negative
commandment an affirmative is also contained: where being taken by a
Synecdoche for the whole Election of a Pastor, it must be taken either for a
rite, or for an essential part; (otherwise it could not be put for the whole)
or at least for a proper adjunct, and that which is common to all Callings.]

Now you begin to draw toward a conclusion, and propound this question:

If therefore laying on of hands be not essential, why should those be kept
altogether from laboring in the Lords harvest, who cannot or have not
receivedit, and in a way too that is as questionable as the thing it self? If
the Calling may be true without it, why is it equally pressed with it? Is there
more need of an adjunct, an accessory, a solemnity, then of Ministers, peace,
salvation to peoples souls by Preaching? As Soon as they had but an Altar, they
offered on it when they came out of Babylon, and stayed not till all the Temple
in all its furniture and utensils was ready, Ezra 3. Before they were wholly
carried away into Babylon, they worshipped and served God with those vessels
which were left in the Sanctuary, though they had not all, 2 Chronicles. 36. 7. 10.
18. What higher point of Separation is there, than to make void or deny a whole
Ordinance for want of a Circumstance?

Ans. 1. Here are many rash insinuations: As,
1. That some are kept altogether from laboring in the Lords harvest, who
cannot, or have not received Imposition of hands. 2. That the way to receive
Imposition of hands, (speaking of the present) is as questionable as the thing
it self. 3. That Calling, and Imposition of hands are equally pressed. 4. That
nothing should be pressed about the Calling of a Minister, but that which is
essential.
I shall speak a little to these, and then answer your main question.

For the first. The fault of our times is, and long has been a boundless
liberty usurped by some, and connived at by others. Perhaps some may be denied
approbation for, and admittance unto the public Ministry by way of charge,
not because they had not, but because they would not (though tendered to them)
receive imposition of hands. But who are kept back altogether? Many, both men
and women, are said to have labored much in the Lord, by their private
endeavors; who did not yet stretch themselves Phil. 4. 3. Romans 16. 12.
beyond their line to preach publicly un-ordained. This liberty in a moral
way is denied none.

For the second, I suppose your Margin is intended, where you tell us --

We have the word [Presbyterie] but once spoken of in all the Scripture, as
belonging to the Churches of the New Testament. Calvin understands by it the
office of a Presbyter, not a company of them. Those who take it for a company,
differ among themselves. Some say a company of Preachers, as the
Leyden-Professors. Synops. purior. Theol. disp. 43. n. 37. Some take it for a
company of extraordinary Ministers, as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets. Scoti
(...), Paracles. p. 228. Others for a company of Ruling Elders as well as
others, Eng. pop. cer. p. 171. Some understand it of a Congregationall
Presbytery, (as the Non-conformists against See the answ. to Bp. Downham,
sermon. p. 93.
Downham, and the Scots against Tilenus.) Some of a Classical Provincial
Presbytery, as the LONDON-Ministers.

Ans. 1. You should do well to let us know your own judgment, whether we shall
repute you Prelaticall, Brownist, Anabaptist, Independent, Erastian, Seeker,
Sceptick? Or whether you understand it of a Conclave of Cardinals. Would you
have it a cipher to signify nothing, or ad placitum? What means this
pretending of ambiguity, where there is none? You cannot but perceive that most
of these opinions fall into one, against those that place the power of
Ordination in the People. There might be a company of Preachers, and of
extraordinary Ministers, and some Ruling Elders, and yet all in one
Presbytery. No man yet ever dreamed that it signified a company of Believers
without Officers. 2. What of that that it is but once spoken of in all the
Scriptures? You cannot find the word Excommunication so much as once, nor
Trinity; will you therefore be Erastian or Arrian? Show us one place for
Ordination by the people, or calling to the office of a Minister without it?
Wheresoever there were diverse Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, or Bishops and
Elders orderly assembled for acts of power, there was the substance of a
Presbytery, (we have neither fitter nor other name in Scripture to call such
an Assembly by.) Such there were both at Jerusalem, Act. 15. and at Antioch,
Act. 13. 1. and at Philippi, Phil. 1. ^. And therefore though we read of the
name but once, we have the thing often. 3. For Calvin, these are his own words
upon that Text (1 Timothy 4. 14.) Presbyterium qui hic collectivum nomen esse
putant pro Collegio Presbyterorum positum, recte sentiunt meo judicio. [They
who think Presbytery in this place to be a Noun collective put for a College
of Presbyters, do think rightly in my judgment.] Therefore though he think
another sense (non male quadrare) may agree with the words; yet you have no
reason to set him at a distance from others, and from himself. 4. As touching
the Leyden-Professors, whereas your printed book has disput. 43. n. 3^. I
suppose your Copy had disp. 42. for there only is show of something for your
purpose, but nothing indeed. Though the power of Ordaining or Confirming
Pastors (say they) belong to the whole Presbytery; yet of old the Presbytery
did execute that in the rite of laying on of hands, not so much by Ruling
Elders as by Pastors, who did especially attend on prophecy or explication of
the Scripture, and application of it to the use of the faithful. unde
Prophetia cum Manuum impositione per quam olim fiebat Ordinatio Pastorum, ab
Apostolo conjungitur. 1 Timothy 4. 14. By this it appears they have a singular
opinion of the word Prophecy, not of the word Presbytery; for they plainly
suppose the Presbytery consisted of two sorts of Elders, and yet that
preaching Elders only laid on hands. And well they might suppose that, (as does
your Author so often cited page 171.) because much of Prayer and Teaching is to
accompany the act of Imposition, before and after. 5. That which you cite out
of the answer to Tilenus, under the title of Scoti (...) Paraclesis, is not to
be found in it as applied to the word: but this he says in general. There
were many Presbyteries in the Apostles times, in which no Bishop (properly so
called) could preside. Quia pars magna ex Apostolis, Evangelistis, and ejusmodi
viris constabat, qui Episcopis long erant superiores. [Because a great part
(not the whole) did consist of Apostles, Evangelists, and such like men, which
were far superior unto Bishops.] 6. None affirms that the word Presbytery as it
is used in 1 Timothy 4. 14. does necessarily imply a company of Ruling Elders as
well as others. But upon the supposition that there are two sorts of Elders,
proved by other places, they may be included under that one word, because its
comprehensive of them both. The Presbytery may be in the essential
consideration, but cannot be whole in the integrall without them. He that says,
The number of preaching Elders in one city, together with those Elders Eng pop.
cer.
which in the same city labored for Discipline only, made up that company
which the Apostle (1 Timothy 4. 14.) calls a presbytery; must be understood to
speak of that company in the general notion of it rather than in the peculiar
or individual. And this is plain by those words of his which follow a little
after. The Doctor himself (speaking of Forbes in his Irenicum) by the
Presbytery whereof the Apostle speaks, understands as we do, Consessus
Presbyterorum. 7. That some understand it of a Congregationall Presbytery, is
granted; and some exclusively, as if there were no other, as you your self
perhaps. But whatever the Nonconformists against Downham do, surely the Scots
in general do not, nor those in particular who wrote against Tilenus. And
howsoever they use the word, Parish or Congregation, as distinct from Diocese,
yet they use it in so large a sense, as serves to take in the greatest City of
England to make but one Congregation. The words of him that wrote against
Tilenus (lib. citat. cap. 28. page 218.) are these. Diversae sunt Londini
paroeciae distinctae, quarum tantus est numerus, and tam exiguus Note.
locus, ut impossible sit omnes simul and semel convocari, and tamen pro una
tantum habentur congregatione seu paraecia. 8. For the London Ministers, it
appears plainly page 191. that they bring the word Presbytery as used in 1 Timothy
4. 14. only for the proof of this Position, That there is a pattern of a
Presbytery in the Word of Christ. And that not only because they find the thing
as in other places, but the name as here. And if we find the nature of a
Presbytery, we shall more easily discern what use is to be made of it. 9. All
this while I hear nothing but a windy noise, that the way to receive
Imposition of hands is as questionable as the thing it self. Sir. to be plain
with you before ou^ parting, If you can say no more against the way of
receiving, then you have said against the lawfulness and expediencie of Laying
on of hands, (which is worth the while in reference to practice) than you have
said yet, You may begin when you please, and bring both ends to nothing.

To your third insinuation, that Calling and Imposition of hands are equally
pressed. I answer, 1. Were it so, you need not wonder; because there are few who
zealously oppose the one, but they oppose the other also: if you mean it of a
Church-Call, the thing it self is struck at. Most of those who care not for
having Hands laid on them, do as little value the Peoples choice; were it not
that the people are purs-bearers, and the beneficium is sure to come from them,
whosoever conveighs the officium. Gifted men would plead only the right of
their own gifts, but that the Peoples gifts byas them toward the peoples Call.
2. He that scruples to have Hands laid on him, may well be suspected to
question something else; the rather, because they make a new Sect beyond all in
ordinary enumeration, who pretend the unlawfulness of this Rite: and therefore
Church and State have need to watch against the creeping in of such.

To the last, That nothing should be pressed about the Calling of a Minister, but
what is essential. I answer; Consider of qualifications whether every one of
them be essential or no: if they be not; yet whether they may not be pressed? Is
there any Church in the world that urges only essentials? Many things may be
said for Imposition of hands, that cannot be said for every rite, if it be but
a rite. This is to me in stead of all: That liberty, whereby we pretend to lay
aside this, will imholden us to devise some other in stead of it; and that is
(at least) dangerous. Be it but an adjunct, in one sense it will prove an
inseparable one; Ordination is likely to fall with it, and this monster like to
arise in the room of it: the Church will be all body, in visible
administrations to it self, to act her own part and Christ's, confusedly.

But it remains to answer your Questions a little more particularly.

If the Calling may be true without it, why is it equally pressed with it? Ans.
It is as well pressed, but not equally; and therefore pressed though it were
not essential, because so to do is conform to the Apostles practice, not only
in the particular thing, but in other cases, as Act. 15. Order, in the
particulars of it, is not essential; and yet particulars may be pressed for
Orders sake, and that by way of commandment, 1. Cor. 14. 37.

Is there more need of an adjunct, an accessory, a solemnity, than of
Ministers, peace, and salvation to peoples souls by Preaching?

Ans. The necessity of Ministers, peace and salvation, are strong obligations
to bind those who desire the office of a Minister, not to refuse a lawful
adjunct, accessory, and solemnity. Woe unto him that had rather not preach,
then submit himself to have hands laid on him; especially when the use of that
rite is carefully purged from superstition and abuse.

As soon as they had but an Altar, they offered on it when they came out of
Babylon, and stayed not till all the Temple in all its furniture and utensils
was ready. Ezra 3.

Ans. Yet they did not sacrifice before they had an Altar, under pretense of
necessity: And why should any do the work of the Office, and take the profit of
it, who refuses in an orderly way to be admitted to the Office it self? Our
Temple yet has not all his furniture and utensils, but we have a way of
Ordination: let such as it concerns make use of it, and take heed that by their
example in neglecting and opposing this particular, they provoke not God to
make the work of Reformation cease, to the joy of our adversaries, and the
grief not only of our own hearts, but of Gods spirit. Can any thing be more
displeasing to God, and delightful to the Popish and Prelaticall, than to make
the labor of Reformers a Iudibrium and opprobrium? Is this to cry grace!
grace! unto the work?

Before they were wholly carried away into Babylon, they worshipped and served
God with those vessels which were left in the Sanctuary, though they had not
all. 2 Chro. 36. 7. 10. 18.

Ans. Therefore though we have not the power of all Censures, nor a pure
administration of every Ordinance; yet Ordination being purged, let us make use
of that as a pledge of the rest. To set and observe the right way of entering
into the Ministry, whereunto Ordination serves, is not only to lay the
foundation, but as the rearing of gates and bars belonging to the ^ngresse of
the House of God. Let none be as a thief to break through and steal, but
enter in by this door.

Yet you have one question to be resolved.

What higher point of Separation is there, than to make void or deny a whole
Ordinance for want of a Circumstance?

Ans. 1. You shall do well to beware of points of Separation Nam consilia
Separationis and inani^ sunt, and perai^iosa, and sacrilega; quia and superba
fiunt, and pl^^ perturbant infirm^s bon^s, quam co-rigunt animosos malos. A^g.
^on. Parm. l 3 c. 2. to. 7.
. In these times many Teachers and Christians are all for Chymicall extracts of
Society; [quorum separatione novus quidam Monachismus irrepit] by whose
separation a new kind of Monkery is crept in: And this plague is the more
hurtful [quo est hypocrisi picturatior] by being colored over with a show of
greater holiness. These are the expressions of Bullinger Lib. de funct.
Prephetica. p. 18. col. 2.
(no contemptible one among Protestant Divines) speaking of the Catabaptists.

2. To make void or deny a whole Ordinance by refusing to use a lawful
Circumstance, is, whether a high point of Separation I know not, (the phrase is
improper) a great sin questionless. But who are guilty of it, if not they,
who rather than they will suffer Hands to be laid on them in such a way as is
now established agreeable to the Word, will either not be Ministers at all, or
be made Ministers (as they suppose) by such a company of People as are not in a
capacity for their parts to Elect, either by the laws of the Land, or any
warrant in the Word of God; and much less to Ordain?

3. Multitudes have been allowed to preach, and that publicly to their great
profit, in this time of general disturbance in Church and State. But that
liberty might be given and taken then, and whiles Reformation was under debate,
which now can neither be asked with modesty, nor granted with wisdom and
justice. If you please to take like pains for proving the Lawfulness of
Imposing hands in Ordination, as now established, as you have done to argue
against the Essentiality; I hope there will be little need to complain either
of pressing to, of withdrawing or exclusion from the Ministry.

As touching your Paradox (for so I call it) A man may lawfully Preach the
Word, who is not Called to be a Minister, That also shall be examined, God
willing, by it self apart.

FINIS.

