A GLASS FOR THE Times: Wherein is represented the MALADY and REMEDY OF
Divisions.

In a SERMON Preached at Mercers Chapel, April the 7th 1650.

By LA. SEAMAN D. D. Pastor at Alhallowes-Breadstreet. LONDON.

ROMANS 16. ver. 17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause Divisions
and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwell at Sun and Fountain in
Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Foot, Lord MAjOR of the City of LONDON, With the
rest of the Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
I Trouble not my self with thinking what there was in my poor labors which
might occasion you, or any of you to desire, that is, to command me to print
what I had preached in your hearing. When we are weak, then we are strong. May
it please God to glorify his power, through my infirmity; I shall rejoice, and
you shall reap some profit. But by this means I am forced to confess (which
otherwise had been concealed,) that I had no Notes to bound my utterance then,
or now to guide me in preparing for the Press, save those which were since
transcribed by a ready Writer: without whose help I had not been able to let
the world see what it was which you heard.

My spare time since has not sufficed for to prune, and much less to dress
and order the exuberancies, either of my own expressions, or of his pen.
Neither have I minded to file this little piece into such a smoothness of
phrase, or lick it into such a comeliness of proportion as might make it lovely
and graceful to peruse. And though to enlarge the subject in some way of more
particular, and quickening application, might conduce most to the Conversion of
sinners, and Reconciliation among those who through Division are at enmity
among themselves, which was the scope of the whole; yet I am confined, to what
you called for, and presume not further, because the slip is easy from a
digression, into a transgression.

I pray for the peace of your City, let them prosper who love it. And am.

Yours, in the service of Jesus Christ, L A. SEAMAN.

MALACHI 4. verse. 5, 6. 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before
the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord.

6. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart
of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.


THe words now read unto you, are the close and Omega of all the Old Testament;
A Prophecy they are, that is out of all contradiction; Quod nos omnino non
recipimus. Hieron. Vide Christoph. Castrum. in cap. 1. Mal. Riberam. Tarnovium
in Prolegom.
but whether it was delivered unto the Church of God in an extraordinary way by
the ministry of an Angel, (as Origin and some of the Rabbis of the Jews
conceive) or in a more ordinary manner by Ezra, (as many think) is not so
clear, because we have no History concerning Malachi, nor record of his
parentage, neither in the beginning of this book, as uses to be in others, or
elsewhere.

In the first of Mark and the second verse, there, chap. 3. verse 2. of this
same prophecy is cited, as a testimony of the Prophets concerning John, As it
is written in the Prophets, Behold, I send my Messenger before thy face, etc.
And by virtue thereof we may extricate and wind our selves out of that
Labyrinth where the Jews or others would leave us.

But I intend not to be long or troublesome in matter of Preface; I forbear
also to speak any thing of the Book in general, or the Chapter, (though it be
but short) because the words are full in themselves. In the Prophecy which they
contain, two general parts are to be observed.

First, here is a judgment threatened.

Secondly, a blessing promised.

The judgment is threatened by way of implication. And the blessing promised in
words at length, as we use to phrase it.

Concerning the Judgment, there are two things further to be taken notice of.

First of all, the cause of this judgment which for name is here employed only,
but from the thing expressed, it appears to be Division, or the distance that
is between the hearts of the fathers and of their children, the fathers being
against the children, and the children against their fathers; this is the sin,
the special sin that God seems here takes notice of.

Then secondly, we are to consider the nature of the judgment that is here
threatened, and that is called a curse; lest I come and smite the earth with a
curse: It is a curse and a curse with a witness (as we use to say) that is
intended by the phrase in Hebr. which holds out two several things. 1.
Smiting, and 2. smiting with a curse. That of smiting signifies also to kill
and slay, and metaphorically to propagate (...)
and diffuse, all which senses may not unfitly here be taken in together. As to
smite with the pestilence or sword is to kill with them, and to kill
abundantly, to pour out men's lives like water; so to smite with a curse, is
not barely to strike or wound, but unto death and destruction, that many may
fall into perdition, never to recover it.

In Zachary 14. 11. you have the same word Cherem that is here used in the
original, and rendered utter destruction; there (...)
shall be no more utter destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.
Put both the translations together and then the curse of utter destruction is
the judgment here spoken of. No less the righteous Lord (as we may so say) had
under his consideration for to inflict for the sin of division, had not mercy
intervened and found out way and means for the preventing of so great a judgment

In Leviticus 27. (upon the perusal of it) you shall find a difference
between the consecration or dedication of a thing and the devoting of it. The
consecrating of a thing seems to be nothing else but a kind of conditional,
limited and reserved setting apart to God with some kind of caution and
consideration; and therefore things so consecrated were liable to redemption or
to exchange; Money might be given for them, and so the thing again for
propriety might be taken away from divine use to be as a man's own for common
use. But the things that were devoted, admitted of no redemption, nor exchange.
Whatsoever was consecrated to God in that sort, was so to remain and abide; And
therefore this latter seems to be, (as I may call it) an absolute verse. 28, 29.
dedication to God, the former a conditional. That which was so devoted to God,
is also called cherem.

Note this also, that things are devoted either by God or by men. By God,
either in mercy or in judgment. If God do devote any person or place to
destruction, thereby he makes it a cherem, and consequently it becomes
irrevocably set apart to destruction, and there shall be no redemption, nor
exchange, but that thing according to the appointment of God shall go unto that
destruction to which he designs it. And thus all the reprobates in the world,
and those that are damned, they are all of them devoted, cursed in this sense,
because they are set aside by the just and unchangable purpose of God, to be
vessels of his wrath, that is to be filled with wrath according to their
deserts. Such a kind of curse is meant here by this expression, lest I come
and smite the earth with a curse, h. e. lest I come and devote it to
destruction, lest I bring utter destruction upon it, and there be no place
neither for redemption nor for exchange; A heavy judgment, and that that may
very well make our ears to tingle, and fill our hearts with horror when we
seriously consider that the sin of Division deserves no less a punishment.

But thus briefly of those particulars which pertain to the first general
part, that is, the threatening employed in these words.

It remains to consider of the second, that is, the blessing here promised.
Touching that observe,

First, the person promising. Behold (says God) I will send Elijah the
Prophet. The Lord himself is he that undertakes to bestow this great mercy, who
is Faithful, therefore will certainly verify his word; Omnipotent, and
therefore able to perform all he undertakes; And exceeding gracious, and
therefore as his power cannot fail him or us, so for his goodness sake he
will not be wanting in those things wherein he is so fully engaged.

Secondly, we are to consider the thing promised; the substance of all lies in
this. I will send you Elijah the Prophet. Here we are to consider the
instrument God intends to make use of, and the work he appoints him to do, with
the success thereof; for in these, jointly considered, lies the blessing.

The instrument is described in those words of the fifth verse, I will send you
Elijah the Prophet. And the work he is to do, in the sixth verse; He shall turn
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to
the fathers. Concerning the instrument, you have him described, First of all by
his name, he is called Elijah; I will send you Elijah. And secondly, by his
Office, I will send you Elijah the Prophet. And then thirdly, By the time when
he shall come, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the
great and dreadful day of the Lord. What is to be understood by this same
great and dreadful day, is not altogether clear amongst all sorts of
Expositors; some refer it unto the first coming of Christ, and some refer
it unto the second. The sound of the words at the first hearing, and the
propriety of the expressions seem to incline very much, and to carry our minds
to conceive that only the second coming of Christ is intended. And thus the
Papists for most part, because it makes for their advantage in another point,
would have us to understand it. But if you consider well of all the
circumstances of this place, and that interpretation which the Holy Ghost
himself gives us elsewhere, you shall find that however the second coming of
Christ is not necessarily to be excluded, yet the first coming of Christ must
needs be primarily intended.

In Malachi 3. v. 2, 3. we find the first coming of Christ spoken of without
all peradventure: And yet concerning that first coming of Christ, we have there
these expressions; Who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand
when he appears? for he is like a Refiners fire and Fullers soap. And he shall
sit as a Refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi,
and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering in righteousness. There you see a coming of Christ which can hardly
be endured by those that serve in the house of God, which is yet but to prepare
them for a way of more acceptable sacrifice, and this must needs be understood
of a first coming, for the second coming puts an end to all kind of service,
not only according to the Ceremonial Law, but likewise according to the Gospel.
And if this first coming of Christ is looked upon as so dreadful and terrible a
day, that the Prophet brings it in in a way of question and admiration, Who
shall abide the day of his coming? Who may stand when he appears? What shall we
think of the second?

In the first coming of Christ, as John Baptist tells us (who was this same
Elijah here prophesied of) the axe was laid to the root of the tree, (so you
have it in the third of Matthew v. 11.) And every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. And when the Pharisees
resorted to him; Oh generation of Vipers (says he) who has forewarned you to
fly from the wrath to come? As if he should have said, had not you come and
submitted to this Ordinance of Baptism, and made profession of repentance of
sins, there was wrath of God at hand ready to seize upon you; therefore surely
the first coming of Christ was a dreadful day in regard of threatening at
least, though not for execution. The acceptable year of the Lord and day of
vengeance of our God, go so together in relation to several sorts, Gods humble
penitent people being on the one side, and the impenitent and unbeleeving
people being on the other side, that it is no wonder we hear sometimes of the
mercy of his coming and sometimes of the judgment. There is therefore no need
why we should understand these words restrictively and solely of the second
coming of Christ; for the nature of the phrase and of the thing it self will
very well bear us out to understand it of his first coming also; But the great
thing which we are to eye in this same expression, is, that before such time as
God comes in a way of judgment, he will offer terms of mercy; he will as much
as wisdom or mercy and justice tempered together do require, prevent his own
judgment: There shall one come, a Prophet, a Messenger, a man of God which
shall endeavor to win and gain the Jews to God, that the dreadfulnesse of the
day may not befall them; and this is that which makes exceedingly for the
amplifying of Gods mercy in this promise.

That however in justice he might surprise them unawares, yet nevertheless as
he himself made it a law among his own people, That before they besieged a
place, they should send offers and terms of peace; so he himself intends Deuteronomy.
20.
to do with them; they were to be merciful to their enemies, and therefore he
would not be wanting in mercy to them, to whom he always professed more then
friendship. But on this particular I shall not stand any longer.

The maine thing remains yet to be considered of, and that is the work it
self, that this same Prophet Elijah is appointed to do. And here we are to
consider two things.

First of all the endeavor of John, and then

Secondly, the success thereof. His pains and labor on the one hand, and
Gods blessing which alone crowns all our endeavors.

If we look not upon these two as accompanying one another, it is impossible
that the curse should be prevented. If John had altogether labored in vain,
and spent his strength for naught, the curse would and must have come upon the
Jews; therefore these two things must be considered of here to make up the
entireness of the blessing promised.

First, therefore John shall labor the conversion of the Jews to God, and
their reconciliation one unto another: This is to turn the hearts of the
fathers to their children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers;
that is, he shall seriously set himself with all his skill and all his might,
with all his parts, graces, powers and abilities, so far as in him lies, that
he may in a faithful discharge of his duty compass so glorious an end as this
is.

And here beloved, consider first of the subject which John has to work upon,
and that is the hearts of men, a very hard task. They that have to do with men's
persons, the outward man, may happily win upon them and prevail with them; but
the heart seems to be of that secrecy and reservednesse, and so impregnable to
any humane power, that he that shall attempt any thing upon the heart of
another, seems to work in vain: We have not the knowledge of men's hearts, and
much less power to work upon them, and yet this is the business John shall set
himself to in his ministry, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,
and the hearts of the children to the fathers. True conversion lies in the
change of the heart, and therefore John's labor shall be not to make men
hypocrites and formal professors, but true Israelites in whom there is no
guile.

Secondly, John shall not only have to do with the hearts of men, but with
divided hearts, with hearts that are at distance one from another, that are
alienated, and not easily reconciled; where there shall be a wonderful
disorder and confusion, the fathers being against their children, and children
against their fathers; whether you take these words properly for division in
the family, or synechdochically, for division of like nature in all kinds of
societies, as when inferiors are against superiors, and superiors against
inferiors; when Ministers shall be divided against people, and people against
Ministers; and Magistrates against subjects, and subjects against Magistrates;
in a time of such confusion John shall then come in; and this is to be his work
and business to compose and reduce all into a right frame and order, that
every one may act in his own Sphere, and perform the duty of his place both
unto God, and in all other relations.

Thirdly, observe the method of John's work; he shall begin first of all to bow
the great ones, for so the words run, the heart of the fathers to the children,
and then the hearts of the children to the fathers. He shall not apply himself
first of all to the inferiors, making them submit themselves to their
superiors; but shall first of all begin at the top, at the uppermost end, at
that part of the work that seems to have the greatest difficulty in it.
Inferiors may a great deal more easily be reconciled to their superiors, then
superiors that have authority in their hands can be prevailed with to be
reconciled to their inferiors. It must be an overruling power that makes any
reconciliation in great ones; but herein shall be the glory of John's ministry,
that without any respect to inferior or superior, he shall labor to bow and
bend every one of them to the will of God, and turn the hearts of the fathers
toward the children, as well as the hearts of the children toward their
parents, and sorestore all things. Mas. 17. 11.


Further, in the fourth place consider the thing it self, that John is to
endeavor now upon this subject, when he has to do with their hearts, and with
these divided hearts, and with these hearts of fathers, as well as hearts of
children; he is to turn them, to change, and alter them for to take away their
divisions and enmity, and to reconcile them, for to bring the hearts of all men
in to God by true repentance and unfeigned conversion, and to knit and unite
them one to another by love and friendship, an exceeding great enterprise; who
is sufficient for these things? as the Apostle in another case, and yet this is
the business that God intends to put John upon.

I, but what shall be the fruit of his labor? shall he have the honor for to
be successful in such an enterprise as this is?

Yes, that is the great thing that God intends here by this same promise. He
shall turn the hearts of the fathers, etc. This is to be understood not only
quoad conatum, as touching his endeavor; but quoad effectum as touching the
thing it self, he shall do it, God shall use him as an instrument, and God shall
bless his ministry; such grace and divine power shall accompany him in this
kind that this work of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

In Luke 1. 16 where the Angel makes a Prophecy beforehand unto Zachary
concerning his son John, who was not then borne, we find this among other
things. Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
God will grace him not only with honorable work, but with wonderful success,
however there be a great many that shall not be converted by him, and it may be
the far greater part; yet many shall; what ever we hear before of the
instrument, or of his work further then it has this success, it wants of the
fullness and comfortablenesse of a blessing; for herein lies the compleatnesse
of it.

Thus briefly of those things that do belong to the blessing promised, which
was the second general part that I observed in these words.

There are so many particulars here complicated together as the proportion of
time allotted for this exercise will not by any means suffice me to go through
them; and therefore of those many things that have been hinted at unto you,
there are only three that I shall endeavor to speak farther unto.

First, of the sin that is here employed. And then

Secondly, of the judgment that was intended for that sin; and

Thirdly, of the remedy of that judgment.

Concerning the sin that is here employed, it has no direct name in the words
of the text; but a sin is employed, yea an exceeding great sin; consider two
things about this.

1. The root and seat of it, it lies in the heart. And then

2. The fruit and consequent of it. It exposes a people unto a curse, yea unto
the greatest curse of all curses. Two Observations here fall in by the way.

that God principally eyes the hearts of men, both concerning the good that is
in them, and concerning the evil that is in them. If there be any good thing
in the secrets of the soul, the Lord takes notice of it. On the other side if
there be any wickedness, any abomination in the heart, the Lord in a special
manner fastens the eye of his observation upon that also.

Jeroboam was father of a wicked family, a son of Belial himself, and a man
that has this brand laid upon him to all posterity, he was he that made Israel
to sin; he could not be content to take his own liberty, but he labored to
bring the people under his power to Idolatry. He made Israel to sin partly by
his example, partly by his command, and partly by his persecution, by changing
of their Religion he involves all into sin. Well, but now in the loins of this
wicked man there is one that God espies and takes notice of, that had some good
thing in him toward the Lord God of Israel, 1 King. 14. 13.
the Lord takes notice of this, and it is not without record in Scripture. The
words of Peter to Ananias and Saphira his wife you know; Whyhath Satan filled
thy heart to lie to Act. 5. 3.
the holy Ghost? As if he should have said, I do not so much take notice, nor
God takes not so much notice of your words or of your fair pretenses here,
that you have (as you say) sold all, and will lay all at the Apostles feet as
believers do to be disposed of by them; there is something else in your hearts.
God that was able to give a power to one man to discern what was in another
man's heart, is much more able himself to epsy it out, Thou understandest my
thought afar off, says David, Psalm. 139. 2. Look which way soever the
inclinations of our spirits are working, the Lord fully apprehends them; all
things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, as it
is in Hebr. 4. 13.

I will not be long upon this for the proving of it. It is a principle
ingraffed in our minds even by nature, that God is the knower or the searcher
of our hearts, and we take it for granted if we have any inward bent and
working toward him he observes it, and therefore we suppose that a mental
prayer suffices to God, and that we need not use a voice for information; if
there were no other grounds for it in prayer, but that it should be a means to
bring somewhat to Gods knowledge that otherwise could not be, it needed not;
God is the maker of the heart, and God is the searcher of the heart. But for
the application of this.

Isa. 11. 3. He shall not judge according to the seeing of his eyes, nor
reprove according to the hearing of his ears; But with righteousness he shall
judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth, v. 4. And
righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle
of his reins, v. 5. Such a person God has delegated to be the judge in all
causes and overall persons at the last day, and such a Judge is he himself;
and therefore it is in vain to pretend this or that, either in matters wherein
we have to do one with another, or in things that do more immediately belong to
the the Lord; for God searches the hearts, and he tries the reins; and
therefore far be it from any of us to please our selves in being Hypocrites;
our first parents did vainly think to hide their nakedness by a few
fig leaves; all our pretenses are no better in his sight, before whom all
things are naked and open.

Secondly, God does principally observe the heart; let it be our maine care
therefore to approve our hearts unto him. It is the great comfort of those
afflicted people of God we read of in Psalm. 44. 18. that were under very sore
trials, That their heart was not turned back from him, nor had their steps
declined from his way. What ever we may suffer from God, notwithstanding all
afflictions or temptations which we may be exercised with, we must keep our
hearts close to him, in faith, love, fear and patience.

Thirdly, God is a principal observer of the heart; it will be our wisdom
therefore to give our selves and our hearts up into his hands, and not to trust
them in our own keeping; let him have the ordering of them, and let us not
lean to our own understanding. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? But I the Lord search the heart, I try the
reins. Jer. 7. v. 9, 10. Therefore there is no trusting of our own hearts as
they are in our custody, though the duty of keeping the heart with all
diligence, be commended to us, Proverbs 4. 23. The Devil labors to get
possession of it, and to fill it; and we our selves are not able to withstand
him, especially in his wiles and methods; And therefore as we commend our
selves to Gods protection, so let it be our care to give up our hearts unto his
holy Spirit. But I hasten to the second observation.

Division of heart is a sin that does exceedingly endanger a people. Look how
much Division there is in the hearts of men, so much sin, and by that sin they
lie open to a curse. This is an item most necessary for us to consider of in
these distracting times; we have long been at enmity among our selves, and yet
there is no reconciliation amongst us, not so much as external from the teeth
outward; for in our words we know not how to express our selves as those that
are indeed agreed; but the Division of our hearts is much more. However some
men have so much wisdom or policy as to conceal their thoughts, yet
notwithstanding God takes notice of them; and when men's hearts are sinfully
divided, he takes it for such a disposition as is not to be endured, but
avenged.





1. When it estranges us from God himself, to the dislike either of his
Service, or Providence.

2. When we are estranged in opinions and affections, and thereby taken off
from communion and duties of love one toward another. Division amongst men
has its original in Division from God; for if we could keep our hearts close
to God by virtue of our union with him, we should be the more compacted amongst
our selves, but when we begin a little to fall off from him, we are the more
easily and endlesly divided among our selves.

first faith against Popery.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy might. When a man has a spirit in him
that does really obey God in the substance of this Commandment, then his heart
indeed is close to God; but if we be lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, as it is prophesied of many in the later times, if we love our selves more
then him, if we love our estates, lives and credit, or our relations more then
him, we make them our gods. Suppose there be no gross idolatrous principle, we
have no mind to worship the host of heaven, nor to fall down before any
Image, this is a base kind of idolatry, that we scorn; wondering at the folly
of men that lived in former generations for things of this kind; but the
question which we must put to our selves, is, whether we be not of a worldly
mind, of that young man's temper, who being required to sell all, upon a
promise to receive treasure in heaven, he went away sorrowful because he had
great possessions. And did you never hear that covetousness is Idolatry? It Is
much to be feared in these times, that many fear men more then God; this is a
certain sign that our hearts are divided from God; As also when we are
exceeding solicitous in those things that concern our outward being here, but
leave all things appertaining to the glory of God, to take care for themselves.

Secondly, hearts are divided when they are at a distance one from another. Ye
know the second Commandment, which is like unto the first, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. And now there is nothing but self love in us, when as
one man takes no care for another, puts not himself into another man's stead,
but looks what power and authority he has in his hands, this I can do, and
this I will do, and this I may do, and this no body can or will trouble me in;
this shows our hearts are divided one from another, when we consider not the
case and state one of another, so indeed and really to do as we would be dealt
withal; when we break thus with God and thus with men, this is Division. Would
you know how great a sin this is? I beseech you consider of these two things.

First of all, That when God would inflict a great spiritual judgment upon a
people, then he uses to make use of Division.

Secondly, when God does intend to bring a people unto destruction, he prepares
them for it by Division. So as Division is both the cause of judgment, and the
means to bring the judgment; and the sign and forerunner of some greater
judgment, and it self no small judgment, as no small sin.

In Psalm. 55. v. 9. you shall find David praying in this manner against his
enemies. Destroy them (O Lord) and divide their tongues, for I have seen
violence and strife in the City. Violence and strife are the sins which stirred
up the zeal of David. He knew that such sins exposed people to destruction,
and that Division was the means which God used to effect it by. When God has
a mind to destroy, he needs not think of any other course then giving way to
men's tongues. This he may most justly do to punish oppression; for when men get
power into their hands, they use it not for the interest of the persons, with
whose good they are entrusted, but for themselves; this is a crying sin.

Holy men that are endowed with an extraordinary spirit of discerning,
sometimes by way of imprecation call for such a judgment as they foresee God
purposes to inflict, and then their prayers are not only prayers, but
prophecies; and so it seems to be in the place forenamed. When God had a mind
to destroy those builders of Babel, he confounded their language, they could
not understand one another; and so by that means, their enterprise had no
other then a ridiculous issue. In like manner when God intends destruction to a
people, he uses to prepare them for it by Division. It Is worth our observing
concerning the Jews, they were many years contending about government from
their coming out of Babylon, till their subduing by the Romans, whether the
Priests should govern them, or some other, till such time as they were
reconciled by a desolation; God destroyed their Temple and their City, and by
that means put an end to all their intestine quarrels about government. But
till such time as God had brought upon them that judgment, they could not be
quiet; Division so far prevailed amongst them, that when their City was
besieged by the Romans without, they had no sooner gotten any little respite by
beating back their assaults, but they fell presently to fight as eagerly
amongst themselves, as if they had had no enemy near them. If we would know
how likely a people are to be destroyed, or how near they are to a mercy, let
us consider with our selves how far forth they are divided, or how far
forth they are in a way of reconciliation. The more Division increases, so
much the nearer they are to ruin; the nearer reconciliation, so much the more
hope of a mercy.

In Hosea 10. 2. the Lord observes this, Their heart is divided, now shall
they (says he) be found faulty. He shall break down their Altars, and spoil
their Images; and they shall say we have no King, because we feared not the
Lord; what then should a King do to us? The Original of all misery is this,
their heart is divided, or as the words may be read, He has divided their
hearts, God has brought this heavy judgment on them, then they are a people
prepared for destruction; Now they shall be found faulty, that is, without any
excuse, nothing can be pleaded in their behalf. A Kingdom divided against it
self cannot stand, nay, it must not stand, because it is not in a righteous
state.

This should cause every one of us to look exceeding sadly and bleedingly
within our spirits on these times, because of our Divisions; for in truth as
long as this sin takes place amongst us, in that wonderful manner that it
does, there can be no security; this heart-division will upon all occasions be
a means to betray us; when our peace and happiness has only an outside
foundation, that men's tongues are tied, and their mouths are stopped, and it may
be their hands are manacled, that they are not able to act as they would, yet
as long as their hearts are divided, and there is an enmity there an inward
broyling, and we grudge one against another, and bellow as Oxen do when they
want fodder (...). Jam 5. 9.
, and do but watch for an opportunity that we may be mischievous one unto
another, Oh beloved! can this conduce to the peace of the Nation; we must look
upon our selves as in a miserable condition while such a principle as this
takes place amongst us, to be divided from God, and divided one from another.
This is the thing I would have you exceedingly affected with, this division on
the fathers part toward the children, and of the children toward the fathers;
those that govern cannot be reconciled to them that are under government; and
those that are under authority, cannot be reconciled to them that are in
authority; Shall God reconcile us by bringing a common curse upon us? Unless
he find out some means of his infinite mercy to take away this sin, we can
expect no other but this very curse that is here spoken of.

But I would not altogether hold you in this sad and doleful consideration,
either of the greatness of the sin, or of the danger of it; And therefore I
hasten now in the later part, to speak a word of the blessing promised; I will
send you (says the Lord) Elijah the Prophet before the great and dreadful day
of the Lord, and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers, etc.

I will not trouble you with those questions that belong unto the words,
whether Elias be to be expected in person before the second coming of Christ,
or whether the words are to be understood only of Elias figuratively, viz.
John Baptist, according to the interpretation or application of our Savior,
because the consideration of these is nothing at all necessary to that which I
intended in the choice of the words. But there are two things I shall desire
you to observe out of them.

First of all, when God intends to bless a people, he will Dectrine 1.
provide some effectual means for healing of their Divisions. Though he had a
mind to show mercy and do good to his people, yet until such time as he had
prepared them for it by conversion to himself, and by reconciliation amongst
themselves, they were not fit for mercy; and therefore to make way for it, he
here promises, I will send you Elijah to turn the hearts of the fathers, etc.
lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.

Secondly, the means which God principally intends to Doctrine 2.
make use of to heal divisions by, is ministry; the ministry of the Word,
ordinary or extraordinary, call it what you will, it is the means that God
chooses to use for the healing of breaches, by turning the hearts of fathers
to their children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers. To these
two particulars I shall speak a little further.

1. When God intends mercy to a people, and to prevent a curse, he will
provide means for the healing of Divisions. The wisdom of men suffices not;
all power and policy, all humane endeavors without him are indeed to no
purpose; and the reason is, because none of them reach the heart. Take the
Magistrate that carries the civil sword, go to the General of an Army that
has the long sword; let these men try their power concerning the hearts of
men, they shall be able to do nothing, because neither the one sword nor the
other is a proper instrument to reach the heart or to work upon it; they can
destroy the person, and take away the outward being, and so make a change in
the external state or condition of men; but they are not able to make any
inward conversion, nor to put a principle of reconciliation into the hearts of
men one toward another; the Lord reserves this as his own work, that he alone
may have the glory of it. It is a work which he takes to himself, because he
alone is able to effect it; and therefore when we desire or endeavor
reconciliation one with another, our eye must be principally upon him, in whose
hands are all men's hearts; the providing of instruments, and the blessing of
their labors is his, and there can be no reconciliation without him. It Is a
vain thing therefore for men to endeavor reconciliation among themselves,
until such time as they have made a reconcliation with God; God is the party
principal, not only in the matter of offense, but in the business of
reconciliation; we offend against him, and therefore our great care must be to
gain him and to strengthen our interest in him; when God is reconciled to a
people, he will raise up fit instruments, show them their work and their way,
and make their labors effectual. And although the instruments which he
provides be unlikely, such as promise but a very little, yet the work shall
prosper in their hands; and why? because God is reconciled, and provides means
of reconciliation among men with a purpose to bless Oh! how exceedingly are we
beholding unto God, that he is pleased to take this great care in saving poor
sinners, that he makes it his work and business to find out means of
reconcilement; we are the parties injuring, that do the wrong, we should take
care to look after reconciliation; but the Lord disdaines not to take this work
upon himself; it is no dishonorable service therefore for any man to put
himself upon it, to be an instrument of reconciliation; for God himself
delights to have the glory of this work, In 2 Corinthians. 5. 19. we read God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing unto them their
sins, and has committed unto us the ministry of reconciliation; And we
therefore as Ambassadors in Christ's stead beseech you that you would be
reconciled unto God. Oh the wonderful love and goodness that is contained in
this piece of Scripture! God he begins the business of reconciliation, he laid
the plot, he found out the instrument and the means, he contrived by his
wisdom this great mystery, that the word should be made flesh, that his own
Son should come and take upon him our nature, and live in obedience to the Law,
and yet suffer the curse due to transgressors, and that we should be freed
from the curse; and that this should be made known to men by the ministry of
the Gospel, all this business is the pure design of love. Well, therefore God
must have all the glory of reconciliation; and all those that desire it, must
in an especial manner apply themselves to him. Reconciliation can never be
effected, unless God be pleased; take God in and let him have his full
interest, give we up our hearts to him sincerely, and then the business will
succeed. But I hasten to the second Observation, and that is,

The ministry of the Word is a principal means that God pitcheth upon to make
a reconciliation by. That we may the better understand this, I beseech you
consider what there was in John's ministry? (for our minds will presently be
running thither) what singular thing that made it so effectual for
reconciliation and for conversion?

I shall in a few Observations plainly set before you what is obvious out of
the Scripture concerning the ministry of John.

First of all, John laid his foundation in self-denial, he laid himself
concerning his person as low as possibly might be. His raiment is said to be of
Camels hair, and a leather girdle about his loins, and his meat was Locusts
Matthew 3. 4.
and wild Honey. He came not, as our Savior observes of him, neither eating
nor drinking. That is, he would not take to himself the ordinary freedom that
Matthew. 11. 18.
other persons did; he was one of exceeding temperance and abstinence in all
that belonged to his person; He was also very mean and humble, exceeding
careful that no apprehensions should be had of him beyond those that he was
worthy of; And therefore when his Disciples envyed the dignity of Christ, and
thought their Masters honor would be eclipsed thereby, You your selves (says
he) bear me witness, that I said, I was not the Christ, but that I am sent
before him. -- He must Joh. 3. 28. 30.
increase, but I must decrease. Here was John's principle and foundation; That Is
one thing that is to be observed.

Secondly, in his ministry he especially applies himself Matthew. 3. 2.
for the pressing of repentance; that was the sum and substance of his ministry
to call all sorts of men to this duty, to convince them of the necessity of it,
and that if they would have the forgiveness of their sins, and escape the
wrath of God, they must needs repent, to declare both their repentance and
faith, he required them to submit to every ordinance that was of Gods
commanding, and particularly to be Baptized; And to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance. Matthew. 3. 8.


Thirdly, he opened a door of grace to all humble sinners; for he told them of
Jesus Christ that was to come, and of the Kingdom of God that was at hand. 1 John 1. 29.
Behold (says he) the Lamb of God that takes away the Matthew. 3. 11.
sins of the world. I baptize you with water, -- but after me comes one that
shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. This is the third thing we
have to observe in him.

Fourthly, he did press every one without respect of persons, unto the duty of
his place, calling, state and condition. And therefore that Herod should carry
himself like Herod as a King, and that he should take to himself no other
liberty for sin then other men; he told him to his face that it was not lawful
for him to take his Matthew. 14 4.
brothers wife, etc. And when the soldiers came before him, and put questions
and cases of conscience, he pressed Luke 3. 14.
them strictly to their duties, that they should do violence to no man, neither
accuse any falsely, and be content with their wages.

In the fifth place, the ministry of John was rather practical then
polemicall; there were many disputations in those times amongst the Pharisees
and the Sadduces, and diverse other Sects; but we never heard that John engaged
himself in any of those controversies, but went on in the preaching of
repentance and faith and obedience, not minding those matters of lesser
difference wherein the Jews of those times contended among themselves.

But sixthly, although the ministry of John was practical rather then
polemical, yet he was a faithful witness in the grand controversy of the
time concerning the matters of religion in that great question, whether Jesus
Christ was the true Messiah or no? And therein he alone bore up his head
against all the John 1. 8.
body of the Jews, and though he was not that light, yet he came to bear
witness of that light; In this he was so far from not engaging himself, as
that he became the principal, the hottest and most zealous man in this point,
and upon all occasions did labor to make it out in the most convincing manner,
that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah. And when they would have had him to
have thoughts of himself, as if he had been the man: When the Jews sent Priests
and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him who art thou? He confessed, and John 1.
19. 20.
denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ. So as though he meddled not
with lesser things of difference, yet he contended for the truth of this.

And seventhly, there is one thing more I shall note to you concerning the
ministry of John, It was his great design to prepare Disciples for Christ, and
to bring over all his Disciples to be the Disciples of Christ, and as much as
in him lay to magnify Jesus Christ, and to vilify himself, yea to make
himself nothing, that Jesus Christ might become all in all. In the third of
John there you have a very large story for the confirmation of this. The
Disciples of John take notice of Jesus that he baptized, and all men came to
him; John 3. 26.
they seem to be offended at this, and thought that John was wanting to his
own credit and reputation, if he did not something to recover his dignity. Oh!
says John, ye are my witnesses that I said I am not Christ, I am but the
friend of the Bridegroom, and therefore I must be true to him; hereupon he
stirs them up to believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, And he that
believes on the Son of God (as he there teaches) has eternal life, and he
that believes Verse 36.
not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Thus you
see that in John's ministry there was nothing of flattery, or complying with any
corrupt interest of the times; this was his plain downright way of preaching
the necessity of repentance, and of faith, and of a holy life; these were the
great things to which John applied himself, and above all, to drive on the
interest of the Lord Jesus Christ; these are the characters of his ministry.
Now such a kind of ministry as this is, the Lord delights to make use of to be
the instrument and means both of conversion and of reconciliation, to turn
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to (or by) the
wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1. 17.
And now beloved give me leave to close this with two or three words of counsel
and exhortation to you.

as if so be it were a needless, vain and superfluous Ordinance, or as some
pretend, no Ordinance, but pretended to be only for the interest of some
particular persons, and not for the good of mankind, or common benefit of all
sorts within the Church. Certainly, this tends to nothing but more and more
division, to bring men's hearts farther off from God and from one another; its
the Devils great design, first to take men off from the ministry, then from
Ordinances in general; when he has prevailed with them so far, then also to
take them off from the Scripture, upon pretense that the immediate
communication of the Spirit of God suffices, and is all in all. But by this
means he secures men to himself, and brings them to be where he would have
them, for then he is able to make his own impresses upon their spirits,
transforming himself into an angel of light, and causing something in them
that is not humane, but beyond the power of a natural spirit; but those
elevations are no other then such as proceed from himself the Prince of
darkness, take we heed lest we also be caught in his trap, as of late years many
have been.

Secondly, seeing ministry is the isntrumental means that God pitcheth on to
convert and reconcile by, let us pray that the Lord would be pleased to gift,
qualify and bless the ministry of this age wherein we live for such a work as
this is; for certainly nothing seems to be more necessary for the glory of
God, good of Christians, then that some ways of reconciliation should be found
out, and that the foundation should be laid in converting men's hearts to God,
thereby reconciling them one to another, which is not to be done without a
real change; it cannot be by outward power or by humane means alone, there
must be some divine influence that must bring this to pass. God has pitched
upon an Ordinance, and made that the way and rode which he choseth to walk in.
And however he steps sometimes a little out to fetch in some persons, yet
nevertheless he never uses to bauke this means, nor to decline this way. It
has pleased him all along, in all ages to carry on his great design of
changing the hearts of men by an Ordinance of spiritual efficacy, and not in
the way of outward power.

When God had that great business to do to fetch his peope out of the Land of
Egypt, however he could have forct them out of Pharaohs hands, yet
nevertheless he chose rather that it should be done by way of divine oratory,
and therefore sends to him a Prophet; he pleads with Pharaoh, and the Lord
graces the ministry of Moses, adding also a power of miracles and course of
judgments till he made it effectual.

But God sets a special observation upon this, That Hos. 12. 13.
by a Prophet he brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet was he
preserved; Because though Plagues and Judgments wrought most on Pharaoh, yet
the Ministry of Moses as a Prophet prevailed most of all upon his people. And
when God had a mind to bring them out of the Babylonian captivity, and settle
them again in their own Country, that was to be effected not by might nor by
power, but by my Spirit says Zach. 4 6.
the Lord.

When God intends to reduce the later ages of the world by the destruction of
Antichrist, the calling Rev. 19. 15.
of the Jews and the remaining Gentiles, the principal means to effect all
this shall be the ministry, the Sword that comes out of the mouth of the
Lord. And therefore seeing this is the means that God in his revealed will
has pitched upon, we should pray and encourage our selves in praying, that God
would be pleased in mercy to provide such a ministry for us, and give such a
spirit unto those of this age and generation, that they may be instrumental
hereunto.

Thirdly, (and this all) Is the ministry, the means that God pitcheth upon for
reconciliation? then certainly it is not to be despised; the wisdom or the
judgment that God gives unto his servants the Ministers of the Word, is not
lightly to be slighted, neither may men promise unto themselves securely to
contemn and scorn it; there may be more of the mind of God then we are aware
of in the genius and disposition of his servants; And therefore it should
reverently be respected; but especially every one of us should bow our selves
to the Ministry, when it comes unto us in the power and evidence of the Word it
self; my meaning is, Those things that are clearly preached to us to be Gods
revealed will, for sin to be repented of, error discountenanced, order and
government to be set up, when the ministry of the Word beats upon us
convincingly, in these particulars, we should bow our selves, and look besides
the instrument that is speaking to us, and consider of the will of God, that
manifests it self hereby. Truly those that are of a disposition to slight
the Ministry, are not only very much injurious to God, but wanting likewise to
the good of their own souls, as much as in them lies they labor to make that
means ineffectuall, that God has intended for the turning of themselves and
others, and likewise for the happy and comfortable converse of men in this
world.

And here it must be remembered that more is not to be Caution.
expected from the Ministers of this later age then from those of former time;
we may not call for a spirit of infallibility, and say, unless they be
infallible, they be not worth the hearing. For, where has God promised an
infallible Ministry? and therefore why should we tie him to send it? We are
sure of this, when Jesus Christ ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men,
Some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. If God had
intended to bind himself to give us Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets, we
should have had them, and heard of them for these 1600 years that are past and
by gone; but certainly they have been nowhere to be found; and yet God has
not been unfaithful in making good his word, nor Jesus Christ in taking care
for his Church, and therefore we must suffice our selves with our Pastors and
Teachers. But we must look up to God for Ministers; whatsoever they are, they
are but instruments in his hand, and farther then it pleases God to bless,
they labor for naught, and spend their strength in vain. If we had Prophets
and Apostles, if we had John Baptist and Elijah in person; if we had Jesus
Christ himself amongst us, farther then it shall please God to bless their
ministry to conversion and reconciliation, they could not be effected by it;
Paul may plant and Apollos water, but it is God only who gives the increase.
If God will vouchsafe increase, though it be by the meanest of his servants, it
suffices; and if God withold, it is in vain for us to cry out for other
instruments. But I find my self very much straightened for time; those things
that have been spoken I shall commend to God for a blessing.

FINIS.

