Exceeding GOOD NEWS FROM SOUTH WALES. OF The Surrender of Tinby Castle upon
mercy, on Wednesday the 17 of May, 1648.

With the taking of Colonel Powel, and diverse Gentlemen, Officers and
Soldiers, to the number of five hundred and seventy.

ALSO, Good news from the North, of the complete condition of Major General
Lambert, who is upon the Borders of Cumberland and Westmerland.

TOGETHER, With an exact and true Relation, of the relief of Dover Castle, by
the Lord General Fairfaxes forces, where were taken prisoners of the Enemy 300
men, and 400 horse, the rest being beaten back to Sandwitch.

Imprimatur

G. M.



June 8thLONDON, Printed by J. C. MDCXLVIII.

Exceeding good News from SOVVTH-WALES, from that Honounourable Collonell
HORTON, of the surrender of Tinby Castle, upon Mercy, Wednesday the 31. of May,
1648.
Sir,
A After a long and tedious Siege of this Town and Castle of Tenby, Finding a
most resolved and stubborn Enemy; but God did so enable us, that we were no way
discomfited. Upon the 14. of May, we Stormed the Town in one place, and were
repulsed, then our men fell on a certain Work, where there were some slain, and
30. taken prisoner of the Enemies: presently after this, they did very humbly
seek from time to time, whereby they may March out upon Conditions, but our
honorable Collonell Horton would give no ear to them, knowing the Serpentine
Malvolency of their natures, especially of that proud and insolent Col. Powel,
that shameful Apostate, who indeed deserves no mercy at all, but that he
should be cast into that Curr^nt of the Fludgate of Justice, and made
exemplarie to posterity, and to all perfide^us villains.

This nest of verment did not desist from creeping and c^auling, until they
were not able to subsist no longer and then they were foret to strike sail,
and submit to mercy, and out pleasures.

On Wednesday last May the 31. 1648, we had an humble suite from this proud
Powel, to desire that Noble Col. Horton to take them into protection and mercy:
upon which they did freely and willingly surrender a^l* both Men Arms, and
Ammunition, there are most part of the Gentlemen in Southwales, that were in
this Rebellion against the Parliament, and their Army; were the chief
Ringleaders and complicises of these base Appostates, as namely, Laughorne and
Powel, as I writ you before, there are a great many Gentlemen of quality,
there be in all taken of Soldiers and Gentlemen, between 5. or 600 who are now
prisoners in Tinby under Col. Horton.

I praise God the Lieut. Genesis is gallant and well, he has subdued all the
Rebellious party in Southwales, except Pembrooke Castle, of which you shall
hear more presently, All the Gentlemen of Southwales are come into him, I mean
all those that were not engaged, and they hold a very fair, and I believe a
real correspondencie with him; for the common people that are the Natives of
Wales, he did consider they were but a seduced ignorant people, and they have
promised never to take up Arms more, but for your arch Caveleering Rogues that
were privatelie invited from London, Worster Chester, and other parts of the
Kingdom, merely to haighten the mischief in Wales, they are kept Prisoners,
and it is intended the^ shall be sent to the West india, for p^evention of
further mischiefs here. There be several Counties in Northwales that have
ass^siated, and are reso^ved to live and die with the Parliament and Army, and
all the Gent. of the whole Counties of Northwales hold a very fair
Corespondencie with L. G. Cromwell and have recourse to him daily, the L. G. is
now before Pembrook Castle, and has taken a Villedge that does Command the
Town, and part of the Castle, on which we have planted Batteries, which play
into the Town daily, I do not qu^stion but we shall give a very good account
of it very suddenly; the greatest part of our forces are in a Capacity to
march, either North, South or East, according as the Parl. and my Lord Genesis
shall appoint, because they may be very well spared here.

One thing I had almost forgot, they in Pembrooke are feign to feed their
Horse and Cowes with the Thatch of their houses; Poyer pretends his old
princ^ples still, and does protest he was not confederate with Laughorn nor
Powel in that Rebellion of Southwales: Now he is under the lash, he makes show
of these Cullers; It is admired by the well aff^cted in these parts, that, that
Ordinance of Parl. is not put in execution against all those that shall take up
Arms since the deliverie of Oxford, contrary to the consent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parl. or without Comm^ssion from his Excellency, Sir.
Thomas Fairfax Captain General, etc.

I pray Sir send me down some of these Ordinances of Parliament, and it were
well they were dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, to the Committees of
each County, it would be a great means to prevent the insurrections and
rebellions that are in many Counties of this Kingdom; You may imagine my haste
by the rudeness of my pen, I love you, and will be your faithful friend

W. S.
From before Pembrook, June the 5. 1648.
Exceeding good News from Major General Lambert out of the North, from the
borders of Cumberland and Westmerland.
LAngdale and Musgrave are in a dispairing condition, they have betaken
themselves to Carlisle, Duke Hamilton has frustrated them them of what he
promised and they expected: Major General Lambert is in a very gallant
condition, he is able now to march 7000 into the field, he has regained
Skipton Castle, which was surprised by the Enemy. Langdales men do melt from
him daily, I do not fear before many days, but you will hear of the
dissipating of that Enemy: yet notwithstanding, we have some ill news, which
may prove to the best.

Many of the North being ill affected, they did so connive at a party of
Langdales that marched obscurely in the night, upon the Moors out of Cumberland
into Yorkshire, having some private engagements from some perfidious men that
were in trust in Pomfret castle. One morning, there were a certain number of
carts, pretending to lay in provision for the Castle, there were some 20 men
came in Frocks with daggers and pistols under their frocks, who surprised the
Guard; then they had a party of horse with Muskateers behind them which
alighted presently, and flanked the horse, and so surprised the Castle.

June the 6. being Tuesday, Coll. Rich, Major Husbands, with their Horse, and
that valiant, and ever to be honored, Coll. Hewson, fell upon the Enemy that
had besieged Dover Castle, where there were some contest, not many slain.
Taken Prisoners by his Excellency, my Lord Fairfax Forces, of the Enemy befoe
that place of Dover Castle, 300 Men, 400. Horse, releeved the Castle, and made
all clear and free, beaten the remainder of the Enemy into Sandwich. This day
being Tuesday, likewise he sent a commanded Party of Foot, which landed in
Essex, to join with the Commanded party of Horse, under the Command of Col.
Whaeley, the appearance of which made the Essex Calves, and the Kentish Elves,
run away in the night from Bow-bridge, and dispersed themselves into the
Country, who are now persued into Essex, by his Excellencies Forces under the
command of Collonell Whaley. June 7. being Wednesday his Excellency Marched
from Rochester toward London, and it is thought, will be at Ellton this night.

FINIS.

