THE SCOVRGE OF CIVILL-WARRE. AND THE BLESSING OF PEACE.
A Memento very necessary; Showing the Miseries and Discommodities of
Civill-Warre or the Fruits and Effects of Blessed-PEACE.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

ARMA PACIS FVLCRA

IRESCIT VVLNER VERITAS



WAR, In her own Kingdom scalds her very Bowels.
War, Makes the Fathers throat a sheath for the Sons Sword.
War, Enforces the Mother to behold the Ravishment of her own Daughter.
War, Makes the Sister mingle tears with her Brothers blood.
War, Made the Senate House no Sanctuary for CAESAR, nor Pater Patriae, a
Protection for CICERO.
War, Turns the Fountains from the Cities, and makes the Channels flow with
their Merchants bloods.
War, Fires fair Buildings, and makes Houshold-Servants prove sometimes
Incendiaries.
War, Makes the Rascality become Masters of mighty Prizes, and the richest
Merchant goods.
War, Stops the mouth of Justice, and gives unto Oppression an hundred hands.
War, Makes Law give place to bloody Swords, and Orators to the Neying of
Horses.
War, Makes the uncivil Sou^dier, to judge the rich grave Alderman.
War, Makes Nobility become Suppliant to the giddy multitude.
War, Makes Religion mis-prized, and Youth ill instructed.
War, Yields no reverence to Gray hairs, nor makes distinction between
Kindred and Strangers.
War, Brings a Famine of Bread, Virtue scarce, and nothing public but
Disorder.
War, Makes the Vineyards lie disorderly, and the Briars to over run the
fruitful Fields.
War, Brings the Plough to be laid in the Fire, and makes the fire be hurled
into the Husbandmans Barn.
Civill-Warre, Lays the strongest City flat and even with the Earth.
When the Romans beheld in their own Cities these havocks of ^^vine and Humane
Blessings, they were so sensibly touched with (...) in their Hearts; That
whereas before they had been very vehement (...) over-forward in pursuing
WAR, they quite altered their course, (...) (in a short time after) became
humble Suitors for PEACE, which is (...) the Crown and Top-Garland of a
Nations best Glory, Happiness, (...) Felicity. As in these Verses (upon sweet
Peace) following shall be (...)

PEACE, Of the Moral Virtues is, the sole and (...) reign Queen:
Peace, Is the Mirror Christaline, where Science (...) is seen.
Peace, Is the Fountain next GODS Word, from where does Goodness flow:
Peace, Is the Holy Ground, whereon a^l Earthly Blessings grow.
Peace, Is the Trump or Tongue of Law; yea, sets Justice upon
Peace, Measures Right to every Man; yet with a several Gup.
Peace, Does cha^tise the Wicked men, and cherishes the Good:
Peace, Executes the pains of Law, but sucks no guiltless Blood.
Peace, Open sets the City Gates, that Plenty enter may:
Peace, Leads and guids the Travailer (in safety) all the Day.
Peace, Brings the Merchants wandering Ship into the wished (...)
Peace, Safety seals upon the Doors, where Strangers do (...)
Peace, Hangs Armor by the Walls, that Men may ply the (...)
Peace, Does sustain the Poore-mans need, that lives by Sweat of (...)
Peace, Brings Victual to the Town, for all those that have (...)
Peace, Where she reigns makes the Land to flow with Milk and (...)
Peace, Lends, Relieves, and freely Gives, and keeps Enough in store
Peace, Showers down Riches on the Ground, and many Blessings (...)
Peace, Shields the Wife from Soldiers force, keeps Virgins undeflour^^
Peace, Lets the Flock to feed at large, and saves them Undevour^^
Peace, That harmonious Music is, which yields a silver sound,
Peace, Is the sum of Earthly bliss, where most our Joys abound.
The City of the mighty GOD, sacked through the Peoples Crime,
Of blessed Peace was Salem called, until King JE^VS time.
God would not have his Temple built, but in the Times of Peace,
Christ was not borne until that War throughout the World did (...)
Christ his Apostles thus does bless, With you be Peace and Love;
Christ thus the wicked Jews does curse, Peace shall from you (...)
Christ is the Author of all Peace the sacred Word does say;
And will have Peace throughout the World against the Judgment Day*

FINIS.
Printed at London, by T. FORCET. 1645.


