A LETTER SENT TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD DIGBY, FROM SIR BARNABAS
SCVDAMORE GOVERNOR OF HEREFORD, Concerning the late Siedge of the CITY OF
HEREFORD.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1645.

MY LORD,
A Numerous and Active Army closely besieging us has rendered me, and those
engaged with me, (in regard of perpetual duty, without relief of Guards for
five weeks together) incapable of presenting your Lordship with an exact
Relation thereof; I can therefore hint it only for a better Mercury. The
Officers, Gentry, (whereof I shall send a List) Clergy, Citizens, and Common
Soldiers, behaved themselves all gallantly upon their duty, many eminently; to
particularize each, would be too great a trespass on your Lordships more
weighty affairs. Briefly believe me (my Lord) the walls of their valiant
breasts were all strongly lined with Courage and Loyalty.

On the 30th of July, I sent out a Party of 20 Horse over Wye-bridge, who
discovering their Forlorne-hope of Horse, charged them into their maine Body;
and retreated in very little disorder, and with loss only of one Trooper,
(taken Prisoner) some of the Scots falling. Immediately after this, their whole
Body of Horse faced us, about ten of the Clock in the morning within the reach
of our Cannon, and were welcomed with our metal; good execution being done
upon them, their Foot as yet undiscovered. About half an hour after, I caused
a strong Party of Foot (seconded with Horse) to line the hedges, who galled
them in their passage to the Fords, after whose handsome retreat, I began to
ensafe the Ports, which I did that night. In the morning, appeared their Body
of Foot, and we found our selves surrounded. I enjoined the Bells silence,
least their ringing, which was an Alarm to awaken our devotion, might Chime
them together to the execution of their malice. For the same reason, I stopped
our Clocks, and hereby though I prevented their telling tales, to the advantage
of the Enemy, I my self lost the punctual observation of many particulars,
which therefore I must more confusedly represent unto your Lordship.

Before they attempted any thing against the Town, they invited us to a
Surrendry, and this they did by a double Summons, one from Leven, directed to
me; the other from the Committee of both Kingdoms (attending upon the affairs
of the Army) sent to the Major and Corporation: but we complied so well in our
Resolutions, that our positive Answer served for both Parties, which was
returned by me to their General.

This not giving that satisfaction they desired, they began to approach upon
the first of August, but very slowly and modestly; as yet intending more the
security of their own persons, then the ruin of ours: but all their Art could
not protect them from our small and great shot which fell upon them. Besides
this, our men galled them handsomely at their several Sallies, over Wyebridge,
once beat them up to their maine guard, and at another demolisht one side of St
Martins Steeple; which would have much annoyed us at the Bridge and Palace;
this was performed with the hurt only of two men, but with loss of great store
of the Enemies men.

When they saw how difficult the Service would prove, before they could
compass their designs by force, they made use of another Engine which was
flattery. The Major and Aldermen are courted to yield the Town by an Epistle,
subscribed by six of the Country Gentlemen, very compassionate and suasory: but
upon our refusal to stoup to this lure, they were much incensed that they had
been so long disappointed, and having all this while continued their line of
Communication, they raised their Batteries, commencing at Wyebridge, from
whence they received the greatest damage, but instead of revenging that loss
upon us, they multiplied their own, by the death of their much lamented Major
General Crafford, and some others that fell with him. This provoked them to
play hot upon the Gate for two days together, and battered it so much, (being
the weakest) that it was rendered useless, yet our men stopped it up with
Wooll-sacks and Timber, and for our greater assurance of eluding their attempt,
we brake an Arch, and raised a very strong Work behind it.

The Enemy frustrate of his hopes here, raises two several Batteries, one at
the Friars, the other on the other side of Wye River, and from both these,
plays his Ordinance against the corner of the wall by Wye side, but we repair
and line our walls faster then they can batter them, whereupon they desist.

About the 11th of August, we discover a Mine at Frein-gate, and employ workmen
to countermine them. When we had stopped the progress of that Mine on one side
of the Gate, they carried it on the other; which we also defeated by making a
Sally-port: and issuing forth did break it open and fire it.

About the 13th, they raise Batteries round about the Town, and make a Bridge
over Wye River.

The 14th, Doctor Scudamore is sent by them to desire admittance for three
Country Gentlemen, who pretended in their Letters to import something of
consequence to the good of the City and County, free leave of ingresse and
egresse was allowed them, but being admitted, their suggestions were found to
us so frivolous and impertinent, that they were dismisd, not without some
disrelish and neglect: and the said Doctor, after they were past the Port,
coming back from his company, was unfortunately slain by a shot from the
Enemy.

About the 16th, they discover the face of their Battery against Frein-gate,
with five several gun-ports, from hence they played four Cannon jointly at
our walls, and made a breach, which was instantly made up; they do the like on
the other side with the like success.

The 17th, a notable Sally was made at St Owens Church with great execution,
and diverse Prisoners taken with the loss only of one man, at which time little
boys strived, which should first carry Torches and Faggots to fire their
works, which was performed to some purpose, and so it was at the same
Sally-port once before, though with a fewer number, and therefore with less
execution.

And I may not forget to acquaint your Lordship with those other four Sallies,
made by us at the Castle to good effect, and what emulation there was between
the Soldier and Citizens, which should be most engaged in them: Now their
loss of Prisoners, slaughter of men, and dishonor of being beaten out of
their works, which they found ready to flame about their ears if they returned
presently into them, had so kindled their indignation, that presently they
raised Batteries against Saint Owens Church, and played fiercely at it, but to
little purpose, which they so easily perceived, that from the 20. unto the 27.
there was a great calm on all sides, we as willing to provide our selves, and
preserve our ammunition for a storm, as they could be industrious or malicious
to bring it upon us: yet I cannot say either side was Idle; for they plied
their Mine at Saint Owens, and prepared for Scaling, we countermined, employed
our boys by day and night to steal out and fire their Works; securing their
retreat under the protection of our Musketeers upon the wall, and what our
fire could not perfect, though it burnt far, and suffocated some of their
Miners, our water did, breaking in upon them and drowning that which the fire
had not consumed, and this saved us the pains of pursuing a mine, which we had
sunk on purpose to reader theirs in that place ineffectuall.

The 29th, Leven (a merciful General) assayes the Town again by his last
offer of honorable conditions to surrender, but he found us still unrelenting,
the terror of his Cannon, making no impression at all upon our Spirits, though
the bullets discharged from them, had done so much against our walls: this
(though some of their chief Commanders were remiss and cool at the debate
and some contradictory) drives their greatest spirits into a passionate
resolution of storming.

And to that purpose August 31th, and September. 1. they prepare Ladders,
hurdles, and other accommodations for the advancing their design, and securing
their persons in the attempt, and played very hot with their Cannon upon
Bysters gate, and the half moon next Saint Owens gate, intending the morrow
after to fall on, presuming as they boasted, that after they had rung us this
passing peale, they should presently force the Garrison to give up her Loyal
Ghost, but the same night His Majesty advancing from Worcester, gave them a
very hot alarm, and drawing a little nearer to us, like the Sun to the
Meridian, this Scottish mist began to disperse, and the next morning vanished
out of sight. My Lord, I should give your Lordship an account of the valor of
our common Soldiers and Townsmen, that would hazard themselves at the making
up of breaches (to the astonishment of the enemy, till their Cannon played
between their legs, and even the Women (such was their gallantry) ventred
where the Musket bullets did so, and I should acquaint your Honor, what
frequent alarums we gave them by fireballs, lights upon our Steeple, by Dogs,
Cats, and outworne Horses, having light Matches tied about them; and turned out
upon their works, whereby we put the enemy in such distraction, that sometimes
they charged one another; this recreation we had in the midst of our
besiedging: and one morning, instead of beating Reveillie, we had a cry of
Hounds, in pursuit after the train of a Fox about the Walls of the City, so
little were we dismayed at the threats or attempts of them. I may not forget
one remarkable piece of Divine Providence, that God sent us singular men of all
professions, very useful, and necessary for us in this distress, and so
accidentally to us, as if they had on purpose been let down from Heaven, to
serve our present and emergent occasions: as ^^ilfull Miners, excellent
Cannoneers, (one whereof spent but one shot in vain throughout the whole
Siedge) an expert Carpenter, the only man in all the Country to make Mills,
without whom we had been much disfurnisht of a means to make Powder, (after
our Powder-mill was burnt) or grind Corner that providence that brought these
to us, at last drove our Enemies from us, after the destruction of four or
five Mines, which since appears to be their number, the expense of 300 Cannon
shot, besides other Ammunition spent with Muskets, the loss by their own
confession of 1200, and as the Country says 2000 men, we in all not loosing
about 21 by all Casualties whatsoever. Thus craving your Lordships pardon for
my prolixity, I take leave and rest

Your Lordships most humble servant, BER. SCUDAMORE.

For the Governor of the City of Hereford.
SIR,
Our appearance before you in this posture, is for no other end, but the
settling of truth with Peace in England, without the least desire to shed the
blood of any Subject in it, our bypast actions may be a sufficient evidence
hereof; Therefore is to Summond and require you to deliver up that City unto me
to be kept for the use of His Majesty and the Parliament of England: whereunto,
if shall be so wise and happy to condescend, you may have Conditions honorable
and safe, but if otherwise worse Council shall so far prevail with you, as
to contemn this offer, I am persuaded all the World, and you also, will acquit
me of the manifold inconveniences which will undoubtedly ensue upon your
refusal. Consider hardly of your own Condition, and of these now under your
charge, whose blood will be laid upon your account, and return an Answer
within three hours after the receipt of this, unto me.

So sent at the Leaguer before Hereford, this last day of July, about ten of
the Clock in the forenoone. LEVEN.

For the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of Hereford, these.
Gentlemen,
WE the Commissioners appointed by the Parliament of England, to reside in the
Scots Army, foreseeing the great Miseries and Calamities that are likely to
ensue to this City of Hereford, in case the Summons sent by his Excellency the
Earl of Leven, shall be refused by the Governor; Have thought good to give
you timely advice to use your uttermost endeavors, that a positive and
satisfactory Answer may be returned thereunto, least that by a wilful delay or
refusal, you bring utter ruin and destruction, not only to your selves, but
to all that are with you, which will not lie in the power of any to prevent.

From the Leaguer before Hereford, July 31. 1645. Your Loving friends, John
Corbett. Edward Baynton. William Pulfrey. Humfrey Salwey.


My Lord,
I Am not to give up the Kings Garrison upon any Summons or Letter, neither
shall it be in the power of the Major or other to condescend to any such
Proposition made unto him; I was set in here by the Kings Command, and shall
not quit it but by special order from His Majesty or the Prince. And with this
resolution I shall persist in Hereford, this last of July, 1645.

B. SCUDAMORE.

May it please your Honor,
WE whose names are subscribed, having a great desire for the good of City
and County, and seeing the present great distress that is like to ensue both
to City and County, have thought fit to present these to your Honors
consideration, and to give you to understand, That if it please your Honor to
admit us with safe Conduct into and out of the City, to impart some matters
unto your Honor, which we hope may be conduceable for the good of City and
County, we will with your honors approbation, address and present our selves
unto your honor: and so humbly desiring your honors speedy answer with our
respects we rest

At your Honors Command, Herbert Westfalling. Roger Hereford. James Newton.

From the General's Quarters 14. August 1645. To the Honorable the Governor of
the City and County of Hereford, these present.
For the Right worshipful the Major and Aldermen, and the Citizens of
Hereford, these.
Right worshipful and loving friends,
Our earnest desire to prevent the effusion of much Christian blood, which must
unavoydably be spilt, if the City should be forcibly entered, and the
consideration that a number of Religious and Innocent Persons are likely to
suffer with the rest, whose blood, if spilt through your obstinacy, will be
required at your hands, has caused us to beg that favor from his Excellency
and the honorable Commissioners of both Kingdoms, that these our advice and
desires might be sent unto you, hoping that our neernes in blood to many, our
familiarity and friendship with most, some of us being known even unto all,
may obtain Credit with you, at least with as many, who love either themselves,
their Families, or tender the glory of that great God whom they pretend to
serve; That you would seriously consider the heavy burden which at this time by
reason of so great an Army lies upon the adjacent County, to the great
prejudice of diverse of your near friends, and some of your own Familios,
which at last, if your obstinacy continue, will fall heaviest upon your own
selves: That you would not too long be flattered with the conceit, that
Conditions may be had any time: That you would not give credit to those who by
false suggestions keep you to their obedience, and make you the unhappy
Instruments to effect their hellish designs, tending both to your own and the
Kingdoms destruction* But that whilst Mercy may be shown to you, you would
embrace it, whilst future subsistence is remaining for your selves and the
Country, you would submit your selves and City to the obedience of the King and
Parliament: and in so doing, you shall preserve your Lives and Goods from the
rage of the devouring Sword, your Country from approaching Famine, and be
assured you have no Enemies here, longer then you are enemies to your selves
and the Commonwealth; your inability to hold out against so Puissant an Army,
we well know, and if you will credit us, (who have, and must live amongst you)
Relief you can have none. We are so much the more earnest with you, by how
much the more (if obstinately you withstand the Patriots of your Country) we
know your Condition desperate, we have done our duty as friends to you; God
grant it work so far upon your hearts, as that you may be friends to your
selves, and for your guidance, you shall have the daily prayers of

Your loving friends, Ed: Harley. Tho: Seaborne. Franc: Pomber. Io: Herring.
Io: Style* Eusbare Hardwike.


For the Governor of Hereford.
SIR,
BY a former address, I made known unto you the constant desires and
resolutions of this Army to shun the effusion of blood, and to preserve Cities
and Families from desolation; And for that end did invite you to a peaceable
Surrender of that City for the use of His Majesty and the Parliament of
England, upon Conditions honorable and safe, whereby they might enjoy the
fruits of a settled Peace, which other Garrisons that have been in the like
Condition now do: whereunto upon grounds best known unto your self, you
thought it not then fitting to condescend; Nevertheless, that I may convince
you of the Realities of your desires and resolutions before mentioned, and of
your own guiltiness of all the bloodshed misery and desolation, which your
obstinacy may draw upon the Persons, Families, and Estates of that People who
are now under your charge, I have hereby once more resolved to renew my former
offer, expecting your Answer against to morrow morning by six of the Clock,
assuring you, that if the opportunity be not laid hold of, but rejected, the
like will not be offered unto you, by

Your friend LEVEN.
Leaguer, 28. August. 5 a Clock in the afternoon.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Leven, General of the Scottish Forces.
My Lord,
FOr your favorable proffer to the Inhabitants of this City, I shall return
their thanks and resolution, that they intend to suffer with me, and I shall
not suffer alone, for the effusion of blood, I am sorry to think of it, that
two United Nations should so much differ, having paid once well for Scotlands
friendship. My Lord, I am resolved to endure all Mines and Storms which shall
be made against this place, and doubt not by Gods assistance to render His
Majesty a good account of it, the which by my endeavors, I shall maintain to
the last, and remain

Your Lordships Servant, B. SCUDAMORE.
29. Aug. 1645.
FINIS.

