The vvitty Rogue Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed. OR, The HISTORY Of that
incomparable THIEF RICHARD HAINAM. Relating the several Robberies, mad Pranks,
and handsome Jests by him performed, as it was taken from his own mouth, not
long before his Death. Likewise the manner of robbing the King of Denmark, the
King of France, the Duke of Normandy, the Merchant at Rotterdam, cum multis
aliis. Also, with his Confession, concerning his robbing of the King of Scots.
Together with his SPEECH at the place of Execution.

Published by E. S. for informacion and satisfaction of the people.

London* printed for E. ^. and (...) to be sold in the Greyhound in St. Paul's
Churchyard 1656.

To the READER.
Reader,
YOU have here the Life, Pranks, and Death of one of the most unparalled
Thieves in these our days, as it was partly delivered by himself, and partly
by others that were conversant with him in his Life. I have forborne to tell you
his petty Thieveries: but because there is one, which being his first, and as
it were a Prologue to his former Actions, I shall insert it here; and thus it
was: Being in the Marketplace, where there sat a Woman selling Puddings, he
spies her, steps unto her, and feigning himself desiring for to buy, asks her
the price, she told him; but speaking to another Customer, he in the interim
slips as many as handsomely he could into his codpiece, which having done, told
the Woman, He would not give so much; and thereupon left her. Upon this good
success, taking himself to be one of Fortunes Favorites, he frequently comes
to Market: insomuch, that by degrees, from robbing of a Stall, he comes to rob
a Shop; from a Shop, to rob a House; and from a House, even to dare to rob the
Court: until his doings did at last undo him. Whether it was more for need, or
more to covet other Men's applause, that thus he lived, I question which. But
such is the Policy of the Devil, that plotting to undermine the frailty of a
Wretch, he shows him what it is to be admired; this spurs him on with a conceit
of acting something that may make him famous: of which he runs the hazard, and
at last is taken: for so the custom of the Devil is, When he has brought one
in a dangerous way, to leave him in the wolvish jaws of death.

Thus has the wings of Fame flown away with many, that not only might have
lived in the Callings wherein they were educated, and contentedly; but died
peaceably, and so have lived, as not to fear to die, and took the easier way to
Heaven, viz. in a Feather-Bed, and not a S^ring.

I shall not stay you any longer at the door, which being open, you may enter,
and view the grandest Thief in Europe: but give me leave, before you wander
further, to give you a true account of what he left behind him on the Ladder.

The Speech and Confession of Mr. Richard Hainam, on Tuesday last in the rounds
of Smithfield, immediately before his fatal Leap from off the Ladder.
ALthough I am a Prisoner, and condemned to die; yet I cannot but retain a
favorable Construction of your Proceedings (this day) toward me; presuming,
that you will not deny me that Liberty due to all Christians, from Christian
Magistrates, which is, that I may be permitted the freedom of speech to clear the
Innocent (at this my hour of death) that now lie accused as being privy to my
Designs, and Consederates with me in my late Actions. As for my part, resolved
I am to accuse no man; no, no, Gentlemen, I abhor the Thought, much less the
Action of so horrid and foul a Crime; and on the contrary, am as willing and
free to clear those that are accused for me; which it seems is my poor Landlord
and and Landlady, Mr. Chamberlain and his Wise, whose hard Face and cruel
Destiny from my soul I pity, as much as my own, and do protest their Innocence
in all respects [towards me] whatsoeever. However, seeing it is my unhappy
fortune, to end my days upon this Gibbet, I humbly submit to the Divine Hand
of Justice, and desire the prayers of all good Christians, to Almighty God,
earnestly to implore a Remission of all my sins, which are many; and enable me
to fail through this violent Storm and Tempest, that so at the last I may
arrive at the Haven of Happiness, there to cast my Anchor of Faith, and lay
hold on my Lord God: and so farewell, farewell unto you all.

Then turning himself about, Mr. Clerk the Minister of Newgate spoke unto him
by way of Exhortation; and after him one Mr. Tuke; unto whom he was very
attentive, and seemed to have a very relenting Spirit* etc. But the hour
drawing near, he was commanded up the Ladder, where the Executioner sat ready
to do his Office; and having put the Rope about his Neck, Mr. Hainam pulled out
a white Cap out of his Pocket, and giving it to the Executioner, he put it on
the said Hainam's head, and after that his mourning Ribbon that he wore about
his Hat; and taking out his File which he had hitherto concealed, he gave it to
Mr. Brisco, (of which you shall hear more hereafter) and so lifting up his
hands to Heaven, and the Executioner laying his hand upon his shoulder, (which
was the sign) asking if he was ready, he immediately leaped off on the left
side, uttering these words, Lord have mercy upon me.

The Contents are as follows.
Chap. 1. A Brief Discourse of his Life and Qualities. 2. How he robbed the Earl
of Pembroke. 3. How he robbed a Merchant in Rotterdam. 4. How he cheated the
same Merchant of 400 l. 5. How he robbed the Portugal Ambassador of a
Silver-Table. 6. How he was imprisoned at Paris, but escaped. 7. How he was
again retaken; and the manner of his strange escaping. 8. How he robbed the King
of France. 9. How he robbed a Goldsmiths in Bristol. 10. How being taken, he
attempted to break Prison, but was prevented. 11. How he desperately gets away,
and cunningly deceives the Watch. 12. How he takes a Lodging in Essex. 13. How
he was again apprehended, and the manner of his escaping. 14. How he robbed a
poor Man, and delivered him his Moneys again. 15. How he cheated a Goldsmiths
in Cheapside. 16. How he seized on an English ship, and sold it in another
Country for 1700 l. 17. How he cousned a Gentleman of ^our Jewels. 18. How it
was afterward known that Hainam had the Jewels. 19. How he being pursued,
notably escapes, and puts a trick upon his Wench. 20. How he was secured in
Germany, and got away. 21. How he robbed the Duke of Normandy of 700 l. 22. How
he robbed Mr. Marsh at Hackny of 400 l. 23. How he robbed Alderman Hancock at the
Greyhound Tavern in Fleet Street. 24. How he cousned a Merchant of 300 l. 25.
How he cheated a Draper in Gracious-Street. 26. How he returned to England, was
taken (and afterward hanged) for robbing an Alehouse in St. Swithins-Lane.
27. How he had almost escaped again. 28. How he was executed in
Smithfield-Rounds, with a brief account of his dying words.
The vvitty Rogue Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed: OR, The HISTORY of that
Incomparable THIEF, RICHARD HAINAM.
CHAP. I.
Being a brief Discourse of the Life and Qualities of Richard Hainam.
HE was by birth an Englishman, descended from an ancient Family, and
instructed in the rudiments of Learning; insomuch, that at the Latin Speech he
proved a good Proficient: and had likewise gained a smack of diverse Languages.
His discourse was pleasant, savouring much of Scholarship and Wit; so that
whoever saw him, if they had a breast that* harbored any Christian thoughts,
would either pity his condition, or admire his parts. He was ever in his
childhood thus addicted, counting it a greater credit to be thought wise enough
to cheat, then honest enough to hate it: And when maturity of years had made
him capable of a greater Game, he finds acquaintance; which if ill, like
Tar, stick where they touch; or, as it is reported of the Mermaids, sings a
man into a trance, till he dances into the mouth of dangers. Thus stepping from
one degree of Mischief to another, he comes to be acquainted with one Allen,
and, as I suppose, with Hind; which Allen, being a Master Thief, and an
ingenious Villain, would oftentimes rob on the highway in his Coach, who would
there sit in the habit of a Bishop, while his men, which were the actors,
making his Coach their storehouse, because unsuspected, either escape, or
putting on a Livery, ride by his side in the nature of his Servants: with which
man when Hainam came to be acquainted, having before lost the Conscience, he
now resolves to find out all the customs of a sinful life: And for his better
education, jonis himself to a band of other Villains; who seeing him a forward
man, and stout, were as much desirous of his company, as he was before
ambitious of enjoying theirs. With these having now accompanied in some
Exploits, it was as difficult to fall back, as it was facile to begin; but not
so much through their means, by forcing his continuance, but by his own; who
having tasted of the Devils bait, and proved the pleasure that he found in sin,
could neither by entreaties of his Friends, nor the instigations of abundance
more, be dissuaded from his wicked courses. Nay, had he seen the Torments of a
damned Soul pictured before his face, or if it might be possible, the gates of
their infernal habitations opened to him, where he might behold the Usurer
choked with his Molten Gold; the Fornicators, and those wretched souls, that
have worn out sheets of lawless Lusts, upon the Rack of steel; the Murderer,
which before was filled with blood, now crying, water, water, to quench his
parched thirst; or the Thief, with nothing left him but his Miseries: I say,
had he beheld all these, they would have seemed but fancies to him, and no more
have touched him, or to as little purpose, as a lighted Match does Powder when
it is wet. Notwithstanding, he was a man complete in parts and person; had he
had grace equal to his other endowments, he had been the Mirror of the Age.
But it so pleases the Almighty wise Creator to disperse his blessings, to some
Wit, and to others Virtue; without which, a man's wisdom is but a deceiving
Guide, which leads him to the fatal Pit, as it did this man, helping him, as we
may too truly say, to a dead lift, and only served for a varnish to his
villainies, teaching him how to glory in his shame; as if it were a Maxim to be
learned, That he that fears not to sin, may never fear to show it: from which
indeed he would not be retarded: Nor could any persuasions be so prevalent with
him, as to prove an obstacle to his nimble tongue: insomuch that he would often
boast, That all the Prisons in England, Holland, and elsewhere, were far too
weak to hold him; as you shall more plainly perceive in the Narration here
ensuing.

CHAP. II.
How Richard Hainam Robbed the Earl of Pembroke.
HAving by his wyles screwed himself into the acquaintance of Mr. Herbert, one
of the Lords Servants: for his several courtesies (which as a Prologue to his
Villainies) he bestowed on the said Herbert, he was in requital invited to meet
him at his Lords; at which time Hainam so insinuated himself into his favor,
that a while after, nothing could be done without the others advice: insomuch,
that coming to be sensible each of the others mind, it was suddenly resolved
of, That Hainam should appear the next day at the Lords outward Hall, where he
assuredly should find Herbert, to the end he might receive instructions for
the conveying away of the Plate after Dinner. Now was the Sop fallen into the
Honey-pot; it fell out as pat, as a Pudding for a Friars mouth. Hainam had his
desire, and Herbert his. The prefixed time, when come, Hainam very gallantly
attires him, not varying half an hour from the time agreed upon, but repairs to
the Earl's house; where he had not long continued, but it was notified unto
him, that the Earl had dined, and was walking from one end of the Dining Room
to the other, till the Servants had dispatched, who were then taking off the
wrinkles from their bellies; and moreover, that the Cloth whereon the Earl
dined, was taken away, and the Voider wherein the Plate was usually put, was
set upon the Cup-boards-head. Hainam having received this Intelligence, ascends
the stairs, which conducted him to the room where the Plate stood, and where
the Earl was walking; who seeing a Gentleman in such goodly Equipage, and
supposing him to be a Friend to some Gentleman belonging to the house, he
courteously salutes him with a Conjee; in which silent complement, Hainam
returns the like, and continued walking in the Room. The Servants seeing a
Gentleman walking there, supposed him to be some Nobleman that came to give the
Earl a visit. In this manner both parties were mistaken, and Hainam watching
for the Lords return to the other end of the Room (which was somewhat long) he
nimbly whips the Voider full of Plate under his Cloak, to the value of
fourscore pounds and upwards, and went away, taking his journey to the side of
the Bank, where he presently melted it into one great mass. The Butler,
according to his custom, comes to fetch the Plate, which he found missing.
Then every one was questioned, but in vain, no tidings could be had, neither of
the Plate nor Thief: Then the Steward gets some Bills presently printed,
wherein he discovered the Lords Arms, with other Marks which was thereon, and
caused them to be carried to most Goldsmiths in London, and elsewhere, but to no
purpose; insomuch that (to verify the Proverb, He that has once stolen, will
steal again) the former Thief was induced to a further progress, relying much
upon his former fortune; so that not long after, more goods were wanting: and
whether Heaven pointed out the author, I leave to you to judge; but the
Servants having some suspicion of Mr. Herbert, caused him to be severely
questioned, who was so ingenious as to frame no other answer, but a just
Confession; which he thus enlarged, telling them, That he had a sum of Money of
Hainam, for informing him of the customs of the house: whereupon, Hainam was
apprehended, but in a short time following, by leaping over a wall, made his
escape, taking his Leap from London to Rotterdam.

CHAP. III.
How Richard Hainam Robbed a Merchant in Rotterdam.
AFter his Villainies had made England too hot a place for him to stay his foot
on, he journeys to Rotterdam; where being arrived in fashion of a Gallant, he
visits an eminent Merchant, with an intent seemingly to woo his Daughter. The
Merchant having the qualities of a Gentleman, thought he could not in civility
but give him the welcome, if not of a Son, yet a Friend, or a Gentleman; and to
that end, with many Complements on both sides, urged him to choose no other
habitation then his own; and being a stranger, he said, it would redound much
as well to his benefit as convenience. After many denyals, which seemed barely
of a complement, he entertained the proffer; but alleging, Nothing could more
dissuade him, then the small hopes he had of his gratuity, or his
insussiciencies of requital. Having been now entertained, rather like a Prince
then a Picaro, with all the dainties of a furnished Table, he feigned himself
inclinable to sleep, and seemed desirous to take his rest; and to that end, was
conveyed to his Chamber, where he lay considering of his intentions, till the
folks were bedded: of which being by the deadness of the night informed, he
softly descends the stairs, and ransacks those rooms where he discovered the
richest prizes; and having made up a weighty pack, in the morning betimes he
forsakes the house, puts on another suit of Apparel, and in that case passed
unsuspected. The next day, every one, when up, betakes himself to his usual
occupation, not discovering the loss of any thing, till the day was halfway
spent: Then was there calling from one to another, Where is this thing, and
where is that? Who saw the silver-Tankerd? who saw my Mistress best Scarf, or
my Masters Gold Hatband? Every one had his answer ready tuned, Not I, says
one; Nor I, says another; Nor I, says a third: which sounded basely in the
Master's ears. But at eleven of the clock, every one admiring at the
Gentleman's long tarriance in his Chamber: The Merchant sends a servant to
enquire his health; who when he was at the door, having no acquaintance with
his Name, uses no other phrase then Sir; which after his often pronouncing, he
found no echo: he assays the Chamber, which he finds in a bare condition, not
only destitute of its new-come-guest, but the very sheets whereon he lay,
which were no mean ones: Which when he had observed, he acquaints his Master
with, who needed then no spurs to post him on; he presently pursues him, by the
description of his habit: but Hainam had made a shift to change that, before
they had clothed them with their own; and having notice that he was pursued,
thought the best shelter was the Merchants own house, for there none would seek
him or mistrust him. Thither he goes in his new-chang'd habit, pretending he
had some Commodities to sell which he had brought from England, and would
desire him to give them house-room, for which he would content him; not-so-much
for that he wanted money, and would therefore sell them, but because he
esteemed an INN no secure place to lay them in, by reason it was free to all
comers, and the people unknown to him, as well as the Merchant; but having a
good opinion of him, he would wholly rely upon his worth and honesty. To this
the Merchant willingly consented: so he left him.

CHAP. IV.
How he cheats the same Merchant of Four hundred pounds.
THe next day he sends one of his Companions to this Merchant, whom when he
saw, he told him, His business to him was about his Son, a youth which then he
had with him, who he would desirously have to reside with him in the condition
of a Servant: And having intelligence of his good disposition, and the Trade he
drove, he would not spare any moneys to give with him, that he thought might in
reason content him. The Merchant greedy of gain, desired him to leave his Son,
that they might have some experience of one another humors; which he did, and
went his way. About a week after, Hainam sends for this youth, and inquires of
him what rich Commodities his Master had in his Warehouse; who having narrowly
espied, gives him a punctual information; and for the better surety, brings
with him his Masters Shop-book, wherein he noted what he usually received: The
which book Hainam peruses, and finding a Note of several Commodities, which one
had lately left with the Merchant, to the value of Four hundred pounds, he
writes underneath in the book, This is mine. And having an excellent faculty in
counterfeiting of hands, he writes sutably to the Merchants own fist, as
follows, Left with me by such a one (framing an English Name) on such a day,
such and such Wares, delivered in the presence of F. M. and P. D. Which F. M.
and P. D. were the one the Merchants man, the other Hainams; both of which
under-write their hands; and moreover, makes a small Note in a piece of loose
paper, expressing the same words: which Note he orders the youth at his best
opportunity to convey into his Masters cabinet; and with some other
instructions he took his leave. The youth returned with the book to his Masters
home, where he had not long been, but Hainam comes and enquires for his Master,
who being then within hearing, runs out to him, as supposing he had brought
those things he told him of: But contrariwise, Hainam demands of him some of
those commodities he left with him about a week since: The Merchant was amazed,
and asked him what he meant: he answered, To have his goods. Quoth the
Merchant, I have no goods of yours in my hands. No* quoth Hainam, sure you
have, Sir; you cannot forget so soon. Quoth the Merchant, You were with me, and
told me that you had goods, and would send them in, but I received none: No?
quoth he, this shall not suffice, I have my Witness of it: therefore let me
have my goods by fair means, or I shall publish your Knaveries, to the cracking
of that little credit you have in other places. But the Merchant still
persisted, crying, He saw not his goods: Insomuch that Hainam fetches
Officers, endeavoring to force them from him. When the Officers were come, the
Neighbors likewise crowded in, every one giving a fair character of the
Merchant. But after pro and con a long while, nothing could be done, the one
pleading as ignorantly, as the other impudently. Then they examine Witnesses,
who both confirmed it: the Merchants man said, that he by his Masters order set
his hand to such a Bill; so said Hainams Servant. Then did the Merchant stamp
as if he was mad, swearing they had a plot to Rob him; and were they examined,
he feared he should find some of them guilty of his late loss, occasioned by
the subtle trick of his counterfeit Son-in-law. But Hainam having now the
voice of all the people there, who cried, he was the Owner, it was plain; he
sends for one of the chief men in Authority, to whom they stated the case, who
admired at the Merchants stubbornness, that was so lately reputed such an
honest men; and willed Hainam to open what Chests he pleased; and if in case he
would not deliver the Keys, to force them open. Nay, quoth Hainam, for a
further confirmation, view his day-book, where if he has not crossed it out,
you shall see his own hand, his servants hand, and my servants; so that were he
the veriest Knave in the world, there could be no shifting of it: So reaches
the Book over, which he looks, and at last finds the Wares written in a hand
which the Merchant could not deny but he should know, but avowed he was
ignorant of its coming there. Then the Witnesses were asked, Whether they knew
those hands? who both answered, They were their own: insomuch that they wanted
little of either making the man mad, or persuaded him he had been so. And
further, says Hainam, if you will please to cause this Desk to be opened, I
question not but you shall find another Bill of the Wares, which, if I mistake
not, he locked therein. The Merchant in a rage replies, He should be hanged for
a cheating Rogue, ere he should look in his Cabinet or Desk; he would not open
it: Whereupon, the Officers broke it open, and turning over some papers, find
this same Bill: Then did they all rail upon him extremely; who, poor man, could
hardly make any thing audible but his Tears; but with much ado would cry, Pray
secure him, for I know he has a Familiar: This must needs be the Devils work.
And not being able any longer to withstand the Authority of the Officers, he
suffered all the goods to be carried away, and with them discharged his house
of such an unworthy person as his servant, who he sent away to his Father, and
never heard of him after.

CHAP. V.
How he robbed the Portugal Ambassador of a silver Table.
HAinam with his full bags thought it now high time to be gone: whereupon
taking ship, he comes to London; where having some notice of the rich
Attendance, with the Appurtenances belonging to the Portugal Ambassador then
resident in London, he fits himself to repair unto his Lodgings; where,
discerning a small Table of pure silver, which served only as an ornament to
the Room wherein it stood, he presently contrives his plot to steal it, and
never wanted some to assist him: He sends a discreet young man into the room,
to speak with a Gentleman which was there walking; which man was to pretend
some occasional business, as he did: but what it was, I am ignorant of. The
man being entered the Room in a gay Suit, Gallant-like, salutes the Gentleman,
and begins to frame his discourse, which he continued, walking with him from
one end of the Room to the other; who had no sooner turned his back, but Hainam
following of him, nimbly conveys the silver Table under his Cloak, and stands
at the door as he did formerly: His Companion seeing the Table gone, and
walking on that side whereon it stood, shadowed the vacant place thereof (from
the Gentleman's sight) with his body as he walked; and being come to the door
where Hainam stood with the Table, he steps forth, pretending to have somewhat
to say to Hainam concerning their discourse, and willed the Gentleman to step
forth with him. Not many words passed, till Hainam watching his fit time, tells
them he would go call his friend which waited without for their return: but
when he was half way down, his Companion calls after him by a devised Name; and
meeting on the middle of the stairs, they both call to the Gentleman whom they
found walking, who not knowing but that they might have some real business with
him, goes unto them; and being come, they jointly tell him, That about an hour
after that time, he might expect their return, and then a fuller account of
their business. Having thus said, they leave him, who returned to his former
walk; and immediately missing the silver Table, did mistrust them for the
Thieves that had stolen it: But before he could get down stairs, they were
gotten clearly out of sight; and taking ship for Paris, could never be
afterward heard of, not returning to finish their discourse, which they left
so abruptly, that the Gentleman did say, it was the pitifull'st Tale that ever
he had heard.

CHAP. VI.
How he was Imprisoned at Paris, but escaped.
HAinam being for some Exploits in Paris imprisoned in the Common Goal; and
because his fact was great, as for robbing a French Lord, he was guarded with a
load of iron, and having a great chain about his middle, was fastened to a
stake, which for the said purpose was drove into the ground: but Hainam, with
his File and other tools, being his Arts-master, easily shook off all his
shackles, and by main force, like a second Samson, rooted up the post from out
the ground, which having done he easily escapes.

CHAP. VII.
How he was again re-taken; with the manner of his strange escape.
BUt after a strict inquiry and search after him, he was found in the Chimney
of a neighboring house, into which he gets, having not time to make a further
flight: So being again in custody, he was suddenly tried, and was in a short
time to be Executed at the Mill. And that he might not then make use of shifts,
he had a guard of Men, and was in Chains: But having vowed himself a Prisoner
to his Guard, and that he would not stir, but only use his mirth and frolicks
with them; he gives them drink and money, of which he had no want, nor they, so
long as he continued with them: but having one time made them drunk, his Chains
he soon unknit; which he with ease would do, and put them on again: he takes
three Screws, with which he used to ascend a house, by thrusting them into any
wall of stone or brick; which so easily entered, that in a short time he would
end his purpose. One of these Screws he takes, and winds it into the
Prison-wall; then taking another, with which he does the same a step above the
former, and so a third; and by these Screws got up unto the top: the undermost
of which he pulls forth, and sets it above the others. Being almost at his
journeys end, and earger to have his Name divulged, that he might ride upon the
wings of Fame, he calls unto the Guard; one of which with much ado he wakes,
but to so little purpose, that being drunk, he could hardly see him; but
hearing of a noise, cried out in French, Lie still, you drunken Rogue: But
Hainam, not taking his advice, he makes his entrance through the top, and that
night leaves the City.

CHAP. VIII.
How he Robbed the King of France.
HAving been at the charge of a long imprisonment, where he had nothing to do,
but to do nothing: Let us now take him in his wants; he was no other then a
Rogue in Rags: but having an itching desire to a better estate, he thus
bethinks him, That the King of France had an Exchequer, wherein they laid
several great sums of all Coyns throughout the world, to the end that any
Ambassadors, either from or to him, might be furnished with such as their
necessities should crave. Hainam having now received a taste of this same
Honey, thought it long until he had his fill; and having provided a small
Screw, with which he could lift any thing under the weight of Twenty hundred,
he thus repairs to Court, and straightway fell to action; and with such
efficacy, that in a short space he became Master of more then he could master:
for having unhinged six doors, he found his entrance into the Exchequer: But
one of his Companions, thinking it a Christian resolution, to be contented with
a little, if got by a frugal honesty, in hopes of a reward, betrays the Plot:
Whereupon, Hainam was searched for, who taking up a bag of some French Crowns,
casts it to the other end of the Room, leaving the mouth of the bag something
loose, which in the fall made such a noise, that the searchers supposed the
Thief to be there; and that they might not miss him, ran earnestly to the place
where they judged the Thief was, who standing in a corner near the door, stole
forth, escaping only with the gain of 100 Pistolets, and the loss of abundance
more he might have had: by the help of which, he, with some others, got a
speedy transportment unto Bristol.

CHAP. IX.
How he Robbed a Merchant in Bristol.
Where he, with some of his Companions, perceiving a Goldsmiths glass which
stood upon the stall, to be well-furnish'd, watched their opportunity to steal
it, which one night they thus effected: The shop being open somewhat beyond the
hour, by reason of a Gentleman's stepping in just when the youth was going to
remove the glass; which Gentleman was purposely sent by Hainam to cheapen
Rings, and to pretend he had some Gold to change: While they two were talking,
in comes Hainam, and asks the Apprentice, if he had any silver Buttons: which
he had no sooner said, but, says he, pointing to the young man's face, you have
a spot of dirt upon your Nose; and therewithal throws a handful of beaten
Pepper in his eyes: which while the young man was wiping out, away goes he in
the shop with the box of Rings, and Hainam with the box which stood upon the
stall. All which, when the youth recovered his sight, he presently missed; and
calling to the Neighbors, ran to overtake them, that way which by the noise of
their running he supposed they might take, but never overtook them, nor heard
he either of them or the goods.

CHAP. X.
How being taken, he attempted to break Prison, but was notably prevented.
HAinam having hitherto escaped the Sword of Justice (which hung over his head,
and was ready to cut the thread of his Mortality) dared even God himself, as if
heaven were too high, and earth too low for his imperious Mind. Having sailed
through many dangers, and once more driven on the Rock that split his Fortunes,
he was safely cast upon the shore at Newgate; but not without jeopardy of life:
for his Accusations tumbled in, as fast as he was loose; so that it was a
desperate game, and doubtful, nothing to be expected, but the favor of a
speedy death. But in the nick of time, when he had almost shook hands with the
world, his active brain conceived some sparks of hope, arising from his Keepers
sudden visit, with whom he stood, whether to discourse with him, or with his
Keys, the sequel will inform you. But so it was, no sooner was his Keeper
gone, but he having kept a strong remembrance of the Wards, discharged his head
of that same toil, and wrought the forms in some few ends of Candles lying by
him; which he had no sooner done, but delivered it to a friend, to procure a
Key suitable to his pattern; which accordingly he did, and delivered it unto him,
by the help of which he attempted to force the Prison locks; and had opened
some, insomuch that he assayed to the last of all, where being discovered by
the Keeper, he was unfortunately prevented, and with greater care secured for
the future.

CHAP. XI.
How he desperately got away, and cunningly deceives the Watch.
BUt all the care which could be used or thought on, nor all the locks and bars
which could be made, were strong enough to hold him, so subtle was he in his
tricks and slights, that he would break the iron Chains like thread, as lately
was too manifest: for having forced his way through many barricadoes, he gets
him to the Leads, and by virtue of his Coat or Cloak, which he tears, and
fastens like a Cord, conveyed himself upon the neighboring houses, and by a
leap from thence into the street; in which adventure he shrewdly hurt his Leg:
but dissembling of his hurt, he takes him to the Gate, through which he was to
enter, where being come, he calls unto a Watchman, and in the best drunken
phrase he had, desired him to wait upon him home, and for his pains a shilling
should reward him. The Watchman then ambitious of the office, not only caused
the VVicket to be opened, but supposing him to be much in drink, leads him
toward his place of habitation, which he informed them was on Holborn-Hill;
and having reached the Conduit, there salutes him two or three of his
Companions, who to the Watchman seemed to be Sparks; but having entertained a
short discourse, they offer to assist him on his way, and to that end liberally
discharge his former guard; who seeing that they knew him, went his way, not
doubting any thing: but no sooner was the Watchman gone, but Hainam was
conducted to a place where there was a horse provided for him, on which he
mounts, rides to St. Albans, and was by a Surgeon there, cured of the burden
of a useless Leg.

CHAP. XII.
He takes a Lodging in Essex.
HAving, as you heard, escaped out of Newgate, he leaves S. Albans, and
journeys into Essex; where he there takes his lodging at an Alehouse: standing
at the door one day, when his Landlady was gone to Lees about some business, a
Gentleman coming by, took cognizance of him; but Hainam fearing lest he would
betray him, presently runs to his Chamber; the door of which being locked, and
the Key missing, he breaks it open, and taking out 400 l. in Gold, which he had
thither brought, he left a shilling and a pound of Sugar on the Table to
satisfy his Landlady, and departed.

CHAP. XIII.
How he was again apprehended, and the manner of his Escape.
TO prevent the designs of an evil fortune, he thought it no policy to stand at
his Lodging to consider which way to steer his course; therefore hies him to a
private place not far off, where he resolved to remove to Redriff; where he had
not long been, but by the Constable and some others he was guarded up to
London, as far as to Warwick Lane: where being, at the end, within sight of
the fatal College, he made a proffer to escape; to prevent which, they catch
hold of his cloak, which he suddenly unbuttoned; and leaving his cloak in their
hands, very fairly escaped.

CHAP. XIV.
How he Robbed a poor man, and delivered him his Money again.
REsiding now in London, he was informed, that a certain man at Newington had
in his house some moneys lately delivered unto him, which he attempted to
seize, and did, by breaking in in the night: but understanding that the man was
poor, and the sum not being much, he returns it him again (after the good man's
hard entreaties) and with these words left him, There honest man, take your
Moneys, I come not to rob the poor.

CHAP. XV.
How he cheated a Goldsmith in Cheapside.
ANother time he provided himself of rich clothes, which when he had put on, he
comes to a Goldsmiths in Cheap Side, and desired to see some Rings, and of the
best, by reason it was for a special Friend; giving them to understand by the
dumb expressions of his smiling signs, that it was to be bestowed on his Lady,
and therefore would desire him to show him the best he had, for which he should
have what content he asked. The Goldsmith then shows him diverse choice ones,
but above all, one very rich, which he valued at the rate of 18 l. This Hainam
pitched upon, and calling for a candle and some wax, having a Letter ready
writ, he pretends to send it by a friend, who that night was to leave the City.
A candle was brought him, and he having a counterfeit Ring in his pocket, pulls
it out, and wraps it in the Letter, leaving the true one in its place; and
having sealed the Letter, gives it to the young man of the shop, desiring his
Master to let him carry it home with him, to the end he might there receive his
Money, which was in Paul's Churchyard; which was without any suspicion easily
granted: so forth he struts, with the Goldsmiths man following him; who being
come to Mr. Corbets the Cooks in the Churchyard, quoth Hainam, Come in friend;
and being in the house, he called for a cup of Beer, which was brought; he
drank to the Goldsmith, and when done, tells him he will go up to his Chamber
and fetch his Money: The youth thought he was safe enough, so long as he had
the Ring; but he in stead of going for the Money, slips out of door, and was
never heard of after. A long while the young man waited, but no Man nor Money
could be heard of; insomuch that he began somewhat to fear, and inquiring of
the house for him, they cried, They knew him not: then was he assured of his
loss, and returning home, opened the Letter, wherein he found the brass Ring,
and no other writing, but Set this to the account of your constant Customer.

CHAP. XVI.
How he seized an English Ship, and sold it in another Country for 1700 l.
THere being a Knot of these Blades of about sixteen in Number met together,
whereof Hainam and one Martin were the chief: which Martin put it to the Vote
amongst them, Whether they should then seize on such a ship as then lay in the
River; which, it being resolved on, and to that purpose hearing the ship was
bound for France, they in two days time coming one by one, and not taking any
cognizance one of another, they agree with the Master to land them on some part
of France, who promised he would: but having lanched forth, and the night
over-shadowed the Deep, when most of the Mariners were asleep, excepting one or
two which stayed upon the Deck, who upon some excuse they send below; who were
no sooner down, but the sixteen appear at a Watchword among them, and locking
all the Seamen under-Deck, carry the ship to France; where disburthening it of
the Men, and such Goods as there was, they in a short time following sell it
for Seventeen hundred pounds; and having shared the Moneys, take their leaves,
some for Spain, some for Denmark, and some for England: where, in process of
time, Martin, and two or three more were apprehended, and for the Fact, five or
six years since Bequeathed their Souls to God, and their Clothes to the Common
Executioner at Tyburn.

CHAP. XVII.
How he cozened a Gentleman of four Jewels.
HAinam having in his Voyages gotten some acquaintance with a Gentleman, to
whom he seemed to owe abundance of respect, was by this Gentleman accidentally
met in the street; and that they might renew their former knowledge, was by the
Gentleman invited to a Dinner. Hainam having the mischievous engine of his
brain in continual action, needed no double invitation, but promises to see him
the next day; and to spend some time with him, in the relating of such
passages, which in his travels his eyes could bear him witness of. The next
day, when come, Hainam goes to the Gentleman's house, where he was entertained
in a plenteous manner, with Dishes of all sorts; and after Dinner, the
Gentleman showed him the Relics of his Travels: which several Toys, with some
Jewels which he had brought with him; four of which Jewels Hainam in a trice
conveyed between the two crowns of his Hat, which he had made for such like
purposes: the Gentleman little mistrusting him, but thought he had pulled off
his hat by reason of the heat of the season. But going to lay every thing in
its proper place, the Jewels were soon mist, and no body being there but the
Gentleman and Hainam, it was clear enough that one must have them: But Hainam
rages at the sudden loss, and freely himself urges to be searched; and for
better satisfaction, was searched: but though the Jewels could not be found,
the Gentleman's countenance showed, that he conceived a jealousy of Hainam;
which Hainam taking heinously, would needs be gone, and without any more words,
then ( Farewell you and your Jewels too) he left him.

CHAP. XVIII.
How it was afterward known, that Hainam had the Jewels.
THe Gentleman despairing of ever finding them, being confident that none but
Hainam could convey them thence, gets some printed Bills, which he stuck about
the streets, and left at Goldsmiths shops; by the which he came to hear of one,
and consequently of all the Jewels: for a Gentleman, to whom Hainam proffered
to make sail of one of the Jewels, bought it at an easy rate; and seeing those
Bills, which directed to the loosers house, he hyes him thither, and showing
the Jewel, it proved the right; so that the Gentleman very honestly returns it
for the same price it cost him; and after the description of the Thief appeared
evidently to be Hainam, who was then pursued.

CHAP. XIX.
How he being pursued, notably escapes, and puts a trick upon his Wench.
BEing one day at an Alehouse with his Wench, it so fell out, that the
Gentleman which bought the Jewel of him came by, and seeing him, went and
fetched Officers to apprehend him: He not thinking any hurt, was toward
dallying with his Wench; and for her Cut-Lemmon, agreed to give her one of
those Jewels which he then showed her; which bargain was soon finished; he
gives her the Jewel, upon which while she was looking, in comes the Gentleman
with the Officers, who when they saw the Less having the Jewel in her hand,
tended the burden of their business rather toward her then Hainam; who in the
interim slips aside, and by leaping into another body's house, currantly
escaped, leaving his true Jewel and his cracked one behind him; who (that we
may not digress from the point in hand) we leave in the custody of a trusty
Prison.

CHAP. XX.
How he was secured in Germany, and got away.
HAving now, as it were, fetters upon his Legs, and so much a Prisoner to the
world, as not to know in which part thereof to inhabit, his wandering thoughts
carried him to Germany, where he found, That though God has Leaden Feet, he
quickly overtook him, and made him likewise know, That he had Iron Hands: For
having played some prank there, he was apprehended and committed to Prison;
where, having continued about a Fortnight, he goes to three Prisoners more, and
told them, That that night he intended to procure a way for the escaping of
them all; whereupon they are mighty jovial, till the time came they were
escape; at which time Hainam, and two of the others got out, leaving the third,
that in their mirth, had made himself so drunk, that he not power to stand,
much less to run away; and was the next Assizes, for Coining and other
Misdemeanors, hanged at the common place of Execution.

CHAP. XXI.
How he Robbed the Duke of Normandy.
HAving, as you have heard, broken Prison again, he betakes himself to
Normandy, where having accommodated himself with a habit befitting some
honorable Person, and Attendance suitable to the same; which when he had done,
after he had enquired into the Affairs of the Duke of Normandy's Court, he in
person visits it: where he found the Duke at Dinner in his Dining Room: in
which Room there stood a Cupboard of Plate to a great value; together with two
standing Cups beset with Diamonds, to the value of Four thousand pounds, which
he attempted to make prize of; but missing his opportunity, was smoked, and
only pinched the Cully of a Casket of Jewels of Seven hundred pounds.

CHAP. XXII.
How he Robbed Justice Marsh at Hackney of Four hundred pounds.
BEing desirous once more to see his Native Country, he takes shipping in an
English ship; whither when he was arrived, having notice that at such a place
there was a booty for him, he undertakes to gripe it; and in the night, having
broke into the house where it was, after a serious searching, found a Chest, in
the bowels of which, when he had untomb'd it, he found in silver and gold to
the value of Four hundred pounds, and a small Cabinet, wherein were diverse
Writings; which when he came to open, after his perusal, he found them to be of
some concernment to the Gentleman, he fairly parts stakes, keeps the Moneys,
and by a Messenger of Trust, returns the Gentleman his Writings.

CHAP. XXIII.
How he Robbed Alderman Hancock at the Greyhound Tavern in Fleetstreet.
AFter he was convicted for Robbing of Alderman Hancock, concerning which,
being desired by some Ministers and friends to clear his conscience, he
confessed in the presence of one of the Aldermans Kinsmen, the day before he
dyed, That he broke open the door; and being supposed the stoutest of the
company, was left to defend the same, in case any Tumult should arise without.
But after they had finished what they went for; and when returned, informed him,
That they had wounded the Alderman, he denied to share of their booty;
protesting, That above all things, he abhorred the shedding of blood.

CHAP. XXIV.
How Hainam and his accomplices cozened a Merchant of London of 300 l.
HAinam taking occasion to visit a Merchant in Marke-lane, under pretense of
some business he had with him from a Merchant at Cullen, from whence he lately
came. The Merchant being somewhat busy in his Counting house, desired by his
man, that the Gentleman who attended to speak with him, would be pleased to
come to him thither, who imediately was conducted by the Merchants servant to
his Master; where after some ceremonies, Hainam took a seat, and so they fell
to discourse; but Hainam who had settled his fancy upon something more pleasing
to him then the discourse, which was three bags of money which lay upon the
Table (every one containing 100 l. a piece) and eying them very exactly,
perceived them to be sealed all with one seal; and leaving no stone unturned to
gain his enterprise, made with his eye a diligent search to find the seal
lying any where in the Counting house, but not perceiving any, began to draw to
a conclusion of his discourse, and pretended he had forgot some earnest
business which he should have done with another Merchant a neighbor of his
from the same Merchant at Cullen; desires to be excused at that time, that he
must so abruptly break off their discourse, and he would wait upon him at some
other time; the Merchant being unwilling he should part without the civility of
his house, desired him with many complements to stay and drink a glass of new
wine, which with a great many complements he refused, but at last yielded, if
that he would be pleased to honor him with his company to the Antwerp Tavern
behind the Exchange, where he had appointed to meet with the neighbor
Merchant. At last they both concluded so to do; but Hainam pretended he had
some other business with some other Gentlemen at another place, which he would
only write a line or two to them, not to expect his coming at that time, but
would give them directions how to finish their business themselves; and so
desired that he would be pleased to favor him with a piece of paper, and a pen
and ink, with which he was presently accommodated; wherein he took occasion to
write to one of his men that waited on him, his full mind about the premises,
which when he had finished, he desired the Merchant to lend him his seal to
seal it, which he presently took out of his pocket (it being a seal Ring) which
Hainam well observed to be the same impression with the seals on the bags of
money, with which he was well pleased, then he made presently another excuse to
make a Postscript to his Letter of some thing which then came in his mind;
which he did, adding his mind further how he had projected to deceive the
Merchant of 300 l. which when he had done, he sealed his Letter and gave to one
of his attendants, and bid him make have with it, and bring him an answer to
the Antwerp Tavern behind the Exchange. So the Merchant having received his
seal put it on his finger, and left his Cashkeeper in his Counting House, and
to the Antwerp they went; where they had not long been, but falling into
discourse of diverse businesses, came at last to businesses of Merchandising,
and so by degrees fell to praising of diverse rare inventions and curious
workmanship, that at last the Merchant came to praise the rare workmanship of
his Ring, it being presented him from the Indies rarely graved; which was the
thing Hainam principally aimed at to discourse of. Humbly desired him he would
be pleased to let him see it, which the Gentleman willingly assented to, and
seriously viewing of it, praised the rare invention of the Graver, that had
expressed an Angel ascending into the Heavens, threatening vengeance (as was
expressed by a flaming sword in her hand) to a man underneath her, adoring the
Godesse Pecunia, which Hainam exceedingly admired how rarely it was expressed; in
the midst of this admiration, his man whom he had sent with the pretended
Letter came in and desired to speak privately with him; in which conference
Hainam gave his man an account of what he should do for the gaining the three
bags of money. Which was thus neatly done, Sir, said Hainam, I cannot but
admire the rare invention of the Graver which has done it so exquisitly that
no hand in the world could mend it, nay equal it. Sirah Franck, says Hainam
to his man, do you know Mr. Richeson the Stonecutter, that has the Stone a
cutting for me which the Queen of Bohemia gave me; Yes and please your Honor
answers his man; pretheee go to him and bid him come hither presently, I shall
and please your Honor. Away went the man (and by and by coming again, as
before the plot was laid) told his Master he was at home, but had taken Physic
that day, and was in no capacity to go abroad. I am sorry for that, says
Hainam, but I will request so much favor of this Gentleman as to lend me his
Ring to send to him, to have him cut mine exactly the same impression as is
this, so much says he, I am pleased with the fancy. Which the Gentleman
readily did; and so Hainam bid him make have, and go into Mark-lane and bid Mr.
T. H. come to him presently, for he had waited there two hours for him, and
bid the Graver take an exact impression, but bid him not grave his stone till
he spoke with himself. Away went his man, being not a little pleased to see
that he was like to possess the Merchants silver; comes to the Merchants house,
and enquires for the Cashkeeper, which when the Cashkeeper saw him, knew him to
be the Gentleman's man that went out with his Master, desired to know his
business, he told him his Master was at the Antwerp Tavern behind the
Exchange, and had sent for the 300 l. upon the Table in the Counting House
sealed with his Masters seal, and there was his seal; which when the man saw,
he presently delivered the money and sent his Master the Ring again. And the
man for fear the Merchants man should profer to go along with him to carry the
money, told him, his Master desired him to perfect* the account he was making
up as soon as he could, and desired to know where he might have a Porter to
carry the money; one was called, so away they went together into Birtchir-lane,
and there he left the money and discharged the Porter, and so went to his
Master and carried the Merchant his Ring, and told his Master all things should
be done according to his mind; and also that the Merchant he sent him to, was
gone to the Pie Tavern at Aldgate with some other Gentlemen of his
acquaintance, and desired he would be pleased presently to come to him thither,
which he seemed to be angry at, and so with many complements at the last called
for a reckoning, which the Merchant would needs pay, and so parted. So Hainam
and his man went into Birtchin-lane, and took the money between them and away
they went, leaving the Merchant to the protection of his angry Angel, while
Hainam himself adored and embraced the Goddess Pecunia.

CHAP. XXV.
How Hainam cheated a Draper in Gratious-street, never heard of nor ever owned
by the Draper, but confessed by Hainam to a friend of his in Newgate.
HAinam having pincht the Cully on London Bridge of a small piece of plate,
conceived he was pursued, hearing some noise behind him, which was occasioned
by two Butchers dogs in Eastcheap fastening one of the other, marched forward
in no small have; but perceiving (by casting his eye into a Drapers shop) the
Master of the shop telling forth of a considerable sum of money, stepped into the
shop, and presently without speaking to any one, set himself down on a stool by
the Counter side, and by and by looked out of the door, his fear of being
pursued being over, cast in his thoughts how he might be possessed of those
glistering faces; but before the Gentleman of the shop had done telling of his
money, he cast his eye on his Customer that stood attending, desiring he would
be pleased to give an account of his business. Sir, says Hainam, I am loath
to trouble you till you have done your business, lest you in minding my
business, you should commit an error in telling your money, which would put
you to a double labor to tell it over again; but so it fell out, the Gentl^man
did mistake and so was fain to tell it over again, which Hainam eyed very
diligently; insomuch that he took an exact account (by his telling) how much
there was; and also it fell out, that there was a parcel of about 14
thirteenpence halfpennies which he put in a paper by themselves, and noted on
the paper how many there was, which Hainam observed, and when the Gentleman had
done, he put the rest of the money in the bag, and also the paper of odd
moneys, which Hainam well noted; and afterterwards the Gentleman took a piece
of paper and writ upon it the value of it, which was 70 and odd pounds, and he
being going forth of Town, left a direction upon the bag who he would have it
paid to; which he easily observed by leaning on his elbow; and also observed
where he laid the money. After he had so done, Hainam began to speak to him,
Sir, if you have finished, I shall give you an account of my business, which
is this, Sir I have a parcel of Calicoes lately come from the Indies, which
indeed I can sell more then an ordinary penniworth, by reason we had them freed
of Custom and Excise, and I desire to deal with no better chapman then your
self, being acquainted with your worth and ability; being directed to you by
Mr. R. B. a Broaker upon the Exchange, to whom I addressed my self unto being
newly come into England, who advised me to your self; and so it fell out for
him that the Gentleman knew the Broaker he named very well, and had spoke to
him about some Calicoes, the Gentleman was extremely desirous to drink a pint
of wine with Hainam, but he refused it, in that he would not be so uncivil as
to hinder his journey upon so small an account; but at last to the King's Head
in Fishstreet they went, where after some discourse they began to treat of
their bargain, and the Gentleman desired to know their finenesse, and about
what prices they were of: Sir, says Hainam, I come not Sir to make you a price
of them here, but Sir be pleased to come to one Mr. Harris a Merchant, well
known in little More-fields, and there you shall hear of me, my name is Denham,
and you may see the commodities which for mine own part I have no great
judgment in, but your friend and mine Mr. R. B. has seen them, and I parted
from him but even now at a friend house here hard by, and but for incivility to
leave you alone, I would step and call him: the Gentleman answers his
complement with a desire to step for him. Hainam presently steps out and goes
to the Drapers shop, and goes to one of the servants and desires him to deliver
him the bag of money in such a place, marked with so much money, and directed
for Mr. T. S. by the same token there is 14 thirteenpence halfpennies in a
piece of printed paper in the bag, which the fellow opened and found it so as
he had said, delivered him the bag. Hainam telling him he met the Gentleman
that was to have the money at the Tavern, and so desired him to fetch it by
that token. Hainam having gotten the prize safe, went toward F^shstreet a
pace, and going along pretended to make water at the Counduict, only to look
back to see if any of the men followed him; and casting his eye suddenly back,
perceived one of the youths to stand at the door looking that way, which Hainam
perceiving after he had done, marched forward his usual pace, but presently
started back again, and goes to the shop again, and perceiving Customers in the
shop buying of Cloth, tells the man that stood at the door, he had forgot one
thing, which was, that he should go up into his Masters Chamber, and in the
window he should find a writing sealed, which he should bring to his Master
presently at the King's Head, and that he was in the Room called the Crown, and
if he found it not in the window, he should find it somewhere else about the
Chamber; presently the boy went to look the writing, which with much search he
could not find; he went to his Master, telling him he could not find the
writing he sent for; the Master wondering what the boy meant, at last the boy
telling him the story, the Master perceived he was pincht, went home with a
heavy heart; and charged his men (after some correction for their too much
credulity) never to divulge it to any person whatsoever; so much he was ashamed
the world should take notice how nea^ly he was cheated.

CHAP. XXVI.
How he returned to England, was taken (and afterward hanged) for robbing an
Alehouse in St. Swithinslane.
HAving now sufficiently lined his purse against the inundations of a winters
day, he strikes up sail for England, where when he was arrived, he meets with
his Father in law Mr. Rudd, one more, whose name I know not, and the wife of
Thomas Dales a Fiddler, whose came to Mr. Langhornes a small Victualling house,
at the King's Head in St. Swithins-lane, and desired a Room above stairs, which
was showed them; they call for a cup of Bear, which they drank, and the party
returned that brought it up; then fall they to their work, which was to pick
open a chest wherein they were informed moneys lay. The woman having occasion
to go to her Chest for money, perceived them at it; retires privily, and by
warrant from the next Justice, apprehended two of them, which as it afterward
appeared, had taken out 8 l. 19 s. in money, with other goods which the woman
conveyed away; and Hainam likewise making his way through the house top, left
his Father in law, and the other to the mercy of the Law. But not contented
with this fair escape, but being sent by heaven to be punished for his
villainies on earth, he in three or four hours returns (having shifted his
apparel at his lodging hard by, in the house of one Chamberlayne a Boxmaker
and an Alehouse-keeper in Beer-binder lane near Lumbardstreet) and supposing
that the Master of the house Mr. Langhorne knew him, with a Dagger which for
that purpose he brought with him, he stabbed Mr. Langhorne in the back and twice
through the arm, intending to have killed him; and again made his escape over
the houses till he came into Sergeant Probyes yard, whose man having some
business at that time there, espies him coming toward him with two Daggers in
his hands, whereupon he runs for a Rapier which he had not far off, and engaged
with him; Sergean Proby having by this time heard or seen something, comes with
another weapon to the assistance of his man, with which he valiantly encountered
Hainam, and wounded him in the thigh, but was himself suddenly after stabbed in
the belly by Hainam; yet having the more right on his side, he took the greater
courage, and put the more confidence in his might, by the power of which Hainam
was held in play till it so fortuned that a Gentleman of 23 or 24 years of age
coming by, perceived the fray, and discerning desperate wounds arising from
their blows, he draws his sword, and with that in his hand, forces entrance
at the door, which Hainam perceiving to open, runs at, endeavoring to escape,
but the Gentleman starting back wounds him on the leg, and with another blow he
cut him in the head, and following his blow closely, he sals within him, so
that Hainam had neither time nor power to use his Daggers or his two Pistols
which at that time he had about him in his pocket. Being thus overmatched, he
was attended to the Counter, where it was found he had 7 l. about him; at the
taking away of which he vowed, they did him a great displeasure, for he
intended the day following to be drunk therewith. But his intentions thus
crossed, he was the next morning being June 15. 1656. guarded by six men with
Clubs and Daggers to the prison of Newgate.

CHAP. XXVII.
How he had almost escaped again.
NOtwithstanding the privy search that was made as well for weapons as for
moneys, and other mischievous employments, he had concealed a small file, which
he hid in a place made fit for it in his clothes, to the intent that when he
should be fettered in Newgate (which he was assured he should be, having been
formerly condemned) he might with that work himself out of bondage. This file
was of such a nature that should you stand in the Room where it was filing off
a thick iron bar, yet you could not hear the noise. With this file had he
disrobed himself of most of his Fetters, and wanted little of proving himself a
loose man; but being discovered sooner by his Keepers eyes then his ears, he
was at that time prevented, and more carefully looked unto for the future; yet
was the file undiscovered, and so continued till he was challenged to the field
to answer at his death for several abuses performed by him in his life.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Execution of Richard Hainam in Smithfield-rounds, with a brief account of
his dying words.
THe next day his Keepers (through the fear they conceived of his escaping,
which they well do, there having been one formerly hanged on the same account)
they sent to the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, desiring a speedy dispatch;
otherwise they feared their Prisoner would pay his ransom with some of their
lives, as he formerly had done. Whereupon it was immediately concluded on, that
he should be hanged in the Rounds of Smithfield, June 17. 1656. being Tuesday.
Which day being come, he was accordingly carried in a Cart unto the place of
Execution, apparelled in a stuff suit laced in the seames with a small silver
lace, a most pure rough Hat, a black Cloak with things suitable thereto; all
which upon the Ladder he bequeathed to the Hangman. He said but little, and
that little tended to the clearing of his Landlord and Landlady Chamberlayne
where he lay, who were both at that time in custody. He said, that he came
thither in the condition of a working Goldsmith, and they knew no other but
that every day when he went forth, he went about his lawful occasions, he
pretending that he wrought a broad. And for his Father in Law, he hardly knew
him, so lately were they acquainted, but for his wife and some others, if they
deserved ought, he would not save them, nor would he accuse them. He denied
that he robbed the King of Scots, and said he would rather have parted with a
thousands pounds then have been so asperst. His confession was but small,
alleging it a point of P^pery to give an account to mortals, or to any one
but God. Moreover, he denied the Messiah, and said he ought to pray only to the
Father and not to the Son, as not believing he was yet come, but that he would
come. Having disburdened his mind of what he then delivered, he pulls forth (or
caused it to be pulled forth) his file, and delivered it to Mr. Brisco who
belongs to Newgate, and with a jumpe from the Ladder, as the Ep^logue of his
Exploits, we leave him taking his last swing.

Thus courteous Readers you have his imprimis, His items, totals, and at last
his



FINIS.

