SOLOMON'S CHOICE: OR, A President for KINGS and PRINCES, and all that are in
Authority,

Presented in a SERMON before the Honorable House of COMMONS at Margarets
Westminster, at their public Fast, September. 25. 1644.

By Lazarus Seaman, Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Alhallowes-Breadstreet-London. One of the Assembly of Divines.

Wisdom is better then weapons of war, Eccles. 9. 18. Scornful men bring a
City into a snare, but wise men turn away wrath, Prove. 29. 8. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Psalm. 2. 10.
LONDON, Printed by E. G. for J. Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Sun, in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE THE House of COMMONS in Parliament Assembled at Westminster.
Honorable, and Renowned Worthies,
THe subject which I have treated on was well worthy of your ears: but very
unseemly for my tongue. Yet because WISDOM which is THE EXCELLENCY OF KNOWLEDGE
is so exceeding necessary to make poor England once more happy, therefore I
have endeavored to quicken your desires and prayers for the attaining of a
full measure, that the want of all other ranks may be supplied out of your
abundance. We have amongst us the worst of evils, A CIVIL WAR. A KINGDOM
DIVIDED AGAINST IT SEEFE. The Nations round about us might justly apply St.
Paul's reproof of the Corinthians unto us with a very little alteration *. And
how can we choose but apply Cor. 6. 5, 9.
it unto our selves? It may be said of England now as * one sometime said of
France, THAT THERE IS MORE (...) de Cleg^is de lapsu ^eparatione (...). cap. 10.
RIGHTEOUSNESS IN HELL, THEN IN THIS KINGDOM. For there norighteous man is
afflicted, nor any wicked man punished unrighteously: but here good and evil
men are all involved in common miseries, and suffer either on the one side, or
on the other, and too often by both. I speak not this either to blame Gods
righteous judgments, or your necessary defense of your selves, and endeavors
to suppress the Forces raised against you; but to represent the most miserable
condition of this distressed, and almost-utterly-destroyed Kingdom. As
touching outward means to redress these grievances, our hopes are in your
wisdom, WHO ARE MEN THAT HAVE UNDERSTANDING OF THE TIMES, TO KNOW WHAT ISRAEL
OUGHT TO DO *. And suppose Chro. 12. 3^.
the Lord should be so gracious unto us, that we might have just occasion to
beat our Swords into Plowshares, and our Spears into Pruning-hookes *, which
is the unfeigned (...) 4. 3.
desire of all the well-affected; there is a further task to try your wisdom.
For what is it that is expected from you as chosen instruments under God for
his special service in these days? Surely no less, (if I may use that
Scripture phrase proverbially, as some interpret it) * then a new ^on the
^ation.
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. That is, A REFORMED
CHURCH, A REFORMED COMMONWEALTH. For the one, we have had the name a long
time, (as Sardis had a name to live, and was dead.) And for the thing, we had
it in part, now we would have it entirely, and without mixture. The other, viz.
the Commonwealth must be suitable to the former. It Is a charge laid upon those
Worthies who labored for reformation * By Dr. Jackson.
in the days of QUEEN ELIZABETH OF BIESSED MEMORY, and after, as if they had
winked at the corruptions of the State which were known and certain, and
pretended to singular holiness in the business of Religion as it is strictly
considered. It ought therefore to be the less offensive if the Watchmen of
this present generation do sound their Trumpets louder than heretofore, and cry
out in good earnest for A REAL REFORMATION, The substanc^ of the Covenant.
as among themselves, and in things Ecclesiastical, so in your selves
likewise, and in all affairs and businesses whatsoever. Be not deceived, God
is not mocked. It will not be taken at our hands that our goodness be like the
morning dew, or that we should be like Ephraim, a Cake half baked. God
requires more. He promises grace for more. The Word, and the Rod, in both which
God stretches out his hand and says, Behold me, behold me, must teach us to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. The NOBLES OF BOHEMIA in the preface
before the confession of their Faith rehearse some prophetical passages of
their Ministers; and particularly, the words of JOHN Hus, to this effect:
Corpus and S tagma Confessnum, part 2 p. 224.
We (speaking of himself, and other teachers of that age) as yet go but about
the surface of the business, and see as it were through Latices, or a Cloud,
not piercing to the inward parts: but a people shall succeed which shall dive
into the bottom of the business, and build on the solid foundation. Yet this
must be done by little and little. And it shall be effected with great pressure
and affliction, and with exceeding difficulty. All this is very conso^^^^ to
Scripture and experience, and therefore the more to be heeded. Reformation must
proceed from one degree to another, TILL THE LAMBS WIFE HAVE MADE HER SELF
READY, etc. Rev. 19. 7.
And until those other prophecies be accomplished which I shall but point you
to peruse, and that because they concern both States. Isatah 1. 25, 26, 27.
Revel. 11. 15.

If the question be, When shall these things be? It must needs be answered in
part with the words of Christ, It is not for you to know the times and seasons
which the Father has put in his own power Acts 1. 7.
. And yet it must also be added, that the time for us to endeavor it is now,
even while it is called to day.

For our parts who are Ministers, we know it, and rejoice in it. Christ must
increase, we must decrease, until the time come, That the Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously See Calvin on Isaiah
24. 23.
.

As for you that are Magistrates, and now sitting in the Supreme judicatory of
this Kingdom, I beseech you to consider what is expected of you, and from you.
Shall tyranny, bribery, oppression, partiality, covetousness escape
unpunished, or remain unreformed any where? Will God humble Monarchy, and
destroy arbitrary government every where, (as certainly he will) and let
inferior Magistrates degenerate into the same sins? Must scandalous
Ministers be cast out as unsavory Salt unto the dunghill, and shall
scandalous people live as if they were Lawless?

All this is but to praise, Qui monet ut faciat, etc.
encourage, and strengthen you in your holy purposes and resolutions,
notwithstanding the difficulty of the work in hand, and the mighty mountains
of opposition which are raised in the way. What remains, but that you be
real, resolute, and exemplary in the work of reformation. For thus says the
Lord. If ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, if ye thoroughly execute
judgment between a man and his neighbor --. Then will I cause you to dwell
in this place, in the Land that I gave to your fathers, for ever, and ever Jer.
7. 5, ^7.
. The Lord furnish you with all the fruits of his Spirit, whereby you may be
enabled hereunto.

I shall not presume, (that be far from me) to direct your wisdoms in any
part of the great work which is before you. Only touching the means of
attaining that wisdom which I have spoken of, I beseech you consider those
words of David Psalm. 119. 99, 100.
. I have more understanding then all my Teachers, for thy testimonies are my
meditation. I understood more then my Ancients, because I kept thy precepts. I
know your business is great, and your spare hours but a few. You cannot read
much, nor it may be pray long. Yet even in the Camp Alexander would find time
to read Homer, Quintus Curtius.
and from him he might soon learn how to husband time. (...). H^^. ^^. ^.
The books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles are proper for you, and a key
to the Prophets. There are many prayers with you and for you, but your own
humility and fervency in private will afford you most comfort. And that your
practical wisdom, according to the rule of Scripture may be seen and read of
all men in all your proceedings, and a blessing from Heaven upon them, is and
shall ever be the prayer of him who is

Humbly and affectionately devoted to your service in Christ Jesus. LAZARUS
SEAMAN.

SOLOMON'S CHOICE: OR, A President for KINGS, and PRINCES, and all that are in
Authority.
1. KINGS chap. 3. verse. 9. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart
to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able
to judge this thy so great a people?


FOr more orderly entrance into the handling The Introduction.
of these words, and the better understanding both of them and of the context,
there are three special things which I shall commend unto your present
observation out of this Chapter.

1. Solomon's love to God. 2. Gods love to Solomon. and 3. The special use
which Solomon made of Gods special love unto him.
Solomon's love to God is described in the third and fourth The first special.
verses, and therein there are these particulars considerable. First, the
sincerity of it. Secondly, the infirmity which did accompany it. These are laid
down together in the third verse. And thirdly, an instance to prove both, in
the fourth verse.

The sincerity of his love is contained in these words: And Solomon loved the
Lord, walking in the Statutes of David his father. That is, in the same
Statutes which David his father walked in See 2 Kings 22. 2.
. In which words there is both a direct assertion, He loved the Lord; and a
demonstration of that which is asserted, He walked in the Statutes of David his
father. This agrees well with those words of our Savior, If ye love me, keep
my Commandments. ^ohn 14. 15.


The infirmity which did accompany his love, is expressed in those words:
-Only he sacrificed, and burnt incense in the high places. His marrying of
Pharaohs daughter is no where imputed unto him for a sin, Nusquam hoc nomine
in sacris literis reprehenditur. Mencchius in loc.
because it is supposed she was before the marriage converted to the true
Religion. The 45 Psalm makes this more then probable.

Sacrificing in high places seems to be excused in the second verse, yet not
wholly, but in part. A tanto sed ^on a toto.
The Law of God for sacrificing in one place only which God should choose, is
very express. Levit. 17. 3. Deuteronomy. 12. 13. And therefore whatsoever might be
pleaded from examples of old, the custom of the times, or the ease and benefit
of the people, it was a sin either to use, or suffer other places then that
one for sacrifice. Yet as the people in the second verse, so the King in this
third seems to be reprehended in that regard Not only Cajetan on the place,
but Tremelius and Junius excuse Solomon; how solidly let the learned judge.
. Yet such an infirmity as this might well consist with sincerity; for we read
the like of Asa. The high places were not removed; nevertheless Asa his heart
was perfect with the Lord all 1 Kings 15. 14.
his days.

By the way let us here take in these following Observations:

1. To love God is a matter of singular commendation. Inferences from the first
special.
This was the brightest Diadem in Solomon's Crown. There cannot be a blacker
brand then that which is set on many in the prophecy concerning these latter
days: That they are lovers of themselves, and lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of God (...) 2 Timothy 3. 4. A second inference.
.

2. There is no absolute perfection to be found in the best of Gods servants.
David was a man after Gods own heart, except in the matter of Vriah. That
which is said of the Angel and Church of Sardis, I have not found thy works
perfect before God Revel. 3. 2.
, may be said of all Magistrates, Ministers, and the best Christians. Cur
righteousnesses are as filthy rags Isa. 64. 6.
. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us 1 John 1. 8. Use of the second inference.
.

Therefore, 1. let us humble our selves upon all occasions, and be serious in
the work and business of this day, which is to afflict our souls before God
Levit. 23. 27
.

2. Let Us be always mortifying of corruption, and die daily to sin, and
cleanse our selves from all filthiness, both of the flesh and spirit;
perfecting holiness in the fear of God 2 Cor. 7. 1.
.

3. Let Us add to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge. 2 Pet. 1. 5.


But above all, 4. let us trust perfectly to the grace of Christ 2 Timothy 2. 1.
, and rest wholly and alone upon him, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption 1 Cor. 1. 30.
. In whom it is that we are complete Col. 2. 10. The third Inference.
.

3. Observe we further. God takes notice of all good and evil in his children.
He does graciously distinguish of their ways. That which is evil, he sets
upon record as evil; yet acknowledges, ownes, and accepts of that measure of
good which he finds in them, be it more or less. This appears at large by all
Christ's expressions to the seven Churches of Asia Rev. ^. and 3. chap.
.

The knowledge of it makes much for the praise of his Use.
Wisdom and Justice, and serves both for our humiliation and consolation: For
our humiliation, because all things are naked and open before him with whom we
have to do Heb. 4. 13.
. He is acquainted with all our ways ^sal. 139. 3.
. For our consolation, because there is no God like unto him for passing by
transgression M^c. 7. 18.
. If he should mark iniquity who should stand? Psalm. 130, 3.
. As for all the good we do, we shall in no wise lose our reward M^t. 10. 42.
.

As touching Gods love to Solomon, it is largely described The second special.
from the fifth verse to the fifteenth, wherein we have the History of a most
holy and gracious communication between God and Solomon in a dream, in which
the exub'rancy of Gods love to him appears by these particulars.

First, in passing over the corruption of the times unpunished. The particulars
whe^eby Gods love to Solomon is manifested.


Secondly, in communing with him as one friend with another, and that in such a
manner as was not ordinary either between God and man, or between God and his
own peculiar people.

Thirdly, in giving of him liberty to ask what he would. And God said, ask
what I shall give thee, at the fifth verse; a strong temptation, and yet
withal an extraordinary favor, and that which cannot be paralleld. 'Twas a
great liberty which Abraham took to himself in prayer, Genesis 15. ^.
when he said, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesses etc.
And God did mightily stoop unto that unbeleeving Ahaz, in saying, Ask thee a
sign of the Lord Isa. 7. 11.
thy God: ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. But no instance
reaches fully unto this, wherein the love Ephesians 3. 20.
of God was so much the greater, because he is able to do exceeding
abundantly, above all that we ask or think (...).


Fourthly, in guiding of his heart to ask that which was most meet. It was
easy for God to promise freely and largely, and to perform accordingly, but
it was hard for Solomon to ask that which might become him. Nemorite preca^ur,
nisi quem 'Deus incitet ad ^^andum. Pe^. Mart.
Many have not only lost their opportunities but undone themselves by foolish
requests, as Adonijah.

Fifthly, in accepting of his choice. And the speech pleased the Lord, that
Solomon had asked this thing, the tenth vers^.

Lastly, in multiplying of his blessings upon him beyond all desert, and
expectation. Behold I have done according to thy Word, lo I have given thee a
wise and an understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before thee;
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also given thee
that which thou have not asked; both riches and honor: so that there shall not
be any among the Kings like unto thee, all thy days. The 12 and 13 verses.

By all which there is a lively demonstration, that besides An inference from
the second special.
the common love of God to mankind, and his special love toward his Church
and children, there is a singular and peculiar love wherein he abounds toward
some according to his good pleasure.

And this serves first to manifest and magnify (...).
the exceeding The use of that inference.
riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2. 7.

As also, secondly, to quicken us unto a holy emulation amongst our selves,
that each of us may strive to be better then other, and to do and suffer more
for Christ, because God can make us more then a proportionable recompense, even
in point of love.

It serves also, thirdly, to show the reason of that variety which is found in
Gods providence toward his own children; some rich, some poor, some noble
and sitting among Princes, others are made the dung and offscouring of all
things, and yet all equally chosen in Christ, called according to his purpose,
justified, adopted, sanctified, and heirs of glory.

And yet further, fourthly, to reprove our slothfulness for neglecting God, as
usually we do. This singularity of his love is no matter of discouragement, as
some Dix^rit forte q^^spiam, ^ur etiam (...) opti^ ^^^is n^^ datur? Into datur.
Ch^istus e^im dixit, Quicq^id (...), etc. John 14 14. 1 John 5. 14. Romans 8. 2^.
Zich. ^^ 10.
may think, but rather an invitation and incitement unto all. We have every
one of us a full breast of consolation in the promises, Ask, and it shall be
given you, etc. Mat. 7. 7. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do
it, says Christ our advocate. And this is the confidence that we have in him,
that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us. We have also the
spirit to help our infirmities. The spirit of supplication and grace. God does
every day new and strange things for his people. And which of us have not some
blessing or other which we must needs acknowledge to be our own peculiar?

The third special, and that which is most remarkable in The third special.
the Chapter is the singular use which Solomon made of Gods singular love; That
consists in two particulars:

First, in improving of it to his own benefit, and the good of the people
which God had committed unto his charge, as in the words of the Text. Give unto
thy servant therefore an understanding heart, etc.

And secondly, in improving it to Gods glory (the center wherein all things
meet at last,) as is declared in the 15 verse. And Solomon awoke, and behold it
was a dream; and he came to Jerusalem and stood before the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, and offered up burnt-offerings, and offered peace
offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.

Oh that there were in every one of us such a heart, that we could improve the
evidences of Gods love to us, unto his praise and for public good. Our days
of humiliation wherein we have long waited on the Lord, and still do wait,
would soon be turned into days of thankesgiving, according to that promise in
Zachary, chap. 8. verse. 19. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the Fast of the
fourth month, and the Fast of the fifth, and the Fast of the seventh, and the
Fast of the tenth shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and
cheerful Feasts. But alas, destruction upon destruction is cried, for the
whole Land is spoiled Jerem. 4. 20.
. And what is the cause of all this evil? Even that which follows in the 22
verse of that Chapter. For my people is foolish, they have not known me, they
have no understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge.

If it be demanded, what remedy? the answer is out of the words of the Text,
Give unto thy servant an understanding The Text.
heart, etc.

In which words we have three things to consider of.

1. Solomon's choice, or desire. 2. The ground and reason of that choice. 3. The
means which he uses to attain it.
His desire in general is an understanding heart; and

That is, ability and faithfulness to perform the office and duty of a King
toward the people of Israel, agreeably to the will of God.

The ground and reason of his desire is partly the sense of For who is able to
judge this thy so great a people? and more fully expressed in the seventh
verse. I am but a little child: I know not how to go out, or come in; and
partly also from the consideration of the people over whom God had set him, and
that in two particulars: 1. Because they were Gods people. Thy people. 2.
Because they were a great and numerous people This thy so great a people. Both
these reasons are more fully laid down in the eighth verse immediately
foregoing: for in these words Solomon sums up and couches the strength of all
which he had said before. And thy servant is in the midst of thy people,
which thou have chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered, nor counted for
multitude, verse. 8.

The means which he uses to attain his desire is prayer, 3.
which here he makes to God in faith, and with a great deal of humility.

Some of the Schoolmen, and popish Commentators dispute out of this text, 1.
whether Solomon had the use of free will in this dream; and 2. whether he
merited at the hands of God by asking wisdom Aquira^. 1. 2. qu. 113. a^. 3.
ad. 2. and 2. 2. qu. 156. ar. 5. ad. 1. Cornelius a Lapide in loc.
; but I shall leave them to their dreamings about these their supposed
problems. And for the better understanding of every tittle in the Text, and
that every word may be duly weighed before I settle on any point of doctrine,
I shall endeavor to hold out unto you such observations as may the better
enable us to comprehend whatsoever it pleases God herein to reach forth to us
by his Spirit.

The first observation toward the explication of the 1. Observation.
words is this: All the expression; which are used in the Text are very
significant. Give, i. e. graciously bestow on me, and work in me, according to
thy free grace, and almighty power.

Unto thy servant] an humble description of himself. Kings are Lords and
Masters toward men, but servants toward God. Under his authority. At his
command. Set up by his providence. Deposed at his good pleasure. He changes
the times and the seasons: he removes Kings, and sets up Kings. In
particular we read of Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. ^. 21.
He was driven from the sons of men -- till he knew that the most high God
ruled in the Kingdom of men, and that he appointed over it, whomsoever he will
Dan. 5. 21.
. And more generally, the Psalmist speaking of God says, He shall cut off the
spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the earth Psalm. 76. 12.
Therefore absolute power, and to be the sons of men are absolutely
incompatible, even in those who are called Gods.

An understanding heart] This expression also, savors of a great deal of
humility. Cor docile, so the vulgar Latin; a teachable heart. Cor audiens, so
Arias Montanus, (...)
a hearing heart. He presumes that God would be willing to teach him by his
Spirit, but is afraid lest through corruption he should turn the deaf ear.
God offers himself a teacher to many, but they are not willing to learn of
him. -Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge Job 21. 14.
of thy ways. Yet we may not be too curious about the phrase here; it is plain
enough what Solomon meant, both by Gods answer, at the 11. and 12. verses,
compared. Because thou have asked this thing, -- understanding to discern
judgment. Behold, I have done according to thy word: lo, I have given thee a
wise and an understanding heart. And by that other relation which the holy
Ghost makes in a Chron. 1. 10. Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may
go out and come in before this people, etc.

It follows in the Text, to judge] This one word comprises all the duty of a
King, either for peace or war, at home, or abroad, upon ordinary, or
extraordinary occasions. As in that other place, Make us a King to judge us,
like all the Nations 1 Samuel 8. 5. To judge here is praeesse, regnare, imperare,
gubernare. vide Barthol. Westthemerum.
. There be several ways of judging which your selves are experimentally
acquainted with. I Will say nothing of the particular kinds. All are here
included, and in all, even in the lowest, about smallest matters there is need
of wisdom.

Thy people] Solomon seems to be much affected with this consideration, and
therefore we should take the more notice of it. All people are Gods people by
Creation, and general Providence, but Israel were his peculiar people. Yea, a
peculiar treasure unto him above all people -- A Kingdom of Priests, and a
holy Nation Exodus 19 5, 6 v^r ^^ R^^pect must ^^ had to Saints as S^ints:
. The more Saints therefore there are in a Kingdom, the more care should be
taken for governing of them with respect unto their Saintship. It Is Christ his
glory to be King of Saints Rev. 15. 3.
; and it is the glory of all Kingdoms to have Saints for Subjects. To be King
of Men is something. To be King of Nations is greater. To be King of Christians
is the height of all. This therefore does sadly aggravate the sins of many
Governors in these latter ages, that all the injuries which they do unto
their subjects, are done to Christians, to Gods people, by such as profess
themselves to be Christians.

That I may discern between good and bad] This relates both to persons, and
things. Different things, and different persons, require different
administrations. There is a show of wisdom in folly, and an appearance of
evil in the greatest good. Princes, and all that are in authority, use to be
haunted with flatterers, and evill-counsellors, therefore they have need of a
discerning spirit.

For who is able to judge this thy so great a people?] A great people, that
cannot be counted, nor numbered for multitude. As in the latter end of the
eighth verse. Solomon admires the multitude of his Subjects. They were his
glory Prove. 14. 28.
in one sense, but they are also his fear and care, and make his burden the
heavier. He seems to despair in himself, as well he might, at the greatness
of his charge. Nowadaies the Great ones of the World think they never have
subjects enough unless they could conquer all the World, yea all Worlds.
Alexander wept to hear of more than one, because he had not as yet conquered
one. As some men join house to house, so do others join Kingdom to
Kingdom. The Catholic King would feign be a Catholic Monark. But Solomon's
heart aches within him to consider the greatness of one Nation, which, as it
was the smallest of all people in the beginning Deuteronomy. 7. ^.
, so it was never to be accounted of in comparison with those who were under
one of the four Monarchies. An humble heart takes a true estimate of
difficulties as they are, and such a heart God had graciously given unto
Solomon. And thus far of the expressions and their significancy, which fall
under the first Observation.

The second Observation is this: Solomon disputes not upon 2. Observation.
the words of God, Nec petiit, ne^ expectavit deliberandi spatium. Pet. Mar.
either on the meaning of them, or of the secret intention of God, whether it
was to try him, or otherwise; much less of Gods power, or faithfulness: but
in ^ull assurance of faith he closes with the promise implied in the command,
and improves the liberty which God had granted him with all holy boldness. Oh
that we were like minded in reference to all the great and precious promises
which are spread before us in the Scripture. Open thy mouth wide, (says God)
and I will fill it Psalm. 81. 10.
. Concerning my sons, and daughters, command ye me Isa. ^5. 11.
. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee Psalm. 50. 15.
.

A third Observation. Solomon's heart was secretly guided 3. Observation.
by God to ask wisdom. It Is a special favor from God, to have grace whereby
we may be able to ask things which are meet for us, and things agreeable to
his will 1 John 5. 14.
. There are some (too many) who whisper into the ears of God such desires as
are not fit to be named Qui ^urpissim^ vota d^i^ insusurrunt Seneca.
. Ye ask, and have not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon
your lusts, says St. James James 4. 3.
. Gods children are in a double respect beholding unto God in point of prayer,
for teaching of them to pray, as well as for hearing prayers. The Lord in mercy
vouchsafe us this grace, on this day of prayer, and then we shall have no
occasion to complain as those wicked ones in Job, -What profit should we have
if we pray unto him? J^b 21. 15.
Or as those hypocrites in Isaiah, Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou
see not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge?
Isa. 58. 3.
but to conclude as David begins. I love the Lord: because he has heard my
voice, and my supplications Psalm. 116. 1.
.

The fourth is this. His request savours of many excellent 4. Observation.
graces. Of faith (as we have seen already) and of humility, but especially of
wisdom. He asks wisdom, with a great deal of wisdom. Wisdom proper and
peculiar for him. Wisdom to govern. That which was most necessary for him.
All that was necessary, and no more. He has respect to his person, to his
office, to the people, as they were his in one sense to rule and govern under
God, but especially as they were Gods. 'Twas not for nothing that his father
said of him, Thou art a wise man, and know what thou ought to do unto
him 1 Kings 29. H^d not Solomon been wise before, he had not known the worth of
wisdom. Hall his contemplations, 17 book.
. Sometime we have the graces which we seem to want. If Solomon had not
received wisdom for government, yet he had wisdom to pray, and in prayer to
prefer the choice of wisdom before other things. If we had all more wisdom
in prayer, we might speed better, if it were but so much as Bernard had, to
say, Lord thou that give grace to the humble, give me grace to be humble
Domine qui das gratiam humilibus, da gratiam ut sim humilis. Bern.
.

The fifth Observation. Solomon is not at all sollicitous for himself, his
Honor and Prerogative, but trusts God with all of that kind. All the care
which he takes is for the discharge 1. Observation.
of his duty. Happy were it for all Nations, if those who succeed him in like
Office did inherit from him such a disposition. Princes would be more
honorable both in life and death, in themselves, and in their posterity then
usually they are. Jeroboam corrupted Religion to secure the Kingdom, as many
in our days have turned Papists, or hankered that way for such an end. But the
only means to establish a King upon his Thron is to be conscionable in his
place. How large a promise is that which God made even unto Jeroboam, by Ahijah
1 Kings 11. 38
? And it shall be, if thou will hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt
walk in my ways, and do that which is right in my sight, to keep my
Statutes, and my Commandments, as David my servant did, that I will be with
thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel
unto thee. The book of Proverbs speaks frequently, and with strong
asseveration to this purpose. It is an abomination to Kings Prove. 16. 12.
to commit wickedness, for the Throne is established by righteousness. The
King that faithfully judges the poor, his Throne Chap. 29. 14.
shall be established for ever.

But where is the man of any rank or quality, who makes matter of duty his
maine care? And if it be a fault, as questionless it is, in the Highest on
Earth, to seek themselves, or to stand too much upon their honor, and
particular interests, what shall we say or think of those who are of inferior
rank and quality, not fit to be named when Kings are spoken of, and yet are
guilty in this kind? The glory of God, the service of the State, and the good
of the whole Kingdom, would be much more promoted then it is, were it not for
those shameful and inexecusable contestations which are between those who are
otherwise most Honorable, and well-deserving, about points of honor, and
by-respects.

The sixth Observation. The King here makes no question but 6. Observation.
God had grace and wisdom enough in store, to enable him for his Kingly
Office, that he might bring glory to God, and be a blessing to Israel in the
discharge of it.

And therefore Kingly government is not simply, and for it self to be excepted
against. The Queen of Sheba's inference was very good. -Because the Lord loved
Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King, to do judgment and justice 1
Kings 10. 7.
. It was part of the special blessedness promised unto Abraham, That Kings
should come out of him. And to Sarai,-Yea I will bless her, and she shall be a
mother of Nations: Kings of people shall be of her Gen 17. 6. 16.
. Christ rejoices in it as part of his glory, that by him Kings reign^, and
Princes decree justice Prove. 8. 15.
. He himself was a King, and has thereby sanctified that calling and estate.
The benefit of this kind of government is as fully asserted in the Scripture as
of any other. A King that sits in the Throne of Jud^ement scatters away
all evil with his eyes Prove. 20. 8. 26.
. And in the same Chapter, A wise King scatters the wicked, and drives the
wheel over them. What shall we say to those most considerable places in
Jeremy, wherein God seems to set out all the dimensions of his love toward his
people the Jews? And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me,
says the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this City on the
Sabbath day, but hallow the Sabbath day, to do no work therein: Then shall
there enter into the gates of this City Kings, and Princes sitting upon the
Thron of David, riding in Charets, etc. Jer. 17. 24, 25.
It seems therefore that profanation of the Sabbath is very prejudicial unto
Kings, and the true sanctifiers Note.
of it are their best friends. It follows in the same book, -Thus says the
Lord, Execute you judgment and righteousness, deliver the spoiled out of the
hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence unto the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place. For if
ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the gates of this house,
Kings sitting upon the Throne of David, riding in Charets, and on horses, he
and his servants, and his people Jer. 22. 4.
. By all which it is more then manifest, that as it was never worse with that
people, then when there was no King in Israel Judge. 21. 25.
, so it should never be better then when God bestowed a King on them, as the
fruit and recompense of their obedience. Among the glorious things which are
promised unto the Church of God, to be enjoyed in the latter ages of the world,
this is one, and a principal means which is ordained toward the completing
of her happiness, that Kings shall be her nursing fathers, and Queens her
nursing mothers Isa. 49. 23.
. That the sons of strangers shall build up her walls, and their Kings shall
minister unto her Chapter 60. 10.
. When the New-Jerusalem shall come down from God, Kings shall be no
hinderance, but shall bring their honor and glory into it Rev. 21. 24.
. And therefore the most exact reformation in the Church may well consist with
this kind of government in the State, and the folly of that Proverb will in
due time appear to all the world, No Bishop, no King.

We have therefore the more cause to be humbled this Special matter of
humiliation.
day for all the evil which befalls us under such a government. The cry of such
as are robbed, and spoiled, or impoverished, is loud; the cry of the widows,
and fatherless is far greater. There is abundance of innocent blood shed in
the Land. The green tree and the dry are both cast into the fire. The
circumcised and uncircumcised are visited in like manner. We must needs take
that in Ezekiel unto our selves. Behold I am against thee, and will draw forth
my Sword out of his sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the
wicked Ezel. ^1. ^.
. That judgment which is threatened in Zachary lies heavy upon this Kingdom. I
will no more pity the inhabitants of the Land, says the Lord: but lo, I will
deliver the men, every one into his neighbors hand, and into the hand of his
King, and they shall smite the Land, and out of their hand I will not deliver
them Z^ch 1^. 6.
. God has cut asunder his staff, Beauty, by withdrawing his wonted Providence
toward us; and his staff, Bands, by breaking the brotherhood betwixt one part
of the people and another. It shames me to speak of these things without
tears of blood. But what might be the cause of all this evil?

In the maine quarrel, I am confident we may plead our innocence, and say with
David in the case between him and Saul. -Judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me Psalm. 7. 8.
. But surely the sins of the one party, are not the adequate cause of the
judgment on both. What says God? Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and
that Israel had walked in my ways. I should soon have subdued their enemies,
Psalm. 8^. 13, 14, 15.
and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should
have submitted themselves unto him -And Solomon, When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes his Prove. 16. 7.
enemies to be at peace with him. We must needs conclude therefore, that our
ways are sinful, crooked, ways that are not good, seeing so many who were
our friends are become our enemies. And we also may say, We have no King
because we feared not the Lord; what then should a Hos. 10. 3.
King do to us? And if we shall still do wickedly, we shall be consumed, both
we, and our King. 1 Samuel 12. 25.


Yet one Observation more to comfort us a little. Solomon 7. Observation.
is very confident that his heart was in Gods hands. Either to blind, or
inlighten, to mollify, or to harden, to make him a blessing to Israel, or a
judgment.

Let not us therefore despair, either in regard of our selves, or Our King. He
that made Esau, and Laban relent toward Genes. 33. 4. 31. 29.
Jacob: That caused Saul to acknowledge unto David, Thou art more righteous
than I: for thou have rewarded me good, where as I have rewarded thee evil.
And gave 1 Samuel 24. 17.
Daniel so large a room in the affections of Darius, notwithstanding the
conspiracy of evill-counsellors against him. And he that gave his people favor
in the eyes of those Dan. 6. 20.
who carried them captives, even that great heart-commander Psalm. 106. 46.
is able to set us all right in the apprehensions and affections of Him who is
now too many ways at distance from us. We have a divine testimony to build our
faith upon. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water:
he turns it whithersoever he will. And many instances Prove. 21. 1.
to strengthen our faith by. Almost all the Persian Kings. Before them the
Babilonian Monark, (that head of gold, and heart of stone,) to say nothing of
Pharaoh the Egyptian. How wonderful is that passage concerning Amphilochius of
Iconium, Theodoretus hist. Eccles. lib. 5 cap. 16.
who changed the Arrian Emperors heart, by denying that reverence to his son
which he expected should be given him? But consider what the Scripture says
further:

Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaks
right. Prove. 16. 13.

He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be
his friend. Prove. 22. 11.

I shall not need to speak of these by way of applicacation. By this time
there is sufficient light given, as I hope even to the inside of the Text. But
a maine part of the work is yet behind, which is to raise some Doctrines, and
give in the Uses of them. I shall but name the points and open them a little,
and though they be several, apply them all as one.

1. The office and duty of Governors (Kings or others) is The Doctrines
to judge the people committed to their charge, and to discern between good
and bad. That Is the first.

2. The second. All that bear such Office have special need of wisdom.

3. A third. Wisdom is to be desired rather then any outward blessing, but
especially wisdom for government in Governors.

The fourth and last is this: One special means to attain unto wisdom is
prayer.

I shall not need to prosecute any of these points at large, it will suffice to
speak something of every one of them mixtly, rather to work them into the
heart by some quickening explication, then by reasons and demonstrations to
persuade the understanding.

The first Doctrine presents the duty of Governors in 1. Doctr. The duty of
Governors. 1. part to judge their people.
two summary expressions, or a twofold duty. The first is to judge. The second,
To discern between good and bad. If the question be, what it is that such as
are in authority have to do? here is the answer. Not to exercise an arbitrary
power over men's goods, and persons, estates and lives. Nor to gather up
abundance of treasure for themselves and their posterity, and much less to
oppress and tyrannize. It was an express Law of God concerning the Kings of
Israel. That they should not greatly multiply to themselves Silver and Gold.
Which was not intended Deuteronomy. 17. 17.
only as a reason why they might not choose a stranger tobe King, as Philo the
Jew supposed, but rather as a caution to teach Princes humility, and
moderation. That their Phile. de creatione Principi^. verse. 20.
hearts might not be lifted up above their brethren. Daniel speaking of
Nebuchadnezzar says of him, Whom he would Dan. 5. 19.
he slew, and whom he would he kept alive, etc. But therein he relates not jus
regis but factum. Not what was done as of Rolloc in loc.
right, but what used to be done by usurpation. He which rules over men must
be just. Moses in the Law speaking to Judges 2 Samuel 23. 3.
says, That which is altogether just shall thou follow. Altogether Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
just ((...)) Justice, justice. The doubling of the Ainsworth on the place.
word is for more vehemence. The meaning is, all manner of justice, and nothing
but justice, exactly, carefully, and continually.

The special things which belong to Rulers in way of judging are these, and
such like.

1. To provide good and wholesome Laws for themselves and their people to walk
by. God does not judge men, but by and according unto a Law. We have a Law;
John 19. 7. Chapter 7. 51.
and by our Law he ought to die --.Does our Law judge any man before it hear
him, and know what he does? -Sit thou hear to judge me after the Law, and
command me to be smitten contrary to the Law? Acts 23. 3. We see good men
plead the Law, and wicked men pretend to it. Both suppose it as a necessary
rule.

2. To appoint inferior Officers and Judges in all places, and for all kinds of
business. Judges and Officers shall Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee,
throughout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the people with just judgment. Of
Jehosophat, it is thus recorded, And he 2 Chro. 19. 5, 9.
set Judges in the Land throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by
City. And as touching the right manner of judging, He charged them, saying,
Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, and with a perfect heart.

3. To see that right be done to every person, (even to the poorest and
meanest, the widow, fatherless, and stranger) in every cause, without
partiality and byrespects, as in Gods presence, and in Gods stead. Oh house of
David, Thus says the Lord, Execute judgment in the morning, Jerem. 21. 12.
and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury
go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of
your doings.

4. To encourage the good, and terrify the wicked. For Rulers are not a terror
to good works, (i. e. ought not to Romans 13. 3.
be) but to the evil. This was David's resolution as a King. A froward heart
shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked Psalm. 101. 4, etc.
person. Who so privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I ^ut off: him that
has an high look, and a proud heart will I not suffer, etc.

5. By all good and lawful means to provide that all sorts of men, and
especially such as are in covenant with God may lead a quiet and a peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty. Subjects must pray for this 1 Timothy ^. 2.
. Rulers must improve their authority toward the furtherance of it. This must
be their end, aim, desire, and endeavor. Gods example toward men. His command
laid upon Governors. The end why Magistracy was ordained. That happiness
which all men naturally desire, and cannot otherwise be attained. The light of
nature, and dictate of every man's conscience, as also the Oaths which are
usually tendered, almost among all Nations to Princes at their solemn
Coronation, do not only sufficiently inform, but abundantly convince of all
this, which in one word is to judge.

And that Governors may be the better able, and more faithful in judgeing, it
is exceeding necessary, that ^. Part. to disc^^ne between good and ^ad.
they discern between good and bad, which is the second thing wherein Solomon
desires to be enabled by God, and a second part of the duty of Governors. The
woman of Tekoah praises David in this respect, and for that excellency which
God had bestowed on him in this kind. -As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the
King to discern between good and bad 2 Samuel 14. 17 (...)
. The phrases of the Original Language are not altogether the same in the Text
(...)
, and in the place last cited (c), but the sense seems to be one in both, and
plainly to imply, that as all Christians (...)
in matters of faith and Religion should labor to have their senses exercised
to discern both good and evil Heb. 5. 14. (...).
, as in the phrase of the New Testament: so all that are in authority should
endeavor the like in matters of government. Which is the more necessary in
these regards.

1. For themselves, that they may know what they have to do upon all
occasions, and distinguish between the right hand and the left, to secure
their own inward peace, and that outward respect, reverence, and obedience,
which is necessary from others. Nothing does so much affect the heart of
inferiors as to see a divine Spirit in those who are over them. When Solomon
had given proof in one special instance of his ability this way, the Text
says, All Israel heard of the judgment which the King had judged, and they
feared the King, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do
judgment 1 Kings 3. 28.
.

2. For others, that they may give suum cuique, every one that which is their
due. Praise and encouragement unto such as deserve it, and bring the wheel
upon the wicked. Their frowns and smiles, their ear, and eye, their severity
and clemency must be distributed and applied to each person according to their
demerit. That rule of the Apostle may be of great use here. And of some have
compassion, making a difference Jude 22. v.
. How miserably the judgments of some are blinded, their affections misplaced,
their ways and doings corrupted for want of ability this way, poor subjects
have too much seen and felt. Haman is preferred at Court, when the Tree is
fitter for him; and Mordecai is forgotten till it was almost too late to
remember him. There was a great deal of zeal against the poor Gibeonites,
and none against the Amalekites, though there was a Covenant to preserve the
one Josh. 9 15.
and both a general Deuteronomy. 25 19.
and a special Law 1 Samuel 15. 3.
to destroy the other. Christ must be crucified, and Barabbas released. The
Kings of the earth agree, and give their Kingdoms unto the Note.
beast R^u. 17. 17.
But when the Kingdoms of this world should become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ, The Nations will be angry. Chapter 11. 18.


3. Good and evil do sometimes change apparel, and evil is always bold to
thrust in even among Governors without asking leave, and exalts it self in
the midst of them. I saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that (...) 3.
16.
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
there. If it were not so, there would be no cause for the Lord to threaten in
that manner as he does by Isaiah. -Woe unto them that decree unrighteous
decrees, (...). 10. 1.
and that write grievousnesse, which they have prescribed. What is it therefore
that Governors, especially Lawgivers have to do, but to discern, as between
person and person, so likewise between Law and Law? It follows not, because
it is a Law, therefore it is just Mi^ah. 6. 16.
, and much less is that a good consequence. Such or such have a power to make
Laws, therefore this shall be a Law. A discerning faculty must be improved by
the way. And this shall suffice for the first Doctrine. It will be necessary to
repeat the second again in the same terms wherein it was first delivered.

All that are in place of government have special need of wisdom. Solomon's
request must be theirs for themselves. 2. Doctr.
Give unto thy servant an understanding heart. There is a truth in the point,
whether we apply it to Officers in the Commonwealth, or in the Church Moses
directing the people of Israel in the choice of Magistrates, prescribes wisdom
for a necessary qualification. Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known
among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. And when the Apostles
Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
saw it necessary to institute Deacons to ease themselves of their care, and
burden in serving Tables, and making provision for the poor, they give the
same thing in charge. -Look you out among your selves men of honest report,
full of the holy Ghost and wisdom. And if men be not Acts 6. 3.
sit to manage the business of the poor unless they be even full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, it will clearly follow that the greater and more noble
employments do much more require alike proportion of endowment.

As for State-governours, they have much business to run through. Many
enemies to encounter with, either foreign, or domestique, or both. As Paul
said to the Elders of the Church, -Of your selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things to draw disciples after them: so may it be Acts 20. 30.
said to the Elders of the Land. There will be some, even among you that will
drive their own designs, and consult their own interests, and so make
parties and factions, to the prejudice of public good. David makes a sad
complaint to Abishai, Behold my son which came forth of my bowels seeks my
life. And the like is too often verified 2 Samuel 16. 11. Filius ante diem etc.
in others. Among enemies we may well reckon flatterers, hypocrites, false
friends, as well as those who are factious, seditious, rebellious, traitorous,
heady, and high-minded, and it will require no small measure of wisdom to
deal with all these to advantage. The trust which is reposed in supreme
Magistrates is great. The persons which they have to govern are many in
number, of different conditions, dispositions, opinions, in whom there is a
mixture of all contrarieties. That which pleases some, others abhor. One man's
rise is from another ruin. The ends which should be prosecuted are high and
noble. The means not easy to be determined, and such as often miscarry. The
subject to be wrought upon is ill affected, and so are the instruments. The
want of a little wisdom does often prove a great prejudice, not only to the
credit of such as are in authority Eccl 10. 1.
but to the success of their affairs.

Besides all these generals, I desire these few particulars may be taken into
consideration.

1. Even the best Governors are subject to a great deal of censure. (...).
(...).
There be many curious eyes upon them. Many that seek advantages against them,
and wait for their halting. If any evil befall the multitude they are apt to
charge it upon such as are over them. Moses and Aaron could not have subsisted
under the murmurings, complaints, and conspiracies which were directed against
them, though they were set over Israel by Gods extraordinary appointment, had
not the Lord himself wrought miracles for their preservation, and for the
dreadful confusion of Korah and his accomplices. When David's company were a
little more then ordinarily distressed, they spoke of stoning him. 1 Samuel 30. 6.


3. Suppose that all in authority were as happy all their lives as David was
for a while. Whatsoever the King did, pleased all the people. Yet there is a
strict account to be 2 Samuel 3. ^6.
given unto God hereafter. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. If therefore we 2 Cor. 5. 10.
can approve our selves to the world, that will not satisfy. All the Lions of
the world must give an account to the Note.
Lamb. He is the blessed, and the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. The only Potentate, ^ Tim. 6. ^5.
because he alone is to continue King for ever. To be a Monarke, is only to
act a part for a while upon the Theater of this world. It is appointed unto all
men once to die, and after this the judgment. And I saw the dead (says Heb.
9. 27.
St. John) small and great, stand before God: and the books were opened-. And
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works. Rev. 20. 12.
Shifts, subtilties, excuses, etc. will stand no man in stead at that day. Who
ever ponders these things aright will surely apply his heart unto wisdom. Yet
because some, though they be not so Atheistical as to question the foregoing
consideration, may be the less affected with it because it is future, an object
of faith and not of sense, therefore I Will add this third.

3. There is a wisdom (such as it is) even in Satan and in all his
instruments. His instruments for number are legions, Luke 8. 30.
for property they transform themselves into Angels of 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15
light; and as touching the measure of their wisdom, they are in their
generation wiser than the children of light. Luke 16. 8.
The spirit of Machiavel, and the Jesuits is I fear to be sound in many who
would be thought to be at as great a distance from them, as the Jews from
Satan when as Christ told them, Ye are of your father the devil-. Such John 8
44.
will never be discovered, muchlesse prevented in their mischievous devices to
hinder good, and increase misery, unless it be by that wisdom which all our
adversaries are not able to resist. Thus much to show the necessity of wisdom.

The third Doctrine. Wisdom is to be preferred before all earthly blessings,
especially wisdom for government in 3. Doctr.
Governors.

It Is hard to look besides the proof of this point, if we cast our eyes into
the book of Proverbs. Thus we read in the third chapter, Happy is the man that
finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. For the merchandise of
it is better than the merchandise of Silver, and the gain thereof than fine
Gold. etc. And in the fourth Prove. 3. 12, 13.
chapter, Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and above all
thy getting get understanding. Exalt her and she shall promote thee, etc. Yet
further in the eighth Ch 4. 7.
chapter, Receive my instruction, and not Silver, and knowledge rather than
choice Gold. For wisdom is better than Rubies, and all the things that may be
desired are not to be compared to it. Surely there is a worth in wisdom more
Chapter 8. 10. 11.
then we do readily believe, or commonly apprehend. The Holy Ghost uses no
repetition in vain. If it were discerned as it is, it would inflame us with
the love of it. Si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles sui amores excitaret. Cicero de
Off. lib. 1.
And yet some caution must be used in our estimation of it. We may not compare
it with the love of God in Christ. Nor with any saving grace: (when we speak
of politic wisdom) But it is better 1. than long life. A sinner may do evil
an hundred times and his days be prolonged. Or 2. then riches. There is a sore
evil which Eccles. 8. 12.
I have seen under the Sun, riches kept for the owners thereof to their
hurt. 3. It Is better than victory over Chapter 5. 13.
enemies. If that be not well improved, as it seldom is, our shame and misery
may be the greater in the end, as Vincere scis Hannibal. etc.
it was with Saul in conquering the Amalekites, with Ahab when he took
Benhadad prisoner, and with Alexander who quickly skipt over the world like a
Goat, (according to Daniels prophecy) and touched not the ground, Dan. 8. 5.
as if he had flowne in the air, rather than marched with an Army on earth.
But this great horn was soon broken, and all his glory like Jonahs gourd, grew
up and withered Jonah 4. 6, 7.
all in a day. 4. It Is better also then success in business, for that is
common to wise men and fools. -The race is Eccl. 9. 1^.
not to the swift, etc. Wisdom prepares the heart to bear all events, and
make advantage of them. 5. Yea we may truly say, it is better than any single
virtue. All graces without it lose their luster. Patience is folly and
cowardice. Zeal, madness. Courage and resolution, is rashness. Justice,
cruelty. And mercy, a forfeiture of our selves into the hands of the living God.

And what shall I say for the benefit of it? It directs Governors how to
discharge their duty to God and man aright in all respects. This one alone
shall suffice to be instanced in, in stead of all the rest. All the precious
stones in the Priests breast plate were not be compared with the Urim and
Thummin: knowledge of that which ought to be done, and a readiness in doint
it, makes a complete man, a complete Christian, and a complete Ruler. Wherein
consists the excellency of Christ, as King of the Church, but in this, that the
Spirit of the Lord Isa. 11. 2.
rests upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord?

But will any kind of wisdom suffice Governors? No. It must be wisdom for
government. Sapientiam quam a Deo Solomon postulavi^ non eam intelligo qua fit
a est in (...), sed potius quae ad res greendas facit, and (...) seu (...)
consuevit appellari. P. M.
A wisdom to direct them how to go in and out. How to order all their
affairs, and each part of their Office upon all occasions to right ends, by a
strait rule, in due season, with respect to all circumstances, that what is
done may be just, honorable, seemly, and most graceful. A wise man's heart
discerns both time and judgment. Eccl. 8. 5. And the wisdom of the prudent
is to understand his way -. Prove. 14. 8. David was short of Solomon in point of
wisdom, and yet for government as well as in other respects he was a man after
Gods own heart, and therein a type of Christ who is often called David by the
Prophets. Some great Emperors were no Scholars without any great prejudice to
their good government. There is therefore a wisdom wherein Rulers may be
wanting. It Is no defect in the care that it cannot see nor in the eye that it
cannot hear. ^ut for a Ruler to have (like the Carvers head, which had art is
multum, and sensus nihil,) a great deal of skill in some kind, and yet no
understanding in matters of peculiar concernment, is not only dishonorable to
himself, but pernicious to his people in regard whereof that's too often
verified. The Prince that wants und^rstan^ing, (...). 28 ^6.
is also a great oppresson. Do but consider what Solomon the father gained by
wisdom, in this kind, and Rehoboam his son lost for want of it, and it will
suffice for a full proof of this point.

There is enough said to show the necessity and excellency of wisdom, the next
enquiry will be how it may be purchased, and therein the fourth Doctrine
instructs us.

One special means to attain unto wisdom, is prayer. We 4. Doct^.
need no more proof then those words of the Apostle James, If any of you lack
wisdom let him ask of God that James 1. 5.
gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given unto
him. Use, and memory, though very comprehensive, (...) Doct. lib. ^. cap. 8.
yet are too narrow to conclude all necessary meane^. Good books, good parts,
good counsel, Good example, and Gods Word, and the daily study and meditation
thereof Ama Sanctas (...), and amab^^ te sap^^nt^a. Hierod. ep. ^d Demetriadem.
do jointly and severally conduce much to get and perfect wisdom, but all in
vain without prayer. It Is God who gives wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge
to them that know understanding Dan. 2. 21.
. Your great Book-men are not always the ablest Statesmen. Much learning has
made some mad, and much business does little less. Parts without grace are
like to a crab-stocke that was never grafted on. Rehoboam had good Counselors,
but he knew not how to make use of them. The ^^le of Machiavell, that Princes
must hear their Counselors, but be led by their own dictates, perverts many,
and is perverted by them. Nothing is scorned so much as good example. Great
ones do not love to be presidented. As for the Scripture, that is most of all
despised. As the Familists jeare at Scripture-learning under pretense of the
Spirits teaching all things, The Prephecie of the spirit of love, by H. N.
so do some Statists in their affairs, as if Religion it self which is
learned from it made men both fools and cowards. But who dares speak against
omnipotent prayer? Luthers ph^ase
If all the rest avail any thing, this much more. For

1. Prayer alone can procure direction for, and blessing upon the true and
kindly use of all other means. Even diligence and industry are sometimes
cursed, because God, and his ordinance of prayer are neglected. Vain man would
be wise Job 11. 12.
, but God will not suffer it, Who resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble James 4. 6.
.

2. The blessing of all things whatsoever depends on prayer. There is an event,
and some issue of all that is said or done; but who can take any comfort though
his business prosper if he sought not unto God? Or who must have the blame but
our selves if any thing miscarry, when we restrained prayer aforehand? Strong
resolutions, vigorous endeavors, a prudent choice of fit instruments, the
nicke of time, all possible care come to nothing if God oppose, nay if God do
not graciously interpose. And when he is humbly sought unto in prayer, we speed
as Eliezer in his undertaking to provide a wife for Isaac, as if the things
which we desire ran on wheels Genes. 34. 15.
toward us.

3. Prayer is of all other means most efficacious. God will do that at the
humble request of his servants, which he will not do upon any other occasion.
Not upon the use of any other Ordinance. Daniel was at prayer, and the Angel
Gabriel interrupts him (pardon the phrase) with this message. I am now come
forth to give thee skill, and understanding (...) 20. 22 comp^^^^.
.

I Will conclude all in few words. There Is no wisdom so mean which we need not
pray for. That Is not fit to be had or desired which we are afraid to ask. To
have any at all, especially in mercy, and not be beholding to God for it, is
impossible. We may commence many degrees per saltum, if God please to show us
special favor. A few may get enough to save a whole Kingdom. The means to
attain it is within every Christians reach, and of daily use.

Thus much for the Doctrinall part of this exercise.

Now to make some special application of all the former An entrance into the
application.
points together. I Will not insist upon any use of reproof, but reserve that
entirely to my self. There needs no consutation. The points themselves are
matter of instruction. But exhortation is exceeding necessary, and that shall
be directed, 1. To all sorts in general without exception. And 2. more
particularly unto Governors.

For the general part of the exhortation. 1. Let us labor General
exhortation. 1. Branch.
to be sensible of the want of wisdom, and to be humbled for that want.
Consider we, 1. Who want it. 2. How far forth. And 3. the misery which is
upon us by reason of that want. Which of us can say I am wise, or I have my due
proportion either for the soul or for the body, or for outward things? We need
it every way in temporal things, and much more in spiritual, but most of all
for matters of eternity. And I fear we want it every way. Who knows how to
order as he ought to do so much as his own family, or his own person, any
one faculty, or the least member? It were good for us with David, to take heed
to our ways, that we sin not with our tongue, to keep our mouth with a
bridle while the wicked is before us Psalm. 39. 1.
. To make straight paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of
the way, and that it may rather be healed, according as the Epistle to the
Hebrews does persuade Heb. 12. 13.
. And, To give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God, which St. Paul gives in charge 1 Cor. 10. 32.
. But woe unto us because of offenses given, and needlessly received. Offenses
against God, against the weak, and the strong, those that are within, and
those that are without. Against one another, and against our enemies, who are
not a little strengthened and hardened by our folly. Differences might either be
prevented or lessened, or sooner remedied, (both the smaller and the greater
differences) if we had more wisdom. Families, Church, and State, our selves,
and posterity, are all in a perishing condition. If it be the property of a
wise woman to build her house, and of a foolish one to pluck it down with
their hands, as it is indeed Prove. 14. 1.
. We must needs bear our share in that reproach, for hitherto we have done
little else, which way soever we apply the words.

Secondly, let us consider the benefit of wisdom, that The second branch of
the general exhortation.
we may prize it, and hunger after it, as well for the excellency of it, as to
supply our want. A little wisdom may stand us in more stead then a great deal
of strength, witness that Parable or History, I know not whether to call it,
of the little City and few men in it, which was delivered by a poor wise man
from a great King who came and besieged it, and built bulwarks against it Eccl.
9. 14, 1^.
. If there be any Plaster that can heal our wounds, or any Physic to cure
that deadly disease whereof Church and State have long been sick, I Am sure
wisdom must be the principal ingredient. Is there any thing impossible to
this most Sovereign ^race? could each of us attain a due proportion, it would
reconcile all discord and enmity. That sweet promise would be accomplished. The
envy of Ephraim shall (...), and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off.
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim (...).
. There Is likely to be another Earthquake to rent not only the veil of the
Temple, but also the foundations of it. Nothing but wisdom can prevent this,
and I fear the (...) of wisdom must be brought forth before it will be
effected. A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong City, and
their contentions are like the bars of a Castle (...) 18. 19. (...).
.

Thirdly, let us pray earnestly for our selves, and one for anothert, that we
may be richly supplied with this grace, each of us according to our need in all
respects. For our King, in the same words that Solomon uses for himself, and
likewise for the Parliament. For our Armies, for all inferior Magistrates, for
the Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, and for all the people of the
Kingdom. That God would teach us to know our duties toward him, and one unto
another in every kind. It may be one reason why there is not sufficient wisdom
found among us, is, because we do not seek it, or if we desire it for our
selves, yet we care not how destitute others be. The Lord has enough in store
for us all. There is a special promise made to Christ in those words, Behold
my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very
high (...) 52. 13.
. All that are heirs of promise may plead their portion even in this. Christ
is made unto us wisdom, not only by imputation, but effusion. A spiritual
and heavenly wisdom is wrought in Gods children; whereby they are instructed
how to please, and glorify God, and how to work out their own salvation.
Yea, and how to carry themselves among men, wherein they sometimes so excel
that they are exceeding beneficial unto others, Josep^. Daniel, etc.
and their adversaries are either convinced, or astonished. The Libertines and
others were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which Steven spoke
Acts 6. 10.
. The promise which Christ made was general, to all the members of his Church.
I will give you a month and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be
able to gainsay, or resist (b). For matters of government, ( d) Luke 21. 15
there is that in Isaiah, -I will also make thy Officers peace, and thine
exactors righteousness Isaiah 60. 17
. Which implies, that when God blesses Church or State he will provide
governors for them that shall be wise as well as just, and so order things
that all may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2. 2.
. But it is as hard a matter to obey well, as to rule well; the rather because
the Powers which be are sometimes divided against God, and among themselves. In
the case between God and man its clearly resolved in the Scripture. That
question puts it out of question, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye Acts 4. 19.
. When the powers on earth are divided among themselves there is a great deal
of difficulty pretended, and yet if men were to resolve this case blindfold, I
mean abstractively from by respects and partiality, there is not one of a
thousand who consulting with the light of nature, or Scripture, would not
resolve for the less power in a just cause against the greater, when there is
nothing but greatness to support it. The Lord teach us all to learn this
lesson perfectly which has cost us so dear. Yet we shall do well in these
times to take in those words of David, And see if there be any wicked way in
me, and lead me in the way everlasting Psalm. 139. 24
.

Fourthly, let us enlarge and bound our desires about A fou^th branch of the
gene^all ex^^r^a^ion.
wisdom as we ought to do. If we need a manifold wisdom, let us not fear to
ask it, for God gives liberally. ^ut we must have respect unto our rank, and
station. Secret things, high things, other men's matters, needless things, and
curiosities must be let alone. The only wisdom is for every one to be wise
for himself; Prove. 9^ 2.
To know his own duty, and to do it. How to prevent offenses, and jealousies,
to reconcile differences, to deny our selves, and to promote a public good.
To seek God in due order, 1 Chr. 15. 13
and first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Ma^th. 6. 33.
To save our souls, though we lose the world. Chapter 16. 26.
To sear him who has power to cast soul and body into hell, Chapter 10. 28.
and not the oppressor. Isaiah 51. 13
To build Gods house, and not our own Hag. 1. 4.
. In a word, to kiss the son lest he be angry, Psalm. 2. 12.
and to make this our only design, that whether we live or die we may be the
Lords, Romans 14. 8.
and when Christ Jesus shall come the second time we may be found in the number
of those on the right hand, whom he will welcome to himself, saying, Come ye
blessed of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world Mat. 25. 34.
. Yet the times, and our condition in them call for more than all this. Pray we
therefore that the Lord would teach us how to strengthen our friends, to gain
our enemies, if it be possible. But above all, how we may glorify God, by
doing or suffering in the midst of all scandals and blasphemies, whereby he is
dishonored. How to use his ordinances aright. To try the spirits, and to know
his true Ministers from the messengers of Satan, who transform themselves into
Angels of light, Who be the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines, and
their tender Grapes, and what to do with them. Cant. ^, 15.


Yet one step further. Let Us practice, exercise, and manifest A fifth branch of
the general exhortation.
our wisdom in all affairs, and upon all occasions. When our Savior says, Be
wise ^s Serpents, and innocent as Doves Mat. 10. 17.
, he means it of a practical wisdom. There is a prudence which some
Moralists call prudentia practice practica *, which is of all other kinds the
most Pavonius in Ethicis, disput. 1. q. 2.
excellent. An ability of the mind whereby we know what is fit to be done, all
circumstances considered, and are inclined to do accordingly. If things were
so and so, as sometimes we fancy and desire, we could tell what to do, but as
they are, we are at our wits end. Our duty is to take the worst, and make the
best of it. He Is a skillful Pilot that knows how to order the ship in a storm,
so as to prevent shipwreck.

I Will conclude this general part of the exhortation with that of St. James,
Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? let him show out of a
good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom James 3. 13.
. And with St. Paul's charge, See that ye walk circumspectly, (or accurately
(...).
) not as fools, but as wise. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil
Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
.

As touching the second part of the exhortation, to The special exhortation
unto Governour^.
such as are in authority, and entrusted with the public weal, out of the
depth of affection which I bear them, and the righteous cause wherein they are
engaged, I desire with all due reverence, humility, and subjection, to spread
before them the following considerations, that their way may be like the path
of the just, which is ^s the shining light that shines more and more unto the
perfect day Prove. 4. 18.
.

The first consideration is this. The fear of the Lord is The first special
consideration.
the beginning of wisdom Prove. 1. 7.
. This is so much the more to be regarded, because it is so often repeated by
the Holy Ghost in Scripture Chapter 9. 10. Job 28 28. Psalm. 111. 10.
. If there were no more but a S^la^ in the close, there should be the more
diligent attention to it but being so often inculcated in the same book, and by
several men of God, our hearts should be deeply affected with it. Men that have
no fear of God before their eyes are seldom of Gods counsel. They plough not
with his heifer. I mean, they consult not with his Spirit in the word, no
wonder if they read not his riddles. All his counsels are to them like the
writing on the wall to Belshazzar. Yea, they have rejected the word of the
Lord, and what wisdom is (or can be) in them Ierem. 8 9.
? The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant P^^l. 25. 14.
. As for the wicked, it is with them as with Jerusalem. The things which made
for her peace were hid from her eyes Luke 19 42.
. Labor therefore to be really godly, that you may be truly wise, Have
respect unto all Gods Commandments, that ye may not be ashamed Psalm. 119. 6.
. Let his testimonies be your delight and counselors Verse. 24.
.

Secondly, There is a wisdom which God curses, beware The second consideration.
of it. He takes the wise in their own craftiness. And again, The Lord
knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain 1 Cor. 3. 19, ^0.
. Those words of the Prophet Isaiah are very dreadful. Behold, I will proceed
to do a mavelous work among this people, even a mavelous work, and a
wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding
of their prudent men shall be hid Isa. 29. 14.
. The causes assigned of this so fearful a judgment which the Prophet
(though most eloquent) wanted words to express, were Hypocrisy, and
Superstition in Religion. They that are not wise according to the Word for
Religion, shall not be wise for the good of the State; at least their wisdom
shall have no good success. Pharaohs wisdom was to keep Israel under Exodus 1.
10.
but thereby he multiplied strange plagues upon himself and people, and was
utterly overthrown in the red Sea, he and all his Host.

Balaams wisdom was to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel
Revel. 2. 14.
, to make them eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication. by
this means he thought to have brought them under a curse, but it lighted on
himself Number. 31. 8.
. And on the Moabites and Ammonites, Who were ever after to be looked upon as
bastards, and shut out of the Congregation of Israel unto the tenth generation
for ever Deu^. 23. 2, 3
. Achitophels wisdom was to make the difference between David and Absolon
irreconcilable, but God turned it into foolishness 2 Samuel 16. 21
. Jeroboams wisdom was to make Religion serve the State, but while he labored
to stablish himself by this means, he rooted out both his family, and the
Kingdom it self 1 King 12. 26, 28.
. The Jews were so wise as to reject Christ for fear lest the Romans should
take away them, and their Nation John 11. 48.
. The evil which they feared came upon them, the means which they used to
prevent a judgment, brought it upon them with expedition. Therefore let there
be no oppression neither of people, nor of Ministers. Religion must be pure,
and sincere. They who consult other men's mischief, shall procure their own.
No perpetual war but with the devil and sin. Let our Kingdoms be the Lords
and his Christ's in the first place entirely, lest we be no more a people. If he
be not the Cornerstone of the whole building both in Church and State, all will
prove but a Babel, and end accordingly.

Thirdly, consider this. Wisdom and Authority are The third consideration.
not always entailed. The Scribes and Pharisees fate in Moses his chair, and
yet were blind leaders of the blind. It Is one of Solomon's observations too
often verified. Folly is set in great dignity Ecel. 10. 6.
. But Job speaks more fully of the way of Gods judgments in this kind. He
leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools Job. 12. 17.
. The nineteenth chapter of the Prophecy of Isaiah is full of expressions to
this purpose. At the third verse, The spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst
thereof, and I will destroy the counsel thereof. At the eleventh verse, Surely
the Princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh
is become brutish. And in the thirteenth, They have also seduced Egypt, even
they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof. We are apt to desire more and
more power, but what gain we by that without wisdom? Great men had need to be
of all other most humble. And more care must be taken to know how to govern,
then to be able to command. If this were not an humbling day I should not touch
on this particular.

Yet give me leave to draw a little nearer. (...) fourth ^pe^^ll con^^deration
Consider the persons with whom, and the things wherein you have to do. As for
your enemies, I need not bid you beware of them; nor to distinguish of your
friends. I speak of the people generally. Among other observations touching
their disposition, there is one noted by Gildas of old, that they desire novi
aliquid audire, to hear of some new G^ldas in lib. de ex^id^^ Britanniae
ways: Hence it is that we have had so many changes among us, especially in
Religion. Your care must be not so much to please the people, as to do them
good. We are very greedy of things, and as soon weary of them. It might be
written over us, Unstable as water. A little slackning of the golden raines
has made too full a discovery of our weakness. But you have three Kingdoms
to look unto. Three distressed Kingdoms. He Is a skillful Physician that can
quickly heal or recover the best of them. Alas for poor England, the
distemper of it increases by the means of cure. Who would have thought so many
of her children would prove unnatural? Some T^res must needs be spared for the
Wheats sake. There may be good use of the woman of Tekoa's parable, if it be
well 2 Samuel 14. 6, 7.
applied.

There is yet another Kingdom about which you must Of the Kingdom of Christ.
bestow your greatest care. I mean the Kingdom of God, and of his Christ. In
reference to this, set your hearts upon that admonition which nearly concerns
all in authority. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of
the earth-. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
his wrath is kindled but a little-. Psalm. 2. 10, and 12
The question is not (as sometime in the Roman Senate) Tertul. in Apolog.
whether Christ shall be God or no? It Is resolved among all Christians that he
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And his Kingdom is given him of his
Father, and when and where he pleases he will rule as King even in the midst of
his enemies, Psalm. 110. 2.
and before they are aware. Luke 17. 20, and 21.
His Will in the Church is a Law, and therefore our only enquiry is, What is
the mind of Christ? In matters of Religion you may over-doe, and under-doe; too
much, and too little. I hope you will not be persuaded to look on, and be
neuters between Christ and Antichrist, betwixt God and Belial. There are
disputes about liberty and power. The things are certain, both from Christ,
how to set out the bounds of each, that they may consist and promote one
another in the Church is a task that will try all your wisdoms. Liberty must
reverence power, and power preserve liberty. The Lord help you to find out
the true means for both. I mean all this in matters of Religion. The World
has been mistaken in these things a great while, and Christ professedly wages
war with the Kings of the earth in these latter days, and shall overcome
them Rev. 17. 14.
. Yea, he invites all the Fowls of the air, and Beasts of the field to
banquet on the flesh of Kings, Captains, great and small, etc. (...) ^^. 17, 18
Which argues there is some neglect toward him, and yet we know subjection to
him and faith in him have been pretended for many generations. But we have not
learned Christ as we ought to do. If we shall still stumble at this stone, we
shall be broken at the last.

And further. Compare your work with Solomon's, the The (...) spe^iall
^^nside^ation.
advantages, and di^advantages, how far forth it is alike, or unlike. It Is
alike in these things. 1. He had the sons of ^^rviah as a special charge
(...).
, they were too strong for David his father, but it was expected at his hands
that he should see justice executed on them. It Is looked for at your hands that
enemies to the State, and grand delinquents should be brought unto condign
punishment impartially; for wherefore else has the Kingdom engaged themselves
to live and die with you? 2. There was a Temple to be built in his days. And
now is the time that God will raise up the Tabernacle of David that was fallen,
and close up the breaches thereof, and raise up his ruins, and build it as in
the days of old Mi^a^. 9. 11.
.

3. He had the government of Gods people, and so it is now. The people of this
Kingdom are in covenant with God. Yet the case differs very much. 1. He had
peace round about, we are in the midst of war. 2. He was himself a King. But
the supply of our Kings failings are expected at your hands. Let none of those
evils be found (...)
in Y^^u, or your Committees, which your selves have complained of in his Court
and Counselors. He that has called you unto all this will I hope enable you
through his own Almighty power, for his mercy sake.

And now bethink your selves what means are The sixth special consideration
used to corrupt your wisdom. Some use threatenings, accusations, and slanders.
Yea, grievous things are laid unto your charge, and all this to affright you
from your resolutions and endeavors. Even among your friends there are too
many that raise mists, and scare you with threats of losing a party. etc. There
be many hypocrites, and fiatterers. Yea, and many Shimer's who in the beginning
of our troubles looked upon you as bloody men, and men of Belial 2 Samuel 16. 7.
, and now come and submit themselves as he did Chapter 19. 16.
, I hope you will distinguish of them. There is a generation who look for much
at your hands, and yet ask nothing, I mean by way of humble petition. When
they find you or themselves in such a posture as that they cannot be denied,
it may be you may hear of them. Besides the many loose, profane, and
scandalous Ministers, there are a new sort arisen among us, who have thrust
themselves into the Lords Vineyard. It Is no less then persecution (so they
commonly give out) to desire that their suspicious opinions may be examined
according to the Word of God, and they commanded to forbear the publishing and
spreading of them for the present. There be many dangerous books abroad,
dangerous at least; I le say no more.

The names of certain books which have crept abroad of late.

Liberty of Conscience. The bloody Tenent. The compassionate Samaritan. John
Baptist.
From among your selves there did one arise, the forerunner of all these,
called, the Interest of England; which is the rather to be taken notice of,
because it gave occasion to the rest. The Calling of Ministers, the power of
Magistrates in matter of Religion, the Law of God it self, are all struck at.
As touching the Calling or Office of Ministers, I Will say nothing for the
vindication of it, lest I might seem partial. Our Lord Christ Jesus, whose we
are, and whom we serve, will right himself as he pleases upon all those who
revile any Ordinance or Servants of his own appointing. You will not be
wanting to your selves. Your work is easy, if it be no more then to repeal
all Laws already made in matter of Religion and to bind your selves from ever
meddling in such matters hereafter. One of those books The bl^o^y ^^nen^.
is reported to be burnt by Order. The shell is sometimes thrown into the
fire, when the kernel is eaten as a sweet morsel. But I am persuaded better
things of you, though I thus speak. I beseech you see the Law of God righted.
Never think those men will make man's Law a rule to walk by, whatsoever they
pretend, who disclaim Gods own Law in that respect.

Consider also what helps God has graciously provided for The seventh
^onsideration.
your encouragement, and the increasing of your wisdom, and improve them. You
have the prayers of many faithful Ministers, ordinary and extraordinary. More
Sermons have been preached unto your ears, and printed for your eyes, then for
any one Parliament, yea then for all the Parliaments that have been before you.
There are some daily consulting by your Authority what advice to give you in
matters of Religion. They have not such titles among them as Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and it may be they are not looked upon as
equally learned, but I hope they will approve themselves both able and
faithful. I Am sure they love you better and more sincerely. And I believe you
consult with them not as Ahab with Micaiah, with a great deal of prejudice.
Nor as the Elders and people of the Jews with Jeremiah Jer. ^2. 5, 6.
, who pretended fair, for thus they spoke. The Lord be a true and faithful
witness between us if we do not even according to all things for the which
the Lord thy God shall send thee to us, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, We will obey the voice of the Lord our God to whom we send thee, that it
may be well with us when we obey the voice of the Lord our God. But when it
came to trial, this was the conclusion, Chapter 44, 16, 17. As for the word that
thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not harken unto thee;
But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth,
etc.

Nor as Henry the eighth with the masters of the new learning See the preface
before Bishop Cranmers confutation of unwritten verities.
(as the first endeavors for Reformation were called) to have their consent
that all Ecclesiastical Revenue might be alienated from Ecclesiastical use,
and be disposed of by Him arbitrarily, which they opposed, and thereupon he
made the Whip with six strings to scourge them withal, I mean the six
Articles, which drew out the heart blood of many of them. But as Cornelius and
his friends with Peter, -We are all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God Acts 10. 33.
. Go on as you have begun, and reverence their advice. The Father of lights
make his own ways plain both before them, and you, to walk in. They consult
the good of the Kingdom, but they also stand in need of your wisdom and
authority, as for their vindication from unjust aspersions, so also for
necessary supplies to uphold them in their work.

Yet again for your selves. Consider the special things The eighth
consideration.
wherein Solomon's wisdom did appear, and follow them close as you have
occasion. He peremptorily denied unreasonable Petitions, though preferred by
his own mother in his brothers behalf 1 Kings 2. 23
. Some think him too severe in the judgment against Adonijah for point of
death Sir W. Ralegh in Hist. of the World, 1 part, 2 b. 18 chapter 1 sect.
, but I never heard of any who suspected his wisdom in refusing to grant him
Haggith. He that blames the one gives strong reasons for the other. You have
multitude of Petitions before you, and may have more; I make no question but
you will distinguish of them. Only remember, delays are denials, it is as great
an injury not to hear and grant some, as it would be to yield unto all (...) 9.
. 2. He took the first opportunity to execute justice on grand delinquents,
Joab, Shimei, A^iathar, etc. and would not leave them to offend a second time.
Mercy is so good, it is a thousand pitties it should be misplaced. 3. He judged
her to be no true mother who would have the living child divided K^ng^ 3. 27
. And certainly they are without natural affection who desire to have the
Kingdom still divided, and to make wars endless. 4. He set himself to build
the Temple for the Lord, before he built his own house 1 Kings 6. ^8, compared
w^t^ 7. 1.
. Oh that we had sought God in due order in this respect. Let us redeem the
time. 5. There was order, beauty, and comeliness in all things belonging to his
Kingdom 1 Kings 10. 4, 5.
. Order and beauty is the end which you aim at, hasten to it apace, and let
not all run into confusion. 6. The beginning of his reign was in blood,
only for execution of justice; his latter end was peaceable, and that peace
most glorious. Your beginnings were the same, let it not repent you, be true to
your principles, and we shall see alike glorious issue.

Consider also his failings, and beware of them. 1. He had The ninth
consideration.
many wives, even seven hundred Wives, Princesses, and three hundred Concubines
1 Kings 11. ^.
. Let not us have as many Religions. There Is some anology between the one and
the other. 2. There was in his days first a connivance at Idolatry, then open
toleration, and withal Apostasy. His wives turned away his heart after other
gods, verse. 4. He built an high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moah, and
for Molech the abomination of the children of Ammon. And likewise did he for
all his strange wives, - Verse. 7, 8. Observe the gradation, first connivance.
Then open toleration. Herewithall apostasy. What shall we think of Solomon?
The papists picture him between Heaven and Hell. Some Divines, though they
resolve it affirmatively, Perkins cases of conscience:
yet they make a case of conscience of it, whether he were saved or no. Behold
in him a perfect pattern of humane frailty. Let him that stands take heed
lest he fall.

To prevent the like we have a Covenant. God and his The Covenant urged.
Angels are witnesses of it. The public faith of the Kingdom is engaged in
it. The stones of these walls, and the timber of this house will rise up in
judgment against us if we forget it. Copies of it are by your own Order sent
abroad to all the reformed Churches. And though there be no comparison between
a man's covenant and Gods, yet I hope I may say of this, it is Holy, Just and
Good. Urge it. Renew it, but above all, Keep it. Brethren I speak after the
manner of men. Though it be but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man
disanulleth or adds thereto, Gal. 3. 15. England shall be England, or as
Sodom and Gomorrah, according as it breaks or keeps this Covenant. And if we
be steadfast herein, we shall be wiser in this respect then Solomon himself.

The next head which I desire you to think on is this. It The tenth
consideration.
rests upon you to be thankful for the great measure of wisdom which God has
graciously bestowed on you. The work before you has been exceeding great,
all along very difficult and perplexed. The experience which many of you had
before was not great. How many have fainted under the burden? Who knows not
the number and quality of your adversaries? The plots and treacheries which you
have discovered, prevented, or made advantage of, are known to all. The
business of Sea, and Land, peace and war, at home and abroad, Religion and
Justice is all in your hands. I hope you have managed all to the satisfaction
of your own consciences. Some envy at your proceedings. Many bless God daily
for you. Your proud enemies are at their wits end. They who have tried both
sides settle with you at last. Your fears fall off as leaves in Winter. Your
hopes do yet flourish and wax green. How often has the enemy changed place,
like wandering Stars? you are yet fixed in your Orb, and at rest like the
Center. All these are the fruits of Gods wisdom bestowed on you. Be thankful,
be very thankful. What you have done, and what you have suffered, will be a
good foundation for your selves and families to succeeding generations. But in
this case remember Rabshakeths words, though he meant them ill, there is a good
use to be made of them, Say not I have council and strength for the war
Isaiah 36. 4.
. But as the ^fa^ est and ab ^oste doceri.
Psalmist, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise, etc.
Psalm. 115. 1.
.

Yet for all the wisdom which you have be humble. Remember The eleventh
consideration.
the gracious items which the Holy Ghost gives unto all sorts of men, without
exception. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine
own understanding Prove. 3. 5, 7.
. And in the same place, a little after, Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear
the Lord, and depart from evil. I may not omit the Lords charge, Jer. 9. ^3.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might, etc. You had need be humble lest wisdom pervert you Isaiah 47. 10
. Lest it be mingled with a spirit of errors Chapter 19. 14.
. Lest God cast you down in stony places to make his own words sweet unto you,
Psalm. 141. 6,

I have but one word more, and that shall be for consolation. The twelfth
consideration.
The burden of judging lies not wholly upon your shoulder. In the business of
the Church Christ stands charged with it as well as you Genesis 18. 25.
. And God himself is Judge of all the earth. Isaiah 6. 9.
Yea, he is with you in judgment 2 Chr. 19. 7.
A God in the midst of Gods Psalm. 82. 1.
. He will pity your frailty, and supply your defects. His wisdom shall richly
supply whatsoever is wanting in yours. Endeavor your whole duty. Pray, and
pray earnestly, that your love (to the Kingdom) may abound in all wisdom.
Nothing remains but that we strive together in prayer with you, and for you.

FINIS.

