THis Discourse (entitled, The godly man's Choice) written by a now deceased
friend, together with those directions added by a reverend Divine yet living, I
approve to be printed and published.

Joseph Caryl.
July 24. 1644.
THE GODLY MAN'S CHOICE: OR A Direction how single godly persons, who intend
Marriage, may make choice of a fit and meet Yoak-fellow. Being the Meditations
of Caleb Grantham in his single estate, as a Rule and Guide for himself to walk
by. And since his death perused and published with some profitable directions
how persons should live as becomes Christians in the married estate.

By Henry Scudder, Minister of the Word.

Prove. 19. 14. Houses and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers, and a
prudent wife is from the Lord. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for Henry
Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, Earl of Exeter, Baron of Burley, etc.
Noble Lord,
MAny whose eyes are upon your Lordship, do acknowledge the good hand of the
Lord toward you, not in conferring eminency of honor upon you in your
minority, (as it were, before your time) but in giving you a serious
discerning spirit, far above your years, whereby they conceive great hope,
and power out many prayers to the Lord, that he may in due time bring you forth
in public, as a choice Instrument in the hand of your God, to do worthily
Ruth 4. 11
in Ephratah, and to be famous in Bethlehem.

Among others the publishers of this small Treatise, (part whereof being the
Meditatio^s, of a pious young man, now with God, and the residue the labor of a
reverend Divine) to declare their great affection to your Lordship, have
importuned me to recommend this Tractate to your Honor, conceiving, that
under your Lordships Name these Meditations not only may appear to the world
with some access of luster, but that the influence they may have upon some
hereby may prove more available.

The subject herein handled, is about the choice of that which scarce yet ever
entered into your serious thoughts, yet it is wisdom to store up good rules
before you need to use them: Mariners learn their skill before they launch
into the deeps: All Artists study the Theory before the Practice; Wise men are
long in contemplation, before they adventure upon action: It Is a known rule,
Deliberation must be long, where Determination can be but once; and where there
is no admission of second thoughts to reverse a former error, the first
thoughts must be careful, that error be prevented.

In the interim, before the Lord incline your heart to think of any choice that
way on earth, be entreated to make your choice in heaven; that the Lord Jesus
may be the guide of your youth, and so the God of your age, that God may say of
you: I remember the kindness Jere. 2. 2.
of thy youth, and the love of thy espousals.

Surely it can be no disparagement, for the greatest of men to betroth
themselves to the great God, to contract spiritual alliance with innumerable
companies of Heb. 12. 22, 23.
Angels and Souls made perfect, and to match with him Ephesians. 3. 15.
of whom the whole family of Heaven and Earth is called.

Satan has done his utmost to brand the servants of God with ignominy, and to
deter men of quality from owning the way called holy. It is not long since
some of our Nobility, eminent E. M.
for piety, paralleled our age with the sad times of Cogunt^^ ^ss^ ma^^^ (...)
^sse v^les Sal* de Prove.
Salvian, wherein the complaint was, that great men were forced to be more
sinful, that they might not be reputed to be less honorable.

But God has begun to take away the reproach of his people from off the earth;
and doubtless, will make his servants an eternal excellency, when men of
carnal policies shall be made an abhorring to all s^. 66. 24.
flesh.

You cannot make any choice higher, nor is it possible you should begin too
soon to love him, who has loved you from all eternity. Love of all
affections is most active, and in youth predominant; It Is restles till it fix,
and if it fix any where below Christ, it debaseth it self, and may easily be
enthralled, but cannot easily be disingaged: What pity is it those vital
streams should run in a channel that goes down to the Chambers of death?

I hope the Father of mercies is looking toward your Lordship, and saying unto
you as once unto his Church, Surely, this is a time of love. Ezekiel. 16. 8.
Your pious mother, whom I may truly call an Elect Lady, is to your Lordship
as another Monicha to Saint Augustine; You are the son of many prayers: and
as Solomon was to Bathsheba, You are the son, not only of her womb, but of
her vows; Pro. 31 1.
She has learned to love Filii diligend^ sunt in Deo, (...) propter Deum.
you in the Lord, and for the Lord: The longings of her soul, are for your
spiritual Quid Christus nisi Deum in nobis dilexit, non quem habebamus sed ut
haberemus, Lomb. l. 3. D. 27.
and eternal good. It is one of her greatest comforts on earth, that she has
such a son to call her mother: But it will be far greater, even the Crown
of her glory, to see you the adopted son of the eternal Father, and that God
has honored you, even in your youth, to obtain an Inheritance among them that
are sanctified.

You are left in your fathers family, with your hopeful sister, as the only
branches of many, which have long since ceased from among men. And when the
destroying Angel was smiting all, the Father of mercies looked upon you, and
said, Destroy him not, for a blessing Isa. 65. 8.
is in him.

The Lord delight to fill you with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things,
and make it every day more and more appear, that God has reserved you to be
blessed, and to be a blessing to your family, to your Country, and to the
Kingdoms. And when your Lordship* settles in the world, you may begin with
Josuahs fixed resolution, I and my house will serve the Jos. 24. 15
Lord. And that you may show forth the grace of him that has called you out of
darkness, and the shadow of death, into his mavelous light; that they that
observe your Lordship may see, that greatness and goodness, as they are
inseparable in God, so they are not incompatible to the sons of men. That so
you may rejoice above all greatness, that you have your name written in the
Lambs book of life, and you may look beyond death* and the grave, and see your
greatest portion in eternity; which is the earnest prayer of

Your Lordships servant, JER: WHITTAKER.

To the Christian READER.
THese directions following, which teach how to make a wise and godly choice of
a meet yoak-fellow in marriage, were put into my hands by a near friend of the
Author, to consider whether they were fit to be made public, and to give my
judgment thereof.

I was very much taken with the soundness, plainness, cleernes, fulness, and
good composure of them, and do judge that they may be of excellent use to put
single persons into Gods way, the only right way of entering into the honorable
estate of marriage, a matter of greatest consequence concerning Man's weal or
woe in this life, according as it is well or ill done.

The composer of these choice Rules or Directions, was a most ingenious and
holy young man, of good learning and rare parts, he studied before hand, and
practiced these Rules, which he had gathered out of the Oracles of God; and he
had God going along with him: for he gave him a wife according to his desire,
with whom he lived but a short time, it pleasing the Lord (in favor to him to
take him away from the evil to come.

The memory of the just Prove. 10.
is blessed: Some erect monuments in Marble, that their name may be kept in
perpetual remembrance: And it was the manner in some places, that in their
mourning for their dead friends, they held forth and showed some of their Act.
9. 39.
most excellent works which they wrought while they lived.

I think a better monument cannot be raised, nor better means can be used to
preserve this man's name, most precious, sweet, and ever living, and most
profitable to posterity, then by making this his work public to the Churches
of God.

These are such as will alike serve to direct a single woman in her acceptance,
and choice of an husband, and to teach parents how to make choice of husbands
and wives for their children, as well as to direct a man to make a good choice
of a wife.

I commend unto all the practice of this our brother for their imitation, that
every one study and endeavor to know and to do the works and duties of the
places and conditions wherein God has set them, that they may walk with God,
and please him therein.

Amongst the secondary evidences of being in state of grace, and accepted with
God, I know none more clear and certain then this, that a Believer in Christ
Jesus do add unto his faith a conscionable care to please God in the well
doing the work of his particular calling and relation.

I cannot think that a man has any more power of godliness, then as he shall
respectively endeavor to manifest it in the particular calling and condition of
life wherein God has placed him, as well as in his general.

For an upright man, as he will (as David did) keep himself from his iniquity,
that is, the Psalm. 18. 23.
iniquity which through his natural corruption he was most prone unto, and to
which through the particular condition of his life, he was most tempted and in
greatest danger, so his special care will be to do the duty of his own place,
to do that work which God in special has given him Joh. 17. 4.
to do.

The Apostle, in diverse places, after he had delivered the doctrine of faith,
he subjoyneth the doctrine of good works. First, more generally, as the effects
and evidences of a lively faith, and then he descends to particular duties of
men and women, according to their several ranks and relations, as of Wives to
their Husbands, Ephesians. 5. 22.
and Husbands to their Wives, of Children to Parents, and Col. 3. 18.
of Parents to their Children, of Servants to their Masters, Tit. 2. 17.
and of Masters to their Servants, as the effects and evidences of true
sanctity.

Where a general good conversation is not endeavored, there faith is not
alive, but dead, and if a man think he Jam. 2. 17.
has faith, and has not works, he deceives himself: so if he think he has
works, because he does many of the works of holiness and righteousness, which
his general calling to Christiaanity leads him unto, but yet does not the
work, which God particularly has given him to do, he also deceives himself,
and he may fear that the holiness and righteousness which he seemed to have, is
not sound.

Whosoever shall be desirous to make use of these Directions, to make a good
entrance into marriage, will, I think, be as desirous to know how to live, as
becomes Christians when they are married. Wherefore for their help I have
added unto the end of these directions, some others touching Husbands and
wives, their loving and living together, so as they may please God, and may
live comfortably and happily in the married condition.

Both these directions I commend to all that desire information herein, and
also commend you, and these to be blessed to you, by God, the instituter of the
ordinance of marriage, to whom be ascribed, as most due is, all honor and
glory now and for ever.

Yours to serve you in the Lord, HENRY SCUDDER, Pastor of Collingburn Ducis in
Wilts.
July 23. 1644.
The Godly man's Choice.
EVery end has its proper way and means appertaining to it. All ways will not
equally alike lead to the same end; there is a contrary way that will never
bring thee to it. There is a crooked and indirect way, that may perhaps, but
with much trouble and labor; but then there is a straight and direct way, and
this is that way, which will both with ease and pleasure, bring thee to thy
desired end. This is the way which all men grope after, but few can find it.

Now if to marry, and to marry in the Lord, a wife and a good wife, one with
whom thou may begin thy days with joy, continue them in quiet, and end them
with comfort, if this be the end of thy thoughts, then surely the most direct
and straight way to obtain it, will be to seek her of God. Not a few are the
inducements to move us to this course.

1. Because he is best able to guide and direct you to the finding of her; she
is a flower that grows not in every garden, an herb that is not in every
field, she is not to be found in every house; you may seek long enough ere you
find, and finding be deceived, unless God direct you.

2. She cannot be had from any other but from him, he it is, who is the great
Patron, in whose family are all the prudent, wise, virtuous, religious persons
that are to be desired; and if thou would have one of these, apply thy self
to obtain his favor, so shall thou find a good wife, Pro. 18. 22. In other
families Pro. 18. 22.
no doubt thou may find a rich wife, a beautiful wife, but a prudent wife is
Pro. 19. 14.
from the Lord, Pro. 19. 14.

3. It is the easiest way to find her. Mercies (though great) yet when they
cannot but with great difficulty be obtained, it either disheartens us in the
pursuit of them, or else abates the sweetness in the enjoyment of them; but
with how much content and delight is the heart filled when it apprehends a
great mercy, tumbling into his lap? Would thou obtain a good wife, (which of
temporal mercies is the greatest) lo, this is the most compendious way: sit
thou still, do but seek and wait, and at length thou shall as it were behold
God bringing her in his hand, and offering her to thee: we see Adam slept while
God brought Eve unto him, Genesis 2. 21
Genesis 2. 21.

4. Never any found, that did not thus seek; many indeed have wandered and roved
over this wide world, seeking in every place, casting their eyes in every
corner, through City and Country, Town and Village, but after the most
diligent scrutinie, what have they at length found? Peradventure riches. Alas!
that is vanishing. It may be, honor, that is a burden; perchance beauty, that is
vanity, at the best; or civility, and that is but gilded impiety; yea, should
they at length stumble on a good wife, yet if not thus sought, they shall
either not long enjoy her, or else not so comfortably, because of many bitter
ingredients which God will cast into it, which otherwise might have been a
sweet portion.

5. Otherwise in stead of finding a blessing, thou may find a curse; what
greater blessing then to enjoy a meet help, one who may rejoice thy heart in
this thy pilgrimage, one who may accompany thee, and cheer thee up in the way,
when thou art treading many a weary step to the land of rest? But on the
contrary, what heavier curse can thou groan under, to what soarer vexation
can thou be yoak't to, then to an unequal yoak-fellow? It is that which will
imbitter all thy comforts, bereave thee of all thy delights, rob thee of all
thy contentments, yea make thy life wearisome, and death uncomfortable.

6. Hence it is, that they who otherwise seek, inherit so much anxiety and
trouble in their seeking, who in stead of imploring Gods aid and assistance,
employ their own wits in contriving how to accomplish their desires: and if
their ends fail, and their expectations are crossed, how are they disturbed
with the thought of it, their spirits being dull and stupid, their minds
altogether lost in that which they desire to find, consume and wear out all
their comfort and content in the pursuit of that which now they become
incapable to attain: being bereaved of themselves, their comforts, and
peradventure their wits all at once: so at length make themselves fitter for
Bedlam then the marriage bed; when as on the contrary, those who set themselves
to seek her of God, enjoy much pleasure and quiet in seeking, contentment in
finding, and comfort in the possessing.

7. Hereby shall thou yield unto him due obeisance, acknowledging him to be thy
supreme governor, going to him as children to the Parent, for guidance and
direction in all their affairs; a thing well-pleasing unto him. But if on the
contrary, we will rush into such weighty businesses, and venture our selves
upon things of so great concernment, without acquainting him with it, or
seeking to him for it, or imploring his aid and assistance for the
accomplishing of it: what is it but to pluck our necks from his yoke, casting
off all obedience and subjection to him, as if we had no dependence on him;
and therefore would slight all direction from him?

8. Then lastly how ever it fall out, thou may find comfort in it: Be she
virtuous or vicious; if virtuous, then comfort will flow in, on every side;
great comfort will redound to thee, that God was graciously pleased to bend his
ear unto thee, and give thee so favorable a pledge of his loving kindness.
Every time thou casts thine eye upon her, thou may with rejoicing cast up
thine eyes to God, and say, Lo, this is the wife that thou have given me, and
bless him in that thou have so goodly an heritage. If vicious, yet if thou
have the inward testimony of thy conscience, bearing thee witness, that thou
did sincerely commit thy way unto the Lord, and roll thy self upon him for
direction in it: Lo here thou may assuredly take comfort that all shall be
for thy good: he who brought thee to this condition, shall support thee in it;
he will either lighten the weight of thy burden, or strengthen the weakness of
thy shoulders. But now if this web of trouble has been of thine own weaving,
if by thine own negligence thou have been much wanting in thy duty to God, and
by indirect means have haled this cross upon thee, and God not cast it on
thee, then lay thy hand upon thy mouth, patiently submit, repentance is fitter
for thee then comfort.

Now, who will not but easily be convinced, that no course is like this, for the
procurement of a good wife? It were well if our hearts could as easily be
brought to subject to the practice of it, as our minds brought to submit to the
truth of it.

But here it may be demanded, how or in what manner must God be sought, and
dealt withal, by those who desire this blessing?

The only way as for this, so for all other mercies, is prayer; a means, under
which may well be written, Probatum est: for seldom any who diligently applied
themselves to this way, ever failed of their end; therefore let it be your study
in the best manner you are able, to direct your supplications to him to this
purpose.

1. That he would give you wisdom and understanding in your choice (for only
the wise in choice seal to their joys) that when any one is presented to your
view, that your heart might not be taken either with their beauty or riches, or
natural endowments, so as to be careless and negligent in seeking and
searching after that, which is the main: That grace in her heart may be the
only orient pearl that shines so bright in your eyes. Had we indeed nothing
but a corporal substance, then beauty, riches, honor, and the like, might be
chiefly desired and most sought after, as things most agreeable and delightful
unto sense: but we are endowed with a most noble soul, too high born to feed
on such husks; all these will afford no more relish, then the white of an egg.
Therefore other dainties must be provided, other qualifications must be sought
for, which may be more suitable to this noble faculty: And what can that be but
grace? that alone is the dainties with which the soul thrives: shall therefore
the chiefest of our desires, and the greatest of our endeavors be laid out for
that which will nourish the body, but poison the soul; which will feed the
slave, but starve the child? God forbid: yet thus many do, and thus shall we
do if God withdraw from us his wisdom, and deliver us up to our own folly.

2. Again, beg of God, that he would never knit thy affections to any whose
affections he has not knit to himself; that thy love might never be sincere
to them, whose love is not sincere to God. And because we many times see that
there may be a rotten karkasse under a fair Sepulcher, and deadly poison under
a smooth skin, that there may be gall and bitterness in their hearts, whose
mouths drop as the honey, and the honey comb: that there may be loathsome
hypocrisy under the fair shows of sincerity: And because God alone searches
the heart, and tries the reins, we can judge only by outward appearance:
therefore desire of him, that he would search and try them; and see if there be
any way of iniquity found in them, and discover it to you, that so your
affections might not be as some men's eyes, led astray with false fire.

3. Now if upon discovery it evidently appears, that as yet the truth of grace
is not wrought in her heart: then earnestly beg of God, that he would withdraw
thy affections, and take away the edge of them: for it is to be questioned,
whether thy heart be sincerely gracious, if thy affections can be sincere to
them which are graceless. Fling not the reins of thy love upon the neck of thy
affections, but beg of God that he who subdueth all things to himself, would
subdue thy affections, and bring them into subjection to his will, that they
might be like the Captains servant, to go and come at his pleasure.

4. But now if thou have so far engaged thy self, that it is neither able nor
lawful for thee to withdraw thy affections, and yet can not evidently
perceive that there is truth of grace in her heart, then double thy requests
before God, pray, and pray earnestly, that he would bestow on her his
distinguishing mercies, that he would implant the seeds of saving grace in her
heart, and make them to appear in her life; give not over night or day; give
not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thy eye lids, till thou have obtained
this for her; what fellowship has light with darkness, or Christ with Belial?
yea enlarge thy requests unto God, that he would first unite her unto Christ,
before he joins her unto thee: that he would first marry her unto his Son,
before he marries her unto thee; that he would make her one with him, before he
make her one with thee; that he would make you members of one head, before he
make you one body; that ye might be both one spirit, before ye are one flesh;
that he would first join your hearts, and then join your hands.

5. Now if by diligent search it does manifestly appear, that God has done
more then ordinarily for her soul, that there are the impressions of a new
creature stamped upon her, and that the pangs of the new birth are over, then
the chief, but yet not all thy work is done: thou may not presently sit down
and conclude, This is a wife for me and I will be an husband for her. No, there
is yet a further inquiry to be made: for as thou may not make choice of any
who is not godly, so neither may thou choose of every one that is; she may be
good, yet not good for thee, she may be a fit wife, yet not fit for thee.
Further therefore enlarge thy requests, that God would provide for thee not
only a good wife, but a meet wife, meet in every respect.

1. In regard of age, a green head will not suit with gray hairs, neither do
we usually graft young plants upon old stocks: to see youth joined to age, is a
thing no less ridiculous to others, then incongruous in it self; such matches
never please any but the parties; yea and them but for a while.

2. A meetnesse not only in regard of age, but parentage would be convenient:
let birds of a feather flock together, pares cum paribus. The Eagle will not
join herself with a Sparrow, neither is it fit for an Ass to associate with a
Lion, they seldom join without confusion, which is commonly the event of such
unequal matches, being begun with the discord of parents, and end for the most
part in the dissension of parties.

3. Seek a meetnesse in regard of estate in some equal proportion*; though
means ought not chiefly to be sought, so neither altogether to be neglected.

1. Marry not one that has naught, lest she be set at naught by thee, or by
thy friends. Rachel was not so much despised for her barren womb, as many now
are for their barren purse.

2. Again, seek not one whose estate does far surpass Jer. 45. 5.
thine, Jerem. 45. 5. *Indeed if God by his providence cast such an one upon
thee, thou may embrace it; but it is one thing to seek it, and another thing
to have it cast upon thee. But this is the Haven which most men desire, and
here lies the rock on which many men are split. Some are so desirous of
riches, that no competent portion will serve their turn, but having many large
proffers, yet remain unsatisfied, and so while they covet all, at length
perhaps lose all; so that there is danger in seeking, what is there then in
finding a wife richly laden? Surely that saying is true: Non videmus idmanticae
quod in tergo est, we see not that part of the wallet that is behind, we view
the forepart of her wallet laden with wealth, and there we fix our eyes,
without either care or desire to look further: But had we wisdom to cast our
eyes into that part, which is behind, we should behold it filled with sorrow and
trouble in full measure, thrust down, heapt up; yea, if not running over. How
many inconveniences attend such marriages, they best know who feel the weight
of them, and groan under the burden of them; yet some there are, which reason
and daily experience inform us of; as first, thou do incur the danger of
losing all thy right of respect that is due unto thee, who in stead of
reverencing thee, will disrespect thee, in stead of making thee her head, will
set thee at her feet: and because in riches she weighes most, therefore she
will look in authority to sway most: she whose desire should be to thee, now
thine must be to her; and because she has brought thee thy estate, therefore
will she take upon her, without controlment, to consume thy estate. And if by
words or actions thou any way show thy dislike, thou shall soon find it, to the
loss of thy peace, and the increase of thy daily trouble and vexation: yea, to
an higher pitch will this flame arise, if there be not grace to qualify it.

3. There should be a respect had to her constitution, and disposition; two
passionate natures will not well agree: much like the meeting of two
millstones, when there is no corn between, it enda^gers the firing of the
whole Mill: little peace and great trouble is the portion of that family where
such meet. Neither will two melancholy bodies suit well; when any cross or
trouble befalls them, how will they be able to bear one another burden, or
comfort one another, when as melancholy, the nourisher of grief, is as much
predominant in the one as in the other?

By this then it may plainly appear, that it is a business of great
importance; wisdom is not more necessary and beneficial, neither is
rashness more obnoxious in any thing then in this: *For being once done, it
cannot be undone. Why is it, that every corner almost echoes with these or the
like complaints? One will say, I would I had never seen thy face; another will
say, I never enjoyed merry day since I knew thee; a third, I would I were
unmarried again. Some bewailing their condition with tears, others railing
with oaths, and a third raging with curses: All which is nothing else but the
fruit of an indiscreet and unadvised brain, which leapt before they looked, and
so run headlong upon their own ruin.

But now if by thy diligent prayers God has been so gracious to thee, as to
bring to thy view, and to thy proffer, one endowed with all those
qualifications before mentioned, and so every way fit for thee, yet before thou
setlest thy self to woo her, woo both thy friends and her friends, labor to
obtain their free will and consent unto it; you know the proverb, Stolen goods
will not prosper, if thou take her, without her friends consent, she is no
better then stolen, for thou violently take from them, that which they do not
willingly give thee: and how can thou expect a blessing should accompany this
thievish match? Again, if thou give thy self to her, without thy friends
consent, thou robbest them of their privilege, and becom'st thine own carver,
a thing contrary to the rules of reason, and Gods word. Against the rules of
reason: for what more reasonable then for a man to dispose of his own, and
what more his own then his children? They are the parents right, they brought
them into the world, they came out of their own loins, and were bred up at
their own breasts; they have suffered much, and done much for them: How many
sick sits, and weak faintings were they subject to in their conception? How
many terrible pangs and painful dolours did accompany their production? With
what diligent care and fervent pains, and frequent cost were they at for their
education? How many a wakeful night, and wearisome rest, and tedious thoughts,
and doleful tears, and earnest prayers, have they poured out for them? Let
not him be worthy the name of a child, who having received thus much from their
parents, will not with all possible subjection acknowledge it. And what better
testimony of thy acknowledgement can thou give, then in this, to submit thy
self to him, who (under God) has been the cause of thy being, and so
earnestly seeks after thy well-being? It is a part of the parents duty
seasonably and carefully to provide in this kind for their children. Thus did
Abraham for his son Isaac, Genesis 24. 2. 3. Genesis 24. 2. 3.
And Isaac for his son Jacob, Genesis 28. 12. And Hagar for Genesis 28. 12. Genesis 21.
21.
her son Ismael, Genesis 21. 21. And as the sons, so the daughters were at the
parents disposing, therefore says Caleb, I will give thee Achsah my daughter
to wife, Josh. 15. 17. Jos. 15. 17. 1 Samuel 18. 27.
And Saul gave David Michol his daughter to wife, 1 Samuel 18. 27. yea Naomi was
careful to provide for Ruth, her daughter in law, Ruth 1. 2. Ruth. 1. 2.
And is it not then the childrens duty to submit to their parents providing?
Yea surely: for so did Jacob, Genesis 28. Genesis 28. 6, 7.
6, 7. Nay, it is observable, that the parents consent amongst the heathen, is
a thing requisite in marriage, Genesis 34. 4. Genesis 34 4.
Therefore said Shechem to his father Hamar, Get me this maid to wife, implying
that unless his Father would get her, he could not take her. And what do they
but heap up woe to themselves, and sorrow and grief upon the gray hairs of
their aged parents, who do otherwise? Genesis 26. 34, 35. Therefore seeing Genesis
26. 34, 35.
it is the Parents duty to provide, and thine to submit, beg of God that he
would direct the hearts of thy parents to pitch upon one who may be every way
qualified and meet for thee, as before mentioned, that their hearts may not be
so carried away with some particular object, at which they look most, and like
best, be it beauty or honor, or friends, or riches, or the like: (for with
these many are so taken, that if they see these attend her, be there else never
so much unfitness and incongruity, yet they are resolute, none but she shall
have their consent,) but that their affections might be taken most with that
which deserves it best: and then desire that thy affections may be pliable to
his, that he would bring them into a submissive frame; and not like some whose
affections having taken an head, run themselves upon this desperate resolution,
that what ever become of it, they are resolved, fall back or fall edge, like or
dislike, none shall stop them, none shall hinder them; certainly where such
unbridled resolutions meet in either, it plainly argues that God was sought of
neither; neither of the parent for the child, nor of the child for himself.
But surely this is the fruit of prayer, and here is the finger of God, when the
thoughts, intentions, and affections of both sweetly and harmoniously meet, and
conjoyne in one. The building up of this match will be like the building up of
the Temple, 1 Kings 6. 7. wherein was heard neither the voice of the Hammer or
the axe: so here all things shall come forward so prosperously and so easily,
that there shall not need an hammer to drive them, and all obstacles shall be
so dissolved, that there shall be no need of an Axe to hew them asunder.

Now having successively wooed thy parents, then proceed to obtain the good
will of the party; but first be sure she be one to whom thy affections can be
entirely knit. Let no riches entice thee, nor beauty allure thee, nor friends
persuade thee, no nor grace move thee to make any thy wife, where thou do not
find thine affections equally drawing thee to it: for where entire love begins
not the match, there jarring discords for the most part will end it. First, be
sure that thy affections are on her; and then labor to get her affections unto
thee: This mutual love is the foundation on which this marriage structure must
be built, and the pillars which must continually support it. Indeed it is the
very kernel of the business; he who will attempt it without this, must expect
that it cannot stand firm, but will ere long shatter about his ears.

And as thy care must be to get her good will, so how thou gettest it: for
herein many bewray abundance of weakness, and a bundle of folly.

1. Some will declare their kindred, from what a noble stock they are derived,
how nobly descended, what royal blood runs in their veins: Thus they seek by
honor to win their wives.

2. Others will unlock their Treasuries, lay open their riches, spread before
them their revenues, declare unto them the length and breadth of their
possessions, with large proffers and promises, that the quintessence of them
all shall be extracted for their use and service. Thus riches shall be a net to
entrap their affections.

3. Some will acquaint them what large privileges they shall obtain, what
liberty they shall enjoy, what ever is in the house, or in the field, or in the
purse, shall be at their disposing, that without controllment they shall come
and go, walk and ride at their own pleasure. These pretend liberty, but intend
to bind them sure to themselves.

4. Others there be who will spend their time and studies in frequenting the
Muses, that so by their aid they may compose some curious Poems, and Anagrams,
decked with many quaint expressions, and fawning flatteries, thinking by these
to ravish the affections of their silly sweet-hearts.

5. Some again will seek to win their affections not with words, but actions,
they will heap on them, many rare presents, and present them with many gifts,
and give them many tokens, nay how will they strain their purses, and stretch
their wits, as it were on the tenters, to contrive what gifts will be most
acceptable, and what presents may be the best lodestone to draw their
affections?

6. Others there be, who will ^pply themselves by base flatterings and
enticings accompanied with many foolish gestures, fond and unseemly carriages,
the fruits of a weak brain, and a light behavior, as if they had to deal with
a simple child, and not a wise maiden.

7. And if this will not take effect, some there be who will set their hellish
thoughts awork, how to accomplish, so as to have their lustful will upon her,
thinking that then all will be sure, as if they had to deal with a prostitute
queen, and not a chaste Virgin.

There are many other ways and methods, which to the wisest are unknown. The
way of a young man with a maid, is one of those four hidden things, Prove. 30.
19. Prove. 30. 19.
But it is to be feared, that among the many ways that so many persons tread,
there are but few that hit upon the right: Surely I should think this course
best: it is most sure and less chargeable, a way wherein abundance of comfort
and contentment may be brought in, and not any the least expended or laid out:
seeking in another method, many spend abundance of rest and contentment, and at
length miss of their aim, but in this way they shall gain abundance of peace
and comfort, and seldom or never fail of their end.

Go to God, and earnestly entreat him, that as he has afforded thee his
assistance hitherto, in guiding and directing thee to pitch thy thoughts only
on one who is religiously and virtuously disposed, one who is every way
qualified and fitted for thee; and as he has been gracious unto thee, so as to
afford thee the free will and consent of parents, and removed all difficulties
and rubbs that might lie in the way; that so now there is a smooth and plain
passage open for thee to her, and her to thee: desire him, that as he has
begun, that so he would finish the work: that he would guide thee and direct
thee to pitch upon such a course, to obtain her affections, as may be most
prosperous in it self, and best pleasing to him: Tell him thou know, that
neither thine own nor her affections, are at each others own, but at his
disposing; he is able to turn them and wind them as he pleases: therefore
i^treat him to knit and unite your affections one toward another in an
unsep^rable bond that might never be broken; in a knot so firm, that nothing
but death may dissolve it: and not like some, who after their affections have
been settled, and the match even almost concluded, I know not whether by their
parents, for some trivial business, or money matter; or by the parties
themselves for some small jarre or prejudice, entertained perhaps only through
the aspersion of some, malevolent to their future happiness, they have rashly
broke off all, which for the present, though they have swallowed down, yet
perhaps never thoroughly digested, and so it has bred in them a distempered
head, a disquieted mind, and a discontented heart.

Again, tell him, thou do not attempt by any indirect ways of thine own, or
by any unlawful enterprises of others to insinuate thy self into her
affections, or to draw her affections unto thee, but thou leavest it to him:
And, as many do, sometimes make choice of some special friend to employ in
this business of wooing for them; so thou do make choice of him, as thy most
especial friend, into whose hands thou do wholly commit thy self,
intrusting him with the whole business, desiring him to do all thy works for
thee.

Now if he should seem to put thee off, as not willing to undertake for thee,
thou may tell him, it is contrary to his practice of old, he was wont to
invite his servants and children, that when they had any great business to do,
they should come and cast the burden of it on him, Psalm. 55. Psalm. 55. 22.
22. Tell him he is immutable, he is God and changes not, therefore he cannot
shake thee off. Tell him thou do trust him with it, and press him with his
promise wherein he has said, He will never fail any that put their trust
Deuteronomy. 31. 6. Psalm. 9. 10.
in him, Deuteronomy. 31. 6. Psalm. 9. 10. and then thou may be sure he will not
begin with thee. Tell him thou will stay his leisure, and wait upon him,
knowing that he that believes, makes not have; tell him thou know that
none can so easily unite your affections as he can; if he do but speak the
word, it shall be done; and if he do but once unite them, they are united to
the purpose, nothing shall be able to loose them; neither sickness nor
poverty, or misery, or persecution, or imprisonment, or what ever it be that
may separate their bodies, nothing shall separate their affections; yea further
desire him, that he would in such a way, and in such a manner draw your
affections together, so as you may see, it is his hand alone that knits them:
so shall thou be encouraged to fasten them on her, as on one which he has
provided for you: yea, let him know, that as there are many prayers put up unto
him, so there are many prayers wait upon him; and if he will successively
accomplish the desires of his people, he shall most willingly inhabit the
praises of his people. Surely, whoever does apply himself in these ways, he
shall find them very prosperous; God does usually crown them with success,
thou shall find more then an ordinary providence going along with thee, and
doing for thee; yea, it may be, beyond thy expectation, thou shall see and feel
such a sweet conjunction of heart and affection, the very contemplation of it
will exceedingly please and delight thee.

When you or your friend for you, do make the motion to her friend or friends,
under whose power she is, or if (she being in her own power) it be made to her
self, you must then deal truly, do not dare by any means, to circumvent them
to gain your desire, either by seeming to be more religious, or better then you
indeed are, or by making your condition, or estate, seem better then it is,
conceal nothing from them, the knowledge whereof after marriage, may cause
grief unto them; or may give them cause to say, that you dealt falsely and
deceitfully with them.

9. When you make and prosecute your suit to her, be serious, free, ingenuous,
and discreet, with all kindness, yet do not pretend more love then indeed you
bear unto her.

10. Now if at last God has answered thy prayers, and fulfilled thy desires,
and has given thee a virtuous wife, has given thee her friends and thy
friends consent, and has most firmly united your affections in a sweet and
inviolable bond of love, so that now the match is struck, and thou enjoyest thy
hearts desire; then forget not thy former serious resolutions, and intentions:
Did thou not resolve when thou wast in the multitude of thy thoughts,
entangled in thy affections, surprised with fears, and doubtful of thy hopes,
that if God would be pleased to quiet thy thoughts, settle thy affections,
banish thy fears, and make sure thy hopes, that then thou would with all
thankful acknowledgement, return to him the glory of it. Remember therefore
what has gone out of thy mouth; and as he has turned thy petition into
fruition; so do thou turn thy resolution into action, and presently fall a
blessing of him.

1. Bless him that ever he put it into thy heart to fall upon this course of
seeking of him; when as others in all their thoughts, and amidst the variety of
their ways and contrivances, this is the least, yea, not any of them: To seek
God in such a matter as this, they think it a thing as ridiculous, so
unprosperous; now that thou should make choice of this way above all others,
which by experience thou have found to be the best and surest, here is cause of
blessing.

2. Again, bless him, that he has given thee any wisdom in choosing, that
he has restrained thee from hurrying thy affections headlong, as many do,
without wit or discretion, upon any which their rude fancy, and roving eye is
cast upon, giving the reins to their unbridled affections, to run unadvisedly
upon any, where they see no other excellency, but only that which is in wealth,
honor, beauty, parts, or the like: as for grace, they desire it not at all; or
if they do, only as the over-waight to so many pounds of Gold; yea, some are so
besotted, that where none of these are, yet there shall their affections be;
how then have thou cause to bless God, that he has given thee such spiritual
wisdom, wherewithal to over-master thy affections, so as they are carried
out only there, where there are better motives to draw them? as for Beauty,
Riches, and the like, these thou desire only as Adjuncts, as the shell:
Grace, that is the substance, that is the kernel, for which thou take so
much pains to get, and being gotten, take so much delight in enjoying.

3. Bless him, not only for applying thy mind to seek a virtuous and gracious
mate; but that he has crowned thy seeking with finding, that thou have found a
Rose among the Thistles and a Lilly among the Thorns; that among so many
thousands, he has, as it were, culled out one, whose gracious and godly
disposition is every way answerable to thy desire; and whose qualification is
every way suitable to thy nature; he has not dealt so with every one, many have
sought, but not found, and few have had their expectations answered in their
enjoyments.

4. Again, bless him not only that thou have found, but that thou have found
with so much facility and delight; he has made thy pains easy, and thy
labors delightful, thou have obtained a great blessing with little cost;
should thou have obtained her as many have done, with the undergoing of a
troubled mind, a disquieted spirit, many tumultuous thoughts, and restless
vexations, yet thou could not but bless; nay, should thou have been put to
it with David, to obtain thy wife with the danger of thy life, by dint of
sword, to slay an hundred Philistims, and bring their fore-skins for a dowry,
1 Samuel 18. 25.
1. Sam. 18. 25. or with Othniel, who won his wife with the hazard of his life,
by smiting Ki^athsepher, and taking it, Josuah 15. 17. yet there was cause to
Jos. 15. 17
bless: but if thou have been so far from undergoing such difficulties, as that
thou have with no danger, but a great deal of safety, and much felicity
obtained her; God having removed for thee even all those lesser impediments,
that at any time did but lie in the way as rubs to hinder it; and has in all
thy way made good that promise to thee, Isa. 26. 3. keeping thee in Isa. 26. 3.
perfect peace, because thy mind was stayed on him; Oh then what cause have
thou to bless!

5. Bless him that he did freely give thee the good will and consent of thine
and her friends; the procuring of which some have sought with many a sad
thought, and turbulent mind, but could not obtain it, and those that have
ventured so far, as to match themselves without it, have incurred the loss, not
only of their friends favor, but of their own comfort.

6. And bless him, if he has weaned thy affections from any that formerly
they were cast on (now seeing Gods providence otherwise disposing of her) thou
wast hereby wrought, not to a malicious hatred against her, or to a fretting
vexation in thy self, as many have been, who having been once crossed in their
affections, have for the time to come, resolved irreconcilable hatred against
the party, and rashly vowed perpetual virginity to themselves, a thing not in
their own power. But herein may thou bless, that thou did willingly submit
to God, as to that which was best for thee, still preserving thy affections
toward her, so as to pray for, and desire her welfare, rejoice in her
prosperity, and mourn with her in adversity. And for thy self did patiently
commit thy self unto the Lord, waiting till he would provide for thee, who
has now answerably satisfied thy desire, and given thee such a blessing as
that thou have not lost by waiting.

7. And lastly, bless him, that he has so prospered all your enterprises,
that he has so heard your prayers; as that now he has given you a full and
complete fruition of them, he having now knit your affections one toward
another in a most firm and indissoluble union; so that all your former
distempered thoughts are now quieted, your affections settled, your fears
banished, and your hopes (respecting so great a temporal mercy) enjoyed.

(...).
Some other directions for unmarried persons,
YOU have in the former Discourse seen many Directions how to make a godly
choice of one, with whom you would marry. Before I give you like Directions how
to live as becomes Christians in that married estate, I shall mind you of
some things needful to be known and made use of, before that your marriage be
consummate.

1. Do not please and deceive your self, with a mis-apprehension of the married
estate, promising to your self to reap and enjoy that good, and (as many will
call it) that happiness, which is not to be found in it.

2. There is an insufficiency in marriage, as in all other earthly (though
lawful and good) things, to give full content, and to satisfy your desires:
you must bring content with you unto it, or you shall never find content in it.
You must first be so good a scholar in Christ's School, as to have learned in
every estate to Phil. 4. 11.
be content.

3. Take heed that heat of love do not make you so blind, that you see not
things as they are, nor yet look after, or see any thing but what may concern
the satisfying of your present desires.

4. How many are there, that when they are in love, see nothing but fair, and
good, in their Beloved? then they can see no faults, scarce any infirmities,
who, after marriage, when their lust is a little over, or unsatisfied, or not
finding the content they expected, are too quick-sighted to see and find
faults, when there is none, or such only, as wise men should have foreseen, and
can easily bear and pass by.

5. They are also so wholly taken up with expectation of the present delights
and content they shall have by marriage, that they do not at all forethink of
the many duties, which, when they are married, they must do; nor yet of the
cares they must take; nor of the evils they are to suffer.

7. All these you must think of, and prepare for, before that you marry.

8. God has in his Word told you, what you must do when you are married, most
of the particulars I shall show you in the ensuing Discourse.

9. God has also told you, that when you are married, you shall have troubles
in the 1 Cor. 7. 28.
flesh, such as single persons are freed from; yea, troubles so many ways, and
in so many things, that they cannot be numbered; daily experience of married
persons proves it to be most true.

10. When sin entered into the world, it made the whole Romans 8. 20
Creation subject to vanity; it did empty the creature of that sufficiency
which before it had, whereby satisfaction and content might have been found in
it for all those purposes for which God had made it. This sin it brought a Genesis
3. 16
curse upon the creature; yea, Eccl. 1. 14.
upon marriage; so that if any shall be so foolish as to expect nothing but
good in it, he shall find nothing but vanity Eccl. 2. 3. 11.
and vexation of spirit; as we learn by Salomons experiment.

11. I write not this to discourage any, who have a calling to marry; For
marriage is an honorable ordinance of God, for excellent ends; as to Mal. 2. 15.
be a seminary for the propagation of mankind, a nursery out of which to
gather his Church, a means to prevent sin in those who have strong 1 Cor. 7. 2
desires, and cannot well contain, as also for mutual help and comfort in
humane society.

12. Such may be a single man or woman's constitution of body, and condition for
their outward estate, that the good and comfort of marriage may countervaile
and exceed the troubles of it. In such cases it is best to marry; whereas
otherwise it would be best to abstain.

13. The least sin is worse and more to be shunned, then the greatest earthly
trouble. Touching marrying, or not marrying, choice is to be made, according as
men may best please God in either estate, and be most free from sin, or (as
their condition may be in comparison) most free from worldly cares and
distractions. 1 Cor. 7. 32. 35.
In some cases, some few distractions in the unmarried estate, may exceed the
many troubles in the married.

14. Where a wise and good choice is made, there are indeed many benefits and
comforts to be found in the married estate; For in many cases Two are better
then one, especially, Eccles. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12.
when those two are one in their studies and affections, to do one another
good. Loving and faithful husbands and wives, will one help another in keeping
off, and (if this cannot be) in bearing one another burdens, and will supply
each others wants in very many things, both corporal and spiritual, and will
be special helpers of each others joy.

15. In the married estate may be expected the greatest earthly comforts
attainable in this life; yea, much spiritual comfort, if the yoak-fellowes do
truly fear God, and are truly religious and loving one to another, so that
they apply themselves to be helpful, and to do good, and give all lawful
content unto each other, in all the good offices they owe as husband and wife,
and as heirs together of the same grace of life.

16. It shall be your wisdom to be provident and wary how you enter into this
estate; and that you foreknow, and do thoroughly forethink and prepare for
ability to do the duties, and to bear the troubles which that estate will
necessarily put you upon, as I hinted before.

17 I would therefore have unmarried persons take heed that they deceive not
themselves in expecting more good in the married estate, then it has in it to
afford them, lest (when they are disappointed of what they expected, nay, when
contrary to expectation they find much to be done, yea, much evil to be
suffered which they neither looked, nor prepared for) their lives be made
comfortable; and as to some it does prove so irksome and intolerable, that they
sinfully (and too late) repent of that their marriage which they so
inconsiderably did enter into.

1. When two meet persons have acc^rding to the former directions proceeded,
and have gained consent of parents, and consent of each other, so that they are
resolved to marry one another: it is good that they be contracted and made sure
one to another, by betrothing, before that they be solemnly married.

2. This has been the use of Gods people in all ages, Deuteronomy. 20. 7. Deuteronomy. 22.
32.
both before and since the coming of our Savior: His mother, the blessed
Virgin Mat. 1. 18.
Mary, was betrothed to Joseph.

3. This act of betrothing of two meet persons allowed to marry, is by mutual
plighting their troths, and giving themselves one to another, to enjoy each
other, when they shall be solemnly married.

4. This act does so assure them one to another, that they cannot (though both
should consent) go back and desist from marriage; yet it does not give them
right of marriage society and due benevolence one from another, which is not
given until marriage: Mary the mother of Mat. 1. 20.
our Savior, was Joseph her husbands Wife, by virtue of the betrothing, but
she continued a Virgin. Joseph had no knowledge of her, because Mat. 1. 18. 25.
they were not married.

5. This betrothing is of great good use; For after that they are betrothed,
the minds of those two are settled, all fears and doubts of breaking off, are
removed. They may then not only give leave to their affections, but may
heighten and enlarge them, one toward another. Now, they may, and ought to
consider beforehand of their coming together, and of making provision for it.
And this staying some time between the contract and marriage, will show, that
it is not lust which makes them run headlong into this estate, as it is with
too many, more like brute Beasts then reasonable men; but that they do it
advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God.

Profitable directions for married Persons.
SOme of these concern Husband and Wife mutually; some concern each peculiarly.

1. When God has joined you in so near a relation, you are first to see God,
and to acknowledge him in this your match; It was God who Mat. 19. 6.
joined you together.

2. All things come to pass by his providence, which is to be taken notice of;
but marriages are made by the special hand of his providence: House and
inheritance Prove. 19. 14.
are of the fathers, but a prudent Wife, and so a good Husband, are of the
Lord, yea, every good Husband and Wife is of the Lord.

3. The seeing and acknowledging of God in your marriage, as it will cause you
to be thankful to him; so it will arm you against all the troubles in the
flesh which you shall meet with in that estate. It will keep you from repenting
of your match, and from wishing, that you had not married this person, and from
wishing, that you had married such and such; you cannot now say unto, or twit
one another with this; that I might have had such an one, so beautiful, so
personable, so rich, so well qualified; no, now you see you could have none
other, this is the man, this is the woman, that God has given me; you must
say, I will therefore thankfully and contentedly satisfy my self in this my
lot and portion.

4. Now you are married, consider what you then did, you then entered into a
near covenant one with another; yea, into a Covenant with God Prove. 7. 2.
to be one another, and to be faithful to each other. Now Genesis 2. 23* 24.
Mat. 19. 5* 6.
you are no longer two, but one flesh, not your own, but one another self: So
that if you break covenant one with another, you break covenant also with your
God.

5. You must love each other as your own souls with a Christian, pure, tender,
abundant, natural, and matrimonial love.

* 6. The foundation that must bear up this love, and the spring, which must
feed and nourish this love, is not only, or chiefly, the commendable parts and
endowments that are in each of you, but the near relation into which you are
entered; being now no more two, but one flesh, and bone of each others bone, and
that it is now from God, that you are thus made one; and that it is his will
and pleasure that it should be so.

7. When your love is thus ^rounded, it will be constant to each other, as well
in one condition as another. You must therefore love her (as before you are
taught) because God has made her your wife; And you must so love him, because
God has made him your husband: Although it may happen, that there is not in
your yoke fellow that personablenes, beauty, wit, virtue, and good qualities
that are in many others, yet the own husband and wife, 1 Cor. 7. 2.
must be the object of your choycest and singular love, and you must esteem of
each other so, as to be endeared one to another, above and before any other in
the world.

8. This love must show it self in the fruits of it: and first to the better
part; to the souls one of another. True love edifieth not only a 1 Cor. 8. 1.
man's self, but others also.

9. You must therefore pray one for another, and one with another, you must
further one another in holiness and righteousness. The godly and 1 Pet. 3. 1.
unblameable conversation of man and wife, does much conduce to the conversion
and building of one another up in their holy faith, being accompanied with
instructing, exhorting and comforting, and (as there shall be cause)
admonishing in the Lord: It is no usurpation, but love and duty in a wife, as
well as in the husband, to perform to each these Christian offices; provided
always, that the wife do it with all humble respect to her husband, in due
time, place, and manner.

10. This love must also show it self in all due study 1 Cor. 7. 33, 34.
and care to please each other in all things wherein you may; giving all
lawful content one to another; you to your power and skill, must be helpful
one to another: If the wife be made to be an help to Genesis 2. 18.
the husband, the husband much more is to be helpful to the wife, because God
has made him to be the stronger, and has given him more ability to do it.

Your hearts must be so knit to each other, and so for one another, that you
may trust one in the other, doing good, Prove. 31. 11, 12.
and not evil: the wife to the husband, and husband to the wife, all the days
of your life.

11. You must also show your love in faithfulness to each other, in keeping
your bodies chaste, and only one for 1 These 4. 4 Heb. 13. 4.
another, giving to each due benevolence in a seasonable, temperate 1 Cor. 7. 3.
and sanctified use of marriage; There are some Lev. 18. 19, 24.
times wherein God has forbid marriage society: Also intemperate and immodest
use of marriage, springing from immoderate affections, will not satisfy and
quench lustful desires, but increase them rather; and marriage is reckoned
amongst those good things of God which are warranted and sanctified 1 Timothy 4.
4, 5.
by the Word of God and Prayer.

12. You are to satisfy your selves in the society and embraces Prove. 5. 18,
19, 20.
each of your own husband and wife: Adultery is a most heinous sin, and most
destructive of the marriage Covenant, you cannot wrong one another in any thing
more, nor any way sooner wrong and root out your posterity, Job 31. 12.
nor bring a greater or more abominable and everlasting blot and infamy upon
Prove. 6. 33
your name, then by the embracing of the bosom of a stranger. It will bring
destruction Prove. 6. 32
upon the soul; for Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: If any
temptation Heb. 13. 4.
or motion to that evil shall present it self, either from within, or from
without, repel it, with indignation, saying thus with thy self, in like words
to those of chaste Joseph, when he was tempted by his lewd Mistress Shall I
wrong my yoke fellow; shall I break my covenant that I made with my God? How can
Genesis 39. 9
I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? Adulterers by the law of
Moses Lev. 20. 10.
were to be put to death.

13. As you must not give cause, no, nor occasion of jealousy, so abhor to be
causelessly jealous one of another; true and ardent love will think no evil; it
believes all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
it hops all things.

14. You must with all tender care be preservers of each others names and
credits, you must be so firm to each other, that you may trust one in another,
and lock up your selves in one another breasts, keeping each others secrets,
never blazing abroad the faults, or frailties of each. True love can, and will
cover 1 Pet. 4. 8.
even a multitude of sins; you must do with them as you will do with the soars
of your own bodies, never uncover them, but when a plaster is to be laid to
them.

15. If God give you no children, do not impute the fault to the one or other;
It is God that gives, or withholdeth children: when you have commended this to
God by Prayer, you must patiently and contentedly submit to Gods will. It was
Rachels great fault, to say to her husband, Give me children, or else Genesis 30.
1
I die.

16. If God do give you child or children, then join in hearty thanks to God,
who has graciously given them unto you; join also in breeding and bringing
them up in the Pro. 22. 6. Ephesians. 6. 4.
nurture of the Lord.

17. You must be helpful one to another, in over-seeing, guiding, governing,
and well-ordering the ways of your family. Though the husband is specially to
have an eye to the men, and the wife to the maids; yet it shall be your wisdom
to join as in the choice of the faithfullest Ps. 101. 6. Genesis 18. 19 Deuteronomy. 6.
7.
you can get, so in teaching and furthering them in goodness, taking all good
occasion to instruct them in ways of godliness and righteousness, and to
stop and restrain them from wickedness, looking to them that they be diligent
and faithful in their places: you must join in looking to the state of your
family, for their due employment and maintenance. Prove. 27. 23. 26. Pro. 31. 27
And as in governing the children, the father must not take part against the
mother; So neither must the master take part with the servants against the dame
or mistress, nor must the mother, or dame, or mistress, do the like, when
the father or master does reprove or correct, but must join one with another
therein. If either father or mother, master or mistress, do fail in reproof
or correction, they are in private to show one another their failings, and not
openly before servants or children. If when one reproves, the other does
cocker and approve, and when one corrects, the other saves from correction;
this does weaken the authority of each in the family, and will embolden the
children or servants in evil; and both father and mother, master, mistress,
or dame, will be brought into contempt.

18. Touching your worldly estate, you must be helpful and faithful to each
other; you must be diligent in your Pro. 10. 4. Pro. 21. 5.
places, and be good husbands and good houswives, thrifty and frugall,
laboring with hand Ephesians. 4. 28.
and head, about something that is good, according to your calling, that you
may have whereon you and yours may more comfortably live; and wherewithal you
may do good, and give to them that need. Let nothing be wastfully and wickedly
spent.

19. And know, there ought to be a community in the use of that temporal
estate, which God has given you; with husband and wife all such things should
be common; one house, one purse, one bed, in every thing alike, suitable to
their place and means. God has made the husband to be head, and therefore to
have the chief power in disposing and ordering of his worldly estate; yet the
wife is not at such a distance, as is the servant, or child, but so near to
him, and one with him, that she has a right, as in his honors and dignities,
which he cannot restrain her of, so in all his goods, with which he did endow
her at their marriage: She therefore is to enjoy them as well as he for her
use, for all good purposes, as there shall be cause, except her manifest folly
and wastfulnesse do cause a restraint.

20. You may and are to have your times of more then ordinary familiarity one
with another, in your amiable converse and delighting one in another, and with
such expressions as are meet to be showed between none, but such as are man and
wife; as Isaac with his Rebecca. But this Genesis 26. 8
is not seemly before others, but when alone; I mean, that palpable courting of
each other, and dallying one with another, as is the manner of too many, who
therein express much lightness and vanity in their love, and do minister
matter of temptation, at least offense to others.

21. Your love must be so strong, as not to be easily provoked; 1 Cor. 13. 5. 7.
true love is exceeding patient, it will bear all things, endure all things;
nothing must quench your love one to another.

22. If any difference shall arise, tending to make a breach between you, take
heed, that it do not rise to a flame, be sure that you compose it, and stifle
it speedily; do not dare either of you to sleep upon any such discontent, for
you know not what a night may bring forth, and what alienation of affection,
and what strangeness it may breed ere morning. The Sun should not Ephesians. 4. 26.
go down upon the wrath of any, much less should it upon the discontent of
man and wife; Each of you should strive, who should begin first to look
cheerfully, and amiably, and show kindness one to another, that the breach may
be prevented, or if any be, may be made up between your selves. The wife, she
out of duty, the husband, he out of wisdom should begin first, which when it
is done by the one, let not the other dare, but lovingly and readily to
entertain it. If your love be true, and if it be managed by that wisdom which
is from above, as it will be pure, so it will be peaceable, gentle, easy to
Jam. 3. 17.
be entreated, full of kindness, and good fruits. Consider this seriously, and
then you cannot; I am sure, you will not continue long in any variance that
shall fall out between you.

23. If you find pride and folly to be so great in you, that it keep you at
too great a distance, through dislike or distaste one with another, the best
way to remedy all, is to call upon one another to go together into Gods
presence, and there join together in hearty prayer to him, confessing your
faults unto him, entreating pardon, and that he will unite your hearts again,
that you may love and live together in all well-pleasing to God, and to the joy
and comfort one of another. Many who in the pride of their heart, will in their
hear stout it out one against another, yet (if they have any grace) they will
calm their spirits, and come to a right mind again, when they humble
themselves in the sight of God.

I come now to the particular duties of husband and wife.
1. YOU that are an husband may, nay, must wisely, but with love, keep your
place, and use your authority which God has set you in.

2. By keeping it, I do not mean; that you should take upon you to be stern,
fierce, and domineering in your carriage toward her, tyger-like, as too many
do, but that you carry your self like a wise head, winning honor and respect
from her, doing her all right, giving her all her due. In your government you
must not be light, nor foolish, for so you will lose your authority, and bring
your self into contempt. Though she be a wise and good wife, and you think fit
to pass over much of your authority unto her, yet hold your authority in
your own power; let her use your authority for you, joining with you in
ordering and managing the affairs of your estate and family, yet never suffer
her (if she attempt it) to usurp authority 1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 7.
over you, but dwell with her as a man of knowledge and wisdom, which ought to
be in every one whom God has made to be the head of his wife; yet know, though
you are not to suffer your wife to rule you, it shall yet be your wisdom, not
to contemn her counsel and 2 King. 4. 9, 10. 22. 24.
advice, nor to deny her any reasonable request.

3. In the use of your authority, remember always, that she is thy
companion, and the Mal. 2* 14.
wife of thy Covenant: and consider how near God has made your wife unto you,
even flesh of your flesh; but she is the weaker, and more tender part of you,
and therefore you are to honor her as the 1 Pet. 3. 7.
weaker vessel; in tender care of her, pitying, covering, bearing with, and
healing her imperfections and infirmities; you must not put her upon any thing,
but according to her strength and abilities; you must support her weakness by
your strength, and supply her defects by your wisdom: The weakness she has
by reason of her sex, she yet being so near unto you, and necessary for you,
and may be helpful to you, must indeare you to her, and cause you to be
exceeding tender in your care of her. God has made you to be the guide of her
youth, Pro. 2. 17.
yea, of all her days; and he has given you to have authority to command and
reprove as there shall be cause, and to order her in her place, and has left
it to you to provide for her good every way. All this you must do out of
conscience of duty to God, and in love to her.

4. That you may do this the better, you must go before her in all holy
example, in godliness and righteousness; you must store your self with
knowledge of the Will and Ways of God, wherefore study the Scriptures, hear
the Word much, and treasure it up: The wife might not speak in the Church, 1
Cor. 14. 35.
her husband at home is to teach her, she is appointed to learn of him there.

5. You must pray not only for her, but with her, and that not only in the
family, but with her alone: some confessions and petitions will be needful for
you to make together, which cannot fitly be put up in hearing of others: you
are therefore, says God, to dwell with her as a man of knowledge; that your
prayers be 1 Pet. 3. 5.
not hindered; you are heirs of the same blessing, therefore you are to help her
in all good ways whereby she may have knowledge and grace, that she may
partake of that inheritance.

6. You must use your authority with wisdom, mildeness, and love; your
commands must be lawful, not only in themselves, but such as she does not make
scruple of their lawfulness; you must command in the Lord, else she is exempt
from obedience.

7. Your commands must be of things not too difficult, but in her power to do
them.

8. You must not require of her things unreasonable, and such as are not fit
for her, but rather for others in the family for to do.

9. Use not commands for trifles and small matters.

10. Be very seldom in laying any command upon your wife; An intimation of what
you would have done is enough between an husband and a wife: entreaties of a
wife do not unbecome a husband, though she be his inferior, and usually they
do more prevail then flat commands.

11. Frequency and imperiousness in commands of one so near in equality, will
make your authority burden some, and grievous unto her, and will much abate in
her (do what she can) of that honor and reverence which she should and would
give unto you.

12. You may, and ought to dislike and reprove your wife when she is
blameworthy, but you must do this also in much love and wisdom.

13. Be sure that there be a fault, and a great fault in her, else reprove not;
lesser failings may be healed and amended, either of themselves, or by a bare
remembering her of them; many failings you are not to take notice of, and are to
bear with in her, as she must do the like with you.

14. When she is very faulty, the reproof must be proportioned to the quality
and greatness of the fault, but must be done with the spirit Gal. 6. 1.
of meekness. Rough language, and overmuch heat in reproving (though the cause
be never so just) will be like a good potion administered scalding hot, this
will not be forced down, she can hardly take it so hot, but will belch it up
in the face of him that gives it, and the virtue of it, is utterly lost.

15. Due time and place must be observed when you reprove and admonish your
wife; you must not do it, when either your self, or your wife is in a pelting
chafe, or passion, for then you are not fit to give, nor she fit to receive
reproof. A mad man is not in case to reprove, nor a mad woman in case to be
reproved; while men and women are in passion they are not themselves.

16. As for the place, (except in extraordinary cases, when the fault is
notorious and open, or may presently corrupt others, if it be not then and
there reproved) ordinarily it is best to be done when you are private and
alone, she may then see, that it is done in love to her, and for her good,
which will cause it to be well taken, and will work more kindly with her.

17. Your whole government of your wife must be in all sweetness and kindness;
you must not rule a child, no, not a servant with rigor; you must much more
abhor all Lev. 25. 43. Col. 3. 19.
bitterness to a wife, you must always remember, that she is your self, and
you know who says, No man ever yet Ephesians. 5. 29.
hated his own flesh.

18. I would not have it to be a question whether an husband may beat his wife,
and correct her with stripes, as he does his servant, or child, though she do
offend him; He may for some of her faults (if she persist in them) withdraw
from her some of his former expressions of kindness and fruits of his bounty,
and may abridge her of some of her former delights which formerly he did allow
her: But to beat her, that is himself, we have no rule nor example in the Word
of God for it. He is worse, and more unnatural then a brute beast, that will
fight with his own mate.

19. If the wife be intolerable, and will not be governed by the husbands
commands and reproof, if she remain unsufferable, he must crave help of the
public Magistrate, that by him she may be reclaimed.

20. You must likewise show love and wisdom in the matter of your wives
employments: A wife must not live idly (as neither must you,) neither must
she be made a drudge, and be overburthened with too too much; Let her
employment be suitable to her place, and to her condition, skill, strength, and
ability; she is to be assistant to you in matters of your calling, if thereof
she be capable: also she is to assist you in guiding and governing the family.

21. You must also provide for your wife, and allow her things needful, and
protect her from things hurtful, according to your place, and as you are able,
you must allow her plentiful and comfortamaintenance, as food, apparel, etc.
even the very same for kind and proportion suitable with that which you provide
for your self, for she is your self, that she may live like your wife,
cheerfully with you.

22. And as you may dislike and reprove your wife, when she does ill; so, much
rather, are you to take notice of, and give her due praise and encouragement
when she does well; Give her of the Prove. 31. 31.
fruits of her hands, says the Lord by Solomon: He has little (if any)
grace, ingenuity, or love to his wife, which will not do it.

23. If God take you out of this life before your wife, (if good provision be
not already certainly made for her) then you before your death, are by your
last Will and Testament, to take care for her comfortable maintenance after
your death: in which I would not have you to do, as too many fond and foolish
husbands do, give all, or most part of your estate to your wife, you having
children; leaving them to her disposing. This does but expose her to
temptations. By experience you may see that many enter into such second
marriages, as prove to be a great wrong, if not an utter undoing of the
children of her former husband.

24. But do not, as too many also do, neglect their wives, and give all, or
most part of their estate to their children, leaving his wife their mother, to
need to be maintained by them; how unnatural many children prove to their
mothers, when all their fathers means is in their hands, is seen too often, in
woeful experience: consider well your estate, and accordingly give her so much,
that her children may have more need of her, then she of them; that she may of
her self, without them, live comfortably, and they may expect to be beholden to
her, rather then that she should need to be beholden to them; and this will
better contain them in duty to her when you have left her in an estate able to
do them good, if they continue loving and dutiful to her.

There is also duty peculiar to the wife to be performed to the husband.
1. FIrst, you that are a wife must see in your husband (whom God has given to
you, and set over you) a stamp of Gods Image and authority, whereby he is become
above you, and is made your head, and you are made his inferior, Ephesians. 5. 23.
and are made subject to him; whatsoever his birth, parts, or wealth was, or
is, or whatsoever yours is, or was, you must now look upon him as bearing some
of the Image and glory of Gods power and authority; which God has invested
him withal: for your good, he is now thy lord, he is now thy better, he is
one who must be highly esteemed: of thee, one, to Genesis 3. 16.
whom your desire must be subject, one, who has rule over you.

2. You must show your love to him, and due esteem of him* and due reverence of
Ephesians. 5. 33.
his person; you must see that you reverence your husband, says the Apostle;
you must reverence him in your heart. It was Michaels great and 2 Samuel 6. 16.
shameful sin, that she despised her husband David in her heart.

3. Show reverence to your husband in word, and gesture, in word and deed; when
you speak either before him, or of him, or to him, you must show in all these,
that you have an honorable esteem of him; For this, Sarah (whose 1 Pet. 3. 6.
daughter you are if you do well) is commended by the holy Ghost. There is
time and place for very familiar speech to the husband, but never for a slight,
neglective, contemptuous or rude speech or behavior to him; you must always
reverence him.

4. You must also show your love, in being subject and obedient to him.

5. This obedience must be a ready, hearty, and an universal obedience to all
his reasonable and lawful commands, or significations of his will. God says,
Let wives be subject Ephesians. 5. 24.
to their own husbands in every thing. This general, in every thing, admits
only this limitation, that it be in the Lord. If your husband commands what
God forbids, or he would restrain you in that wherein Christ has made you
free; in this case you are to obey GOD rather then man.

If you enter into marriage according to the directions formerly given by that
holy young man, (now with the Lord) which he took out of the word of God, and
shall live in a married estate according to these present directions taken from
the same holy Scriptures, you shall live comfortably one with another, and
shall be a blessing each to other, and shall add much to one another
happiness here in this life.

I will shut up all in a few words of caution and advise unto both husbands and
wives.

Consider, that although this estate (if you be not wanting to your selves) be
full of comfort, benefit, and matter of delight and content; yet it will be but
for a time, it may be but for a very short time that you shall live 1 Cor. 7. 29
together. This will cause you to redeem the time, with thankfulness to God,
enjoy each other, and do good to each other, as well as in receiving good one
from another, while you may, lest else it prove to the surviving party, great
grief of heart, that he or she did let slip that good opportunity which God
had given them.

Moreover, you must consider, that there is another choice to be made, which
(if you be the same you profess your selves to be) you have already made,
which is better, and everlasting, namely, you have handfasted and betrothed 2
Cor. 11. 2.
your selves to Jesus Christ. This concerns that one thing Luke 10. 42.
needful; which when you have obtained, it shall never be taken from you,
without whom all earthly blessings in the end will prove curses: your whole
heart must be taken up about this, and wholly placed here.

What is said of riches when they increase, that may be said of the good of
marriage, Set Ps. 62. 10.
not your heart thereon, as upon that wherein you should place your happiness, or
set up your rest.

Christ Jesus, and his kingdom are first to be sought, Mat. 6. 33. Ps 45. 11.
he must be your chief love and desire; you must obey him in all things
absolutely; you must wholly live to him at all times, and must delight and
satisfy your self always in his love; your love and delight in one another,
must be in a subordination to your love to him, and as it will stand with your
love and obedience to him.

The Apostle advises you that are married, to be as if 1 Cor. 7. 29
you married not, you that have husbands, as if you had none; and you that have
wives, as if you had none. It is not meant that when you are married, you may
separate at pleasure, and live one from another, as too many do, nor yet to
neglect one another, though you live together; But your lives must not be so
bound up one in another, but that you can part one with another. And you must
use this estate as you do all other earthly good things, with such moderation
of affection, and indifferency of judgment, that by no means it take you off
from your love to God, and Christ, and from cleaving to him; and that you can
without murmuring, or inordinate grief part therewith, when you see that it is
the will of God you shall enjoy them no longer.

Be you sure therefore, that you use this estate as you are to use all other
good things of the world, as not abusing it. For the Apostle says, the time is
short in which ye shall 1 Cor. 7. 30. 31.
live together, and the world and the fashion of it passes away.

Therefore in whatsoever state you are in, and whatsoever you do, let your eye
be principally upon, and toward your best beloved Christ Jesus, to be always
loving and faithful to him; waiting for ^ These. 3. 5. Mat. 25. 1. 4. 7. 10.
the coming of this your Bridegroom, when your spiritual marriage shall be
consummate: At whose coming, at, and after the Resurrection, Luke 20. 35, 36.
there is neither marrying, nor giving in marriage, but you shall be like the
holy Angels in 1 These 4. 17.
heaven; and shall ever be with him the Lord, the blessed husband of his Spouse
the Church, partaking of all his beauty, riches, and glory. For when he shall
appear, in whose presence are fullness of Psalm. ^6.
joy, and pleasures for evermore; we shall be like him, for we shall 1 John 3.
2. Phil. 3. 21.
see him as he is, and our vile bodies shall be made like his glorious body,
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

Now to this King Eternal, Invisible, only wise God, and our blessed Savior,
be all honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen. To whose grace and blessing,
I do heartily commend you, with the whole Israel of God.

An Abstract of former Directions, whereby you may take a short view of all;
and it may serve as a Table to show where each particular in the Discourses is
spoken of more fully.
A Good wife is to be sought of God. page. 2. He can, and will best direct you
to find. ibid. She cannot be had from any other. p. 3. It is the easiest way
to find her. ibid. Never any can be said to have found, who has not thus
sought. p. 4, 5. Otherwise in stead of finding a blessing, thou may find a
curse. p. 6. They who seek otherwise, do usually find much trouble. p. 7. They
who rightly seek a good wife of God, enjoy much pleasure in seeking,
contentment in finding, and comfort in posiessing. p. 8. Thus seeking is well
pleasing to God; and is an argument of acknowledgment of his sovereignty, and
of your subjection unto, and dependence upon him. p. 7, 8. If you seek her of
God, then, how ever it fall out, you may have comfort in this, that you have
done your duty in respect of God, whether she prove virtuous or vicious. p. 9,
10, 11.
How God is to be sought.
This is by Prayer. p. 12. That he will give you wisdom to make a good choice,
that grace in her may be your chief aim. page 12, 13. Beg of God that your
affections may not be knit to any, whose affections he has not first knit to
himself, p. 14, 15. Otherwise, that God would withdraw your affections. p. 16.
If you be engaged so far, that you cannot well go back, then double your
desires, that God will give her grace, and that he will first unite her to
Christ, before he join her unto thee. p. 17, 18. Desire of God that she may be
not only endued with grace, but that she be a wife every way meet and sit for
thee. p. 19 Fitness for age, parentage, estate, constitution and disposition of
natures are with wisdom to be considered. p. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
The former concurring: then
First, acquaint your friends, in whose power you are, and get their consent.
p. 26. Also before you do woo her, you must get her friends consent. p. 26, 27.
Reasons why you must have consent of your own and of her friends. p. 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
Parents, or Guardians being consulted with, and consenting.
Foresee this, before thou do woo her, that thou can entirely affect her.
page 33, 34. Mutual love must be the foundation on which the marriage
structure must be built. p. 34. In getting her good will, care must be had how,
and that it be wisely and rightly done. 34. 35. Not so much in setting forth to
her thy parentage. p. 35. Nor thy wealth. ibid. Nor the liberty and privileges
she shall enjoy, if she will have thee. p. 35, 36. Nor with flatteries. ibid.
Nor by seeking to blind, and inveagle her by presents and gifts. p. 37. Nor at
all with foolish, unbeseeming, wanton gestures and behavior. ibid. Much less
by any solicitations to have your lustful will of her to make her sure, as too
many do; which is abominable. 37, 38. The right way of wooing. 38, 39. Pray to
God to direct thee in such a course, as may best gain her affections, and may
be most prosperous in it self, and best pleasing to him. p. 39. A Directory for
such prayer, p. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. When you or some friend make the
motion to her, whom thou would make thy wife, or to her friends, deal fairly
and truly, do not make a show, either of thy Religion, or thy outward estate,
more then indeed it is. p. 46. In prosecution of your suit, be serious, and
ingenuous, and loving, but never pretend more love then indeed you do bear
unto her. p. 46, 47.
After God has answered your desires,
You must make a thankful acknowledgement thereof unto God. p. 47, 48. A
Directory for this blessing, and giving glory unto God. p. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52,
53, 54, 55.
Other useful Considerations of single persons before marriage.
Expect not to enjoy that good in the married estate which it cannot give unto
thee. p. 58. 65. There is an insufficiency in marriage to give thee full
content, and of it self to satisfy thy desires. p. 58. Let not heat of love
make thee blind, so that thou can not see things as they are in thy Beloved.
p. 58, 59. Duties to be done, cares to be taken, and evils to be born in the
married estate, must be forethought of, prepared for, as well as the joys and
the good of marriage. p. 60, 65. Whenever you marry, you shall have troubles
in the flesh p. 60, 61. If you look for that happiness in marriage which God
never intended it should give you, you shall in stead thereof find nothing but
vanity and vexation of spirit. p. 61. Yet none are hereby to be deterred from
marrying, who have a calling to marry. p. 61. Marriage is of excellent and
necessary use. p. 61, 62, 63. Such may be the condition of an unmarried person,
that the good and comfort of marriage may countervail and exceed the troubles
of it. p. 62. The least sin is worse then the greatest earthly trouble. p. 62.
In the married estate may be expected very great earthly comforts. p. 64. Much
evil does follow the expectation of that good in marriage which it cannot
give. p. 65, 66.
After consent is gained in the way prescribed,
It is very expedient that you be betrothed to eath other, before that you be
solemnly married. p. 66, 67. Betrothing will make you sure one to another, but
not give a right to marriage society. p. 67. Betrothing before marriage is of
excellent use. page 68.
Directious for married persons: Some Duties are common to both.
Being married together, see and acknowledge it (being made as before has been
prescribed) to be of God. p. 69, 70. This acknowledging of God will be of great
good use to you both. p. 70. Consider well what a strict bond and covenant you
entered into, even into a covenant with God. p. 71. You are mutually to love
each other abundantly. p. 72. The neerness of relation into which by marriage
you are entered, it being the express will of your God, that you should thus
love one another, must be the spring and foundation of your love. page 72, 73.
This love must show it self in care of each others souls; you must pray one for
another, and in your places edify one another. 74 You must study to please
each other in what you may; and be helpful to each other. p. 75. You must be
faithful, and keep your selves chaste, and not defraud each other of due
benevolence. p. 76, 77, 78. You must not be jealous of each other. p. 78. You
must be preservers of each others names and credit. 78, 79. If God give no
children, you both must submit quietly to his will. p. 79. If God give you
children, you must join in bringing them up in the nurture of the Lord. p. 79,
80. You must be helpful to each other in governing and ordering the ways of
your family. p. 80, 81. Touching your estates you must join in all lawful
ways of maintaining it with diligence in your calling, being thrifty and
frugall. p. 82. There ought to be a community betwixt you in the use of your
temporal estate. p. 83. Expressions of special familiarities betwixt you are
best showed when you are alone. p. 84. Your love must be so strong that nothing
can quench it. p. 85. You must not suffer any difference to make a breach or
faling out betwixt you. p. 85. If any such shall be, be sure that you do not
sleep upon a discontent between you. p. 85. The husband out of wisdom, the
wife out of duty, should begin to show kindness, and to make up the breach. p.
86. When either of you begin, the other must readily embrace it. p. 86. To join
in prayer to God is an excellent means of reconciling man and wife, if any
breach have been betwixt them. p. 87.
The peculiar Duties of the Husband.
You are wisely to keep that authority over her which God has given you. p.
88. 90. You are to dwell with her as a man of knowledge. p. 90. You must esteem
her, and use her as your companion, and second self. p. 90. You are to tender
her as the weaker vessel. page 90, 91. You are to teach her the ways of
godliness. p. 92. You must daily pray with her. p. 92. 93. You must use your
authority with mildness. p. 93, 95. You must command her only things lawful;
not things unreasonable, nor trifles. p. 94. Lay commands on her but seldom, a
bare signification of your will to her should be enough. p. 94, 95. Never
reprove her but for a great and manifest fault, and that with the spirit of
meekness and love. p. 95, 96. Due time and place must be observed when you
reprove her. p. 96, 97. You must nnver be so unmanly and unnatural, as to
correct her with blows. page 98, 99. If she will not be governed, then help
of the Magistrate is to be desired. p. 99. You must show wisdom in her
employments, p 99, 100. You are to give your wife all good encouragement when
she does well, being more ready to approve her well-doing, then to reprove her
for evil. p. 101. The wife must be well provided for before your decease, that
she surviving, may live more comfortably. p. 101, 102. You must not give all,
or too much to her, with the neglect of your children. p. 102. Nor yet may you
give all, or most to your children, neglecting your wife. p. 102, 103.
Peculiar Duties of the Wife.
You must see in your Husband, and acknowledge the stamp of Gods authority upon
him; God having made him to be your head and ruler. p. 104. You most in
abundance of love show true reverence to him in word and deed. p. 105. You must
obey him in the Lord in all things. p. 106. Some Cautions, and other general
Directions to Husbands and wives for the close of all; that the married estate
to them may be more contentfull and comfortable. p. 107, etc.
Errata.
FOr comfortable, p. 66. l. 1. r. uncomfortable: for enjoy, p. 108. l. 14. r.
enjoying: for do, p. 108. l. 15. r. doing.

FINIS.

