pair of spectaclesA pair of Cristall Spectacles WITH WHICH Any man may see
plainly at a Miles Distance, into the Counsels of THE ARMY AND Take a full
View of the Grounds of all their DESIGNS. Published for the satisfaction of al
those who will drink his Majesty's healthy, Sing Vive le Roy, and cry God
bless King Charles. But chiefly made for the City of London.

By a Member of the House of Commons.

Printed in the Year 1648.

A Pair of Crystal SPECTACKLES.
IN the first place I will begin with our Brethren of Scotland Commissioners,
what rare contradictions and practices they held forth in their papers,
sometimes the King must not come to London, or be admitted to a personal
Treaty, until he has given security and satisfaction for all the Innocent
blood he has shed, etc. And then again, he must come without either, and
sometimes Propositions and no personal Treaty, and at other times a personal
Treaty and no Propositions, which are impositions, sometimes the King must take
the Covenant, other-while if he come not to the length of our desire in so
doing, we must be content; and sometimes they tell the King upon his refusing
the Propositions, both kingdoms will be constrained, for mutual defense and
safety, to agree to settle Religion and Peace without him; and then upon the
turn of the tide, they tell us we must wait until God change his heart, and
for the safety of the Kingdom the Army must be disbanded, the King invested in
the Militia, or it in him; and when our Commissioners in Scotland tell them
Barwick and Carlisle are taken, and demand reparations against those Malignants
and Incendiaries they protected; they Answer, that when they know the parties
names that have taken them, and the certainty those Garrisons be taken, then
they will give the Parliament an answer; And were not they and their faction
with the King, and all the Malignants and Papists, the first contrivers and
abettors of this last personal Treaty; the King and his party being wholly
conquered, and having no hopes but this left, which the Parliament, in the heat
of all their War, with the advice of the Kingdom of Scotland, would never
admit of: For had not the Lord Goring told you in his former intercepted
Letters, that if the King could but cudgel the Parliament into a Treaty, the
King had brought his designs to perfection; and reported of the King himself,
that he should say, then it should not be in the power of men nor Devils, in
hindering him from bringing al his Designs to his own hearts desire: Have you
forgot how the last invitation of the Scots into England, and the Rebellions of
Wales, Kent, and Essex, etc. and by whom countenanced? and in this last Treaty,
with what a slight hand were Delinquents beaten, the first and last war, in
this Treaty has been passed over, and many seemed to be satisfied with the
Kings Answer, though he will neither part from Episcopacy nor their Lands, nor
with Delinquents, which by Covenant, Promise, and public Faith, we cannot
comply with the King therein: And have you forgotten the Kings unparalell
Uxoriousnesse and affections to the Queen? For does he not tell you under his
own hand, in his Letters taken at Nazeby, That he will be ever constant to the
Rules and Grounds in the Little paper the Queen left with him? and That he
would not desert the Bishops, and Papists, the Queen and his best friends: And
has he not indevoured to bring in Irish and French Forces, etc. and promises
to suspend all Laws against all Papists, both in England and Ireland? And have
you forgotten the Queens Letter, wherein she advises him in the first place to
disband this perpetual Parliament, and then she says, All the rest will
easily follow. And be Judge your selves, if all the Papists in all the 3
Kingdoms do not oppose this Parliament, and their friends that are most active,
and were not Parliaments ever called by the King, Factious, etc. because they
always stood in his way against the bringing in of Popery and tyranny. And
has he not indevoured with the Bishops, and by juggling designs, by degrees
to cheat us of our Religion, and to settle popery and Tyranny? And has he not
indevoured to stir up factions and differences between the honest party in
England and Scotland; that he might take advantage by such Devision? And has
not he often broken his promise and protestations in many particulars which
might be named? And did he not openly declare in Parliament, that he owes an
account of his actions to none but to God alone, and that the Houses of
Parliament, joint, or separate, have no power to make or declare a Law without
him? And have you forgot what has been reported about King Jamses death, and
Marquis Hambleton? and what cutting and slitting of noses have been before this
present Parliament; and Loans, Shipmony, Star Chamber, Council Table, High
Commission Court, and Court of Wards, Monopolies; Knighthood, enlarging of
Forests enclosing of Commons, and ingrosing of Gun powder, Judges turned out
of their places for doing their duties, and many hundred of other particulars
might be here named; And were not the people forbidden so much as to speak of a
Parliam. and when a Parliament was enforced to be called in May 1640. was it
not dissolved after 14 days, because they would not engage against the
Kingdom, in a War against the Scots? And is his Design in bringing up the
Northern Armies forgotten? And his large offers to the Scots Army to be brought
up to London to awe the Parliament, and his sending over the Jewels of the
Crown, to be pawned by the Queen for Powder and Ammunition to fight for the
Protestant Religion, and his sending for Papists horses, for to seat Protestant
Riders upon, and then give his Commission to thousands of Papists to fight for
him, contrary to his many promises and protestations. And did not Henderson
that godly and learned Divine tell him, he had made 1500 Widows in one morning
in Scotland, and do you not think there was a design by the King and his party
to alter the Militia of London, whose faithfulness to the Parl. and City have
been tried to the uttermost, in a fiery furnace of six years Wars; And have
you forgot the Kings secret compliance with Secretary Windebank, in favoring
of papists and priests, etc, whom the Scots call the Popes Vicar. And is the
Popes Nuncio residing here, and his private transactions forgotten? And the
Cardinals cap sent to England, and the Kings Agents at Rome, and his Letter to
the Pope, and many other secret practices in this kind* to have brought in
popery and Tyranny? And have you forgot the Duke of Buckingham the Kings
favorite, how well he managed the Militia of this Kingdom, and of the loss of
Rochel in France, by the Kings lending his ships to the French K. and the Isle
of Ree, and Cales Voyage, and the Grounds and reasons of the Quarrel? And have
you forgot that ancient and true saying, That ancient Monarchy, is ancient
Tyranny? And stick close to those in the Parl. and Army, which stand most
against the Kings prerogative, otherwise you will never get any to serve you,
except such persons as Henry Jermin, and Jack Craffes, it is your disposition
always to be murmuring at your present condition.

Did ever Parliament take more pains, and ventured their lives and estates for
you then this Par. has done, against all unlimited and Prerogative power,
claimed by the King or Clergy over them? And were not honest and active men,
ever in former time called Puritans, if they had but public spirits, to stand
for the liberty of the Subject? and then Round heads, and of late Independents,
whatsoever their opinions be, because our enemies call them so, and by this
cunning and subtle pretense, diverse of your well-affected Citizens have been
aiding and assisting to them in their Councels and actions, indevouring to
destroy and disgrace those that have been the most eminent instruments under
God to save us, and this City and Kingdom from Ruin and destruction: And this
in plain English is the great offense that has so much lost them in your good
opinion and affection; And can any reasonable man think Antichrist lives only
at Rome, and that we have scared him out of Engl. by hanging up half a score
for the Powderplot. But upon further search he was found going to Church with
the King, where I saw him as busy as he could be bowing to the Altar, and
reading in the Common Prayer book, and singing the Letany, and about a great
deal more of such stuff, and for fear he should not be near enough, he crept
into the Kings bed, and now because the old name of Papist, Malignant and
Cavaliers are grown so odious to the People, therefore this cunning high Priest
of theirs teaches them to call themselves Presbyterians, for he says with so
doing, and with some other tricks he has, they shall gain a considerable party
both of the City and Clergy, and also make a division in the House of Commons,
and consequently in the Kingdom, until they have gotten the King into their
power, and a considerable Army of French, and their Catholic Brethren of
Ireland about them, and then he will put the Scots in mind they were the
beginners of their troubles; and tell them that it is no deceit to deceive the
deceiver, and they will then also, as they say, put London in mind of their
former zeal to the Parliament; and let them know their good King has always
called them a rebellious City, and has given them the City for their Arrears:
And have you forgotten the bloody massacre in France, were none killed there
think you but Independents, and what kind of Presbyterian government think
you, you shall have settled by Langdale and the Northern Cavaliers, for they are
turned Covenanters and have taken the Covenant, and the Irish Rebels and
Papists must be assisting to them in this great work; and is it not now come to
pass as it was in the Bishops time before this Parliament, that all those that
were very active Common wealths men, and stood most for the Liberty of the
Subjects, were they not called Puritans, then Roundheads, and of late
Independents and Sectaries, etc. so that if our common Enemies of our peace
have but as much wit as to call you Independents etc. according to these
practices it is policy enough to destroy you all. And concerning Ireland it is
clear by many several passages and by the examination of Mac carte, and
Macquire, etc. that the pretense of men for the King of Spains service, a year
or two before the Rebellion in Ireland was, but a color to keep some in Arms
for a foundation of that Rebellion: And have you forgotten the first clause in
the Oath enjoined by the supreme Catholic council at Kilkenny in Ireland, to
owe Faith and Allegiance to King Charles, and by all means to maintain his
Royal Prerogative against the Puritans in the Parliament of England, and that
they call themselves the Kings and Queens Army, and that they did nothing but
by the Kings command, etc. And the Parliament could not so much as obtain a
Proclamation against them for diverse months, though the King was daily pressed
thereunto, and when the King had yielded that some might be printed, there must
be but forty printed, and the King under his own hand, commanded that none of
them must be published without further direction; and did he not in one of his
Letters taken at Nazeby command the Earl of Ormond to give particular thanks to
Muskerry and Plunket the two Arch-rebels in Ireland, and have you forgotten how
the Earl of Leyster was delayed, and of the Kings refusing to give the Lord
Brook and Wharton Commission when large Provisions were made for their journey
into Irelands; And had not diverse of the Irish rebels private Passes from the
King to pass from hence into Ireland for the Heading of the Rebels there, when
all the Ports were shut by the King and Parliaments command, and when they
wanted Command^rs at the beginning of their Rebellion; and have you forgotten
the Irish General Oneales letter to Monro the Scots General there, desiring
him that those that could show the best Commission from the King might yield to
each other; and my L. Digbies letter, the Kings Secretary, taken when the L.
Taffes Army in Ireland was beaten, in which he writes to him to be careful in
engaging; for the Kings designs and welfare did much depend upon his Army? And
have you forgotten the many thousands of innocent souls that were barbarously
murdered by the Rebels when the Irish Rebellion first broke out; with their
barbarous cruelty to Cattle, etc. and all things that looked like English,
and digging their bones out of their graves; and also the often and secret and
private meetings every day at Whitehall, for 3. months together, with the
Roman Catholic Commissioners, and soon after their return into Ireland the
Rebellion brake out. And because many have forgotten the Commission, which
though formerly has been printed, and affirmed upon Oath to be the true copy,
the I rish say they have under black and white from his Majesty for what they
have done and do, I will conclude with the last Branch verbatim of this
Commission, as it is printed in the Book called the Mystery of Iniquity.

You are to use all politic ways and means possible to possess your selves
for Our use and safety of all the Forts and Castles, and places of strength and
defense within the said Kingdom, except the places, persons and estates, of
Our loyal and loving Subjects the Scots, and also to arrest, and seize the
goods, estates, and persons of all the English Protestants within the said
Kingdom to our use: And in your care and speedy performance of this our will
and pleasure, we shall perceive your wonted duty and allegiance unto us, which
we shall accept, and reward in due time: Witness our self at Edenborough, the
first of October in the seventeenth year of our Reign.

And now Reader judge, if it stands with divine Providence, after so much blood
and misery, to have a bare, and a base covenanting breaking Accommodation and
Peace ^^^h this man.

FINIS.

