Die Mercurij, 27. Januarij. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That Mr Seaman is hereby thanked
for his great pains taken in his Sermon, Preached before the Lords of
Parliament, this day in the Abbey Church Westminster, It being the day of the
Public Fast; And he is hereby desired to print and publish his said Sermon,
and that none do presume to print the said Sermon or any part thereof, without
authority under his own hand.

John Brown. Cler. Parl.
John Rothwell is hereby appointed for the printing of the Sermon intended by
the Order above specified.

LAZARUS SEAMAN.



THE Head of the Church, THE Judge of the World. OR, The Doctrine of the Day
of Judgment briefly opened and applied IN A SERMON Preached before the Right
Honorable, the House of Peers; in the Abby-Church at Westminster, on a public
Fast day, Ian. 27. 1646.

By LAZARUS SEAMAN Preacher at Alhallowes Breadstreat London. One of the
Assembly of Divines.

He commanded us to Preach unto the people, and to testify that IT IS HE which
was ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and dead. Acts. 10. 42. Audivi in
Belgio insignem potentemque Concionatorem, qui in omnibus concionibus multis
e^hcacibusque verbis populo refricabat and inculcabat memoriam Judicii,
motusque animorum vehementes ciebat, and multos convertebat. Cornel. A Lapide.
LONDON, Printed by E. G. for I. Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard, 1647.

TO The Right Honorable THE House of PEERS.
MY LORDS,
BEfore the sitting of this PARLIAMENT, the shadow of ONE of YOUR number was a
shelter to me; and the kindly influence of HIS favor, no small refreshing.
Since the beginning of it, I am more ohliged to HIM in special, and to YOUR
WHOLE HOUSE under GOD for a peaceable settling in that Ministerial station
wherein I stand at present. How much I am engaged to AN OTHER, is not for me to
express. These thoughts made me the more obedient to YOUR call for preaching,
though most unworthy both of the work, and audience. And though I have as
little love unto, as fitness for the press, yet to show my humble gratitude,
with due respects unto YOUR HONORS, and by writing to be more useful in the
Lord, then I could be by voice, I now present You with my second thoughts upon
that grave subject the day of judgment.

Many Stars within a few years, have fallen from the firmament of YOUR
HOUSE. Besides the Bishops, whose place shall know them no more, and those
LORDS who dyed in war against the COMMONWEALTH (who have all but those two
words for their Common EPITAPH

-- ILLACHRIMABILES PERIERE --)

And those also who are either wandering in Foreign parts, or sit solitary at
home, and are dead as to any place or vote among YOU: there were OTHERS WISE,
VALIANT, and FAITHFUL, whom we lament with wonder, HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN?
and yet death has Lorded over THEM also. When I consider these things (for we
poor men are bold sometimes to think thus high) it seems to me a real
demonstration that thoughts of DEATH and JUDGMENT are necessary for YOUR
LORDSHIPS, as for other men.

May it therefore please YOUR HONORS to make these things the matter of YOUR
daily meditation. There shall be a day of JUDGMENT. This DAY is already
APPOINTED. As the DAY, so the JUDGE. The JUDGE ordained is the MAN CHRIST
JESUS. The WORLD is to be judged by this MAN. And this MAN shall judge the
World in RIGHTEOUSNESS.

For the Judge, nec fallitur, nec flectitur, as BERNARD speaks. The day is
certain, though uncertain. The judgment is either for salvation, or
condemnation. The persons to be judged are quick and dead. h. e. Just and
unjust as AUSTINE. Souls and bodies, as RUFFINUS, or rather, those whom he
shall find alive, and those who shall be dead before his coming. Among these
shall he the great as well as the small. YOUR LODSHIPS among others. Then PEERS
shall have no privilege. The servant of Rulers Isa. 49. 7.
shall show himself to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Let these thoughts sleep with you, and wake with you, bring them to the
House, carry them abroad, let them ride with YOU in YOUR Coaches, and dine at
YOUR tables, yea make them YOUR meat and drink. Ezechiels roll had written in
it lamentations and mourning and woe, yet it was in his mouth as honey for
sweetness. Ezech 2. 10. Chap. 3. 3.
Such a roll is the doctrine of that day, and it will have like effect in their
hearts who can well digest it. Let it therefore abide with YOU till you can by
faith with diligence look for and haste unto the coming of the day of God, 2
Pet. 3. 12.
and count it as blessed for You, as it will be Glorious for Christ. Tit. 2. 13.
All that love his appearing shall receive a Crown of righteousness; 2 Timothy 4
8.
But how can they be said to love it, who love not to think of it? My hearts
desire is to speak comfortably unto YOUR Honors as Paul did to the
Colossians; When Christ who is our life, shall appear, then shall YE also
appear with him in glory. But I must needs add that which follows
immediately. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, etc.
Col. 3. 4 5.


And remember that besides YOUR account as men and Christians, you have more to
reckon for, by reason of YOUR places, Honors, and condition. Something was
amiss in the Star Chamber, and at the Councel-table; for why was the one put
down, and the other regulated? State affairs at present are all of YOUR
mannaging. But this above all is considerable, Religion in YOUR time has a
great change, and I am persuaded for the better; yet it will be inquired into,
what Divine principles have acted you in Divine things? and whether you have
followed the Lord fully which was Calebs praise. Number, 14. 24.
In the things of Christ has your care been to please Christ? Can you say
before HIS THRONE, as he said unto his Father while he was on Earth, I have
glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the work whith thou gave me to do?
John, 17 4.
Have you indeed settled a government in the truth and power of it according to
the Covenant? h. e. according to the word of God, and the example of the best
reformed Churches. Are you resolved that YOU and YOUR FAMILIES will be subject
to it? Because their is neither Jew nor Greek, Bond nor Free, Male nor Female,
but all are one in Christ Jesus? Gal, 3. 28.


To look forwards. The hardest part of YOUR work is yet behind. The
disbanding of Armies, dismantling of Garrisons is very desirable. To settle the
Militia in safe hands, pay the debts of the Kingdom, bring Delinquents unto
condign punishment, provide for Widows, and Orphans, must not be forgotten.
And for this the vows of God are upon you to bring the three Kingdoms unto
the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion. But what will ye do with
Christ Jesus and for his Church? Settle the Crown firm on his head, lay him
for your cornerstone and soundation in all the parts of your building, lest he
raise himself out of the ruins of this Kingdom, and another Crown perplex
you, till you learn from his word that it is your only safe rule whereby to
order Civil affairs, and much more all matters of Religion.

I should say more, But I hope tbose who succeed me, as better able will drive
this nail more home, and be more practical on this Doctrine. In the mean
while, that God would guide YOUR HONORS by his Spirit, so to Judge YOUR
selves, and others here, that when you come before the Supreme Tribunal, THE
MAN CHRIST JESUS may welcome YOU with Well done good and faithful Servants,
shall be the daily prayer of

Your Lordships humbly devoted in the service of Christ Jesus LAZARUS SEAMAN.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the House of Peers, on a
Public Fast Day, January 27. 1646.
ACTS. 17. part of the 30th. together with the 31. ver. But now (God)
commands all men every where to repent. Because he has appointed a day in
the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead.
THe end whereunto that solemn day of fasting once a year under the Law, was
appointed unto the Jews is said to be for atonement, to afflict their souls,
and to offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord. Levit, 23. 27.
The henefit of the day was atonement. It Is worth the while to spend a whole
day entirely, to attain such a blessing. This is given as a reason why they
might do do nothing else on that day; Ye shall do no work in that same day,
for it is a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you before the Lord your
God. ver. 28.
The duties of the day are 1. soule-afflicting, and 2. offering sacrifice. No
soule-affliction will procure us peace and pardon without a sacrifice, for
without shedding of blood there is no remission of sin Heb, 9. 22.
. Neither may we trust so much to the sacrifice, as to neglect the humbling of
our selves. But this is our comfort under the Gospel, our atonement is already
wrought out by him who is the propitiation for sin, and our Advocate with God,
1 John 1. 1. 2.
the High priest of our profession Heb. 3. 1.
. And the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart,
O Lord thou will not despise Psalm. 51. 17.
. Yet we have still need to afflict our souls, to humble our selves, and not
to rest in the formalitie of hanging down our head like a bulrush for a day,
but to be always repenting, yea to bring forth fruits meet for repentance
Math. 3 8,
, for now God would have all men everywhere to repent, etc. 1. Now, even in the
times of the Gospel, and 2. now, for he has winked or over-looked long
enough. 3. Now presently, while it is called to day, we may no longer harden
our hearts. Heb, 3. 15.
. This is the duty here pressed by St. Paul; the ground which he builds upon is
of force till the end of the world. If we must repent because of the day of
judgment, all men in all ages successively, must be repenting till then.

Now to further the power and practice of this duty, look not on the poor
instrument that is speaking to you; but imagine your selves to be the men of
Athens, and that you heard some son of thunder, Paul himself, who made Faelix
tremble when he heard of Judgment to come Act, 24. 25.
. Lend your ear a while to a brief repetition of that Sermon of his which is
recorded in this chapter, and very considerable in all that belongs to it.

The Preacher was none of the Philosophers, but an Apostle, and more then an
Apostle, one chosen by Christ, not on Earth, in his humiliation, but from
Heaven, after he had sat down on the right hand of Majesty on high. If
neither the inferior Ministers of the Gospel, nor those twelve, Who must sit
upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Math, 19. 28.
were worthy to be heard, yet next to Christ himself, such a one is worthy of
all acceptance.

The place where he preached in general was Athens, (...)
famous for learning and policy; the greatest honor that ever it attained was
this that Paul for some time was professor of Divinity in that University.

But more particularly, either there where that grave Senate of Areopagites
met, which is so renowned in humane Sen. de Tranq. animi cap. 3.
stories, and Seneca calls religiosissimum judicium, or in the street where
their Courthouse stood.

Some think the Judges were not present, Beza in ver. 19.
and it is the more probable because the Apostle was so fairly dismissed, ver.
33. Yet why did the multitude bring him of purpose to that place, ver. 19. but
because he seemed to be a setter forth of strange Gods, ver. 18. and
consequently deserved Maximus Tyrius disput. 39. Montac. Analecta. exerc. 1.
a like condemnation with Socrates, who had been put to death among them for a
like crime.

This is certain Dionysius the Areopagite was one of his converts, and
therefore he at least, (and probably some others of his rank) were his
hearers, ver. 34.

The number of those who became believers by this Sermon was but small. Howbeit
certain men clave unto him and believed; (...) some eminent persons, one man
and one woman for instance (...) and some others of an inferior rank. The
preaching of the Gospel is not alike successful in all places. The Doctrine
and Preacher may be the same, but the soil differs whereinto the seed is cast,
and God blesses his own Ordinance as he pleases. The Bereans were more noble
then those in Thessalonica. (ver. 11.) more noble and therefore the more
ingenuous; or rather, therefore the more noble because they received the word
with all readiness of mind; Not many noble are called 1 Cor, 1. 26.
.

Among the Apostles hearers, some mocked, others said we will hear thee again
of this matter. (ver. 32.) I am persuaded better things of you. And though this
roll should be torn in pieces as the Prophets was, and not be written over
again, and my rude draught of the day of judgment be blotted out; yet as John
Hus dreamed concerning the Inter Epist. John Hus.
Images painted in the Church of Bethlehem at Prauge, others shall arise and
make a more lively portraicture of the same thing; or this will be instead of
consolation, that among them who spent their time in nothing else but either to
tell or hear some new thing, (ver. 21.) Paul himself converted but a few.

For the substance of his Sermon you shall find therein

First, a sin reproved. The Athenians indicted before their Areopagites or
Magistrates and people before their own faces, for Superstition and Idolatry.
See the holy boldness of this man of God; and what an heroicke virtue is
sometimes to be found in the Ministers of the Gospel. If at any time you find
some sparklings of this Diviner Spirit in those who preach before you, when
they tell the Nobles of their sins as Nobles or Lords of Parliament, before
the people: let it be so far from being distastefull to you as it may appear
it is the more welcome, because so like the spirit of Elias, John the Baptist,
or Paul, transcendents among Preachers.

Secondly, Instruction tendered. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you. (ver. 23.) Ministers should be as ready to show the truth
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, as to reprove of error. One
reason why the child of reformation has stuck long in the place of breaking
forth, is, because when many among us were convinced of the evil one way, they
were not sufficiently informed of the good of an other.

Thirdly here is a duty propounded, and a motive urged.

The duty, to repent.

The motive, because of the day of Judgment; These fall into the words of my
Text. Yet before I enter on them, hear some thing of St Paul's method, and
manner of Preaching.

He begins like Demosthenes or Aeschines, with his (...) Men of Athens, a title
accepted of and affected among the Athenians. Ministers must have leave to make
out all their advantages. 'Twas no fault to say at another time, I am a
Pharisee the Son of a Pharisee, and Act, 23. 6.
elsewhere. Ye men of Israel. chapter 3. 22.
Men and Brethren children of the stock of Abraham 13. 26.
.

And being before them, who would have all done without a proem; (...). Jul
Pollux lib 18. cap. 10.
he falls presently to his charge. I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitions. See how he aggravates their sin, Superstitious, too
superstitious, too superstitious in all things. He speaks not of other men's
sins, but of theirs. Hearers must be content to have their particular sins
charged home upon them. Nor of their moral failings, but of their false
worship; Sins in matter of Religion are of all other most worthy of reproof,
because more immediately committed against God, and most dishonorable unto him.
The argument which he uses to prove their guiltiness, is taken from their own
practice. I found an Altar with this inscription, To the unknown God.

Whether this was all the inscription, or but a part of it, vide Heinsium in
locum, and Bezam.
is not much material; there was so much at least, enough for his purpose, to
make use of against them. Why will they worship they know not what? fear, or
phansy compels or invites vain man to a pretended Religion. Superstition is so
lightly grounded, that they who use it may be confuted either ex ore or
exopere, from their own mouth, or from their own works. Where was all this
while the learning and wisdom of the Philosophers, that none of them had one
word to reply? How forcible are right words? Error may obtain long, but truth
prevails at last.

Though the Apostle was full of zeal, yet he is not transported, or without
compassion. He qualifies the sharpness of his reprofe with many mitigations:
As it were too superstitious, (...) I know not how the (...) comes to be
neglected in our translation. As Quasi religiosiore^. Beza. quod in omnibus
excellitis in Religione demmum Trem. vel redundantes aut nimijestis. Id. in
notis.
I beheld your devotions, (...) your Gods, or your worship; that which you
intend by way of honor unto him or them whom you adore. Wh^^^ ye ignorantly
worship: ye worship, though ignorantly. And the times of this ignorance God
winked at, or over-looked as not regarding, nor laying it to heart. Note here
these 2. things.

1. Repentance is necessary even for sins of ignorance. How much more for
known sins?

2. The worst of sinners must not be made desperate. Sometimes sins must be
heightened, that the proud and hard-hearted may be the more humble, and
sometimes they must rather be lessened, that there may be some encouragement.
The promise is to you and to your children: thus Peter invites those to repent
who were first pricked in their hearts. At another time he says, Ye denied the
holy one, and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; And
killed the Lord of Life. Act, 2. 37. 38. 39.
Yet afterward he says to the same persons, who were not pricked as the
former, And now Brethren I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as also did
your Rulers Act, 3. 14. 15. 17.


Paul says the like of the Princes of the World; Had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 1 Cor, 2. 6.
How comfortably Samuel speaks unto the people of Israel when they seemed a
little sensible of their great sin in asking a King, may be read at large. 1 Samuel, 12. 20.
A hard flint is soonest broken upon a soft pillow; Some things may sooner be
dissolved by art, then broken by force. But what shall become of them whom
neither Law nor Gospel, threatenings nor promises, judgments nor mercies
prevail upon? All is one whether you handle them with the rough hands of Esau,
or the smooth ones of Jacob. However we Ministers must be made all things to
all men, that by all means we may save some. 1 Cor, 9. 22.
If God peradventure will give them repentance. 2 Timothy, 2. 25.
Thus far of St. Paul's Sermon in general, which I have the rather insisted on,
because as the Holy Ghost composed it, so it seemed good unto him not only to
take notes as Paul preached it (pardon this phrase for once) but also to leave
them upon record, and make them part of the Divine Canon.

For the words read in the beginning, we have therein these three things to be
observed.

1. A Doctrine propounded. 2. A proof annexed. 3. One use specified.
The Doctrine. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world, etc.
The Proof in those words. Whereof he has given assurance unto all men in that
he has raised him from the dead. The Use. Now he commands all men every
where to repent.

In the general Doctrine (for it is very full and comprehensive) these
particular points are twisted together in one.

1. There shall be a day of judgment. 2. This day is already appointed. 3. As
the day, so the Judge. 4. The judge ordained is the man Christ Jesus. 5. The
World is to be judged by this man. 6. This man shall judge the World according
to the will of God, and in righteousness.
Of each of these, breifely with some general application in the close, so as
may best agree with the scope of Paul in the whole, and with the work and
business of the day.

As touching the 1. point. There shall be a day of judgment; 1. Point
to the clearing, and proving of it, I shall briefly show, 1. what is meant by
a Day, and 2. what by judgment, 3. what kind of day it shall be, then 4. what
considerations may principally strengthen our Faith concerning this Article.

1. Concerning a day, there are three opinions. Some understand A Day.
a day precisely, not to be exceeded. Others, conceive that by the day is meant
a thousand years. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as Meade in Apoc.
one day 2 Pet, 3. 8,
. A third sort take day for time indefinitely; this is safest, because to put
day for time is ordinary in Scripture. There must be a day wherein that great
work shall begin, and for the continuance of it, that is to be measured by the
nature of the thing, and the Counsel of God. That some are said to sit on
thrones, and have judgment given unto them, (i. e. power of Judging) and to
live and reign with Christ a thousand years, Reu, 20. 4.
will no more prove that the last judgment shall be continued so long, then
the nameing of eternal judgment Heb, 6. 2.
proves that it shall continue for ever. When those thousand years are expired
Satan shall be loosed out of prison. verse. 7. The Nations deceived by him shall
compass the Camp of the Saints about and the beloved City; and fire shall
come down from God out of Heaven and devour them. verse. 9. But how agrees
this with that of Paul, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death? 1 Cor,
15. 26.
For wherein is death destroyed but in the resurrection of the just?

2. As concerning the end, and work of the day, that is A day of judgment.
judgment. Thence is the name so frequent in the New Testament, the day of
judgment. Math, 10. 15. chapter 12. 36.
Some of the Schoolmen do thus distinguish. There is a judgment of
discussion, and of retribution Judicium discussionis, and retribut.
; That all things shall be rewarded whether good or evil, is granted and some
things discus'd, but whether all, is disputed. The word (...) to judge, as it is
used in Scripture is very comprehensive, Aquin, tertia part. quoth. 89. art 7.
and 8.
and signifies either singly to inquire or examine a cause, Luke 12. 14. to
give sentence or determine, 1 Cor. 5. 3. to absolve, Genesis 30. 6. to punish and
censure evil doers, 2 Pet. 2. 9. to condemn, Math. 7. 1. to deliver the
afflicted and oppressed, Heb. 10. 30. Psalm. 26. 1. Luke 7. 51. to reward the
righteous or wicked according to their works, Eccles. 3. 17. to reign as a
King, 1 Samuel 8. 5.

Or else it includes these and all other actions of like nature in one, and so
I understand it in the Text. There shall at that day an account be given, Mat.
12. 36. Some are set forth as ready to justify themselves, Math, 7. 22.
and others to condemn themselves chap, 25. 37. 44.
. But the manner of judging will better appear under the third head for
explication.

3. What kind of day shall this be, for the properties of it, to cite all
texts out of the Old Testament which the Fathers apply this way, Hieron. in
cap. 24. Isaiae and in 7 cap. Danielis.
and to insist on them* or to speak of the signs foregoing, or solemnities
belonging to the day it self, as they are more plainly revealed in the New, is
too great a task for the present; only in general, the day it self, in the
whole work of it, shall be a day of the revelation of the righteous judgment
of God, Rom, 2. 5.
which implies not only what, but why he shall judge, in way of mercy or
otherwise.

In relation to the godly and penitent, it shall be a day of refreshing. Repent
ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And he shall send Jesus
Christ which before was preached unto you Act. 3 19. 20.
And a day of rest to his afflicted and oppressed ones. To you who are troubled
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels 2 These, 117.
.

As also a day of redemption.

Then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh Luk
21. 28.
.

But with reference to the wicked impenitent, it shall be darkness and not
light. Am. 5. 18.
A day of wrath. Rom, 2. 5.
When the Kings of the Earth and the great men, and the rich ones, and the
Captains, and the mighty, and every bondman, would hide themselves in the
dens, and in the rocks of the Mountains; And shall say to the Mountains and
rocks fall on us and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand? Reu, 6. 15. 16. 17.


Now for the fourth thing propounded, Some considerations to strengthen our
says, that there shall be such a day; take these few instead of many which
might be produced.

1. A natural conscience is terrified with the heareing of it, Felix trembled
when Paul preached of it Act, 24 25. chapter 17. 32.
. And of the Athenians it is said that when they heard of the resurrection of
the dead, some mocked, but there was no mocking at the judgment; the Heathens
generally had some glimmerins of light about it, though that light was clouded
with much darkness and obscured by their fables: what makes all men so afraid
of death, and so sollicitous about the sins of their life past, when they do
most strongly apprehend, that they that are to leave this world, if it be not
from an inward conviction, that it is appointed unto men once to dye, and after
this the judgment Heb, 9. 28.
?

2. There is great need of such a day, and that in many respects. 1. No humane
judgment or judicatory is infallible and perfect; we have here but a dark
apprehension either of God or of his works. And there are many errors,
unrighteousnesses and oppressions, even among Magistrates: But it cannot be
thought that error and wickedness should take place unto eternity. 2. Good
men for the most part suffer evil, and this has not only puzzeld many
learned Heathens in their disputations about Divine Providence, as Seneca and
Plotinus, Quare bonis vir^^ mala accidant cum fit providentia. Sen. per totum
librum. Plotinus Ennead. 3. lib. 2.
etc. but the best of Gods children have been much offended hereat, as David,
Psalm, 73. 2.
and Jeremy Jer, 12. 1.
. The best answer to all objections raised from this ground, is by asserting a
future judgment. 3. There be many mysteries and Labyrinths of providence. The
judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; and while
they are so, we may well admire and adore, but we can not give God that
distinct and rational service which he deserves, and we might render, if we
had more understanding of his works. The end of Gods works is for the
manifestation of his glory, and that he may receive glory, neither of which can
be perfectly attained on his part, or ours, without a day of judgment.

But thirdly, which is the strongest of all. There are plain Prophesies of the
day of judgment in Scripture, and that in two kinds. 1. By way of threatening
against the wicked. And 2. by way of promise, for the present comfort and
future benefit of the godly. The way of threatening is most frequent, I need not
therefore to instance in the particular places: The way of promise is very
express, The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, 2 Pet, 3. 9.
says Peter while he is speaking of the second coming of Christ; and
answering their objections who say, where is the promise of his coming? And if
God be either, as he certainly is both, Just and Good, Faithful every way,
there must needs be a day of judgment; If his merce were so great that he
should repent of the evil intended, (though that be but to dream with Origin)
yet even that greatness of his mercy would make the judgment so much the more
necessary for the good of his Elect.

The use of this truth is either, 1. for all in general, Application.
or 2. more especially for such as are in authority.

There shall be a day of judgment. Therefore

1. Let it ever be in our eye, ear, and heart, and let us be frequently
meditating of it, and of all that belongs to it, but above all of the account
which we must then give, and that condition and state of Eternity which will
follow thereupon; some never dreamt of a Parliament, but they have seen it and
felt the weight of it; and if we should be so foolish as not to think of this
day, the coming of it will be never a whit the farther off, because we put it
far from us, but the more dreadful; The Scripture speaks so much of it as
serves to call in all our senses. For the eye. Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, Jude, 15.
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among
them. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels: In
flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ 2 These, 1. 7. 8.
. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which peirced him, and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail before him. Rev.
1. 7.
For the ear. The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, 1
These, 4. 16.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God.

But that which should most of all affect our hearts, is that God shall judge
the secrets or hidden things of men. (...).
Rom, 2. 15.
Our swarms of evil thoughts, and lusts, our simulations and dissimulations
(as one distinguishes Dike of the deceitfulness of the heart.
) and all wicked desires, devices and purposes shall then be disclosed, and
whereas carnal policy, hypocrisy, and deceit stands us here instead sometimes
among men, they shall make most against us before God. To think on these
things and such like, may prevent many sins, speed and quicken our
repentance, and make us careful to have a conscience void of offense toward
God and man Act, 24. 16.
.

2 Seeing there shall be such a day, let oppressors, persecutors, Tyrants, and
all that are any way injurious tremble, but let the oppressed and afflicted be
of good cheer; verily there is a reward for the righteous, and doubtless
there is a God that judges the Earth Psa, 58. 11.
. The Nimrods, Pharaohs, Herod's, Pilates and such like, of the Earth, shall not
stand in judgment as the Psalmists phrase is Psa, 1. 5.
. And where shall the sinner and ungodly appear, when the righteous are
scarcely saved? 1 Pet, 4. ^8.
But the poor and meek of the earth shall there be pleaded for, and avenged
Jsa. 11. 4.
.

Therefore thirdly. Let us all live as becomes those who profess this faith.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.
Psa, 119. 9.
There is no way to live free from inward rebuke here, or from open confusion
before God, men, and Angels hereafter, but to live up in the power of
godliness, unto that perfect rule which is set before us in the word. If the
argument be good as it is, from the dissolution of the world, to a most holy
life, it is the stronger if we join with it the day of judgment. Seeing then
that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be
in all holy conversation and godliness, (...).
2 Pet. 3. 11. 12.
Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of God? Psalm. 51. 6.
Labor we therefore both for truth in the inward parts; and to cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.


2. For such as are in authority, Gods on earth, judges among men. Psalm. 82. 6.
First, Let them be upright, and humble, because they resemble him, are
subordinate unto him, and must be countable.

There be higher then they. Eccles. 5. 8.
And they must one day hear that command, and obey it, Give an account of thy
Steward-ship. Luke 16. 2.
Let them therefore judge, as those who must be judged.

2. Let them beware of all corruptions in judgment, to respect persons, take
bribes, directly or indirectly, neglect the cry of the widows and
Fatherless, with hold good from the owners thereof, protract causes, (and so
to make the remedy worse then the disease,) to be partial, to prefer private
interest before public, are all abominations in the sight of God. For such
like the Land mournes, the foundations of it shake, some courts of judicature
are thrown down, others are threatened. It Is a common outcry, that these sins
are to be found elsewhere then at the council Table, in the Star Chamber, or
High Commission, and Ecclesiastical Courts. Has not the wrath of God been
sufficiently revealed from heaven, against the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men in this kind? what means then the lowing of the Oxen,
and bleating of the sheep in ours ears, that persons are changed in the
exercise of authority, but not the crimes? The Supreme Court should set all to
right in the inferior; but if the fountain be tainted, what wholsomnesse can
be looked for in the streams?

3. Suppose there was nothing wanting in way of justice, yet because there
shall be a day of judgment, let those that judge on earth be as merciful as
they may be. h. e. as will stand with wisdom, justice, and the public safety.

Themselves may need mercy; unless mercy save them, they shall perish. For
those who are insensible, or incorrigible or inveterate and implacable in
malignity, the Lord humble them that they may find mercy in that day, I plead
not for them: but such as in the simplicity of their hearts are turned a side
and invol'd in the late fatal calamity, as the Orator calls the civil war
between Caesar and Pompey, should be pitied. * Cic. pro. Mar. Marc.
Those words of the Apostle may not unfitly be made use of here. And of some
have compassion, making a difference. Jude. 22.
But be sure you neglect not them, who have undone themselves, to save you; my
heart bleeds and breaks to think that the wisdom and power of a state should
be so vain a thing as not to find out, and effect some thorough remedy to
relieve them, who beg as for mercy with sad hearts and pale countenances, the
price of their husbands and friends blood which is more then owing to them upon
the strongest obligations. To quiet them, and awaken those who are concerned in
their cries, I have no more at present, but there shall be a day of judgment.

Now the second point, That this day is already resolved 2 Point.
on, comes in very fitly to drive on all that has been said upon the first. It
is appointed. God has appointed it. Though it be one of the four last things,
yet it was first conceived in the womb of Gods eternal decrees, and a statute
in heaven, before the foundations of the earth were laid. It is appointed for
all men once to die, but after this the judgment Heb 9. 27 Compare Deod. with
the Engl. Amotat, in fol.
; it is not indifferent whether we will understand the judgment in this place
of the Hebrews, of every man's particular, or of the general judgment, and
much less of the former rather then of the latter, or of this latter
peremptorily: for if after death there be a particular judgment upon every
man, we can hardly be kept of from imagining an interstitium or some space
between death, and the judgment after death, and consequently we might suppose
a purgatory in the interim. I take judgment there for the general judgment.
That Is appointed. Known unto God are all his works --

Two questions fall in here to be briefly considered 2 Questions
toward the clearing of the point in hand.

1. Why Christians in the Primitive times prayed Tertull. in Apoc. cap. 39.
Oramu^ etiam pro Imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum and potestatibus, pro statu
saeculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis, h. e. ut horrendum Dei judicium
differatur. Zeph. vide plura. cap. 32. eusd. Apol.
pro mora finis, for keeping off the end of the world, not for the hastening of
it?

Answ. Either from the apprehension of the evil and danger of the latter
days, by means of Antichrist, or rather out of a principle of patience in
themselves, and a merciful disposition toward the Enemies of the Gospel,
their persecutors, because this account is given by Peter why the second coming
of Christ is deferred. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some
men count slacknesse) but is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9.


2. May we not rather pray for the hastening of this day seeing there is so
much need of it? For there is no effectual remedy of corruptions in government
and the miseries which flow from them, but that; especially seeing that when
Christ says with such asseveration. Surely I come quickly. Rev. 22. 20
John seems to answer in the name of the Church, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus?

Answ. We do or should pray daily, Thy Kingdom come. And we may pray for the
accomplishing of all prophesies, but more especially for promises; but we may
not pray for the end but with reference to all known means ordained
thereunto; and as it is vain to imagine that times determined in Gods decree,
can be changed: so is it also presumptuous to desire it. It must suffice us
that Christ comes quickly; not in our imaginary due season, but in the Fathers.
To this we must add our Amen, Even so, as fully persuading our selves, that his
coming shall be, even the self day (m) as Exodus 12. 41.
Moses speaks of Gods faithfulness in his promise to bring Israel out of
Egypt. But yet the Lambs wise has not made her self ready, Rev. 19. 7
neither is she prepared as a bride adorned for her Husband; Chapter 21. 2.
and though the promise is exceeding comfortable which is often repeated behold I
come quickly, and the performance of it is most certain on Gods part, and
desirable on ours, yet our best means to hasten it is to further our own and
the Churches reformation.

For the use of this.

1. Let us satisfy our selves that the day is appointed Application.
though unknown to us. As our Savior says in one place generally. Act. 1. 7.
It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the Father has put in
his own power. So he speaks else where more particularly of this time. But of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my Father
only. Math. ^4. 36.
There Is nothing whereby the credit of Divinity suffers more then by
groundless, and yet confident assertions concerning the year and day of
Christ's coming. To give in all instances of mistake from Luctantius down-ward
unto this day (as is already done by some in great measure) would not keep of
others from presuming still. If in any thing, in this much more, we should be
wise unto sobriety. True beleivers are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake them as a theife. 1 These. 5. 4.
Lets be more careful to be beleivers, then to know secrets.

2. Seeing the day is set, we must arm our selves to be content in the mean
while. Be patient therefore brethren unto the coming of the Lord. Iam. 5 7.
If God should make us wait as long for Christ's second coming, as the
Patriarchs did for the first, no reason could be brought against it, and were
the world to last more thousands since, then there were hundreds before, this
might be said for it, they had but a bare promise for both, but we have the
History of his first coming, to help us in waiting for the promise of his
second. Can we desire that one of the elect should not be borne, or live
uncalled? Let Us therefore be content with that course of providence which falls
out in our time and for our afflictions, death Bonum factum habet Deum
debitorem sicut and malum; quiae Index est omnis causae re^un^rator. Ter^.
shall come between us and judgment to free us of them in the mean while.

3 If the day be set, then our reward is certain not of worth, but through
grace. * Here we may take in Saint Paul's conclusion from a like ground.
Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Next unto the certainty of the day, the certainty of 3. Point. Ingr. (...) pro
(...). Graecismus. Pisc. in Sch.
the Judge is to be considered. By that man whom he has ordained or defined.

The honor of this work is too much for any to assume, and the burden of it
too great for any to bear. It Is said of the book of secrets in Gods right
hand, No man in heaven nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open
the book, neither to look thereon. And John wept, because no man was found
worthy to open and read the book, neither to look thereon. Reu. 5. 3. 4.
If it be so great a matter to be of Gods council, who is it that shall be
trusted with all his power? who ever is judge, must be able for so great a
work, or else God and man would suffer extremely by it; but note this that
ability without authority, or a call to exercise it, will not suffice, no not
in Christ himself; While he was on earth he was exceeding careful in this
respect; when the people would have made him King by force, he withdrew
himself: John. 6. 15
They had no authority to confer such a dignity or power upon him. When one
desired him to decide a controversy about the right or wrong of an
inheritance, He said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
Luke 12. 14
He knew how he came by power in heaven, and that made him the more exact on
Earth.

The use of this calls me to it, because it is of great importance, and
therefore I hasten from matter of proof.

1. If none be Judge but he who is appointed, they who think the question de
Iure divino in any matter of Religion to be a needless one, may be better
informed. All authority which may truly be called divine, that is to be
exercised under God and in his name to a spiritual end, can have no other
original then himself, and must be founded in his appointment or
determination. That which we expect a divine efficacy in and by, must be of
divine efficiency, or else the effect and cause are not proportioned. A divine
warrant is therefore necessary in every one that judges in divine things.

2. Does not the supreme Judge intrude himself? what then will become of his
inferiors, who thrust themselves into those things whereunto they have no
call? As 1. the Pope, whose office strictly considered in the substance of it
is a tyranny. And 2. Bishops, as a superior order to Presbyters is little
less. To clear this, hear how some distinguish of Tyrants. There is Tyrannus
titulo a Tyrant in title, and tyrannus exercitio, a Tyrant in exercise. Parcus
in 13. ad Romans
Of Tyrants by title there be two sorts; some whose function is good, but they
have no right to it (or the power which they assume is lawful in it self, but
not for them) others whose office or power as they assume it, and in the
substance of the thing it self is unlawful. The Popes power is a Tyranny in
the highest kind because that authority which he challenges is not lawful
neither in him, as Bishop of Rome, nor in any Bishop of the world. The power
which Prelates assumed in ordination and jurisdiction in the substance of it
was a lawful power, but unlawful and Tyrannous in them as they appropriated
it unto themselves, excluding those to whom of right it did belong. In the
exercise of power, they whose authority in it self is most unquestionable, and
whose title is confessed, may yet become Tyrannous, by abuse of power. And
therefore care should be had every way by all those who take upon them any
thing in affairs of religion. This also (3.) concerns all Christian people
and that singly, or combined; for single Christians, they should not take upon
them the work of officers, that is absolutely inconsistable with order, polity,
an organicall body, and with the nature of the Church, which is built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20.
And because all the congregation is holy, every one of them Numb 16. 3
upon that ground or under that pretense for the congregation to oppose those
who are over them in the Lord, in those things wherein they are over them, is
directly to fall into the sin of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and that whereof
Saint Jude gives special warning in his Epistle. Jude 11. ^.
It Is of great use for every one that does any thing either in government or
worship, to have an answer ready unto that question, when Christ shall propound
it at the last who has required this at your hands? Isa. 1. 12.


3. This one word more. The Judge is of Gods own ordaining, therefore there
can be no appeal from him; no not unto the Father, The Father judges no man,
but has committed all Judgment unto the Son. John. 5. 22.
If he say come ye blessed, or go ye cursed, we must abide by it unto all
eternity. How comfortable is this to all that believe in him and obey him? but
oh the terror of it unto all those that will not have this man to reign over
them. The Jews cried out not this man but Barrabas. Ioh. 18. 4*
They denied the holy one and the Just, and desired a murderer to be given unto
them: Acts. 3. 14.
But God has made him Lord and Christ. Cha. 2. 36
They who will not come unto him to have life; John. 5. 40.
shall be brought before him to receive eternal death. But of this more fully
and expressly in the next point.

The man Christ Jesus is the person ordained to be Judge, 4. Point.
God is not here excluded, for God shall judge by him as in the Text. And in
other places the Judgment is more directly referred unto God. Henceforth
(says Paul) is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day 2 Timothy 4. 8.
The man Christ Jesus is said to be the Judge, because he is to discharge this
office also in forma servi as a righteous servant, appointed by his Father
hereunto.

Two things are here to be insisted on, before the use.

1. That He is ordained Judge. 2. Why He is ordained Judge.
1. If we consider Him in his humiliation it may seem Ille qui stetit ante
Iudicem, ille qui alapas accepit, ille qui consp^^os est, ille qui spinis
coronatus est. Dr. August. in Psalm. 96.
strange that one born in a stable, laid in a manger, reputed a poor Carpenters
Son, that had not whereon to lay his head, who was counted a friend of
Publicans and Sinners, a Samaritan, that cast out devils by Beelzebub the
Prince of the Devils, whom one of his own Disciples betrayed, the rest forsook,
whose own whole Nation as one man accused as a blasphemer and traitor, who was
crucified among theives, and forsaken of God; should receive such glory, and
have such a power and trust committed into his hands; who can believe this
report? Isa. 53. 1.
But take of the veil a while, or look through it, and you shall find he was
in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Phil. 2.
6.
Nay more: In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God The same, or even he, was in the beginning with God. All things
were made by him, and without him was nothing made that was made; John. 1. 1.
2. 3.
Consider of him likewise in his estate of exaltation.

He is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Rev 19. 16.
The blessed and only potentate. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
God has given him a name above every name, Phil. 2. 9.
yea, all power both in heaven and earth. Mat. 28 18
Every knee shall bow to him, and every tongue confess unto him. Romans 14. 11.
who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, and
authorities, and powers being made subject unto him. 1 Pet. 3. 23.


But what ever he is, or the world thinks of him, he is the man; for we must
all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Peter tells Cornelius and his company of him, He commanded us to preach unto
the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead. Acts. 10. 42.
Between his resurrection and ascension he conversed with his Disciples 40.
days, speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 3.
It seems by the former testimony, this was one principal thing, which he
then gave in charge to be taught concerning himself.

2. But why is he Judge? To answer in few words. 1. As he was born King of the
Jews, Mat. 2. 2.
so was he also as the natural, proper, and only begotten Son of God, borne
herre to God, and therefore fittest to be taken into the fellowship of Empire.
with his Father. And 2. because God has also a Kingdom ex consilio, like a
purchase over and above the natural inheritance, therefore he was appointed
heir of all things. Heb. 1. 2.
3. He is in all respects most desirable, and least liable to exception; every
way qualified for such a work as Isa. declares at large. Isa. 11. from 2. to 6.
4. And seeing God purposes to deal with men after the manner of man, he
condiscends to let them have one that is flesh of their flesh, and bone of
their bone, to be final judge between him and them, that he may be the more
justified, and they without all excuse. 5. Besides that Christ has gone so low
in abasing himself for his Fathers glory, that he only is worthy to be thus
far exalted. 6. What the Jews will think of this at last, that he whom they
scorn to own for a Messiah, shall be the Judge of all the earth, I know not;
but being as he is of the seed of Abraham and David according to the flesh, it
will make the more for the justice of their condemnation. 7. And therefore he
is the fitter to be made Judge, that we may the rather believe on him and obey
him, and in all respects apply our selves to him as is meet while he offers
himself to be our Savior, and says, having his Arms of mercy outstretched
in the mean while as on the cross, Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mat. 11. 28.


For the use of this. 1. Let us observe all those special Application.
Items which are given us in Scripture about Him. As 1 to beware of him. Behold
(says God) I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in
him. Exodus 23. 20, 21.
This is no other then the Angel of the Covenant. Mal. 3 1
Both places are commonly understood of Christ. 2. To kiss him. h. e. to love,
reverence and obey him, or according to the Ancient Latin translation, which
was used in Cyprian's Discite Disciplinam.
time, to learn discipline. Kiss the Son least he be angry; and ye perish
from (or in) the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all
they that put their trust in him. Psalm, 2. 12.
3. To hear him. At his transfiguration in the Mount, a voice was heard from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; Hear him.
Mat. 17. 5
4. Not to be ashamed of him before men, or offended at him. They are his own
words. Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me. Mat. 11. 6.
But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in heaven. Chap. 10. 33.
5. The last and principal one is to believe in him; for this is the work of
God, (h. e. the principal duty which God requires all men to endeavor toward
Christ;) that ye believe on him whom he has sent. John 6. 29
If we desire to find him a friend when he comes to be our Judge, let it be
our care to approve our selves in every one of these specialties while we live
here, and the rather because we are so particularly and distinctly warned of
them in his word.

And secondly, let us have due respect to his Ambassadors, Members, little ones,
Ordinances, Commandments, and whatsoever person or thing has any relation to
him. For his Ambassadors, you know what he said to some of them for their
encouragement, He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me. Mat. 10. 40. etc.
These are times wherein God is purifying the Sons Levi; and many among us
must take that in Malachi unto our selves. Therefore have I also made you
contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my
ways, but have been partial in the Law. Mal. 2. 9.
But what though some have proved unsavory Salt, will you therefore condemn
all? This is an hour of trial and day of temptation upon the Land. God
exceedingly humbles the Ministry, many therefore condemn the calling and
function it self, as if Ministers were a needless generation of men, born
only to live upon the sweat of other men's brows; and while care is taken to
remove such as are scandalous, others are left to the mercy of the people,
little less then starved out of one place into another. But while the
punishment of Priests and Levites under the Law, lights upon Ministers of the
Gospel, let such as envy either their gifts and parts, or their livelihood and
subsistence, or unjustly molest, or reproach them, take heed least the curse of
Levis Enemies light also in these times of the Gospel on the heads of those
who malign Ministers. Smite through the loins of them that rise against him,
and of them that hate him that they rise not again. Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
This Moses speaks either by way of Prayer, or Prophecy; take it in the
mildest sense, it is a fearful curse, where ever it lights. Secondly, for his
members (and here also I hope some of his Ministers must be computed) he that
touches them, touches the Apple of his eye. Zach. 2. 8.
Yea to every one of them belongs that in the Psalm, Touch not mine anointed
and do my Prophets no harm; Psalm. 105. 15.
and that of Christ from heaven in a vision, Saul Saul, why Act. 9. 4.
persecutest thou me? Thirdly, Of the little ones he says; whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him
that a Mil-stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea Mat. 18. 6.
. I confess there needs a great deal of wisdom to apply these things,
because among the many pretenders to be of near relation unto Christ, certain
it is, that there are many whom he himself will not own. We have one Character
given by him, to help us the better in discerning of them. They are workers of
iniquity. I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity Mat. 7. 23
. On the other side even among the sheep of Christ, Jacobs portion, there be
many spotted, and ring-straked; Some that are weak, sick, broken, that either
wander of themselves, or are driven away, and lost in appearance; Ezekiel, 34. 4.
we must labor for the like affection and behavior toward all these that
Christ himself has. Fourthly, for his ordinances. There are but few which can
peculiarly be called his, for newness of institution, in the N. T. we should
therefore be the more careful in observing of them. To think there is no
Government of his appointing (without which no well ordered society can
subsist) cannot enter into my mind to conceive. If there be none; the greater
care and burden lies upon the Magistrate; he has the more to answer for, if
divisions, errors and confusions multiply in the Church, through his neglect.
As for the Lords Supper, judge in your selves, do you think it is the mind
of Christ, that bread and wine should be provided in the Church, and set upon
the Table as at a Tavern, that whosoever will, may come and take it for his
money? If you would have any respect given to your Honors, or Ordinances, be
careful of Christ's. I Will say no more. Fifthly, for his Commandments, the
chiefest of them is that we love one another, John 15. 12.
wherein we most fail. His example, Rev. 1. 5.
who has loved us and washed us in his own blood is sweet and strong, yet that
suffices not. Pray we therefore earnestly, that by his grace, we may be able to
say, God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of love and of a sound
mind. 2 Timothy 1. 7.
Sixthly, to add a word or two upon this occasion: There be others taken in of
late, according to the example of the best reformed Churches, and by warrant of
the word to share in Church government with the Ministers. These also we must
obey, and submit unto, as being in the number of those who watch for our souls
as they who must give an account. Heb. 13. 17
Seventhly, to conclude this use; Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power and riches and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing. Rev. 5. 12
And therefore we may not think much of any thing given to him or his Church.
In some cases, Gold and other treasure was taken for common use, after it had
been dedicated, or consecrated unto God. 2 Kings 12. 18. Chap. 18. 15. 16.
And the State may take from the Church, as the Church it self uses to
alienate for the good of it: yet care should be taken, that Christ may not have
any just occasion against us either in behalf of his Ministers, or other
members in any kind. To bestow a box of ointment on him, was thought waste by
Judas, but not by Christ himself.

A third use is this, seeing Christ shall be judge, let us love where he loves,
and hate where he hates, so we shall be sure to please him, and that he will
befriend us. Let that be our meat and drink which was his, to do the will of
him which sent him, and to finish his work. John, 4. 34.


To deny ungodlynesse, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world; yea to deny our selves, to take up our cross, and
to walk as he has walked, cannot but be most acceptable Titus, 2. 12 Math.
16. 24.
in his sight, because this is the true use of the grace of God toward us in
the Gospel, and the duty of his Disciples. And seeing he loved the Church and
gave himself for it, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church
not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish Ephesians. 5. 25.
; we may be sure that all sincere upright regular endeavors toward the
reformation of it, are according to his heart. As for the things which Christ
hates, there be some particulars which are accented with his abhorring as, 1.
Hypocrisy, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites. Mat, 23. 13.
2. The deeds of the Nicolaitans; for thus he writes in his Epistle to the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus. But this thou have that thou hate the deeds
of the Nicolaitans which I also hate Rev. 2. 6.
, 3. the doctrine of the Nicolaitans as well as their deeds, for so he writes
to another, I have against thee (...)
(h. e. this great evil to lay unto thy charge) or some heavy judgment to
inflict, because thou have there, them that hold the doctrine of Balaam. So
have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate ver. 14. 15.
. So as evil doctrines are hateful to Christ, as well as evil deeds; we may
as well plead for the toleration of the one, as of the other; yea to hold the
doctrine, h. e. to be stiff in maintaining evil opinions, or to suffer such
as do, (which thing I hate (...).
) is abominable before Christ as well as to teach them. 4. Lukewarmenesse also
is another particular, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will spew thee out of my mouth Rev. 3. 16.
. This is said to be the Church of Englands sin in worship and government
Brightman in apoc. c. 3.
under Liturgy and Episcopacy; would to God it were not her sin even till
this day; we are neither so cold as by public indulgence to tolerate all
opinions, nor so hot as to suppress one Sect. Not so cold as not to admit of
Presbyteriall government upon trial, and in part; nor so hot as to receive it
wholly in the power, and practice. 'Twere well if in these things we were more
then almost persuaded to be Christians.

The Fourth use. Above all things let us take heed of crucifying Christ again,
and of putting of him to an open shame, or of betraying him or his cause for
by-respects, least as he said unto his Brethren, I am Joseph whom ye sold Gen,
45. 4.
, so it be said unto us, I am Christ whom ye denied. The Jews will not believe
him to be the true Messiah, and fear not his second coming: (though some
prove a first and second coming of the Messiah by their own traditions)
Petrus Galat. de Arca. Cath. verit. lib. 4. c. 1, Tit, 2. 13.
but his glorious appearing, is our blessed hope; yet while we desire he may be
our Savior, let us so walk as becomes those who remember he must be our Judge.
The fifth point follows.

The world is to be Judged by this man. The world, this 5. Point.
implies, 1. All persons, for we must all appear before All persons.
the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in
his body 2 Cor. 5. 10.
. And whereas it is written (Jsa. 45. 23. As I live says the Lord, every knee
shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.) The Apostle from
thence concludes in this manner, So then every one of us shall give an account
of himself to God Romans 14. 11 12.
. Saints as well as sinners, for of such he there speaks. And yet more
distinctly, Jews and Gentles. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye
shall see him, they also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the Earth shall
wail because of him Rev, 1. 7.
, small and great chapter 20. 12.
, quick and dead 1 Pet, 4. 5.
. Our Savior speaks of Tire, Sidon and Sodom, that it shall be easier for
them at the day of Judgment then for Capernaum and Bethsaida Mat, 11. 22. 24.
, which implies, that all who ever lived, not only after his incarnation, but
from the beginning of the world, shall be respectively countable unto Christ,
one as well as another. And as all persons, so All causes.
2. all causes shall be judged by him. The distinction between civil and
ecclesiastical judicatories shall then vanish, all things shall be
indifferently heard at one Bar, and men shall give an account of their
practice or conversation. He shall reward every man (...) (...) Mat. 16. 27.
Of their works. The dead were judged out of those things which were written
in the books (...), Rev, 20. 12.
, of their words: Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an
account thereof in the day of judgment Mat, 12. 36.
. of their counsels. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come who
both will bring to light the hidden thing of darkness, and will make manifest
the councels of the hearts 1 Cor, 4. 5.
. and of their secrets. God will bring every work to judgment with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil Eccl. 12. 14.
.

3. As all persons and causes, so likewise all creatures, All the Creatures.
the Angels not excepted. The creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God Rom,
8. 21.
; And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the great day Jud. 6 ^e.
.

This in the use of it, serves, 1. To show us the vanity Application.
of the world and of all humane jurisdiction; it is not final nor supreme.
When a Parliament is sitting, all inferior courts tremble; and every one is
ambitious to get in to be a member of that Court, which is the highest. There
shall be a time (as we are now assured) when Lords and Commons must also give
an account. How much better is it therefore to be a Christian, a Saint, then a
member of either House? Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world
1 Cor. 6. 2.
? Let all that judge in this world, carry themselves so in all respects, as to
be not only willing to be judged by Christ, but also in the number of his
assessors at the last.

2. Hence is comfort to Gods people, they are chastened in and by the world.
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be
condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11. 32.
.

3. Let Us all prepare for judgment in every thing: Here the Church complains
not only of men, but sometimes of God himself, My judgment is passed over of
my God Jsa. 40 27.
. Though there is no cause for this, yet Satan takes occasion to make
corruption give such language; But surely when Christ judges all the world, he
will remember his Church; yet let Saints beware that they do not so much
please themselves Note.
with the thoughts of their reigning with him, as in the mean while to forget
that even they also must be judged by him.

4. To conclude, seeing Christ shall judge the world, let the world take heed
how she carry her self toward Christ and his Church. As Christ was content to
stand at Pilats bar, and Paul before Cesars judgment seat Act, 25, 10.
, so must all the members of the Church be subject in like manner; Christ
himself thinks it enough to have supremacy in all causes hereafter, though in
some respect he is supreme now. His Church the Spouse can be in no better
condition on Earth then her Lord was. But he that is head of the Church, shall
be judge of the world, and though this claim be justly rejected in the man of
sin, yet it cannot be denied unto this man, whom God has indeed ordained, as
he by whom he will judge the world in righteousness. This brings me to the
last point.

The man Christ Jesus shall judge the world, according to ^. Point.
the will of God, and in righteousness. According to the will of God, for God
shall judge by him; And shall not the judge of all the Earth do right Gen, 18.
25.
? And in righteousness, this must needs follow, because the will of God is the
rule and root of righteousness. Righteous judgment, is that which God
commands to be used between man and man, and that which all men expect from
God. The want of this in men, and our not discerning of it in many of the ways
and works of God, is that which makes a future-finall judgment to be most
necessary; and therefore this particular of all others belonging to that day
must needs be most certain. The glory of God who ordaines Christ, and the
glory of Christ who undertakes that whereunto he is appointed, and the glory of
the work it self which is the last and most solemn of all that comes within
the compass of divine providence, depends altogether upon this condition, that
all be done in righteousness.

But what does this import that Christ shall judge the world in righteousness?
I answer 1. Negatively.

1. There shall be no respect of persons, Rom, ^. 11.
kindred, friendship, greatness shall take no place with him.

2. He shall not judge according to the sight of his eyes, or hearing of his
ears Jsa, 11. 3.
, or according to appearance, John, 7. 24.
but as the truth of every cause and case shall require. Some suppose that a
Judge on earth is tied to go secundum allegata and probata, according to legal
proof and Baldwin. de Cas. Cons. lib. 4 cap. 12. casu. 6.
evidence, though in his conscience he be persuaded otherwise, or else that he
must deponere personam judicis, suspend his act as Judge, and take upon him the
place of a witness before an other. But Christ shall never be brought to this
straight, by causing all evidence to be brought in, or by supplying of it with
his righteous sentence.

3. He shall not only give sentence, but also cause the equity of it to
appear, when he says come ye blessed -- his reason follows, for I was an
hungered and ye gave me meat, etc. Math, 25. 34 35.


2. For the Affirmative part of the answer, he shall judge in righteousness,
that is, 1. In general, according to the tenor of all prophesies which went
before of him, wherein no particular belonging to the office of Christ is more
frequently or emphatically expressed then this, that his judgment shall be
righteous, Psa, 45. 6. 7. 72. 2. 3. 4.
and righteous in this sense, that poor afflicted ones shall have benefit by
him, and the wicked and ungodly be condemned. And therefore his judgeing in
righteousness shall be (to speak more particularly) Both 1. according to the
tenor of all promises made to such as believe in him and obey him, and all
testimonies which import any thing that tends unto their happiness. The sum
of all which is, that all tears being wiped from their faces Jsa, 25. 8.
, they shall have fullness of joy and pleasures at God right hand for ever more
Psa, 16. 12.
. And 2. according to the threatenings denounced against the wicked, hypocrites,
and unbelievers, all which speak nothing less then that as vessels of wrath
fitted unto destruction, they shall be filled with wrath, and lie under it for
ever. 2. His judgment shall be righteous, both with reference unto God, that
his council may stand, and decrees take place; and also in relation unto men,
and therefore his decrees shall so take place, as the harmony of them with his
revealed will shall be sounded forth, though in several tunes, as well by them
who perish, as by those who are heirs of glory; every tongue shall confess to
God Rom, 14. 11.
.

This point requires a larger application then Application.
the proportion of a Sermon will allow, and another kind of use then is proper
for a day of humiliation; for the present I shall only touch upon these few
heads.

It serves 1. to assure us that there is an infallible Judge provided for the
deciding of all controversies, and to put an end unto all strife. The Papists
busy themselves, and puzzle others with disputes about this question, who is
to be the supreme and infallible Judge of controversies in matters of
Religion, whether the Pope, or general Counsels? Our answer is, neither the
one, nor the other, nor any at all Davenant. de Iudice and norma fidei. cap 4.
Carkon in exercit. Theol.
since Christ and his Apostles, but he only at his second coming. They that
will submit to no government but upon the supposition of infallibility in the
persons judging, must be subject unto none at all, neither civil nor
ecclesiastical, no nor to their own judgment of discretion. If any might
presume of infallibility, the Church has the fairest pretense, because she
has many promises, which the world has not. The last resolve of things shall
be most exact, but here we are all subject more or less, either to error or
uncertainty. Happy is he that can say I know nothing by my self; but that
which follows in St. Paul's words must needs be added, yet I am not hereby
justified, he that judges me, is the Lord. 1 Cor. 4 4.
If Moses Aaron and Samuel were amongst us, the best Magistrate Priest or
Prophet that ever was, they could not satisfy in all things, either some
unrighteousness might be found in them, or they though innocent might fall
under suspicion, and therefore both they who are in place of judicature and all
that are under authority, for the present have need of patience, wrongs and
injuries may be the better borne here, because hereafter God will judge the
world in righteousness.

2. Though on a fast day, the ministry of the word should tend to humbling,
yet because that humbling is in relation to comfort, therefore I may not hide
from you the consolation which this point affords for all Gods children; the
rather because the Psalmist calls for all possible rejoicing from all creatures
upon this ground. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad: let the
Sea roar and the fullness thereof; let the field be joyful, and all that is
therein: then shall the trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord, for he
comes, for he comes Primo adventu ad redimendum. I^^rato adjudicandum. He
onymus
(twice repeated) to judge the Earth: he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with his truth. Psalm. 96. 11.
The contents of the Psalm refer all this to the general judgment; Some of
the Ancients As Augustine and Jerome.
include both the first and second coming of Christ; and though that title
which is prefixed by the Septuagint, (A psalm for David when his land was
established unto him) (...):
gives some light to understand the occasion of it; yet that hinders not but
that it may, and from the matter of the Psalm it self, it must be understood
of Christ. When the Apostles speak of Christ's last coming, and the proper use
of it unto believers, they set it forth as the most blessed time that can be
imagined. And therefore we pray thy kingdom come, because the coming of it,
in that part or manner of administration which is yet future, is for the
comsummation of our bliss; And seeing we do pray for it, let us all reform;
Corrige te, and non ores contra te. Augustinus.
the righteousness of the judgment should teach us to live righteously, that
our joy might be full both now, and then.

3. If Christ judge righteously, wicked men who are so hardened as not to
repent, must needs perish; riches, learning, honor, power, nobility, a form
of godliness will be of no use before a righteous judge, to make ungodly men
escape. The more any abound either in outward blessings, or shows of piety,
the greater shall be there condemnation. The righteous Lord loves
righteousness Psalm. 111 7.
; and hates all workers of iniquity. Psalm. 5. 5.


4. I shall add but one word more; Lords and Commons, all that are Judges in
the earth may learn from hence what God and men expect at their hands; to
judge as Christ judges, in righteousness. That question which God puts by
David, Do ye indeed speak righteously, O ye congregation? do ye judge
uprightly O ye Sons of men?(x) does not only imply the duty, but the (r) Psalm.
58. 1
sin, and the danger of all great Assemblies, or smaller Courts. They who
represent God in their places, should also resemble him in his virtues: and
because they act his part here, therefore he is present with them. (God
stands in the congregation of the mighty Psalm. 82. 1. etc
) observes and overrules (he judges among the Gods.) And though he bear with
them, because though called Gods, they are but men, subject to like passions as
other men are, and too often to greater corruptions and abominations then many
of their inferiors, yet having said ye are Gods, and all of you the Children of
the most high; He will the rather expostulate, How long (...) Rabbini fere in
malum. Sicut Tyrannus quispiam praecipitabimini ad inferos. R. Selomo. Arnob.
Chrysostom. daemones, vel ut I heod. daemonum principes intelligunt.
will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Neither is that
all, he threatens further, and will execute accordingly, ye shall dye like men,
and fall like one of the Princes. * As common men you shall dye a common death,
as Princes you shall dye like Princes. The shame, sorrow, and curse of your
deaths shall as much exceed other men's, as the glory and power of your places
is above the condition of meaner persons. Therefore let him whose daily work
it is to judge others, judge himself. If he have been righteous, let him be
righteous still, Rev. 22. 11
strive for that praise which is given to the Angel of Thyatira, I know thy
works and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works,
and the last to be more then the first. Rev. 2. 17.
He that has not been righteous, let him repent; for now God would have all
men everywhere to repent. If any will be so wicked, as to harken unto neither
of these directions, and so hard-hearted as to despise the terror of the Lord,
the judgment to come, yet let every one that fears God believe, that he has
appointed a day, etc.

If I had to do with those scoffers whereof Peter prophesies, 2 Pet. 3. 3.
and they should ask how it may be proved that there shall be a day of
judgment. I might answer, that God has given proof of this in raising Christ
from the dead. This is the second general propounded in the beginning, and
those words of Paul in another place do much strengthen this, For to this end
Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead
and living. Romans 14. 9
And though the phrase of the Text in Greek, which signifies to give faith,
might seem to import some other thing, yet the better sort of interpreters
concur with our translation. (...) hoc loco non declarat fidem praebere i. e.
crodendi potestatem facere. sed fidem facere Beze. Praeb^n^ mibi est faciens
nec ^liter Syrum capio and Arabem. Ludev. de Dieu. The General use.
If any thing might hinder this hope in Christ, his being under the power of
death was the most likely; that impediment being removed by his resurrection,
we are not only assured that he will come, but encouraged to pray, Come Lord
Jesus, or in the Psalmist's words, Arise O God, judge the earth, for thou shall
inherit all Nations, (e) Psalm. 82. 8.

In the mean while our work at present is to repent. The day calls rather for
the practice of this duty, then a Sermon. I shall only therefore put you in
remembrance of this one thing. Our sins in worship and religion I fear are
yet to be repented of. One reason why God keeps us from a settled order and
government, may be, because many are willing to some changes: but few see, or
are sufficiently affected with the evil of our former ways. Besides the
greatness of the sin it self, this may prove the woeful consequence of it,
that many will lick up their own vomit, and wily-carnall politicians make
worship and government to change fashions with the times, and be upon all
occasions so ordered as may please profit, or humor men; but how this will
please God judge you; and how Christ will take it when he comes to judge the
world in righteousness, let it be considered: Let your own judging mind you
of his; and your bar help you to remember his tribunal. Many in these days
pass, and more are likely to be sent for, from judging others among men, to be
judged themselves before God. If either the fear of Christ's justice, or the
love of his mercy, may be of any force with us, let us all repent now, and from
henceforth be preparing to give an account of our selves, unto that man by whom
God will judge the world in righteousness.

FINIS.

