A Dying Fathers Living Legacy, to his Loving SON: OR, Lively RULES from the
Rule of Life, to be lived by every Mothers Child.

Prove. 4.1. Hear, O ye Children, the instruction of a Father, and give ear to
learn understanding.

By F. S. Gent.

Printed for the Author, And are to be sold by Elisha Wallis at the gilded
Horse-shooe in the Old Bayley.

1660.

Dear Child.
I Have been at work for thee, heart and hand; it lies upon thee as a duty
now, to perfect what I have begun, to get these notions into thy heart by
prayer, and let others read them in thy life by practice. The Speculative part
of Religion, is not comparable to the practical. Begin in the Spirit, oh but
take heed you end not in the flesh. Satan is subtle, I know his devices; the
world is tempting, take heed of its flatteries; the heart is naught, beware of
its deceits; Keep thy heart with all keeping, and yet do what thou can,
Corruption will break out; but let not sin have a free passage to go in and out
at pleasure.

Mind nothing but the one thing necessary, union with Christ, and never let it
be thy aim to make thy self glorious in the world, but to glorify God in the
world. They only that follow holiness in this life, shall attain to happiness
in the life to come. Be as holy as ever thou can, the more holy here, the
more happy hereafter; without holiness no happiness. It is not thine but
Christ's.

Thou will find an opposition in the practice of Religion; when you think your
self surest, then suspect your self most; though thou should get a foyl, yet
lay not down thy weapons, and say, I will fight no more. He that continues
faithful unto the death, shall receive a crown of life. Get wisdom, and get
understanding; the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from
iniquity, that is understanding: so shall thou crown the work, and not only
rejoice the heart of thy Father on Earth, but our Father in Heaven, and Elder
Brother, and Sweet Comforter. Unto whose protection I leave thee.

F. S.

Reader.
THese sententious words or proverbial sentences, are left as a Legacy, by a
dying Father, to his Son. Expect not Method, but apply thy self to meditation,
which was by the Author chiefly intended.

Youth is active. It is good for us to busy them in the best things, to write
our children copies to write after, or write over.

A good life is better than good lines. Most men, especially young men, are led
much by example. It is best so to walk before our children, as that they may
see Christ in us, and follow him. Christ is the best copy to write after, and
the best pattern to follow. Christianity is more than Christ to be known, it
is the life of Christ to be followed. The Author is not willing to have his
name known for reasons best known to himself, and yet both reason and Religion
too put him upon the work, having his own experience to witness such beginnings
successeful. If through goodness it prove profitable either to thee or thine,
Let God have all the glory, but let not prejudice hinder from closing with
truth. What is Manna the worse for being brought to thee in an earthen vessel?
The Apostle rejoiced that Christ was preached, though they that preached him,
did it out of envy: Here is my rejoicing, that what I have done, was out of
pure love to poor souls, and not to seek or purchase a fame among men.

Help me with thy prayers, that all these truths might be put in practice, by
thee and me, thine and mine; so will thou not only engage the Author, but
many more to subscribe themselves,

Thine in the Lord, F. S.

A Dying Fathers Living Legacy to his loving Son.
REligion is necessary, not in the way of nature to our being, but in the way
Grace to our well-beeing.

In all matters of Religion, get Jesus Christ to be thy Partner.

Reason perfects us as we are men, Religion as we are Christians.

With God, it is not how Rational, but Religious.

Religion does not consist in externals, but in the motion of the soul after
God.

God will not be content with outsides.

The saving light of the Spirit is, when that which is light in the head, is
heat in the heart, and light in the Conversation.

Common light comes from the Spirit, but saving light is that which is with the
Spirit.

Do not determine thy estate by head-illumination, but by heart-illumination.

Many Christians are in the dark, merely from their light.

True light, where ever it is, there is a desire after more light; the light of
the righteous shines more and more.

Where ever this true light is, it lays hold on Christ for life: as it leads
us unto Christ by faith, so it leads us after Christ by practice.

They only that live to Christ, shall find Christ to be gain to them at
death, To me to live is Christ, to dye is gain, Phil. 1.21.

BEfore you put your hands into the worlds bosom, put your heart into Gods
hands.

As God has bound you by precept to pray, so he has bound himself by promise
to hear.

Though prayer can make no change in God, yet it may make an alteration in you.

We come to learn our duty, from our request.

We pray not that Gods will may be altered, but accomplished; not to alter
his counsel, but his sentence.

Though God be resolved to show mercy, yet he requires submission.

Though duty does not merit mercy, yet duty is Gods order to mercy.

Do not rest without prayer; Oh but take heed, do not rest in prayer.

External duties are means to convey grace, but no arguments to prove the truth
of grace.

The performance of duty is no sure sign of a man's acceptance with God, but
the neglect of duty is a sure sign of a man's abomination unto God.

However all external duties are as nothing so long as a man is an old man, yet
the nothingness of a duty that arises from the doer, must be no prejudice to
Gods Authority, or breach of man's duty.

A new creature is not so all in all, that external duties must be neglected,
seeing they are means appointed by God to make him more a new creature.

YOur prayers must not be offered up as righteousness, but with righteousness.

You cannot pray without a promise.

Gods promises are the Saints best prayers.

All things promised must be prayed for under the notion of promised things.

Promises are the ground of prayer, and the ground of faith in prayer.

Promises are the rules of what we may pray for in faith, and faith is the
ground of what we may expect with comfort.

As God gives promises to ground faith, so he adds providence to build it up.

As the soul lives by faith, so faith lives by promise.

Promise.
A Promise is a word-revelation, arising from mere mercy out of the purposes of
Gods heart, concerning good to fallen man in Christ Jesus.

You had never known Gods purposes, but by his promises.

The impulsive cause of Gods making promises, was his love, the meriting cause,
Christ.

They are purging, healing, raising up, only as Christ is folded up in them.

The promises are the plasters upon which the blood of Christ is spread: the
blood of Christ gives virtue to the promise.

They are all made in Christ, and performed in Christ, purchased by his blood,
and executed by his power.

The Saints are therefore heirs of promise, because members of Jesus Christ.

Promises have a being because of Christ.

After the breach of the first Covenant, God had never declared his good will
to man in a second Covenant, but for the sake of Jesus Christ, and it is by our
being in him that we lay claim to those promises.

All promises are made for him, and in him unto us, so far as we are
incorporated into him, and are members of Jesus Christ.

All the promises are yea and amen in Christ.

Thy interest in one promise is worth all thy interests.

Gods promises which could not be too dearly bought, yet they are freely given.

Gods promises are free in respect of the making of them, yet they are
conditional in respect of the performance of them.

The promises are tendered without exception, but not without condition.

Though they are made out of free mercy, yet they are performed in relation to
our subservient duty.

God never promised life absolutely, but upon condition. In the first Covenant,
Do and live; In the second Covenant, Believe and live.

Now faith is so poor a condition, as puts no worth in us to receive; and
therefore justified freely of his grace.

You are saved of grace, but through faith, and it is therefore of faith, that
it might be of grace.

If God made a promise to thee when thou wast wallowing in thy blood, then
certainly God will make it good.

By promising, God has made himself a debtor to himself.

God has made promises of pardon, consider not thy own weakness so much as the
strength of Gods promise: look not to thy unworthiness, but upon the truth,
worth, and excellency of the promise.

GOds outward proceedings of providence, do sometimes seem to contradict the
truth of his promises.

Gods promises speak healing, when Gods providence seem to speak trouble: yet
the position holds true, that it is Gods purpose, under all the pressures and
troubles of his Church to deliver them.

There are two things that may be written upon the Church of Christ, Holiness,
and Victory.

Whatsoever the difference is betwixt the enemies of the Church and the Church,
Christ's party shall overcome.

This should make us live by faith, and not by sense.

If you look upon things necessary or contingent, in both these providence
rules.

There is a special providence over every hair of a child of God, all his
hairs are numbered.

If a hair cannot fall from the head without providence, the head shall not
fall from the body without providence.

Troubles are the issues of neglected providence.

Labor to relieve thy self, in thy greatest straights, in Covenant-promises.

Hard throws have been made advantages to the birth of sweet mercies.

Though trouble may be thy condition, yet rest shall be thy portion.

Though affliction may be thy exercise, yet deliverance shall be thy
inheritance.

providence orders all actions and agents to her own end: Actions may move very
strangely in our view, and yet very orderly to the greatest good, as their
supernatural end.

Give not way then to sinkings and despondencies of spirit in any trouble, in
the lowest conditions and greatest sufferings there is yet ground of hope.

When vain is the hope of man, then comes the salvation of God.

When the morning is darkest, then comes the day.

When troubles are at the highest, then deliverance is at the nearest.

Things wonderful to us, are yet easy with God, mavelous in our eyes, and
yet familiar with him.

Awaken thy heart to pray.

Nothing shall be too hard for him to do, whose heart God carries forth, and
holds up to believe and pray unto him.

Nothing has been done without it, nothing can be done against it.

Providence.
GOds Providence is an act of infinite power and wisdom, whereby he preserves
and governs all things in order to his glorious Mercy and Justice.

Gods will, being immutable in its determination, his Providence must needs be
infallible in its administrations.

Gods Providence is not limited by means, therefore trust Providence when you
see no means.

Let nothing puzzle you that does not puzzle God.

When God makes use of means, it is not from the deficiency of his Power, but
from the riches of his Goodness.

To establish the means, and deny the providence of God, determining the end,
is a part of Atheism; to establish the providence of God determining the end,
and despise the means, is great profaneness.

Use means, yet withal trust and attend Gods providence for the obtaining of
the end.

True faith sets God highest in means, sees God out of means, and waits upon
him in the opposition of means.

Endeavors are appointed by God, not to alter his will, but perform it, and in
what we obtain not our desires, we testify our obedience.

Use means as if there wereno God, trust in God as if there were no means.

Be not over-perswaded of particular means.

The water-man thinks his boat will save him, but perhaps it is a twig.

To neglect helps is to tempt God, to trust in them when we have them, is to
commit Idolatry with them.

WHen you come to pray, look to what God has promised, and in prayer look into
the promise.

When you pray, labor to avoid two things, calling upon God in your own
strength, and expecting an answer from God in your own worth.

You may direct your prayer to Father, Son, and holy Spirit, but not as one
separated from the other.

When you go to pray, you give God a visit; frequency of worship does maintain
a respect between God and you.

It is then very seasonable to attend upon, and apply our selves to the work or
duty of prayer, when the working or grace of the Holy Ghost does beget a
disposition in us to pray.

When grace does offer a seasonableness to pray, (you shall find) it affords a
sufficiency of strength for prayer. Seasons of grace last not always, it is
not at our command to have the Spirit of God moving in us: when you know the
motions of the Spirit, act accordingly to them.

Keep heavenly things as thou would keep heaven it self.

Strive for spiritual life; A dead man, and a dying Christian, are two sad
sights.

A dead prayer leaves a dead Spirit behind it.

A dull Spirit is the fruit of a dead prayer.

A dead heart argues a dying soul.

God is coming into that soul with comfort, who is mighty in duty. Consolation
and supplication go together.

When we do our present duty, God will not remember our former sin.

Pray unto God for a better praying heart, there will nothing prevail with God
if prayer will not.

The heart is then most fit to pour out a prayer to God, when it is lowest in
the apprehensions of misery.

When you hear David praying for mercy, it is a sign he is in misery.

There is no want so great, but prayer will help.

Prayer is the most efficacious Engine a man can work by, for what is in the
power of God, the same is in man by prayer. Prayer is a calling upon God.

Prayer.
AS Christ's prayer was not, so ours must not be a bare manifestation of our
minds unto God, but a holy arguing with God.

No natural man can pray, he is muzzled.

You may be able to word it in prayer, but you cannot have a prayer in the
sight of God as well as in the sight of man without the Spirit of prayer.

Do not judge of your having the Spirit of prayer, by your freedom of
utterance in prayer, by your constant performance of prayer, nor by your
extraordinary inlargements under prayer, but by the inward reaching of your
heart after God.

It is the panting soul that is the praying soul.

Watch unto prayer, not only to keep off drowsiness, but to eye providence.

To pray and do nothing else, is in effect to do nothing less.

Let not your practice be a confutation of your prayers, lest the day of
supplication prove a day of provocation.

Remember this, If you regard iniquity in your heart, God will not hear your
prayers.

Then is a good prayer when God does not only confirm thy hopes in prayer, but
conform thy life to prayer.

In duties we can do nothing with God (as they are our duties) but God will do
something in us.

If stolen waters be sweet to wicked men, begged meat is much more sweet to
godly men.

We are too ready, after we have done well, to lie down and catch cold: When
we have pleased the Lord in lawful duties, to please our selves in unlawful
liberties.

ASk thy self often, what sin have I left?

It is not the converting, but the converted sinner that is the true penitent.

All that are converted shall be saved, but all that shall be saved, are not
converted.

He that confesses his sin; and turns to it again, repents of his repentance.

He that repents provides for after repentings.

God gives heaven to a man that is fit for heaven, there is no aptness in a
sinner for heaven that repents not.

Repentance.
REpentance is an universal turning from all sin, even unto God.

Though repentance and turning from sin does not deserve heaven, yet it fits us
for mercy and pardon.

It is against the Justice of God to give pardon without repentance; though
repentance does not profit God, yet repentance pleases God.

Such as are kind and merciful to their sins, that love not their sins should
be spoken against, never repented.

Health and freedom from sickness, is a great mercy, pardon of sin is a
greater, for this is the ground of the other.

Take heed of sinning, lest you teach God to punish you.

When you see a man sinning at a high rate, do not sensure him, but say, Why am
I so low in grace?

To delight in men's sins, is the sport of Devils; Recovery from those sins is
the joy of Angels.

The eye of the Lord is more upon the root of sin, than upon the act of sin.

Nature makes a soul sensible of the act of sin, the Spirit of the root of sin.

Nature presents to us the painfulness of sin, the Spirit the sinfulness of sin.

Nature makes sensible of gross sins, the Spirit of the least sin, as well as
the greatest.

The Spirit teaches to measure every sin by the greatness of God, and so no
sin: is little.

If you would keep from the act of sin, avoid the occasion of sin.

They that confess and forsake not, are only dog-sick, when they have
disgorged their stomachs, they will return to their vomit.

Every sin a believer commits deserves damnation, but no sin shall condemn, but
the living and continuing in it.

As it is not the falling into the water that drowns, but lying in it, so it is
not the falling into sin that damns, but dying in it.

Neither good, nor bad at the last day shall be judged by every one of his
actions, but by all, not according to his steps, but according to his ways.

There will be every days pollution, let there be every days purifying.

The Devil will be at his work, be you at your work.

To him that knows to do good, and does it, not to him it is sin.

It is not the body that sins, it is the soul that sins.

A Christian should always have this care, that the iniquity of his hands may
be cleansed, and the filthiness of his heart purged.

The Spirit of God loves clean hands, and the holiness of God loves a pure
heart.

To be always suffering and never repenting, is the property of infernal
spirits.

Wise men that set themselves against God, they very wittily go to hell.

Could you but think what bitter pains your sweet sins will cost, you would be
provident, you durst not but be innocent.

Sin drives a man from himself, and from God. Conversion it brings a man to
himself, and unto God, when the Prodigal was come to himself, he returned to
his Father.

We never go below our selves, but when we sin. We do not go below our
selves when we suffer.

Holiness has a silent excellency in it, Sin has a secret deformity.

No person in the world that sin does so much defile, as a child of God, and
no person in the world that sin does so ill with as a child of God.

It is a spotting time, let the Saints take heed.

The eclipse of the Sun, is more observed than the shining of the Sun.

Sin becomes no man, more ill becomes a wise man.

Find out your sins, before Gods judgments find you out; It is good to be
beforehand with God.

If you are inclined to intemperance, take heed of ill company.

When drunkenness says Come, say No, I have got a new acquaintance.

We must consider our own ways, before we can turn our feet to Gods
testimonies.

The house of God is the worst place to sin in.

The Lord is in the midst of his people, there must be no hypocrite there.

The City where God dwells must be a holy City, and the Mountain a holy
Mountain: Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord for ever.

There is nothing that the Law can call sin, but the Gospel can pardon: Do your
sins reach as high as Heaven, Christ is above them.

Christ has as much compassion, as thou have iniquity: Christ is sensible of a
sinners condition, every sin-labouring soul is a welcome guest to Christ.

But remember this, sin cannot be killed without the death of Christ, nor
mortified without the Spirit of Christ.

Conversion is your first work, then mortification.

However Christ makes intercession in heaven for his own people, he does not
speak a word for the wicked.

AS the thread follows the needle, so death follows sin.

Man had never fallen into the grave, if he had not fallen into transgression.

Man dyed, not because his nature was subject to corruption but because sin had
corrupted his nature.

Man was wholly a stranger to death, till acquainted with sin.

There is no man that lives that shall not see death; Death will find every
man, and connive at no man.

The glorious end we should aim at in life, is not to study how we might
enjoy the comforts of life, but how we may overcome the discouragements of
death.

Death is always drawing nearer and nearer, whether you improve your time, or
throw away your time.

Men ordinarily leave the earth, when they are most busy about it.

Those must dye that shall not be damned.

It is a good mind in a man to be content to dye, and willing to live; but to
be willing to dye, and content live, is the mind of a strong Christian.

To labor not to dye, is labor in vain, to live without fear of death, is to
dye liveing.

The comforts of life are no rational comforts, till you be freed from the
terrors of death.

What comforts of life can be sweet, when a man is afraid of death, and
uncertain of life?

Seldom does he dye well, that lives ill.

They are fools that give away their souls for nothing.

Prevention is better than confusion.

He lives twice, that bestows the fore part of his time well.

That man that lives to dye, shall dye to live.

The way to dye well, is to dye often; often and seriously think of dying, and
then sin if thou can.

A dram of grace will be more worth to you when you come to dye, than a sea of
gifts.

A man may live by a form, he cannot dye by a form.

Remember this, the bellows of death will blow the spark of sincerity into a
flame, and the blaze of formality into nothing.

He neither fears nor feels death that has his hopes in heaven.

Though death be terrible, yet innocence is bold.

Christ by death, in death, delivers us from death.

If he dyed that you might live with him, do not desire to live long from him.

1 If you would live well, take heed where you live, even the place of pleasure
is dangerous.

2 In learning to live, study how to dye; he loses all his time, that knows
not how to end his time.

3 Dye you must, be active for God whilst you live.

You that must dye shortly had need to live strictly.

The way to have great confidence when you dye, is to get, and keep a good
conscience whilst you live.

Man's life may be very short, it cannot be long; the time of man is a long
death, but it is but a short life.

Men's principles speak the shortness of life, but their practices speak the
eternity of life.

Time is but short, but eternity is long.

If a wicked man would be happy, he must make time long, and eternity short.

As time is the measure of his sin, so eternity is the measure of his
punishment.

Prepare for an enemy that is always getting ground of you; not only the
approaches of death are perpetual, but insensible.

Make sure of death, that you be not miserable in death; and after death.

When I was a young man (says Seneca) my care was to live well, and when age
came, I studied how to dye well.

The right way to dye well, is to live well, and the right way to live well, is
to dye betimes to sin, the world, and self.

You must dye, make sure of an interest in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Christ will do you good when you come to die, so will the power of godliness.

AFter death comes Judgment.

At that day the wicked shall know Gods forbearance is no acquittance.

Wicked men are surely ordained to punishment, as godly men are ordained to
deliverance.

Though the Saints may be losers for Gods word, yet they shall lose nothing by
God.

It cannot be long before the worlds Funerals, and the birth day of Judgment.

Though we sleep in sin, judgment slumbers not.

The Lord Jesus Christ he is judge, not only of the fact, but of the heart.

Make the Judge your friend; Get him that is your Judge to be your Advocate.

It is not the varnish of profession Christ will respect at that day, unless
he see the workmanship of the Holy Ghost in the heart.

The wicked may drink a sea of wrath, but they shall not sip one drop of
injustice.

The sinner being self-condemned, shall clear the Judge.

Christ's first coming, was to unite, his second coming shall be to separate.

That heart that would not break with sorrow for sin, shall now be rent through
with despair.

They that would not weep for their sins, shall now barn for their sins.

To bear this will be intolerable; to avoid this will be impossible.

Sinners they must come to the Bar, and they are sure to be cast at the Bar.

If you have not a part in the blood of the Lamb, you shall be sure to have a
part in the wrath of the Lamb.

But if thou have no sins of allowance, thou shall have grains of allowance.

One dram of grace is too good to go to hell.

ALL that will expect to be saved must wait upon the foolishness of preaching.

The creature as a creature is indispensibly bound to serve God.

Pray privately, hear publicly.

God never comes so nigh to the soul, as when he enters into the ear.

It is preaching that brings hearing, and hearing that brings faith, and faith
salvation.

As God will be worshipped in Spirit, so in truth, not only in opposition to
the Ceremonial Law, but in opposition to the hypocrisy of the heart.

That man never received the word in the power of it, that never received it in
the perpetuity of it.

Instability is always a sure note of insincerity.

God looks more at the manner of the duty, than the matter; it is not what you
do, but how you do, not how much, but how well.

As God will have you holy, because he is holy, so you must worship him in
spirit, because he is a Spirit.

What is the reason that men sleep so securely after so many Sermons? they say
with Samuel, It is only man's voice.

The outward teachings of man, is of no power without the inward teachings of
Gods Spirit.

Christ revealed to us differenceth us from Pagans; Christ revealed in us
severeth us from Reprobates.

It is not thy hearing of man's voice, but thy subjection to Gods voice, that
begets thee anew to God.

As he sins that gives not God the hearing, so he sins that only gives God
the hearing.

The word is never spoken in vain, though it may be often heard in vain, it
either purifies or consumes.

Gospel Ordinances (you will find) either ripen your graces, or ripen your
corruptions.

The word of God is an enemy to none but them that are enemies to themselves.

No worship is a breach of the first Commandment; false worship is a breach of
the second Commandment.

Will Worship is always false worship; All things that I command you in
matters of practice, and in matters of worship, that do, and no more.

You must worship God with your will, oh but take heed of Will worship.

When the heart goes not along with the duty, that is hypocrisy, when the
heart is not stirred up in the duty to lively and vigorous acts, that is
formality.

As God will have the heart in prayer, so in hearing, he is a Spirit, and he
will be worshipped in Truth.

The Lord whose Name is Jealous, is a jealous God.

Take heed of the false worship of the heart, if thou are not guilty of
Idolatry, thou may be guilty of Hypocrisy.

Take heed of the Idolatry of the heart.

Be spiritual in what you do.

A jealous eye is a watchful eye.

When ever you come to worship, look to your thoughts.

Look to your conceptions of God when you worship, how you represent God in
worship.

There is as much danger of imaginations within, as there is of Images without.

That which makes us successeless in duty, is undue thoughts of God.

Make spiritual growth the end of coming to the word.

That Spirit that says, Hear my Law, says, My Son, forget not my Law.

A holy life is the infusion of holy truth.

Truth shall never dye, who ever dye or live.

Charge thy self with that which is the end of the word (that is) Live well.

ASk thy heart every night what has been thy darling to day, who has been
most in thy thoughts to day.

The actions of men's lives, are the ways of their thoughts.

Secret thoughts will engender gross transgressions; secret sins will bring to
open shame, if you do not shame your self before God for them.

Sins of act are like arrows that fly by day; Sins of thought are the
pestilence that lurks in darkness.

It is not what thoughts are injected into thee, but what thoughts are
maintained by thee.

Thoughts are sins of the highest part of a man, for they are the sins of his
heart.

Thoughts are the firstborn of original corruption, if it be the first born,
it must needs be the strongest, as Jacob said to Ruben.

A man many times does not what he would, but he always thinks as he will.

If thy heart be heavenly, thy thoughts will be holy.

God thinks on you when you forget him.

If God should withdraw his thoughts from us, as we do ours from him, what
would become of us: Think on that.

Thoughts are called the counsels of a man's heart, if thy thoughts be not
counseled thoughts, such as thou do determine to think on, they are not good
thoughts.

The souls part of fin, is the greatest part of sin, therefore thoughts are the
greatest part of sin; yet sins in deed are in regard of progress the worse,
because thoughts are included in them.

This is that which undoes many a man (let it not be thy undoing) to have good
thoughts of God, and good thoughts of themselves too.

THere is no soul has more high thoughts of God, than that soul that has low
thoughts of it self.

The foul that lives lowest, has the highest objects before it.

The lower the soul lies, the higher the things are it aims at.

The lower the ebb, the higher the tide.

The lower the foundation of virtue is laid, the higher shall the roof of glory
be overlaid.

They that are risen with Christ, that seek the power of Christ risen, seek
things above.

(An humble spirit may be busied in low things, but not taken up with them.

If Saints be sad, it is because they are too busy here below.)

The more low we are, the more comfort we have of God: When we are nothing
in our own eyes, then are we something in Gods.

If thou would be all in God, learn to empty thy self, not by taking notice
so much of thy graces, as thy wants.

The more we can empty our selves, the more we shall be filled with God.

A Christians emptiness is his fullness, and his fullness is his emptiness.

God is in that man that is not in himself.

If I will be any thing in my self, as of my self, I must look to be no
creature of Gods making.

Whatsoever a Christian is for grace or glory, it is out of himself, he has
nothing in himself, as of himself; all that he has, he has in Christ.

We altogether shine in the beams of our husband.

Follow Christ's example, his whole life and death was an absolute denial of
himself.

It unburdens a man of himself, this self-denial.

If a man lets go his fleshh ec shall advance his spirit.

A self-seeker is a clod of earth that sucks the sap of his soul only to
himself.

Deny thy self wholly; if there be not through self-denial, ere long there will
be God-denial.

Whosoever is not poor in himself, he will never go our of himself, for he
has some other supply.

Those that have full conceits of themselves, can never thirst after Christ.

When man makes an Idol of self, he wants now and then some to come and
worship him.

Those that have least knowledge of themselves, are apt to dote on themselves.

He that knows himself best, loves himself least.

Those that have most light, have lowest thoughts; they trust not to the grace
in their own hearts, but to the grace in the Covenant.

Pride is a conceit of selfsufficiency.

THou can never act freely and cheerfully in Gods ways, until the divine
nature be communicated.

Where divine power works not creatingly, it works not relievingly; hence it is
that one that is not a Christian in deed, holds not out always to be a
Christian in show.

As vital principles, and spiritual habits are infused by God, so they owe
their permanency and stability to God.

It is his work to perfect holiness in his fear.

The judgment of sense ought to be regulated by reason, and the judgment of
reason ought to be corrected by faith.

Though I must not, nor cannot give a reason of every thing I believe, yet I
must give a reason of my faith.

There is the life of faith, the living of faith, and the liveliness of faith;
the first is the habit, the second is the act, the third is the grace.

Faith does not justify as a grace in us, or as a work; not as an active
condition, contributing any thing to its own worth, but as a passive condition,
or qualification, whereby we receive Jesus Christ the Lord, and it is for his
merits, and not for our faith, though by our faith we are justified.

It is the application of Christ's righteousness, not our apprehending it.

By faith alone we are justified, but the faith by which we are justified is
not alone.

As we cannot get it of our selves, so we cannot act it of our selves.

Faith is not our righteousness, yet it makes the righteousness of Christ to
be ours: Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

Christ in our nature has fulfilled all righteousness, this God has promised
shall be ours for justification; now faith closes with this Covenant, applies
this promise, and rests upon Christ for justification.

Therefore of faith that it might be by grace; therefore of faith to the end
the promise might be sure to all the seed.

Faith is the root of a Christians conversation, and a Christians conversation
is the fruit of faith.

Many measure their faith by persuasion, but I had rather measure my faith by
the power of mortification: so much as it sanctifies, so much it is; faith
cannot conduce to the act of redemption, but faith conduces to our
justification.

You are to act faith upon God, that the promise may be returned.

Wherefore do I believe? because God has promised; Wherefore do I hope?
because faith believes; Wherefore do I wait? because hope expects.

An easy faith is always a false faith.

He that never found it hard to believe, never believed.

A fruitless faith is always a false faith.

It is not the work faith, nor the works of faith, but faith with her proper
work by which we are justified.

By faith the person is justified, and by works the faith is justified.

Though faith alone does justify, yet not that faith which is alone.

Christians should not only labor to be justified by faith, but they should
labor to justify their faith.

Show me thy invisible faith by thy visible life.

God does justify a man by his faith, he does not justify him for his faith.

Faith is the Engine by which we do all; by which we prevail with God, and
overcome the world: it must not only live in us, but we must live by it.

Faith, it grows in the exercise.

Do what you can for faith, though your doing will not come up to believing;
and say not that you cannot believe: for if you go not thus far, to do what you
can, your unbelief is not from your cannot, but from your will not.

Go and put forth that faith thou art able to put forth, and in the end God
will make it a spiritual believing.

As the water Christ commanded to be poured out, was turned into wine by the
pouring of it out: so deal with Christ Jesus for believing, and in the end God
will turn thy faith, which is but water, into wine.

Thou will believe thy self into believing.

You ought to believe till you be persuaded that you do believe, for the more
you do believe, the more you shall be persuaded to believe.

By frequency of believing, you shall feel at your very heart that you do
believe, 1 John 5.10.

If repentance accompany faith, it is no presumption to believe: but it is
presumption to look for mercy in a way of unbelief.

Beware of unbelief, for it is a shelter to sin all your life.

As faith is the shield of the new man, so unbelief is the shield of the old
man.

As the shield of faith does quench the fiery darts of the Devil, so unbelief
does quench the fiery darts of God.

This unbelief removes all the blocks that lie in the way of sin, as belief
removes all the blocks that lie in the way of holiness.

Unbelief, it robs God the Father at once of all his Attributes; it robs God
the Son of the Glory of his triumph over Sin, Death, and Hell; it robs God the
Holy Ghost of his seals to thy evidence of pardon.

The Spirit seals to thy soul the pardon of thy sins, and unbelief comes and
tears thy evidences, and breaks the seals.

Labor as much for faith in the threatenings, as for faith in the promises.

And remember this, though other sins merit hell, yet it is this sin of
unbelief only that puts you into damnation.

AS great sins are not easily to be reformed, so great mercies are not soon
obtained.

When the stream of thankfulness is not returned, the tide of mercy stops.

Although God looks for nothing in us to bestow his love upon us, nor for
nothing from us as the ground of the continuance of his love to us, yet we are
to be highly thankful for any little the Lord gives, and to be humble, and
judge our selves worthy of nothing when the Lord denies.

Mercy is not the purchase of the creature, but the gift of God.

Follow God close with your praises, that goes before you in his mercies.

As praises are the seasonable fruit under mercies, so humiliation and prayers
are the seasonable fruit under troubles.

Sinners may speak good words of God, it is only comely for the upright to
praise God.

Thanksgiving, it is the proper work of Christians, and the natural work of
Angels.

A little makes a thankful man admire much: Oh how big are a thankful man's
mercies, and how little he!

Be careful for nothing, but by prayer, and supplication, make your requests
known to God with thanksgiving.

Days of thanksgiving and prayer are helps to the duties God requires from us,
they are not our only business.

When we pray and give thanks, it is not the only business of the day, but
these are helps to us that we may persevere and improve our obedience.

Though our goodness reaches not to God, yet it should to the Saints.

If God be rich in mercy unto us, it is that we should be rich in good works
unto others.

It is good to receive a mercy from God, it is better to improve a mercy.

Great and renewed receivings from God, should beget fresh, quick, and strong
resolutions of obedience unto God.

The more holy fire there is in the service, the more pleasing the service.

When ever you serve God, it must be with fear; when ever you praise God, it
must be with trembling.

Though I cannot praise God sufficiently, yet Christ can.

ALl have a call of inexcusableness, few have a call of effectualness.

Grace is not denied to the wicked, but it is only given to the weary.

By grace is meant the love and favor of God within himself, and is the spring
and fountain of all that good which he does give out unto his children.

As grace is communicative, so it is called goodness.

As it is with delight, so it is called love: as it is given out to man in
state of misery, so it is called mercy: as it is dispensed freely, so it is
called grace.

When the Spirit works a man for salvation, then does the Spirit pour forth
those graces, and exercises those operations without which you cannot live
grace.

Notwithstanding Christ has paid the price of salvation, yet you shall not be
saved without the Spirits application.

The Spirit is the executor of that will of which Christ is the Testator.

Christ gives the Legacies, but the Spirit paies them.

Christ is the Mediator of the new Covenant, and the Spirit is the
Administrator of that Covenant.

You can no more expect to be renewed without the Spirit, than to be saved
without the Son.

As you cannot be saved unredeemed, so you cannot be saved unrenewed.

A graceless man shall never inherit heaven.

A graceless man is a cruel man to his own soul.

As sinners are given up to sin, so those that have really profited by the
means of grace, are given up to grace: hence it is, that a gracious person will
ask, How does this stand with grace?

Grace is either getting or losing.

No man can decay in good, but by some thing that is bad.

It is always some sinful evil that makes us to wither in spiritual good.

It would be a wonder to see a man dying in grace, and not withal living in
sin.

If that which should keep down sin be kept down by sinning, how exceeding
sinful may thou be?

When we be less good, we shall always do the less good, and the more ill.

You will find much ado to do a little good.

Graces are given, not only to make us good, but to make us to do good.

Grace, as it is in man, is but a creature, and would fail him, for the Angels
and Adam had the perfect habits of grace, and yet fell: therefore beg of God
continual assistance and supply for the acting of thy grace.

Grace which is meat and drink to a holy heart, is but physic to a formal soul.

If thy grace be true grace, it will drive thee out of thy self, by making
thee more humble, and draw thee unto Christ, by making thee more thankful.

If God has called thee to grace, be not discouraged, though thou have never
so little.

Calling is from God, therefore the called should be for God.

Does God call? then all the holiness within us, is matter of humiliation to us.

Not only sin, but grace should make us humble.

Your-sins should make you humble, because they are your own: your grace should
make you humble, because it is none of your own.

It is a hard thing to get grace, and it is as hard when we have it, to get
above it.

Live unto grace, not thy own, but the grace of God.

Grace brings glory to you, and grace requires glory from you.

When all is received from the grace of God, return all back again to the glory
of God.

What we receive from God in a way of mercy, we must return to God in a way
of duty.

God returns our duties, we are to return his mercies.

Our mercies are sure in Gods hands.

There is a time when mercy flows in, and there is a time when mercy flows off.

Be it winter or summer, be it sickness or heath, be it riches or poverty, in
the want of mercy as well as in the enjoyment of mercy, in all things give
thanks.

The condition of the Saints in this life, is like the days in the year,
sometimes cloudy, and full of storms; sometimes fair, and full of comfort.

The soul lives in the enjoyment of God, and dies without him: nothing can make
up the loss of God.

Beware of making up a lost God with other things.

Aholy discontent in other things without God, is the readiest way to get God
again.

In the absence of God, take no delight in any thing below God, in any thing in
the world.

It is better to honor God in thy greatest misery, than to dishonor him in
thy greatest happiness.

Keep up thy heart in holy employments, trust in the Lord in times of darkness.

Serve an angry God with all sincerity, as a reconciled God, when he hides his
face, labor to see his heart.

What ever those reasonings be that would keep thee from God, say, Get thee
behind me Satan.

Trusting in God in the midst of all discouragements to heaven, is a noble act
of faith.

Would you see God in the way of his distressing dispensations, then labor to
cease from self, and walk by faith.

Faith does enable the soul to eye the present design of God under the variety
of those difficulties his people are in.

Faith knows how to improve past experiences in order to present help and
relief.

Gods immutability is the foundation of the Saints safety.

God to the Father by prayer, that you may go to the Son by faith.

God will have his people walk before him, not by sense, but by faith.

Though God sometimes withdraws from his people, yet his heart is still toward
them.

Though God does withdraw from his people, yet he does never utterly forsake
them.

It is a discovery of a new Covenant-frame of heart; when we can trust God in
difficult, dark providence.

Though sometimes God hides his face from his people, he never sets his face
against them.

In times of affliction, it is the property of a good child to love God most,
in times of speaking peace, to fear God most, and his goodness; to fear to
offend him for his goodness sake.

God is angry with wicked men's sins, but he is grieved for yours.

To grieve God, is more than to provoke God; therefore when thou art tempted,
labor to renew those thoughts which thou had of thy sin at that time when
thou wast suing for peace, when thou would have given a world for Gods
favor.

GOd hates and abominates the services of wicked men, as bad as their sins.

Conscience sees a necessity of duty, and then starts a resolution.

In thy resolution look not so much what terminates and bounds it, as what
bottomes it.

Wicked and ungodly men do not come to serve God, but come to serve their turns
upon God.

No punishment, no prayer.

As God is pressed down with the sins of wicked men, so with their sacrifices.

To obey is better than sacrifice, but to sacrifice, and not to obey, is worse
than Witchcraft.

God will damn wicked men as much for their sacrifices, as for their sins.

He will sacrifize them in hell, for their sacrificing here upon earth.

God does abominate their persons, therefore he must needs abominate their
prayers.

In the first Covenant, the person was accepted for the works sake; in the
second Covenant, the work is accepted for the persons sake.

God does not bid a man welcome for his gifts, but he bids the gifts welcome
for the man.

Wicked men make their sacrifices their saviors.

Wicked men do as beggars do in want, give me now, and I will never ask more.

Duties in themselves are good, but as they are thy duties, they are sinful.

So long as our duties grow upon the bitter root of corrupt nature, they are
bitter; but remove them into Christ Jesus, and they shall be sweet and
acceptable.

The prayer, the desire, the breath of an upright soul, is Gods delight.

CHrist is always readiest to help his people, when they are in most danger.

Righteousness is called a Breast Plate, not ours, but Christ's: the best way
then is to shelter our selves in Christ.

When there is a storm abroad, you shall find them all secure that have
security in Christ.

Take Tower in Christ as soon as possible, there is no security in any other
strength or Tower.

The name of the Lord is the godly man's Tower, and the wicked man's Terror.

A wicked man goes unto it as a shelter in trouble; and counts it a prison in
peace.

A godly man runs into it, and counts it a sweet thing to be housed in a storm.

If thou be Christ's in a time of peace, he will be thy Tower in a time of
trouble.

Those that are under the government of Christ, are sure to be provided for by
Christ.

Unto whom Christ is a King to rule them, he is a strong tower to secure them.

Christ's power is beyond the distresses of his people.

Our difficult work is Christ's work.

If thou would not fear temporal judgments when they come, strengthen thy
faith, and be much in prayer before they come.

As faith gets up, so fear gets down; the strength of fear is from weakness of
faith.

All our spiritual swouns come from unbelief.

The way for a Christian not to act his fear, is to act his faith.

The creature is not much to be feared.

You cannot fear man too much, but you fear God too little.

The main sin that brings destruction upon men, is trusting to men, and not to
God.

Fear adds much to our vexation, nothing to our safety.

When fear prevails, take a promise, and plead it by faith.

If you go to the Father by prayer, you need not fear peace through the Son.

Make the Lord of hosts your fear, and you shall have him for your sanctuary.

You must sanctify God, and make him your fear and your dread, and he will
sanctuary and safeguard you.

In evil times God will have a special care of his own people.

That man is too big for all evils, that is great in God.

He that dwells in God for sanctification, shall dwell in him for preservation.

He that walks uprightly, shall dwell on high, and his place shall be in
the Rock.

THe times of the Churches calamities are the times of wicked men's insolences
and blasphemies.

When the Church suffers, there should be a veil of sorrow drawn over thy eyes.

Look not what the world does, but what God would have thee to do.

Be not afraid or discouraged, though sometimes our Ark does move upon very
troublesome waters: Victory in the end shall be on the Churches side.

The Church is taken for the whole number of Gods Elect, effectually called
into a fellowship with Christ, through sanctification and belief of the truth.

What ever the difference is between the enemies of the Church and the Church,
Christ's party shall overcome.

On whose side do thou think God does engage himself.

Is not the Sea able to quench a coal of fire?

One acting of a grace, sometimes is sufficient to destroy an enemy, Heb.
11.33, 34.

The Church of Christ in this life, is like a ship upon the Sea.

The ship has goodly sails, the Church has admirable graces.

If there be not a gale, the ship cannot stear: so notwithstanding all the
Churches graces, it cannot move from faith to virtue without the fresh actings
and breathings of God upon those graces.

The ship is a trading vessel, and so the Church: They are the great tradesmen
for heaven.

The ship is the only safe place, out of the Church there is no safety.

The Church of God, though it be tossed and tumbled, yet it has an Anchor,
the blood of Christ.

The ship in comparison of the sea, is but a little thing; yet it is above the
water: so the Church in comparison of the world, is but a handful of men; yet
it has an Ark, the Lord Jesus Christ.

In every new danger, the people of God are apt to forget their former
deliverance.

The proper time of fear is in thy prosperity, and the time to believe, when
other helps fail.

There is all in God in the want of all.

The life of a Christian as a Christian, is to live out of himself.

As the graft of a tree lives upon the root, so a Christian by faith lives upon
Christ.

You must provide for a troubling time, as well as a healing time.

Profane persons will make troublesome times: with such David had to deal,
their words pierced nearer his heart than their swords.

When a people are not healed by their troubles, they must expect to be
troubled in their healings.

Observe this, wheresoever there is faith, there is a quiet soul, first or last.

THe top of a Christians joy is not in outward, earthly, but spiritual things.

They which are most acquainted with carnal mirth, are greatest strangers to
spiritual joy.

Every grace, as it is the expression of Gods love, so it is the spring of our
joy.

We may joy in these things below, but they must not be our spring and sea,
the spring from which they come, and the sea to which they tend.

Joy, it sets the soul upon wing for heaven: what is the nature of your joy?
does it make you fly up or fly out?

Cursed is that joy that makes God sad, eat and drink, and rise up to play, and
not rise up to pray and praise God, and your table will be your snare, your
death.

There is a desperate propension and active forwardness in the affection of
joy, to run out upon such things that are sinful.

Let not that be the matter of your joy, which is the fruit of your sin.

Do not make that the matter of thy joy, which should be the matter of thy
humiliation.

The sins of others, the calamities of others.

God allows us to rejoice in creature comforts, and lawful liberties, so it be
done lawfully.

It is not the thing rejoiced in, but the manner of rejoicing, that makes our
joy criminal and sinful.

Though the Scripture allows thee to rejoice, yet it forbids sinful rejoicing.

It is a sinful thing to rejoice in a creature for it self.

Joy sinfully acted, is when the sweetness of the creature is not a means to
lead thee unto God, but as an object to satisfy thee without God.

Creatures are not given properly to be enjoyed, but to be used and directed
to a further end.

You are not to bound and terminate your comforts in them.

You cannot joy in any thing for it self, but you make it a God

Delight is a glory proper to God as God.

Joy naturally centers it self in the things of this life.

A natural man does not take occasion to rejoice from the creature, but he
rests his joy in the creature.

Do not you over-joy in the things of this life, but joy in this; that your
name is written in the book of life.

Your heart cannot be overmuch taken, or best pleased with that which is not
best without sin.

Though outward comforts are good in themselves, and so occasions of joy, yet
they are not good enough for the joy of thy heart to be taken up at, or to be
taken up with.

As we may quickly be more taken with these things than they are worth, so our
joy cannot but exceed.

Worldly comforts, since the fall suit so well with our carnal humors, that
while we deal about them, we cannot but feed too heartily on them, and drink
more deep of that cup than we ought.

It is a lawful thing to take pleasure in lawful things, but they are made
unlawful to us, when much of our time is eaten up in eating and drinking.

Time is short, and time is precious, and time employed in acting our joy on
creature comforts, it is to fit us for better joys.

A day of prosperity must not be a day of joy, when we have gone a whoring from
God, Hos. 9.1.

In regeneration and sanctification, the affection of joy is renewed.

A new creature, and a new joy.

It is the godly man's practice to make heavenly things his chiefest joy.

Joy rectified, rejoices in nothing contrary unto God, in nothing above God, in
nothing equal unto God, in all things for God.

Make God, and Christ, and the Word, the center and complacency of thy soul,
the rule and reason of all thy delight in other things.

In a word, delight in spiritual things first and last, only and most.

ALL the Saints in this life, some way or other, they have or they shall have
their afflictions.

That father that does always dandle his child upon his lap, may be a fond
father, but he is but a foolish father.

God in his wisdom, he will not let us be always dandled upon the lap of
pleasure.

God loves his children, yet he makes not wantons of them

We have a mixture of grace and sin, therefore we must have a mixture of
mercy and affliction.

Sorrow shall never cease to be, until sin cease to be.

The least sin is a greater evil than the greatest affliction: therefore God
makes use of affliction to cure his people of their sin.

A wicked man is bad under affliction, a child of God never better.

A rose is never so sweet as under the Still.

Faith gets more by affliction, than mercy.

Faith gets more love by mercy, but more strength by affliction.

The less a child of God has of affliction, the less of faith and patience.

The more the Bullock is accustomed to the yoke, the more quiet.

There is not so much danger of spiritual pride under afflictions, as under
mercies.

Affliction lays the soul low in humility, but lifts it up in heavenly
mindedness.

Whom have I in heaven but thee?

God may condemn a man to prosperity in this life, so as that prosperity shall
both increase and secure his ruin.

As God sometimes scatters his blessings in wrath, so now and then he throws
away his rod in wrath.

Gods judgments may be secret to the persons afflicted; they cannot be
injurious: they come not by chance, but by special direction from God.

For a man to say, it is my chance, or my hard hap, is the language of Ashdod,
of a Philistine. 1 Samuel 6.9.

Afflictions, as they are the candle of the Lord, whereby he searches our
hearts, and makes inquiry into our lives: so they are the voice of the Lord,
that we would search and try our hearts too.

When God smites, he does as it were judge thee, and those afflictions command
thee to judge thy self.

As the instructing voice of affliction is, that God is displeased: so the
exhorting voice is, seek my face.

Every lash is, seek and pray.

Seek Gods face more than the removal of Gods judgments.

He does not lay on so much as he is able to afflict, but a the Saints are
able to bear.

God will either bring down the Saints afflictions to their strength, or raise
up their strength to their afflictions.

Now if thou be not the better for being the worse, thou may suspect thy
self.

Thou need no other art of memory besides misery.

If smarting here will save from smarting hereafter; refuse not the chastening
of the Lord, neither be grieved at his correction.

When Gods hand is on thy back, let thy hand be on thy mouth.

When the father has the rod in his hands, the child falls upon his knees.

Let Judah repent of the evil of her ways, and God will repent of the evil
of his punishments.

Providence lays the plaster, but grace makes the cure.

The work of the Devil is to destroy us, the work of grace is to try us.

God has a great deal of honor, not only by the truth of grace, but by the
trial of grace.

Wheresoever God chastises, there he is, there he is in mercy.

By affliction he separates the sin that he hates, from the sinner that he
loves.

He that continues faithful unto death, shall receive a crown of life.

The ready way to the crown, is by the cross.

Those that are saved souls, are most of them afflicted souls.

THe glory of our hereafter glory, will be in oneness of communion with the
Father, Son, and Spirit, and one another in God, who is one in all, and all in
one.

Death to the Saints, is a guide to convey them to happiness: to the wicked as
a Jailer, to carry them to the place of execution.

It is good for us to be here, says Peter; but it is better for me to
depart, says St. Paul.

Here we are like Martha, cumbered about many things; there we are like Mary,
at the feet of our Savior.

If you live holily, like a sound Christian upon earth, you shall live happily,
like the glorious Angels in heaven.

It is the peculiar privilege of the Saints to appear in glory when Christ
appears.

Redemption of the soul from sin, was the end of Christ's first coming;
redemption of the bodies of the Saints, is the end of Christ's second coming.

The bodies of the Saints are members of Christ, joined in a mystical and
perpetual union unto Christ.

Union and intimate relation to Jesus Christ, as it is the ground of, so it
infallibly infers communication of grace and glory from Christ.

Seeing the union of the body is certain, the glory of the body is certain
likewise.

The bodies of the Saints are in part sanctified by Christ's first coming, and
therefore shall be hereafter glorified by his second coming.

Sanctification begun is a forerunner of glorification hereafter.

A man that would reap glory, must sow grace.

The best of a Christian is to come.

The state of a Christian is nothing in real possession, to what it is in
reversion.

The only way for thee to make good provision for thy soul, is to be a Saint.

And here is your duty.

1 To live in unity, Ephesians. 4.3.

Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace.

2 To keep the Saints company, Psalm. 16.3.

But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all
my delight.

3 To pray for the Saints, Ephesians. 6.18.

Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto, with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints.

4 To have the bowels of compassion toward all the Saints, Phil. 2.1, 2.

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

5 To help thy brother out of sin, Gal. 6.1.

Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted.

6 To provoke to goodness, Heb. 10.24.

And let us consider one another to provoke to love and good works.

7 To relieve the Saints, Act. 4.34, 35.

Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors
of lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were
sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, and distribution was made to
every man according as he had need.

8 To imitate the Saints, so far as you have Christ for an example, 1 Cor. 11.1.

Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

FINIS.
Books sold by Elisha Wallis, at the gilded Horsshooe in he Old Tailor.
MR. Caryll his exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, twenty
seventh, twenty eighth, twenty ninth, thirty, and thirty first chapters of the
book of Job, in Quarto.

Mr. Robinsons Christian Armor, Octo.

Mr. Ellis his Pastor and the Clark, or a debate (real) concerning
Infant Baptism, wherein, 1 the truth of the doctrine is afresh cleared, 2 the
Scriptures alleged for it, vindicated, 3 the objections usual briefly
answered, 4 the seeds-men of them truly ciphered, together with some
retractations of the Author and repentings, in reference to the late civil and
ecclesiastical changes, Octo.

A vindication of the Civil Magistrates power and authority in matters of
Religion, with a refutation of the toleration of all Religions among
Christians, with the judgment of the reformed Churches concerning the same,
Quarto.

Dr. Thomas Tailors works in two volumes, in folio.

First Volume. 1 An exposition on Christ's temptations. 2 On Peter's Sermon
before Cornelius. 3 Circumspect walking. 4 A threefold Alphabet of rules for
Christian practice.

Second Volume. 1 An exposition on the 32 Psalm. 2 The parable of the sower. 3
A map of Rome.

With several other Sermons.

FINIS.
The Dying Fathers Living Legacy.


