Gods warning to England BY the Voice of his ROD.

Delivered in A SERMON, Preached at Margarets Westminster, before the
Honorable House of COMMONS, at their late Solemn Fast, October. 30. 1644.

By HENRY SCUDDER, Rector of Collingborn-Ducis in Wiltshire.

Published by Order of the said House.

ZEPH. 2. 1, 2, 3. Gather your selves together, yea gather your selves
together, O Nation, not desired. Before the Decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before
the day of the Lords anger come upon you. Seck ye the Lord, all ye meck of the
earth, which have wrought his Judgments, seek Righteousness, seek mecknesse;
it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. LONDON: Printed by J.
R. for Philemon Stephens and Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at their
shops in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament; That Mr Rous, Mr Long, and Mr
Wheeler, do from this House give Thanks to Mr Scudder, for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he Preached this day, at the Entreaty of the said Commons,
at S. Margarets Westminster, (it being a day of public Humiliation) and to
desire him to Print his Sermon; And it is Ordered, that none shall presume to
Print his Sermon, but whom shall belicensed under the hand writing of the said
Mr Scudder.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Philemon Stephens and Edward Blackmore to Print my Sermon.

HENRY SCUDDER.

To The honorable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THis is a time of Englands trouble, most sad, and tempestuous: and if we look
upon the face of things as now they are, and of the gathering of new clouds to
the darkning of the heavens over us; and upon the ordinary course of Gods
Providence in the way of his Judgments, who can but Judge, and fear, that
these are but the beginnings of troubles, and that they will be much greater
and much worse then yet they are? Isai. 4. 5. 7.


The Lord does as well create darkness as form light, and does as well create
evil as make peace. And there is a vicissitude of these, a succeeding of
these, one in the place of another in Gods Government of the sons of men.

First, he gives Peace and prosperity, and tries what the riches of his
goodness will work upon men: he assayeth to Hos. 11. 4.
endear and draw them to himself, by the cords and bands of his love; to bring
them to Repentance and Obedience.

But such is man's unhappiness, since the fall of Adam, that usually this
goodness and bounty of God is despised and abused: men quickly forget God, and
grow proud, tyrannous, and Luxurious; and, waxing fat with Prosperity, they are
wanton, and kick against God, and do exceed Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
in all manner of Impiety, uncleanness, and unrighteousness.

Yea, amongst them, Gods own people, who profess his Name; even they will be
too much tainted with the common sins of the times, and places where they live.

With these, yet, God bears a long time, being very loath to alter the course
of his bounty, being unwilling to afflict or grieve the Children of men: but
they continuing Lam. 3. 33.
and increasing in their wickedness, he is enforced by his Justice and Truth,
to Create and bring evil upon them, to plague and punish the whole world, or a
great part of it, even so much of it as does partake of like sins, with
Famine and Pestilence, or other diseases, and last of all, with war, the sorest
of his plagues.

In such General Visitations it is Gods manner commonly to begin with his own
people.

For he is most provoked with their sins, and takes it most Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
unkindly at their hands: as he says, You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth; therefore I Amos 2. 3.
will punish you for all your iniquities.

He may also first begin with them, that they may repent and give good example
to the rest of the world round about them.

Also, that all men may see that God is Impartial in his punishments.

And also that the wicked enemies of Gods people may know that they certainly
shall not go unpunished, as God says, Lo, I bring evil upon the City, which
is called by Jer. 5. 29.
my Name, and should ye go unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished: for I will
call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth.

In the days of King Asa there was war, not only against 2 Chronicles. 14. 9, 10.
against Judah, but in all Countries thereabout. It was with them then in that
part of the world, as it is now with us in Europe. No peace was to him that
went out, or came 2 Chro. 15. 6.
in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of those Countries.
Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, God did vex them with all
adversities.

The like General punishing of the Nations by war, we read of in the Prophecy
of Jeremiah, which ended in the Jer. 25.
destraction of Babylon.

The like, when after Christ's death, Jerusalem was destroyed. Mat. 24. 6, 7.


God has his hours of temptation to bring upon all Rev. 3. 10.
the world, to try them that dwell therein, sometimes in one kind of trial,
sometimes in another.

At this time God is visiting of Europe and most of the Christian world with
the fearful Judgment of War.

About six and twenty years since there was Peace and great prosperity in most,
if not in all, parts of Europe: but the inhabitants thereof; nay, the Churches
of God served not the Lord, with joyfulnesse and gladness of heart, for that
their abundance of all things. They corruped their ways, and became
notoriously wicked in all sorts of abominations. The Religion of the best,
take them in the generality, was but a form of Godliness without power, such
as the Apostle Prophesied of, should be in the last times, which temper in
Religion God hates. And as they were increased 2 Timothy 3. 1. 5*
so they sinned. Wherefore the Lord changed his countenance toward us; and
has taken the Rod and sword in hand to correct and punish us.

He caused the fire of war, the fire of his anger to begin to burn and break
out in Bohemia, and in the Palatinate, (none of the worst of the Churches) yea
it is run through all Germany, and where is it not now in Europe? It is now, to
our woe, come into Ireland and England, and Scotland is not altogether free.

This war lays all wast before it in other Countries: How can we think it
should do any otherwise in England?

The Symptoms of a desolation that shall overrun this kingdom are too too
manifest: It was a true saying of our Savior, A Kingdom divided against it
self, is brought to desolation. Do not our divisions continue? Mat. 12. 25.
do not they increase? Divisions in the Church, Divisions in the Commonwealth,
Divisions in the Army, Divisions in Counsels, Divisions every where; amongst
all sorts in the Kingdom, Whilst God does thus divide us, and does in his just
judgment, give us over thus to make Divisions, certainly he means that by
our selves we shall be destroyed. We would not in time of Peace agree together
to serve him with one consent; he will therefore that we shall agree in this,
By our dis-agreements to destroy and consume one another.

I beseech you take into your serious consideration those Symptoms which
argued our utter ruin and destruction to be near, if not speedily prevented;
as you heard them, so you may help your memories, if you can gain time to read
them in the ensuing Sermon, which as it was Preached, so now is Printed by your
Order.

Are not gray hairs upon us here and there already? Hos. 7. 9.
Is not much of our strength devoured? Are we blind? Or will we still wink
with our eyes, and not see? And not know all this? Does not our wickedness
(which abounds more and more in England, even while we are under the Rod)
testify unto our faces, that we do not return to the Lord our God; and seek
him with our whole heart for all this?

When you were pleased to call me to go before you, and to bear a part with
you, in your day of Fast and solemn Humiliation; I looked upon our Nation in
this ill Condition, I knew no better Subject to Treat of, to be applied to
your selves and to all that then heard me, then to teach you, or atleast to
remember you of a timely and profitable Use-making of the Rod of God, which is
now so sore upon us; Namely, to learn what God teaches us by it.

To be showed our danger in which we are, and the neerenesse of our ruin, for
our sins; will be no discouragement unto you in the work of standing in the
gap, and Psalm. 106. 23.
making up the breach, in which you have so long stood; and which with
unweariednesse and undauntednesse you have (to your eternal Renown)
endeavored, maugre all the mountains of opposition and difficulties which you
have met withal. But it should rather put an edge to your courage, as all
difficulties do to men of courage and true valor. You are, Honored and worthy
Patriots, the repairers of our breaches, under God: Be ye Mosesses, and
Phineasses to our Israel. When Israel sinned in the matter of the golden Calf,
God said, He would destroy them, had Psalm. 106. 23.
not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath,
lest he should destroy them: When Phineas executed Judgment the plague was
Psalm. 106. 30.
stayed; you are called not extraordinarily as he, but in an ordinary way to do
it: God when he foretold his purpose to destroy the Kingdom of Judah, did look
for such as you are, to make up the hedge and stand in the gap, before Ezekiel.
22. 30.
the Lord, that he might not destroy it.

These Worthies by prayer held Gods hands from striking, Exodus 32. 10, 27.
and by executing judgment for him, did save the Kingdom, did save the people
from destruction.

Whatsoever the event may prove, Noble Sirs, Let the fear of the Lord be upon
you; Be strong: Let 2 Chronicles. 15. 7.
not your hands be weak, deal courageously, The Lord will be with the good; and
your work shall be rewarded; 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
and you may expect a happy issue: But however, it is honorable for a Soldier
to dye in maintaining, or making up the breach; and your work shall be with the
Lord, and if you save not the Kingdom, you shall without Ezeck. 14. 18, 20.
fail (as it is said of Noah, Job, and Daniel) save your own souls, and may
expect some temporal deliverance.

Neither should the knowledge of our likelinesse, and neerenesse to ruin
disanimate any, or should it weaken the hands of the people of the Land: For
when God sent Jeremiah to Prophecy against Jerusalem that he would destroy it,
and that they should be carried Captive, this is the inference from it:
Therefore amend your ways Jer. 25. 13.
and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will
repent him of the evil Jer. 18. 7, 8.
that he has pronounced against you.

Moreover, let it be conceived that God is peremptorily determined to destroy a
Nation, which we cannot be certain of, though we can see a Nation deserving it,
and is near to it; For God is not limited, nor can be prescribed to do what in
like case he has done, yet it will be profitable for a people to be warned of
it: For they that fear God, will thereupon endeavor to prevent it; or to Ezekiel.
9. 4.
prepare for it. That making their own peace with God, they may be marked for
safety as those in Ezekiel were, and may make their adresses to God, as to a
safe and strong tower, thereby entering into the chambers spoken of in Isaiah,
and shut the doors about them; and hide themselves for a little-moment, that
is, cast themselves upon Gods Providence and Protection, securing themselves
Isai. 26. 20.
in him, until the indignation of the Lord be overpast.

No man can apprehend misery and destruction more certainly to come upon a
people, then the Prophet Habbacuk did, at which, at the first hearing he was
much terrified: yet it was much for his good and advantage. For it did cause
him to humble himself before God, and to seek his face, That he might rest in
the day of Hab. 3. 16.
trouble, when the Chaldeans should come up and invade them with his Troops;
Through faith he could see safety, and matter of comfort and joy in God: so
that he could say, though he should be deprived of all livelihood, and means of
subsistence for his person and outward man; Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God Hab. 3. 1^.
of my Salvation, etc.

I have here given you some account of the choice of the Subject, whereof in my
Sermon I spoke unto you, and have prosecuted more fully something which I did
then but hint unto you; I take the boldness to publish it and put it forth
under the shelter of your honorable patronage.

I have only this maine suite unto you, that you would continue resolute for
God, and his true Religion, for the Kings Majesty's just Rights, for the Laws
of the Kingdom, and just Liberties to which we are all born. And the Lord of
Hoasts and King of kings, our good God, He bless and prosper the work in your
hands, wherewith you are entrusted, The Lord prosper your handy work: So
prays daily

The unworthiest of those, which you have employed to serve you in the Lord,
HENRY SCUDDER.

A Sermon at the monthly Fast, October. 30. 1644. BEFORE the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
MICAH 6. 9. The voice of the Lord cries to the City, and the man of wisdom
shall see thy Name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.
THe Word of the Lord came to the Prophet Micah in the days of Jotham, Ahas,
and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. This word concerned Samaria, and Jerusalem, the
head Cities of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah.

The word now read unto you, concerns us, as well as them; being written for
our learning, and for the admonition Romans 15. 4.
of us, upon whom the ends of the world are come according as we are like to
them in their sin, and in their condition. 1 Cor. 10. 11.


In this Prophecy, the Lord by this Prophet sets before these Cities and
Kingdoms the many and great sins, which, with an high hand, they had
committed against him. And withal foretells them of those Judgments which
he would certainly bring upon them; if they continued in those their sins. And
that at last, both kingdoms should be destroyed, and captivated by their
enemies, the Assyrians and Chaldeans. But withal to support, and comfort, the
hearts of the faithful that were found in those kingdoms, he foretells the
temporal deliverance of Judah out of the Babilonish Captivity, also the
everlasting deliverance of the Church of God, to be gathered out of all
Nations, through the promised Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The sins, whereof he would convince, and for which he denounces Judgment
against these Kingdoms, were, extreme oppression by all, from the Prince to
the meanest, according as they Micah 2. 1, 2.
had power in their hand. The heads thereof judging for reward: The Prophets
and Priests were profane and wicked, all for their Micah 3. 11.
covetousness; teaching for hire, and divining for money. They were very
licentious, promising liberty; saying, Peace, peace, to Jer. 6. 13, 14.
the wicked: The Prophets prophesying falsely, and the Priests bearing Jer. 5.
31.
rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so. They were also
Idolaters, Superstitious, will-worshippers, silencers, (as much as they could)
of the good Prophets, and Ministers of the Word: saying, to the Scers, see not;
and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us Isa. 30. 10.
right things, speak to us smooth things, prophecy deceits. They did set up
and countenance false and wicked Prophets; They, notwithstanding these sins,
and other their abominations; and notwithstanding the severe threats of God,
were presumptuously secure, because they had the Temple of the Lord, a sign of
his presence amongst them; and because they professed the name and Religion of
God, having a form of Godliness: they promised to themselves impunity, and
freedom from the destroying Judgment, They would yet as the Prophet says,
Lean upon the Lord Micah 3. 11.
and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.

All which sins of theirs are aggravated by their ingratitude toward God, who
had been good unto them, and had done great and wonderful things for them,
from Shittim to Gilgall, even Micah 6. 3, ^, 5.
from the miraculous leading them forth out of Egypt through the Wilderness,
till he brought them into the Land of Canaan, and until this day.

At the time of this Prophecy the Kingdom of Judah was under the rod of Gods
Judgments. For in the days of Ahas, Pekah the son of Remaliah King of Israel,
and Rezin King of Siria were 2 King 16. 5.
confederate, and came against Judah, and came up even to Jerusalem, and though
they did not prevail to take Jerusalem, yet God delivered him and the people
into the hand of the King of Syria, so that They smote him, and carried away a
great multitude of them 2 Chronicles. 28. ^.
captive, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand
of the King of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter; for, one hundred
and twenty thousand, of the men of Judah were slain in one day, which were all
valiant men. At which time 2 Chronicles. 28. 5, 6, 8.
the Children of Israel carried away Captive of their brethren, two hundred
thousand women, sons and daughters, and took much spoil from them, and brought
the spoil to Samaria. In his days also 2 Chronicles. 28. 17.
the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives. The
Philistims also invaded their Cities and took many of them, with their
villages, and dwelt there. God brought Judah very low at that time, because
they had transgressed sore against the Lord. This I have premised to lead you
unto the Text, and to 2 Chronicles. 28. 19.
give some light, for the better understanding of it.

Do we not as in a glass, see our selves, in this kingdom of Judah, we being
too to like them in their sin, beginning also to be too like to them; nay, in a
worse condition then they were, if the Lord, as he has begun, shall go on to
power out his wrath upon us.

The likeness of our condition now, with theirs then, has given me occasion
to make choice of this Scripture, to speak of it, and to speak to you by it.

In these words God does warn and advise his people what they The Text opened.
should do, now they were under the rod of his anger, and were like to be more
sorely punished according as it had been denounced against them by his Prophets
for their sins. That whereas he had by fair and loving means, spoken to them,
and warned them by his Prophets, and had gently smitten them by the rod of his
mouth, that he might reclaim them, and they were not sensible of his Word, to
obey it: He now thinks it best to teach and warn them by the rod of his hand,
and calls upon them to hear and learn to be reformed by it.

Now concerning this admonition and Council given, the Prophet does three
things.

First, to gain attention, and that this Word might be entertained with the
greater Authority, he shows, who it was that spoke unto them.

Secondly, who they were that would see God in his Judgments, and would hear
his voice, and would learn by his correction.

Thirdly, what it is he warns them of, and advises them to do.

Every sentence in this verse is diversely rendered by Translators, and
Interpretors; each of them two or three ways: but they agree in their scope,
namely, That God would have them to hear him, and turn to him, that the
judgment threatened might not come upon them.

I have diligently considered the several readings, and compared them with the
Original, observing the context and scope of the place, and do keep to the
last Translation, as it is now before you. If I should rehearse them all, and
give reason why I make choice of this reading rather than other, it would take
up very much time, and hinder the delivering of things more needful.

First then, the Voice of the Lord cries to the City: in this sentence we are
to observe who speaks, and in what manner he speaks, and to whom.

The Voice of the Lord, that is, God by his Prophet Micah utters his voice.

Cries, this shows the seriousness and earnestness of God, in warning his
people, the Prophet lifting up his voice like a Trumpet, Isa. 58. 1.
that all might understand their danger, and might know what God would have
them to do;

To the City, some understand Samaria, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of
Israel: but others understand it better of Jerusalem, the chief City of the
Kingdom of Judah. The Prophet was to cry aloud to awaken them out of the deep
sleep of security wherein they lay, notwithstanding he had threatened and now
began to punish them.

Secondly, in declaring who would hear this voice, and learn of the rod, he
implies that there were not many; only the man of wisdom, substance in
proper speech in Hebrew. Now because (...)
a foolish man is empty, and has nothing in him, but the wise have something,
yea much in them, therefore this word is in Scripture used for Wisdom, so in
this place, the abstract being used Job 6. 13.
for the concrete, the man of Wisdom, that is, he that is wise with Job 12. 16.
godly wisdom, a man endued with the true knowledge and fear Prove. 3. 21.
of God. This the Prophet speaks by way of complaint, and does by an
Apostraphe turn his speech to God, as if he had said; Prove. 8. 14.
Lord, thou cryest aloud by us thy Prophets, to the City, but few have regarded
or yet will regard it; Only the wise they will See thy Name; they will
understand thee in thy Word and works, they will understand thy will thereby,
and give glory to thy Name in accepting their punishment, and turning to thee
that do smite them.

Thirdly, the thing which God does admonish them of, is twofold: 1. To hear the
rod, what it speaks: which that they might the better do, he adds, 2. and
who has appointed it.

Hear the rod, that is, the judgments and asslictions you now feel, and the
scourge or judgment threatened, which you have cause to fear. God has diverse
rods; as, the rod of his mouth; Isa. 11. 4.
this is the Word: or, the rod of his hand, wherewith he does afflict and
punish; and that is either the rod of correction, called, the Psil. 89. 32. 2 Samuel 7. 14. Psalm. 2. 9.
rod of men; or, the iron rod, the rod of destruction: What they then felt, was
his rod of correction; what was threatened, and was shaken over them, was the
rod of destruction.

It is not a proper expression to say, Hear the rod; the rod properly is felt,
and the word is heard: But as those acts of hearing and feeling are in the
expressions thereof borrowed one of another: they are very emphaticall. Men
never do profitably hear the word, except they feel the stroke of it; and men
do never profitably feel the rod, except they hear the voice of it. When the
word is so heard, that it smites and affects the heart, to leave a print Acts
2. 3^.
and impression upon it, then, and not till then, does it work effectually. So
the rod, when it is so felt, that Gods will is understood by it, which is to
hear the voice of it, then it also will work effectually. If men feel not the
word, they hear it in vain: so they that feel the rod, and hear it not, do feel
it in vain, and to no good purpose. There are too many that hear the word, but
feel it not; and too many that feel the rod, but hear it not. To hear the rod,
then, is to learn and understand why God strikes, and what he would have them
to do that are stricken.

Who has appointed it? Not man, who is Gods rod, or Gods sword, but it is God;
neither do these judgments come by chance, Isai. 10. 5. Psalm. 17. 13.
but they are appointed and ordered by God. This is first to be heeded and
understood by the voice of the rod, namely, who smites; and then men shall
understand for what he smites, and what he would have them to do when they are
smitten: Then they will see that it is their duty, and that it shall be their
wisdom to return to him that smites them, and to make their peace with him.
Isa. 9. 13.


Having given the sense, I haste to the Observations. And first, whereas it is
said, The voice of the Lord cries to the City: what the Prophet spoke, is
called Gods voice; we are hence to observe, That,

When the Prophets and Ministers of God speak to any people Doct. 1.
from God, in his Name, it is the voice of God; God, in and by them, speaks.

Proof hereof is plentiful in the Prophets, who (to raise attention, and to
win authority to what they spoke, that it might be received and obeyed) say,
Hear the word of the Lord; or, Thus says the Lord; or, The mouth of the Lord
has spoken. Such expressions as these, are many hundred times in the
Scripture. Take one full proof for all: He spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets Luke 1. 70.
which have been since the world began. Though it was their mouth, it was Gods
speech, it was Gods voice.

They are, by way of Calling and Office, Gods stewards, they are Reason.
Ambassadors and Messengers of the Lord of Hosts. They receive 1 Cor. 3. 1.
Mark 1. 2. Mal. 2. 7. 2 Cor. 4. 19, 20
the word at his mouth, and it is committed to them, that in Gods and Christ's
Name and stead, they should speak to those to whom he does send them: whether
it be by information, entreaty, command, threat or promise.

To apply this, I desire that every one of you would take this truth into
serious consideration, that you may undoubtedly believe, Use.
that what the Prophets and Ministers formerly spoke, and the Ministers of God
now speak to you from him, in his Name; that God himself speaks to you, in
and by them. Did you indeed believe this, you would profit by this and all
other Sermons.

If it be objected, The Prophets and Apostles were immediately Object.
inspired of God, and had an immediate Commission from God, and they could not,
neither did they err; but Ministers now are subject to error.

I answer, We do not compare ordinary Ministers with the Answ.
Prophets and Apostles, who could not err: But even then they had false
Prophets amongst them, as there will always be some 2 Pet. 2. 1.
false Teachers in the Church: And even then they were to try the Prophecies,
whether they were of God or no. Read Deuteronomy. 13. 2, 3, 5. and Deuteronomy. 18. 21. and
yet were to receive the sayings of the Prophets as the word of God.

Besides, They had ordinary Ministers, who had not immediate inspiration,
namely, the Priests, who were as subject to error as the Ministers of the
Gospel are; and Ministers now have as good a Calling to speak from God in his
Name, as they had. The people were to receive the Law, the word of God, at
their mouth; for they were Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, as well as the
Prophets, Mal. 2. 7.
to deliver what they received from God, in the word written by the Prophets,
as were the Prophets, who received what they wrote, by immediate revelation
from God. And ordinary Ministers of the Gospel are in the Scripture said to
speak to men by 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. Heb 13. 7.
the word of the Lord, and to speak the word of the Lord, as well as the
Prophets, who were immediately inspired of God.

The people then had a Test, a Rule, to try whether that which the Messengers
of God spoke were his Message or no: To the Law and to the Testimony, says
God, if they speak not according to this Isa. 8. 20.
word, it is because there is no light in them: But if they spoke according to
that word, it was to be received as the very word of God.

God has left as sure a means, nay, in respect of us, a more certain way of
knowing the will of God, namely, the Scripture of 2 Pet. 1. 19.
the Prophets and Apostles, whereby Ministers may know what God would have
spoken in his Name; and people may know whether God speak by them or no.
Therefore all men are bid to try the spirits, the Doctrines, whether they be
of God or no; as the Bereans 1 John 4. 1. Acts 17. 11.
did, searching the Scripture daily, whether the word spoken by Paul were so;
and finding it to be so, they received it as the very word of God, and believed.

Wherefore, though it be true that it is possible that Ministers may sometimes
err, both in their Doctrines and Application; and when they err, that is to
be rejected, because it is not the will and word of God; yet they are to be
heard as men speaking in the Name and stead of God, and what they speak
according to his Word, is to be received as if God himself spoke unto you.

I do with all earnestness press this upon you, that you be convinced of this
truth, so as undoubtedly and firmly to believe it. I mean not only the
Doctrines we teach, whereby we show you what is true, what is false, what is
good, what is evil, are to be received as if God spoke them himself; but all
reproofs of your vices, all redargutions and confutations of your errors, all
exhortations unto, and instructions in righteousness; also all threats,
promises, and consolations, when they are all applied according to the Doctrine
of truth and godliness, they are to be received as reproofs, corrections,
exhortations, threats, promises and consolations of God: For the word is
profitable for all these purposes, as you may read, 1 Timothy 3. 10. and 2 Timothy
4. 2.

I do therefore now, as I have just cause, reprove a great fault and Use 2.
sin in most men, who when they come to hear, they come not to hear God speak,
but man: and when they hear, they receive what they hear but as the word of
man; they hear not the voice of God, they receive it not as the Word of God. I
would to God that you would now hear God reproving you for this great sin.

Most hearers of the Ministers of the word of God, receive and regard what they
teach, but according as they have an opinion and esteem of the man that
speaks. As men are endued with rare parts and gifts, and show themselves
witty and learned (as carnal men count learned) if they show much of this, in
rarity of invention and elocution, in that excellency of speech and wisdom,
with the entising words of man's wisdom, which wise, eloquent ^ Cor. 2. 4.
and learned Paul purposely shunned; their Sermons do take with them
accordingly: but commonly, their fancies, and not their hearts, are taken
therewith: Those who thus hear, may receive all that is of and from man in that
Sermon, but little or nothing of that which is of and from God in it. Therefore
many hear much, and learn little; they are not taught of God when they so hear,
because they do not hear God speak in him that teaches.

These men should humble themselves before God, for that they have not heeded
nor regarded God speaking to them by his Ministers. God complains of and
reproves all such hearers: I sent all my Prophets, but they hearkened not to
me, says the Lord: He says Jer. 7. 25, 26.
not, They hearkened not to my Prophets; but, They hearkened not to me. Know you,
that a time will come when you shall be called to an account for your hearing:
if you have not heard and obeyed, but have despised what the Ministers of God,
though frail and mean men, have spoken unto you, in the Name of the Lord; you
Luke 10. 16.
shall answer for it, as if God himself had immediately spoken unto you; for
you have slighted and despised him: according to that of our Savior; He that
hears you, hears me; and he that Luke 10. 16.
despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me.

Let me therefore entreat and persuade you, that you will both now, while you
are hearing of me, and when hereafter the Lord shall please to speak unto you
by any other of his Messengers, that you would receive what is spoken from God
to you by us, not as the word of man, but as it shall be found to be indeed the
Word of God. See and hear God in his Ministers instructing, reproving,
commanding and exhorting, when you are instructed, reproved, commanded and
exhorted by them; remembering and considering well, that they are Gods
Ambassadors, that come not in their own name, but in Gods Name.

If before you hear, you would, as Cornclius did, set your selves Acts 10. ^^
before God, in the presence of God, to hear, not what a Peter should say; but
whatsoever Peter should be commanded of God to speak unto you; then the Word
would be powerful to convert you, and save you, as it did him, and those that
with like faith heard Acts 10. 44.
Peter preach the Word unto them.

If a mean man bring a Message or a Command from a King, or from any that have
power over us, be it a Constable, or other Officer, we do not receive the
Message or the Command according to the meannesse or greatness of the man that
brings it, but according to the esteem we have, and obedience we owe to him
whose Message and Command it is. When the Thessalonians received the Word thus,
not as the word of man, but as it was indeed 1 Thessalonians ^. 13.
the Word of God, then it wrought in them mightily.

Did you believe and consider that it is no other but the voice and word of
God, it would persuade and command your belief; you would not choose but
believe it, without doubting or gainsaying; because you know that cannot but be
infallibly true which the God of Truth speaks: Christ says to his Father,
John 17. 1^
The Word is truth. You would feel a Sovereign power in the Word, because it is
the Word of an Almighty God, the Word of your God. You would then receive it as
a good word, transc^ndently good, good for you; then you would embrace it, and
receive it in love: you would then conform your will and affections to it.

The Word thus received, would be a convincing word, a converting 1 Cor. 14.
24, 25. Psalm. 19. 7. Psalm. 119. 24. Acts 20. 32.
word, a directing word, and an edifying word, which would build you up
further, till it have given you an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified.

I pray you to consider what sins you are guilty of, and yet do lie in; say it
be Blasphemy, Swearing, Drunkenness, Pride, Oppression, Profaneness,
Whoredom, or any other sin, let your conscience now mind you of your own sin;
and then consider each one with himself, Have I not heard these my sins
reproved, and inveighed against, by the Prophets of God, and Ministers of his
Word? And have they foretold and threatened the Judgments of God, temporal and
eternal, due for my sins? Did you believe that it was God that spoke, that
reproved and threatened you? and that it was Gods voice, in them, calling upon
you to repent, and offering pardon through Christ? You would then hear, and
fear, and repent, and thankfully receive the offer of grace, and believe to the
salvation of your souls. If you have any conscience, the word thus received
would, through God, work mightily upon you, to the pulling down of the strong
holds of sin in you, casting 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and would bring into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ.

Learn therefore to hear God speak by his Ministers, or else all your hearing
of Sermons will be in vain, will be lost, nay, will be to your hurt, and for
the aggravation of your sins, and the heaping up of Gods anger and wrath upon
you, which he will pour out upon you in his Judgments, Spiritual, Temporal,
and Eternal.

Because his people would not hearken to his voice, spoken by his Psalm. 81. 11,
12.
Prophets, God gave them up to their own hearts lusts, to walk in their own
counsels. For this very sin of despising the Word of the Lord spoken by the
Prophets, the Lord sent the Caldeans to destroy and captivate Judah. And men
are sentenced to eternal 2. Chron. 36. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Mal. 2. 7. Use 3. 15, 16.
2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. and 2. 11.
death, because they believed not the truth of the Gospel witnessed by the
Apostles.

This does much concern us in the Ministry, since the people of God must
receive what we teach them as the voice and word of God, that we therefore
first go to God, and hear what the Lord has to say, and receive of him what we
are to deliver unto them. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15 2 Timothy 2. 15.
We must therefore diligently give our selves to the reading and studying of
the Word of God, studying likewise to know the Jer. 23. 28. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Ezekiel.
3. 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 3. 12. Ezekiel. 2. 6. Tit. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 17. 2. 1 Cor. 2. 1,
4.
state and need of the people. And then, as the Prophet Jeremiah says, He that
has the word, let him speak it faithfully; also, speak it as the Oracles of
God, with all holy reverence and gravity, plainly, boldly, not fearing the face
of any, unpartially, and with all authority, because it is not our word, but
the word and will of God. We must deliver the sincere word of God purely, not
sophisticating, or adulterating it with the mixture of our own or others
fancies or errors: Neither must we hold it forth and deliver it in the dress
of the entising speech of man's wisdom, but in the evidence and demonstration
of the spirit, and power; not in the words which 1 Cor 2. 13.
man's wisdom teaches, but comparing spiritual things with spiritual,
speaking things of God, the things of the Spirit of God spiritually, in
Spiritual expressions, approving our selves unto every man's conscience, in the
sight of God. 2 Cor. 4. 2.


When Gods Word is thus taught, and his voice thus heard from our mouths, it
will not return to him void, but shall accomplish Isa. 55. 11.
that which he pleases, and shall prosper in the thing to which he sent it. It
will be a sweet savor to God, both in them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2. 15.
and in them that perish. Thus speaking, so that Gods word and voice may be
heard from us, we shall save our selves, and those that 1 Timothy 4. 1^.
hear us.

The man of wisdom shall be thy name. We may here observe, That,

Only the godly wise can and will see God, in his Word, and in his Doct. 2.
Judgments, or in any other his works which he does amongst the sons of men.
It is a high point of wisdom to understand and see God either in his Word or
Works, so as to give him glory. They that are wise according to God, they
understand; but all other, be they never so worldly wise, they cannot. David
setting forth the many providence of God to be observed in diverse varieties,
and changes in this life, as, in casting down some, evengreat ones, and Psa.
107. 41, 43.
raising up others, even the poor, setting him on high from affliction; he
says, Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, he shall understand Jer.
9. 1^.
the loving kindness of the Lord. The Prophet Jeremiah lamenting the estate of
the Jews, for their many and great sins, and for the Judgment to come on that
Nation, making Jerusalem heaps, and dens of Dragons, Who is the wise man, that
he may understand this? The Prophet Daniel foretelling the afflictions and
trialls of the Church, and the good that should redound to Dan. 12. 10.
them, namely, their purifying, and being made white, he says, None of the
wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. And when the Prophet
Hosca told Israel that he had destroyed himself, and was fallen by his
iniquity, and bids him take unto him words, and confess his sin, and ask
grace, God promises him he will take his anger from him, and love him freely,
and promises to them, that then God will bless them with all blessings,
spiritual and temporal; after all this, he says, Who is wise, and he shall
understand all these things? prudent, and he Hes. 14. 9.
shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just, the wise
and prudent, they shall walk in them; but transgressors shall fall therein.
The wise could see the Name of God, even the goodness of God in these his
counsels, and gracious offers and promises; he could see a great deal of
reasonableness, equity and gratiousnesse of God in them: but the wicked, they
are blind and foolish, they can see no such goodness of God, in his calling
them to repentance, and offer of his grace, so as to embrace it, and be
converted by it; but stumbleth, and is offended at it. Even as Christ the
Cornerstone, and Foundation of his Church, is seen by the ^ Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8.
wise, and judged to be precious; they can see Gods Name in him: but the
foolish, the unbelieving, and disobedient, they cannot see such preciousnesse
in him, he is a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense; yea, they are offended
at that good Word of the Gospel of Christ, which makes a tender of salvation,
upon their repenting of their sins, and believing in him.

The natural man he receives not the things of God, neither can he, Reas. 1.
because they are spiritually discerned: They cannot see God aright, 1 Cor. 2.
14.
no not in his works of Creation, wherein the invisible things of Romans 1. 20.
him, his eternal power and Godhead, may be seen. For in the wisdom of God,
the wisest of men in the world cannot by their natural ^ Cor. 1. 21.
Wisdom know God. Nay, though God make himself known to them ^ Cor. 2. 14.
in his Word, in the offer of his grace in the Gospel, of salvation by Jesus
Christ; even this is foolishness to them. Have they never so much quickness
of wit, or depth of judgment, in things natural, or be they never so
politikely wise beyond others, they can see nothing of God, neither in his
Word, nor Works, and Acts of Providence, whether of his mercy or Justice, so as
to apply it to themselves for their good, until God give unto them to be
spiritually wise.

But to the Godly wise men, it is given, to know the Mysteries of Reason 2.
the Kingdom of God. That which is hid from the wise of the world Mat. 13. 11.
16.
God reveals even to the simple, and men accounted but as Idiots in Mat. 11. 25.
the world, when he has made them wise to him-ward. They can also see the
wonderful excellencies of God in his works. Psalm. 63. 2.
In them they can see the greatness of his power, and of his goodness and of
his truth, and of his justice: they can see his Name and Isai. 26. 8, 9.
give him glory in and for all these, whether mercies or judgments. Reason 3.


They who are indeed wise, they give all diligence to see the goodness and
footsteps of God in all his works that may come Dan. 10. 1^.
under their consideration. They set their hearts to understand, they will
observe what God does; and as David says, Wisely consider of Psalm. 107. 43.
his doings: whereas the wicked be they never so worldly wise, Psalm. 64. 9.
They regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hand: Isai. 5.
12.
they will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, when he shows them favor; nor
yet will see his Name, when his hand is lift up against Isai. 26. 10, 11.
them in displeasure.

Be wise therefore all ye that hear me this day, nay, which hear Use.
Gods voice crying unto you this day to hear the rod: you may see much of God
in it, if you were wise and would improve your wisdom, that you may see God in
his Works, and in the way of his Judgments.

It is a sore Judgment of God to a people, when God shall make his name known
to them, not only in his word, but in his great and wonderful works of
mercies and Judgments, and Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
leave them to their ignorance and folly, not giving them wisdom, not giving
them hearts to perceive and understand Gods Name, Gods Greatness, Goodness,
Sovereignty, so as to fear and adore him, submit to him and learn
righteousness thereby. As the Be can find, and gather honey of every flower,
so the wise man can see and learn something of God in all his works.

Be wise therefore, as David calls upon all Princes and Judges Psalm. 2. 10,
11, 12.
of the earth, and be instructed; but by what, even by that Iron rod threatened,
and shaken over them, that thereby they might learn to fear, and serve, and
might kiss that rod; his wrath being pacified and his anger turned away from
them.

Then a man is a man of wisdom, such a one as is meant in this doctrine, when
he can discern what is the chief good, and has the Judgment to esteem it,
and to make choice of it, and of the right ways of attaining and retaining it.
God is the chief good, the knowledge of him so as to believe in him, to fear
him, and to rely on him, and obey him, this is true and sound wisdom: When you
are thus wise, you will see Gods Name, you will see God in his Word and works,
when he shall at any time speak by the voice of his Word, or voice of his Rod,
you then can and shall understand the meaning of those voices.

To be wise to Salvation is the true Wisdom, by which a man Prove. 14. 8.
can see God in his works, so as may conduce thereunto: such a Prove. 28. 5.
man understands his way, and is said to understand all things; but evil men
understand not judgment.

The way to have true wisdom, is, to deny a man's own wisdom, and (as the
Apostle advises) To be a fool (as the world ^ Cor. 3. 18.
counts foolishness) that he may be wise. A man by his natural wit and
wisdom cannot know God. You must not think that because by the strength of
wit and natural reason you dive deep into the search of things natural, and
humane, and can understand them; that it is therefore in the power of your own
understanding to attain to deep things of God, the Divine things of God; as his
Wisdom, Power, Justice, Truth, Goodness, and his Will which may be seen in
and known by his works. Natural wise men may understand the letter of the Word
of God, and the matter of Gods works what they are; but he perceives not nor
can he perceive God, and the things of God, in them, nor the end to which they
tend, to affect his heart therewith, and to make a Spiritual use thereof to
himself.

These things are perceived only by Spiritual wisdom, being 1 Cor. ^. 2^.
revealed by the Spirit of God.

The Word of God has in it, instructions of this wisdom, and it Prove. 1. 4,
5.
gives a spiritual subtilty and ability to discern the deep things of Psalm.
119. 99, 100.
God, by it David came to be a man of wisdom, wiser than the Ancients, and
wiser than his teachers: you must have recourse therefore to the word to that
end. But do not think to bring light with you, whereby to understand it, but
bring faith with Heb. 4. 1.
you to believe it, and come to it to receive sight by it, as well Rev. 3. 18.
as light: for it is eye salve and a means to open the eyes of the blind, as
well as to give light to them that see. When we are Psalm. 19. 8.
rightly principled by the word, we shall learn by it, to see God in Psalm. 19.
7.
his works. You must first believe, and then you shall know, then it will make
you wise.

Also be you much in observing and considering the works of Psalm. 107. 43.
God, and the ways of Gods Providence; the more you exercise your selves
therein, the more able you shall be to see Gods Psalm. 64. 9.
Name.

And lastly, pray for this Wisdom, as David says, Open mine Psalm. 119. 18.
eyes that I may behold wonderful things out of thy Law; so, entreat the Lord
that you may understand the voice of his mercies, and Judgments what he would
have you to learn by them, touching Jam. 1. 5.
him. If any want wisdom, let him ask, Hear the rod.

God would have his people learn by his corrections and by his Judgments Doct.
3.
which he brings upon them, and does execute amongst them. All that are under
the rod, or that have it shaken over them, must learn what God teaches them
thereby.

The Lord complains of, and sharply rebukes the City Jerusalem, Reason.
because she did not Hear and obey his voice, nor receive correction, Zeph. 3.
2. Every morning the just Lord did bring his judgment to light, but the unjust
knew no shame, verse 5. He said to her, Surely thou will fear me, thou will
receive instruction, verse 7. This shows what men should do when he does
afflict them. God expects his people should have heard his rod.

The Rod of God is doctrinall, man may know Gods mind and will, and his own
duty by it, as by the Word: God does Discipline his people by his rod, as well
as by his Word; in the exercise of both he does Open the ears of men to
Discipline, and does seal their instruction, as we read in the book of Job;
The rod and Job 33. 16.
reproof, when they go together give wisdom, as to a child in a family, in
whose heart folly is bound; so to such children and servants in Gods great
family in the world, who will not learn, nor be corrected with words. Many
(like Manasses) carry a deaf Job 36. 10.
care unto, nay, will not hear the Word, yet may be brought to hear the rod; he
thereby learned to see the Name of God, and to know that the Lord was God, and
did humble himself greatly 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12, 13.
before him.

The Judgments of God which are his rod, they do second his Word, and what it
spoke to the ear, they do speak to the other senses, with a louder voice.
Smart and pain seconding the Word, do usually make a deeper impression upon the
souls and Spirits of men.

The Lord never smites, but he has spoken first, and warned by his Word: and
like a father that stands over his child when he corrects him, remembers
him of his faults and of his duty, When the Lord opens the ear to discipline
with the correction, and does awaken the conscience, a wise child will readily
know what God means in those his corrections.

We in this kingdom are under Gods Rod, and he is punishing Use.
us with the rod of his anger: The sorest temporal judgment, that can come to
a Nation, is come upon us. We must hearken and learn what God would have us to
do, now that he is correcting of us, we must hear what the rod speaks unto us.

If we consult the Word, it will tell us what it is that the rod speaks,
showing us why God smites us, and what he would have us to do, now we are
smitten; and it will tell us what he will yet do unto us; if when these his
Judgments are upon us we do not learn righteousness, submit unto him, and
make our peace with him.

First, it tells us that this Judgment is come upon us for sin, and it being
a sore stroke, we may learn that it is for our great sins. When God was angry
with the children of Israel at the siege of Ai, the men of Ai smote of them and
chased them, Josuah 7. 2, 3, unto verse. 12.
from before the gate and slew diverse of them, and made them turn their backs
upon their enemies: This caused Joshuah to humble himself before the Ark of the Lord; Gods answer unto him was, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou upon thy
face? Israel has finned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant, which I
commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing. This sin of one
man, was accompanied with other sins of Rulers and people; namely, carnal
confidence in the Arm of flesh, and carnal policy following it, not asking
counsel of the Lord. They thought all the people were too many to go up, they
presumed that because there were but few men in Ai, a party of about two or
three thousand men would be enough to take it. If thou say in thine heart,
says Jeremy to Judah, when God should punish, Jer. 13. 22.
Wherefore come these things upon me? the answer is, For the greatness os
thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare. In all Gods
judgments upon a person or people, they may hear God telling them that this is
for your sin. But this is not all it speaks.

It secondly does mind all of searching and trying their ways, to find out
their sins, and that they might turn to him that smites them. This counsel
the Prophet gives after he had said, Wherefore does a living man complain? A
man for the punishment of Lam. 3. 39, 40.
his sin: Let us search and try our ways and turn to the Lord, etc. Come, say
they in Hosea, and let us return to the Lord, he has torn Hos 6. 1.
and he will heal us, he has smitten and he will bind us up.

Thirdly, the rod bids men not only to find out their sins, and confess them
to God, but to seek his face and to ask pardon, that God may be at peace with
them. This is one end why God afflicts men, that they might be brought to
acknowledge their offense, Hos. 5. 15. Hos. 14. 3.
and seek his face: In their affliction they will seek me diligently, says the
Lord. To say from the heart I have sinned, I will do so no more, is a good
answer to the voice of the rod, upon this ground; namely, because God had
already punished his people, and had threatened a great judgment; therefore,
Prepare to meet Amos 4. 12.
thy God, O Israel, says the Lord.

Fourthly, the rod teaches another lesson, which is, If men do not amend by
present Judgments, they shall be punished with more, and those greater, Seven
times more for their sin; he will Levit. 26. from v. 10. to v. 40.
then avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and if yet they shall walk contrary
to him, he will again and again chasten them, Seven times more, until their
Land shall be desolate, and their Cities wast. But yet so, as if when he has
brought his sorest judgments upon them, they should by them learn to humble
themselves, and confess their iniquity, and accept of the punishment of their
iniquity, God will remember his Covenant and be merciful Levit, 26.
unto them.

Lastly, when the rod has taught all the former lessons, if men will not hear
it, then it teaches that the Lord may be so provoked as to give over smiting,
as one weary of striking: and to say, Why should you be smitten any more? you
will revolt more and more. Isai. 1. 5.
And because they add lewdness to their filthiness, obstinacy, and
impenitency to their wickedness, the Lord says to them as to those in
Ezekicl; Because I have purged thee, that is, by my judgments would have
reclaimed thee, and thou wast not purged, Thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused Ezekiel. 24. 13.
my fury to rest upon thee. You may, in the taking away of his rod, if he give
over smiting, hear him say: I have taught and corrected you thus, and thus, and
so long: I see all is in vain, I will reserve you for utter ruin and
destruction; and since by no means you will learn to know me, and the things
which concern your own peace and good; You shall dye without knowledge, you
shall dye in your sins; I will reserve you to the day of evil. All this
smiting, Job 36. 12. John 8. 24.
seeing it will not reform you, shall but prepare you for destruction, and be
an aggravation of your sin and condemnation.

There is no man of wisdom but can hear the rod speaking to all the purposes
before mentioned. You may hear most, if not all these lessons of the rod, in
the thirty and sixth of Job, verses 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. If they be bound in
setters and be holden in cords of asfliction, Job 36. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
then he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have
excceded. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they
return from iniquity: if they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days
in prosperity, and their years in pleasure: But if they obey not, they shall
perish by the sword, and dye without knowledge: But the Hypocrites in heart
(that is, such as profess they know God, but in their works deny him, that
have a form of Godliness but deny the power thereof) they heap up wrath, They
cry not when he binds them, that is, they do not hear nor obey the voice of
the rod, to mourn for their sins, to ask pardon and to repent when God does
punish them.

We are greatly afflicted, and under a most heavy Judgment, we cannot but be
sensible of it. I beseech you therefore to hear the voice of God now speaking
by this rod. You do now believe it is for the sins of the Land: it should
therefore put us upon a sad and serious search of our ways.

The Lord is now smiting, wounding, and in the way of destroying of us. Let us
consider our transgressions, that they have exceeded. And truly, they are so
many, and so great, that I tremble to think of them. As God shall bring them to
my mind, I shall remember you of some of them; praying you to remember, that
this Rod of God is upon us for our sin; and for this end, that we should humble
our selves under his hand, that we should repent, and turn to him, and seek
atonement and reconciliation with him. This is the work of the day; let us
with all our might apply our selves to it.

1. It did please the Lord, long since, to begin a happy Reformation The sins
for which God is now punishing England.
of Religion in this Kingdom; and shortly after, made trial what we would do,
whether we would stand fast to the Truth received or not. But in the generality
the Land returned to their vomit, and also persecuted the true Religion, and
shed the blood of many Martyrs, in the days of Queen Mary. We have cause to
judge, that the guilt of that blood, amongst other sins past, does lie upon the
Land, and cries for vengeance, and that God is punishing it this day.

We must not only look upon present sins, to be humble for them, and to bewail
them; but upon them that have been committed long since, by our ancestors that
have been before us. So did Daniel and Nehemiah confess to God not only their
own Dan. 9. 6, 8, 16. Neh. 9. 33, 34.
present sins, but the sins of their Kings, Princes and Fathers that lived
before them; professing, that for their sins also, confusion of face was
brought upon them, acknowledging Gods righteousness therein.

It pleases the Lord many times to seal up, as in his treasury, Deuteronomy. 32. 34.
Job 14. 17. 2 Kings 23. 26. 2 Kings 24. 3. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13.
the sins of a Land, and to keep them as in a Bag; not punishing them so soon
as they are committed: and when they have heaped up more sins upon them, and
their sins are ripe, then he reckons with them, and punishes them for all at
once. The sins of Manasseh brought judgments upon Judah, after his death,
though he had repented him of his sin.

2. Also, when there was a Reformation both in King Edward and Queen Elisabeths
time, though they reformed much, yet they wrought not a through Reformation. Too
much of Rome was retained both in Religion and the Government of the Church:
and the Land has not been purged of it to this day.

Another great sin which has been, and yet is committed in the Land, is
Sacrilege. I speak not of the converting of the maintenance of Abbeys to other
then pious uses, which may admit of question whether it were sin or no: I
insist not on that: I speak of robbing God of the maintenance whereby his
Ministers were and are to be maintained, which has been a cause why many parts
of this Kingdom have been destitute of such Pastors as should and could break
unto the people the Bread of life. There were none to minister unto them
Spiritual things, because their Carnal things, paid to maintain them, was
turned another way.

This Sacrilege lies still as a sin upon the Land, provoking God against this
Kingdom; and you may believe it, that he is now punishing it. For you are
cursed with a curse, says God, to them Mal. 3. 8, 9.
that lie in this sin. It is not possible for the law of man to make it lawful
to take away that maintenance that has been designed, and yet is paid, for the
maintenance of the Worship of God, it making no other sufficient provision of
maintenance for the Church in the place thereof. I dispute not by what right
Tithes are paid: But since they are paid for the maintenance of the Ministry,
and yet taken from them, and given to those that do not mister in the Word and
Doctrine, this can be nothing else but robbing of God, and a great Sacrilege.

The same sins also may be charged upon us in England, for which God had a
controversy with his people, and did judge them heretofore. Hos. 4. 1. Ezekiel.
22.


4. The knowledge of God is not in the Land. This Kingdom notwithstanding the
long time of our enjoying so plentifully the light of the Gospel, does yet
remain extreme ignorant of God, and their duty to him. And this not only in
the dark places of it, in Wales, and far North and West, but in the Countries
and Cities in the midst of the Kingdom.

5. The sins of Swearing and Cursing, of hellish and damming Blasphemy, have
overgrown this Land, the cry whereof does reach unto heaven: besides the sin of
Perjury, concerning which sin God has said, that his curse shall remain, and
never depart from Ezekiel. 5. 3, 4.
the committers thereof, nor from their houses, till they be consumed, with the
timber thereof, and the stones thereof. All sorts of persons, as Supreme, and
all Officers in the State, from the Judge to the meanest; all sorts of Jurours
in any Jury, and all sorts of Witnesses in all Courts, they bind themselves to
God, by a solemn Oath. How many Protestations, Oaths and Covenants have been
lately taken? But have men kept their Oaths, and do they keep them? are they
not broken by all that take them? It had Eccles. 5. 5, 6.
been much better for the Kingdom that we had not taken so many Oaths, Vows,
and Protestations, then, having taken them, not to keep them.

God is extremely incensed against a People guilty of Forswearing; especially
if the Oaths of State made by the supreme Magistrate 2 Samuel 21. 1. 2 Chronicles. 36.
13
to the Subject, and of the Subject to the Magistrate, be broken and violated.
We are blind, if we do not see that God is punishing this Nation for these
sins of vain swearing, cursing, blasphemy and perjury. We must call to
remembrance these, amongst other the sins of the Land, to bewail them, and make
our Hos. 4. 2, 3.
peace with God, that he destroy us not for them. Because of these, the Land
mourns.

6. The Land is also guilty of not opposing of the man of fin, Popery and
Idolatry, unto the extirpation or it out of the Kingdom. Idolatry has not
only been tolerated to be committed in the secret Chambers of Imagery; but
allowed in places elsewhere. We have complied much with Idolaters and Idolatry
of Rome. We may judge that for this also the Lord is punishing us.

The children of Israel did not drive out the Canaanites from amongst them,
therefore they were as pricks in their eyes, and thorns Judge. 2. 3.
in their sides. And Joshua tells them, that for their compliances Josh. 23.
13.
with them, they should remain to be snares and traps unto them, and scourges
in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, until they should perish from the
good land which the Lord their God had given them. And they should make them
sin against God, and surely be a snare unto them, as Moses tells them. Popish
and Antichristian Religion, Exodus 23, 33.
and Idolatry, is as abominable to God, as ever the Canaanitish. Religion and
Idolatry was: For Rome is called, The mother of Abominations.

Now whether the permitting of Popery and Papists amongst us, have not been
thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our sides, and have been snares and traps,
means of sin and vexation unto us, God using them as rods and instruments to
punish us, I leave this to your consideration,

When the sons of God took them wives of the daughters of men, Genesis 6. 2.
when those of the true married those that were of a false Religion in the
first Age of the world; and when, after that, both before and after the
Captivity, Gods people by profession did marry strange wives the daughters of a
strange god: Gods judgments Genesis 6. 7.
were upon the old world, and all those States that were guilty of this sin. As
when the house of Judah made affinity with the house of Ahab, we see what evil
followed thereupon, and what 2 Chronicles. 22. Ezra 9. 2, 14.
wrath it brought upon the Kingdom of Judah.

When Solomon (a good King otherwise) forgot himself, and matched with
Idolatrous wives, sinning therein against God, God gave him over to his folly
(though otherwise the wisest of men) that (whether in complement or otherwise)
he did accompany his wives to their Idolatrous Service; whether he joined with
them therein, it does not so clearly appear: yet he went thus far, that it is
said, He went after Ashteroth the goddess of the Zidonians, and Milcom 1 Kings
11. 4, 5, 6, 7.
the abomination of the Amorites; and he did build an high place for Chemosh
the abomination of Moab.

For these very things God brought evil upon his Kingdom. He raised up
adversaries against him; and what a division and rent it made in that Kingdom,
we do well know. May not this be another cause why Gods wrath is gone out
against us? Let us hear the rod, does it not tell us so? Let us humble our
selves this day for these sins also, that God may be pleased to throw away this
his rod from us.

We are guilty of other sins, for which, as for that of Idolatry, when they
reign in a Kingdom, God does punish it with his severest Judgments.

7. These are, Oppression, and the not executing of Justice and Judgment in a
Land. These were the sins of the Princes and Judges of Judah; they were for
bribes and rewards. And all Judah, Micah. 3. 9, 11.
according as they had power, did oppress one another. Has it not been thus
in in England? and, which should humble us and grieve us most, complaints every
where tell us, even while we are smarting by the rod of God, that these sins of
oppression and not executing judgment do increase upon us. Are not many
partial and injurious in their Levies of moneys for the public use of the
State? sparing themselves and friends, laying intolerable burdens upon those
who have been most free, and are now less able to bear them. Also are there
not those who were entrusted with the Moneys of the State, and to pay
Soldiers, that do manage their Trust so ill, that the Soldier is necessitated
to live upon free Quarter, and spoil of those that pay ordinary great Taxes for
the public Service.

Men do exceedingly complain that they cannot have Justice. It concerns you
to look to these things. As these were crying sins heretofore, and God has
brought upon us these Judgments: if these continue and increase, we cannot but
fear that these Judgments shall be continued and increased, until these sins
be reformed.

8. Bloodguiltinesse is another provoking sin. It cannot go Deuteronomy. 19. 13.
well with a Kingdom where the guilt of innocent blood is not put away by the
hand of the Magistrate. God will not pardon a Land polluted with innocent
blood: he will sooner or later be 2 Kings 24. 4.
avenged of it.

How much has been shed heretofore, and the murders either not brought unto
Judgment, or not prosecuted in Judgment? This polluteth a Kingdom with blood;
and this blood cries loud for vengeance upon those into whose hands God did
put the sword of Justice, to revenge for him, and to execute wrath upon such as
are murderers, and do it not. This causes the Lord to execute Judgment
himself, in shedding the blood upon such a People as this.

9. The sins of Sodom, Pride, fullness of bread, idleness, unmercifulness,
and all sorts of voluptuousness, have been the common Ezekiel. 16. 49.
sins of this Kingdom, and yet are, notwithstanding the hand of God is so
heavy upon us.

Our Gentry, and such as were born and left rich in estate, they, in a
generality, have given themselves so to live, as if they had been made and born
for nothing else but to eat, and drink, and play, and sleep, and satisfy their
sensual lusts. They have accounted it to be a blemish, and a matter of
disrepute to them, to live in a Calling, or to give themselves unto any thing
wherein they might be serviceable and profitable in any place of good
employment in Church or Commonwealth.

Men and women have been most luxurious and wanton in matters of Diet, Apparel
and Gestures, that they know not how or what to eat, what to wear, or how to
attire themselves, or what gate or gesture to use. They, for delicacie in
these, are too Isai. 3. 16.
like those inveighed against, and threatened, Isa. 3. 16.

The Land has been, and yet is polluted with Whoredoms, and Hos. 4. 2. Isa.
28. 1, 7, 18.
is even drowned with Drunkenness. For these sins also the Lord is now
visiting of us.

10. Another sin for which God will be wrath with a People, and does scourge
them sore, is formality in the true Worship and Religion Tit. 1. 16.
of God, when those who profess the Name of God, do in works deny him: and,
having a form of godliness, deny the power of ^ Tim. 3. 5.
it. This is the common and great sin of this Kingdom. We in this declare that
we are an hypocritical Nation, and therefore the people of Gods curse, and
people of his wrath. So God spoke of his people the Jews against whom he sent
the King of Assyria, Isa. 10. 6.
the rod of his anger; I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and
against the people of his wrath, giving him a charge to take the spoil, and to
take the prey, and to tread them down like mire in the streets.

These sins I have remembered you of. There are many others, which I pray you to
call to your remembrance. Consider your own sins, and the sins you see
committed in the Land. And be sure that you take this into your serious
thoughts, That for these, and other our sins, God is now punishing of us: and,
which aggravates them all, we are not amended by his Rod, but grow worse and
worse.

What is now therefore to be done? You have heard what the Rod has taught us,
that, It is sor our sins that God is wrath with us.

We are this day therefore to humble our selves for those sins: we must
confess them, repent of them, and disclaim them, and be earnest suitors to God
that he would make the Land sensible of Isa. 9. 13.
their sins, and of this his Rod, that we turn to him that smites us. And
every one of us must endeavor a Reformation in the Land; first of our selves,
and then of others; beseeching the Lord to work it. We must with all
earnestness entreat the Lord to forgive these sins of the Land, and that he
will be merciful to us, and be at peace with us, and heal the Land. We have
great encouragement from God himself, who says, If my people that are called 2 Chronicles. 7. 1^.
by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from
their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will for give their sins,
and will heal their Land.

We may make this stroke and wound incurable, if we go on still in our
trespasses, if we do not speedily make our peace with our God. We have a
promise; let us take hold on it, that he may make peace with us; and he will be
at peace with us; for Isa. 25. 7.
he waits for our turning unto him, and seeking favor of him, that he may be
gracious unto us. Isa. 30. 18*


But, as I said before, let us take heed that we go not on in our sin, lest we
provoke the Lord to continue and increase his judgments, even to make us a
desolation: We are in the high way to it: For, a kingdom divided against it
self, is brought to desolation.

There are many Symptoms (if we consider the state of the Kingdom as now it
is) that may cause us to fear, that, if timely and through repentance do not
prevent it, this Judgment shall not be taken off, but be increased, until the
Land be destroyed.

1. The first I shall mention, is, When lesser judgments do Symptoms of our
being near to utter ruin.
not awaken and amend us; especially, if we are grown worse thereupon. God has
told us that he will destroy such a Nation as this: I sent cleanness of teeth,
and you have not returned to me, Amos 4. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11.
says the Lord: I withheld rain from you, I have smitten you with blasting,
etc. I have sent among you the pestilence; I overthrew some of you, as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; yet have ye not returned to me, says the Lord:
therefore thus will I do unto thee, that is, I will destroy thee utterly. This
you may read in Amos 4. 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12. God swear by his holiness,
verse. 2. Am. 4. ^.
that he would take them away with hooks, and their posterity with fishhooks;
they should be carried away captive, and utterly ruined.

2. A second Symptom is, When the sins of a Land grow universal, in respect
of the several kind of sins, and several sorts of persons. All sorts of sins
are committed, and all sorts of persons are grievous sinners. Read Ezekiel. 22.
Add thereunto these sins; Contempt of the Word and holy Ordinances of God,
despising of those that truly fear God, and enmity against the power of
Godliness. Every one wore in them to their Ezekiel. 22.
power to shed blood: and so he reckons up many other, saying, In thee there
are that commit such and such sins. There are many sins named. There is scarce
any one sin reckoned there, but the salne sins are rife and common amongst us.
And there you shall also find Princes, and Nobles, and Judges, and Priests,
and Ezekiel. 22. 25, 27, 29.
Prophets, and People were all guilty of some of the sins before mentioned.
Therefore the Lord says to the Prophet, Will thou judge? Will thou judge the
bloody City? Thou shall Ezekiel. 22. 2.
show her all her abominations. He would have the Prophet declare to them, that
he would punish them more then yet he had done.

Indeed, before he did bring that destroying National Judgment, before he
brought the Caldeans upon them; after he had threatened it, he did wait to see
whether any would make up the Ezekiel. 22. 30.
hodge, and stand in the gap, before him, for the land, that he might not
destroy it. So, if there be amongst us that will indeed get into the breach,
and in a right way stand in it, and make it up, namely, by prayer, executing
judgment, and reformation; we may have hope that God will not destroy us. We
have reason to bless God, that you, our Worthies of the Parliament, do
endeavor it. But if the sins of the Land shall be too hard for you, because
they make breaches faster then you can make them up; or if the Lord be not
pleased that you shall continue in the breach to perfect the making it up; if
the Lord be so angry with us, that nothing shall prevail in this way: then we
may fear, that now this cloud of blood which hangs over us, and has fallen
in most parts of the Kingdom, shall fall in all other parts, till it have gone
through the whole Nation to destroy it.

3. That which may cause us much to fear, is another Symptom, God is now
visiting this part of the world, bringing the Sword upon it. Gods manner is, in
such visitations, to begin with his own people, as he did when Jeremiah was to
take Jer. 25. ^5, 18.
the wine-cup of Gods futy, and cause all the Nations to drink of it, beginning
with his own people, to wit, Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah.

Thus the Lord has begun with Bohemia, the Palarinate, and almost all Germany,
and other parts of Europe. I am persuaded all this part of the world shall
drink of it; The dregs of this cup, as that of Jeremies, was reserved for
Heathenish Babylon, Jer. 25. 15. 18.
who drunk of it last: so the dreggs of this our cup shall be reserved for
Antichrist, even for spiritual Babylon, for Rome, that mother of fornications,
and for all those that are drunk with the wine of her fornications: she happily
shall drink last, and drink up this cup of the Lords fury.

It was a great while before we began to drink of it; but unless, by a
specialty of humbling our selves before God, and turning to God and seeking of
him more than ordinarily, we do procure that it may pass, and God do take it
from us; as true as God has threatened such sinners as we are, and has begun
to execute it, the sword shall not be put up till we be destroyed.

Our times are very troublous, and God uses to build his Dan. 9. ^^.
Church, as he did Jerusalem, in such troublous times: we are ready to hope
that God will now reform and build up his Church and make it a glorious Church
in this Nation, and we would gladly believe that these shakings are but
preparations to a happy reformation.

I doubt not but these wars and commotions amongst the true Churches of God are
preparations thereunto. But whether we of this present generation may not for
our sins and for our trial be much wasted and destroyed with the sword, and
which is worse, be put under the power of those that are for Antichrist, we
cannot promise to our selves.

I know that ere long that mother of abomination with her Rev. 17. 6.
children, who have been drunk with the blood of the Saints and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus, shall receive double. Rev. 18. 6.
In the cup that she has filled, it shall be filled to her double: But whether
(since the time of Antichrists reign is but short) he may not have a lightning
before his death, as to rise to have so much power added to his malice, as to
shed more blood, that the Lord may take a just occasion by it to execute
vengeance upon that State for all the blood shed by it, we cannot tell: we have
some cause to fear it, if we do but observe that already the Palatinate and
other Churches that were reformed, are brought under the power of those that
are Antichristian; why should we not think that the like may befall us? nothing
but an unfeigned turning from our sins unto God, and a through reformation,
which yet we are far from, can hinder it.

I speak not this to discourage any, but that we should be prepared for the
worst, and to put us upon a more through humbling of our selves before God, and
of getting into, and making up the breach which our sins have made, that he
may spare us and not destroy us.

4. To add one Symptom more, A Spirit of perverseness, a spirit of Division
is in the midst of us, and is spread through all the Kingdom; Divisions in
Church, divisions in Commonwealth. A Kingdom thus divided, how can it stand?
When the Lord is wrath with a people then he mingleth a perverse Isa. 19. 13,
14.
Spirit amongst them, he makes their Princes become fools, and their
Counselors become brutish, destitute of right reason, yea he divides them in
their Councels. He sets Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against
Ephraim, to the making Isa. 9. 19, 20, 21.
of a Land dark through miseries, when no man shall spare his brother, because
of the discords and civil wars which God in his wrath should raise amongst
them; as a just punishment of their not joining together to serve the Lord with
one consent.

It will not be much out of the place to mention a sin which I omitted before;
which is, the growth of Errors and Schisms in this Kingdom, which are so
much the more dangerous, because this error also is grown up with them (a
strong means to nourish them,) Namely, that men must enjoy Liberty of
Conscience, denying it to be in the power of any, no not in the Magistrate to
restrain them. This is grown to a great height, and has many abettors, and
pleaders for it. Little course is taken to repress it. Some to whom it belongs
to do it, I fear are corrupted with this Error. This is an inlet and ground
for the toleration of all Religions. Errors and Heresies are Gangrens, which
if their course be not stopped, will increase to the destruction of the whole.
The Apostle will have that such should not only be shunned, but that their
mouths should be stopped, lest they deceive others and it increase Tit. 1. 11.
to more ungodliness: and he requires Timothy to 1 Timothy 1. 3.
Command that men preach no other Doctrine: every one therefore may not teach
what Doctrine he pleases; but if he teach false Doctrine, he is to be
restrained. I know the first way of stopping the mouths of such, is by sound
Doctrine to convince them Tit. 1. 9. 11.
of their Error, and if they will not be convinced, to proceed against them by
Ecclesiastical censure; laying a command upon them not to teach such Doctrine;
but if still they will persist, God has given power to the Civil Magistrate
to restrain them: For he is to govern so, that under him men may live a 1 Timothy
2. 2.
godly as well as a quiet life: and he bears not the sword in vain, but is
Gods Minister to punish, therefore to his power Romans 13. 4.
to restrain him that does evil. And what greater evil can a man do, then to
seduce his brother?

But to return where I left; be sensible of the divisions that are amongst us,
if they be not made up but increase, we shall Gal. 5. 15.
clash one against another, that we shall be consumed one of another, and
confusion will be in the end. It does presage very Jam. 3. 19.
much evil to a Land, when the Lord shall do with it as he did with the Land
of Judah, when he shall sill the Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and the
Inhabitants thereof with drunkenness. First, drunk with Error and
wickedness, which they have drunk in abundantly; then God makes them drink,
till they be drunk with the wine of his indignation. He says he will Jer. 13.
13. 14, 15.
dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, says
the Lord, I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy; but destroy them. Hear
ye, and give ear, he not proud; (says the Prophet) for the Lord has spoken.
And his council is to give glory to God, namely in confessing and amending
their faults, and making their peace with him, Before he bring darkness and
the Jer. 13. 1^.
sha low of death, this great destruction upon them. Happy should we be, if we
would take this Counsel: We have need of it; if ever any Nation was silled
with such a drunkenness, certainly at this time this our Land is. God says
often; Shall I not be avenged Jer. 5. 9. 29.
of such a Nation as this? when men grow worse in stead of amending, proceeding
from evil to evil, and will not know God and see his Name, when they are
under his rod.

I speak all this, to the end that we may earnestly seek the Lord, and cry
aloud to him this day for mercy, who cries to us with a loud voice, To hear
the rod, and who has appointed it. Jer. 9. 3, 4, 9, 16.


Lastly, we have often times fasted and humbled our selves before the Lord; yet
you see that this great Judgment is not removed, but increasing daily.
Certainly, this is because either we have not been sincere and unfeigned
herein: which if it be, let us afflict and humble our selves this day as we
ought to do, for our selves, and for the Land; or else it argues that God will
yet plague us more for our sins, and we may fear to our destruction. Formal
Fasts are just provocations of God against a Land; as were the solemn meetings
and prayers of the Jews, Isa. 1. 14, 15.
whose hands were full of blood, and their fastings separate from Isa. 58. 4, 5.
Reformation.

It concerns us to repent of our former Fastings and humblings, for in the
generality, men have not kept such a Fast as God requires, no marvel then if
God have not regarded it. We have not fasted from our sins; we have fasted to
strife, and Isai. 58. 3, 4.
debate, and contention, and Schism, and all manner of wickedness and
ungodliness. We have not been so humbled as to turn from our sins to the Lord,
as to loose the bonds of wickedness, Isa. 58. 6, etc.
and to walk in the ways of holiness, sobriety, mercy, and righteousness.

That Land is in a very sad condition, when albeit Fasts are Proclaimed and
kept, God shall say, I will not hear their cry, but Jer. 14. 12.
will consume them with the sword, and with the famine, and with the
pestilence. Yet God forbid that we should give over humbling our selves, and
our praying unto him; his deferring of help may be because he would have us
seek him more earnestly, and more unfeignedly; then we may hope, He will be
found of us Jer. 29. 12. 13.
when we shall seek him with our whole heart.

And who has appointed it, Namely, God has appointed it; we learn hence:

In all Judgments and corrections of any person or people, whatsoever Doct.
the rod or instrument may be, God is the appointer,

It is of God, it is from him, and is ordered by him.

This is abundantly proved in Leviticus 26. and in Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy 28.
where God says, I will appoint over you, such and such diseases, I will send
such and such punishments, or the Lord shall smite thee thus and thus. Is there
any evil in the City, (that is, Amos 3. 6.
evil of punishment) and the Lord has not done it? I make peace and create
evil, I the Lord do all these things, says the Lord: Isa. 45. 7.
Affliction arises not out of the dust: Job 5. 6.


Punishments and corrections are Acts of Gods vindicative Reas. 1.
justice, which he reserveth to himself, as part of his Prerogative belonging
to his Sovereignty. Vengeance is mine says the Lord: Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Romans 12. 19.
God will have the ordering of all corrections.

All things are of God, and in him do consist, and there is not Reas. 2.
any thing, but God wills it to be, either by his effecting or permitting.
What Herod and Pontius Pilate did against Christ, was Act. 4. 28.
nothing but what his hand and Counsel determined before to be done.

The creatures and second causes, they are all Gods servants to do and to
execute his will. Man by whom he corrects any Isa. 10. 6. Psalm. 17. 14.
is but his rod, or his sword.

I desire that this truth should be believed; for then when a Use.
man is afflicted, and under any judgment, he will know and consider, That it
is God that smites, it is God to whom he must return; it is God of whom he
must seek favor and mercy, and with whom he must make his Peace.

This confuteth an Error, and reproves a great fault in many, Use.
who look upon the punishments and judgments they feel, as upon things that
come casually, by hap hazard, or ill fortune, as they call it; or from the
malice of men: they look no further than to the immediate actors or instruments
thereof. They do not, many will not, see the hand of God in it.

This Atheism is common amongst men; beware of it; for from hence it is that
men in their afflictions are impatient under them, and do fret and chafe at the
instrument, and do study revenge against men, and use indirect means to get
them off. Let none shut their eyes against this truth. The Prophet complains
of those that, when Gods hand was lifted up, and his Isa. 26. 11. Ezekiel. 7. 9.
Micah 6. 13.
judgments were upon the earth, they would not see: but they shall see, says
he, and be ashamed. He will make them know that it is he that smites. God will
smite them, till he make them sick with smiting, and make them desolate,
because of their sins.

When men in their afflictions shall consider that God has Use 3.
appointed them, it will humble them, and calm their spirits. Psalm. 39. 9.
They will lay their hands on their mouths, and accept of their punishment,
because God has appointed it, bearing patiently Micah 7. 9.
the indignation of the Lord, because they have sinned against him.

Would we have our present judgment taken off? Now we know who has appointed
it, let us prepare to meet him, let Hos. 6. 1.
us return to him that has smitten us, and make our peace with him.

This Rod and Sword being called, Gods rod, and Gods sword, Use 4.
which smite at Gods appointment, we may then see that the great Quarrel and
Controversy, originally, is not betwixt man and us, but between God and us. We
must therefore first submit to him, and make our peace with him, else we shall
make no peace, or no good peace, with man.

It is not any policy, or power, nor any other means (though good, and so
necessary, that we shall sin if we use them not) can remove our evil from us,
but as we shall obtain it of God, who has appointed it.

When the Sword of God was called upon to put it self up into the Scabbard, and
asked How long it would be ere it would be Jer. 47. 6, 7.
quiet; answer is made, How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a
charge against Ashkelon, and against the Sea shore? there he has appointed it.
The Lord must command it to be put up, or it will not cease smiting till it
have consumed us.

It is not any Articles of Peace, be they never so equal and reasonable; it is
not the power of the sword, nor of any means we can use, though never so
lawful and necessary, that can take off the rod from us, and give us peace;
except in the use of all good means to satisfy him, we shall obtain it of him
who has appointed it.

We may happily use such means as may skin over the wound, and conclude a Peace;
but it will break out again, if God be not at peace with us, and if he do not
appoint and make our Peace for us.

Wherefore I beseech you, that (with all the good means that possibly we can
use) we endeavor, to the utmost of our power, to procure of God to take this
rod from us, and give us Peace.

Let us repent of our own sins, and endeavor that the Land may repent. Let us
remove out of Gods sight whatsoever does offend him. Let us seek, and find
out, and cast out those execrable things which have provoked the Lord to
appoint the rod and sword to smite and destroy amongst us. Let us give him no
rest, but continue our wrestling with him, with Jacobs wrestlings, by humble,
and earnest, and importunate prayer and supplication. By this strength we may
have power with God, Hos. 12. 3, 4.
and (to speak with holy reverence to his Omnipotency) we may have power over
God, to prevail with him.

Then we may expect that he that has appointed the rod will lay it by, if not
cast it into the fire, and will command it to cease smiting, and will command
the sword to be put up into the Scabbard; and then we shall have peace, and not
till then. Is we would cast away our sins, God would certainly cast away his
rod. If we prepare to meet him, he will be friends with us.

But to conclude with a word of comfort to those that truly Use 5.
fear God. That God is the appointer and orderer of the rod in all punishments,
is a Ground of stay, and support of their hearts and spirits in the greatest
afflictions.

Be enemies never so powerful and malicious, we need not fear them; it shall
not be as they intend, either for the greatness or continuance of the evil
which they would bring upon us, but according to the will of God, who has
given them charge to asslict us. As it was in the case of the children of
Judah, when the Lord gave a charge to the Assyrians to war against them,
saying, O Assyrian, the sword of mine anger, and the staff Isa. 10. 6, 7.
of mine indignation; I send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against
the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, etc. Howbeit
he means not so, neither does his heart think so, namely, to correct or
punish for God in measure, and for their good; he never thinks that he is but
a rod in Gods hand: But he being let loose to his own covetousness, and
ambition, and malice against Gods people, it is in his heart to destroy Nations
not a few, and to raise himself upon the ruins of Gods people. But God put a
hook in his nostrils, that he could not have his will of them; and afterward,
for his rage and cruelty in executing his charge in smiting Gods people, God
did utterly destroy him. God does with them, as with Isa. 10. 7, 12, 16, 17.
the proud waves which would overflow the mountains; they have their channel to
flow in; Gods appointment does set Bars to them, and says, Hitherto shall thou
come, and no farther, and Job 38. 11.
there shall thy proud waves be stayed.

It is well for Gods people that the rod and sword is in the hand, and at the
appointment of God, their Wise, Almighty, and tender Father.

God punishes his children in measure, both for how much, Isa. 27. 8. 9.
and how long; not so much nor so long as the enemy intends: He measures
every dram for weight, and every minute for time. His rod shall be upon us no
longer then he has appointed it; no longer then is needful to purge us from
sin, and Heb. 12. 10.
make us partaker of his holiness.

As he has appointed a time of trouble, and trial, so he has appointed an
end thereof. And the rod of the wicked shall not Psalm. 125. 3.
always rest upon the Lot of the Righteous. He will not always Isa. 28. 28,
29.
be threshing: his smiting is for correction and for our good, not for our
destruction. He is wonderful in Counsel and excellent in working. When he
has sufficiently smitten us with his rod, he will take his rod and burn it:
then he holds it to be sufficient, Levit. 26. 41.
when our uncircumcised hearts are humbled, and when we shall accept of the
punishment of our sins, acknowledging that he has punished us less then our
iniquities; when we 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
shall kindly submit unto God, and reform our ways, pray, and ask
forgiveness, he has then promised that he will forgive our sins and he^l our
Land; he will take this strok from us.

And when God uses the wicked; His, and our enemies, to be his rod; when he
has attained his end, our troubles shall end in their destruction, God may use
Papists, Antichrist, and his Abettors, to be his rod, and sword, whereby to
correct and refine his people; which when it is done, They, because God has
appointed it, shall certainly be destroyed. Let not your spirits sink nor fail,
while you are under the rod, though it may happen to be much worse with us then
yet it is: for it shall be only so much and so long as he in his wisdom has
appointed for our good.

I will end with that comfortable Scripture touching his Church then, and
Babylon in Chald^a; which is as applyable to us and to Babylon at Rome; Yet a
very little while, and the indignation shall cease, says God, and mine anger
in their destruction. Isai. 10. 25.
For he has appointed the rod of Iron to break in pieces his enemies; as well
as his rod of men to correct his children: comfort we our selves with these
thoughts, nothing comes to pass in the way of correction of his children,
but as he has appointed. Let us therefore for all these good purposes, Hear
the rod, and who has appointed it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10. line 25, for ^^, read see. p. 14. l. 2. for that rod, read the S^n,
p. 2^ l. 24 for upon read the, p. 35. l. 8. blot out, these, P. 19. l. 24. for
professing, read confessing. P. 23. l. 18. for murders, read murderers.


