A SEA FIGHT: TWO Ships taken by Captain SOUTHWOOD, and Captain FAULKNER.

PRINCE CHARES HIS Letters, with a Commission; and other Letters and Papers
taken at PAROES, with Provisions and Ammunition going to relieve Pendennis
Castle.

With 6 Pieces of Ordnance, 3 Murderers, 20 Barrels of Gunpowder 10 Barrels of
Beef, 6 Chaldron of Coals, 3 Fat of Peace, 100 weight of Match, One Cask and a
half of Bread, a Barrel of Candles.

Also, 50 Head of Cattle taken at Aram. 30 Casks of Salmon taken at
Bereskellet; and a ship taken at Dingle with two great Guns, 2 Murderers, 2
Ch^^bers, and the Rebels all taken prisoners.

These Papers being examined, are commanded to be printed and are published
according to Order of PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed by Jane Coe, June 12. 1646.

SEVERAL Victories, AND GOOD SERvices done by CAPTAIN Henry Southwood, and
Captain Faulkner against the rebels in Ireland, as also the taking of a Ship
going to r^lieve Pendennis Castle, with Letters interc^pted from Prince Charles.
Captain Henry Southwood, and Captain Thomas Faulkner; being implo^ed in the
Command of 2. Merchants men of War, sailing upon the Coasts of Ireland, put
in at Bareskellet, and there went on shore and took 30. C^sk^ of Salmon from
the Rebels, and drove away 60. of them* who fled from the place before them.

And the said Capt. Henry Southwood in the VVarspit Frigot, and Capt. Thomas
Faulkner in the Increase Frigot, took a ship at the Dingle De-Couch in Ireland,
laden with Oade, persumed Oil and Sugers, two Guns, and two Murderers, and all
the men prisoners; from thence they sayl^d toward the Isles of Aran, they took
one of the Isles of Aran before the Bay of Galloway, and about 500 head of
Cattle; besides sheep, horses, and other Beasts, ^ut of which they made use
of provisions: there they had a Design to have fallen upon a ship in the Road
of G^lloway with 24 Guns, and her Consort with ten Guns, but the day coming on
(for it was intended to be attempted in the night) and they being discovered
could not perform it, the enemy being provided with small shot that they could
not come on, so they returned to the Island of the Blasker^es; and from thence
the next day they set out from Ferretors Island, and sailed toward Caplier,
and discovered some Sail of ships within some ten leagues of Caplier before
them: whereupon command was given, and we chased them some twenty leagues, and
then discovering them to be the Parliament ships that came from Minhead, that
business was disserted, and it being distress of weather, our ships put in
the channel in the coasts of England, where on Saturday morning June 6. they
discovered the A^mirall Captain B^ttens Kerch, and had some debate with the
Commander of it, and from thence sailed to and again (by reason of ill weather)
all that night, and on the Lords day in the morning (being near the Coasts of
France we made way toward it, and discovered the end in a short time, and put
into a Port called Paroes, where were diverse French Vessels in the Harb^ur* and
in the Road discovered a Man of War of the Kings, which was a Dagger boat
about 70 Tun; whereupon we made sail toward her, the Commander whereof
perceiving us, caused the Cables ^o be cut, and ran immediately ashore; we came
presently to anchor, within pistol shot of her, and made some shot, they soon
answe^ed us, and the fight was very hot, but the water flowing, w^e weighed
anchor, intending to board her, which the enemy seeing, made means and got
their Vess^ll off the shore, and set sail, but being hardly pursued, and their
Boat taken before with six men in her, they ran ashore with the ship again
some three miles from us, thinking that we could not follow the chase by reason
of the danger of the Rocks through which we was to sail, and all this while
both Parties continued shooting, the Enemy playing very fast upon us, but we
followed them close, so the enemy came ashore ag^in, and seeing us follow them
so close, fired their Guns upon us, which being done, they were so plied with
our small shot* and Case-shot out of our great ^uns, that they having not time
to shoot again, before our men boarded them, diverse of them leaped overboard,
amongst which there were 3 that were drowned, two of them Irish, and one shot.

There were 2. Knights and some others of quality belonging to the Shipp but
were a shore before, and many of them were Irish; the men were all Irish
Soldiers most of them that were going to join with the enemy in Pendenn^^
Castle; having boarded her, we got her off the shore, notwithstanding the
In^abitants and others pl^^^d div^^s small shot against us, insomuch that
Capta^ne Faulkner received a shot through the Crown of his Cap after he
boarded her, but had no hurt at all, and the Bullets flew thick about us, yet
we had not one man hurt, we made many shot at them; but in brief we took the
S^ip, and all therein, and brought her away: The Captain^s name of this Ship
that was sent by the Prince to Pend^nn^s is Captain Thomas Dyamond; who had
his Commission for Prince Charles for the design,

A List of what was taken in Ireland, and at Peroes in Brittany, by Captain
Henry Southwood, and Captain Thomas Faulkner.
At Beresketley in Ireland. 30. Caskes of Salmon taken from the Rebels. 60. of
the Rebbels driven from thence.
At Dingley-de-couch A Ship taken of the Kings loaded with Wares, Oade great
store. Perfumed Oil, and some Sugar. 2. Great Jron Gunes in her. 2. Murd^ring
Pieces. 2. Chambers.

The men that were in her taken prisoners, at the Jsle of Aram. 50 Head of
Cattle taken from the Rebbels, some Horses were there, diverse Sheep Goats and
other Beasts.
Taken at Peroes in Brittany on the Borders of France on Sunday the 7. of June
1646. by the said Captain Southward, and Captain Faulkner. 1. Ship of the
Kings (sent from Prince Charles, from Jarsey to relieve Pendennis) of 70. Tun
burden P. Charles His Commission to Capt. Diamond Commander of the Ship. A
Paper of instructions to Captain Diamond, to bring account from Pendenis of the
strength, and state of that place, what provisions they had received, and what
they wanted. A letter from Prince Charles to Pendennis. Letters from the L.
Culpepper, and others. All tackles belonging to the ship. 3 Letters in the
Cook-room of the ship. 2 Lanthorns. 2 Iron Crows in the Gun-room. 30 Fatham of
spare cable. 2 Anchors for the ship. One cask and a half of bread. One barrel
of Mustard Seed. One barrel of candles 8 priming horns. 100 Weight of Match,
and other Remnants. A great quantity of shot great and small. 12 Great Oars in
the ship to row it. 3 Dry fats of Pease, with corn, flesh, etc. 6 Chauthorn of
Sea-coales. 10 Barrels of Beef. 65 Hogs cut up, and salted. 10 Tun of Syder.
Twenty Barrels of Gunpowder. 10 Muskets. 6 Pieces of Ordnance. 2 Murdering
Pieces and 2 Chambers.

FINIS.

