A COVENANT To walk with GOD IN An holy stedfastness to maintain the peace of
our Spirits with God in CHRIST.

Solemnly entered into

By certain Persons resolving to live according to, and in the power of the
life of Christ in them.

8ber 9th LONDON: Printed by John Field for Philemon Stephens. 1646.

To my worthy FRIEND, Mrs A.D.
THe occasion of this solemn engaging our selves in Covenant with our God, you
well remember, and the framing of this Model (as you know) was at first for
your stay in an holy stedfastnes in the way and life of Christ (to which you
had in some measure already attained) and for my own recovery after a long and
bitter declining, (God in mercy gave an answerable success.) Those expressions
of the way of life I have often received from you, as the fruits of your own
blessed Experience gave me the more confidence often to power out my soul to you
(a singular mercy to be interested in a faithful friend) in this I gained both
ease and refeshing to a troubled spirit (and some consolation in so sad a
condition I am cast into) in sympathizing with me in these saving experimental
passages which I once enjoyed, though now (in bitterness) have nothing to stay
my Spirit, but (it was once otherwise) I have now only one suit, to beseech you
to accept this your own, as it was first composed for our particulars, and to
improve these sweet and spiritual experiences of the love of Christ shed into
your heart, and God shall communicate unto you by his spirit daily, in your
close walking with him, to establish your spirit in assurance and immutable
cleaving to him in all faithful steadfastness, according to this our Covenant.

This is the daily prayers of him who will be ever found

Your faithful Friend And Servant, W. S.

A COVENANT made with GOD and our own Souls, and to be renewed daily, to
maintain a constant peace in a Spiritual walking with our God.
SECT. 1. The occasion and ground of this Covenant.
We seriously and in the sight of God, observing that glorious and blessed
condition we have been called into, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
in the revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ upon our Spirits in the power of
the Gospel, and therein seeing 1. Romans 5.1, 2.
The singular and infinite love of God, in revealing to us effectually the
great mysteries of Christ through the Spirit, and thereby speaking peace to our
Spirits, through the promise in his Son. 2. Romans 8.6
And thence evidential union and communion with Christ resulting. We have truly
found bestowed upon us


A Spirit of life, Gal. 5.25.
to live the life of Christ.

A mysterious mercy we must needs acknowledge, Ephesians. 3.17, 18.
and beyond imagination, much more possibility of requital; especially in as
much as we have found from thence, by blessed and happy experience communicated
freely unto us, that which may fit us in some proportion and comfortable
measure to enjoy communion with our God, as 1. 2 Pet. 1.4
An holy frame of Spirit, answering to the holy nature of God in Christ in some
happy measure. 2. Romans 5.5
Sensiblenesse of infinite love in God to us through Christ in that respect.


And from these two principles have had experience in our hearts of

1. 2 Cor. 5.14.
An holy tenderness toward God in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Spiritual joy in God, 1 Pet. 1.8
as our portion now in Christ reconciled to us.

3. 1 Ioh. 4.8.
Love to, and sincere delight in him.

All which we have found have been accompanied with three special and
prevailing fruits; 1. Col. 3.1.
The alienating of our Spirits from things here below, to favor, mind and
taste spirituals. 2. Romans 7.15.
The disapprobation and disalowance of lust and sin dwelling in us. 3. Romans
8.10.
The subjugating of the power and strength of corruption, that it reigned not,
nor prevailed in our spirits nor ways.


From all which blessed works of Christ in us, through the strength of this
Spirit of life cast into us by his inhabitation in us followed

Power in some measure to walk acceptably to God in peace. Acts 9.31.


From these grounds and principles (besides the internal light of Faith, and
the witness and seal of the Spirit) warranted by Scripture to be the lot and
only portion of the Elect of God called to be Saints. We have concluded

We are now actually in the state of grace, and partakers of the new Covenant
in the Lord Jesus.

Therefore having these evidential grounds, that this is the true grace of
Christ, wherein we now stand we cannot but find our Spirits 1. Psalm. 63.5.
Very sensible of singular love in God toward us in Christ. 2. Psa. 116.12, 13.
Widely enlarged answerably in love and thankfulness to God again for so much
goodness. Ephesians. 1.13.



Therefore knowing our selves hereby sealed up unto our full Redemption in the
great day of Christ, and that the time of our abiding here is but short.
Conclude it our duty

That we live the rest of our pilgrimage wholly unto God, Romans 6.4
in the power of that grace and spiritual life thus communicated to us from GOD
in Christ. Ephesians. 4.17


And forasmuch as we carry still about with us a body of Death (and live in the
world, although we are not of the world) that hauls back unto deadness and
dullness in the way of Christ to the corruptions of our own natures, causing in
us by woeful experience to find the bitterness of our own folly in neglects,
coolings, carelessness and unsteddiness of Spirit, often procuring
irregularities and unevenness in our ways, and sad events upon our Spirits.
We find our selves therefore bounden in all Spiritual wisdom to tie our selves
up

To keep a strict and close watch over our hearts and ways. 1 Cor. 1^.14.


SECT. 2. The COVENANT in general.
VVHereupon knowing the fickle and inconstant temper of our own variable
Spirits, which through our corrupt nature are very false to us, and unless by
strong hand kept under, and with a steady eye watched and observed, grow
perfidious and basely treacherous, leading us to Apostasy, to our own unrest,
and great dishonor to our God.

We conceive it our duty to make a COVENANT with God and our Souls in this
respect, and therefore do hereby in the sight of our God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the sincerity of our own thoughts.

Enter into a Solemn, Neh. 9.38.
Peremptory and faithful Covenant with our God in Christ, Job 31.1.
Psa. 11^.106.
through his strength promised in the Covenant to live to God for ever
hereafter, and to walk with him in all things.

And because all our strength herein to walk in communion with him is derived
from our Union and Fellowship with Christ our head, we therefore resolve as our
duty

To maintain the strength and sense of our union and communion with Christ, and
the increase daily of it upon us.

And therefore our resolutions are in the sight of our God, so far as we know
our hearts to labor daily to find

The power of Christ, 1 Pet. 5.10.
and the sense of Spiritual life in us more and more, Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
conveyed to us, strengthened in us, and working by us.

And because all our strength herein is derived from that principle of fullness
in Christ, and this subordinately, by a knowing, believing in him, and close
compliance to him.

Our Covenant is extended to these particulars.

SECT. 3. General Engagements as means to walk with GOD.
FOrasmuch therefore as our intention is our daily growing up in the power and
life of Christ our Lord, our care shall be exercised in these particulars:

1. To see and observe more clearly daily in the Scripture, Col. 3.16.
that infinite fullness that is in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the intent of God
in him, to communicate the same to us according to the Covenant.

2. Therefore to actuate our Faith in that Covenant, and the Promises we find
we have obtained interest in, and peculiarly in such special Truths as are
revealed to that purpose, believing we shall be possessors of the same.

3. To observe what quickening we receive from any passage in the Word of
Promise concerning Christ; and herein

To gain establishment of heart in Gods love through Christ to us.

4. In all Divine intercourses 'twixt God and our Spirits, to proceed in every
Ordinance so as 1. We get nearer communion with God, and experience of the
power of Christ in us. 2. To stir up the grace of Christ in us, not resting in
the work only done.


And to this purpose our diligent care shall be used to improve the means of
Salvation in their Spiritual power.

Knowing well that all we did before our calling was but polluted, and no way
acceptable, but rather provoking.

So all done by us when we were in Christ, and not by the strength of his
Spirit in us, is no ways acceptable. For, 1. In him alone is our strength. 2.
Mat. 3. ult.
In him alone are we acceptable.


5. To observe diligently how every promise is made good, and accomplished upon
us, especially if we begd it in prayer; and thence to see 1. Gods
faithfulness, in making good his promise, no small refreshing to our Spirit,
and Establishment to our Faith, when we sensibly set to our Seal that God is
true, not only in the thing promised, Ioh. 3.33
but a Spiritual relish of mercy in the same. 2. To reflect upon our own
Spirits in the possession of the same, and love in Christ in its communication.


6. To observe every glance of Gods love in Christ cast into our Spirits, and
thence 1. To gather up a Catalogue of experiments of Gods love in Christ. 2. To
take a strict observation of the graces of Christ dwelling in us: 1. How they
proceed from Christ. 2. How thence they give assurance of Gods love in Christ.



These things observed diligently by us in the constant course of our ways, our
care shall be extended 1. To be daily more Spiritual in every holy duty to
God: 2. To find our Spirits more universally determined unto Christ.


SECT. 4. Special daily walking with GOD.
. 1.
ANd forasmuch as our daily walking close with GOD is a special means to
maintain a constant peace in our hearts in a sweet and Spiritual fellowship
with our God, shining out upon us in the face of Christ.

Our Covenant with God shall be thus daily 1. Heb. 12.15.
To keep a constant watch against every root of bitterness or lust that may
creep into our hearts, or be nourished, that may sad the Spirit, or damp that
vigorous heat of the life of Christ, that may disturb that peace God has
brought our Spirits unto. 2. Psa. 51.5 Romans 7.24.
To keep a sensible tenderness of our corrupt nature, and to bewail it before
God, to be humbled that we carry about with us such a body of death, yet so, as
that we see 1. Mal. 4.2. Zac. 14.1.
Healing hereof in Christ. 2. That we quicke^ our faith and love to the Lord
Jesus Christ, who has delivered us
3. 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. Rev. 2.5.
To renew our repentance daily for sins and failings, begging for assurance of
pardon in the Lord Christ. 4. Acts 2.38, 39.
To believe the pardon of our sins when ever we beg it, and that in full
assurance, waiting with a vigorous and longing expectation of soul, until God
shine out in peace, sealing a pardon by the Spirit. 5. 1 Cor. 13 16.
To watch against every temptation, knowing we are accompanied with snares, so
to shun all appearance of evil. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 6.
To observe the falsness and treachery of our hearts, 1. Suggesting to us the
firmness of our standing, when we do not know our own hearts 2. Engaging us in
temptation that they may ensnare us.
7. To resolve and bind our selves up, to prevent occasion of sin that may
steal upon us. 8. That we labor daily to redeem our time, Col. 4.5.
and keep an account how we spend every day.


. 2.
AND therefore we covenant our daily care shall be to spend the day in these
particulars, in a 1. Constant course of prayer, reading, meditation in the
power of Christ, with expectation of a blessing, and laboring for communion
with Christ therein. 2. Diligence and constancy in our lawful callings.


1. With heavenly minds, and in obedience to Christ. 2. Waiting by faith upon
God, for a blessing upon our subsistency. 3. Improving every opportunity of
doing good to others, especially in Spiritual things, ministering grace to the
hearers. 4. Holding a constant endeared and loving correspondence with the
Saints, Heb. 10.24, 25.
and communicating with experimental christians in their experiences of Christ
working and dwelling in them. 5. Every morning to work our hearts to an holy
frame and sensible activeness toward God, that we may taste of it all the day
after. 6. Above all every morning to labor our hearts to a sensiblenesse of
Gods love to us in Christ, and an enflamed love to him again. 7. Hab. 2.4. Heb.
10.37.
To live that glorious life of faith in an holy dependence upon him in all
conditions. 8. Every night to review the whole day, with observation of 1. Our
own wants and sins, and to be humbled for them. 2. Gods care and provision for
and of us, and to be enlarged in a loving and tender thankfulness to him.
9. In all things to maintain a sensible communion betwixt God and our Spirits.
This is the Covenant of our constant daily walking with God. Yet in all we
make this

Conclusion.
1. THis Covenant to be enlarged daily, as our experience shall administer
occasion, and the manifold intercourses betwixt God and our own souls present
themselves to us.

2. Every Saturday at night, we conceive it our duty, as very convenient,

1. To examine this Covenant with our hearts, to observe our proceedings:
Herein how 1. Our resolutions are more unreserved. 2. Our Spirits more
thoroughly brought over to Christ. 3. And therein to be 1. Humbled for decays.
2. Thankful for improvement.



2. To renew the Covenant with God with more deep, solemn and peremptory Vows,
observing the great peace we gain daily herein.

Wherein we conceive it our duty, to be very observant of two things which we
shall take as cautions.

Cautions.
1. TO look for more opposition and wayward disturbances in our hearts then we
founds before we set upon this course to hinder us therein.

Yet herein, notwithstanding opposition, we resolve 1. Not to be discouraged.
2. But to seek strength and sufficiency in Christ.


2. To be very tender, lest constancy herein make us customary and formal: So
our care shall be, ever to maintain our hearts active and warm in all things.

This Covenant in the presence and sight of our God, for our steady and
constant walking with him, we make, write, and seal to it.

W. S.

FINIS.
Ian. 5. 1646.
Jmprimatur

JOHN DOWNAMI.


