Reverend and Beloved,
IT has pleased the Right Honorable the Lord Major of the City of London, once
and again to write unto the Ministers thereof respectively, in a very pious and
pathetical manner. Not only to bewail the profanation of the Lords day, the
Christian Sabbath, and to signify what he has done by way of Precept; but
also to promise what ever the power of his place may do for the strengthening
of their hands; and likewise to desire all and every particular Minister in the
City, as they tender the honor of Christ, and the good of peoples souls, and
welfare of the City, yea and earnestly in the name of God to entreat (as in the
said Letters appears more fully,) that they the Ministers of Christ Jesus,
press the duty of Sanctifying that holy day, show the danger of profaning of
it, and persuade not only to public worship, but also to retire in private
families to such holy duties as the Lord requires.

We who are some of those to whom the foresaid Letters were directed, have
therefore accordingly endeavored something heretofore in order to the desired
end, but of late more seriously in our Provincial Assembly (where through Gods
mercy we have opportunity to confer about matters of Religion) we have weighed
those foresaid Letters, and labored mutually to have our hearts affected (as
in the sight of God) with the contents thereof. And as we bless God unfainedly
for stirring up the Magistrate to mind the Sabbath, and quicken us in our duty
about it, (the rather because in these times many are of Gallio's temper
careless of such matters.) So we the Ministers there assembled, with the
assistance of the Elders, have consulted among our selves, wherein, and how we
might be most serviceable to our Lord Jesus Christ the great Shepherd of the
sheep, in decrying Sabbath-breaking, and in furthering the true Sanctification
of that holy rest, both in public and private, throughout all the
Congregations and families within the said City, the Liberties thereof, and the
bounds of the Province.

And because the Delegates there assembling are but few of many Ministers
within the City, we judged it necessary by writing to stir up our selves and
the rest of our Brethren and fellow laborers in the work of the Lord, that as
one man with one shoulder we may apply our selves to procure in the first place
the sanctifying of the Sabbath, as the fountain and foundation of a more
perfect Reformation in all other things appertaining to Religion.

To that end we make it our request unto all our dear Brethren and to your self
in particular, that upon and after as you see occasion, you choose some
pertinent Scripture to open and apply for instruction of your hearers about the
Sabbath, that all duties belonging to it may be enforced, and all Errors in
judgment, and sinful practices whereby it is polluted, may be discovered,
confuted and reproved.

And because there are diverse Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in force for
the better sanctification of that day, we desire also that every Officer may be
stirred up to act conscientiously and vigorously according to the duty of his
place, as is in them prescribed.

And what, though we be poor and despised, yet we may not forget Gods Law. We
fear a great part of our trouble arises from hence, that we are not
sufficiently zealous for that rest. If we can vindicate the Lords day, His holy
Ordinances will soon regain their credit. The Calling of the Ministers will not
die, if conscience of the Sabbath do revive. But if that fall, which of us, or
what Ordinance of God shall be able to stand?

It should be no small encouragement unto us that God has prepared the
Magistrates heart to accompany us in our desires and endeavors this way. And
that we have so solemn an Engagement as his promise in writing to every one of
us particularly, that he will use all the power of his place to press and
carry on this work, until it come unto perfection. We want not many other, yea
stronger and more sacred grounds and reasons, to enforce these duties upon our
consciences, yet His encouragements, zeal and forwardness should provoke us,
as the like in Jehosaphat and Nehemia did among the Priests and Levites. God
threatens Sabbaths of desolation, the Land (says he) shall enjoy her rest,
because it rested not in the days and years which He had set apart; This in
some proportion has been verified in mos^ of those Churches which bear the
name of Reformed. To England we may say, considering the state of other places,
Be not high-minded, but fear. Repent and do thy first works. Yea let thy last
be better then thy first, lest God remove thy Candlestick. We speak not this as
if we needed to put words into our Brethrens mouths, but to stir up their pure
minds and to testify how sincerely we desire to sympathize with all those who
mind the things of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Which we desire
so much the more to love, and look after, as they are hated or neglected by
others We forbear to press arguments from the duty of your calling, because of
your self, we hope you are sufficiently sensible thereof. The good Lord
prosper all your labor in the Lord, to whose blessing we commend you.

Signed in the name and by the appointment of the Provincial Assembly by the
present MODERATOR La. Seaman.


