SIR BARNABAS SCVDAMORE. DEFENSE.

Vindicating him from those grand imputations Treachery and Negligence, in the
late Surprisall of Hereford, Which through the ignorance of some, and malice
of others are unjustly laid upon him.

ALSO, Discovering the true Causes and Manner of its Surprisall the 18. day of
September, Anno Domini 1645.

Printed in the Year 1646.

Sir Barnabas Scudamore's Defense.
WHO commands in chief, in any kind of Action, becomes the single subject of
all great faylings; when in success, Officers and Soldiers, expect the benefit
of it. This being my case in the surprisall of Hereford, the 18. of December
1645. is aggravated upon me (with such a kind of Treachery and wilful
Negligence) that could the charge be made good against me, would render me not
only unfit for employment, but for life. The importance of this Town, at that
time, to the King, my Master, and whatsoever depended on him, was not unknown
unto me; And when I have said this, I have saydenough, to show the degree and
odiousness of such a villainy. Yet Passing by (that which is obvious) the
blemishing of that honorable Profession of a Soldier (whose proper Acts ate
the defense of Justice) and the stayning of the Family whereof I am descended;
I will add this, that to betray those persons, and that Town unto plunder and
slaughter, in whose defense my duty and love did resolve me rather to die, had
been an act unchristian and most barbarous. Yet under the oppression of this
restless charge, I have layne languishing a Prisoner at Worcester, seven
months. My importunity for a trial at a Court of War, has been with; out
ceasing. Twice or thrice it pleased his Majesty to write tha^ I should be
transported to Oxford. But malice has been no less busy to keep me both
from that, and all trialls, then it was to asperse me at first. Oxford being
rendered to the Parliament, and Worcester likely to follow, I labored the
Governor of this latter place, to grant me a public hearing there; which yet
I failed to obtain, with effect, through the absence of the said Governor
from the Court of War; though the time and place, and summoning of all
witnesses were fixed upon several public posts by his appointment. Soon
after, Worcester being in the same condition with Oxford, and my marching away
included with the rest, and my liberty a consequent thereof, I see not now any
other means left to vindicate my self from reproach with the world (since I
know not when I may be so happy as to come to a judicial trial) then,
according to the approved example of persons in like cases, to publish a true
relation of the whole business: and therefore I shall endeavor without
partiality to represent the motions, and naked state, of the whole, as it was
carried, point by point, from the beginning.

Sir John Bridges being discontented for the burning of his House, and for some
reproachful Language given him by one of his Majesty's Generals, upon the
business of the Clubmen: and angry with me, for not having something that he
desired, which yet I could not give him; quits the Kings Quarters, and goes to
Gloucester; where, and in the parts adjacent, residing some two or three
Months, and coming sometimes into Hereford-shire in disguise, the better to
lay his design, at length goes up to London, and presents to the Committees of
both Kingdoms, Propositions for the taking of Hereford, by the way of
Stratagem, as he calls it. Hereupon Order is given to Colonel Birch, then
Governor of Bath, to join his forces with Colonel Morgan, Governor of
Gloucester, for the purpose aforsaid.

Coll. Birch, his forces being joined accordingly, comes privately, with Sir
John Bridges from Gloucester, to a place some few miles from Hereford, where
they met with two persons (that is as I am credibly informed, Cap. Howorth, and
Cap. Alderne) both Captains under the King; by whom Coll. Birch (as in his
printed Letter may appear) was sufficiently informed of the state of the
Town; and returning back to Gloucester, they received continual intelligence
of the condition of Hereford, by the means of the said Captain Howorth and
Captain Alderne, but especially from Captain Ballard my Captain Lieutenant;
upon whose advertisements, being now drawn into their party, they most relied.
In few days after, these aforesaid two Colonells marched with all their forces
to Ledbury, in the County of Hereford; where they arrived at five a clock in
the evening, upon Monday the 15. of December. Notice whereof being sent me,
the next morning very early from one at Ledbury, upon whom I depended
constantly for intelligence, I dispatched the messenger back with directions,
that fresh messengers should be sent, to and fro continually, to advise me of
the posture and motion of the Enemy. I likewise dispatched instantly Expresses,
to intimate the same to Sir Michael Woodhouse, Governor of Ludlow, and Sir
William Vaughan, who lay at Bridgenorth, collecting forces for the relief of
Chester. And I gave immediate order to Captain Chaplain, the Towne-Major, to
double the Guards in the Town. And the Town being weakened by forces sent
forth two days before, for the relief of Chester, having drawn in, the day
before, all the Horse that were quartering in the Country (saving the
Lieutenant Colonells Troop) for the better fortifying of the Garrison, upon
this notice of the advance of the Enemy, I drew in his Troop also; giving him
command to guard that night, and to send out of the Town at Port-shutting a
party of his Horse to guard without, and petroll toward the Enemy, to guard
within, and go the Grand-Round himself; to go forth likewise himself at
Port-opening, the next morning with Horse as far as Lug-bridge: all which the
said Lieutenant colonel Ieffreys did exactly perform. This Troop was no
sooner in, but, though it were drawn in upon this cause, a company of Townsmen
take occasion from hence to raise a mutiny; and so, while we should have been
in attendance to the motions of the Enemy without, the townsmen refusing
quarter to this troop, and townsmen and soldiers going together by the ears,
and the countenance of the mutiny appearing as if it were like to grow to a
very great height, work and difficulty I had enough; yea, I was wholly
employed to suppress the mutiny within. Whether this was done upon design or
no, I cannot say; but I have inducements to think it so. Sure I am, the notice
of it gave encouragement to the Enemy: Of whose march, all Monday night from
Ledbury toward Hereford, as far as Cannon-Froom, I had notice by diverse upon
Tuesday morning; as likewise upon Tuesday night, of their return back to
Ledbury. Upon Wednesday in the afternoon, I was advertised that the enemy was
marched out of Ledbury, and that the discourse of the common Soldier in
Ledbury was, that they were going toward Hereford.

This news the Messenger delivering privately by word of mouth, when Master
Major, and some half a score Gentlemen and Townes-men were in the room with
me, I did instantly communicate it in public to them all. And directed Master
Major to make Proclamation; that the Townsmen might have notice of this
intelligence: And withal, he required presently to shovell off the Snow from
the Walls, that the place might be fit for them to stand on with their Arms
upon the first Alarm; which Proclamation was accordingly made. At two of the
Clock, the said afternoon, Order was given by me, to Livetenant Colonel
Jeffreys, who commanded the Horse in chief, that as he, in his own person had
performed the duty of the Guards the night before, as is before expressed, so
he should give Order, that the Officer, who had the Guard that Wednesday night,
should do the very same. This Order Livetenant Colonel Ieffreys acknowledges
to have received from me; and affirms, that he transmitted it to Major
Fletcher; who by turn had the command of the Guard that Wednesday night; and
Major Fletcher under his hand, has acknowledged that he received the said
Orders from Livetenant Colonel Ieffreys; But the next days success does
manifest, that no Horse were sent out that night, and that Major Fletcher
failed in that important duty.

About three a clock, that afternoon, I gave Major Chaplain Orders to double
the Guards: Which he performed not, as by the list he gave me appears. At nine
a clock, I dismissed the said Chaplain to go to his rest; telling him, that I
would go the grand round my self; and should expect him to be with me at five
a clock in the morning, to receive from me the defects of the Guards and to
look to the Town, while I might catch an hours rest or two; being, at eight
a clock in the morning, to sit at a Court of War, upon the Mutineers of the
day before. The grand round I went about one of the clock, and beginning at the
maine Guard, I found that Captain Traherne, Captain of the Watch, was not
upon the place; and resenting it, I directed his Ensign to send for him, in my
name, to attend his duty: which was done accordingly, but Traherne came not.
Going on the round, at every Port, I charged them, upon pain of death, that
neither Officer, nor Soldier, should stir off from their Guard; ever adding,
that the enemy was advancing, and the Town in danger. Coming to Bysters
Gate, at which Port they that come from Ledbury enter, and where indeed the
enemy did enter, I found the Corporal so drunk that he could not give me the
word, whom I corrected for the present with my Cane, and commanded my Captain,
Livetenant, the above mentioned Ballard, who commanded the round with me, (mine
own Company being upon the Guard) to place an Officer in Commission at that
Port, as soon as the grand round should be ended, and to lay the Corporal by
the heels. Looking up I called to the Sentinel that stood on the top of that
Gate, to swingle his match; and answer being made, that he had a snap-hanz, for
the more surety, I sent another Soldier up and called him down, and finding
it to be so, and fixed, and laden, I returned him up to his sentry place and
added one more to him; leaving a strict charge, that the Sentries should be
often visited, and relieved every half hour. So that whereas it is noysed,
that I called down this Sentry, and returned none up, to meet with this rumor,
you may perceive, that instead of one I placed there two. And here, seeing it
is in my way, let me answer another as frivolous objection. It is bruited
abroad, that I gave money to corrupt the Guard. It Is true, that as I passed by
the Ports, I gave in that cold snowie night, some twelvepence, or eighteen
pence a piece, as my custom was, to each Guard; yet with order to the Officer,
who received that money from me, that they should not drink it till nine a
clock; and five shillings I gave to the Officer of the Horse, with like order.
But at this Port ( Bysters Gate) finding things as you see not in order I gave
not one penny. The grand round being ended, about five of the clock I commanded
my Captain Livetenant Ballard to continue rounds without ceasing, until eigh,
tand to give me an account. Which Order he altogether neglected, though I did
not only give it him at the dismissing of the Guards; but afterward, at mine
own house, repeating it twice at least: Yea, it was the last word I said unto
him. But it is no wonder, if we consider what does follow: For in place of it,
it is very well known, by testimony of some who entered the Town with the
enemy, that he the said Ballard drew off the Guards from Bysters Gate; where,
when the Town was entered, were but four Soldiers. And further, that he had
beforehand poisoned, or by some other means, disabled the Murdering Piece,
which lay in the mouth of Bysters Gate. Both which good Officers were fair
preparatives for the force which was without to enter with greater ease and
safety. But where is Major Chaplain, the Town Major, whom the Common
Council some weeks before recommended to me for that place with much
importunity. It is not unknown, I then told them, that he would deceive them,
and would not rise in a morning. And now they find my words made good: For
according to Order I expected him to take the charge of the Town as befitted
his Office; yea, I enquired often for him not without passion; but then no
news could be heard of him: Yet now in his confession, under his hand, he is
not ashamed to avow, that he was in his bed when the Town was taken, which was
about eight a clock in the morninge. And though his nature may incline some to
think that this was sloth; and others, through his report, that the wounds
which he had in his body, and the attendance of the Chyrurgion to dress it,
may be the matter; yet I doubt there was a worse thing in it. For clearly, the
wound that troubled him, for it is but one, is but in the nature of an Issue,
and requires but the attendance of an Issue. Besides, this wound has been in
him some years; and notwithstanding it, during the siege of Hereford, which
was not above four months before, he was able to watch all night, and do his
duty all day, taking his rest but as other Officers did. But suppose him to be
generally unable to rise betimes; yet when that Town which recommended him to,
the place was in danger, and the Governor, by express Order had commanded him
to be with him by five in the morning; and at a time, when all the Town knew,
by Proclamation, that the enemy was approaching: For him then not to obtain of
himself to rise two or three hours before his accustomed time, but to sleep,
secure, does shrewdly infer his mind to be in a worse condition then his body.
But sleep he did not all this while; he was awake early enough, yea too soon
in that respect. For his Lieut: Cooper spoke with him that morning, and
received from his hands the keys of the sally Ports of the Castle: with which
keys, for my part, I know not what Major Chaplain did. But Lieu: Lightfoot,
to whose custody these keys did properly belong, informs, that this
Chaplain, that night in my name (and I say again without my knowledge)
demanded the Keys of him, as sent for by me, and got them from him by much
importunity. Possible enough it is, that through these Sally-ports the enemy
received intelligence that night and morning: for it is most certain, they
expected intelligence out of the Town, even to the very minute of their
entrance, in case any difficulty should have risen unexpectedly, to secure
themselves. But Cooper finding me gone to rest, thought likely the time to be
now most fit, and finding the Salli-port keys to be of no further use for his
design in hand, to conceal himself, rids his hands of those keys to
Lieutenant Lightfoot, as returned by his Major; and then comes instantly to my
house, and demands and presses with great importunity to have the keys of the
great Gates delivered him, pretending that carts and people stayed in the
street to go forth; which though it might have a colorable show was far from
truth. But his earnestness at length prevailed with him that waited in my
chamber to steal up that he might not awake me, and to take the keys which
were in the window (and so still in my sight being awake) and to bring them
down to him.

The keys received, away he hastens, and omitting the ordinary duties, which
were to go to the main Guard, and take a guard with him, sends the other keys
to their several Ports, and passing to Bysters gate, opens not the wicket,
sends out no Scouts, but opens the great Gate, lets down the great Chain,
lets fall the Drawbridge, and going over himself, while he saw upon the side
of the Mote the Liev. and six soldiers, who acted the part of the Constable
and Laborers (whose reported pretense of being sent for by warrant) Cooper
could not but know to be untrue, for he was the overseer of the Works, and
writ all such Warrants, and saw the snow upon the ground which made it unfit
for work, and knew that the Ice was every day broken by the Garrison, cries out
(and to them certainly) Now or Never, Now or Never. And happily thinking it
would be too hot for him to return the same way he went forth, runs amain
along the ditch side, and comes back into the Town at the Castle; which very
return into the Town, when he could not but see as he ran along the Enemy
entering, shows that he had a greater confidence in them, then one true to the
Garrison could have.

With this the Enemy enters, the above mentioned persons, Captain Howorth
being in the forelorne-hope of foot that seconded the said personated Constable
and Laborers: Sir John Bridges in the forelorne-hope of Horse, and Captain
Aldern in the second division. Being entered the Gate, where they found but
four Soldiers, the forelorne-hope of Horse, takes the right hand, and seizes
upon the Maine-guards, where were but six Soldiers and one Ensign; And
Captain Alderne, my professed Enemy, takes the left hand to my house and the
Castle. My man brings word to my bedside the Enemy was entered. I leapt up,
commanded him to get me a horse, and slipping on my clothes, I ran instantly
down with my Sword and Pistol in my hand, to the fore gate toward the
street, where the Enemies Horse already come fired upon me, and shot my
Secretary into the belly. At which I retreating, another of the house, shuts
the door, and out I got at a back way toward the River, in hopes still of my
horse. Upon the left hand, at the Castle, I was showed the Enemy gallopping
toward me; upon the right hand, going to the Bishops Palace, I found a body
of their foot coming into the Palace yard: and seeing my self thus beset, my
boy showing me that a couple were gotten to the other side of the River over
the Ice, by which I perceived it would bear; I passed over, and got to the
gate at Wybridge, where intending to get into the Town at the wicket, I saw
most of the guard gone, and a body of their horse coming upon the Bridge; and
then, understanding the Enemy to be fully possessed of the Town, and no
possibility of resistance left, I resolved to cast my self at the King my
Masters feet, and rather to be sacrificed for his service, if his wisdom, upon
trial of me, should so order it, then to live with appearance of such evil,
either by putting my self into the protection of the Enemy, or by any other
way of flying from the Kings justice, desert mine own innocence. From hence
then I went to Ludlow, and from Ludlow in like manner to Worcester, professing
there my purpose to ride to Oxford. But sickness staying me there a week
untoucht, in comes my deputy Governor, and very unthankfully, being stirred up
with a causeless revenge, charge me with the loss of Hereford by treachery;
which, if it were true, the Orders given and diligence used by me, manifested
in the foregoing Relation, would be a strange piece of policy; for it is as
clear as the Sun that if the inferior officers upon whom this Relation in
the face of the world, charge the loss of the place, had performed those
Orders, it had been impossible that the Town should have been taken in this
manner though I had concurred. For there would have been an Alarm, and then,
the Garrison with the Town and Gentry, would have made their defense
sufficiently, maugre the Governor. But I am charged, and must answer; you
shall hear the proofs. It is said that I received money for the delivering
the Town and Lieut: Wykes, who is a person that has relation to my known
Enemies, gives in evidence, that Mr. Charles Bridges did affirm to him, that
about five or six days before the loss of Hereford he brought sixteen or
seventeen hundred pounds to me for the delivery of the Town.

To clear which, Mr. Charles Bridges has disclaimed it to several persons of
honor and quality. But then Wykes alleges further that Mr. Thomas
Pembridge, Collonell Morgans Secretary, said to him, that he knew nothing of
the said seventeen hundred pounds; but that he had brought twelve hundred
pounds from Gloucester to the old Gore, being a little Village between
Hereford and Gloucester, he being one of the Convoy, which money he saw told in
Gloucester, and (to Wykes his best remembrance) said it was for Sir Barnabas
Scudamore for the delivery of Hereford; and that he the said Pembridge
thought, that the Parliament would be glad, if Sir Barnabas Scudamore were put
to death that they might pay him no more money. Now, if for one man to allege,
that he heard another man, and another, say this and that thing, shall pass
for good evidence in a judicial trial, or with just men; what innocence, what
person can be safe? Besides, for mine own part, I that tender the good of my
soul, and would not (however other things may go with me) lose my reputation
with good men, by adding wilful falsehood to these scandalls, do here solemnly
protest before God and the world, that I never received from the Parliament, or
any other person whatsoever, or treated with the Parliament, or any person
whatsoever, directly or indirectly, for the delivery up of Hereford.

And Collonell Birches printed letter, upon the taking of Hereford to his
superiors in London, shows, that there were great disbursements made to
several persons, besides deep engagements, upon their going on to Hereford:
so that there were instruments enough to be satisfied more then this twelve
hundred pounds would perform; and therefore, men need not muse what employment
there should be for this sum though the Governor touched it not. Secondly,
it is alleged I had intelligence with the enemy: And for proof of this there is
produced a paper, wherein there were figures and words at length, which they
say were written by me.

Resol. It Is true, I confess the scribbling of such a Paper; but not with those
thoughts as they would have it. To satisfy your desires, the manner, thus:

About a Month before the Town was lost, having been all day sitting with the
Commissioners of Array, and returning weary and melancholy to my House, some
little space before supper time I found my Secretary writing in the Parlour,
with diverse others of my Servants; and taking one of his permes, I tore a piece
of the backside of a letter, which was foul too, and broken with the seal;
and sitting down I began to suffer my pen to drop forth any thing that a
melancholy fancy, intending nothing, might happen upon. So first I wrote three
or four Arithmeticall figures, then three or four words, then leaving a
blanck space I wrote again words, and then figures, and so words
interchangeably for some six lines, subscribed with my name, and dated at
Hereford, both written backward; and then again my name written at large
forward. By which time, hearing some company coming in to suppe with me, and
knowing one of them to have an intention to procure a pass from Gloucester, I
suddenly foulded up this written characterized piece of paper, and endorsed
it, (for Major Dobson at Gloucester) to give occasion to the company and the
aforesaid Gentleman to exercise their wits and to make themselves merry in
desciphering and giving significations to things that were altogether
non-significant, and so left it carelessely upon the Table for one of them to
take up. Accordingly taken up it was by one of them, (Sir Baynham Throgmorton
my Cousin Germane in the first degree) but it seems with a false heart; who,
insteade of communicating it for sport, concealed it in his pocket; (though he
could be contented to sup with me that night,) and instead of revealing it
Loyally to the King, with that diligence as the nature of such an affair did
require, (it being in his apprehention, as is now pretended, intelligence with
the enemy,) conceales it about a Month, till Hereford was lost: And then,
comes his unthankful brother, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton my Deputy Governor,
in a causeless revenge (being formerly upon some difference with a person of
quality, as well as he, confined by me) and bringes it with him to Worcester;
and by virtue of that nonsense-paper, principally, lays this charge of
Treachery upon me. But, seeing no intelligence can be held between two without
communication, and that no conceits of the mind can be communicated by
non-significant means, I hope this serowle will never be admitted as an
evidence against the, until that which is writ within, be first proved to
signify and intend such intelligence as is presumed. Now that by scribbling or
writing upon this paper there was my intention in me to send or communicate any
thing to Major Dobson, I disavow, and do here again affirm in the presence
of God, under the same Protestation, which I formerly made concerning Money,
that it was not so much as conceived in my thoughts. Which yet if any man
should distrust, I could produce a paper from Major Dobson, though I never
sought it, in which under his own hand, he does upon the faith of a Gentleman,
and the honor of a Soldier aver, that there has never any letter, or
character, passed from me to him, concerning the betraying of the Town of
Hereford. And these are the Columns upon which they have placed their charge of
Treachery; namely, these two heare-saies, and this scrap of non-significant
paper.

But here is not all: For besides this Treachery, I am further charged with
wilful negligence; and so examined upon these particulars following.

Ob. 1. First it is alleged, that I commanded to have the Key of the Sally-port
of St. Owens Gate, to send out a Party of Horse, but did not.

Resol. It Is true, I intended to send forth a party of Horse, in case an Alarm
should be given; but no Alarm coming, no order was given to send out that way.

Ob. 2. Secondly, they say, that a Knight in the Town sent two of his men in
arms to have gone with the party of Horse, but the Governor sent them back
with thanks, and said he had sent out a party already which was not so.

Res. I grant there was no party sent out; but that was Major Fletchers fault,
not mine: for I gave Orders that afternoon, to him that commanded the Horse in
chief, to send out a good party of Horse, with a careful Officer, at Port
shutting; which Order Major Fletcher, in his examination upon oath, confesses
to be charged upon him by the person commanding the Horse in chief: but, it is
evident, these Orders were not observed by him. Now, I supposing Horse to be
sent forth according to my Order and no Alarm given, to what purpose should I
have sent out that Gentleman's two Horses? But the truth is I remember nothing
of any such offer made me.

Ob. 3. Thirdly, it is said, that Captain Fletcher, and one Master Terringham,
after they had gone the grand round with me that night, desired that they might
go forth, or send out a party of their Horse.

Resol. But, this is as true as the rest, and Major Fletcher in his examination
only affirms, that having gone the grand round, he asked me whether I would
command him any further service, expecting (he does not say desiring) that I
would have some of those Horse sent out. To which question, (apprehending it
only as a civil taking of leave, not knowing that the Order of sending forth
Horse at Port shutting was charged on him; nor having the least suspicion that
the said Order was neglected, and so no Horse abroad) I answered, no more then
the observance of their former Order; which was an Order requiring all Horse in
the Town (excepting those that were upon the out-guard that night) to be ready
by eight a clock the same morning, and so dismissed them.

Ob. 4. Fourthly, because Livetenant Cooper, the Major of the Towns
Livetenant, did fetch the keys of the Ports from my House, and did so
perfidiously open the Gate, at which the enemy entered, it is alleged (by the
said Major Chaplain, to excuse his own palpable naughtiness) that I did know
and allow of his Livetenant Cooper to open the Ports.

Resol. But this has as much truth as the former: For to what end did the
Town commend, and I entertain him to be Major, if his Livetenant could supply
the place, and the trust should be reposed in him? And these be the maine
arguments, by which they would make me guilty of wilful negligence. I confess
I am more then half ashamed to lengthen the Readers trouble in setting down
such trivial things, especially since none of these objections have been
proved upon oath. Yet, having been interrogated upon them, I thought it not
amiss for satisfaction, to produce them to the view of the world to meet with
rumors, lest they should gain credit to my prejudice.

So, now you have seen both the charge and the proofs. The charge great enough,
Treachery and Negligence: And the proofs weak enough, neither of them valid,
even to the ordinary Reader. For as to the Charge of wilful negligence, none
of the allegations above recited has been made upon oath: but being sent to
the Advocate Marshall, he thought it not amiss to hear what I could answer to
them.

And as to the charge of treachery they have only offered as I said before, two
heare-saies and a scrap of non-significant paper. Yet I have lain long enough
a prisoner at Worcestor for depositions to have been sent in, if matter could
have been as readily found as my adversaries have been laborious and curious to
hunt after it.

But how unlikely is it, that my desires should any ways concur in this
fact, seeing the loss of that place has not only put my life, but my good
name, more precious then life, to most eminent hazard? By this means, I am
deprived not only of the honor of being Governor, and the benefit accruing
by that command; but of all means of satisfaction for provisions of my own,
which were in the town, before the time of my being Governor, and delivered
by my Commissary to the Garrison, amounting to the value of 700 and odd
pounds; of all hopes of relief for my other engagements and disbursements to
the Commissarie for the Garrison, amounting to as much more by the Commissaries
Accounts; of all stores of provisions, and arreares of my allowance for my own
house: Not to speak of my intertainment money, horses, plate, and
housholdstuffe, surmounting in all the sum of 3000l. Besides, the estates of
my friends, and of my best friends in that County, in which was included the
only means remaining for my subsistence, was hereby exposed to
Sequestration: the many noble and worthy persons of both sexes, whom I loved
and honored, who had fled thither for their last refuge.

The Town, in which I had some part of my Education, and whereof I was now a
sworn member: my fellow Citizens and companions in Loyalty, that so bravely
assisted me in the late siege against a formidable Army of Scots; all these
were made liable (I should detest to live, if by me) to the mercy of a party
which esteemed us, as of all others most malignant, so most worthy of extreme
severity. And all this, for what? for twelve, or seventeen hundred pounds? why,
you see by that above mentioned, that I should have been so a loser in point of
money. And if it be replied that I should have received more afterward; I pray
you reflect, that the way to Oxford, was not the way to that. The blood of
ancient Gently, and of an untainted family, makes me abhor the first
apprehensions of so detestable and damnable a fact. For no act can be more
perfectly base and cowardly, then, for fear of any temporal want, to desert
in this sort, Justice, Honor, and Humanity. Let my carriage be considered
before, and after this action. Take a view of the whole course of my life, and
particularly in this war. Look upon the orders I gave even to the last,
while this evil fortune was in motion Regard my behavior since, putting my
self, stripped of all assistance, into the power of the Kings party, enraged
like Lions with that loss; and does not my behavior in these distinct parts
of time, administer just arguments of innocence and constancy?

But not to tire the Reader, this was done by external force, and therefore it
needs not be considered what reason or what affection might carry me, for it
was done by others, and in no wise by me. Briefly, you see my diligence was
such in point of intelligence, that we had continual notice of the motions of
the Enemy, till the Horse were to got forth at Port-shutting that Wednesday
night; and the failing of their going forth was not through default of order
from me. Then, upon the intelligence, orders were presently given out, and
continually renewed by me, to the Major of the Town, Captain Chaplain, to
double the guards within. And drawing the Horse in, I commanded them double
duty, that is, to guard as well without as within the Town. Upon the said
Wednesday in the afternoon as soon as the notice of the Enemies advance came
to me, I imparted it immediately to Mr. Major, and published it by Proclamation
to the whole Town. At nine a clock that night, I dismissed the Town Major
Chaplain to his rest, that he might be with me at five next morning to take
care of the Town. I went the Grand Round, not remissly; but correcting faults
as I passed: I sent for Captain Traherne Captain of the watch to come to the
place of his duty, the Maine Guard: At every Port, I charged them upon pain of
death, that neither Officer nor Soulder should flirre off their guard, ever
inculcating, that the Enemy was advancing, and the Town in danger. I Cudgelled
the drunken Corporal at Bysters Gate, commanding him to be set by the heels,
and that an officer in Commission should be placed at that Port. I viewed the
Centries Arms that stood over that Gate, and added another Centrie to him,
directing the Centries should be visited and relieved every half hour. At the
dismissing the Guards, I charged Ballard to continue Rounds, without ceasing,
until eight a clock in the morning, and then to bring me an account.

Permit me this further, that I was so far from giving order (as is reported)
that the Gates should be opened at 8. a clock, that I intended they should be
kept shut at least till ten. For having received private notice that some
opposition was like to be made by Townsmen, in defense of the Mutiniers to be
tried; I was willing, that business should be ended, before the Gates were
unlocked. And my resolution being, immediately after the rising of the Court of
War, to march out my self in person with the whole body of Horse, to
discover, and observe the motions of the Enemy, I truly meant the ports should
not be opened till I went forth my self. And of this resolution of mine, Liev.
Collonell Ieffreyes is a perfect witness; to whom I did communicate it, upon
Letters I had received the day before, from Sir Michael Woodhouse Governor of
Ludlow, who suspected the Enemy had a design to plant a Garrison at Tenbury,
to stop the intercourse between Ludlow and Worcester.

But you see how my intention was made frustrate: my servant that waited upon
me in my chamber, stealing away the keys (as he might no less easily have
taken away my life) from the place (where and in places like to which all
Governors use to confide their keys) they usually rested, and safely enough
even during the late siege; though I will not charge my said servant with any
knowledge of Lieutenant Coopers treacherous purpose. And this is the negligence
that I am guilty of. Now if any of these orders had been fully executed, could
this Town have been lost? It cannot be imagined. On the other side, you see
how the plot was laid and Carried. Sir John Bridges and Colonel Birch, riding
into Hereford shire, receive information of the present state of Hereford, by
Captain Howorth and Captain Alderne: these two, with the addition of Captain
Ballard my Lieutenant, conveyed continual intelligence to Gloucester. Major
Fletcher omits to send forth out guards: Major Chaplain fails to double the
guards within; and, in a word, keeping his bed, neglects the whole duty
naturally inherent in the place of Major. Captain Treherne, Captain of the
watch, comes not at all to the maine Guard. Captain Lieutenant Ballard,
commanding the guards, draws off the guards from Bysters Gate, in order to his
disabling beforehand the murdering Piece. Lieutenant Cooper opens the great
gate, lets down the chain, lets down the draw bridge, and gives the word,
Now, or Never; with which the Enemy enters, with three or four and twenty
hundred; accompanied with Captain Howorth, Sir John Bridges, and Captain
Alderne: And yet the whole business still lay upon me: although, by this time,
it is very well known what it cost the Parliament, and who received their
moneys.

This is the truth: and I doubt not, but it will find credit with good men,
and abundantly satisfy the generous and judicious spirits in order to my
innocence, and deliver me from the false and foul charge of Treachery or
Negligence. My conscience bearing witness with me, that I am guilty only of
the unhappiness of it; which has been, and is common to all men, of honor, of
my profession, (...)


