ENGLANDS Timely Warning-piece.
Or, The wonderful Prophecies of Bishop Usher, Mr. William Lilly, Dr.
Partridge, and Dr. Gadbury, Predicting great and strange Alterations to befall
this Climate of England very shortly; with the Judgment of Mr. Lilly concerning
that great and threefold Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter this year 1682, and
concerning the late Comet, the wonderful Flaming sword, the great Floods, the
two Eclipses of the Moon on the 11th of February past the other on the 8th of
August, of the barbarous cruelties in France, of the Blazing star seen lately
in Germany, and of several strange wonders as Mr. Lilly writ of several years
ago.
These things being found in his study since his Decease.
Written by James Seal, Licensed according to Order.
great Wonders and Strange Prodigyes: Are the Foreruners of great Calamatyes:
Thearefore Repent and to god Pray: That he May Turn his Wrath Away


CHristian Reader, whosoever thou art that reads these strange Wonders, let
me entreat thee to take Notice by them, and to remember they are the Beacons of
the Almighty, which are set on fire to forewarn us of approaching danger; these
remarkable Signs Thousands can testify the truth of them, and I hope there is
none that hears or reads them but will take Notice by it.

A New Table of several strange Signs and Wonders.
THe first was of an unusual Prodigy of three Suns that was seen in most part
of England, being seen in the Firmament to get the upper-hand of each other,
and in a small time they vanished; this is called by Philosophers a Parilly,
which after the last three Suns as was seen, was a little before Queen. Mary
began her bloody Reign, and in the late Wars in 44, not since until on the 23d
of January 1681.

The second wonderful Sign as was seen, was on the 4th of December 1681, of a
siery flaming Sword that was seen in several parts in the West of England, and
in South Wales, in Carmarthen, and in the County of Cornwall, and in other
parts beyond the Seas, as many Seamen can testify; This flaming Sword pointing
to the Earth, and sometimes it showed as if it moved and shaked toward the
Earth, until the Clouds interposed between that and us as hindered them from
the sight of it; it continued for half an hour visible, and ^hen vanished quite
away: it is observed that the like ^rodigy was seen before Jerusalem was
destroyed, where there hapened such a Famine in the Land, but ^specially in the
City of Jerusalem, that the women was forced to eat their own Children, as you
may read at large in the History of Josephus

The third strange Prodigy, is of two Armies that was seen to engage against
each other in the Firmament over the City of Exeter in Devonshire on the 27th
of December 1680, the one Army coming from the North of Heaven and the other
from the South, they continued for some two hours visible fighting, the North
Army was worsted, and there were heard the noise of wounded men as they
supposed in the Air after the Battle was ended. This is observed the like
Prodigy was seen before the breaking out of the late Rebellion, and not since,
till now, which from the like Good Lord deliver us.

Fourthly, Since the last Armies was seen in the Air, we have an Account from
France of the barbarous cruelties as is acted by those cruel and unmercifull
Papists on the poor Protestants in France, where they have invented new ways of
torments: As by putting their feet into scalding Water, and by wedging their
Fingers into Auger-holes, and by burning their Tongues with Red-hot Irons, and
also of their barbarous cruelties to several women, but especially to a
Protestant Lady living in Paris the chief City in France, whom those Jesuits
and Friars solicited to renounce her Faith, and to relaps from her Religion, to
which she replied unto them, As she had lived in the Protestant Faith, so was
she resolved to die in the same: No sooner had she spoke those words, but those
cruel Papists (being only Pretenders to Religion) fell a beating, striking,
kicking, and treading on her body, insomuch that the Child fell from her body
alive, which they flung about the street till they had murdered the same, so
those poor Protestants are served in France for professing the true Protestant
Religion, which from suchlike cruelties good Lord deliver us, and all that
trust in him.

6ly. In January last 1681, we have an Account from Flanders, Holland, and
Zealand of a very great and unusual Inundations of the Sea, which by the
slightness of the Banks as they had there, which was nothing but Wood knocked
in with Stakes very slightly, the water broke them down, and ran into the
Country a vast great way, drowned many thousands of Cattle, and their Hay and
Corn was drove away, and many thousands lost their lives before they could fly
for succor, it coming so swift upon them as there was nothing to be seen but
the tops of Churches; Flanders being low and Zealand together, and was first
gotten out of the Sea, they thought they should never get their Country again:
It being nothing but what is testified by several Seamen, and others.

7ly. A great Earthquake lately happened at Stow Market in Suffolk which was
accompanied with such claps of Thunder and Lightning and a storm of hail, that
some of them were 5 or 6 inches in circumference, and some as big as Turkey
eggs, which has destroyed much Corn and other things that 40000 l. will not
repair it.

8ly, Concerning the late Comet which appeared to us in December, 1681, it
appeared to us in England, in Capricorn near unto the body of the Sun, being of
a very great swiftness moving four Degrees in 24 hours and lessned its Motion
toward the end to one Degree and fifty five Minutes in twenty four hours, its
stream at first appears pointed a little to the North, afterward Eastward; so
having no more to say of it, but to refer you to large Writers, as Mr. Lilly's
Anglicus for this Year 1682, where is a large Note of its Motion from the
beginning to the end, only I will tell you as it was a Saturnine Comet, so I
dare say it will have Saturnine and dismal Effects; from which good Lord
deliver us.

9ly. Something concerning the Conjunction of the two Superiors Saturn and
Jupiter, which (according to the Tables of Mr. Thomas Street) will be
celebrated on the 23d of October 1682 in a fiery Trygon in and about twenty
Degrees of Leo the ascendant of Rome, and it has always been attended with
memorial Changes both in Church and State; This being the 8th time of their
meeting in the fiery Trygon since the Creation of the World, and was attended
always with great Prodigies in the Heaven, and Alteration on Earth, and it
will have great signification to those places that have Leo for their
horoscope. I would speak more of it, but I have not room here to insert it,
only I Will tell you it fignyfieth no ill to England, in regard it falls in Trine
to Aries, Englands Ascendant, but violent and raging Discases must be expected,
from which Good Lord deliver us.

10. Those two great Eclipses of the Moon, the first being on the 11th of
February and was total and almost centeral, and the second will hapen on the
8th of August, at five hours 55 minutes, mane, but invisible to us: This
threatens the Earth (with her Inhabitants) either with the Plague, or some very
great Mortality, with dearness of Corn; It denotes the ruin of ancient
buildings, and division and hatred amongst the Professors of Religion, high
winds and Tempest at Sea, and very dangerous Sailing: It denotes the
destruction of Fishes, and overflowing of Rivers, and has a very bad
signification, according to the famous Mr. Lilly in his Merlini Anglici. This
Month the two Superiors are enjoined,
And in the fiery Trygon are combined:
They Are meeting still, great Changes does foreshow,
To hapen in the Regions here below.


Mr. Lilly in his Ephemeris in 1655, has these Prophetical Expressions, which
are now very near their Period, and does in a prophetical manner predict his
own Death.

In the Year of eighty three, great changes there will be,
That thou poor Merlin never shall live to see.
Also Mr. Gadbury and Mr. Partridge have written very dubiously and strange, as
may be seen in their Annual Books this year 1682.

Mr. Partridge writes concerning the French Kings death and has given his
Judgment at large, as may be seen in his Mercurius Coelestis, 1682.

Also Mr. Gadbury in the latter end of his Dyary or Almanac for this year
1682, has these Mistick Verses

Geneva Jiggs shall disagree,
And days turned into weeks shall be,
So into months and years at last,
Just Judges shall their madness cast.
Comets are d^eadful Objects to men's eyes,
God's angry warning, heavenly Rarities
That still proclaim Gods wrath, and Kingdoms woe,
Plagues, or great Sickness, bloody Wars also;
According to Mr. Lilly in his Anual books.

Also the Right Reverend Bishop Usher did prophecy of several strange Events,
which some have came to pass and some have not, he prophesied of the Massacre
in Ireland, and several years before it came to pass, and also of the death of
King Charles the First, and of another Massacree here in England now by the
Papists.

God has not made Celestial works in vain,
But in them power and virtue great remain,
They cause effects on Earth, by them we know
That God is working Changes here below.
London, Printed by H. B. for James Seal, and sold by J. Conyers in Ducklane
1682.


