THE Scottish politic Presbyter, Slain by an English Independent.

OR, The Independents Victory over the Presbyterian Party.

The rigor of the Scotch Government, their conniving and bribing: the
lewdness and debaucherie of Elders in secret.

A Tragi-Comedie.

Diruo and aedifico, muto quadrata rotundis. Printed in the Year 1647.

The Persons.
DIrectory the Scotch Presbyter. Sargus, Luxurio, two lewd Elders. Anarchie, an
Independent. Priscilla, his Wife. Liturgy, an Episcoparian. Moneylesse, a
Courtier. A Pursevant. Officers. Mutes.


Prologue.
Presbytery and Independencie
Have long time strove for the precedencie:
Here one kills the other, when ye see him die,
Wish his destroyer fell by Liturgy.
The Scotch politic Presbyter.
A Tragi-Comedie.
Act 1.
Scene 1.
Enter Directory, Sargus, Luxurio, two Elders. Direct. IT must be so,


Sar. If that he will not comply: have you heard nothing from him.


Lux. No, he seems to slight our Summons.


Direct. Let him smart for it Luxurio, denounce him to the horn, after
excommunication ipso facto, what madness does possess him, that he will not buy
his peace?


Sar. I sent one of my Agents to him, who gave him timely notice, there was no
way but punishment except a Fee.


Dir. Have you already framed the Warrant?


S^r. Yes.


Dir. Read it.


Sargus reads. Bishops Liturgy,
WE the Elders of the Congregation Demoniack, upon information and notice of
some scandalls that you have g^ven whereof we are to take notice, do hereby as
Officers of the Church, requ^re and command you to appear before us, on
Tuesday the seventh day of February, Anno 1644. to answer such things as shall
be objected against you.

Directory, Sargus, Luxurio.



Dir. Send it away with speed: fond man, does he not know that we have scourged
Lords, and trod on Kings? that temporal force will aid our spiritual plots;
Knox and Melvill have left power to us, ample as that Romes Bishop claims; I Will
make my self as great as him if I get foot in England: I hug my Genius that
does prompt me on.

No dull and heavy fancy clogs my soul,
It Is purest fire extracted from the Pole.
If that I can persuade the Englishmen to let me noose them, as their Brethren,
I Will spread my pennons further yet:

And like a Comet in the evening sky,
Strike with amazement every wondering eye.
Let Us be gone.

Exeunt.
SCENE 2.
Enter Liturgy, Dipwell. Litur. And why new Jordan?


Dip. If we give credit to the Card, 'twill tell us, like to that river through
which once Levites did bear the holy Ark. New River ^lowes.


Litur. But can those tender Virgins that resort there for to be rebap^i^ed,
endure the bitter blasts of Boreas and Hyems frostie breath, and not be much
impaired in their health?


Dip. The water without doubt is sanctified, and as the holy Martyrs girt with
flames, sang cheerfully, as if they nothing felt; so compassed about with ice
and cold, those that we there do dip, receive no harm.


Litur. Strange delusions.


Enter a Pursevant, with Officers. Pur. By the command of the ruling Presbytery
Demoniack, Sir I arrest your person.


Litur. Where Is your Warrant?


Pur. Here.


Litur. Ha, my inveterate foes have all conspired to work my ruin. Look here
friend; because I did refuse to come when summoned, nor sent a Fee for my
discharge, so to Shows Dipwell the Warrant. maintain their lust and luxury, who
by their daily prodigality consume their aurum Tholosanum, in riotousnesse,
adultery, and fornication. O England! Will thou be slave to these vermin? the
vulgar do not know what will ensue, should they accept of a Presbytery; those
that do sit at helm will not discover it, for that it tends to uphold their
pride and wantonness; good men are vassalls to the vile:

The Crown stoopes to the mace,
The noble to the base.
While that the Fathers of the Church do walk like men dejected and forlorn,

Mourning like doleful Pelicans, and howl
In desert places, like Minervas Owl.
Who would have thought so flourishing a State

As England was but seven years ago,
Should now become the pattern of all woe:
Calamity and comfort comes and goes
From State to State, as Neptune ebbs and flows:
With humane things a thing divine does play,
Nothing arrived at height, but does decay:
Earths joys are false, they bid us soon adieu,
Her during sorrows are most certain true.
Come I Will along Sir with you: M. Dipwell, will you be witness of my usage with
me?


Dip. Sir, do not go, it is madness for a man to put himself into their hands
that hate him.


Litur. Should I not go, they will give me over to the temporal sword, and in the
Marketplace proclaim me rebel, confiscate my estate, and send me into
banishment.


Dip. Will English men put on this Scottish yoke? I have a hope the
Independents may send hence this government to be abhorred, from England to
Genevah, where 'twas born.


Litur. Pray heaven it prove so. Now to my adversaries: my soul contemnes
their most usurped power, though now it overflowes in tears, whose current
overflowes its banks.

Where griefs Virago, upon either hand,
Worser t^en Scilla, or Charybdis stand.
Exeunt.
Act 2. Scene 1.
Enter Anarchy, Priscilla his wife. Pris. I Will none of this same lousy
learning to make my son a Whoremaster, e're he has seen the age of eighteen
years, for when they once come but to conster, Ovid de Art Amandi, their
bowels earne to occupy the nine.


Anar. Away thou fool, does not even nature tell us, that learning does
support the world, and taught the rustic Clown the way to till the ground, to
bind the corn in sheaves, and weild the flaile?


Pris. I say I will not make my son a beggar, expose him to contempt and
scorn, send him to Oxford, send him to Cairfax rather and see him caper in a
string; no, no, we in this age of ours (the heavens be praised) have little use
of learning, if he can read his Psalter, and cast up his accounts for bread and
salt, he is a sufficient Scholar: besides heaven bless the Parliament for
their most pious Acts in general, and in particular, that they have reduced
those t^pp^g Black-coats to a new modeled garb, that where before they drank
too much and eat too little, they now shall neither eat nor drink: what shall
we do with such Lobcocks, that must sit all the week in Taverns or Alehouses,
and on the Saturday bellow two hours in study, which when they utter the next
day there is none can understand it.


Anar. The b^ind cares not if Sol never shine, they still can grope their way,
my son shall be a Scholar, and let the worldlings wallow in the dung, while he
the Indies bears about him, none knows the learneds bliss, but those that
learned are, I do look on Plato's D^i^y next unto Moses writings, famed
Aristotle's lear^ed Philosophy, next unto Jesseis sons rare Proverb, Livies
large book next to the Chronicles of Isreal's Kings, and Homers Deathlesse
Verse, next unto David's Lays: may hell conspire for to cast plagues on those
would not have learning be advanced and honored, when ignorant Armies,
ignorant Parliament, ignorant Synods, ignorant Fools and Knaves

Shall lie unthought of, rotting in their graves,
The learneds songs when they in dust do lie,
Shall wrestle even with eternity.

Enter Monielesse. M. Monielesse, I joy to see you Sir.


Mon. Sir, I made bold to press into your privacies unawares, my ignoranc^
will I hope purchase my pardon.


Anar. Still complementing, you Courtiers feed on complements as your meat,
leave it and take more solid food, a thousand of ^um will not staunch ones
hunger: what news, what news abroad?


Mon. Faith none that makes for me, the King must not yet see Whit^ hall,
Cromwell will not have it so.


Anar. We can grow great without him, what profit does the world receive by
Kings, who at the best are but relenting Tyrants, whose power is dissonant from
Gods appointment: how bravely Holland thrives uided by States, where people
rule the people, there is a strong simpathy in nature, the mutual love they
talk of that was wont to be 'twixt Subjects and their Kings, is now for ever
lost.


Mon. Sir, I know you are an enemy to Monarchy, and would digress even from
your principles, should you allow of Kingly Government, which makes your words
invalid.


Anar. Well said, I like thee, that adversities bleake storms have not
unriveted thy fixed resolves, but thou still art faithful to thy Master.

O Courtier curse them that have caused thy woe,

That like a Skeleton, thou now do show:

You came I know to dine with me, and are most welcome: what printed news
abroad?


Mon. As I was coming to you, I met another meagre Courtiers face, and he
showed me a song, of which I begged the copy, I hope 'twill not offend your
ears, if I do sing them to you.


Anar. Not the ^east, let us hear.


Moneylesse sings. The King shall now enjoy his own,
And have the S veraigntie,
O^ce more fi^l his refulgent Throne
Like to some Deity.
But first of all his charge must hear
For things most trivial,
Three Kingdoms blood, Lilburne does swear,
Upon his head must fall.
The Parliament, as some report,
Intend for to disband,
And if they would we would thank them fort,
And something give in hand.
They now have seven years sat,
And yet it will not be,
The Army (shall I tell you what?)
Will never make them free.
Is it not pity, that at last
When they intended flatting,
They should out of their House be cast,
And suffer for their sitting.
And all the gold that they have got,
And without fear extorted,
For to enjoy is not their lot,
O they are strangely thwarted!
His Majesty is quitted now of Brown that wooden Jailer,
And in his stead they do allow Joyce, that same prick-louse Tailor.
It Is very good to ease our teen, the Army are so witty,
And many thousands of them seen incompassing the City.
Why sure it cannot but well hap, and prove a good purgation,
That fourscore Members at a clap are forced from their station.
The Propositions now are gone, and surely now the King
Will ratify them every one, but I fear no such thing.
He cannot sure dare to resist, if he intend to eat,
For it is well known he long has mist his wonted clothes and meat.
Our dearest Brother (Jockey) now is his destruction wooing,
And very fain would something do to purchase his undoing,
Their long-ear'd Assembly do grieve and groan for ire,
That their compounded Presbytery should back to them retire.
Truth is, how much the more at first our splendour shined bright,
We are so much the more accursed, invelloped with night.
How like you this.

Anar. It Is an excellent Song in faith, shall I Mr. Monilesse crave a copy of it?


Mon. Both I and it are at your service.


Anar. Come Mr. Monilesse, it is almost dinner time, time was you welcomed me,
it is fit I should be grateful, come wife.

Exeunt Anar. Priscilla, manet Mon.
Did I ere think that want should so oppress me, that I should be constrained
to wait on this man for a dinner.

Yet of my wants, how dare I so complain?
Shall I not suffer with my Sovereign,
whom yet I Will not despair to see placed in his Throne, his Crown on's head,
his Scepter in his hand; the Citizens now do triumph over the Courtiers:

O why should Fortune make the City proud,
And give them more then is the Court allowed;
The Kings own brightness, his own foil is made,
And is to us the cause of his own shade.
Exit.
Act. 3.
Recorders, a Consistory of the Presbytery, then enter Directory, Sargus,
Luxuria, after them, with Officers, Liturgy, Dip-well afar off. Direct.
BRing forth those weeds of shame -- apparel him.


A Coat of Sackcloath brought out. Litur. I hope I shall have license for to
speak.


Direct. Not a syllable, it is known thou art by name and nature an enemy to
our Government, and have avoucht it to be tyrannous; saying, that Scotland by
their policy in bringing their Church-forme amongst us, do but assacinate o^^
Monarchy, thirsting to be our Lords, all which here openly recant, or we will
surrender thee.


Litur. I recant ye Cacademons, hear me, and mark,
First, Leatherne Swains shall plow amid the sky,
Thames turn his course, and leave his Channel dry;
Sodomes dead Lake revive, and entertain
Leviathan and Neptunes hungry train;
Fishes the Flood forsake, and Fowls of Heaven
Be decked with scales, and in the Ocean driven;
The brightest flame of Heaven shine by night,
And horned Cynthia give diurnall light,
Before I change my settled constant mind,
To damn my self, that you may count me kind;
Cemonian stairs, Phalarian Bulls, nor all
Torments that flow from cruel Tyrants gall,
Tarpeian Mountains, Altars of Busire,
Or Fornaces of Babylonian fire,
Shall Not make me stood to such base fools as you,
Or unto your intentions for to bow.

Sar. He raves, Sir these loose words will but augment your sorrow in the end,
do you know where you are?


Lit. Very well, letcherous Sargus, better then thou know to be honest.


Direct. Stop his mouth, was ever heard speeches so desperate? Dare you before
this holy Convocation to prate so peremptorily?


Litur. Dare you, ye sots, assume unto your selves the name of holy?

Methinks your cheeks should, knowing you to blame,
Out-blush the crimson of your Gowns for shame,
You are more cruel then the Crocodile,
That mangles Memphians on the banks of Nile,
That kills, with weeping tears, for hungers need,
But you can smile, and murder for no meed.

Lux. Venerable Fathers, this is unsufferable, if with audaciousnesse you thus
dispense, hereafter nere look to be reverenced, but to be scorned and laughed
at.


Dir. Satan has sure inspired him, The stool of Repentance brought forth,
contrived in the fashion of a Pulpit covered ore with black. bring forth the
Engine, support him up.


Litur. He that lays hand on me, encounters death. plucks forth a Dag.


Direct. Hear then your sentence, Since you deny to be a penitent, we here
confiscate all is yours, to be employed for pious uses, your self within three
days for to depart the Land, and nere for to return, on pain of death; this
is your doom, and now break up the Court.

Exeunt.
Litur. O my mild Judges, you show your pity and your piety, your utmost wrath
cannot hurt my inward man, I there am still the same, and not exiled.

Guilt, sorrow, shame, horror attend you still,
And let vile Atae lead you where she will.

Dip. Heaven keep me steadfast to my principles, is this a limb of the
Presbytery?


Direct. Yes, but his merits make him fit to be lopt off were it, who could be
infected worse then they are?


Dip. You hear your sentence, will you depart the Land?


Direct. No, I Will not forsake my Native soil, upon such slender grounds, I Will
live a while in private, I know an Independent Army will crop Presbytery in
the bud, and break this bed of Snakes, the only way that now is visible for
to repairs my breaches; O thou Etern, the true Almighty Jove, suffe not
Innovations to go on, to bring this Kingdom to destruction; but why alas do
I now talk of Jove,

For now alas no Jupiter is found,
But in all Lands Pluto a God is crowned.
Exeunt.
Act. 4.
Enter the two Elders, Sargus and Luxurio singing. Sar. NOw sable night has
with her ebbon Robe
Darkened the surface of this earthly Globe
And drowsy Morpheus with his Leaden Key,
Locked up the doors of every mortal eye,
Come let us fall unto our wonted games,
Let us be blithe, and nourish wanton flames.

Lux. What Lincian eye discernes our lewd delight,
Covered with darkness of the cloudy night,
Why should we censure, fear, or idle sound
Othumane words, that are environed round
With Marble walls, the wit of Mortals can
Not find our wiles, past finding out of man,
And Heaven regards not the works of men,
Come let us boldly feast and frolic then.

Sar. Come forth yea creatures of delight,
And let us in embraces spend the night,
Six Whores put forth on two beds, three on a bed, Music they rise and dance
with the two Elders.
A SONG. Meet, meet, and kiss,
and girt each others waste,
And enjoy the Lovers bliss,
until the night he past.
Elders that are holy men
all day, must sport at night.
So, so, to it again,
'twill heighten Appetite.
Sar. Those three are thine, these mine, let us to it Like Monkies or the reeking
Goat.

They ascend each on a several bed, and are drawn in.
SCENE 2.
Enter Priscilla solus. Prisc. Methinks the hours fly not with winged have as
they were wont, or is it the expectation of my Love, that makes the night seem
tedious, my heart extremely throbs, methinkes the walls seem as washed o'r with
blood, it is my fantasy, thought like a subtle Jugler makes us see things that
really are not; there is something in me whispers fatal things, and tell me
it is not safe to sleep betwixt my Lovers Arms to night; why sure I dream, I
was not wont to have these dubious fancies? I have begun to love him, and will
now never desert his friendship until death, but thus I tamper poison for my
self, but were I sure to drink the banefull draught, I could not now go
back.

For when the flesh is nuzled once in vice,
The sweets of sin makes Hell a Paradise.

Enter Directory. O you are welcome Sir.

Direct. Worthy of all Loves joys, have thou not blamed my tardy stay? thou
art most certain sure thy husband is far off, if he should take me with
thee, his jealousy and wrath might prompt him to strange actions.


Prisc. I have not the least fear of his approach.


Anar. Come then my Ptixdra, and let us taste those joys thy Husband is
unworthy of.


Act. 5.
Directory and Priscilla put forth in a bed both sleeping. Enter Anarchy with a
Torch. Anar. TItan to the Antipodes is gone,
To luminate another Horizon,
It Is now dead midnight, Morpheus Deaths eldest brother*
Hover about this place, and charm the sense
Of these two creatures made of impudence;
Are they so shallow, to conceive that I
Am made of Mamicall Pantominie.
O woman, woman, who art compounded of all ill, I durst have pawned my soul
this wife of mine, had harbored a soul white as the Alpine snow, but she is
ulcerous and deformed, who knows how often they have met, and wallowed in
their active sweats? what woman may be trusted?

Lust is a subtle Siren* ever training
Souls to destruction by her secret faining.
She is the Prince of darkness eldest daughter,
Wanting no craft her cunning Sire has taught her:
It Is like Medusa's Tresse, and if it be
Twound in the body of man's living tree,
Man's heart of flesh converts, if he have one,
By secret vigor to unliving stone.
Damned strumpet, have I taken you with your Letcher.
Affrican Panthers, Hircan Tigers fierce,
Cleonian Lions, and Danonian Bears,
Are not so ravenous, whom hunger pined,
As women that are le^cherously inclined.
But I prolong their lives, and tire the Ferry-man with expectation -- Stay, it
is not wisdom to cope with two that strugle for their lives -- These are the
bonds of death.

Ties e^ to the bed. So awake you lustful pair.

They awake.
Direct. Ha, -- we are undone.


Anar. Yes Directory, ere winged time add one hour more to this declining
night, thou shall be numbered with the dead.


Direct. O my unhaphy fate!


Prisc. Dear Husband spare our lives, and then inflict what punishment thou will.


Anar. O my fine Directory came thou from Scotland hither, to cheat us out of
our Religion, our lives, our King, and covering thy ills with virtues cloak,
act even those crimes, which but to hear them named, would fright the
Caniballs; and shall we not strive to circumvent thee?


Direct. I pray hear me Sir.


Anar. Has guilt emboldned so thy mind, that thou dare view my face, and
speak.


Prisc. Sir, I confess my crime cannot be expiated but with blood, but if mild
pity harbor in your breast, I do implore your mercy.


Anar. Peace, vile strumpet, thou may as well attempt to scale the Heavens,
and ride on the Sun beams, as strive with talk to mitigate my fury, and stay
the course of my revenge, but first good Directory I Will stab you by the book,
and torture you not opening a vein.

Dumb Show. Solemn Music. One representing Directory, accompanied with a
rabble in the habit of Elders, running as flying from Soldiers, who pursue
them with their swords drawn. Did you behold the Pageant, great Babylon is
fallen, an English Army has extirpated Presbytery root and branch, the Elders
may in Scotland court Susanna, here are too many Daniels to sift them; and now
Sir you must go, but not to Scotland, that is but Purgatory, yet where you will
find many Blew Bonnets more, I mean to Hell -- Thus I dismiss thy soul. --


Direct. Hold Sir, and ere you send my soul to wander in the ivisible Land,
hear what I now shall utter; by Heaven and Earth, and him that made them both,
I nere was guilty not in thought, til this dire hour, of the defiling of your
Marriage bed.


Anar. Do think dull fool, that all thy protestations, thy heaved up hands,
and sighs, were they as numerous as the sand hid in the Battick Sea, should
raise my heart for to relent; no, in thy death England gathers life, whose
happiness I wish; thus for it work.


Stabs him with a Poniard. Direct. O thou have opt a flood-gate, which will not
close till my heart blood in drained.


Pris. If thou were born of woman spare my life.


Anar. O thou luxurious Strumpet, has not thy guilt or fear bereft thy tongue
of utterance; methinks thou should, when thinking on thy fact, convert to
stone, and save my hand a labor to send thee to another world. There strumpet
stabs her.


Pris. O heaven!


Anar. So, -- how like you this, Phlebotomizing only can care the fever in
your blood, why don't you mingle limbs? get up and at it.


Direct. Like to a Ship dismembered of her sails and cuft from side to side by
surly waves, so does my soul fare,

As that poor Vessel rests my brittle stay,
Nearer the Land, still nearer cast away.
Presbytery in my fall receives its mortal wound, and never must look in
England to bear sway; O, O, I see in this the power of providence. Whose
stronger hand restrains our wilful powers

A will above does rule the will of ours.

He dies.
Anar. He Is dead, but she remains with life, and will thou not acompany thy
letcher, that he may man thee into Charons boat.


Pris. My soul disdaines her habitation, and now will needs be fleeting; know
Sir, for now I fear not all your fury. I loved Directory as my own soul, and
knew him oftener then your self, for which may heaven forgive me; for his sake I
could wish to live, but now he is gone, what should I do on earth.

Death our delights continually does sever,
Virtue alone abandoneth us never.
She dies.
Anar. She Is gone* farewell for ever, may heaven forgive thy fault. I would not
prosecute revenge so far, as wish thy sou'e destruction, what now remains
for me I must be gone far hence ere Sol visit our Horizon, let Fortune do her
worst.

Her frowns he fears not, nor her hot'st Alarmes,
That bears against them patience for his Arms.
Exit.
FINIS.

