SCOTLANDS ALARM OR, Some considerations tending to demonstrate the necessity
of our speedy marching to the assistance of our Brethren in England,
notwithstanding all difficulties and necessities, real or pretended.

ESTHER 4. verse 13, 14, 16. Verse 13. Think not with thy self that thou shall
escape in the Kings house more then all the Jews. 15. For if thou altogether
hold thy peace at this time, thou shall there enlargement and deliverance
arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be
destroyed, and who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time
as this.

Verse 16. If I perish, I perish.

Chap. 8. verse. 6. For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto
(Gods) people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?

TOGETHER, With a Letter dated at Edinburgh, November. the 29. 1643.

Wherein is given full satisfaction to all men who desire to know the reasons
why the Scots Army is not yet advanced into England.

Printed, first at Edinburgh, and Reprinted at London for Robert Bostock. Anno
Domini. 1643.

SCOTLANDS ALARM: OR, Some considerations tending to demonstrate the
necessity of our speedy marching to the assistance of our Brethren in
England, notwithstanding all difficulties and necessities, real or pretended.
FOrasmuch as all works of honor and importance are usually attended with
manifold difficulties, which the spirits of men, unless quickened, many times
suffer to grow up into discouragements: And whereas more especially those
under-takings in which the honor of GOD, and the advancement of the Kingdom of
JESUS CHRIST is concerned, besides those natural impediments that arise from
the weight of the Service, are commonly obstructed with many artificial lets,
which the subtilty and malice of the Devil, and ill-affected Instruments
readily make, and many times the corruptions of the well-affected, too easily
entertain.

It seems not unnecessarie to offer to this Nation, now by solemn and sacred
Covenant engaged with the Kingdom of England, for the mutual preservation of
Religion and Liberty, some considerations proving and pressing the necessity
of the speedy marching of our intended Army, to the relief of our Brethren,
notwithstanding the expectation of money not fully answered, and the
discouragements of this Winter season.

That we of this Nation are to afford assistance to England in thy Cause,
wherein they are engaged against the Popish and Prelaticall Faction, that so
the intended corruption and subversion of the Protestant Religion may be
prevented, and the just Liberties of both Nations secured, it is hoped may be
taken for granted, it being the plain language of our Covenant.

Some it may be there are (and God be thanked there are no more) who either
really think, or carry themselves as if they thought it utterly unlawful to
engage in this Cause, because we are so unhappie as to see his Majesty
entangled in the counsels and practices of them whom we are resolved to oppose,
and think that freeborn Protestant Subjects, in any case of difference betwixt
them and their Prince, have nothing left but the miserable refuge of passive
obedience, which they will, have accounted due to his personal commands, as
well as legal. But God forbid we should so part with our Religion and
Liberty, the Inheritance of our Fathers. A great deal of honor and observance
is due to Princes, but let us find out some cheaper sacrifice for these
Deities, than the honor and truth of him who is exalted far above all gods,
and the welfare and happiness of whole Kingdoms, with which, whatsoever
mortal man is weighed in the balance, will be found too light. But in the
mean time these States and Kingdoms are very much beholding to the patrons of
this Doctrine, who thereby make the condition of the Subjects of great Britain
no whit better than that of the vassals to the great Turk, who can desire or
expect no more than a passive obedience to his will and pleasure.

Others there be, who pretend think to that Religion and Liberty may be secured
by those ways and counsels which have obtained his Majesty's Countenance and
Concurrence. But whether a design whose ingredients are Spanish Counsels,
Romish Bulls, Popish Contributions, and an Irish Cessation, be like to tend to
the good of the true Religion, let any man judge who has not renounced his
understanding.

But this present undertaking is not intended to convince them who oppose or
decline this Service, if there are any who either upon these grounds or worse
are disposed to an opposition, or neutrality in this great Cause, And after so
much blood shed, so many Petitions and Declarations made, such a Covenant as
ours duly weighed doubt of the lawfullnesse and necessity of joining with our
Brethren in this mutual defense. Such are to be left to the just censures of
the Church, and deserved penalties of the State, which certainly are the most
fit, and will be the most effectual means for their Conviction.

That which is now endeavored, is to quicken the hearts, and strengthen the
hands of them who have Sworn and Subscribed this Solemn Covenant, that they
may with the more speed and cheerfulness set their shoulders to the work in
hand. For so it is many times, Probitas laudatur and alget.
that a good Cause is at the same time praised and starved, And those that seem
very much affected with the general representation of a business when it
descends to action, and especially their own particular engagement, have a
strange damp seazing upon them, and can hardly persuade themselves to act
according to what they have apprehended.

If therefore there be any who either doubt of the absolute or present
necessity of contributing their utmost assistance to this Cause of CHRIST so
infinitely valuable, let the love they owe to GOD, and his Gospel which is
endangered, to their Brethren who are so miserably spoiled both in England and
Ireland, to themselves and their own Native Country, which is now within the
noise of the Thunder (for the sharp Letters and terrible Proclamations from
Oxford have already reached us) and will shortly (unless GOD give us grace to
prevent it by timely endeavors) be under the storm: Let these threefold bands
of love not easily broken by any Christian Spirit, prevail with them to lay to
heart these ensuing considerations.

First, let it be duly considered what may be the ill consequents of
disapointing the expectation of the well-affected party in England, who having
done their utmost to answer our desires, have set their hearts and hopes upon
our assistance as the most probable means (under GOD) for the repressing the
fury of the adversary, and rescuing them from those calamities that press them
even at their doors. Job. 6.
To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend; but we shall
instead of that, add affliction to their affliction, if by deferring their
hope, we make their hearts to faint, and give too much advantage to their and
our adversaries to insult over them, and speak proudly in the day of their
distress.

And secondly, if after all these Overtures and Endeavors, our promised and
expected help should be deferred, the Malignants would be very diligent to
improve this disappointment to an alienation of their affection from us, and
the interruption of that Union, so happily made and confirmed betwixt us by the
late Covenant, and our FRIENDS would be ready to look upon us as a people
rather addicted to our own advantages then affected with their dangers, or the
dangers of Religion it self: which we have publicly acknowledged to be much
hazarded by the attempts of Papists and Malignants there.

But it will be said that other men's expectations are not to be the grounds or
rules of our proceedings; It is answered national expectations are not to be
slighted, but sometimes may have the strength of some arguments, especially
when so raised as theirs have been, which may be conceived to be by these two
grounds: First, a representation made to our friends in England by their
Commissioners, of their hearty entertainment here, and that just sense and
fellow-feeling of their calamities, which was expressed by the General
Assembly and Convention of Estates, to which affections they will look for
actions suitable. Secondly, we understand by diverse Letters that our
Commissioners there, seeing their necessities, and yet their willingness to
do to their power, and many of them beyond their power, the better to comply
with the Articles of the Treaty, have given very much encouragement to them to
expect our speedy march, especially upon the sending away a considerable part
of the money required. And we are bound as much as in us lies, to make good
the hopes they have given both for their credit and the honor of the Nation.
For though our difficulties be many, yet it is impossible that they should
become so manifest and convincing to them, as to acquit us from a present
undertaking of this service.

And lastly, by our present march we shall not only satisfy the expectation
of our friends, but besides the real service we shall do in our own persons
in those parts where we come, We shall give reputation to their Forces
elsewhere, disappoint and distract the enemy, who have flattered themselves with
the impossibility of our present assistance, and ordered their affairs
accorddingly: And not only help to save the lives and estates, but the souls of
many, who through a slavish fear are constrained to lie in a detestable
neutrality, and ready to say a confederacy to the Papists, and so to stretch
out their hands to a strange god.

As therefore all warlike undertakings, in regard of the manifold advantages of
dispatch, are called Expeditions; so let us take care, that through our
backwardness, this of ours lose not that name.

But the difficulties are so many: in regard of our necessities not supplied
with the full sum expected, and the manifold inconveniences of a Winter march,
that it seems unreasonable for any to expect we should undertake that which we
can scarce hope to go through. For satisfaction to this great objection, let us
consider something of the nature of difficulties in general, and some things
concerning our particular present difficulties.

First, it is hoped no man will take offense at him that prays GOD to remove
the difficulties in our own hearts, which through sloth and self-love, are
sometimes ready to say, There is a roaring Lion in the way, when it is only a
barking Dog: it may be, if this prayer were heard, the greatest difficulties
were removed, though it cannot be denied, there are many other.

Secondly, Difficulty is the constant companion of great and honorable
undertakings; Mat. 26.39.
the greater our difficulties are, the greater honor shall we gain to our
selves, the greater love shall we show to the Cause and Servants of CHRIST, who
when he came to deliver us, never disputed the bitterness of the Cup, but was
satisfied that it was his Fathers will he should drink it: 2 Samuel 24.24.
A man would not bestow a cheap courtesy on his friend, much less would he
serve GOD with that which costs him naught; In a word, so ardent are those
affections that become this Cause, that they ought not nor will not fear the
encounter of the coldest winter blasts that can be met with.

Thirdly, All difficulties that fall short of impossibility, though they
dis-hearten flat and dull spirits, yet they do but quicken those that are noble
and active, and makes them double their diligent endeavors. Nothing but an
absolute impossibility must stop us in our intended Course, for we have
obliged our selves by Covenant, Eccl. 5.4.
Zealously and constantly to continue in the pursuance of this Cause against
all opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against all Lets
and Impediments whatsoever. Let this be thoroughly weighed. Vow and pay.

Fourthly, The manifold experience we have had of difficulties may justly make
us rather love them then fear them, let us reflect upon the unexpected relief
GOD has given us in our streights, for want of Money, victuals, and Ammunition
in our former expeditions, and be discouraged if we can, it is true the
thought of them should not make us neglect the means and tempt GOD, but they
may and must, when we have used the means, make us trust him. The great things
GOD that done for us, have surely their use, and there is none better then in
the strength of them, and to set upon new, as David remembering the Lion and the
Bear adventured on the Philistin. The place wither we are to go, may justly be
called by us Jehovah Iireh, as it was then said, in the Mount of the Lord, it
shall be seen; so may it by us in regard of the extremities we have passed,
the more difficulty, the less danger.

And as it is very well worth our labor, to re-collect and consider the
several passages of special providence, which have befallen us and others on
this Cause of Preservation, and Reformation of Religion, So may it not be
amiss in the mean time to take notice of this general observation, That GOD
delights to be very much seen in the carrying it on, he honors men so much as
to employ them, and lets them show their duty to him, and love to his Cause,
but the Work that is done he does it himself, and in the midst of all the
means that are used, he seems resolved to bring his people out of Babylon, as
once out of Egypt, by tentations, and signs and mighty wonders* How strangely
has he rejected all humane confidences? Armies have been raised with great
Preparations and Zech. 4.6, 7.
Expectations, how small parts of them has God made use of and indeed no part
til he has first reduced them to great straits and extremities, and emptyed
them of their own confidence. It is a work paralled to that mentioned by the
Prophet, which the Lord declared to be accomplished, not by power nor by might,
but by his Spirit. Though this Work of Babylons ruin shall not be done without
power or might, for double must be rendered to her, and happy shall they be
that reward her as she has served us, giving her blood to drink, for she is
worthy; yet not by that power or might in an ordinary way, but by the Spirit of
GOD the disposer of all affairs (especially those that concern the Church of
GOD) strangely ordering things, that so little of men or means, but much of
GOD may be seen, so that when he has made the Mountains become plains, before
his Zerobabels, the head-stone may be brought fotth with shouting, crying not
Armies, Councels, Commanders, but Grace grace unto it.

But this is a strange Dialect to States men, and Soldiers, It may be so, but
GOD will probably make it familiar in time.

Let this discourse be taken as it was intended, not to take men off the using
preparations, but from trusting them, and standing so precisely upon all
accomplishments, when GOD has given so good encouragement to hope that he will
make up our unwilling and unavoidable necessities. But in the midst of our
business, let it be seriously laid to heart how much blood is spilt, how many
Towns and Countries spoiled, how miserably our friends are distressed and
distracted, while we are preparing only for their relief. We have professed
to look upon their condition as our own, and well we may, for it is truly,
though not presently and immediately our own; let us so carry our selves, as if
they enemies Forces were as near Edinburgh as they are London. But this must
not be interpreted quarreling, but quickening.

And now let us descend from this general consideration of difficulties, and
take a particular view of the present difficulties that interrupt and retard
our so much expected and desired aid.

And first, whereas it may be there are some that quake and shiver at the
thought of a Winters march, and look upon it as an unreasonable motion, that
our Army should then take the field, when other Armies betake themselves to
Garrison.

Let none take exception, if we pray GOD to keep Winter out of our hearts, and
we shall make a reasonable good shift for our bodies, the worst weather in the
world, is that which our Savior tells of; When iniquity abounds, and the love
of many waxes cold. Christ never complained it was too hot, when he sweat drops
of blood, GOD has given us bodies able to endure much, let not our minds
refuse it; necessity makes all seasons alike, and that is our case, or I am
sure the case of our friends, which we should make ours, or GOD will make it
ours. But if the consideration of the condition of our friends, who endure a
hard winter for want of coals from New Castle do not move us, let us look at
the carriage of our enemies, sure we shall be ashamed to decline that for the
Service of Christ, which they so readily endure for Antichrist. Did not the
Kings Army march from Oxford to Brainford in November, the M. of New Castle,
with his Popish Army from Northumberland to York in December. Did not the
Cavaliers take in Cicester in Glocestershire in the depth of Winter, Feb. 2.
1642.

Vt iugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones,
Vt teipsum serves non expergisceris?
Shall villains to destroy get up by night,
And we not stir to save till day be light?
For shame let not this be thought an impediment, much less made an excuse by
any, GOD will either send such weather as we may endure, or make us able to
endure such as he sends. If we complain the winter is too cold, it is much to
be doubted, we may have reason hereafter to complain that the Spring is too
hot, when our work shall be made ten times more difficult by the increase of the
enemies strength from Ireland and other places, and the provision of Arms and
Ammunition (now so much wanting among them) which these dark winter nights,
notwithstanding the guards at Sea, will befriend them with; Let us not favor
our enemies while we think to favor our selves, and suffer them to make use of
those provisions for horse and man, which are now in the Country; though
Winter be more cold, the Summer is like to be more hungry. Delays especially
in Military affairs, are seldom or never without many dangers: Ours will have
sin and danger too, if they be not timely looked unto.

But the last and greatest difficulty is, the matter of money; how can it be
thought that we should satisfy the expectation of our friends and neighbors,
when they fall so much short of satisfying ours, in that which is the sinew and
strength of war.

This is a strong objection, but necessity is a stronger answer; we must be
sure at some time or other (for we are made Traitors and Rebels by Proclamation
already, and promised protection but upon a slender condition, that is, so long
as we behave our selves so, as evil Councillors may give a good report of
our deservings) we shall be compelled to raise an Army in defense of this
Cause and our selves, and though the terms are not so good as some expected,
they are better then we are like to find, if our brethren in England be
utterly spoiled, and we left to shift for our selves. Let us therefore
persuade our selves to do that now, which otherwise we shall be in time
constrained to, that is, part with what we have, for the vindication of our
Religion and Liberty.

As it was just and reasonable, that for the better accomplishment of the
intended work, we should make as good provision as might be, and to that end
desire a considerable sum of money, the better to prevent future
inconveniences. So it is no less just and reasonable, that our friends,
having (as we are credibly informed) done their utmost, for this present,
toward the satisfaction of our propositions in that point, we should be
willing and ready to do our utmost to supply their unwilling wants, the cause
being as certainly, though not so immediately ours, as theirs.

It may be more money might have been had, if Malignants, Neuters, and
lukewarme-professors could have found in their hearts to have parted with it;
but as some have done below, so doubtless some have done beyond their ability.
Shall honest men be destroyed, because worldlings will not part with their
Mammon: For that is the case, if we help not the good Protestants of England,
because money is short, they must be lost and undone, because after this vast
expense upon the Cause of GOD they are no richer?

And if this be an impediment, certainly it will be an everlasting impediment;
the longer we stay, the less assistance must be expected from our friends,
which be daily more and more exhausted, and that middle sort of men, which
have the riches of the Kingdom, will rather with their money buy an unlawful
peace, than maintain a lawful war.

Considering therefore, that GOD has so in his providence ordered things, that
our Brethren of England and we, should be happily united in a Solemn Covenant
(a thing we would, not long since, have purchased at a dear rate) and has
disposed the hearts of the Parliament, readily to condiscends to the Articles
of the Treaty, without any material alteration: Seeing that notwithstanding
the spoil of the Kings Armies, having a great part of the Kingdom under
contribution, and almost destroying the trade of London: and notwithstanding
the charge of their own Armies, which has been exceeding great both in England
and Ireland, and yet is like to be, they have used so much care, and so
faithful endeavors for the fulfilling our demands; Let us every man look upon
his Covenant, wherein he has engaged to his power, and then look to his purse;
his barns, his shop and storehouses, and whatsoever he can call his, And last
of all, look back into his own heart and conscience, and make an impartial
judgment of his ability, and do accordingly, left our hands in contribution,
not being answerable to our Vow in the Covenant, we be accounted deceivers, and
meet with a curse in stead of a blessing. What GOD has denied us in money, he
has grant ed us in victual, whereof he has vouchsafed us plenty, let us not
suffer his Cause to starve in the midst of it. Let us consider that there is
now no place for concealments, we have not to do with men, but with GOD, with
whom we have covenanted, he searches our hearts, sees our actions and
abilities. He takes notice what profane Esaus there are among us, that
prefer pottage to their birthright; What churlish Nabals, who say of the
servants and Cause of GOD, 1 Samuel 25.5.
as he once of David's, Shall I take my bread, and my flesh, and give it to men
whom I know not whence they be? and he takes so strict notice, as to render to
them according to their ways, and according to the fruit of their doings, as
you may see in that reckoning Christ makes at the 25 of Matthew. v. 41. I was
hungry and ye fed me not, naked and ye clothed me not, Depart ye cursed, etc.

But I will not so much distrust your faithfulness and forwardness in this
great Cause of Jesus Christ, which pleads so strongly for it self in every
Christian heart. If this labor be superfluous, I am glad you wanted it not, if
it be necessary, I am glad I spared it not.

I shut up all with the words of Ioab to Abishai, 2 Samuel 10.12.
Be of good courage, and let us play the men for the people and cities of our
God, and let the Lord do what seems to him good, Only adding that lively
encouragement of David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 12.6.
Arise therefore, and be doing, and the Lord be with you.

FINIS.
A LETTER From EDINBVRGH, NOVEMBER, 30. 1643.
Giving full satisfaction to all men why the SCOTTISH Army is not yet Advanced
into ENGLAND.
My true and constant Friend,
GIve me leave to use this compellation of you who lives in the midst of so
many changes and changlings. Suffer me also to entreat you to afford me a
little of your patience (if it be not all spent) till you have perused and
pondered these few lines, expressing the condition of our affairs here, and
then pronounce your sentence.

Master Hatcher and his Company with the Treaty, and the Money, came to Leith
road November 21. so long a time it pleased God to keep him on Sea, and thereby
to excroise our patience.

The public Orders to the Shyres concerning the general Randevous (which is
appointed to be upon the 29. of December at Hatrlaw, a place four miles from
Berwicke) were exped upon the fourth day after the arrival of the Ship, which
was November. 25.

The nearest Regements are appointed to march presently toward the borders,
there to quarter and exercise themselves, and to meet with the Cavaleeres, if
any of them shall appear till the day of Randevous.

Consider with your self, what time you will allow for sending the Orders to
the Shires, to call the Committees of the several Shires, to bring together
the Soldiers to their Colors, and to march as far as Barwicke, from which
some of the Regiments are no less then a hundred miles distant; after you have
impartially considered these and other such necessary duties and distractions,
you will not condemn us of delays or slacknesse.

Ireland has also bred us at this time, much trouble and hinderance, for upon
the very day of Master Hatcher his arivall, Commissioners came from Ireland,
expressing the unsupporable sufferings of our Irish Army: One of them swore to
my self, that being present at a Parade, he did see a whole Regiment, whereof
scarcely one hundred had either stockings or shoes, but all bare-legged and
barefooted in this season of the year; and yet poor souls, they are ready
to take the Covenant, and to spend their lives against the Cessation, if they
had necessaries for their lives furnished unto them.

Our Councels were tossed betwixt two extremities, upon the one hand to bring
them away, was to give up that Kingdom into the hands of Papists and Rebels;
to suffer the poor Protestants there either to be driven forth, and to come
upon us for relief, or their throats to be cut by their barbarity, which has
destroyed so many already; and to make the Rebels strong and united for
invading these two Kingdoms. Upon the other hand, to keep them there, and to
feed them with promises, and really to starve them, as we have done for a long
time were to fall in the like barbarity.

In this perplexity, we have been forced to dispatch from Air 4000 bolls of
meall, which we had provided for the Western Regiments, and are providing other
necessaries to be sent unto the^ with diligence. This has bin an unexpected
and untimeous, but a necessary diversion of our councels from the great
business. And has taken up a great part of our time, which the English
Comissioners here do know; and the wise there cannot but acknowledge.

The act of public faith is also concluded, and sent up that there be nothing
wanting on our part: No sooner did the Committee of the convention of Estates
resolve upon the day of general assembly in their meeting at Edenbrugh, have
appointed a public fast and humiliation for a blessing from Heaven upon our
expedition, which is to be solemly kept in the Army, and in all the Kirks of
the Kingdom Jan. 7. being the Lords day, and the wednesday following according
to the warning sent to all the Presbitaries and the particular causes expressed
therein, which I have herewith sent unto you.

Thus have we resolved with our prayers and endeavors to join in the cause of
God and to wait for his blessing for success.

FINIS.

