A NARRATION of the late accident in the NEW-EXCHANGE, On the 21. and 22. of
November, 1653. Stylo Vet.

Written by the most Noble and Illustrious Lord, DON PANTALEON SA, Brother to
His Excellency of Portugal, Extraordinary Legate in England, to his much
esteemed Nobility of England, AND To all of the beloved and famous City of
London, from Newgates Prison.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1653.

A NARRATION, etc.
MANY will wonder, what feelings I have to be detained in a place so
unsuitable to my Condition, whilst few vouchsafe me their Commiseration, all
deem me worthy of reproof. Truly I do acquiesce in this to me harsh tenor of
English Justice, and obey it without resistance, to this universal and
undeserved hatred toward me and ours. Notwithstanding because I am conscious
of my own intentions herein, I cannot but grieve to see the whole envy and
malice of this affair pursue only my part, not having given (neither the first
nor the 2. time) any occasion for it, without permitting that we remote
strangers from our native country enjoy any pity at all. Much I am afflicted
that few cherish my cause, most withstand it, and as it were none interpose
themselves to ascribe this unhappy accident (as really it ought) to chance,
rather than to malice, to the ignorance of some particulars, than to the
pertinacy of all, to the reciprocal hurly-burly, than to the pretended
violence of one only side. This I only say, to that end that I may lay open
the business, and intentions herein so to be made apparent to the most beloved
Gentry and People of England, that all may more easily compassionate my Person
and condition, and restore to me and ours again their love and favor, which
truly in these circumstances I equally value with my life.

It no wise can be conceived how deeply I am struck, when I reflect that I am
come to that point, that neither I in my proper Cause, nor others can be heard
for me, many imagining their aim and honor to withstand me as much as is
possible; yea, and that those who assist me herein therefore are deemed
principals in the act. Whence to you all who read these I leave it to be
judged, what an unspeakable grief I must needs inwardly feel, when I hear
such strange speeches against me every where in this City, and that only for my
sake my Country men all and Nation displease them. Truly if it were as at
first it is now bruited, I might justly seem a madman toward my Brother, most
uncivil to all the English Gentry, and ungrateful to all this City wherein I
have so long been and so well known: But these fore-running discourses at first
discredit themselves by their variety, and afterward totally become
groundless.

1. Should I, as it is said, oppress the English, or withstand them from whom
my Brother sent hither particularly by my King demands peace and amity, and
under whose protection we all are? should I commit by such a levity
everlasting by me to be repented, that I should not also seem to intend what
my Brother with so much pains hitherto endeavored to effect? I would not have
been so great an enemy to my self, both in the opinion of my Brother, and in
the esteem of my King, in whose hands it lies to dispose of my whole life,
honor, and fortune; which since it is so, I confide none will exaggerate my
Cause, or accuse me beyond Reason.

2. Should I hate the English Gentry? alas, I am a Gentleman my self, and
indeed I much ever desired to deserve their love and esteem: I never would have
dreamed such a folly, unless I had first forgot my own birth, in which so far
I am from doing wrong, that I endeavored to show my self, as I was able, a
true follower of my Brother, whom I still perceived and noted heartily desirous
to oblige all Gentlemen, by whatsoever manner of civility and kindness he
could afford them.

3. Should I lastly on set purpose bring, I know not what Arms to besiege the
Exchange? I witness heaven, and beg pardon first of all this Commonwealth, to
which I totally submit my self, then again of my dear Brother, if either of
them harbor such an opinion of my deportments: nay, if by chance I had
indiscreetly offended in this kind, it might have been ascribed to my
unexperienced youth and pardonable, but every indifferent Judge will find me
to have only sought to defend my self and honor, and not in the least to
offend others. And I swear to Heaven, I knew nothing of what is spoke of
powder which was found in a Hackney Coach.

Some will object, why would I go and meet the threats I might have before
heard of? first, I believed no such threats, which I conjectured could not
proceed but from a very few, especially when I reflected of the great
civilities and kindnesses which for this year and more had been betwixt the
English and Portugal Gentry, and that all differences might be decided by some
other handsome mean and not by the like threats. Again, how could I imagine any
hindrance to go to so public a place, which I see open to all Nations, even to
the basest sort of people? if I had been forbidden any private house, by its
owner, or by a Decree of Parliament from any public place, I had kept home and
not stirred, to manifest with joy and promptness my obedience therein to this
Commonwealth. And thus I feared none, nor suspected in the least, that any
would assault me when they saw me unarmed, neither did I think that a
public place could defend me, when my Brothers house is patent to all.
Notwithstanding being danger of life and honor must be provided against, I
would not go totally unprepared, in case any where I should be offended.

Coming therefore to the Exchange as I was wont to do, on the 21. of November
1653. so to gain and increase love and acquaintance with the English
Gentlemen, I walked with a certain English man new arrived from Portugal, who
assured me of the civilities he enjoyed among my Countrymen there: As we two
thus hand in hand discoursed, behold, on a sudden, an English Gentleman
obtrudes himself betwixt us with great violence: I regarded not this until I
heard that party and my companion at variance. At this though I understood
little, yet I very much resented it, because I carnestly wished nothing of
scandal attempted where I might have any thing to do This was my mind then,
as they will easily believe who behold me with an impartial eye. But what?
out of hand the Gentleman casts at me most contumelious words, repeating them
twice or thrice in the French tongue, against me alone who had not offended
him, calling me Jean Foutre, Brugher, and Coquin: I pray what flesh alive in
these conjunctures could have contained himself from taking a just revenge?
Let any speak whether he could have patiently took the like injurious words
from me: if not, why should it be my charge and only blame, not to have been
then so patient as to hold my hands without repelling him, making at me in so
scurvy a manner? It Is true, I then rushed upon him, yet naked as I was without
either sword, or any weapon that could do him the harm he in that mutiny
received. Here quickly a world of English crowded about me, by whom I was
unkindly, yea harshly abused, and by naked swords drawn against my life,
compelled to withdraw my self thence as I could, especially perceiving none
there so favorable as would either speak or stand in my behalf.

Upon this I was no little afflicted, and tenderly felt what was acted against
me a Gentleman, a stranger, and innocent, if I had been rightly understood,
against whom none in my own Country durst have attempted so much, if not for
the honor of my deportment, at least for the respect and duty of my Birth. I
say no more but leave it to your commiseration to reflect how deeply I resented
this. I know you are well instructed all in those wholesome Counsels of holy
Writ, and therefore with greater confidence I now and ever did cast my self
into your arms fearing nothing, Levit, 19. v. 33. And if a stranger sojourn
with thee in your Land, ye shall not vex him. Exodus 22. v. 21. Thou shall
neither vex a stranger nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt. Exodus 23. v. 9. Also thou shall not oppress a stranger, for ye know the
heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt. I am sorry
that the Gentleman cause of all this should have been wounded, and if any of my
followers did it, I am the more sorry, although 'twere done in my defense. But
I call God to witness I had not so much as a pin in my hand then by which I
could in the least harm him.

With these unhandsome injuries I thought to have rested, hoping the party that
had affronted me would have been sensible of what he had done, and so I would
have deemed my self sufficiently satisfied. But what? There were several who
abused diverse Portugal Gentlemen then casually walking, with blows and words.
Nay, the Gentleman of whose wound was complained so much, assisted by many
others meeting a Portugal Gentleman ignorant of what had passed, rushed upon
him, and with a blow in the face, wanted but a little to put out one of his
eyes.

I was an am sure all this did proceed but from some few ill affected persons,
and therefore the day following, I esteemed it superfluous to look to my self
more than usually.

I slighted those who then publicly bragged that no Portugals should dare to
return and expatiate there again: for I should much have admired, if from the
plurality of this Nation so dear to us all such hard speeches and prohibitions
had proceeded, especially remembering how all English, and particularly
Gentlemen, are, and have always been loved and honored in my Country, where
Portugal against Portugal would have boldly and laudably stood for any stranger
in such a rancounter, according to that Polyanthea, Verbo hospitalitatis redeo:
Do no harm nor affront a Guest and stranger, do not so much as endanger his
safety, etc.

Upon these considerations I came the next night to the Exchange, but with
(...) far other intent then I am accused of; I my self brought no arms at
all, nor any of those that then entered with me, so great was my confidence in
the affection I hoped from the greatest part of whomsoever I should find there
sought for always and deserved by my Brother and my self. This I did on purpose
persuading my self with sweet and civil language, and with my unarmed habit
of both mind and body, to appease and moderate those that by chance might be
there unsatisfied by reason of the mistake happening the night before. I call
God to witness who searches the secrets of hearts, and I appeal also to all
the English Gentlemen, there to argue me, if hitherto I flinch from the truth.

For my self I stood not at all in awe of those threats which I was informed
of, but some of our domestics followed me of their own accord, apprehending
some danger in my behalf, so to assist me if need were, but only in a
defensive way, wheresoever it were requisite. It Is true, all are prone to love
and respect me, to whom I will not give any thanks upon this occasion, but
only resent and grieve that they should follow me in so great a number, whose
duty I assure them shall be less acceptable, because it was not expected; for
I do protest I dreamed not of half so many as that night came after me.
Although among these some had too many arms, as I said before, yet would not
attempt any thing, if I should enjoy quietly the liberty of my accustomed walk.
I confide nothing can be laid to their charge as done otherwise then I relate;
yet if any thing were untowardly and foolishly committed by any one of them, I
beseech it may not be or seem my fault, who was seriously ignorant of it; and
I would rigorously punish them, if my Brother but granted me leave; nay, I
would importune his Excellency, and my King also with bowed knees for such a
power, so excessive is my sorrow for this most unhappy accident, in which I
hear we have displeased so many of this City, and singularly of the
Exchange-Merchants, who have asserted many things wholly unknown to me
against me and ours.

It is hard to take away the first impressions so deeply grounded, yet I humbly
beg of them all, that without any partial love or aversion each one would say
no more then his conscience dictates, and he assuredly knows. I doubt not this
I demand, for none can but pity us, seeing we are so small a company, so remote
from our Country, and to that condition brought, that most are prone to
censure and condemn us by the very name of Portugals, especially because the
total envy of all this business by most is only ascribed to us. Let none I
pray be so much our enemy as to exaggerate our crime above truth, but let all
favor us for our former affection, rather than hate us for this present event.

For you, Noble English Gentlemen, Pardon me, if I were so touched with too
quick a spur of Honor, that nothing could retard me from coming to the
second, yet by me unexpected broyle. I never imagined what so unluckily fell
out, but put a greater confidence in the civil Character I framed of each one
(nor was I deceived in most) of a more kind and gallant disposition then to
give an origin or provocation to all this which presses me alone. You know
and experience, how ardent the thought of glory is in generous souls, whence I
grant that I do not contemn my life, but I far more value my honor: although
I protest if I could have foreseen what befell, for all those threats I had not
come to the Exchange, but would have waved my honor a little blemished by the
indiscreet Counsels and threats of some few: I would not, I say, have ventured
so before I had made my way by my civility to you all, and procured a better
understanding reciprocally 'twixt both parties. But believe me I did not think
it my duty either to fear or fly, or to be reconciled to any that justly would
meet me there upon any unhandsome terms, for indeed I was conscious that I had
peradventure received, but given no offense to any that would a right reflect
and understand me.

Let here that English Gentleman speak, if he will honor and befriend me so
far in these my straights, for he must needs call to mind how I then carried
my self: He first expostulated quietly with me for what befell the night
before, to whom I replied in all meekness and civility, that I was ready if
need were to satisfy both him and all the English Gentry, as was fit for me to
do and them to demand. This also I added and desired, that none should so
mistake me as to esteem it any injury, contempt, or quarrel to them at all:
for indeed the Portugal Gentry can neither presume, nor wish to contest with
the English, from whom they seek and desire a firm and stable peace and union.

While thus things were carried, behold, all the Exchange men with great noise
shut up their shops, which I will not interpret to any ill intention against my
person, for both I in French as I could, and diverse English Gentlemen cried out
aloud, what is the business? what needs all this? to what purpose so great a
change? Nevertheless no Portugal did hitherto endeavor any hostility at all,
until such time as a Pistol was discharged upon the very ascent of the lower
walk to the higher; here began the unhappy mutiny wherein so much ill followed,
which I grieve as much as any English man whatever. Unhappy man! whose shot
that was, a most rash action and cause of all this, whether English or
Portugal, if taken he deserves no light punishment. I am sorry from the
bottom of my heart, that my people should so love me, as for the fear they
conceived of me to have made way through that throng to seek me. I am sorry, I
say, because on both parts blood was shed in that confusion.

For all this tell me I pray why that which so unhappily fell out, should
only produce malice against me and ours? is it because that powder was found
in a Coach? I do protest before Almighty God, I knew nothing of that; nay, I
hope that my Brother will not leave him unpunished who committed so undiscreet
an action, not only thereby to give satisfaction to this deserving Gentry and
loving people, but to my self also, seeing for that and such other
inconsiderate and tumultuous actions I suffer these no ordinary things, and
very disproportionable to my person.

This I write to show my inclinations impartially for Portugals and English,
both whom I desire to be dear, yea, and to give the truest relation I could of
all this business, with my intentions therein. I doubt not but my Brother, as
the greatness of this affair required, has made his addresses to the most
Excellent Counsel, to whose prudence and safeguard I commit my self: nay, I
trust and rely more to the piety of this Nation toward strangers, and people
remote from their Country, then to this Narration of mine which has no other
defense for me but naked truth, which I lay before the eyes of all this City,
that none have a partial aversion for me and ours, though otherwise this
business hitherto as I hear in News Books related, might justly deserve.

I ask lastly in all humility of all the English Gentry, that they will not
esteem any wrong done them by me, since even what is effected was not, nor
shall the like be ever intended by me or ours. Ascribe I pray you, this whole
accident to chance rather than to deliberate envy, and pardon it for the Love
our Nation has ever borne to yours. So I demand mine from you Gentlemen, as my
Brother for his King, peace and amity from all your Commonwealth. Unless I
were too long, I would compassionate many who have suffered most in this
unfortunate chance, but such person or persons I will endeavor to comfort and
satisfy when I shall be delivered from this prison, as much inferior to my
Native quality, as I hope above my misdemeanour. In the mean time I lament
equally and more this sad conjuncture then the humble and abject condition
wherein I am, and so friendly subscribe my self,

To all the English Gentry, and whole City of London, in all duty a devoted
Servant, PANTALEON, SA.
Newgate, December. 8. 1653.

