Die 13. October. 1648.
A NEW REMONSTRANCE FROM The Kings Majesty to all his Loyal Subjects in His
three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, Declaring his unchangable
Resolution concerning Episcopacy, and his intentions touching the book of
Common Prayer. Also the Ministers answer to the Kings three last Scrupler, with
His Majesty's Reply to the said Answer, And His Answer to the Commissioners
last Paper.

Signed, CHARLES R.



Perused and extracted out of the Original Copies, and published by authority,
for General satisfaction of all loyal and true-hearted subjects within the
Kingdom of England, and Principalities of Wales.

depiction of King Charles I

October. 13. LONDON Printed for R. N. 1648.

The Kings Majesty's most gracious Remonstrance to all His Loyal Subjects in
his three Kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland, and his Resolutions
touching the Book of Common Prayer.
Honored Sir,
HAving Received your letter dated the 8 of this instant; wherein you were
pleased to^ inform me of the present condition you are in; I do return you
hearty thanks, and have sent you the best intelligence that I can possibly
impart unto you which is as follows; viz. That there has been much debate
about the Directory, but nothing don.

The King in this debate asks, what fault they found in the Common Prayer
Book, one of the Commissianers said, he had heard it was the saying of a very
learned man (and he knew the King would confess he was so) that the Liturgy
was taken out of the Mass Book, only spoiled in the translation, who was
that, said his Majesty? It was replied, It was your Father King James: His
Majesty said, If it were good in it self, that did not make it il: the King
has since made offer of a limited Episcopacie. And for the Militia Kings
Majesty and the Commissioners have Enacted that it may be in the hands of the
Parliament for 20. years, a Copy of which Act follows viz.

Be it Enacted by the Kings Majesty, and by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, and by the same, That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of
England affembled, shall during the space of twenty years, from the (...)
Arm, Train, and D^cipline, or cause to be Armed, Trained, and Disciplined,
all the Forces of this kingdoms of England and Irrland, and Dominion of Wales
the Isles of Gurnsey, and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, already
raised both for Sea and Land service, and shall from time to time, during the
said space of twenty years Ralse, Leavy, Arm, Train, and Discipline, or caused
to be raised, levied, armed, trained, and diciplined any other forces for Land
or Sea service, in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and places aforesaid, as in their
judgments they shall from time to time, during the said spcce of twenty years
think fit, and appoint: and that neither the King his Heirs or Suceesiors, nor
any other, but such as shall act by the Authority or approbation of the said
Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of twenty years, exercise any
of the power aforesaid.

And that moneys be raised and leavied for the maintenance and use of the said
forces for land service, and of the Navy and Forces for sea-service, in such
sort and by such ways and means as the said Lords and Commons shall from time
to time during the said space of 20 years think fit and appoint and not
otherwise. That all the said Forces both for Land and Sea service, so raised or
leavied or to be raised or leavied, and also the Admiralty and Navy, shall from
time to time during the said space of 20 years, be employed, managed, ordered
and disposed by the said Lords and Commons in such sort, and by such ways and
means as they shall think fit, and appoint, And the said Lords and Commons
during the said space of 20 years shall power. 1 To suppress all forces
raifed, without authority and concent of the said Lords and Commons, to the
disturbance of the public peace of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and
Dominion of Wales, etc. 2 To suppress any foreign Forces who shall invade, or
endeavor to invade the Kingdoms of England and Ireldnd. Dominion of Wales,
etc. 3. To conjoyn such forces of he Kingdom of England, as the said Lords and
Commons shall from time to time during the said space of 20. years, judge fit
and necessary: To resist all foreign invasions, and to suppress any forces,
rased or to be raised against, or within the Kingdom to the disturbance of the
public peace of the Kingdom, by any authority under the great Seal, or other
Warrant whatsoever without consent of the said Lords and Commons of the Parl.
of England, And that after the expiration of the said 20. years, neither the
King, his Heirs or Suceessors, or any person or persons, by color or pretense
of any Commission power deputa^^^n of authority to be derived from the King,
his Hei^^ or Su^^essors, or any of them shall raise, arm, train, dis^e employ,
order, manage, disband, or dispose any (...) forces by Sea, or Land, of the
kingdoms of England and Ireland, the Dominion of Wales, etc. Nor exercise any
of the said powers or authorities in the precedent Articles mentioned and
expressed to be during the said space of 20. years in the said Lords and
Commons; Nor do any Act or thing concerning the execution of the said powers,
or authorities, or any of them without the consent of the said Lords and
Commons first had, and obtained.

That after the expiration of the said 20 years, in all cases wherein the
Lords and Commons shall declare the safety of this Kingdom to be concerned, and
shall thereupon pass to any Bill or Bills for the raising, Arming, training,
disciplining, employing, mannaging, ordering or disposing of the forces by Sea
or land, and the Kingdoms of England and Ireland the Dominion of Wales etc. or
concerning the Admiralty and Navy, or concerning the levying of moneys for the
raising, maintenance, use, of the said forces for Land service, or for the
Navy, and forces for sea service, or for any part of them.

And if that the Royal assent to such Bill or bills shall not be given in the
House of Peers, within such time after the passing thereof by both Houses of
Parl. as the said Houses shall judge fit and convenient.

That then such Bill or Bills so passed, by the said Lords and Commons as
aforesaid, and to which the Royal assent shall not be given as is herein
before expressed, shall nevertheless after declaration of the said Lords and
Commons made in that behalf, have the force and strength of an Act or Acts of
Parl.: And shall be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if his Royal
assent had been given thereunto.

Provided, that nothing herein before contained shall extend to the taking away
of the ordinary Legal power or Sheriffs, Justices of peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Coroners Constables, Headborows or other officers of justice, not being
Miliiary Officers, concerning the administration of justice so as neither the
said Sheriffs, Justices of peace Mayors, etc. nor any of them do leavy,
conduct, employ or Command any forces whatsoever, by collonr or pretense of any
Commission of Array, or extraordinary command from his Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, without the consent of the said Lords and Commons.

And if any persons shall be gathered and assembled together in warlike
manner, or otherwise to the number of thirty persons and shall forthwith
disband themselves being required thereto by the said Lords and Commons, or any
of them, especially authorized for that purpose.

Then such person or persons not so disbanding themselves, shall be guilty and
incurr the pains of high Treason, being first Declared guilty of such offense,
by the said Lords and Commons; Any Commission under the Great Seal or other
Warrant to the contrary notwithstanding.

And he, or they that shall offend herein to be incapable of any pardon from
His Majesty, His Majesty his Heirs or Successors, and their Estates shell be
disposed as the said Lords and Commons shall think fit and no otherwise.

Provided that the City of London, shall have and enjoy all their Rights,
Liberties and Franchises, Customs and usages in the raising, and employing the
forces of that City, for the defense thereof in as full and ample manner, to
all intents and purposes, as they have or might have used or enjoyed the same
at any time before the making of this Act.

Sir, The Treaty goes on very succesfully, and this great business of the
Militia being agreed on, it is hoped that his Majesty will err long give his
Royal Assent to the rest, that we may all have cause to bless God for a happy
conclusion.

Your affectionate friend. W.S.
Newport October, 10.

The 11 instant came letters that the Kings Majesty declared his 3 scruples,
mentioned in the last, which the Com. desired to se before the Minsters had
them.

The last which was the Coronation Oath, because depending on the law, way
judged improper, for them to resolve, the other 2 Mr. M^rshall received, and
desiring to withdraw, the King consented; after they returned, Mr. Marshall M^^
^nes, and Mr. Seaman spoke: His Majesty desired it in w^ing which they were
willing. If the Commissioners thought fit, the Com. to have the Oath at
Coronation and the Ministers were Tuesday to being their answer which was done.

The Kings Bishops and other Clergy and the Ministers of Parliament bring
present Mr. Vines read it, His Majdesired it, promising to prepare an answer.

For the sale of Bishops Lands as Sacrilege, the Commissioners told his
Majesty that thing lay so much in Laws of the Land, that the Ministers could
not judge of it, at last his Majesty appeared inclinable, but said, that if
they were alienated, then they did revert to the Crown.

As for the Propositions of the Militia, his Maj. esty consent thereto as is
set down in the Proposition.

Signed CHARLES R.
Thursday came Letters from Newport that the Com. have delivered to the King a
paper concerning Ireland which he has promised speedily to answer. And his
Maj. has delivered a reply to the Ministers, to their answer to his Pape.



FINIS.

