The wicked Plots, and perfidious Practices of the Spaniards, against the 17.
Provinces of the Netherlands, before they took up Arms.
Being gathered out of several Dutch Writers, by a lover of truth, and an
unfeigned hater of Oppression and Tyranny, the bane of Commonwealths:
Gentle Reader,
I Shall speak so much touching the cruel, inhumane, treacherous, perfidious;
yea, unnatural practices of the Spaniards, in these parts, and elsewhere,
which may sufficiently delineate him in his deserved colors, that whosoever
beholds him may mourn to see this Hazael so to tyrannize over the innocent, and
that the Lord should permit, and the earth bear such an unheard of monster:
yet notwithstanding much more might be added in sundry other particulars, as
the Dutch Chronicles mention, and other Writers have well set out: amongst
which, although I my self be a stranger by Nation to them; yet since the time
of my abode here, having attained some understanding in the Language, I have
thought fit to speak so much, which in my reading I have observed.

First, thou art to understand, gentle Reader; that the King of Spain was
lovingly received here in the 17. Provinces, and a solemn oath was taken on
both parts; the King for his part swore to maintain all their Laws and
Privileges, and they to him all due homage and allegiance: He presently
demanded of them a sum of money, whereupon the States did assemble, and
collected for him 40. millions of Florines, of Brabants money, to be paid in 9.
years, and they paid it into the Exchequer, and although it was more then they
had paid before to his predecessors, yet upon this he took great displeasure
against them, and, as they write, he for this did hate them to death.

But he pretended this to be the cause of his wrath, because he saw that there
were some among them, that did defy the Pope and all his Religion: but that
could not be, for the City of Aelst was as superstitious in that Religion as
Rome it self; for they did persecute the Reformed Religion even unto death:
and yet for all that both they, and 170. fair Villages that belonged unto them,
were by them plundered and spoiled of all their goods, and many of them wounded
and tormented for to confess where their money was, and many were killed. Thus
much by the way.

My scope and chief intent, is to show the first and just cause of the wars in
the Netherlands; whereby the diligent Reader (not partially affected) may
clearly understand, that the Netherlands did not rebelliously take up Arms
against a lawful Prince, (as some ignorantly think and speak) but justly and
religiously defend themselves against a perfidious Tyrant who sought their
ruin, by all possible means he could, and the subversion of the whole State.
A long while they patiently underwent his cruel oppressions, and intolerable
vexations, as the Histories clearly manifest; till there was no hope, but
either they must become slaves in soul and body, worse then that of Israel in
Egypt, they and theirs for ever, or else be butchered by merciless
executioners of a cruel Tyrant. This Tyrant having a purpose to innovate all
things, to root out ancient inhabitants, and to frustrate all the Laws,
Customs and Privileges which himself had sworn to maintain; knew not how
better to effect his evil ends, then by raising a bloody Inquisition to set
over them for their government; The Inquisition was there fou^e yearesefore.
which said Inquisition (raised in Spain) concluded and pronounced certain
Articles, the tenth of February 1568: which were confirmed by the King, the 26.
following. Now because it may appear I do them no wrong in this charge; I will
lay down the Articles themselves verbatim.

The most sacred Office of inquisition, so often attempted in the Netherlands
by his Majesty, and hindered until this time, shall be instituted and advanced
in this (...) with (...) ^hole administration of the Nethe^lands.

2 That the Emperor with his two sisters, having given over all affairs,
leaving the Netherlands, shall retire into Spain unto Us, being assured that
they shall never return more to do any harm.

3 These being dispatched, we must also draw the King to us, and keep him for
ever that he part not, and not suffer any Flemings to have access or
conference with him.

4 That the King write unto, and command the Clergy of the Netherlands, that
with the Inquisition they should accept of 15 new Bishops, the which should be
free from all secular jurisdiction, yea in cases of treason.

5 The subjects of the Netherlands through their malice and waywardness, will
revolt and move seditious and tumults, pleasing to all but our company.

6 The Princes and Noblemen, heads and authors of those factions, with the
subjects, must be taken away, and the others reduced unto reason.

7 They shall hire at our charge thieves and spoilers of Churches and Images,
whose offenses shall be by all the world imputed to Rebels, by some subtle
means, and so we shall vanquish them.

8 That all Comerce, Negotiation, Liberties, and Privileges, shall be rooted
out, and that all be reduced to extreme poverty, whereby the realm shall be
permanent for Us.

9 No man of all those Countries (except he be of our faction) shall be held
worthy to live; and finally all to be rooted out: and all Goods, Possessions,
Arts, and Trades, and all Orders to be taken away, until there may be a new
Realm, and a new people.

10 In this action the wise and valiant Duke Alva shall be employed in person;
whereas any other, were he of the blood Royal, or a Prince, shall be of no
esteem: so as being suspect yea in the smallest matters, they must be
dispatched.

11 No Contracts, Rights, Promises, Donations, Oaths, Privileges, and solemn
Assertions of the Netherlands, shall be of any force for the inhabitants, as
being guilty of high treason.

12 But above all we must have an especial care that in these matters of so
great weight and moment, we proceed not violently, but by means, by degrees,
and that discreetly, to the end the Princes, Nobility, and inferior sub^ects
may mutiny amongst themselves, so that one may persecute, yea execute the
other until at last the hang man be executed himself. For in all Christendom
is there not a Nation more foolish and indiscreet, and whose levitie and
inconstancy may sooner be deceived then these Netherlanders, and God punishes
them accordingly.

There were other Articles found in president Vergaes chamber at Antwerpe and
there printed; and those are more cruel then these, but not more subtle.

By these Articles and unlimited power of these lawless inquisitors, no man
had any assurance of life or goods for a day, but were endanger continually to
be called into question, either for the Law of their God, or for some work of
mercy, which either religion, moral equity, or the bond of nature called for:
or else if they had color for none of these, they would impose such
unreasonable taxations, which if the Cormorants had not their gorges crambed
full, they would make prey of all, whether by right or vvrong it mattered not.
But my purpose being to avoid prolixitie, and to pass by impertinences and
needelesse repetitions, I will come to that (...) intended.

In the year 1565. a match was concluded for the Prince of Parma, and the
nuptials were solemnized at Bruxels, whither all the Nobility and Gentry of the
country were invited, and accordingly there met of them about 400. who like
faithful Moses being grieved to see the daily oppression of their brethren by
the hard taskmasters of the Inquisition, who not only robbed them of their
goods, but also by inhumane cruelty, and unnatural butchery, deprived them of
their lives, who daily led them as sheep unto the slaughter: The consideration
hereof they jointly laid to heart, and hereupon (being met upon this occasion)
they resolved to present a petition to the Princess of Parma, which they did
the 5. of April next following. The E. of Breedrod delivering the Petition,
The substance of this relation is not unsuitable to these times.
humbly requested a favorable answer. Three days after they received this
answer, viz. they should send two of their Nolbemen to the King, by whom she
would write in their behalf. The Lord of Barlamont being present, after their
departure said (like a flattering Courtier) they were a company of Rascals and
Beggars.

It was concluded that the Marquess of Bargen, and the Lord of Mountigny
should go into Spain, who humbly presented their suit to the King, but could
get no answer in 16. months after.

The 26. of August Anno 1566. the Princess of Parma sent for the Gentry,
telling them she had received Letters from the King, containing promise that
all should be well, and that the inquisition should cease. And for the
Proclamations they should not be of force, but his Majesty would take such
order as they and the States should well like of. The Princess also gave them
tolleration for their Religion, on condition they should not deface, nor break
down the ornaments of the Churches: for, there had been before this time vile
and leude persons that frequented the meetings of the Reformed; these went into
the Papists Churches, stole their silver and what was worth carrying away, and
brake down their Images: but the reformed suspected that this was done by the
appointment of the Princes, neither was their suspicion without good ground,
for it is to be seen in the Kings letter, Art. 7. that she had order to hire
this rascal company to do this vilany, Emanuell de Miter says, that in
Flanders they took 50. of them at one time, and hanged 22. and whipped the
rest.
which fact was imputed to the Protestants, to the end that they might not
only be odions there, but also seem guilty, even in the judgment of other
Nations, howbeit the offenders were punished with imprisonment, yea, with
death, even by the reformed themselves, who jointly confessed the action
unlawful, and were so far from giving occasion of offense in this nature; that
Papist burgers themselves offered good security, that no such thing should be
attempted by them. Who then can make any doubt that they were free from having
any hand in those outrages laid to them? the very opposites in Religion being
judges, who as appears were willing to undertake for them; now as their
faithfulness brought so good effect for their persons, so did the Lord work
that the truth of religion found many friends likewise, the Lord wonderously
prospering the course of reformation, in so much that in short space they had
in Flanders 60. Ass^mblies, some Churches they themselves builded, but were by
Duke d Alva soon cast down, who erected Gallowses of them, and hanged them
upon them,

The Princess of Parma also began to entertain soldiers with pretense to
apprehend the Church-robbers, but intended indeed to take away the ancient
liberties and privileges of the Netherlanders, wherefore sending certain
Companies to Valencyn, the inhabitants denied them entertainment, who for that
were proclaimed Rebels the 14. of December, soon after they were besieged,
sacked, and many of them put to death.

He pretended it for Religion, but his aim was to get their lands and goods.
But before they of Valencyn denied entertainment to the soldiers, the Nobility
had received letters out of Spain, from the Marquess of Bargen, showing, that
the King was exceedingly incensed against the Netherlanders, that he had in he
presence of many vowed to be fully revenged of them, though it were with the
hazard of all his Countries; that he would make them an example to all the
World, and would invite the Pope and Emperor to assist him in this quarrel.
Upon the receipt of the Letters the Nobility assembled at Dortmond to consult
what were best to be done, but concluded not any thing, some judgeing it
safest to join, and make head to resist his tyrannical fury, others seeking
rather to escape by flight.

As the Grau of Egmond, and the Grau of Horn, and many of the Gentry at
Brussels, 1568.
The cruelty of this Inquisition did notwithstanding increase, and many
soldiers came into the Country, that some of the Country forsook their
houses, and resorted toward Freezeland, and some did stay at home, and went to
meet Duke Alva, and welcomed him into the Country, and showed him all the
kindness that they could, but he very shortly took off most of their heads,
so that he did so terrify the inhabitants, that there fled out of the
countries more then 100000. householders, besides many that were taken in
flying, were taken and hanged, and all these had their goods confiscated to the
King.

Now the D. of Alva did command all the inhabitants to pay the hundredth penny of
all their goods, and of all that was bought and sold, the which some of the
States did yield unto: And then he commanded them to pay the twentieth penny:
and then he commanded the tenth penny of all things that were bought and sold,
The like taxations, though in another manner, have been practiced here before
the Parl.
so often as they should be sold. Some of the States did make their humble
Petition to the Duke, and to the Princes, showing them that it would drive all
trading out of the land. The Duke of Alva told them that he would have it,
though it did ruinate all the land: but if he saw them to do their best to pay
it, he would deal favorably with them. But he said that it was against the
Kings honor if they should not pay it, seeing it was his pleasure to require
it. And now did the Inquisition imprison and execute many of the richer sort,
as well Papists as of the reformed Church: and if they were rich there was no
escaping for them. And whosoever was found to have any hand in way of suit and
petition to have the tenth penny to be remitted, All the prisons were filled,
insomuch as they were forced to prepare more, and filled them also.
they were adjudged to have committed high treason against God and the King;
and all these must forfeit life and goods to the King, and not any of their
children to enjoy one penny worth of the same: but (poor Orphans) they must
beg their bread. And somewhat had been buried certain months, they caused to be
dug up, and hanged on the gallows, and some to be burned, because they had
not the sacrament, and confessed before their death; but it was because he
would confiscate their goods to the King: yea when these insatiable
gold-thirsty and bloodthirsty wretches wanted color to cover their injustice
and cruelty, they had their officious imps (false witnesses) suborned by
Jesabel, to get Naboths vineyard; witness Martin Hutton, who was one of the
Inquisitors Clarks, and (being committed to prison) did acknovvledge that he
had made many false testimonies against sundry rich persons, some were of the
reformed Church. Here might fitly be brought in the hundred Merchants of
Granado, who were of the Roman Religion, and were never other; what
pretense had he to cause them to be murdered all in one night, and then
presently to command all their goods to be brought to his treasury or
Exchequer, whose estate was vvorth more then 28. hundred thousand pound
sterling? Now as this tyrant was a devourer and destroyer of the lives of
men, so he did presume to usurp further not only upon civil ordinances, but
upon the things of God; so that those that were married in the reformed
Church, he forced to be married again: and if they were rich, he took them
from their husbands, and gave them to his soldiers to make prize of them:
those that were babtized in the reformed Church, be compelled to be baptized
again, contrary to Gods word, and to the decree of the ancient councels, so
intolerable were the burdens that this cruel Pharaoh laid, so excessive was
his cruelty, that he filled all places with blood, blood touching blood, as the
Prophet speaks. For in small towns he executed 50. and in great towns 200.
and 300. or 400. And in places as men traveled from one town to another, they
might see many that his Soldiers had hung up in trees to death, and some were
worth 80. thousand guldens, and some less: yea this tyrant did confiscate so
much lands and goods, as by his account sent into Spain, did amount yearly to
8. tun of money sterling, besides the many thousands that he and his soldiers
had. All the money that he did exact out of this land in 6. years, did amount
to more then 50. millions of gold. And if any were known to have any thing
that did belong to any that were put to death, and had not brought it to the
knowledge of the Inquisition, they did loose both life and goods: yea the 16 of
February 1566. The like cruelties may justly be feared to be among us, if the
Parl. should be subdued.
he gave sentence in his court at Madrill, that they were all traitors against
God and himself. At Vtrecht he beheaded a widovv that was 84. years old,
because she had before lodged a preacher one night, whose living was vvorth
four thousand guldens yearly. And at Mastricht a father for lodging his son
that he had not seen in a long time, that was fled for religion, was put to
death. And at that place there was one put to death for giving a widow a
peck of corn for an alms, whose husband this bloody court had put to death.
And many women were put to death, because they received their husbands in the
night that were fled for religion; yea they have killed women great with
child, and ripped up their bellies, and taken out the child and killed it, and
some they have fleyed alive, and covered drums heads with their skins, and
some they have tied to a post, and made a small fire round about them, and so
roasted them to death.

The like cruelty they did at Oudwater.
At Naerden they received the Spaniards friendly into the town, who promised
them both their lives and goods; and as soon as they came in, they commanded
them to come to the Statehouse without their Arms, the which they did, and
the Spaniards gave fire upon them and murdered them all: and then they ran
about in the town and ravished the women, Take heed of such treachery here.
and after Killed them and fired the town. The young children that lay in the
Cradle, they quartered them, and took them upon their pikes, and so went up
and down the town rejoicing in their cruelty.

Such savage cruelty is scarcely to be found in any history, what Christian
heart can hear it, and not be affected with deep sorrovv? yet behold some
monsters herein have been found, that have been so far from humanity herein,
(for he that has humanity in him will commiserate others calamities) that
they have applauded it, as if he had in all these outrages done God good
service. Amongst the rest, I shall content my self at this present, but to
name the holy Father the Pope, and one of his chief sons in this business.
The Pope sends his Legate to commend these so rare exploits, and calls this
cruel Duke Alva his beloved son, sends him a costly sword, the hilts whereof
were of gold, and a hat wrought with gold, and beset with rich and costly
stones, thanking him for his good service in maintaining the Romish Religion
and subverting of heretics. Howbeit that his chief son I mentioned
(exceeding this man of sin, in the sin of cruelty, as if he would verify
himself to be ten fold more the child of Satan, then his father the Pope)
thinks not so well of it, his name is Vergas, the President of this bloody
Inquisition; for going shortly after into Spain, he told the King, that he and
Duke d Alva, did mar all in the Netherlands, by showing so much mercy to
those people.

Concerning this Duke d Alva, of whose outrage and cruelty so many have felt,
and perfidious dealing which many have found by lamentable experience, whereby
may easily appear of what stamp his excessi^e mercies are, even such as the
Wise man speaks of, These words he spoke at a banquet as he sat at the table,
rejoicing be had done the King so good service.
Pro: 12.10, the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. In which he prides
himself, boasting he had slaughtered eighteen thousand and six hundred, in
form of justice, in six years time, and ten tunes so many he and his Soldiers
murdered otherways. And many more would he doubtless have murdered, had not
the Lord restrained and limited him, for his desire herein was as hell, that
cannot be satisfied: Witness the purpose of his proceeding against the
Magistrates of Bruxels, because they did not collect the tenth penny so as he
defired. He tware that he would have it, and before he would let it fall or
remit it, the Sun and Moon should leave their shining, so he went to
Brussels, and commanded the executioner to prepare ladders and ropes to hang up
that night in their doors 70 of the citizens, and gave them his vvarrant in
vvriting what they should be: But God in his providence prevented this his
cruel purpose, Anno 1573. April. 1.
in that there came news that the Grave of Mark had taken in the Brill; so the
tyrant did not go forvvard with his bloody enterprises.

I have instanced but 4. or 5. towns, but there were scarce any town escaped
their cruel pillaging, except they had bribed their Commanders with exceeding
large gifts.
Thus having given you a t ste of some of those many things I have o^served
concerning the intolerable oppression, and worse then salvage cruelty of the
Spaniards, exercised upon the people, which they endured and labored under
the space of sixteen years; I will now leave these cruel tyrants to the Lord
for judgment, and address my self to speak somevvhat further concerning this
Earl of Mark, who had those Gentlemen with him that fled. Before this he
had layne with his shipping in England, but the King of Spain sending his
Ambassador to our Queen (who was then in peace with him) to desire her that
she would not suffer his subjects to have their harbor in her land, and that
she would not give them or suffer them to have any relief whereby they should
make head against him: and hereupon the Queen sent and commanded them out of
her harbor, and she commanded that they should not be suffered to have any
provision in her coasts, so that now they had no other means but only God, who
did in his mercy provide for them better then they expected. For they were
purposed to have gone for the Tassel, and to have taken some town about that
part; but when they came near that part, they had the wind contrary that they
could not come there, so they went for the Maise, and came with their ships
before the Brill, and there they went presently and took it; yet the Duke of
Alva had his forces in the town, near so m ny as they were, whom they
presently killed and chased out of the town, and out of the Island. The Prince
of Orange being in France, and hearing what had happened, he sent them
soldiers with as much speed as could be out of France. And within one month
after Duke Alva sent certain companies to Vlishing to keep that place strong
for himself, and many of the commanders were come into the town: So the
Magistrates commanded the citizens to come presently upon the Statehouse, so
they told them they must lodge Spaniards in their houses; and they knowing how
they hade used the citizens in all places where they came, they told the
magistrates they would not have the Spaniards in their town, the Magistrates
asked them which of them it was that did refuse to receive them. They said, All
of them. So the Magistrates seeing them so earnest against the Spaniards, they
jointly took their Arms, and killed and took prisoners all them that were in
the town, and with their Ordnance they shot at his ships where the Spaniards
were, and they made away. And of those that were taken, there were the names of
about 80 that they had in writing from Duke Alva that dwelt in the Island, that
they should put to death. So those of the Bril sent their Soldiers with speed
to help them. He had appointed those to be executed because they were the
chief that stood against the pryment of the tenth penny.
And shortly the Prince of Orange came with forces and defended them; and some
other towns seeing the cruelty of the Spaniards, forsook the Spaniard, and
joined with them, and took the Prince of Orange to be their Protector, yet the
States notwithstanding did remain in obedience to the King some seven years
after.

Again it is further worthy to be noted that these Provinces did three times
send to the King their Noblemen, but could obtain no mercy, and many more times
they went to the Princess of Parma, and made their humble petition for
redress of their oppression, but could not obtain any favor, then they made
friends to the renowned Queen of England, and to the Princes of Germany, and to
the Emperor, who did earnestly entreat by their Ambassadors for them. The
King of Spain answered their Ambassadors with these words; he bade them tell
their Masters, That they should meddle with their own subjects, and not with
his, for he knew well enough how to rule his subjects without their Counsel.
Anno 1575.
Now when our Queens Majesty found his unreasonablenesse and cruelty, then and
not before, she assisted them with Arms.

His own son Prince Charles did entreat for them, that it would please him
to let them have their Laws and Privileges, and that they might not be so
oppressed; and vvithall he told his father that those Countries did belong to
him, Marplam in his Cronicle. Anno 1567. Pray the like may not be he^e in
England.
and that they were given him at his Baptism, for the which his father sent
him to prison, and he never came out again. If the Lord would not have forgot
what Amalek did, long after, for smiting the weakest and hindmost of his
people, how may we in equity forget the infinite murders, and spoils, this
cruel Tyrant has executed vvhereever he has prevailed? And who can forget in
special that bloody attempt against our selves, in the year 1588.

If I should trace this Tyrant from place to place, I should run in
infinitum, having made the name of Christianity hateful, by his cruelty,
amongst the Heathens that know not God further then the light of nature: for
it is confessed by the Spaniards themselves, that some of the chief of the
Indians, who were to be burnt to death, They were exhorted by a popish priest
to (...) mind, that after this life there was one place for joy, and another
for torment.
being told of heaven and hell, they asked whither the Spaniards went when
they dyed? It was ansvvered to heaven, Oh then said they we will never come
where the Spaniards are. But not to run so far, I will rest content to keep me
within the bounds I chiefly intended concerning these Countri^s. When the
Citizens of Leyden were in great extremity, by reason of a long siege, the
Spaniards proffering conditions of peace, if so be they would yield up the
City and themselves to them, they returned answer; Not while they had a right
hand to hold the sword, or a left to eat, but if they should be driven to fall
into their hands, they would rather burn the City and drovvn themselves, then
to submit to them, of whose perfidiousnesse they had had so lamentable
experience: and when some of the Citizens pressed a yielding, in respect of
the extremity of famine, a Burgermaster, called Peter Adrianson, said; Loving
friends I confess the famine is great, and that some do die for want of food:
yet rather let us agree to eat up on^ another, as it shall fall by lot, begin
with me first, and divide me amongst you.

At Antwerpe, the Spaniards by the appointment of their Governor did come into
the City in battle order, and marched up and down their streets, and shot into
their houses, and made a tumultuous noise, as if they had been so many devils,
for one day and two nights, and took the keys from the Magistrates, and set
watch at the Ports; No sort excepted.
whereby they put the Citizens in so great fear, that many women with child
fell in travel, and some dyed with fear: and they went by 12 or 20, into the
best houses, and commanded them to prepare them the best cheer, as boiled and
roast, and other dainty dishes, as they list to call for; and besides beer, they
would have at least two sorts of wine. They did offer them two parts in money,
and the 3. in cloth, but they cried all for money.
And all the chiefest Citizens houses had at least ten of these guests. And
they all cried out for money, and said that they would have 15. months pay
before they went out of the City, of them; and the Magistrates told them that
they would procure them in cloth, and apparel, and money the sum; but they
all cried out for money, and that money they would have before they went away; so
at the last, the Magistrates got the money, which did amount to 400. thousand
Guldens. And the charge they were at, which these companions did cost the
Citizens, There stands in the Chronicle a quire of paper of their cruelty
against this City.
was 600. pound sterling the day, and thus they were oppressed with them 28.
days, in which time they had made them all rich suits, some of satin and
velvet, and some of cloth of gold: and one of them had a cushion of velvet,
with these words in letters of gold, I am the Dutchmans Bride-well Master.
And thus they got rid of them for the present. And about two years after they
came again, and then they used the Citizens much more cruelly, for these devils
did bring straw, and set on fire, and put it into the houses, vvherby they set
nine rich streets on fire, and burnt them with many rich and costly goods, and
rifled the Citizens of all their rich and costly jewels, and silver-vvorks,
with their money, and three days did they torment the inhabitants for money:
and in this time there was murdered of the citizens above four thousand. The
money they took at that time is reckned for more then 40. tun of gold, beside
the Jewels and the loss they had by fire, was as much as the rest. And thus
was the best city of Merchants in Europe ruinated.

In the year 1580. the States proclaimed K. Philip to have lost his right, by
reason he violated his oath.
Diverse things being manifested of the Spaniards cruelty, I will add one
instance of their treachery, and that of a famous person to his nearest
familiars; yea when he pretended sweetest familiarity and friendship, Pope
Alexander the 6. a Spaniard by birth, invited diverse Nobles and Cardinals to a
banquet, with a purpose to poison them all, The meetest instrument he made
choice of to effect this, was a Spaniard, one Caesar Burgia, his svvorn
servant. The Pope shevved himself vvonderfull pleasant to avoid suspicion, and
drank a carouse to them all; vvilling that his trusty servant to fill from such
a bottell he knew well: which he did very effectually to the Pope himself as
well as to the rest. A Spaniards kindness to his friends.
After the company was departed, the Pope perceiving by an alteration in
himself, what was done, and that he must die now also, said to Burgia, This is
a right Spanish trick. It is written of them that they are so expert in these
exploits, that if Judas himself were alive, he might go to them to School.

FINIS.

